AN EXPOSITION Of the Prophecy of HOSEA. Begun IN DIVERSE LECTVRES Upon the
first three Chapters, At MICHAELS Cornhill, LONDON,

By JER. BURROUGHES.

The Second Edition Newly corrected.

Inter omnia dona, donum verbi Dei est amplissimum: Si hoc auferas, soleme
mundo sustulisti: Quid erit mundus, sublato verbo, quaminfernus?

Luther. LONDON, Printed for R. Dalwman, in the Year, 1652.

TO THE READER.
YOu have these Lectures as they were taken from me in preaching, Iperused the
notes, but I could not bring the style to that succinctnesse that I desired,
except I should have wrote all over again, which I had no time to do: my
perusal was but cursory, therefore many things have slipped me: You have them as
I preached them, without any considerable alteration. I had thought to have
been far briefer: that which caused me to go somewhat beyond an expository
way, was the meeting with so many things almost in every Lecture so nearly
concerning the present times: in the remaining part of the Prophecy, if God
give life to go through it, I shall keep my self more close to an expository
way: what here you have, take it as you find it: what good you meet with,
receive it in. This will be the encouragement of

Thy friend in Christ, J. B.

Aug. 10. 1643.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryll,

AN EXPOSITION OF The Prophecy of Hosea.
The First LECTVRE. May 8. 1642.

Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2. etc. 1. The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea the son
of Beeri, in the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah,
and in the days of Jeroboam son of Ioash King of Israel.

2. The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea: and the Lord said to Hosea,
etc.


The Preface To The Work.
THis day begins a Scripture Exposition Exercise, which has lost much of
the honor of it, by the disuse of it: The best Apology for it is to set
presently upon it. It is ancient in the Church of God, old enough to speak for
itself. Nehem. 8. 8. we read, that Ezra, Ieshua, Bani, and the rest read in the
book of the Law, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand the
reading. You love brevity; in this Exercise you shall have it, in all that
shall be delivered unto you.

I have pitched upon the Books of the small Prophets, to open them unto you, of
whom Jerome has this expression: Nesco utrum brevitatem sermonum, an magnie
tudiuem sensuum admirari debeas.
You cannot tell which to wonder at most, either the brevt^y of speech, or the
greatness and abundance of sense. And this Prophet Hosea in special is
excellent this way, of whom the same Author speaking, calls him Commaticum and
qua si persentias loquen tem.
exceeding concise, and speaking by sentences.

Being the Prophetical books is the work that falls to me, why I chose rather
to begin with Hosea then Isaiah, I shall afterward give you an account. If God
continue this Exerciseand life, we may go through them all, both small and
great.

In these Prophets we have most admirable divine Truths revealed to us, and
pity it is, that the mind of God contained in them should be so little known,
even unto his children, that such treasures of heavenly truths that are there
should lie hid from so many so long a time as they have done.

We might preface this our work (because this is the first days entrance into
it) with laboring to raise and sweeten your hearts with the consideration of
the excellency of the Scriptures in general. Luther has an high expression
about them; he calls them Ge^^s generalissimum omnium benorum. Si hoc auferas,
sol^m e mundo sustulisli: quid mundus sublate verbo quam infernus. (...).
the highest genus that contains in it all good whatsoever. Take away the
Scripture, and you even take away the Sun from the world. What is the world
without the Scriptures, but hell it self?

We have had indeed the word of God to be as the Sun in the world, but oh how
many mists have been before this Sun! We have seldom the Sun shine clearly to
us. It is pity, seeing there is such a glorious Sun risen, that there should be
such a misty day. Now this is the work we are called unto, to dispell the mists
and fogs from before this Sun, that it may shine more brightly before your
eyes, and into your hearts.

Chrysostom. in his 29. Sermon upon Genesis (...), etc. Quid est Scriptura sacra
nisi quaedam epistola emnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam. Greg. 1. Ep. ^0. ad.
Gregorium Theodorum Medicum.
exhorting his Auditors to get the Scriptures into their houses, and to a
diligent exercise of himself in them, tells them that by them the soul is
raised and elevated, and brightned, as with the beam of the Sun of
righteousness, and delivered from the snares of unclean thoughts.

The Scripture is that wherein the great God of heaven has sent his mind to the
children of men, wherein he has made known the counsel of his will, and opened
even his very heart unto Mankind. It is the Epistle that God has sent into
the world. And did we but hear of such a Book that were dictated imediatly by
God himself, to the end to show the children of men what the eternal counsels
of his will were for the ordering of them to their eternal estate, and to open
his thoughts and intentions concerning their everlasting condition what it
shall be: Did we I say but hear that there were such a book in the farthest
part of the Indies, would we not rejoice that the world was blessed with such a
mercy? what strong and vehement desires should we have to enjoy but one sight
of it before we dye! We would be willing to venture upon any hazard, to pass
through any difficulty, to be at any charges, that we might have but a sight of
such a book as this. My brethren, you need not say, Who shall go to the
farthest part of the Indies to setch this book? Who shall descend into the
depth, or go to the uttermost part of the earth to help us to a sight of this
book of Scripture? For behold, the word is nigh unto you, it is in your
houses, and we hope in your hearts, Sacrae scripturae expositio est emnium quae
ad cul^^m Dei fiunt ^pus maximum, and utilitates humano generi max (...)
efferens.
and in this exercise is to be in our mouths, not only to tell you what it
says, but open unto you the mind of God in it.

The exercising our selves in this book is sweet indeed; Luther professes
himself out of love with his own books, and wished them burnt, lest men
spending time in them, should be hindered from reading the Scriptures; which
says he are the only fountain of all wisdom: and I tremble says he at the
former age, that was so much busied in reading of Aristotle and Averroes.

We read in that 8. Lect. 1.
of Nehem. verse. 5, 6. when Ezra opened the book of the Law to expound it to
the people, he blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered,
Amen, Amen. And now blessed be the Lord, the great and gracious God, for
stirring your hearts up to such a work as this is, Wolfius in loc.
and blessed be his name for those liberties we have thus freely to exercise
our selves in this service; Luther in Genesis c. 19. Ego adi lie beos men's and
saepe opto eos interire, quod metuo, nemorentur lectores and abducant lectione
ipsias scripturae, quae sola omnis sapientiae fons est, etc.
O praised be the name of the great God for this days entrance into so good a
work as this is.

Yea they did not only bless God, but the Text says, They lifted up their
hands, and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to
the ground. Why? because the book of the Law was read to them and expounded.
How comes it to pass that their hearts were so taken with it now to hear the
book of the Law expounded to them? Surely it was because they were newly
returned out of their Captivity; and now they came into their own Land, and
heard the Law of God opened to them, they blessed his great Name, and bowed
their faces to the ground, worshipping him. This day (my brethren) witnesses
to us our great deliverance and return from our bondage. It was not long since
that we could have either Ordinances, or Truths, or Religious exercises, but
only according to the humors of vile men: But now through Gods mercy a great
deliverance is granted to us (as this day witnesses) that we may come and
have free liberty to exercise our selves in the Law of our God: O do you
bless the Lord, and bow your faces to the ground, worshipping of him.

In the 12. verse. of that Chap. we read, that after they had heard the Law read
and expounded to them, they went their way to eat and to drink, and to send
portions, and to make great mirth: Why? Because (says the Text) they had
understood the words that were declared unto them. I hope if God shall please
to give in assistance unto this work, many of you shall go away hereafter from
this Assembly rejoicing, because you will come to know more of Gods mind
revealed in his word then formerly: And this will be the comfort of your meat
and drink, and of your trading, and the very spirits of all the joys of your
lives.

As the sweetness of the fruit comes from the graft, rather then from the
stock, so your comforts, and the blessings of grace in you, must come from the
word ingrafted in your souls, rather then from any thing you have in your
selves.

In the first verse. the Text says, that all the people gathered themselves
together as one man, into the street that was before the watergate, to desire
Ezra to bring the book of the law, and to read it, and to open it unto them.
Behold it is thus this day in this place; here are a great company met
together, perhaps some to know what the business will be, some for novelty,
and some for other ends; howsoever, come unto us you are, and we hope many for
this end, that you might have the book of the Law read and opened unto you.
Now we expect that from you, which is said of them, ver. 3. And the ears of all
the people were attenti^e unto the book of the law, when it was read and opened
to them. And truly that attention that you now begin withal, does promise unto
us that we shall have an attentive auditory. But that is not all; let us have
further a reverential demeanor and carriage in the hearing of the Law, as it
becomes those that have to deal with God in it. The Text says, verse. 5. that
when Ezra opened the book of the Law, all the people stood up. We do not
expect the same gesture from you, but by way of Analogy we expect a
reverentiall demea nour in the carriage of he whole work, as knowing we are to
sanctify Gods Name in it. And as those people after the first days exercise
were so encouraged, that they came again the second day, (for so the Text
says, verse. 13. On the second day were gathered together the chief of the
fathers of all the people, the Priests and the Levi^es, unto Ezra, to
understand the words of the Law) so (I hope) God will so carry on this work,
that you shall find encouragement too, to come again and again, that you may
know more of the mind of God; and that this work shall not be only profitable
to the younger and weaker sort, but to the Fathers, to the Priests and Levites
too.

Let it be with you as it was with them, according as you have any truth made
known unto you, submit to it, yield to it, obey it presently, and then you
shall know more of Gods mind: He that will do my will, shall know my doctrine
to be of God: Ioh. 7. 17.
Thus did they, for verse. 14. when they found it written in the book of the
Law, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the
seventh month, (This was one passage of the Law that was expounded, how they
should keep the feast of Tabernacles, and what booths they should make) the
people went forth presently unto the mount, and fetched Olive branches, and
Palm branches, and branches of thick trees, and made themselves booths, every
one upon the roof of his house. In this Prophecy of Hosea you shall find many
suitable truths to the times wherein we live, the Lord grant you obedient hearts
to what shall be delivered.

I must not retard the work, nor your expectations any longer with large
prefacing to it, only somewhat have been said about the rules for
interpretation of Scripture; I will say no more of that but this, to
interpretation of Scripture, a Scripture frame of heart is necessary, a heart
holy and heavenly, suitable to the holiness and heavenlinesse that is in the
word: as it was said of Tullies eloquence, that nothing but the eloquence of
Tully could set out the excellency of it: So it may be said of the Scriptures
spiritualness, nothing but a heart filled with Scripture spiritualness can set
forth the excellencies of it: and because the authority of Scripture is
dreadful, we desire the prayers of you all to God for us, that his fear
might fall upon our hearts that seeing we are menfull of error, and full of
evil, yet howsoever we may not bring any Scripture to the maintenance of any
erroneous conceit of our own heads, nor any evil of our own hearts: This we
know to be a dreadful evil. It was a fearful evil for Lucifer to say, I
will go and ascend up, and be like the Highest, it is as great an evil for
any to seek to make the Highest to become like Lucifer; for so do they that
make the Scripture come down to justify any erroneous opinion, or any way of
evil they go about to make the blessed God and the holy Ghost to be the
fathers of lies. It is counted a great evil in a Commonwealth to put the
Kings stamp upon false coin; and to put the stamp of the Spirit of God upon an
error, upon a conceit of a man's own, is certainly a great evil before the
Lord: and it was for this that God did make the Priests vile and contemptible
before the people, because they were pa^tiall in the Law, Mal. 2. 9. And for
you (my brethren) our prayer shall be, that the fear of God may fall upon you
likewise, that you may come to these Exercises with Scripture-frames of heart.

What frame of heart is a Scripture-frame?

The holy Ghost tells you, Isa. 66. 1. God looks at him that trembles at his
word: come with hearts trembling at the word of God; come not to be Judges of
the Law, but doers of it.

You may judge of your profiting in grace by the delight you find in
Scripture, as Quintilian was wont to say of profiting in eloquence, a man may
know that, says he, by the delight he finds in reading Cicero; much more
may this be said of the Scriptures, it is a true sign of profiting in
Religion, to whom the Scriptures are sweeter then the honey, and the honeycombe.

And now I shall only tell you what the work is we have to do, ^um debere
scire se aliquid profecisse cui Ciceronis lectio eft valde iucunda.
and then we shall fall upon it, and that is to open Scripture unto you, not
only difficulties, but to show unto you what divine truths are contained in
them what may come fresh, and spring up from the fountain it self, to present
them unto you with adding some quickness. This is our work not to enlarge any
thing with long Explication, Probation, or Application.

There are these five things to be enquired concerning this our Prophet, whose
Prophecy I have now pitched upon to open.

1 Who he was. 2 To whom he was sent. 3 What his errant was. 4 His Commission.
5 The time of his prophecy
All these you have either in the first verse, (where most of them are) or you
shall find them in the Chapter.

For the first then, who this Prophet was. I will tell you no more of him then
what you have in the first verse, (...) in Hiphil. (...)
Hosea the son of Beeri. His name signifies a Savior, one that brings
salvation. It is the same root that Joshua had his name from; and many saving
and savory truths we shall find this Prophet bringing to us.

He was the son of Beeri. This Beeri we do not find who he was in
Scripture, Salvavit.
only in that he is here named as the father of the Prophet in the entrance
into this Prophecy, Surely it is honor is gratia to the Prophet, and from it
we may note thus much.

That so should parents live and walk, Obs.
as it may be an honor to their children to be called by their names, that
their children may neither be afraid nor ashamed to be named by them.

The Jews have a tradition that is generally received among them, that
whenever a Prophets Father is named, that Father was likewise a Prophet as
well as the Son. If that were so, then surely it is no dishonor for any man to
be the Son of a Prophet.

Let those that are the children of godly, gracious Ministers, be no dishonor
to their Parents, their Parents are an honor unto them: But we find it by
experience, that many of their children are far from being honors to their
godly parents. How many ancient godly Ministers, who heretofore hated
superstitious vanities, whose sonns of late have been the greatest zealots for
such things. It puts me in mind of what the Scripture notes concerning
Iehoiakim the son of Josiah, ^ King. ^ 2. 19.
the difference between his father and him. Josiah when he heard the Law read,
his heart melted, and he humbled himself before the Lord. But now Iehoiakim
his son, when he came to hear the Law of God read, he took a penknife,
and cut the roll in which it was written, Ier. 36. 23.
in pieces, and threw it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the
roll was consumed. A great deal of difference there was between the Son and
the Father, and thus it is between the sons of many ancient godly Ministers and
them: their Fathers indeed might be an honor unto them, but they are dishonor
to their Fathers.

The son of Beeri. This word Beeri has its signification from a Well that
has springing water in it, (...) Puteus.
freely and clearly running: So Ministers should be the children of Beeri, That
that they have should be springing water, and not the mud and dirt, and filth
of their own conceits mingled with the word. This only by way of allusion.

To whom was this Prophet Hosea sent.

He was sent especially to the Ten Tribes. I suppose you all know the division
that there was of the people of Israel in Rehoboams time, tenn of the Tribes
went from the house of David, only Judah and Benjamine remained with it. Now
these ten Tribes renting themselves from the house of David, did rent
themselves likewise from the true worship of God, and there grew up horrible
wickednesses, and all manner of abominations amongst them. To these ten Tribes
God sent this Prophet. He sent Isaiah and Micah to Judah, Amos and Hosea he
sent to Israel, all these were contemporary.

If you would know what state Israel was in, in Hoseas time, read but 2 K. 15.
19. and you shall find what their condition was, Jeroboam did that which was
e^ill but he fight of the Lord, he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat which made Israel to sin.

But notwithstanding Israel was thus notoriously wicked, and given up to all
Idolatry, yet the Lord sends his Prophets, Hosea and Amos, to Prophecy to
them even at this time. O the goodness of the Lord to follow an apostatizing
people, an apostatizing soul! It was mercy yet while God was speaking; but woe
to that people, to that soul to whom the Lord shall give in charge to his
Prophets, prophecy no more to them.

But what was Hosea his errand to Israel?

His errand was to convince them clearly o^ this their abominable Idolatry, and
those other abominable wickednesses that they lived in, and severely to
denounce threatenings, yea most fearful destruction. (This was not done before
by the other Prophets, as we shall afterward make it appear, but it was Hosea
his errand to threaten an utter desolation to Israel more than ever was before)
and yet withal to promise mercy to a remnant to draw them to repentance, and
to Prophecy of the great things that God intended to do for his Church and
children in the latter days.

What was his Commission?

The words tells us plainly, The word of the Lord came to Hosea. It was the
word of Jehovah. It is a great argument to obedience to know it is the word of
the Lord that is spoken. When men set reason against reason, and judgment
against judgment, and opinion against opinion, it prevails not: but when they
see the authority of God in the Word, then the heart and conscience yields.
Therefore hovvever you may look upon the instruments that bring it, or open it
to you, as your equals or inferiors, yet know there is an authority in the
Word that is above you al: It is the word of the Lord.

And this word of the Lord, it came to Hosea. Mark the phrase, Hosea did not
go for the word of the Lord, but the word of the Lord came to him: (...)
he sought it not, but it came to him, factum fuit verbum, so are the words,
the word of the Lord came, or was made into him, was put into him. Such a kind
of phrase you have in the new Testament, John 10. 35. If he called them Gods
unto whom the word of God came; (...).
that is, to whom the commission came, to put them in the place wherein they
were. So the word of the Lord came to Hosea. The knowledge of a call to a work,
will help a man through the difficulties of the work. One of the notablest
Texts of Scripture to encourage a man to that work to which he sees he is
clearly called, Magna semper facerunt, qui Deo vocaute docuerunt. Luther.
is that which is spoken of Christ himself, Isa. 42. 6. I the Lord have called
thee in righteousness: what follows then? I will hold thy hand, and will keep
thee, and give thee for a covenant to the people, for a light to the Gentiles.
If we know Gods call to a work (as for the present this of ours is exceeding
clear unto us) though the work will be difficult and liable to much censure,
Yet the Lord will hold our hands, and will be with us, and with our minds, and
our tongues, and our hearts, and will keep us in this work, and make us
instruments to give some light unto you.

But the principal business is to enquire of the time when Hosea prophesied.
You have it in the Text, In the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah
Kings, of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Ioash King of Israel.
It is computed by Chronologers, that Hosea lived about 814. years before
Christ: In his time was the City of Rome built. It was the beginning of the
Olympiads. Eusebius tells us that there was no Grecian History (and if no Greek
learning, then not any that was of any authority) extant before this time of
Hosea.

He prophesied in these Kings reigns, Eusebius. de Prapar. Euan. l. 20. c. ult. Ab
hec tempore Graeca de temporibus historia vera creditur.
Vzziah, Iotham, etc. You shall find that we shall have much of Gods mind
revealed in this, more then at first view we can comprehend. We shall find by
this that Hosea prophesied a very long time, it is very probable fourscore
years, but it is certain he was in the work of his Ministry above seventy
years, and I make that clear thus, He prophesied in the days of Ierobam (who
though he be here named last, yet he was the first of these Kings, and we shall
show you the reason by and by, why he was named last) that then took up some of
his time: But suppose you reckon from the end of Ieroboams reign, yet from that
to the beginning of Hezekiah, here were 70. years, and yet the Text says he
prophesied both in Ieroboams time, and in Hezekiahs time too: after the death
of Jeroboam, Vzziah lived 38. years (he reigned 52. in all) He began his reign
in the 27. of Jeroboam, 2 King. 15. 1. Now Jeroboam lived after that 14. years,
for he reigned 41. in all, take 14. out of 52. and there remains 38. and after
him Iotham reigned 16. years; and then Ahaz. succeeded him, and reigned
sixteen years more: so that between these two Kings, Jeroboam and Hezekiah,
there was 70. years, in which Hosea prophesied, besides the 41. years of
Jeroboam, and 29. years of Hezekiah, in both whose reigns too you see he lived,
and therefore it is probable it was 80. years at least that Hosea continued in
the work of his prophecy. See what of Gods mind we have that will spring
fresh from this.

Hosea continued so long, Obs. 1.
and yet you see there is not much of his prophecy extant, only 14 short
Chapters. It pleases God sometimes that some men's labors shall abide more
full to posterity than others, though the labors of those others more large,
and as excellent as theirs: this is according to the diversity of Gods
administrations. Let the Ministers of God learn to be faithful in their work,
and let God alone for to make them eminent by having their labors extant.

2. It appears from hence that Hosea must needs begin to prophecy very young.
Obs. 2.
If he were a Prophet 80. years, certainly he was but young when he began
first to prophecy, and yet he was set upon as great an employment as any of
the Prophets were (as we shall see hereafter.) It pleases God sometimes to
stir up the hearts of young ones to do him great service, he sends such
sometimes about great works and employments, so he did Samuel, and Jeremiah,
and Timothy, therefore let no man despise their youth.

3. Hosea prophesying thus long, Obser. 3.
it appears he lived to be old in his work. When God has any work for men to
do, he does lengthen out their days. So he did the days of John the Disciple,
he lived near upon an hundred years, if not more, for the time of the writing
of his Gospel (as it is noted) was in the 99. year of Christ, 66. after the
Ascension. Let not us be too solicitously careful about our lives, to maintain
our healths and strengths, let us be careful to do our work; for according
as the Lord has work for us to do, so he will continue to us our health and
strength, and life: when you come to dye, you may dye comfortably, having this
thought in you; well, the work that the Lord sent me to do, is done, and why
should I seek to live longer in the world? God has others enough to do his
work. It was a sweet expression of Jacob, Genesis 48. 21. Behold I dye (says he)
but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
So may the Prophets of God say that have been faithful in their work: Behold I
dye, but the Lord shall be with you, my work is finished, but God has others
that are young, to go on in his work, that is the third Observation.

4. You may so by Hoseas continuance in so many Kings reigns, Obser. 4.
that he went through variety of conditions; sometimes he lived under wicked
Kings, sometimes under moderate Kings, sometimes he had encouragement from
godly and gracious Kings, although they were of Judah. Not only the people of
God, but specially Gods Ministers must expect variety of conditions in the
world, they must not promise to themselves always the same state.

Yet further. Hosea prophesied in all these Kings reigns. Here appears the
constancy of his spirit, notwithstanding the many difficulties he met withal
in his work: for he prophesying in Jeroboams, Iotham, and Ahaz his time who
were wicked Princes, surely he must meet with many discouragements; And though
he continued 80. years, yet he saw but little success of his labor, for the
truth is, the people were never converted to God by his Ministry.

Nay it is apparent that they grew worse and worse, for it is said of that
Ieroboams time in which Hosea began his Prophecy, only that he did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and continued in the ways of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
2 King. 15. 15. But after we read most horrible things that Israel was guilty
of, 2 King. 17. 17. It is said, they caused their sons and their daughters to
pass through the fire, and used divinations, and enchantments, and sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger,
besides many dreadful things, you may read in that Chapter, Israel was grown
guilty of. This was in King Hoshea his time, which was many years after Hosea
began to prophecy, toward the end of his Prophecy.

God may continue a Prophet a long time amongst a people, Obser. 5.
and yet they may never be converted. It is a distemper in Ministers hearts to
think to give over their work because they see not desired success. I remember
Latimer in one of his Sermons, speaking of a Minister, who gave this answer,
why he left off Preaching, because he saw he did no good, this says Latimer is
a naughty, a very naughty answer. That we have here may be a great stay to
these who have lived many years in the work of the Ministry, and yet have done
little or no good. Hosea was fourscore years a Prophet to Israel, and yet did
not convert them. Yet notwithstanding all these discouragements, he continued
constant, and that with abundance of freshness and liveliness when he comes
to the end of his prophesying.

It is an honor to the Ministers of God, Obser. 6.
that meet with many difficulties in their way, and with many discouragements,
yet to continue fresh and lively to the very end; not to be fresh and lively
only at first, as many young Ministers are when they begin first. O how fresh
are they, how full of zeal and activity are they then? but after they have been
a while in their work, or when they have gained what they aimed at, then they
grow cold, and that former vigor, freshness, and zeal, which appeared to be
in them, comes to be a great deal flatter. Like soldiers, that at the first
were forward, and active in service, but afterward come to live upon their pay,
and can do no service at all; or rather as vessels of wine, that when they are
first tapped are very smart, and quick, and nimble, but at last grow exceeding
flat: as we commend that vessel of wine that draws quick to the very last of
all: so it is an excellent thing indeed for a Minister of God to continue
fresh, and quick, and lively, to the last end. It is true, nature and natural
abilities may decay, but a spiritual freshness may appear, when natural
abilities are decayed. To see an old Prophet of God, that has gone through
many difficulties, and sufferings, and yet to continue fresh and lively in the
work of the Ministry, and to have spiritual excellencies sparkle in him then,
this is a most honorable sight, and calls for abundance of reverence.

Lastly, Hosea prophesied so long that he came to see the fulfilling of his
Prophecy, for he continued prophesying till Hezekiahs time, and in the sixth
year of Hezekiahs reign came the destruction of Israel. Hosea had threatened an
utter taking of them away, but all this while it was not done till then, and
then it is most likely he saw the fulfilling of his Prophecy.

It pleases God many times to let his Prophets see the fulfilling of their
threatenings upon the people against whom they have denounced them. Obser. 7.
Perhaps they go away, and scorn, and contemn the Prophets, and their words
are but wind with them, but God many times lets his Ministers live to see
their words fulfilled upon them. For particular persons, when they are cast
upon their beds of sickness or death, it is then ordinary for them to say, Oh
the word of the Lord is true that I heard at such a time, it is now come upon
me. So God dealt with the people in Jeremies time, they laughed and contemned
him, but Jeremy lives to see the fulfilling of those threatenings at last. And
if they live not to see the fulfilling of their words, yet presently after
their death they are fulfilled, as it was at Hippo, where Austin threatened
judgments against them, they were not executed in his time, but presently
after he was taken away, they came.

Yea but he did not only prophecy in these Kings days, but in the days of
Jeroboam King of Israel. Here are three Questions:

1. What is the reason that Jeroboam, who in truth was the first of these
Kings, that he is named last?

2. Why only one King of Israel is named, and three Kings of Judah? for besides
him in the time of Hosea's prophecy there were 6. other Kings of Israel,
Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah, Peka, Hoshea.

3. Why Jeroboam is named at all?

One answer will be sufficient for the two first Questions, why Jeroboam is
named last, and why there is but one King of Israel named. The answer is this,
God took no great delight in the Kings of Israel, for they had forsaken the
true worship of God. Though there was much corruption in Judah, yet because
they kept to the true worship of God, God took more delight in Judah then in
srael. Therefore he names Jeroboam in the last place, though he was first,
and only him.

But why was Jeroboam named at all?

This is of great use. You shall find that it was for this end, that you might
understand what estate the people of Israel were in at this time of Hosea's
Prophecy. Much you shall see is to be learned from hence. The state of the
people of Israel in the time of Jeroboams reign was very prosperous, though
their wickedness was very great. For if you look into 2 K. 14. you shall find
there, that a little before this they had been in very great distress, and
under sore afflictions: Now in Jeroboams time they were in the greatest
prosperity that ever they had been in: for this Jeroboam was not the first
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that caused Israel to sin, and was a means of the
rent of these Ten Tribes from the house of David, that was 140. years and more
before this; but this Jeroboam, in whose time God sent Hosea to prophecy this
greatwrath against the house of Israel, was the son of Joash. Now in all this
time this Kingdom was never in a more prosperous condition then in the days
of this Jeroboam.

Two things are to be observed concerning the condition of this people at this
time.

First, That they were a little before this in great adversity, and then after
they grew upto great prosperity. For if you read that 14. Chap. of 2 Kings, you
shall find that they were under sore affliction, for the Text says, verse. 26.
There was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel. It is a
comparison taken from Shepherds, that use to shut up their flocks when they
would keep them safe from danger; but now here was such a general desolation
and woeful affliction upon Israel, that there was none shut up, nor no helper
left. But then comes this Jeroboam, and it is said, ver. 25. That he restored
the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the Sea of the plain. And
ver. 28. He recovered Damascus and Hamath, which belonged to Judah, for Israel.
This Hamath that he speaks of was of great use, it was the inlet of the
Assyrians, and for Jeroboam to conquer that place, land to recover Damascus,
and to add that to the Crown of Israel, which belonged to Judah, it shows that
after their bitter affliction, God granted a great mercy by Jeroboams means,
and that now Israel flourished greatly, and grew exceeding prosperous. There is
much of Gods mind held out to us in this: As, in that the people of Israel had
been under sore affliction, and delivered, yet God sent Hosea to them, to show
them their horrible wickedness, and to threaten destruction.

Hence see the perverseness of the children of men, Obs. 1.
that after great deliverances granted them from bitter and sore afflictions,
yet they will continue still in their wickedness and rebellion. The Lord grant
this may not be true concerning us. God has delivered us in great measure from
those sore and bitter afflictions, and heavy oppressions, under which we
lately were, and many gracious liberties are restored to us; Now have we not
need of an Hosea to be sent unto us to rebuke us, and to threaten judgment for
the evil of our ways? This is a sad thing.

Further, Obs. 2.
God may let a sinner continue a long time in the way of his sin, and when he
has flourished many years, and thinks surely the bitterness of death is past,
then God may come and threaten judgment. Jeroboam reigned 4^. years, and it
cannot be but that Hosea prophesying so long after Jeroboams death, came in the
latter end of Jeroboams time. Jeroboam might think, what does he come to
contest with me, and to tell me of my sin and wickedness, and to threaten
judgment? have not I continued these 40, years King, and have prospered? and
surely God has been with me. Well, a sinner may hold out long, and yet
afterward judgment may come.

Thirdly, Obser. 3
A people in a flourishing condition, when they prosper most, and overcome
their Enemies, and have all according to their hearts desire, even that may be
the time for God to come out in his wrath against them. So it was here,
therefore we must not judge our Enemies to be happy, nor fear them because of
their flourishing estate for the present, neither let us be secure our selves
because of the mercies we enjoy. God does not always so, but sometimes he is
pleased thus to deal with sinners, to stay till they be at the height of their
prosperity, and then to come upon them, as here he did.

Sometimes God is more sudden, it is like Zechariah the son of this Jeroboam
thought he might venture as well as his Father, his Father prospered in such
ways 41 years, and why may not I? No, God came upon him in six months, 2
King. 15. 8.

Fifthly, Hosea when he came to prophecy against Israel, he saw them in their
prosperity, and yet continues to threaten judgment against them. It was a
further argument of the Spirit of God that taught him, and of a special
insight he had into the mind of God, that he should thus prophecy destruction
to them when they were in the height of their prosperity. It is true, if Hosea
had come afterward in Zachariah his days, when the Kingdom was declining; or
if Hosea had pophesied in Shallums time, and others after him, then he might
have seen by the working of second causes, that the kingdom was going down
indeed. No, but he comes in Jeroboams time, when there was no appearance of
second causes at all of their destruction, and then prophesies destruction
unto them.

It is a sign of special insight the soul has in the ways of God, Obser. 4
that can see misery under the greatest prosperity. The Prophet did not think
Israel in a better condition, because of their outward prosperity. A sign his
prophecy was from God.

Yet further, this being in the reign of Jeroboam, when they were in great
prosperity, surely their hearts were exceedingly hardened against the Prophet;
and it cannot be imagined, but that they entertained his prophecy with scorn
and contempt: for it is an usual thing, when men are in the height of their
pride, and in their ruff, then like the wild asses colt, to scorn and contemn
all that comes against them.

It is nothing for a Minister of God to deal plainly with people in the time
of adversity, when they are down the wind, but when men are in the ruff of
their pride, and in all their jollity, to deal faithfully with them then, this
is something, and thus the Prophet Hosea did.

That their great prosperity did raise up and harden their hearts with pride
against the Prophet, Obser. 5
it appears plainly, if you will but read Amos 7. 10. (for we must find Gods
mind by comparing one place with another) there you shall find what the fruit
of Jeroboams prosperity was, for Amos and Hosea were contemporary. When Amos
was prophesying, Amaziah the Priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam King of Israel,
saying, Amos has conspired against thee, the land is not able to bear his
words. This was said of Amos, it is like that Hosea did not meet with better
measure then this. Amaziah the Priest of Bethel did this. If there be any
enemies against the faithful Ministers in a place, they are the Priests of
Bethel, idolatrous and superstitious Ministers. And what course do they take?
They send to the King, to the Governors, O they have conspired against the
King, they are seditious persons, factious men, that keep a stir in the
kingdom, and break the peace of the Church, the Land cannot bear their words.
Such a message as this you see did Amaziah send concerning Amos; he turns off
all from himself to the King, and all the punishment that must be inflicted
upon Amos, must be in the name of the King. And mark the 12. ver. of that Chap.
Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee away into the land of
Judea, and prophecy there. We are not holy enough for you forsooth, we are
Idolaters, we do not worship God aright, we are no true Church, get you to
Judah among your brethren, and prophecy not any more here at Bethel, why?
Because it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. It seems then in
those times, that the Kings Chapel, the Kings Court could not bear with a
faithful Prophet. And what was the ground of it, but because at this time
Jeroboam prospered in his way, and the kingdom was in such a flourishing
condition as it never was before? Here then was the trial of the faithfulness
of Hosea's spirit, yet to go on in the work of his Prophecy.

Yet further. Obser. 6.
In that Hosea did prophecy in the time of Jeroboam, by that it will apppear
that he was the first Prophet that ever brought these hard tidings to them, of
the utter destruction of Israel, It will appear by that which is said, 2 King.
14. 27. that before this time God had not so threatened Israel; for the Text
says: The Lord said not before this time that he would blot out the name of
Israel from under heaven, but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son
of Joash. Mark, there is given the reason why the Lord saved them by the hand
of Jeroboam, because he had not yet said he would blot out the name of Israel
from under heaven, that is, the Lord never before sent any of his Prophets thus
plainly and fully to declare his intention to them for the utter blotting out
th name of Israel, upon their going on in their sins. So that it is clear, that
Hosea was the first that was sent about this message. And certainly it was so
much the harder, he being the first of all. For they might have said, why do
you come with these new things, and in so great severity, who did ever so
before you? It was a hard task: For we know if a Minister come with any thing
that seems to be new, if he presents any truth to you that has but a show of
Novelty, that you heard not before, though it be never so good and comfortable,
he shall find little encouragement. Nay if he do but come in a new way, as
this very exercise, because it is like to go on in a way that yet has been
disused, it will meet with many discouragements. What then will the threatenings
of hard things, of judgments, and destruction do when they come with novelty?
Surely Hosea had a hard task of this, and yet he went on faithfully with it.

Thus much for the time wherein Hosea prophesied.

Now to make a little entrance into the prophecy.

The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea.

Some from these words do gather that Hosea was the first Prophet that ever
was, Though it is true, we cannot gather it directly from hence, yet it is
apparent, that notwithstanding Isaiah be set first, yet Hosea was before him;
for if you look into the 1 Isa. you shall find that his beginning was in the
days of Vzziah. Now Hosea was in the days of Jeroboam, and Jeroboam was
before Vzziah. And this may be one reason why though I intend the whole
prophetical books, yet I rather pitch upon Hosea first, because indeed he was
the first Prophet: it is clear you see from the Scripture, though we cannot
gather it from these words in this second verse.

But yet thus much we may gather from these words, The beginning of the word of
the Lord by Hosea, that this was the beginning of his prophecy. And what was
this beginning? what did God set him about first? Mark presently the next
words, he must take him a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredomos, and
so declare to the people of Israel that they had committed great whoredom
departing from the Lord. The most grievous charge, and most severe and terrible
expression of Gods wrath against that people that you meet with in all the book
of God. This is the work Hosea must do, and Hosea was very young when first he
went about it. Now as I told you before, God sometimes calls young ones to
great services; but to call a young man to this service, to go to this people
with such a message, now in the midst of all their pride and flourish to
contest with them thus, and to tell them that they are children of whoredoms,
and no longer the people of God, for what? for a young man to do this? Why,
they might have said, if this came from the mouth of some old ancient Prophet,
reverent for his years, and experience, it had been somewhat; but to come from
a green head, for an upstart to upb^aid us with such vile things. Thus men
grown old, and sodden in their sins, Obser.
are ready to reason. But let us know (my brethren) if God send any message
unto us, though by young ones, he expects your entertainment of it. When God
would destroy Elies house, he sends the message by young Samuel; but Eli did
not reason thus, what this young boy come to speak thus malapartly to me! No,
he stoops to it, Good is the word of the Lord, says he.

Again, Obsec.
Hosea must tell them that they are children of whoredoms, and not the people
of God. What for a Minister when he comes first among a people, to begin so
harshly, and severely, and ruggedly, is it not better to comply with the
people, to come with gentle and ^aire means, to seek to win them with love? if
you begin with harsh truths, surely you will make them fly off presently. Thus
many do reason. Now I beseech you take heed to your own hearts in reasoning
thus, Many have done so, and have sought to comply with people so long till
they have complied away all their faithfulness, and conscience, and vigor
that before they had: When they come to great men, rich men, men in place and
emmency, they will comply with such; but let them have any of Gods people in
their Parish that are of a mean rank, and poor, they comply little enough with
them, but are harsh and bitter to them, and regard not the tenderness of their
consciences at all.

It is true. If Ministers have the testimony of their own consciences that they
would take no other way but what shall be for the greatest profit of their
people, maintaining such a disposition as to be willing to undergo any
sufferings that God shall call them unto: they may say first when they come to
a house, Peace be to this house, especially when they come to a place that has
not had the means before. But if it be to a people that go directly against
the light of their consciences, a superstitious people that cannot but be
convinced, and have had many evidences that it is against the mind of God, and
yet only for their own base ends will go on and not amend; in such a case as
this we may come with harshnesse at the very first. So Paul gives a charge to
Titus in dealing with the Cretians who were evil beasts and slow bellies, that
he should rebuke them sharply, Chapter 13. (...).
(so we translate it) the word in the Original is, cuttingly.

The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea. The particle which is
translated [ by] signifies [ in] as well as by, it is not El, but Beth, and so
it is read by some, The word of the Lord came in Hosea. This expression notes
the inward and intimate converse that the Lord had with the spirit of Hosea in
the work of the Ministry. The Lord spoke first in Hosea, and then he speaks out
unto the people. Some such expression we have concerning Paul, Gal. 1. 16. That
Christ may be revealed in me, not only to me, but in me. The more inwardly God
speaks, and converseth with the hearts of his Ministers, the more inwardly and
efficaciously they are able to speak to the people. This is the deep preaching,
when it is from the heart. And so Augustine says of Hosea, Quanto (...) dius
(...) em lo^^itur, (...) into opeto^ius pene^^ratur.
because that which he spoke was so deep it wrought more strongly. Hoseas
Prophecy must needs be deep, for God spoke in him before he spoke out to the
people. We say, that which comes from the heart will go to the heart: Surely
that which comes from the voice of God in the heart, will go beyond the ears
to the hearts of people. And blessed are the people that have such Ministers
that shall speak nothing to them, Aug. de Hosea l. 18. deciu.
but what has first been spoken by God in them.

Again in this second verse he comes twice with the same expression, The
beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea, and again, The Lord said to Hosea;
and yet in the beginning of the first verse, The word of the Lord came to
Hosea. Why all this, three times? All this upon good reason; for Hosea was to
come with a terrible message to the people, and to reprehend them with much
sharpness, to tell them that they were the children of whoredoms, and that
they had departed from the Lord, and he would have no more mercy upon them, but
would utterly take them away. He had need therefore have an express command
for what he did, and to have much evidence of the Spirit, that what he said was
from God, and not any thing of his own spirit. When a Minister of God shall
come and reprehend a people severely for their sins, and threaten Gods
judgment, let him then if ever look to it, that he has a good ground for what
he says, that what he shall deliver may be nothing but the word of God in him,
the sheer word of God, without any mixture of his own. It is an ordinary thing
in Ministers in reprehending of sin, and denouncing of threatenings, to mingle
much of their own spirit and wrath: But if at any time Ministers should take
heed of mixing their own wrath, then especially when they are to denounce Gods
wrath, then they should bring nothing but the word of the Lord; for it being a
hard message, the spirits of men will rise up against it, if they once see the
spirit of the Minister in it, they will be ready to say as the devil in the
possessed man, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you? So they, the
word of the Lord I know, but what are you? here is your own passion, your own
humor, etc. O let not any think to oppose sin with sin, Iam. 1. 20.
the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. You that are
Ministers, would you have a sentence? I will give you one; and I have done: When
you are called to reveal Gods wrath, conceals your own.

The Second Lecture. May 23. 1642.

Hosea 1. the middle of the second verse, and so on. Go, take unto thee a wife
of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land has committed great
whoredom, departing from the Lord.

3. So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and
bare him a son.

4. And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Iezreel; for yet a little while,
and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, and will cease
the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

5. And it shall come to pass in that day that I will break the bow of Israel
in the valley of Iesreel.


THE Preface to the work, and to the whole prophecy you heard the last time.
The scope of the Chapter.
The scope of the prophecy is the very same that the scope of this Chapter is,
to declare, first, The evil condition that Israel, the ten Tribes were in, in
regard of their sins, and punishment that was to be executed for their sins.
Secondly, Gracious promises of mercy, to a remnant, to Judah in the 7. ver. and
to Judah and Israel both, from the 10. ver. to the end of the Chapter.

First, Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem, Quamqua sunt oculis subjecta
fidelibus: and quae Ipse sibi tradit spectator.
God begins with conviction, to show them their sin, and the dreadfulnesse
of it.

Conviction should go before correction. You must not presently fly in the
faces of those that are under you when they cross you: first instruct them,
and then correct them, do as God did here, God would first convince them of the
greatness of their sins, not by verbal, but by real expressions.

Those things that come but to the ear, they do more slowly stir and work
upon the heart, but things that are presented before the eye are more
operative; and therefore Hosea must not tell them only that they had committed
whoredom, but must tell them in this way, he must go and take a wife of
whoredoms, Lect. 2.
and beget children of whoredoms.

In the very threshold, in the entrance of the prophecy you see we meet with
a difficulty, a great difficulty. First, a command from God, from the holy God,
unto a Prophet, a holy Prophet, to go and take a wife of whoredoms; not an
ordinary whore, but a most prostitute whore, for so the word signifies, Such a
one as Thais was among the Athenians. Vir sanguinum.
of whoredoms, as in the Scripture phrase, a man of bloods, is a man that has
shed much blood; and a man of sorrows, is a man that has been exercised with
many sorrows; and so a wife of whoredoms is one that has committed notorious
whoredoms, vile whoredoms. Yet such a wife must the Prophet take to himself,
and his children must be children of whoredoms too. How can this be?

S. Austin, Aug. cont. Faust. l. 22 c. 80.
who had been a Manichee, having to deal much with Macichees, met with this
object on, from one Faustas a Manichee, against the Old Testament, Quid
adversura clementiae veritatis, quid fidei Christianae si meretrix relicta
for^^catiane (...) castum conjugium commutetur, etc.
for they denied it: says Faustas, that Old Testament of yours, Moses and the
Prophets, is that of God? do you not find there a command to take a wife of
whoredoms, and can this be from God?

Austin answers it thus. Though she had been a prostitute whore before, yet
she might be reclaymed, and so she might be called a wife of whoredoms, from
that whoredom that heretofore she was guilty of, and now reclaymed. And so he
thinks that it was a reality indeed, that Hosea did take to himself a wife
of whoredoms, and think to salve it up thus.

Theodoret is somewhat angry with those that think it was not really done, but
done only in away of vision. I find many of our later men that are of the same
mind, Eorum audaciam mirari satis nequeo qui non verentur dicere verba haec
esse rebus destituta. Theod. in Hos. ena^. c. 1.
that think there was a reality in it, that God did command Hosea to take to
himself a wife of whoredoms, and that he did take such a wise, one that was a
notorious harlot, so Arius Montanus, Piscator, Pareus, Tarnovius, and others,
they go that way, and they think to salve it only thus, that it is a command
of God, and therefore though it had not been lawful for Hosea to have done it,
yet God commanding it, he might do it: As they instance in other cases that
seem to be somewhat of the like nature, as the children of Isreal's robbing the
Egyptians, Abraham's killing his son, and the like.

If this should be so, (as many Interpreters going that way might make one to
think it not a thing impossible) we might learn thus much from it.

First, Obser.
that Gods command takes away all matter of offense. It would be a notorious
offensive thing for a Prophet, a Minister of God to marry one that is wicked, a
wicked whore; yet so far as the offense is, Gods command is enough to take it
away. Gods command takes away the offense, not he com^mand of the Magistrate.
For the subject of offense is not duty, but indifferency: any thing that is a
duty to be done, we must go on in it, though it be never so offensive to
others, that is no rule at all to hinder us if it be a duty: but if it be a
thing of indifferency, then we must stop. Gods command takes away all plea of
offense; I say not that man's command does so, for men, even Magistrates
themselves are bound not to offend their brethren, as well as others.

But then it may be said they should command nothing at all, for some or other
would be offended, and shall not they command, because some weak ones may be
offended?

It is true, Ans.
that which they may take upon their consciences to be their duty, that they
are bound to command, and they should sin against God if they did not command
it, and require obedience to it; they must do it though never so many be
offended. But in matters that they themselves acknowledge to be neither here
nor there, either for Gods service or for the good of a Commonwealth, herein
the rule binds them as well as others in regard of offenses, to forbear.

2. Supposing this to be a real thing, 2.
we see that the Prophet must suffer much in his credit before men, only to be
serviceable to God for a further expression of his mind.

All our credits, Obser.
all our names, and all we are, or have, must lie down at Gods feet to be
serviceable to him in the least thing; if but in a way of expression of his
mind, much more then in bearing witness to his truth.

3. This being so, we see the way of God in putting the Prophet in the very
first service upon a very difficult work: Obser.
It could not but be a thing exceeding tedious and irksome to his spirit to
marry such a one, yet God put him upon it.

It is the usual way of God, when he calls any to great services, at the
beginning, to put them to such difficult works, to try them thereby, that if
they go through them, then they may be confided in, that they will go through
more afterward.

But we shall rather take this in a way of vision, as others do; not that
indeed Hosea did really marry such a wife, but this did appear to him in a
vision, as if such a thing were really done, only to declare what the
condition of the people of Israel was at this time in respect of God: As if God
should say, Hosea, this people of Israel is to me no other then as if thou
should have a wife that were the most notorious whore in the world, and all
their children are to me as if thy children were the children of whoredom and
fornication. And this I conceive to be more directly the mind of God, and I
will not give you my mere conception of it neither, but reasons for it why it
must be so.

First, Reasons why Hoseas marrying a whore was but only in a vision. 1.
because we find in Scripture that which is historically related, yet was done
by way of vision. And it is an usual way of Scripture to express that which is
done in a way of vision, as if it were a history, as if it were really done. I
will show you two examples for this, one of Jeremy when he was at Jerusalem,
yet the Scripture speaks as if he had been at Babylon: and the other of
Ezekiel, when he was at Babylon, it speaks as if he had been at Jerusalem. It
is as fully related as this is here, and both must therefore needs be
understood as in a way of vision. First for Jeremy, you have it Chap. 30. ver.
4. God requires there that he should go to Euphrates and hide his girdle
there in the hole of a rock. But this river was a river in Babylon, and Jeremy
was not in Babylon at this time, nor in all the time of the siege, nor in the
time of the captivity, neither could he go to Babylon, for the City was now
besieged, and when he did but assay but to go a little way to Anathoth his own
Town, he was presently taken hold upon as if he had been a Traitor to his
Country. Therefore this which is here declared as a history, as if he had
really done it, was but only done in a vision. And so Ezekiel the other way,
he was at Babylon (for he was that Prophet that prophesied to the people that
were carried captive to Babylon, God sent a Prophet to them to help them there
in their captivity) yet in the 8. Chapter of his Prophecy, Ezekiel seems to
be brought to Jeremiah, and he is bidden there to dig a hole in the wall to see
the wicked abominations that the ancients of Israel did there. Now Ezekiel was
not there, he was at Babylon all this while, but it is declared as if the thing
had been done really. So we are to understand Isaiah his going naked 20.
days, and Ezekiels lying three hundred and ninety days on the one side, and
43. on the other, Ezekiel. 4.

2. That it was a vision and not really done, 2.
the reason is, it was Gods command, Lev. 21. 7. That the Priest must not marry
with a whore; and of all men's wives God is most careful of the wives of those
that are in the work of the Ministry, that are Church Officers, therefore 1 Timothy 3. 11. when but a Deacon is described what he should be, there is his wife
described too, that she should be grave, no slanderer, sober and faithful in
all things. You never read that when God appointed what a Magistrate should be,
what his office should be in a Commonwealth, that he takes such care to set
down what his wife should be: But when he appoints the lowest officer in a
Church, a Deacon, he appoints what his wife should be too. Therefore the
wives of Ministers should go away with a lesson from hence, and know that God
has a more special eye to them, then to the wives of all the men in the world
besides. God is tender of the credit of the officers of his Church, and so
should man be; for their discredit is a hinderance to their work.

Yea further, we read Amos 7. 16. that it was threatened as a curse to Amaziah
the Priest of Bethel, that his wife should be a harlot, for resisting the
Prophet: shall then the wife of Hosea be a whore? For Amos and Hosea prophesied
both at the same time.

And the Scripture says (you know the place, How the woman is the glory of the
man.
1 Cor. 11.) that the woman is to be the glory of the man. What a glory should
Hosea have had in such a match as this? The woman is the glory of the man, How?
(for so I desire not only to open the Scripture that I read here, but as I go
along and quote Scripture, so far as may be for your edification, and suitable
to our argument to open there too.) In two respects she is so. 1. because it is
a glory to a man that he has such an image, for she is from the man, and as
the man being the image of God, shows the glory of God, because he is the
image of God, and from him; so the woman being from the man, and as it were his
image, she is the glory of the man. 2. Because man has such an excellent
creature brought under subjection to him: so the woman is the glory of the man.
Man is not only made glorious by God, in that God has put all other creatures
under him, but especially in this, that God has put such an excellent creature
under him as the woman is, so the woman is the glory of the man. This could not
be here in such a match as this.

3. It could not be that it was a real thing, 3.
but a vision from the prophecy it self, for then Hosea must have stayed
almost a whole year before he could have gone on in his prophecy: For first
he must take to him a wife of whoredoms, and beget a child of whoredoms, then
he must have stayed till the child had been born, before he could have come to
the people and say, My child is borne, and his name is Iezreel, and it is upon
this ground that I have named him thus, and then he must have stayed almost a
year more before he could have Locuhamah, and then after that he must stay
almost another year longer before Loammi could be born.

And lastly, Apparens and loquens ei per vifiouem interiorem ecstafi.
that which is noted by Polanus, the expression that we have here is, that God
spoke in Hosea, speaking and appearing to him by an inward vision as it were in
an ecstasy, says Polanus; therefore we must take it so that this wife of
whoredoms that Hosea was to marry, was in a way of vision, it was to signify
that Israel was to God as a wife of whoredoms, and as children of whoredoms
should have been to the Prophet if he had been married to her.

From all these there is this result, that the people of Israel were gone a
whoring from God. Obs.


Idolatry it is as the sin of whoredom, Adulterium committen^ quasi ad
alterium se (...) conferens.
and I cannot open this Scripture except I show you wherein idolatry is like
the sin of whoredom: The idolatry of the Church, not the idolatry of Heathens
is whoredom. One that commits adultery does give her self to another: The
Heathens because they were never married to God, their idolatry is not
adultery; but the people of GDO being married to the Lord, their idolatry is
adultery.

Adultery first, Wherein is Idolatry like to the sin of Adultery.
because it breaks the marriage bond, there is nothing breaks the marriage bond
between God and his people but the sin of idolatry, as not between man and
wife. Though a wife may be guilty of many faylings, and be a grievous trouble
and burden to her Husband, yet these do not break the marriage knot except
she defile the marriage bed: 1.
So though a people may be guilty of notorious and vile sins, yet if they keep
the worshp of God pure, they are not guilty of whoredom, but still God is
married to them.

2. Whoredom is a loath some thing, 2.
though delightsome to men, yet loathsome to God: Idolatry is so, therefore the
Scripture calls the Idols that men set up by a name that signifies the very
excrement that comes from creatures, (...).
Ezekiel. 22. 3. Idolaters think their way of idol-worship to be very delightsome.
but that which they call delectable, God calls detestable, so you shall find
it if you compare these two Scriptures, Isa. 44. 9. they call their Idols
delectable things; but in Ezekiel. 5. 11. God calls them detestable things.
Idolatry is a detestable loathsome thing.

3. There is nothing wherein a man is so irreconcilable as in the point of the
marriage bed, 3.
the defiling of that by adultery causes an irreconcilable breach. Jealousy
is the rage of a man, and he will take no ransom. There is nothing wherein God
is so reconcilable to a people, as in the point of false worship.

4. Adultery is a besotting sin. 4.
Whoredom and new wine take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11.
says the Prophet: and in that 44. Isa. 19. there, says God, he has no
understanding to consider and say, What, have I not taken one part and roasted
flesh with it, and with another part have baked bread upon the coals, and
warmed my self with another part, and shall I make the residue thereof an
abomination, and fall down to the stock of a tree? He has no understanding
to consider this. Idolatry is a besotting sin as well as adultery. And
therefore we need not marvail though-men of great parts and abilities continue
in their superstitious way of worship, for nothing besotteth men's hearts so
much as that does.

Again 5. 5.
Whoredom is a most dangerous sin. We have a most dreadful place for that,
Prove. 22. 14. The mouth of a strange woman is as a deep pit; heth at is
abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. Oh most dreadful place to an
Adulterer! if there be any Adulterer in this place this day, when thou go
home turn to that Scripture, and let it be as a dart to to thy heart, the mouth
of a strange woman is as a deep pit; he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall
therein; A sign of a man abhorred of God, and so is Idolatry, for in 2 These.
2. 11, 12. God gave them over to believe a lie that they might be damned. Those
that follow the Idolatries of Antichrist are given over by God to believe a
lie, That lie of Popery is altogether one lie. Hence it is that the Popish
party invent so many such strange lies, all to uphold that great lie. What is
this? that they might be damned. It is a dreadful dangerous sin the sin of
Idolatry, though they think they please God in and by such ways of worship,
yet they are given over by God that they may be damned. If this prove to be a
place that concerns those that follow Antichrist, and if Rome proves to be so
as by that place is described, it is a dreadful place to all Papists.

Again, 6.
Whores use to deck themselves up in pompous attire, in dainty, glorious
raiment. So idolaters use to deck up their Idols in bravery, and lavish gold
(as the Scripture speaks) upon their Idols; whereas the Kings daughter is all
glorious within, and the simplicity of the Gospel will not permit such things.

And lastly, 7.
as whores, though they go a whoring from their Husbands, yet still they
retain (before the divorce) the name of wives, and their children (though
bastards) retain the name of children, and bear the fathers name: So
Idolaters, they will retain the name of the Church, the Church, and those that
they beget, must still be called the only sons of the Church.

But how are his children said to be children of whoredoms? Filii Ecclesiae.
for suppose his wife were a wife of whoredoms, Quest.
yet being married to her, wherefore should the children be called children of
whoredoms?

To that is answered first, Answ. 1.
some think upon this ground, because the children when they are grown up would
^ollow the way of the Mother, as it is an usual thing for children to do.
Therefore you need to take heed how you enter into the state of marriage for
your childrens sake, for they will follow the way of the Mother.

Or rather this, because though they were begotten after marriage, yet they
will ye under suspicion as those that are illegitimate; the children of one
that has been a whore are always suspected, and so in repute they are the
children of whoredom and fornication: so says God, these people are to me as
if their children were accounted the children of fornication.

For the whole land has gone a whoring from the Lord.

In going a whoring they go a whoring: Fornicando fornicatur. or as Arius
Montanus Fornicando fornicabitur.
Or as Arius Montanus reads it, In going a whoring they will go a whoring.
They not only Have, but Will, they are set upon it, they are stout-hearted in
the way of Idolatry, and it is the land that has done it, the people of the
land.

But why the land?

It is a secret check to them, and upbraiding them for their unthankfulness,
that when God gave them so good a land, the land of Canaan, that flowed with
milk and honey, the land of promise, that was given to them for that end to
nourish up the true worship of God, yet they made this land of God, this land
of promise to be a land to nourish up most vile Idolaters.

Gone a whoring from the Lord.

From Jehovah.

The more worthy the Husband is, Obser.
the more vile and odious the adultery of the Wife. What, to go a whoring from
God, the blessed God, in whom is all beauty and excellency, and turn to blind
Idols? What, change the glory of the invisible God, into the similitude of an
Ox that eats grass? with what indignation does God speak it? Oh you that go
a whoring after your sinful lusts, this one day will lie most dreadfully upon
your consciences, that it was from the Lord that you departed, from that
infinite glorious eternal Deity, the fountain of all good, to cleaye to
whoring after base, sinful, and unclean lusts.

Who is this whore? and what are the children that are begotten to Hosea by her?

So he went, says the Text, He obeys,

We must obey God in things that seem to be never so much against our reason
and sense. Obsec. (...)


He took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim.

The word Gomer, here, comes from a word that signifies perficere, and
defi^ere, perfection and defection: and so it may be applied both ways. Some
apply it to perfection, that is, a harlot that was perfect and complete both in
her beauty, and in her fornication and wickedness. The word likewise
signifies rottenness, corruption, and consumption: so indeed are all things
in the world; as soon as they grow to any perfection, they begin to decline
quickly to corruption. All things but spiritual do so, they indeed grow still
higher and higher.

This Gomer we will take rather in the second acceptance of it, as it
signifies rottenness and consumption.

Who was this Gomer?

She was the daughter of Diblaim.

The signification of that is (according to so me) one that dwells in the
desert, in reference to that famous desert Diblath, of which we read Ezekiel. 6.
14. noting the way of Idolaters, that they were wont to go into woods and
deserts, and there to sacrifice to their Idols.

But rather, according to most, Diblaim signifies bunches of dried figs that
were the delicacies of those times, so Oecolampadius, from which he has this
note,

That rottenness and corruption proceeds from voluptuous pleasures, from
delicacies, Obs.
and the like. Though the pleasures of the flesh be very contentfull to you,
yet destruction is the fruit of them; destruction is the daughter of sensual
pleasures and delights, of all your delicacies, so says the Scripture, Romans 8.
13. If you live after the flesh you shall dye. Phil. 3. ult. whose God is their
belly, whose end is destruction.

But to apply it to Israel. Israel was as Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, that
is, the people of Israel were now near to destruction, and were the daughters
of sensual delights, they gave over themselves to sensual delights and
pleasures.

It is the usual way of Idolaters, those that forsake the true worship of God
to give up themselves to the pleasures of the flesh. Sensuality and Idolatry
do usually go together. When the people of Israel sacrificed to the calves,
what did they? They eat and drank, and rose up to play, that was all their
work, and good enough for the worshipping of such a god, a calfe.

You know the more we began to decline in the worship of God, we began to be so
much the more sensual, there must be Proclamation to people to take their
sports and delights upon the Lords day; And indeed it is that which does
usually accompany defection in the way of Gods worship. False worship does not
lay such bonds upon men's consciences for the mortifying the lusts of the flesh,
as the worship of God does. Therefore those men that love most to take liberty
to the flesh, they are those that are soonest enticed to ways of superstitious
worship.

Jerem. 24. 9. there Jeremy sets out the state of those naughty Jews that
were in Captivity by that similitude of a basket of rotten figs, suitable to
this, and the more confirming this interpretation, that Israel was as Gomer the
daughter of Diblaim, that is, rottenness, the daughter of sensuality.

Thus for the Mother. But now the son that is begotten of this mother, it is
Iezreel.

Call his name Iezreel.

The Prophet must give a name to his son. It is that which belongs to Parents
to give names to their children. Godfathers and Godmothers (as they call them)
are of no use for this, or for any thing else that I know; and in such holy
things as Sacraments are, we must take heed of bringing in any unusefull, any
idle things.

But here we are to enquire, First, the signification of this name, Secondly,
the reason why the son of Hosea must be callied by this name, Iezreel. You
shall find a great deal in this before we have done with it.

For the first, 5. Reasons of the name of Hoseas son.
Iezreel signifies the scattered of the Lord.

For the second, there are five reasons may be given why the son of this
Prophet must have this name put upon him, Iezreel.

First, that hereby God might show that he did intend to avenge that blood that
was shed in Iezreel.

Secondly, to show that Israel had lost the honor of his name, and was no more
Israel, but Jezreel. There seems to be much neernesse between the name
Israel, and Jezreel, but there is a great deal of difference in the
signification, for Israel is one that prevails with God, the strength of the
Lord, Jezreel is one that is scattered by the Lord. Israel has lost the honor
of his name.

Many outlive the honor of their names and reputations. Obser.
These ten Tribes are no more worthy to be called by the name of Israel,
their famous Progenitor, but now Jezreel, the scattered of the Lord.

Thirdly, 3.
Jezreel, to show the way that God intended to bring judgment upon these ten
Tribes. And what was it? The way should be by scattering, God would scatter
them.

It is a special way of Gods bringing judgment upon a Kingdom, Obser.
by scattering of them. We read, that when Micaiah saw the destruction of Ahab
and his people, he had this vision, I saw (says he, 1 King. 22. 17.) all
Israel scattered one from another as sheep that have no shepherd. There is a
twofold scattering; A twofold scattering of a People.
A scattering among our selves in ways of division, and a scattering by the
Enemy one from another to fly for our lives. The one part of this judgment
(the Lord be merciful to us) is upon us already, and in this sense we may be
called Jezreel. Oh how is our Kingdom divided! how is it scatted? The Lord
keep us from the other scattering, that we be not scattered one from another,
by being forced to fly for our lives before the Enemy. It is just with God
that if we scatter our felves sinfully by way of division, that God should
scatter us in his wrath to our destruction, by giving us up to our Enemies. If
we love scattering, if we delight in division, we may soon have scattering
enough, there may soon be divisions far enough one from another.

4. Call his name Jezreel, 4.
to note that the Lord would scatter them even in that very place where they
did most glory, as they did in the valley and city of Jezreel, they did much
glory in that place (as you shall hear afterward) But God would scatter them
even in that place in which they did so much boast.

And lastly, 5.
Jezreel, because the Lord would hereby show that he would turn these conceits
and apprehensions that they might have of themselves, quite the contrary way.
As thus, Jezreel, it signifies indeed scattered of the Lord, but it signifies
also the seed of the Lord, or sown of the Lord: and so the Jews were ready to
take the name Jezreel, and would be content to own it, because it signified the
seed of God; And hence it comes to signify scattered too, because that seed
is to be scattered when it is sown: And hence it was that they might glory so
much in that name. Oh! they were the seed of the Lord, in an abiding condition,
as being sown by the hand of God himself: No, says God, you are mistaken, I
do not call you Jezreel upon any such terms, because you are sown of me,
but quite the other way, because you shall be scattered, and come to be
destroyed by me.

It is the usual way of God to turn those things which men take as arguments
for their comfort to their confusion. Obser.
Haman who made such an interpretation of the action of Esters inviting him to
the banquet alone with the King, the truth is the right interpretation of it
had been that it was to his destruction: and so here, whereas they might make
such an interpretation of Iezreel, as that they were the seed, the sown of the
Lord, the true interpretation is, that they are the scattered of the Lord.

All these five reasons you have either in the nearenesse of the name Israel
with Iezreel, or otherwise in the words that follow after.

For yet a little while I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of
Iehu, and cause to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

Here now we come to that which is the maine in this Scripture; And these
four questions are of great use, and will tend much to edification.

1. What is this blood of Iezreel that God will avenge?

2. Why God will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu?

3. Why is it called the house of Iehu, and Iehu alone without the addition of
the name King, as it is usual in others, as Hezekiah King of Judah, and such a
one King of Israel, but here only the house of Iehu.

4. What is this little while God speaks of? yet a little while.

The words are read I suppose ordinarily, and past over as if there were little
in them, but you shall find that there is much of the mind of God held out to
us in them.

For the first then, What was the blood of Jezreel that here God threatens
(...)?

You may read the History of it in 2 King. Chap. 9, 10, 11. (for the way of
opening the Prophets is to compare them with the Scriptures that went before)
read those Chapters and you shall find what this blood was. It was the blood of
the house of Ahab, the blood of Iezabel, the blood of the 70. sons of Ahab,
whose heads the Elders of Iesreel sent to Iehu in baskets. This was the blood
that was shed here in this place, which God says he will aveuge.

God will certainly avenge blood, and if God will avenge the blood of Ahab,
Obser.
he will surely avenge the blood of Abel; if the blood of Iesabel then surely
the blood of Sarah; if the blood of Idolaters, then the blood of his Saints.
God will avenge (...) blood.
Oh what vengeance then does hang over that Antichrist, for all the blood of
the Saints that has been spilt by him! the scarlet whore has dyed her self
with this blood, yea and vengeance will come for that blood that has been shed
of our brethrens in Ireland upon any whosoever have been instrumentals in it
great or small: Certainly the righteous God will not suffer that wicked and
horrid work to go unavenged, even here upon the earth. Let us wait a while,
and we may live to see that time wh^rein (...) shall not only be said by the
voice of faith, but by the voice of sense itself, Verily there is a God that
judges the earth.

But why will God avenge the blood of Iesreel upon the house of Iehu? Answ. 1.


Indeed this to an outward view at first is one of the strangest things we
have in all the book of God. If you compare this place here in Hosea with other
Scriptures, you shall find that it is a strange thing that ever it should be
said that the Lord would avenge the blood of Iesreel upon the house of Iehu.
For in 2 King. 9. 7. you shall find that Iehu was anointed by the Lord on
purpose for that action, to shedd that blood, and he had a command from God, he
was bidden to go and shed it, and the holy oil was poured upon him, for that
end that he might shed that blood; yet now this blood must be avenged, and
avenged upon the house of Iehu. Yea Chap. 10. v. 30. you shall find that God
says, because he had done such a thing, and shed the blood of the house of
Ahab in Jesreel, that he would reward him for it, and that his children to the
fourth generation should sit upon the throne of Israel, and govern that
Kingdom. Now that which Jehu was anointed to do, that which he was commanded
to do, that for which God afterward rewarded him for doing; now God says he
will avenge it, and avenge it upon his house. What should be the reason of this?

There are three reasons why God would avenge this blood upon the house of
Jehu. Three reasons why God avenged the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu.


First, Because though Jehu did it, yet he rather looked at himself and his
own ends than at God in it, his aim was to get the Kingdom to himself, but
he never aimed at God in the work, therefore God says he will avenge it upon
his house.

2. Because though he did that which God set him about; yet he did it but by
halves. Indeed he destroyed Ahabs house, but he should have destroyed Ahabs
Idolatry too, but he did not do that, and therefore now God comes upon him.

Yea 3. 3.
Though he were made Ahabs executioner for his Idolatry, yet he proved Ahabs
Successor in his Idolatry. He was Gods rod in punishing Ahab, but he yet
continued in the sins that Ahab did commit therefore now God says, he will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.

From hence we have most excellent observations, that do spring naturally as a
fountain bubleth up fresh and springing water. I will but only show them to
you, and so pass them over.

First, Obser. 1.
That a man may do that which God commands, and yet not obey God. He may do
that which God would have done, and yet not please God. He may do what God
requires, and yet serve himself therein, and not God.

Secondly, Obser. 2
A carnal heart is contented to go so far in Gods commands as will serve
his own turn, but there he stops. So far as might serve the bringing up
of Iehu to the Crown of Israel, Obedience so far as serves a man's own turn.
to the setting of him on the Throne, so far he goes in the way of Gods
command, but no further. Such a heart is like to the hand of a rusty dyall:
Suppose a rusty dyall has the hand stand (as now) at ten of the clock, come
and look upon it now, and it seems to go right, but it is not from any
inward right frame of the clock it does so, but by accident; for stay till
after ten, and come again at eleven or twelve and it stands still as
before at ten. So let God command any thing that may hit with a man's own
ends, with his own way, and be suitable to him, and a man seems to be very
obedient to God; but let God go on further, and require something else,
something that will not serve his turn, that will not agree with his own ends,
and here God may seek for a servant, as for him he will go no further.

Thirdly, Obser. 3. God makes use of men's parts.
God knows how to make use of men's parts and abilities, and yet to punish for
their wickedness notwithstanding.

Jehu was a man of an excellent, brave, valiant, and quick spirit, full of
activity and courage, and God would make use of this for the destruction of the
house of Ahab, yet Jehu must not escape.

Many men that have excellent parts of learning and state policy, which God may
make use of for the pulling down his proud adversaries, yet God may punish
them afterward notwithstanding,

Many that have but weak parts, and can do but little, shall be accepted of
God: and others that have strong parts and can do much, shall be punished by
God. We read Revel. 12. 16. The earth helped the woman, yet Chap. 16. 1. The
vialls of Gods wrath were poured forth upon the earth; men may be useful for
the public, and yet not freed from the (...) of God.

Fourthly, The Lord knows how to make use of the sins of wicked men for his
own ends, to further his own counsels, yet no excuse to them, Obser. 4
but his curse will come upon them at last for those sins, God makes (...)
use of men^ sins.
God knows how to make use of the proud heart and ambitious spirit of Jehu
for that end to fulfill his purpose against the house of Ahab, and yet
afterward when God has done with him, he comes against Jehu with a
Judgment.

There are many whose lusts being strong, yet God over-ruleth them for
himself, and overpowreth them for the furtherance of his own ends. Many a
Scholar who through the mere pride of his heart will study hard and preach
very often and well, God makes use of that for the good of others, and yet the
Minister may be damned himself,

A fifth Observation, God may sometimes reward a work here in this world,
Obser. 5
yet may curse a man for the work afterward. God rewards here those works that
must be answered for he easter.
Many there are that do some outward service for God, and perhaps rejoice in
it, and think that God must needs accept of them: what they? they have been
excellent men in the Commonwealth, they have stood for Ministers, they have
been forward in a good cause. Well, thou have done these; has not God rewarded
thee? have thou not health of body, and strength? look upon thy estate, art
not thou blessed there? look upon thy table, thy wife and children, art not
thou blessed there? Thou have thy penny for what thou have done. But yet after
thou have had thy pay here in this world for what thou have done, God may curse
thee hereafter even for the sinfulnes of thy heart in that work which for the
matter of it was good. God may reward thee for the matter of thy work, but
curse thee for the manner of it.

6. It is a most dangerous thing for men to subject the works of God to their
own base ends, Obser. 6 A dangerous thing to subject public works to our own
ends.
specially the public works of God, when a man is called to public
services, if he subject that to his own base ends, God will be sure to be even
with him for that. The more excellent any work is, the more dangerous it is to
subject it to a lust. It is an evil thing to make use of meat, and drink, and
cloth, to be serviceable to our lusts; but to make use of the great works of
God, suppose he calls us to public services, to make these stoop and be
serviceable to your base lusts, must needs be grievous indeed. It is a thing
accounted burden enough for the basest servant that is, to be serviceable to
some base lust of his Master; but if the Mr. should make his wife serviceable
to his filthy uncleanenesse, oh what a vilany were that! So I say, the greater
the thing is any man makes serviceable to his lust, the more vile and the more
dangerous is the sin. Hearken to this you that are professors o^ Religion.
The drunkard he makes beer serviceable to his lust, and he shall be damned
for that: but you make the worship of God, Prayer, and hearing, and fasting,
etc. serviceable to your lust, oh what shall become of you* A base wretch that
sits tippling in an Alehouse you account vile, but it is but a poor creature
that he subjects to his base lust; but a Minister or a Magistrate subjects
things of a higher nature to their lusts, oh this is exceeding vile.

We had need (my brethren) all pray earnestly for those whom God employeth in
public works, that they may not only have strength to assist them, and
success in them, but that they may have hearts to give God all the glory of
them; for though they may do never so worthily for God in the Church or in the
Commonwealth, yet if they be not careful to give God all the glory, God will
curse them at last notwithstanding.

Further, Obser. 7.
Jehu does somewhat which God commanded him, but not all. We learn from hence,
that when but half the work is done, God curses the whole for our neglect of
the other half. GOD curses partial obedience.
I remember Master Calvin upon this place, likeneth Jehu unto King Henry the 8.
Henry the 8. says he, cast off some degree of Popery so far as would serve
his own turn, but there were the five Articles in force still, for which many
suffered at that time, and so he was like Jehu in that. God will be served with
the whole heart, for all our good is in God, and therefore all our hearts must
make out after God. God must have per^ect obedience in the desire and
endeavor, or else he will have none. Certainly that which must make any man
acceptable, it is not so much that there is somewhat done, but is there that
which God calls for done? or is it done in regard of the endeavor? for that
indeed will be acceptable: though we cannot do all at once, but it we bring
somewhat to God as a part, and acknowledge the debt as the whole, and so are
working for the other, it will be accepted. As suppose a man owes you an
hundred pound, and brings you but fifty pound in part of payment, yet if he
acknowledge the rest, and promise the payment of it., if you know he will be
faithful in the payment of the other he will accept of it: But if a man bring
you fourscore pound in liewe of all, you will not accept it. So it is here,
Hypocrites they say they cannot be perfect in his world, and so think to put
off God with a little; it is true, if thou had an upright heart, and did
bring God but part, and labourst after the whole, he would accept of it: But
if thou bring him ten times more then a sincere heart can bring him, it will
not be acceptable, no not ninety nine pounds will be accepted if brought in
stead of the whole. God must have a man according to his own heart, such an one
as David; you know what was said of David, (...).
I have found a man after mine own heart that shall fulfill all my wills, for
so the words are in the Original, not all my will, but all my wills, in the
plural number.

Again, Obser. 8.
Jehu did but half, and the worst half too, and therefore God comes upon him.
For the great care of Jehu was only to reform things in the State and Kingdom,
and theerfore that indeed he did thoroughly, he altered the way of government
from the house of Ahab, and set up another government. But for the matter of
the worship of God, he cared not what became of that, still the calves
continued in Dan and Bethel, he took no care that the people of Israel should
go up to Jerusalem, the place that God had appointed to worship him in a right
way. This is that for which God thus cursed him and his house.

It is a very evil thing in Reformers who have power in their hands, to be
more careful of the State then of the Church; to be more careful of affairs
in civil policy, Reformers must not be more careful of Policy then of
religion.
than of affairs in Religion, who are afraid to meddle with Religion, for
fear of hindrances in their civil policy, to be so timorous in fearing
disturbances in civil policy, that they will sacrifice Religion for it, and
let that go which way it will: This is an evil thing, and a bitter. Or if
they do reform in the Church, yet to reform only that which is notoriously
evil and vile; so far Jehu went, he destroyed the Priests of Baal, but not the
Priests of Dan and Bethel: the Idols of Baal were destroyed, but the Idols of
Dan and Bethel were kept still. It is the speech of the Philosopher in his
Politiques, when he gives a rule of policy. (...). Arist. Pol. l 7. cap. 8.


First, the care of Divine things must be, and that is the best policy.
Politicians must trust God in the way of policy, and take care of Divine things
first. Yea, and go to a through Reformation too; for Jehu did something in
Religion, but left other things therefore God cursed him.

Men must take heed of betraying, of sacrificing the cause of God for the
maintenance of State Policy; let them be never so excellent in their way, yet
if they do thus, God will blast them.

Yet further, M^n can see the evil of sin in others rather then in themselves.
Jehu saw the danger of that wicked and abominable sin of Idolatry in others,
but he could not see it in himself. What peace (said he to Ioram) so long as
the whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel continue? What peace? Then what peace
Iehu, so long as the whoredoms of Israel continue afterward? This is ordinary
(my brethren) for men to see a great deal of evil and danger in the sins of
others, but when they should come to themselves, to be blind there; to inveigh
against the sins of other men, when they seem to be far off from them, or
that they cannot make use of them; but when they can make use of them, then to
embrace them. Thus it was with Saul, he was exceeding severe against
Witchcraft, all the Witches in Israel must be put to death: but when Saul had
use of a Witch for his lust, he himself goes to the Witch of Endor.

In the tenth place, Jehu thought by retaining the calves in Dan and Bethel,
Obser. 10
to preserve the Kingdom to his posterity, and this proved the ruin of his
posterity. Those ways of sinful policy by which many think to raise their
houses or themselves, are the means of the ruin of them. He that walks
uprightly, walks surely.

Lastly, Iehu does thus, and God punishes Iehu because he continued Oser. 11.
in the same sin that Ahab was punished for. This is of excellent use,
specially to Magistiates; and indeed it is a dreadful place to Magistrates, if
considered of. Let them who are used to punish the sins of others, take heed
what they do, Magistrates must take heed of liv^ng in the same sins they
punish.
lest they be found guilty themselves; for if they be found guilty, God will
plague them, as if they did the greatest act of injustice that can be: As for
instance, Suppose a Magistrate should take away the life of a man lawfully for
that which God would have him take it away: yet if this Magistrate should be
guilty of the same sin, or that which amounts to the same sin, God will
avenge himself upon this Magistrate, as upon a Murderer, as here, God
revengeth himself upon the house of Iehu as for murder, yet Iehu was a
Magistrate, and this was commanded Iehu by God himself. So suppose a
Magistrate fine a man for any evil, and that justly, yet if he be guilty of
the same himself, God will deal with this Magistrate as if he robbed by the
high way side, and took away a man's money by violence. It is apparent out of
the Text. Certainly my brethren, therefore great wrath and vengeance hangs
over the head of wicked Magistrates. All this you learn from what is here said,
that God will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, upon the
inquiring into the reason of it.

And he will do this upon the house of Iehu, (that is the third Question.)

What is the house of Iehu?

That is his Posterity, Quest. Ans.
his Family that was to succeed. And indeed it was to the fourth generation
till God came against him, (as we shall hear by and by) God follows wicked
men to the 3. and 4. generation.

The posterity of the ungodly, Obs. Why a threat against posterity in the
second Command rather then in any ^ther.
specially Idolaters, shall suffer for their Fathers sin. It is very observable
what you have in the second Commandment, that God in no other does threaten
the sin of the fathers upon the children, but in the second Commandment.

What is thereason of this?

(That Commandment forbids Images) Because your superstitious worshippers
of all men are strengthened by the tradition of their Fathers. Oh our Fathers
did thus and thus, and shall we be wiser then our Forefathers? We have now a
company of up-start men, and they will be wiser then their Ancestors. Because
superstitious worshippers harden themselves so much in that way upon their
Fathers, therefore it is, that in that very Commandment against making and
worshipping of Images, God threatens to visit the sin of the fathers upon
the children, and in no other.

What, the house of Iehu, after Iehu was dead? how can this be?

Yes, Theequ^ty of childrens suffering for their Parents.
as a Prince that has to do with two Traitors, both of them have deserved
death, but the Prince is inclined to show mercy; and against the one there
comes this Accusation, This man's Father was a Traitor, and his grandfather,
and his great grandfather were Traitors: Nay then let him dye, says the
Prince. But now the other that is guilty of as much as this man was, yet it is
told the King, Sir, This man's Fathers has done a great deal of excellent
fervice for the Commonwealth, there were never any of his house but were
loya^l. This man now is spared though he deserves death, and guilty with the
other of the same treason; and the King is just in this. And so the first man
may be said to dye for his Fathers sin, that is, he should not have been
executed if his Forefathers had not been in the fault. Take heed what you do
in the course of your lives, (if you regard not your selves, yet for your
childrens sake) that you may not leave a curse behind you upon the offspring
of your loins, and fruit of your wombs; look upon them, pity them. Though you
your selves may escape in this world, yet you may leave the inheritance of your
sins unto your children. Pity your children, that they may not have cause to
curse the time that they were borne of such parents, and wish that they had
rather been of the offspring of Dragons, and a generation of Vipers, then to
be born of such parents that have left them a curse for an inheritance. It had
been better you had left them never a penny, then to leave them to inherit the
curse of your wickedness.

Upon the house of Jehu. The house of Jehu fares the worse for Jehu.

Those that desire to raise and continue the honor of their houses, Observe.
let them take heed of ways of wickedness; for wickedness will bring down
any Family whatsoever.

But why is it The house of Jehu, Question.
without any addition of Jehu the King as in others it is usual?

Hereby God would give a check to Jehu, and bid him look back upon the
meannesse of his birth, Answer.
for Jehu was not of the Kingly race: yet how unthankful was he who was raised
from the dunghill, thus unworthily to depart from the Lord.

You whom God has raised up on high to great honors and estates, Observe.
look back to the meannesse of your beginning, that God has raised you from,
and labor to give him an answerable return of obedience. Those that will not
give God the glory of their honors and estates, it is just their honors and
estates should be taken from them.

But what is this, Question.
Yet a little while?

This is to be understood in reference to Jehu, Answer.
or in reference to the house of Israel. Yet a little while, and I will avenge
the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cease the Kingdom of the
house of Israel. It was a long while before God came upon the house ol Jehu,
and yet now he says, yet but a little while, I will stay but a little longer
ere I avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. It was now the third
generation since Iehu committed those sins, nay, it will appear that it was
above an hundred years from the sins of Iehu to Gods avenging the blood of
Iezreel upon his house: 2 King. 10. 36. 13. 1 13. 10. 13 23.
for Iehu reigned 28. years, his son Iehoahaz 17. years, and Iehoash his
son 16. years, and Jeroboam his son 41. years, and then in the days of
Zachariah the son of this Jeroboam, God came to avenge this blood, which was
above a hundred years. Oh the patience of the Lord toward sinners! But though
he stayed long, yet he says, yet a little while. Here is an excellent
observation from hence.

That God sometimes comes upon sinners for their old sins, for sins committed
a long time agon: Obser. Sin punished a long time after the commission.
Sins a long time agone committed, are perhaps forgotten by you, yet they are
remaining, filed up, and recorded in heaven, above a hundred years after the
commission. It is like these sins of Iehu were forgotten, yet God comes now
at last to avenge the sins of Iehu upon his house. So he did for the sins of
Manasses, and for the sins of Joseph's brethren, it was 22. years before they
came to have their consciences troubled, and then say they, We are verily
guilty concerning our brother, therefore is this distress come upon us, and
now (says Reuben) behold also his blood is required. Genesis 42. 22


Look to your selves you that are young, take heed of youthful sins,
Youthful sins may prove to be ages terrors. Perhaps you think it was a great
while agone that you (when you were a young man) were in fuch a Tavern, or in
such a journey, and committed such and such sins: Have you repented for them?
Have you made your peace with God for them? Though you were then young, and did
not fear the wrath of God to come upon you; yet now you are old, the wrath of
God may come upon you for sins committed in your Apprentiship. Isa. 65. 20.
A sinner of a hundred years old shall be accursed.

Yet a little while. In reference to the house of Israel: Yet a little while
and I will cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel: This Nation had continued
a pompous successful Nation (thoughidolatrous) for about 260. years before the
wrath of God came upon it that was here threatened.

God may come a long time after the flourishing of a Nation upon it in ways of
judgment. Observe.
Which may make us look back to the sins committed in Henry the 8, his time,
and in Queen Mary's time. Let us not plead for our forefathers for the
maintenance of superstitious worship, but let us look to the sins of our
forefathers, and bewail them before the Lord, for God may come upon a Nation
for former sins after it has flourished a long time.

But at length it will prove but a little while. Quest.
What, was it but a little while from the beginning of this Prophecy till the
ceasing of the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

Yes (my brethren) it was many years. Answ.
and it is very observable that from the beginning of this Prophecy) which was
in the end of the reign of Jeroboam) to the rulfilling of what was here
threatened, to the ceasing of the Kingdom of the house of Israel, it was 76.
years. For (as I reckoned the last day, to show the time of Hoseas Prophecy)
from the end of Jeroboam here spoken of, ver. 1. unto the time of Hezekiah was
70. years, and in the 6. year of Hezekiah Israel was destroyed by the King of
Assyria, and yet God says here by Hosea (which was in the time of Jeroboam,
for then was the beginning of Hoseas Prophecy, as ver. 1.) Yet a little while.

Seventy six years is but a little while in Gods account. Observe. Many years
are but of little while in Gods account.
Sinners think either in ways of judgment or mercy, a little while to be a
great while. If God do but defer mercy seven years, it is a great while in our
account. We think our Parliament has sat a long time; How long? almost two
years. A great while! We think every day a great while, for that we would
faint have but 76. years, yea a hundred, a thousand years are but as one day
unto God. So for judgment: a sinner if he has committed a sin seven years
ago, he thinks it is a great while, and he has not heard of it, thereforre
surely it is forgotten. But what if it be seventy years ago? you that are
sinners of seventy years old, all is but a little while in regard of God.

Again, Yet a little while.

The apprehension of a judgment just at hand is that which will stir the
heart, and work upon it most. Yet a little while, and God will cause the
kingdom to cease, Obser.
therefore if ever you repent, repent now, for it is but a little while ere God
will cause the kingdom to cease. The apprehension of a sinner to be upon the
brink of judgment, when a poor soul shall see him self ready to lanch into
the infinite ocean of eternal destruction, to lie under the scalding drops of
the wrath of the Almighty; this works upon the heart indeed.

It is the way of the flesh and the devil to put far from us the evil day, to
make us believe the day of death is a great way off. But it is the way of God
to present things present and real; and in this consists the efficacy and
power of faith to make things that are to come as if present. Present things
affect not.
We say in nature, there must be a contiguity and neernesse between things
that must work. So we must apprehend a neernesse between the evil that is to
come upon us and our selves, that so it may work upon our hearts. An excellent
place you have to this purpose in 1 King. 14. 14. where the Lord threatens to
stir up a King over Israel who should cut off the house of Jeroboam that day;
Omnis actie fit per contactum.
but what? (says he, he presently calls back his word) even now: you may
think the day a great way off, but it is even now: and therefore now come in,
return, and repent. Oh sinners consider that your danger is now, not only in
that day of Christ, but what? even now, it may be at hand.

Lastly, Yet a little while. Jeroboam had continued above forty years in his
sin, but now Zachariah his son, upon whom this threatening was fulfilled,
continued but six months, perhaps he thought to escape as long as his father.
No,

God suffers some sinners to continue long, Obser.
others he cutteth off presently: though the father continue old in his sins,
if the son presume to follow his steps, he may be cut off presently.

And I will cause to cease the Kingdom of Israel.

Kingdoms, Obser.
great Kingdoms and Monarchies are subject to change, What is become of all
the glorious Monarchies in the world? how has the Lord tossed them up and
down as a man would toss a ball? Idolatry is enough to destroy the greatest
Monarchy, the greatest Kingdom in the world.

But here is some instruction in the elegancy of the word. (...) Quiescere
faciam.
It is in the Original, I will cause to cease. It is a Metaphor (according to
some) taken from instruments that a man makes use of for a while, and when he
has done with them, either hangs them up against a wall and regards them no
more, or else brings them to the fire to be burned. So says God, yet a
little while, and I will cause to cease, etc. As if he should say, Indeed there
was a time wherein I had some use of this way, of the rent between Judah and
Israel, and of this Kingdom, but I have done with that use, there is an end of
it now, the use is over I intended, and now I will cause to cease the Kingdom,
I will take them away, they shall be to me as an instrument not to be used any
more, or for the Fire.

When the Lord has any use of a people, Obser.
or of any particular men to do him service, he will preserve them though they
be wicked, and when he has done with them, he either lays them aside, or else
brings them to the fire. A Husbandman so long as he has use of thorns to
stop a gap with them, he lets them alone, but when there shall be no further
use of them, he then bring them to the fire. so God here, I will cause to cease
the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

But how and where will God cause to cease the Kingdom of Israel?

Verse. 5. I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.

By breaking the bow, is here meant the blasting and bringing to nothing all
the strength of their warlike power, all their Arms and Ammunition, for the
bow was a great warlike instrument in these days, therefore in Psalm. 46. 9. He
makes wars to cease, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, etc.

But here, by breaking the bow, there is something more, it is not only
mentioned because the bow is a warlike instrument, but there is some particular
reason why the bow is instanced here, and that is this, because whereas Jehu
did many memorable things in his warlike affairs, yet none more then that he
did by his bow. Mark that place, 2 King. 9. 24. And Iehu drew a bow with his
full strength, and smote Jeroboam between his arms, and the arrow went out at
his heart, etc. So that the victory that Jehu got ever the two Kings of Israel
and Judah, was by the Bow especially. What observe we from hence?

That wherein wicked men have been most prosperous and succesful, Observe.
even in this God will curse them, and let out his wrath upon them.

Again, Break the bow, blast all the power of their Ammunition.

Carnal hearts trust much in their warlike weapons, Observe.
but they are nothing when God comes to break a peoples strength. God has
the power of all Ammunition, the Lord is called The Lord of Hosts, (and he
delights much in this title) First, because God has not only the power over
Ammunition and all Warlike weapons, so as they cannot be used but by him: But
secondly, because when they are used, they can have no success at all but by
him; and so the Lord is the Lord of Hosts in a peculiar sense: He is the great
General of all Armies, more then all other Generals, for the success of all
depends upon him.

My brethren, why then need the Church of God fear the strength of weapons,
the Bow, the Cannon, or all the Ammunition of the enemies of the Church, No
weapons can prosper against the Church.
seeing our Lord is the Lord of Hosts? no weapon can be used or have success
but by this Lord of Hosts. He can break the bow, though of steel, when
pleases, and can give his people strength to do so too. For this you have an
admirable promise, Esa. 54. 17. Behold (says God) I have created the smith
that blows the coals in the fire, and brings forth an instrument for his
work, and I have created the water to destroy. No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper. What need the Church fear then? God breaks the bow
when he pleases: For as God has a providence over all the things in the
world, so there is a specialty of providence of God to order Battles, to give
the victory, not to the strong, or to the multitude, but sometimes to the weak
and few, even as he pleases. And therefore he is the Lord of Hosts, because
though his providence is general over all creatures, yet there is a specialty
of providence of God in warlike affairs.

But what was this valley of Jezreel?

It is worthy our time to enquire after this valley of Jezreel, wherein God
will break the bow of Israel. There were two places called Jezreel, the one
belonging to Judah, Josh. 15. the other belonging to Israel, Josh. 17. 16. and
Chap. 19. 18. Iezreel was a fruitful valley, ten miles long, and by it there
was a famous City built, which was in Ahabs time the principal seat, the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, and there was a glorious tower in it, and from
thence they might see over Galilee and over Jordan. Now there were two great
Cities that belonged to the tenn Tribes, Samarea and Iezreel, as we in England
have two principal Cities, London and York. But this Iezreel was the most
fortified, in which they put a great deal of confidence, yet God says here,
He will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Iezreel. That is, there by
that City in that place, that they accounted the great strength of their
Kingdom, there he would break the bow of Israel.

Fortified Cities cannot help when God comes out against a people. Observe.
Fortified places are nothing where the wrath of God is out against a people.
If we can fortify our Cities against sin, we may soon fortify them against
an Enemy. If sin once get in, the enemy will quickly follow. Nah. 3. 12.
All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the first ripe figs; if they
be shaken, they shall fall into the mouth of the eater. You shall with the
least wind like the first ripe figs sall off, all your strong holds shall do
so. Yea, ver. 13. Thy people in the midst of thee are women, the gates of thy
land shall be set wide open to thine enemies, the fire shall devourthy bars.

You see what the valley of Iezreel is, and the meaning of it. But why will God
break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel?

There are these two reasons for it. 1. Because God would deal with this
people of Israel, as Judges deal with Malefactors; they will hang them up
there where the fact was committed, as we see some hanged up in Chains near to
the City, at or about the place where their villainy was done. So in Jezreel was
shed the blood of Jezebel, and the blood of the 70. sons of Ahab, and the blood
of Jehoram, and there will God break the bow.

Hence it is that guilty consciences are many times afraid to go near to the
places where they have committed wickedness, because their consciences will fly
in their faces, for fear God should come upon them in the place where the fact
was done.

But further, 2.
He will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel, that is, in that
fortified place in which they did so much glory (this is specially observable.)

Even in that place wherein a kingdom shall most glory, Obser. God punishes men
in that they most glory in.
and seem to trust most in, God many times does come and break the kingdom in
that very place, and makes that the breaking of the kingdom most. Nah. 3. 8.
Art thou better then populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had
the waters round about it, whose rampant was the sea, and her wall was from the
sea? Mark, a people just like England in this case: what we overcome by the
Enemy? we that have the Seas for our Wall, and such a multitude of people
amongst us? These have been and are the two pleas that England has for her
self, because our people are many, and we have the seas for a wall: But art
thou better then populous No? yet was she carried away, she went into
captivity, etc. verse. 10. Thus the Prophet pleads with them.

But further, These trusted in Jezreel, they seemed to scorn the Prophet What,
the kingdom of Israel cease, what think you of Jezreel, such a strong place
as that? just as we should say, what, an Enemy come to us what say you to
London, a brave City, a strong City? what say you to the Ammunition, to the
Militia, to the strength that is there? Are they not able to resist all that
can come against it? Have we cause to fear danger? It is true, the kingdom
has cause to bless God for London, and London has not yet been the valley of
Jezreel, but an Israel, the strength of the Lord, and has prevailed with God,
as an instrument: and therefore we bless God for that we have had. But yet let
us not trust in that we have, for even in London, in the valley of Jezreel the
bow may be broken, and God knows how to bring things about so as to make the
Ammunition of London to be broken in pieces, and turned against themselves: Oh
therefore do not trust here. Only let it be your care you of this City of
London that you prove not the valley of Jezreel, and then we shall do well
enough, our bow shall not be broken. What attempts have there been to have made
London by this time the valley of Jezreel, that is a scattered valley, to have
brought divisions in this City, that it might be a scattered people; and woe to
the kingdom if this had bin effected, better these men had never bin born then
that they should have had success in that horrid enterprise. Oh London now the
blessing of God is over you! the means of grace abundantly among you. The eyes
of the kingdom are upon you; take heed you be be not the valley of Iezreel,
Lect. 3.
your divisions will cause great thoughts of heart; continue you untyed one to
another, and then you are as one Israel of God, the instrument of God for our
strength. Pardon me this little digression, though it be a little from an
expository exercise. Thus we have done with the Mother, and with the first
son.

The Third Lecture.
Hosea. 1. 6. 7. And she conceived again and bare a daughter, June 6. 1641 and
God said unto him call her name Loruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon
the house of Israel, but I will utterly take them away.

But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the Lord
their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by ba^tell, by
horses, nor by horsemen.


COncerning Hosea's first son, the last day. She conceived again. This
conception sets out also the estate of Israel in regard of her sin and misery:
Sin it is fruitful, and what brings it forth? Parents bring forth a likeness
to themselves, and so does sin; and what is that? Nothing but ruin and misery.

This second child it is a daughter, it notes the weakness of the state of the
ten Tribes at this time, they were grown to be effeminate in regard of their
lust, and the baseness of their spirits, and in regard of their strength also
they were like the female sex. There are 3. estates of the people signified by
the 3. Hoseas 3. children shows the 3 estats of (...)
children of Hosea; the first was their scattered estate, and that was
signified by Jezreel, the first son; of which the last day: And the story of
that you had in 2 K. 15. ver. 9. to the 19. where you may read their woeful
sedition; for Zach^riah reigned but 6. months, and then Shallum sle^ him, and
reigned in his stead, and he reigned but one month, for Menah^^ came and smote
Shallum and slew him, and reigned in his stead: So here was nothing but
murders and seditions amongst them. A scattered people.

The 2. state of the people of Israel was their weak condition that they were
brought unto, signified by this daughter; and the history of that you have from
v. 16. of that Chapter onwards, where when Pull the K. of Assyria came against
Israel, Menahem presently yielded to him what he would have, gives him IOCO.
talents of silver to go from him, and so lays a taxation upon the people for
it. Here they were brought to a very low and weak condition. And afterward
this K. of Assyria comes again, and carries part of them into captivity. The
3. child was Loammi, and the history of the state of the people signified by
that you have in 2 K. 17. 6. where they were fully carried away, and wholly
rejected for ever: And because they were a little before that time grown up to
some strength more then formerly, therefore this last was a son. We are now to
speak of the second.

She conceived again and bare a daughter.

From that interpretation I have given of it, to note the weakness and
effeminacy of the state of the people at this time, a little before their
ruin; The observation from thence is this,

When the manliness, Observe.
courage, and vigor of the spirits of people are taken away, then they are
under a fearful judgment, and near to ru^ne.

Even when their men shall be as women, Base effeminatenes of spirit in a
people yielding to what shall be imposed upon them, a sign of ruin.
as Nah. 3. 13. when there shall be such baseness of spirit in people, that
for the enjoyments of their present ease and quiet they yield to any thing. So
it was with these, and in thar their effeminatenesse was showed.

When the King of Assyria came to them, they yeeelded to any terms he would
appoint, to give him any thing he would demand; and when the taxes were laid
upon the people, they enquired not whether they were just or no, but merely for
their peace and safety they yield. We must take heed of bringing our selves
into trouble, we were better pay this then venture the loss of all, we must not
displease those that are above us, we know not what hard things may follow; it
is our wisdom, though things are hard, and we complain the taxations are
heavy, yet to suffer something, they had rather have a little though with
baseness, then venture any thing for further peace and liberty for themselves
and their posterity.

2. The eff^mina^enesse of their sp^rits were shown in this, that they were
willing to bow down their necks to submit to the government of most vile
murderers, without any enquiry after them, or taking any course or way at all
to find out their murders and wickedness. Zecharia was slain by Shallum,
then comes Menahem and he killed Shallum, after Menahem, reigned Pekahiah,
and against him conspired Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him in
Samaria, and with him killed 50. men, and reigned in his room, then comes
Hoshea the son of Elah, and he made a conspiracy against Pekah, and slew him,
and reigned in his stead. Here were murderers upon murderers, and yet the
people all this while bow down their necks, and look not after these things:
They have gotten power in their hands, and we must take heed of looking so
high, to enquire after things that are above us, and it is ill displeasing of
them, we were better a great deal be quiet and hold our peace, and say
nothing, than to enquire after such high matters as those are; and so they let
all go, and bowed their necks to the yoke, and by no means such horrible guil
of murders must be questioned, because the murderers had got power in their
hands. Their cowardly timorous spirits were much like the temper of Issachar,
we read of Genesis 49. 15. Isachar is a strong ass couching down between two
burdens, Purity in the Church cannot stand long with slavery in the ^eate.
he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant, and he bowed his
shoulders to bear, and became a servant unto tribu^e. And when men's spirits are
effeminate in regard of the civil state, they quickly grow so in regard of
their consciences and religion too. Purity of religion in the Church cannot
stand long with slavery admitted in the State. We read Rev. 4. 7. of 4. Ages of
the Church set out by four living-creatures: the 3. living-creature the Text
says, had the face of a man, and that was to note the state of the Church in
the time of reformation, they began then to be of manly spirits, and to cast
off that yoke of bondage that was before upon them, to enquire after what
liberty God had granted to them. Not then like those we read of, Isa. 51. 23.
that would bow down to such as would say to their souls, Bow down that we may
go over them.

This (my brethren) has been the condition of many of us; there has bin that
effeminateness of spirit in us, that we have bowed down our necks, yea, our
souls to those that would go over us; yea, (as it is there in 51. Isa.) they
made themselves the very street to them that went over them, their very
consciences were trampled upon by the foot of pride, and all for the enjoyment
of a little outward accommodation in their estates, in their shops, and in their
trading, Oh they must not venture these, rather yield to any thing in the
world. And truly we were afraid not long since that God was calling us by the
name of this daughter Loruhamah, in regard of our effeminateness of spirit,
that the Lord was departing from our nation. But blessed be God that now here
has begun to be a rising of spirit among us, especially among our worthies in
Parliament, and their warmth, vigor, and life, has put warmth, vigor,
spirit, and life, into the whole Kingdom. Now our Kingdom will never bow down
and submit their Consciences, Viri fort^^ est aut pull chrevivere aut fartiter
mori.
nor Estates, nor liberties to that bondage and oppression that heretofore has
been. No, they had rather die honorably then live basely. But why do I make
such a disjunction? die honorably, or live basely? Had we spirits we might free
our selves and posterity from living basely, and we need not dye at all; for
the malignant party has neither spirit to act, nor power to prevail, if we
keep up our spirits and be strong in the Lord we are safe enough, yet we shall
not have our name Loruhamah, but Ruhamah, the Lord will have mercy upon us. 1
King. 14. 15. God threatens to smite Israel, that they shall be as a reed
shaken with the wind: After base yielding to slavery follows ruin.
and then mark what follows, and then he would root them out of this good
land which he gave to their Fathers. If this judgment be upon England that
our spirits be shaken as a reed with the wind, that we bow and yield to any
thing in a base way, the next may justly follow that the Lord may root us out
of this good Land. As it was with Israel before their destruction, they grew
effeminate, so it was with Judah too before theirs, Isa. 3. 3. when God
intended judgment against them, you may observe there that He took away the
mighty man and the man of war, the prudent and the ancient, the Captain and the
honorable man and the Counselor. men of truly noble spirits were taken away,
their Nobles became to be vile and sordid, and to yield to any humors and
lusts, then they were near the ruin; and ver. 12. the Text says women rule
over them; for women that have many spirits to rule is no judgment at all; but
for women of revengeful spirits to rule over a nation is a most fearful
judgment. But so much of the first, that it is a daughter that is here born to
Hosea.

What is this daughters name? Call her name Loruhamah?

Non dilecta, so some, Non misericordiam consecuta, so others, both come to
one, either not beloved, or one that has not obtained mercy, for Gods mercy
proceeds from his love.

I will no more have mercy.

I will add no more mercy; Quae su^^u, abjecturi in altum tolimus ut majori
ruina decidant.
Nothing that God had showed abundance of mercy to Israel before; but now he
says, I will not add any more, I will show no further mercy to them.

But I will utterly take them away. Tollendo tollam; so turned by some, In
taking them away I will take them away; Levaho levando, so others, I will lift
them up, that I may cast them down so much the more dreadfully. The old Latin
has it thus, Obliviscendo obliviscor, forgetting I will forget. And this was
upon a mistake of the Hebrew word, because there is little difference in the
Hebrew, (...) Oblitus fuit. (...) Ab^^ulit. (...).
between the word that signifies to to forget, and that which signifies to
take away. The 70. setting my self against them, I will set my self against
them.

Well the name of the child must bear this upon it, that God will have no more
mercy upon them. Hence then first.

Sometimes the very children of families, and in a kingdom do bear this
impression upon them, that God will have no mercy upon this family, upon this
kingdom. One may (my brethren) read such an impression upon the children of
many great families in this Kingdom, Obser. 1
when we look upon that horrible wickedness of the young ones that are coming
up, how different from their former religious Ancestors; we may see with
trembling hearts) such an impression of wrath, as if God had said, I have done
with this family, I intend no further mercy to this family. As sometimes when
we see in a family gracious children, gracious young gentlemen, noble men, we
may see the impression of Gods mercy to that family, Ruhaniah, I intend mercy
to it.

It was not long since that we might, Encouragement from gracious youth in
England.
and we thought indeed we did see such an impression upon the young ones of
this kingdom, the young ones in the City, the young ones in the chief families
in the Country; that we were afraid that Lornhamah to England was written upon
them, for oh the rudenes and wickedness of the young ones! But blessed be God
that we see it otherwise now; now in regard of that graciousnesse, that
forwardness of so many young ones amongst us, we may see written upon them,
Ruhamah to England, mercy to England, God has taken away his Lo, and writes
only Ruhamah, mercy to you, this great change God has made. For the great
ground of the hope we have for mercy to England, is the impression of God upon
the young ones: When God has tender plants growing up in his Orchard, Obser. 2.
certainly he will not break down the hedge or dig it up.

Secondly, Call her name Loruhamah, for I will no more have mercy upon the
house of Israel. (...) 2. 1.


There is a time when God will not have mercy upon a kingdom or upon a
particular people. Gather your seves together, oh nation not worthy to be
beloved, before the decree come forth. There is a time for the decree to come
forth against a kingdom, when God will not be entreated; a time when though
Noah, Job, and Daniel should stand before him, yet he will not be entreated,
though they cry, cry ^arly, cry aloud, cry with tears, cry with fasting, yet
God will not be entreated. Gods mercy is precious, and he will not let it run
out to waste, he will not be prodigal of it, a time wherein God will say, The
fears of the Saints that heretofore mercy was departed from us justified.
Now I have done, I have done with this people, mercy has had her turn. It is
true, except we had that immediate revelation that the Prophets had, we cannot
now determine of the particular time; yet by examining Gods way toward his
people in former times, the truth is, that those that labored most to search
Gods mind in his word, they were even afraid that this decree had been gone
out upon us in England. It is true, God has seemed for the present to tell us
that he has a prerogative, and he will have mercy upon whom he will have
mercy: But yet neither are those altogether to be blamed, that even in their
own hearts determined (as it were) that mercy was gone; except they did wholly
limit God, and left nothing of prerogative at all to him, but because it was
Gods ordinary way; and except God had wrought with us in a way of prerogative
otherwise than ever he did with any nation before, they did then conclude that
the decree was gone forth; and so it might be true, and what God may do with us
yet we do not know. But this we can say, if the decree be not gone forth, if
there be mercy for us, God has showed his prerogative, that he will now go on
in such a way otherwise than formerly he has done in the world; and if God
will do so, who can say against it?

A time there is likewise for God to say against particular persons, he will not
have mercy upon them, Luke 14. 14. Rev. 22. 1^ Genesis 6. 3 God must not be
dallyed withal in the offers of his grace.
a time when God will say, those men that were bidden shall not taste of my
Supper; he that will be filthy, let him be filthy still, my spirit shall no
longer strive with them. God has no need (my brethren) that we should receive
or entertain his mercy, we had need that God should grant it. God many times is
quick in the offer of his mercy. Goc and preach the Gospel, he that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned. A quick work God makes
many times in the effects of mercy.

Yet 3. Obser. 3
I will not have mercy: This is pronounced as the most dreadful judgment.
What, not have mercy upon them? then indeed is a State or a Kingdom in a
dreadful condition, when God shall say of them that he will not hve mercy. Woe
to you (says the Lord) when I depart from you, woe then to you when my mercy is
for ever gone, then all judgments and miseries must needs flow in upon a nation,
or a particular soul; when the Sea-bank is broken up, then the waves will all
flow in. Isa. 56. 9. All you beasts of the field come to devour, yea, all you
beasts in the forest, why what is the matter? His watchmen are blind, etc. I
argue thus from thence, if the prudence of the watchmen being taken away which
should stop misery, then all evils come flowing in upon a Nation.

What then if the mercy of God that should stop misery be taken away? whither
should the poor creature go if mercy be gone? to what creature should it look
for help? if it cries to any creature, the creature says, I can afford no
comfort, because God affords no mercy: what shall uphold the heart then when
it has no hope at all? It must needs sink.

I will not add mercy (says God) showing, that what good they had received
before it was from his mercy, though they would take no notice of it; well,
says God, you shall have no more, you have taken no notice that it was my
mercy that helped you before, but when my mercy is gone, then you will know it,
Obser. 4.
but then I will not add more. Men best know what the worth of mercy is, when
mercy is taken away from them, when God adds no more.

Again, Obser. 5
I will not add mercy. God does not use to take away his mercy fully from a
people or from a soul: but when mercy has been showed and abused, after much
mercy has been received, and that being abused, then God says he will not
add more. You have a parallel place to this, Judge. 10. 16. I will deliver you
no more, says God, I have delivered you many times, my mercy has been abused,
I will deliver you no more. It is just with God when mercy is abused, that we
should never know farther what mercy means. Mercy as it is a precious thing,
so it is a tender thing, and a dangerous thing to abuse it. There is nothing
that more quickly works the ruin of a people or of a soul, then abused mercy.

But further, I will utterly take them away. Before it was only that they
should be scattered, the name of the first child before was but Iezreel, that
they should be the scattered of the Lord; but the 2. is Loruhamah, that they
shall have no more mercy from the Lord. Obser. 6
Gods 2. strokes usually are more dreadful then the first: Less judgments
forerunners of greater.
God begins first with the house of Correction before he brings to the
gallows. There is branding first before hanging: there are warning pieces
before murdering pieces. God makes way for his wrath by lesser afflictions,
before he comes with destroying judgments. I remember Mr. Knox in his History
of Scotland has this story of one Sir James Hamilton, that having been
murdered by the Ks. means there, he appeared to him in a vision with a naked
sword drawn, and strikes off both his arms, with these words, Take this before
thou receive a final payment for all thy impieties, and within 24. hours 2. of
the Ks. sons dyed. God comes to nations and particular persons with a sword,
cutteth off arms before he takes their lives, he comes by degrees upon them.
As the Lord when he comes in a way of abundance of mercy, lesser mercies make
way for greater mercies. When Manna was rained down, the dew ever came before
it: So, lesser judgments to the wicked are forerunners of, and makers way for
greater judgments; first they are parboild before they come to be roasted in the
fire.

Further, I will not add mercy to the house of Israel. He does not say, I will
not add mercy to this or that particular man of Israel, but to the house of
Israel.

A Multitude of sinners, with God is no argument for their escape of judgment.
It is a rule indeed with man, Multitudo peccantium, tollit peccatum, Multitude
of offenders take away their offenses; Obser. 7
Men know not how to execute the offenders when they are in Multitudes, here
and there some of the ringleaders may be taken for example sake. But it is no
rule with God, though it be the whole house of Israel, God has no mercy for
the whole house of all the people of Israel. Let no man presume to sin against
the Lord, because there are Multitudes that do offend, and think that he shall
escape with the Multitude. No, all the nations of the world with the Lord are
but as the drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of the balance, nothing,
even less then nothing.

And yet further, No mercy upon the house of Israel: Though it be the house of
Israel, yet no mercy upon her. If it were the house of Pharaoh it were not so
much, Obser. 8
but what, no mercy to the house of Israel? The neareness of any to God exempts
them not from the wrath of God. God hates sin, Amos 3. 2.
and hates sin most when it is nearest him: You have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for your iniquities, says the
Lord. As we hate a Toad in our bosoms more then when it is at a further
distance; so God hates sin in those that are nearest to him more than in those
that are further off; for God will be sanctified in all those that draw near
unto him. But wherefore is all this that God will have no more mercy upon the
house of Israel? what has the house of Israel done, that God should be so
angry with it? It is worth our searching and enquiring after, why the Lord will
at this time have no mercy upon the house of Israel. It concerns our selves
nearly.

The first and main reason is, because of their continuance in their false way
of worship, notwithstanding all the means that God had used to bring them off;
not only by his Prophets, sending them again and again to show them the evil
of their false worship in those 2. Calves in Dan and Bethel, but by most
remarkable works of his providence against them. As for example. The work of
God against Jeroboam, when he was but stretching out his hand against the
Prophet that came to denounce judgment against that Altar upon which he was
offering Sacrifice, 1 Kings 13. 4.
his hand that he put forth against him dried up, so that he could not pull it
in again to him, and upon the prayer of the Prophet it was restored and became
as was before. Again, the remarkable work of God in anointing Iehu to destroy
the house of Ahab and his seed for their Idolatry. Yet notwithstanding these
Prophets, and these works of God, with many other, they still persisted in
their way of Idolatry. And this caused the Lord now not to have mercy upon the
house of Israel.

Let us take heed of this, God has used, and still does use means to bring us
off fully from all ways of false worship, not only by sending his Ministers
from time to time to declaim against such things, but by wonderful and
remarkable works of his providence toward England, especially at this day.
Never had any Nation, never had England heretofore more remarkable works of God
to draw them off from all ways of false worship, to bring them to worship God
in the right way according to his will. Now let us tremble at this sentence; I
will not add mercy, I will have no more mercy. God has added mercy to us again
and again from time to time. And now me thinks in this work of Gods mercy,
that he is about concerning us, Exodus 33. 5
he speaks to us as he did to the people, Come and put off thy ornaments, that
I may know what to do with thee. Come now and humble your selves that I may
know what to do; As if God should say, Come and give in your last answer. A
dangerous thing to reject an offer of mercy after reiection of former offers.
Certainly in that way that God is now in with us, he calls England to give
its last answer, as if he should say, Now I am sheing mercy once more, take
heed of rejecting it, lest you have a Loruhamah upon you, I will add no more
mercy, consider not only what we have done, but what we do, how we have
abused mercy, and how we do now abuse present mercy; how opposite the spirits
of most are against the work of reformation now in hand, who even say to the
Lord Christ depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. When the
people of Israel were offered Canaan, and God bade them go in and possess it,
they were then near unto it; but when they then refused Canaan, God swear in in
his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. If ever a people were
offered Canaan, were offered the Ordinances of God in his own way, certainly
we are at this time, Let us tremble lest God (if we reject this mercy) should
swear in his wrath, I will have no more mercy upon you, and so we prove to be a
Loruhamah indeed.

But a second reason why this people could have no mercy, 2.
might be, because of their forsaking God even in the civil State. For you are
to know that this people of Israel had not only left God in their Church,
State, and defiled themselves with false worship, but they had in their civil
government wickedly departed from that that God had appointed over them: They
had departed from the house of David, and rent themselves from it. It is true,
this was of Gods permission, but yet it was the wickedness of their hearts, and
no excuse at all for them. Hence Chap. 8. 4. God charge them that they had
set up Kings, but not by him. From whence this may be observable.

That it is a most dangerous thing for a people to forsake that government to
rebel against that civil government that God does set over them. Obser.


When the people in 1 Samuel 8. 7. had required a King, and would not be ruled by
Judges any more, says the Lord to Samuel, They have not rejected you, but
rejected me, that I should not reign over them: A most dreadful place, And I
confess freely to you, this one Text of Scripture was the first Scripture that
took impression upon my thoughts and heart about fearing to go on in a way of
Church Government that God had not appointed. For thus my thoughts reasoned;
What is God so provoked against a people that will reject but a Civil
government, a government that he has appointed, that specially concerns but
the outward man? Then if it proves that God has appointed any government in a
Church, The ground of civil and Churh government different.
that is Divine Institution, that concerns the good of the soul, and is
immediately to work upon that, surely God will be much more provoked there for
rejecting it.

And going yet further upon search, finding that though we have not a civil
government appointed by God as the Jews had, yet for the Church state, we
have one appointed even by God himself. And reason there must be for it: for
whatsoever has a special efficacy upon the heart, must have a spiritual rule
for the warrant and direction. Indeed prudence and reason is enough for the
ordering of things that concern the outward man, except God will come in with
his own institution. But when it comes to the ordering of the heart, and
there is a spiritual efficacy expected (as in all Church ordinances there must
be) and that authority by which they are executed gives a great influence into
them, now nothing can go beyond its principle, therefore it must have a divine
institution to give it its efficacy.

It may here be demanded, whether hat not God appointed over us a particular
civil government as he did over the Jews?

That our government and all lawful government of other Nations is appointed
by God, Answ.
we must conclude is a certain truth. But not so appointed by God as the
government of the Jews was. And the reason is this, because the Church and
Commonwealth of the Jews was involved in one, and therefore the Apostle
speaking of the Church, he says they were Aliens, and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel; It was meant of the Church state. There was such a
kind of Paedagogy under the Law, that the Church and State were involved in
one, for Christ would be the head of the Church and Commonwealth too, and
appoint them laws; And so their government was imediately from heaven.

Now for us. That we should have a government according to the rules of wisdom
and justice; that indeed is appointed by God.

God would have us have a government; But he leaves the ordering of that
government to general rules of prudence and justice. So that now it is lawful
for any Kingdom or Country to agree together, and according to the rules of
wisdom and justice, to appoint what government they will, as whether it shall
be a Monarchy, or an Aristocracy, or a Democracy, and to limit this according
to Covenant of agreement, as whether that the fundamental power shall be
wholy put out, or any part reserved, how far this or that Man, How far
man's authoritybindes.
or society of Men shall have the Managing of it, and the like; then so far
as it is agreed upon, we are bound in conscience to obey either actively or
passively, but no further are we bound to obey any Man though he be in
authority, yet we are not bound to obey him, either actively or passively,
conscience is not tied.

Though those men be in authority, yet it is no resisting of authority at all,
not to do what they would have. Yea though the thing be lawful they would
have, yet if it be not according to the law of the kingdom, to the first
agreement, I may be bound by the rules of prudence to save my self; but it is
not authority that binds me to obey out of conscience: For we must of necessity
distinguish between men in authority, and the authority of those men. Wherefore
so long as we seek but to keep authority in the right channel, that it
flows not over the banks, we cannot be charged for resisting the government God
has set over us, though we do not obey the wills of those who are set over us,
and therefore there is no cause that we should fear, that God should say to
England upon this ground, Loruhamah, he will have no mercy. To proceed.

But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah. The people of Israel they might
say, Hosea thou art a Preacher indeed, what preach nothing but judgment,
nothing but wrath, to be utterly taken away? Is there no mercy at all? Is not
God a merciful God? Yes says the Prophet, though you be taken away, God
knows how to glorify his mercy; he has others that he can make to be
objects of his mercy though you be destroyed.

From whence first you see that though God utterly reject some, Obser. 1
yet in the mean time he has others to show mercy unto. Therefore it is no
plea for any sinner to say thus, well, I have sinned indeed, but God is
merciful. What if God be merciful? so he may be, though thou be damned and
perish everlastingly. Yea, whole kingdoms and nations may perish, yet God may
be merciful, God has still infinite ways to glorify his mercy. Many people in
desperate moods, lay violent hands upon themselves, and certainly there is a
kind of spirit of revenge in it, as if they thought there would be some trouble
about it, and so God should lose some honor. But if you will have your will in
this, or in any thing else, though you be dead and rotten, and your souls
perhaps in chains of darkness, God will have ways to be glorious in his mercy,
whatsoever come of you.

But 2. Obser. 2
I will have mercy upon the house of Judah. God will always have a Church, he
will never destroy his Church at once, the Lord loves public worship in the
world: Though he will utterly take away the house of Israel, yet he will have
mercy upon the house of Judah.

Again, Israel might say, what will not God be merciful to us? why I pray you
what does Judah get by her worshipping of God in that which you say is the only
right way? Judah indeed keeps her self to Jerusalem, keeps her self to
worship in the Temple, but what does she get by it? for ought we see Judah is
in as hard an estate, and in as low a condition as we (nay as we shall see
afterward, Judah was in a lower condition than Israel,) and certainly such kind
of expressions as these they would be ready to have against the Prophet.

Well, says God, let Judah be what she will, I will have mercy upon her.

Though carnal hearts, when they look upon the low condition of the true
worshippers of God, Obser. 3
think that there is no difference between those that are in a good way, and
themselves that are in the ways of sin, yet God will make a difference; I will
have mercy upon Judah, but not upon Israel. Many carnal men please themselves
with this; I see others that are strict, that pray in their families, that run
to Sermons, and will not do thus and thus, as others do, yet they are as poor,
in as mean a condition as any others, what do they get by their forwardness in
religion? Are not we in as good a condition as they? Well friend, though thy
carnal heart think there is no difference between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not, God has a time to manifest a difference; There shall a
time come (says God, Mal. 3. 18.) that you shall return and discern between
the righteous, and the wicked, between him that fears God and him that
fears him not. I will not have mercy upon Israel, but I will have mercy upon
Judah.

Fourthly, Judah had at this time many gross and fearful evils amongst them,
yea scarcely delivered from Sodomy; it will ask a great deal of time to show
you the state of Judah in regard of the horrible wickedness that was in it,
yet God says, I will have mercy upon the house of Judah. What is the reason of
this?

Because though Judah had many gross evils, yet Judah kept to the right way of
worshipping God, kept to Jerusalem, to the Temple; so far they kept the
worship of God pure. Hence we see,

God will favor a people exceeding much, Obser.
though there be many weaknesses, yea many wickednesses among them, if they
keep the worship of God pure. It is true, there are many spirits that are most
bitter against those that seek to worship God in the right way, if they can but
get them tripping in any small thing, they follow it against them with all
their might, with all the bitterness that they can possibly. This is not like
unto God, God will favor those that worship him in a right way, though for
other respects he may have many advantages against them.

But this (you will say) seems to contradict what you said before, for you
said, the nearer any are to God, the more he hates their sins, and the sins
of those that make a show of worshipping God in a pure manner, are worse than
the sins of others.

It is true, But as their relation to God in the nearness of his worship, is
an aggravation of their sins, so their relation to God is a foundation of their
hope of mercy from God.

How is this?

It makes their sin indeed worse, Object.
so as to provoke God to punish them sooner, and perhaps bitterer, yet their
relation to God keeps this ground of faith, that God is their God still, and
will have mercy upon them at last. But the wicked though God spare them longer
than his own people, yet when he comes against them he rejects them utterly,
so he did Israel: Judah indeed was punished, but yet Judah had mercy at last,
but (says God) I will have no more mercy upon the house of Israel, but will
utterly take them away.

Fifthly, 5.
Israel had prevailed a little before against Judah; for if you read in 2 King.
14. 12. you shall find that Judah was put to the worst before Israel, the Text
says, They fled every man to their Tents, and Iehoash the King of Israel took
amaziah King of Judah, and came to Jerusalem, and brake down the walls of
Jerusalem, from the gates of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits:
And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were in the house
of the Lord, and in the treasures of the Kings house, and hostages, and
returned to Samariah. And this was but a little before this time, Israel had
thus prevailed against Judah, and brought Judah under, yet now says God, I
will have mercy upon Judah but not upon Israel. What should we note from hence?
Obser.


God sometimes shows mercy to poor afflicted ones, and yet rejects those
that are greater and enjoy more prosperity in the world. Many that are poor
people, Poor afflicted ones find mercy when the rich are rejected.
poor souls that are in a low afflicted condition, God looks upno them and
shows mercy unto them, when brave ones that carry it out, and thrive and live
gallantly in the world, are many times rejected of God. Mark what God says,
Zeph, 3. 12. I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. God looks not at the brave and
gallant ones of the world, but at the poor and afflicted ones, and they shall
trust in the name of the Lord. We must not then judge at the happiness of men
according to their success in the world: For you may now be delivered, and
others kept under affliction, yet afterward you may be rejected, and the
others received unto mercy.

Further, 6.
Hosea was the Prophet of Israel, he was sent to the ten Tribes, yet Hosea
tells them, whose Prophet especially he was, and God would have no more mercy
upon them. And he speaks to Judah (he was not sent to them) and he tells them
that God would have mercy upon them.

Here we may learn how impartial the Ministers of God ought to be in their
work, Obser. Ministers must be Impartial.
they must not go according to their particular private engagements, though
they are engaged more to such a people in diverse regards, yet if they be
wicked, they must deal faithfully, and plainly, and denounce the judgments of
God: And if others, though strangers to them, be godly, they are to give to
them that comfort that belongs unto them. My brethren, partiality in those in
public places, especially of the Ministry, is a great evil.

It was for this that God said he had made the Priest and the Levite
contemptible and base before all the people: Why? because they were partial in
the Law, Malac. 2. 9.

7. Obser. 7,
It is a great aggravation of the misery of some, that God shows mercy to
others. For it is here set down as a part of the threatening against Israel, I
will have no more mercy upon Israel, but I will show mercy to Judah. To aggravate
the misery of Israel, God manifests his mercy to Judah. Mark how God in Esaias.
65. 13. makes it a part of his threatening against the wicked, that he will show
mercy to his servants: Behold, my servants shall eat, but you shall be hungry;
Mercy to the saints are aggravation of judgment to the wicked.
my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: Behold, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit.
These [ Buts] are cutting ones to the heart of the wicked. And observe it, here
is the word [ Behold] three times used, in setting out the difference that God
will make between his servants and the wicked, and how God will aggravate the
misery of the wicked by showing mercy to people, because it is a thing much to
be considered. A like place you have, Mat. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East
and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but the children of
the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Mark, they shall gnash their teeth when they shall see how
they are rejected and others received, gnash their teeth for envy and vexation
of spirit, for it is a great aggravation of men's misery. And is it not
fulfilled this day? How do many bite their nails and gnash their very teeth to
see the mercy that God shows to his people in giving them liberty and
encouragement in his service, while he casts shame and contempt upon their
faces, and brings them forth to answer for their wickedness, and to suffer
condign punishment. Wicked men's spirits vex at this, it is that which they
cannot possibly bear, it is that which galleth and fretteth the very gaul of
their heart to see the mercy of God to his people now in these days; to see
such an opportunity as this, to meet together with this liberty to exercise our
selves in the word, when they are caged up. This they gnash and grind their
teeth at.

It is observeable, that which you have in Acts 22. 21. Paul was speaking there
a great while to the Jews, and they heard him quietly till he came to that word
Depart, for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles; the Text says, they
gave him audience unto this word and then they lift up their voices, and said,
Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live.
What to disgrace us thus, and to think that the Gentiles should come to have
more mercy then we! Away with such a fellow from the earth.

We have such an expression likewise in Luke 4. 26. Our Savior Christ told the
Jews of the Widow of Sarepta, that Elias the Prophet was sent only to her, and
that Naaman the Syrian of all the Lepers in Israel was cleansed; They of the
Synagogue when they heard these things, the Text says, They were filled with
wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and led him to the edge of
the hill whereon their City was built, that they might cast him down
headlong. They were so vexed at Christ's Sermon there, that they could have
broke his neck as soon as he had done preaching. It was at this word, There
were many Widows in Israel in the time of Elias, but unto none of them was
Elias sent save unto the Widow of Sarepta; and many lepens were in Israel in
the days of Elisha, and none of them were cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.
The meaning is this, Christ intimated thus much, that though there were many of
the people of Israel, yet the Lord would have mercy but upon a few of them; yea
that God would choose rather other people to show mercy to, then themselves; at
this they were enraged. And certainly this will be the aggravation of the misery
of the damned in hell: Dives magis uritur gloria Lazari, quam suo incendio.
When a damned soul in hell shall there come to know the mercy of God to
others: It may be wicked parents shall see their children that came out of their
loins. or out of their wombes, at the right hand of Jesus Christ in glory, and
themselves cast down into eternal torment; Chrysologus.
this will be a stinging aggravation of misery, no mercy unto thee, but mercy
unto thy gracious child, the child that thou snibbedst and rebukedst for being
forward, he is now at the right hand of Christ and thou cast into everlasting
misery. So it may be a poor servant, a poor boy in a family, may stand at the
right hand of Jesus Christ hereafter and ascend with him in glory; and his rich
Master that was, that murmured at him, and would not suffer him to have the
least time for to do God service in, but checked him in every thing, and cast
it upon his conscience, oh this is your preciseness: perhaps he sees himself
cast down into eternal misery, when that poor servant of his, that poor
apprentise shall go up to eternal glory

But yet further, God says, I will have mercy upon the house of Judah. Here is
another note very observable, and much concerning our present condition too.
God promises to Judah mercy, after Isreal's rejection; yet if we search the
Scriptures we shall find that after this promise both before the rejection of
Israel was executed, and after the execution thereof; I say, we shall find that
even Judah was under very sore afflictions, and a sad condition she was put
into after this promise was made. As if you will turn but to that Scripture
(for we must look to one Scripture and compare it with another. After promise
of mercy, yet great afflictions may follow,
2 Chronicles, 28. 6. you shall see there the Text says, that Pekah the Son of
Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day: We never
heard of such a battle, such a slaughter, we wonder when we hear of five or
ten thousand slain in the field, here we have 120000. slain, and this was
after this promise that this slaughter was made: yea and further, [ ver. 8.]
There were besides carried captives 200000. women, sons, and daughters. yea
further, [ ver. 17] The Edomites came and had smitten some of Judah, and
carried away captives. And [ ver. 18.] The Philistims had invaded the Cities
of the Low Country, and of the south of Judah, and they dwelt there: And ver.
19.] it is said, the Lord brought Judah low, And [ ver. 20.] it is said that
Tilgath-Pilneser King of Assyria, whom Ahas had sent to help him, he came and
distressed them, but strengthened them not. Here was Pekah the son of Remaliah
slayes 120000, and carries away captive 200000. then there comes the Philistims
and they invaded the country, and then the Edomites they carried away
Captives, and God brings them low, and then comes Tilgath-Pilneser, and he
instead of helping, distressed them. What a case were they in now? yet this was
after this promise, for this promise was made to Judah in the beginning of
Hosea's Prophecy, for it is ver. 2. The beginning of the word of the Lord by
Hosea, and it was before the rejection of Israel, for it was in the reign of
Ahas that Judah was brought into this low condition, which was about 22. years
before the execution of the sentence against Israel, for that was fulfilled in
the sixth year of the reign of Hezekiah, which (if you take it from the
beginning of the reign of Ahaz, who reigned 16. years) make 22. years. Now
this promise to Judah (as I told you in the beginning) was made in the days of
Vzziah King of Judah, and of Jeroboham King of Israel, which was at least 76.
years before the rejection of Israel; and yet after the making of this
promise, Judah you see comes to be in this so sad a condition.

Yea and we shall find besides, that presently after Isreal's rejection,
though God had said he would reject Israel, and be merciful to Judah, so that
a man would think now that Judah should come into a better condition than ever,
yet see how Judah was dealt with. And for that mark the 2. king. 18. 13. the
Text says that in the thirteenth year of Hezekiah, Senacherib king Assyria
came up against Judah, No advantage in yielding to wicked men.
and this was after the casting off of the ten Tribes, for that was in the
sixth year of Hezekiah, as ver. 10. and seven years after came Senacherib
against Judah, thinking to prevail against them as they had done before
against Israel; and then Hezekiah was feign to give him all the silver that was
found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the Kings house; Yea
the Text says, ver. 16. that Hezekiah was feign to cut off all the gold from
the doors of the Temple of the Lord, and from the pillars, and to give it to
the King of Assyria. Now the Lord keep our Kingdom, our Parliament from giving
the gold of the Temple doors in any way of compliance with any malignant
party; that have any evil eye at the beauty of our Sion.

Yea after Senacherib had gotten this, not content with it, he sends
Rabshekah from Lachish, with a great host against Jerusalem. You may see, the
adversaries of the Church are never satisfied, yield to them, gratify them, in
what you will, this is the first temptation: what will you be so strict, and
rugged, and yield to them in nothing? but if they prevail with you, to begin
to yield, they will never have done, they will still encroach upon you,
Hezekiah yielded to Senacherib, even to take away the gold of the Temple
doors, yea a little while after he comes again with a great host, so that
Hezekiah said, it was a day of trouble and rebuke, Chap. 19. Nothing will quiet
them but the ruin of the Church, they must needs have that, Down with it,
down with it, even to the ground, nothing else will satisfy them.

To this low estate and sad condition was Judah brought not long after Israel
was taken away, and yet God promises mercy to Judah for all this.

What shall we learn from this?

This profitable lesson for our present condition, Obser.
God may intend much mercy, yea God may be in a way of mercy to a people, yet
may bring that people into very great straits and difficulties. The promises of
Gods mercies are always to be understood with condition of the cross. If we
think that upon the promise of mercy we shall be delivered from all trouble
and affliction, we lay more upon the promise, then the promise will or can
bear.

It is a great evil that proceeds from much weakness of spirit and distemper
of heart, for people, though God has done great things for them, yet if there
come any rub in the way, and difficulty, any trouble, Oh now we are gone, now
we are all lost, now God has left us, we hoped that there would have come
mercy, we looked for light, and behold darkness, now the heart sinketh, and all
is presently given for gone. Know my brethren this is an evil and an
unbeleeving heart, an evil and an unthankful heart. God has indeed done great
things for us, yet how ready are we though God be in such a way, a glorious
way of mercy, if we hear of any difficulty, of any little rub, any combining of
the adversaries together? we must expect nothing now but blood, and bid farwell,
and adue to all our peace; we thought to have had happy days, but now the Lord
is coming out against us, and all that is done must be undone again. A great
evil to be discouraged at some difficulties, when God is in a way of mercy.
Why, why are you so full of unbeleefe? Surely this is unworthy of Christians,
that profess an interest in God, and unworthy of all the good that God has
done for us. Peter though before he had walked upon the seas through the power
of Christ, yet when the waves came, now Master save me, or else I perish. Has
not God made us walk upon the waves of the sea all this while? wrought as great
a Miracle for us in England as he did for Peter? Yet when a wave does but rise
a little higher then before, we are so distressed in our spirits that we can
scarcely cry, Oh Master save us; but we look one upon another and discourage
one another hearts, and in stead of crying unto God, we cry out one to another
in a discouraging way, and so pine away in our iniquities: Certainly God is
exceedingly angry at such a demeanor as this, and yet this is ordinary, both
in regard of nations, and particular persons. Of nations: It was so high with
Judah (for I desire to keep as close as I can to the work I am about) though
God had made this promise to Judah here, yet if we look into the 7. Isa.
(Isaiah was contemporary with Hosea and it was not much after the making of
this promise) we shall see how they were troubled with fear; says the Text,
When it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim,
the heart of the King of Judah, and the heart of his people were moved as the
trees of the wood were moved with the wind, they were afraid and shook as the
very leaves of the tree shake, both the king of Judah and all the people, Well,
but God speaks to the Prophet, in the 8. Chap, ver. 11. (and it was at this
time when they were so troubled because of the enemies coming against them) God
I say in that Chapter speaks to the Prophet, and (says the text) he speaks
with a strong hand, saying, say not ye, a Confederacy, a confederacy: Oh the
King of Israel and the king of Syria are confederate together, what shall we do?
we are undone, we are lost for ever; say not ye, A confederacy, neither fear ye
this fear, nor be afraid, but sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him
be your fear. Thus God would have his Saints do, not when you hear of
confederate enemies, or any ill tidings abroad; Oh the papists are linked
together, and A confederacy, a confederacy: do not say a confederacy, fear not
their fear, but sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a sanctuary to you: and mark the
resolution of the Prophet afterward, ver. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Oh that this
were the disposition of our hearts! Take that note away wi^h you, amongst many,
though you cannot remember all, when you hear so many rumors of fears and
troubles, as if all were gone, and there were now no more hope, Let this be
your answer; I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of
Jacob, for God is in a way of mercy, and mercy certainly we shall have, let us
look for it.

And for particular persons, how ordinary is it though God be in a wonderful
gracious way of mercy toward them, yet if they do but feel their corruptions
stirring never so little, all is gone presently. I was indeed in a good way,
but God is gone, Christ is gone, and Mercy is gone, and all is gone, surely
God intends no thoughts of good to me. Oh be not unbeleeving, but believing;
For this is the way of God, though he promises great mercy, yet in the mean
time he may bring into great afflictions.

I will not have mercy upon Israel, but I will have mercy upon Judah, and will
save them. For a people to be saved when others near them are destroyed, The
destruction of some, sets forth Gods mercy to others.
this is a great setting out of Gods goodness to them: as to stand upon the
shore safely, and see others suffer shipwreck before us, is a great
augmentation of Gods mercy toward us. When the people of Israel could stand
upon the banks, and see the Egyptians tumbling in the Red Sea, and their dead
bodies cast upon the shore, then, says the Text, sang Moses and the children
of Israel unto the Lord. Exo. 15. 1
And this kind of mercy the Lord has granted to us in England, for while our
neighboring nations have been in a combustion, and many of them spoiled, we
have sat under our own vines, and under our own fig trees, and our greatest
afflictions have been only the hearing of what our brethren have suffered and
yet do suffer: Whereas all about us is as the fiery furnace, and we walk in the
midst of it like the three children, and our garments not touched, nor the
smell of the fire passed on them: when as we see all Countries as Gideons
fleece, bewetted with the tempest of Gods wrath, yea with their own blood,
behold we are dry, and the sunshine of Gods mercy is upon us, the blackness
of the misery of our brethren is the brightness of our mercy.

I will save them. It is the Lord that will save them. This is an upbraiding of
Israel. Oh Israel you think to be saved by your own policy, you have got a
fetch beyond God, you are afraid that the people should go up to Jerusalem to
worship, therefore you have set up the two Calves to save your selves. Gods
people need not seek to save themselves by carnal policy.
But Judah shall be saved, and saved after another way; Judah need not go to
such carnal setches and policies to save themselves, for the Lord shall save
them.

Though carnal hearts think, and endeavor to save themselves only by their
own policy and carnal ways, yet let Gods people know, that they have a
stronger means to save them then all the policy in the world. So long as the
wisdom, the power, the mercy, the faithfulness of God is for them, they need
no other string to their bow but that.

I will save them by the Lord.

What is the meaning of this?

This by Interpreters is carried concerning Christ: That God the Father
promises to save by Christ. As Dan. 9. 17. we have such an expression in
prayer, Now O Lord hear the prayer of thy servant for the Lords sake; that is,
for Christ's sake: So here, God will save by the Lord; that is, by Christ.

A sweet lesson we have from thence: Obs. Administ. ration of GODS grace is
given into the hands of Christ.
viz. That the administration of Gods grace to his people is given into the
hands of JESUS CHRIST. It is Christ that does save the people of God, and has
saved them in all former times, in all ages. It is true, in the merits of
Christ all are saved; that every one will grant, as Zach. 9. 11. By the blood
of thy Covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit. All the
prisoners of Gods people ever since the world began, that have been sent out of
the pit, it has been by the blood of the covenant, by the merits of Christ:
and not only so, but Christ in the administration of all has been the chief,
he has been the Angel of Gods presence, that has stood up for his people in
all their necessities, he has been the great Captain and deliverer, the
Savior of them all. Let Christ then have the honor of a Sovereign to us in
regard of our salvation in outward deliverances. Let us look up to him then for
salvation in all our straits. And if Christ was the Savior of his people in
all ages, and still will be, then surely those ages and places where Christ is
most known and honored may expect the greatest salvation. And this is for our
comfort, far above all the ages that ever was since the world began, Christ is
most known and honored in this age, and of all places in the world, here in
England and amongst our country men; and if Christ will be a Savior of those
places where he is known and honored, surely England may expect a salvation:
England has had it, and as England is peculiar in the way of the knowledge of
Christ, so England shall be peculiar in a way of Gods grace to her.

I will save them by the Lord their God. Not your God oh Israel, but their God.
Thus he upbraydeth the people of Israel that they had forsaken their God; that
Judah had kept their God, but Israel had not.

It is a great upbrayding of a people when it can be said of them that they
have forsaken the Lord. Obs.
It is a woeful thing not to have God to be our God at all, Dan 5. 23.
that conscience can charge this upon a man that Daniel did upon Belshazzar,
That God in whose hand thy breath his, and whose are all thy ways, have thou
not glorified; but that conscience can charge this, That God that thou have
chosen, that thou have entered into covenant withal, Oh thou apostatized soul,
thou apostatized Nation, thou have forsaken him, he is not thy God. This is a
sore and heavy charge indeed.

Again, The Lord their God.

It seems he is the God of Judah, though Judah had many evils, Lect. 4.
but not the God of Israel.

Those then that do not worship God in a right way, Observe.
God will not acknowledge himself to be worshipped by them at all.

The people in the wilderness proclaimed a fast to Jehovah, and yet the
Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 7. calls them Idolaters, and it is said they sacrificed to
Idols, because they worshipped God by the Calfe, and not in Gods way. Though we
may think we worship God, yet if we do not worship him in his own way, he
does not own himself to be worshipped by us at all.

Again, The Lord their God.

This could not but sting Israel, that Judah should be thought to have more
interest in God then Israel had.

It is a stinging thing to carnal hearts, Obser.
and much bitterness of spirit it must needs be entertained withal, that any
one should but think of challenging any peculiarity of interest in God. Carnal
hearts cannot endure that any one should think they have more interest in God
then themselves
Thus they scorned at Christ, Oh he trusted in God, he thinks he has more
interest in God then others, now let his God come and save him. I remember in
the book of Martyrs we read that the Papists were much vexed against the
protestants, because they used to say, our God and our Lord, they were known
by this speech, and the Papists were enraged against them for this, because
they seemed to claim more interest in God then others. And indeed what is the
cause of the quarrel in the World against Gods people, but because they think
they claim more peculiarity and interest in God than others? and this is the
reason that soule-searching preaching cannot be endured, because it makes a
difference between the one and the other, and shows that some have an interest
in God more than others. Hence it is that in no places in the world men's
spirits so fret against preaching as in England, why? because there is not such
soul-examining, such soule-distinguishing preaching in the World as in England.
Yea that is the reason of the bitterness of one professor against another,
because one is a Protestant at large, and the other manifests more power of
godliness, is more strict in his course; and seems to claim a greater share
in God than the former. Profession in England is a more distinguishing
profession than in other places.

I will save them by the Lord their God. God is the God of Judah still, Observe.
therefore God will save them.

So long as God is our God we need not fear our adversaries. Ye have heard of
that Palladium of the Heathens in Troy, they imagined that so long as that Idol
was kept safe, they were unconquerable; all the strength in Greece was not able
to prevail against it, wherefore the Greecians sought by all means they could
to get it from them. Ejus fimulacrum catenis constrinxerunt clavisque Basi
affixe. iunt.
I have read of the men of Tyrus that they were afraid their god Apollo should
forsake them: they therefore chained and nailed that Idol to a post that they
might be sure of it, because they thought their safety was in it. Let us fasten
our selves to God in an everlasting covenant, and certainly God will be fast to
us, and then we are safe enough.

I will save them: Lect. 3.
but how? what shall Judah be saved by and not Israel? Judah a poor
contemptible people, how saved?

I will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses nor by
horsemen. It shall not be by any outward means, but by the immediate hand of
God. This promise that God would save them not by bow nor by sword, etc. it was
performed two several times, and there is a third time for the fulfilling of it
which is yet to come.

It was done first when the Angel of the Lord went out and smote in one night
in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: Judah
saved, not by bow, norby sword, two several ways.
1 kings 11. 35. and God tells them, that the King of Assyria should not shoot
an arrow there, nor come before the City with a shield: so God saved them
without bow, for they had no need to use the bow then, because the Angel of the
Lord destroyed them.

The second time was when he saved Judah in their return from captivity, then
as it is Zach. 4. 6, he saved them not by might nor by power, but by my spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts. Mark the phrase, as if God should say, I have
strength, for I am the Lord of hosts, I can command Armies, if I would, to save
you; No, though I be the Lord of hosts, yet I will not save you by might nor by
power, but by my spirit. Therefore Isa. 43. 7. their strength is said to be in
sitting still, and ver. 15. in quietness, and confidence shall be your
strength. Thus they were saved not by bow, nor by sword.

Then the third time, which is yet to come, that is, in the wonderful work of
God in calling the Jews, when God shall raise up out of them, a glorious
people to himself, and save Judah once again, and it shall not be by sword,
nor by bow, but by the Lord their God; For as it is said, Dan. 2. 34. the stone
that smote the Image was cut out without hands, so there shall be a power that
is not visible from whence it comes, but Jesus Christ shall come from heaven to
do his great works, As the lightning from the East to the West, so shall the
coming of the son of man be.

What learn we from hence?

First, Obser. 1.
God ties not himself to the use of outward means in procuring of good to his
people. Though all outward means fail, yet there may be ways of salvation for
the Saints. Wicked men's hearts presently sink, if outward means fail: And
indeed so much as our hearts fail when outward means fail, it is a sign
that we did before rest upon the means, and if we had had the means, we should
have robbed God of his honor. We must use means, but not rely upon the means.
Mediis utendam, non innitendum.
I might show you excellent Texts of Scripture for this, as Psalm. 33. 16. There
is no King saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty man is not delivered by
much strength, etc. And Psalm. 44. 5. 6. Through thee will we push down our
enemies, through thy name we will tread them under, that rise up against us;
for I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me, etc.

But secondly, Not by bow, nor by sword, etc.

Deliverance of a people without bow, and without sword is a great mercy: For
such are the woeful miseries that a people do suffer when war comes, that
usually the victory will scarce pay the charges of the battle: though we be
sure to be saved at last, yet if we must be saved by bow, and by sword, I say
the misery that we may suffer in our salvation, may be more then the salvation.
It was the height of that mercy promised, Isa. 9. 5. that it should be without
confused noise and garments rolled in blood. Such a mercy we have had; and had
Christ come to have reigned amongst us, though he had come with his garments
rolled in blood, we should willingly have entetrayned him; If he had come
ryding upon his red horse; But behold he comes ryding upon his white horse, in
peace and mercy all this while, and the mercies we have had, have been very
cheap, they have not been by bow, nor by sword. And if God should come at
length by the sword, and bring perfect salvation to us by blood, which God
forbid; but if he should, we have had already more mercy without blood, than
our bloods are worth; should we now have our bloods shed, God has paid us
beforehand: who almost in this congregation, but two or three years ago would
have lost his blood to procure so much mercy to England, as England has had
already?

Further. Obser.
Such is the love of God to his people, that he is pleased to work for them
beyond means. The other point was, that he can save his people without means;
This, that he will do it beyond means: For the grace, and love of God to his
people, is so high, and glorious, that it is beyond that which can be conveyed
by means, therefore it must be done more imediatly. Exodus 15. 6. Thy right
hand, O Lord is become glorious in power, in the greatness of thine excellency
thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee. First, it is the hand of
God, Secondly, it is the right hand of God, Thirdly, it is the right hand of
God in power, Fourthly, this is glorious in power. Fifthly, there is excellency;
and Sixthly, there is the greatness of Excellency. It is an high expression.
Magnitudine excellentiae, or magnitudine elationis, in the greatness of thy
lifting up, (...)
for the same word signifies pride, that is here translated excellency; and if
God he lifted up in any thing, it is when he shows himself for his people.
Now take all these six expressions, Gods hand, Gods right hand, his right hand
in power, a right hand that is become glorious in power, his excellency, the
greatness of his excellency, and all this for his Saints, surely this is more
then can be conveyed by means, God must borne imediately and save them by
himself.

But lastly, 4.
the more imediate the hand of God appears in his mercy to his people, the
more sweet and precious ought that mercy to be then (this were an excellent
argument to follow to the full, and so nearly concerning us; you see the
scriptures were made for other times, then for the times in which they were
first revealed) a most excellent place of Scripture you have for this Psalm. 21.
13. Be thou exalted O Lord in thine own strength, so will we sing, and praise
thy power. When God comes in his own strength, and not in the strength of the
creature, and by means, then do the Saints sing and praise the power of God.
Dulcious ex ipso font, we use to say, that which comes imediately comes
exceeding sweetly: Then the Saints may boast in God, when God comes
immediately with his salvation, so you have it, Psalm. 44. 7. 8. Thou have saved
us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us: What follows?
in God will we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever. So that
the Saints of God then praise God, nay they may lawfully give up themselves to
boast, when God works imediately. When God works by means, then they must take
heed of ascribing to the means, but when God comes imediately, then they may
boast.

It is the blessedness of Heaven, that Gods mercy comes imediately: created
mercies are the most perfect mercies. Suppose God had bin with them by bow, and
by sword, when Senacherib came against them, could they have been saved as they
were? Gods hook that he put in his nose, and bridle that he put in his lips
(for so God says he would do with him, use him as a beast) were better then
their sword or bow.

Surely, if ever any nation knew what it was to have imediate mercies come down
from heaven, England does: If ever Nation saw God exalting himself in his own
power, England has: we have lived (and blessed be God we have lived) to see
the Lord exalting himself in his own power: Oh let us cry out with the
Psalmist (and with that I shall end) Be thou exalted O Lord in thy own strength
amongst us, so will we still, and still, and still, sing and praise thy power.

The Fourth Lecture June 20. 1642.

HOSEA 1. 8. etc. 8. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she co^ceived and
bare a son.

9. Then said God, call his name Ly^ammi, for you are not my people, and I will
not be your God.

10. Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea,
which cannot be measured nor numbered, etc.


THe last day was finished the signification of the name of the second child
of Hosea, Lo-ruhamah.

We now come unto the weaning of it, and the begetting of the third, Lo-ammi.

When she had weaned Loruhamah. We do not read of the first child Jezreel
that it was weaned; but the second child Loruhamah that was weaned, before the
third child Loammi was conceived. Lect. 4.
What is the meaning of this?

There is much of Gods mind showed unto us even in this very thing that we
ordinarily let slip and pass over.

The reason is, because this second child Loruhamah was to signify unto the
people of Israel their carrying out of their own Country into captivity into
Assyria: It was to signify to them that they should be weaned from the
comforts and delights that there were in their own Country; they should be
taken away from their milk and honey that they had there; and be carried into
Assyria, and be there fed with hard meat, even with the water of affliction
and the bread of affliction. The first child did but signify their
scattering, especially in regard of their seditions amongst themselves. But the
second child signified the carrying away all of them wholly into captivity
from their own Land, Vaticiantur hic dura ut desti. uantur verbo Dei prophetiis
and gratiis. Vatab. in loc.
Therefore the second child is weaned, Cibis sustent abitur immundis, So.
Jerome has it, They should be carried amongst the Gentiles, and be fed with
unclean meat, they should be deprived of prophecy, and of the milk of the
word, and of the ordinances that they enjoyed, So Vatablus.

Ordinances are as the breasts of consolation, out of which the people of God
suck soul-satisfying comforts. So you have it, Esaias, 66. 11. That you may suck
and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that you may milk out
and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. And Cant. 1. 4. We will
remember thy loves more than wine: Memares uberum tuorum supervinum.
The old latin has it, We will remember thy dugs above wine; and so the
words will bear. These people should be deprived of those dugs and breasts out
of which they had sucked much sweetness before, even deprived of all comfort
in God. Gods people hang upon God, and suck comfort from him, even as the
infant upon the mothers breast, and sucks sweetness, and comfort, and
nourishment from thence.

This expression then of weaning the child, implies these two things.

First, Obser.
That the enjoyment of the comforts of a sweet native soil, specially where
there are any ordinances together with it, is a very great blessing of God; The
sweetness of the comfort^ of a native soil.
and the being deprived of it is a great affliction, yea to some it comes as a
curse. The very sucking of the air of a sweet native soil (and especially such
a comfortable soil as we have here in England) is certainly a great blessing
from the Lord. Those that have been deprived of it, and banished away, have
been more sensible of it than any of you who always have enjoyed it. Many have
lain sucking at the sweetness of this our English air, and at the comforts
that there have been in their accommodations, so long, till they have sucked in
that which (if Gods mercy had not prevented) would have proved to have been
poison to them to have baned their souls. But I speak not of all, I make no
question but there have been many of Gods dear servants that have tarried in
their native soil, and kept the uprightness of their hearts and consciences
as clear as others that went away. It is true, the comforts of a native soil
are sweet, but except we may enjoy them with the breasts of these consolations
(or Ordinances of the Church) they are notable to satisfy the soul: yea,
except we may suck out such milk of these breasts as is sincere milk, and not
soiled nor sowred by the inventions of men, better a great deal that we were
weaned from all the sweetness and accommodation we have in our native soil by
the mortifying of our affections to them, then that God should weane us from
them, by sending of us into captivity, or by giving the adversary power over
us, or by making the Land too hot for us. But that for the first.

Again, 2.
in that this child was weaned, and by the weaning was to signify their being
carried away out of their own into a strange Country; this expression implies
thus much. That it is an evil thing for a child to be taken from the mothers
breast too soon, and sent away to be nursed by others. The expression does
fully imply this, for it is to tell us the evil condition of the people, that
they should be taken from their own, and sent to another Country: This their
affliction is set out by a childs being taken from its own mothers breast; it
could not express what it intended, except it were to imitate thus much unto
us, that it is an evil thing for a child to be taken from its own mothers
bres^.

It is unnatural then for mothers out of daintiness, and curiosity to deny the
fruit of their wombes, Mothers must nurse their children.
the comfort of their breasts. It is true, in time of weakness and danger,
when it may be dangerous to themselves and the child, God permits it. But when
it is merely (I say) out of daintiness, and curiosity, certainly it is an evil
that is against nature it self. Hannahs care of her son Samuel, is recorded
by this, and it is mentioned by the holy Ghost, in her commendation, that she
gave him suck. 1 Samuel 1. 23, The woman abode and gave her son suck until she
weaned him, says the Text. It is said of the Ostrich, Job. 39. 16. That she is
hardened against her young ones as though they were not hers; and this Ostrich
is reckoned among the fowls that are unclean: And Lam. 4. 3. Even the
sea monsters draw out their breasts, they give suck to their young ones, yet
the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the Ostridges in the
wilderness, more cruel then the very sea monsters themselves, that draw out
their breasts and give suck to their young ones.

The instruction of the son belongs to the father, the nursing of the son
belongs to the Mother. (...) Nun e^^dire pa^ris est, ^n^rire matris.


The Mothers milk is the most profitable and wholesome for any one, (says
Pliny) except it be in some extraordinary case. We read in 2 Timothy 3. 3. that
in the latter day, when evil times should come, some should be without natural
affection: that (...), that is here spoken of, is the affection of the parents
to the children, ^^^utilifimum euique maternum. Plin, l. 28. c. 9.
as well as of the children to the parents.

But enough of this; if not too much, to such that are so pleased with their
curiosity and daintiness (the children of their own fancies) that they neglect
the fruit of their wombes and natures duty to the children of their bodies.

But further observe here, (...).
That the Lord stays for the weaning of the child, he stays till Lo-ruhamah
was weaned before Lo-ammi was conceived. And there is much to be known in this.

Why does God stay?

This is to show the great patience of God toward his people: Quest. Ans.
For God was now about to reject his people utterly, from being his people, God
was about to come with the height of his wrath, to declare that they were no
more his people; and here God makes a stop, stays till Lo^ruhamah was weaned, I
have read of the Jews, that their manner was to be a long time, three years
sometimes, before they weaned their children. God then it seems stayed long
here, before he would have the third child, (that is Loammi) born, before he
would come with that dreadful sentence, you are not my people, and I will not
be your God. First when Jezreel was born, then they are scattered up and down,
yea but they are not all carried away captive yet: Then Lo-ruhamah is born, and
then they are gone, carried away captive, never to return again. But for all
this, God may yet own them in their captivity; This is not so bad as for God to
say I will have no more to do with you as my people; Lord though we be under
affliction, under the power of our enemies, own us still, acknowledge us to be
thine, though we be in the fiery furnace, yet let us have thee to be our God,
No (says God) you shall not only be scattered, but you shall be all carried
away captive, and I will not own you neither, I will cast you off, you shall
not be my people, neither will I be your God. Now before this God makes a stop.

Hence observe first.

That God stops in his anger for a while as long as he pleases. Obs. (...)
God is called, Nah. 1. 2. The Lord of anger, so are the words, though
translated otherwise. We may apply it at least thus, God is the Lord of his own
anger, he can let it out as far as he will, he canstop it when he will, he can
command it to come in when he pleases.

It is not so with us; our anger, our passions are Lords over us; if we once
let our anger our passions arise, we cannot get them down again when we would,
we cannot still them when we please; if we let our affections run, we cannot
call them in when we will, but are sometimes slaves to our own passions, Power
over passions.
and they lord it over us.

This is that frame of spirit that we should all labor for, to be like to God,
though angry, yet sin not, so as we can stop when we will, and command our
anger as we please. As it is said of God, that he says to the proud waves,
Hitherto shall thou go and no further: Oh that we were able to say to those
proud waves of our passions, Hos. 11. 8.
Hitherto are you gone, but you shall go no further!

Again, Churches not too suddenly to be rejected.
mark here, God stops in his anger for a while. When this dreadful judgment
was come to be executed, God is even ready to say (as he says afterward in
this Prophecy) How shall I give thee up? Oh Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee,
O Israel? Teaching us thus much,

That those that have been once the people of God must not be suddenly rejected
from being Gods people: but when we are about any such thing, either to reject
any particular man or woman (who have made profession of Religion) from being
Gods, or to reject a Church from being Gods; we had need make a stop, we had
need pause, we had need examine the matter very well; yea and when we have
examined, and are ready to do it, to make a stop again, and to bethink our
selves what we do. We must not be too sudden in rejecting those that have been
once the people of God. from being the people of God now: It is Gods way you
see here.

Many men are too hasty in this point, in rejecting both particular servants of
God, and particular Churches from belonging to God, as soon as they see some
few things amiss in them, especially if there be any thing gross, presently
they are no Churches at all, they are altogether Antichristian, they belong to
the Beast; and so while they strike at the Beast, they wound the Lamb.
Certainly there is to be acknowledged much of Christ, not only in particular
Saints, but in regard of the Church Ordinances of many particular congregations
in England: we must take heed therefore of too sudden rejection of them from
belonging to God, to be his people in that way of Church fellowship.

We come now to the conception of the third child. It was a son, and his
name was Lo-ammi. The second child a daughter, but the third a Son: What is
the meaning of this? I told you (the last day) that by the second child was
noted the state of the people at that time, that it grew weaker and more
effeminate: weaker in regard of their outward strength, and more effeminate in
regard of their spirits: And that I made good to you out of the History of
those times in the book of the Kings. Well, but now it is a son, what do they
grow stronger then before, now they are come nearer to destruction then before?
Yes, though nearer to ruin and destruction, and more heavy wrath then they
were before, yet they get up a little strength before that time: Therefore the
third child is a son. Concerning the strength that this people had got at
this time, a little before this their utter rejection, upon which their spirits
were raised, you shall find the History of it in 2 Kings 17. 4. where you have
a declaration of the state of the ten Tribes then when Lo-ammi was borne; for
the Text tells us, that they began to join in confederacy with the King of
Egypt; and so whereas formerly they had done homage by presents to the King of
Assyria, now being confederate with the King of Egypt, they refused to bring
any more presents to him; they begin now to be a jolly people, and hoped to
cast off that yoke of bondage under which they were in regard of the Assyrians.

God sometimes lets men, Observe.
and Nations, and Churches to rise a little out of their affliction, before
their utter ruin: he gives them a little reviving, they have a little
lightning before their death. Many men think themselves in a very good
condition, if having been in affliction, their afflictions do begin once to
abate, and they begin to get a little up; now they think they are safe, and
they are ready to say with Agag, Surely the bitterness of death is gone, 1 Samuel 15. 32.
surely the worst is past. But you may sometimes be recovered, when God
intends you should be suddenly rejected. Many may be preserved from some
judgments, because they are reserved to greater judgments. The Lord has begun
indeed to give us in England a little reviving, a little strength to enable us
to rise against the oppressions of our Adversaries, those cruel oppressions.
But let us not be secure, notwithstanding this; for though we have some little
reviving, if we follow not God on in the way of humiliation and reformation,
this our little reviving may be but a lightning before our death.

And yet further, it is very observable, when the condition of Israel was at
this time when God was about to say, Lo-ammi, they are not my people; what it
was not only in regard of their strength, but what it was in regard of their
sins. For you shall find (if you examine the History) that the people of
Israel were at this time somewhat better then they had been before: not only
had gotten somewhat more strength, but they were somewhat better in regard of
their sins then they had been; Imeane they had less sins then they had before:
yet now God is saying to them, Lo-ammi, You are not my people. And for that
observe, 2 Kings 17. 2. if you read that Chap^^, you shall find that the very
time of the utter rejection of Israel was in the days of Hoshea, and the Text
says, He did evil in the sight of the Lord; the King in whose days they were
so rejected, did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as the Kings of Israel
that were before him. He was not so bad as the former Kings of Israel, and yet
in his days there comes utter destruction upon Israel. Yea and as the King was
not so bad then as others before him; so it may seem the people were not so
bad as in former time, for ver. 9. the Text says, That the children of Israel
did secretly those things that were not right, against the Lord their God.
Indeed they were sinful, but their sinfulnes was secret, they did not sin with
such an open impudent face, as it seemed, as heretofore. Yet in this Kings
time, and when these people were thus, comes their utter ruin.

What may we learn from hence?

This, That sometimes when there are greater sins, patience stays judgment;
Obser.
and yet afterward when a people seem to be in a better condition, not only
in regard of their outward strength, When sins seem to be less then be fore,
yet then judgments may come.
but then in regard of their sins too, yet then God comes with his wrath upon
that people.

Let us not flatter our selves, although we can say that some things here
amongst us are not so bad as heretofore they have been. Suppose there be some
partial reformation, this is not ground enough to secure us. We cannot reason
thus, Why heretofore the Land was more sinful then now; and the Governors were
more oppressing then now, there has been (thanks be to God) much reformation.
This is not enough, we may be nearer the forest misery at this time (if our
reformation be not a through reformation) then we were before. And the reason
is this because God when he comes against a Nation, he does not only come
against it for the present sins that they are actually guilty of at that time,
but to reckon with them for their sins comited fore, though the judgment falls
out to be inflicted just at that time. It may be a concourse of many passages
of Gods providence might so fall out as might su^e with Gods ends, that the
destruction of this nation should be at this time rather then before, yet the
nation not more sinful then before, but to fulfill other passages of providence
that God intends; and then he comes to reckon with them for sins that were
along time ago committed, and for their present sins altogether. As he does
sometimes with particular persons: perhaps they have been drunkards, unclean,
wicked, 20. years agone, God has spared them, afterward upon some lesser sins,
God may take advantage to come against them for all their other sins together.
We use to say, It is not the last blow of the axe that fells the oak, Vltimus
ictus non dejicit queteum.
perhaps the last may be a weaker blow then any of the former, but the oak was
a felling down all the while before, the other blows made way for the felling
of it, and at length a little blow comes and does it. So our former sins may
be the things that make way for our ruin, and then at length some lesser
sins may do it.

You that have been guilty of gross sins, take heed of small sins; for though
God has pared you when you were guilty of great sins, do not say that he will
spare you now you commit lesser sins; but at this time of committing lesser
sins, you may be called to an account for grosser. Did you never know a house
stand out against many strong and blustering winds, yet afterward some little
puff of wind has tumbled it down? So it is with Nations and people that
sometimes stand out (through Gods patience when their sins are gross and vile,
and afterward upon some lesser sins they are utterly undone.

What is the name of his son? Quest. Ans.


The name of this son is Lo-ammi, and the word signifies (as it is interpreted
here by God himself) You are not my people, and I will not be your God.

The people to whom Hosea prophesied, they might have objected against him
thus: What, Hosea do you say that God will not have any more mercy upon us?
what will not God have mercy upon his own people? Is not God our God? What do
you threaten such-things as these are?

The Prophet answers, It is true, God has been your God, and you have been his
people, but there is an end of those days, God now degradeth you from those
glorious privileges that formerly you had, he willowne you no more to be his,
and you shall have no further right to own him to be yours.

From whence

First this, A people that have been once a people dear to God, may be so
rejected as never to become a people of God more: Obs.
For so these did not, though afterward we shall bear of the promise for
others in other Ages. God has no need of men. God is able to raise up a people
what ways he pleases, even from the very stones in the street, to raise up
children unto Abraham. Though Rome may boast that they have been a glorious
Church; True, there has been heretofore a glorious Church in Rome, what then?
Those that were his people are now no more his people.

We shall meet further with this in the next Chapter.

Only in this Note, observe but this thing, The great difference between the
estate of a Christian in communion with Christ by grace, A Church state may be
lost, but not the fouls communion with Christ
and a Church estate. Men and women may loose their Church estate, and that for
ever; but their estate in communion with Jesus Christ by grace, they can never
lose that: And this is a great difference, and affords abundance of comfort.
True, our Church state (I mean in regard of an instituted Church in
Congregations) it is a great privilege, a great mercy; but our Communion with
Jesus Christ is a higher privilege, and that privilege began never be lost; we
may be cut off from the one, but never cut off from the other.

Secondly, Obser.
yet it is a most heavy judgemen^ for any to have been heretofore the people of
God, now to be unpeopled, for God to be no more theirs, and for them to be no
more the Lords. A heavy judgment for the Lord to say, Well, I will be no more
a God to you whatsoever I am to others, no more yours in my goodness, in my
mercy, in my power, or whatsoever I am in my self.

The being cast off from God.

First takes us off from that high honor that was before upon a people; for so
in Esaias, 4. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou host been
honorable, The people of God gathered together in Church Communion, certainly
are in an honorable condition; when they are dispeopled, they are cast off
from this their privilege, from their honor.

Secondly, 2.
They have not the presence of God with them as before, not the care of God
toward them, nor the protection of God over them, not the delight of God in
them, nor the communication of God to them. What should I speak of all these
particulars? The great argument to plead with God by, is our relation to him.
But among other privileges they want this, namely that great privilege of
pleading with God for mercy upon this relation, which was the usual way of the
Prophets to plead with God, because they were the people of God. So Esaias, 64.
9. Be not wroth very sore O Lord; neither remember iniquity for ever: upon what
ground? Behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people. This is a good
Argument Again, Jer. 14. 9. Why do thou stand as a man astonished amongst
us, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us,
and we are called by thy name, leave us not. This Text is ours this day, and
well may we say, O Lord why do thou stand as a man astonished? Oh yet if we
can but take up the second part, and say, We are called by thy name, we may
make more comfortable use of the former, Why do thou stand as a man
astonished? How does a man astonished stand? He stands still in a place, as if
he knew not which way to go, he is in a kind of destraction. first he goes
one way, and by and by he returns again. The Lord, we know, knows his purpose
from eternity, but the Scriptures are pleased to express Gods ways toward us
in the similitude. Has not God stood amongst us as a man astonished? God has
been in a way of mercy, and then stood still, and then gone forward a little,
and afterward gone back again; and yet back and back still, and we have prayed
and cried, and God has stood as a man astonished, as if he were not yet
resolved which way to go. Let us pray earnestly to God that he would not stand
as a man astonished, but that the way of the Lords mercy may be made clear
before him, and clear before us. But this I bring in to show that the relation
that people have to God, is the ground of their encouragement to pray to God,
and when a people is rejected they lose this privilege.

Our relations to God are very sweet things, though ordinarily they are
exceedingly abused; Relationes minimae ^n titatis, maximae efficaciae.
yea they are glorious things. As it is said of other relations. Relations are
of the least entity, but of the greatest efficacy; so it is here, Our relations
to God are of very great efficacy, whatsoever the entity be: and therefore to
lose our relations to God, especially this relation of Gods being ours, and we
being his, is a sore and he avy curse.

Again, You are not my people, and I will not be your God. Mark here, the
first is, you are not my people, before the second comes, I will not be your
God.

We first begin with God in our apostasy, Observe.
before God begins with us in his rejection; I would not have withdrawn my self
from being your God, if you had not first rejected me, and would not be my
people. When God loves, he begins first; we love not him, but he loves us
first: But when it comes to departing, it then begins on our side, we first
depart before the Lord does: and this is that which will be a dreadful
aggravation to wicked men another day to think with themselves. This evil is
come upon us, God is gone, mercy is gone, but who began this first? where is
the root and principle? Thy perdition is of thy self: Perditio tua^e^ te.
I begin first, and therefore all the loss of that grace and mercy which is in
God, I may thank this proud, this distempered, this base, passionate, wretched
heart of mine own for it.

Again, I will not be your God. He does not say, you shall not have the fruit
of my patience to be yours, you shall not have my creatures to be yours, you
shall not have those fruits of my bounty to be yours: No, but I will not be
yours, I my self will not be yours. This is the sorest threatening that posibly
can be to a gracious heart.

It is a greater misery to lose God himself, Observe.
then to be deprived of whatsoever comes from God. And this indeed is one
special difference between an hypocrite, and a true gracious heart; an
hypocrite is satisfied with what comes from God, but a true gracious heart is
satisfied with nothing but God himself: though God lets out never so many
fruits of his bounty and goodness to him, yet he must have union with God
himself, or else he is unsatisfied. Bona mea tibi non pla cent nisi me cum;
nec bona tu^ mi hi non placent nisi te^um.
It is a notable speech of Bernard, Lord, says he, As the good things that
come from me, please not thee without my self; so the good things that come
from thee please not me without thy self. This is the expression of a gracious
heart. Let us tender up to God never so much, never such duties, with never so
great strength, except we tender up to God our selves, they never please him:
So let God bestow never so many favors upon us, except God give us himself,
they should never pleaseus; I mean please us, so as to satisfy us, so as to
quiet us, if for our portion.

You know what God said to Abraham, Genesis 15. 2.
Fear not, I am thy exceeding great reward: But Lord what will thou give me,
seeing I go childelesse? What is all this to me so long as I have not the
promise fulfilled, that so I may come in Christ to enjoy thy self? Exo. 33. 15.
And Moses would not be contented though God told him his Angel should go
before them; No, says he, Except thou go with us thy self, let us not
depart hence. It is the difference between the Strumpet and the loving wife,
the strumpet cares not so much for the person of her lover, as for his gists,
for what she has by him: but the true lover cannot be satisfied with
lovetokens, but she must have the person himself. So it is with a gracious
heart. It is very observable that of David in Psalm. 51. 9. Turn away thy angry
face from my sins. It seems Gods face was angry; Cujus faciem timet, ipsius
faciem invocat. Aug.
and yet presently, ver. 11. Cast me not away, a facie tua, from thy face. Gods
face was an angry face, yet David would not be cast away from this face of God:
Oh no, rather let God be present with a gracious heart, though he be angry;
though his anger continue, yet let me have his countenance. This is plainly
gathered hence, in that God says not, I will not give you these and these
favors, but I will not be your God, that this is the sorest threatening that
possibly can be to a gracious heart.

5. This is the judgment for sin, 5. Obser.
Gods not being their God. It hence appears that sin carries along with it in
it self its own punishment. How is that? Thus, By sin we refuse to have God to
be our God; by it we depart from God, we do not trust God, nor love him, nor
fear him. The very nature of sin has this in it, that it causes a sinner to
depart from God, yea to reject God from being a God unto him, and this is the
punishment, I will not be your God. And this is the sorest punishment to a
sinner, that he shall not for ever have God to his God.

Lastly, You are not my people, and I will not be your God. Hence learn this.

When any forsake God from being their God, Those who will not (...) Gods must
not be ours
we should do as God does, reject them from being ours, if they will not be
Gods, neither should they be ours: will not such a man have acquaintance with
God, will he forsake him and his ways, then he shall not have our
acquaintance, we will forsake him. How far we may withdraw from a Church that
it shall not be ours, we shall fully meet with all in the second Chap. somewhat
will be said about it there: Only now thus much, though it be true when a
people forsake God, we are to forsake them, yet let them grow never so wicked,
our natural and civil relations cannot be broken because of their wickedness;
but the relations of husband and wife, father and child, master and servant
must be acknowledged: servants must be dutiful to their masters though never so
wicked; And the wife must be loving and dutiful to her husband, though he be
never so wicked a man. But for any inward intimate familiarity with those, not
thus joined in such Relations, ought not to be; if they reject God, if they
will not be Gods, they should not be ours. It is said Job. 8, 20. That God will
not take the ungodly by the hand; It should be true of us all, we should not
take the ungodly by the hand.

Thus much for the name of this third child Lo-ammi, you are not my people,
and I will not be your God.

That which remains in the Chapter, it is a promise of mercy, both to Israel,
ver. 10. and afterward to Israel and Judah together, ver. 11. To Israel first,
and that is,

Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the Sea,
which cannot be measured or numbered, etc. And so he goes on with wonderful
gracious promises of mercy to Israel in future generations, though for the
present God had determined what to do with this Israel.

Here then we have first a promise of mercy to Israel, in the midst of the
sorest judgment that God threatens, he comes in with promises of mercy even
unto Israel. And Secondly, this mercy to be in future generations. And thirdly,
to consist in the multitudes that should be gathered to Israel.

These three things are observable in general.

First, That there is such a gracious promise immediately after such a sore and
dreadful threatening as this, as indeed it is one of the most dreadful
threatenings we have in all the Book of God; yet here in the close of the
Chapter, we have as gracious a promise again as is in the whole Book of God.
From whence we may observe thus much.

That the Lord in Judgment remembers Mercy. Observe.
It is a sore thing when God in mercy shall remember judgment, but it is as
comfortable when God in judgment remembers mercy. When God threatens most
dreadfully yet he promises most graciously. We should therefore when we most
fear the threats of God, yet look up to the promises of God, look up to see
when wrath is denounced in the most hideous and dreadful way, whether we
cannot spy a Promise, It is usual in prospe ^^it* to forget threats, and in
adversity to forget promises.
whether there be not yet a little cloud, though but as big as a man's hand,
whether there be not yet a little crevis through which we may see whether God
does not break forth with a little light in a way of promise.

It is a usual thing when we are in prosperity to forget all threatenings, and
fo it is as usual when we are in adversity to forget all promises. When we
hear of mercy to Gods people, we are taken up and never think of Gods wrath;
and on the other side when we hear of his wrath on unbeleeving hearts are
taken up as well, and never think of his grace and mercy. We ought to sanctify
the name of God in both: when God is in away of justice, look up to his grace;
and when he is in a way of grace, look upon his justice, and sanctify that
name of his likewise. And for that end, I shall give you two notable Texts of
Scripture; there are many of this kind, but two I shall give you, that are as
famous as any I know in the book of God: the one that declares to you that
when God expresses the greatest mercy, yet then he does express greatest
wrath; and the other when God expresses greatest wrath he then expresses
greatest mercy: And I shall show you the name of God oughto be sanctified in
both.

The first is in that 34. of Exodus 6. 7. The Lord there when he passed by
before Moses proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
for giving iniquity, and transgression and sin. What abundance of mercy is
here expressed? Now it follows. And that will by no means clear the guilty,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens
children unto the third and fourth generation. Here is an expression of great
wrath. And then for our sanctifying of Gods name in this, it follows, ver. 8.
And when Moses heard this, he made have and bowed his head toward the earth and
worshipped before the Lord. Thus we must bow and worship before God in our
sanctifying his Name in both together, both his mercy and justice.

On the other side, Nahum. 1. 2. and soon, God is jealous and the Lord
revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on
his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies, dreadful expressions,
yet ver. 8. The Lord is slow to anger; there is a mittigation at first. Then he
goes on still in expressions of wrath, But he is great in power, and will not
at all acquit the wicked: and ver. 5. The mountains quake at him, and the hills
melt, and the earth is burnt at his presence, yea the world and all that dwell
therein: who can stand before his indignation, and who can abide the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is powered out like fire, and the Rocks are
thrown down by him. What more terrible expressions of wrath then these that
come from God here? Now mark. ver. 7. The Lord is good and a strong hold in
the day of trouble, and he knows those that trust in him. What a strong
expression of grace is here? observe it my brethren, that in the midst of
Gods anger, yet God is good still; a gracious heart must acknowledge God,
though he be provoked to anger, yet to be a good God still; and it is a good
sign for the soul to fall down before God when he is in the way of his wrath;
and to say, the Lord is good. As that good old man Eli did after the
denuntiation of that dreadful sentence against him and his house by Samuel, The
word of the Lord is good, let him do what seems him best.

All of you will say when God bestows avours upon you, God in the midst of
his anger knows those that trust in him, Deus bonus est, etiam (...) omnes
homines perderet. Luther.
The Lord is good, oh blessed be God he is a good God: but when God reveals
his greatest wrath, truly then the Lord is good. Luther says he will
acknowledge God to be a good God, though he should destroy all men in the
world: much more then is he to be acknowledged in a day of trouble, when indeed
he appears most graciously to his Saints. The Lord is good, and a strong hold
in the day of trouble: Is God a strong hold now when such wrath is revealed?
yea, and specially now, a strong hold to his Saints in the day of trouble, and
he knows those that trust in him; for all his wrath is abroad in the world;
he knows those that trust in him. Many men when they are angry they scarce
know the difference between their foes and their friends: Many when they go
abroad if any displease them, they come home and are angry with their wives,
with their servants, with their children, with their friends, with every one
about them, they know not then who is a friend and who is not when they are in
their passion, their wives, and children, and servants wonder what the matter
is with them. Sure some body or other has displeased my master abroad to day
he is so touchie, so angry upon every little thing. My brethren, It is a
dishonor to you in the eyes of your servants, and it lays low your authority
in your families, for them to see you come home in such a per that you know not
how to be pleased, though they have done nothing to displease you.

God does not so, though he be never so angry, yet he knows those that trust
in him. Let Gods anger be never so public, and general abroad in the world, if
there be but a poor soul in the world that lies in a poor cottage, in a hole,
that is gracious, the Lord knows it, and takes notice of it, and that soul
shall know too that God does know it. It is true, when the wrath of God is
revealed abroad in the world, and seems as if it would swallow up all those of
the Saints, whose spirits are weak and fearful, they are then afraid of Gods
wrath, that they shall be swallowed up in the common calamity: be of good
comfort, God knows those that trust in him, even when his wrath is never so
dreadful and general abroad in the world.

It is in this case with Gods children, as it is with a child in the mothers
Arms; if the father violently lays hold upon his servant and beats him, and
thrust, him out of doors for his demerits, there is such a terrible reflection
from the fathers anger against the servant upon the child, that the poor
child falls a crying. So it is with the children of God, when they see God in
a terrible way, ^aying hold upon wicked men, to execute wrath upon them, they
cry out, they are afraid lest some evil should befall them too. Oh no, be of
good comfort, The Lord is good, and a strong hold in the day of trouble, and
knows them that trust in him, when his anger is never so great and general.
So it is here; though this Israel be not my people, yet the number of the
children of Israel shall be as the sand of the Sea for all that, so you shall
find it in the 15. ver. of that first of Nahum, Behold (says the Text) upon
the mountains, the feet of him that brings good tidings. What at this time
though Gods way be in the whirl-winde and so terrible, yet now behold the feet
of him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace. God abroad publishes
war, yet he has a messenger to publish life and peace to some.

Is it not so this day? It is true, the wrath of the Lord is kindled, the wrath
of the Lord burns as an oven, and it is hot, but it is against the ungody,
but peace shall be upon Israel. And let us sanctify the name of God in this
too, for so it follows in this very Chap. of Nah. ver. 15. Oh Judah keep thy
solemn feasts, perform thy vows, for the wicked shall no more pass through
thee. And because God reveals such rich grace in the midst of judgment,
let this engage your hearts to the Lord for ever.

Yea a little further (because it is an instraction of great use in these
times, and may be yet of further use in times we may live to see (not only
when God threatens judgments, let us sanctify Gods name in looking up to
promises: but when judgments are actually upon us. Suppose we should live to
have most fearful judgments of God upon us, yet even then we must look up to
promises, It is good ^ way^ing on God in the ways of his judgments.
and exercise our faith, and have an eye to God in the way of his grace at that
time, this is harder then in threatenings. You have an notable place for that in
Esaias, 26. 8. In the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee, the
desire of our soul is to thy name. Oh blessed be God (my brethren) the Lord
calls us to wait upon him in the ways of mercy for the present. It is true,
there was a time not long since, that the Lord was in a way of judgment toward
England; and there were some of Gods people, when he was in the ways of his
judgments amongst us, yet would wait upon God and keep his ways; though
there were many because Gods judgments were abroad, and they saw that they
were like to suffer, departed from God and declined his ways. Much cause of
bitterness of spirit, and of dread of humiliation have they that did so: But
others may have comfort to their souls, that in the very ways of Gods
judgments they waited for him, and they can now with more comfort wait upon God
when he is in the ways of his mercy. But if God should ever come untous in the
ways of his judgments, let us learn even then to wait upon God and keep his
way.

And yet another Text that may seem to be more notable than this for this
purpose, and that is Iere. 33. 24. Consider est thou not what this people have
spoken, saying, the two families which the Lord has chosen, he has even cast
them off; thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more a
nation. Mark the low condition the people were in at this time: Oh, God has
cast them off, they are despised and contemptible, not worthy to be accounted a
nation. This condition was very low: but though they were brought low, and in a
condition contemptible, yet now God confirms his Covenant with them at this
time. For observe, ver. 25. Thus says the Lord. If my Covenant be not with day
and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth, then
will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant. As if God should say,
let them know that whatsoever their condition is now, yet my love, my mercy, my
faithfulness is toward them as sure as my covenant with day and night, and as
the ordinances of heaven and earth. An admirable Text to help not only
nations, but particular persons when they are cast under contempt by wicked and
ungodly men; yet at that time the Lord is most ready to confirm his covenant
with them, to be as sure as his covenant with day and night, and heaven and
earth. This brings honor to God when at such times we can look up to God
and exercise our faith. And indeed this is the glory, and dignity, and beauty
of faith to exercise it then, when Gods judgments are actually upon us.

But what promises are these? They were not promises to any that then lived:
the promise that is here made, was to be fulfilled in future Ages, yet it is
brought in by the Prophet as a comfort to the people of God living then in that
time. Hence this excellent note that nearly concerns us.

Gracious hearts are comforted with the promises of God made to the Church, Obs.
though not to be fulfilled in their days. If the Church may prosper and
receive mercies from God, though I be dead and gone, and rotten in the grave,
yet blessed be God. When Jacob was to die, says he unto Joseph. Behold I dye,
Genesis 48. 21
but God shall be with you and bring you again unto the land of your fathers;
he will fulfill his promises to you though I am dead. Our forefathers, that
generation of the Saints that lived a while since, how comfortably would they
have dyed if God before their death had revealed to them, that within 3. or 4.
or 7. years so much mercy should come to England as we now have seen in these
days! Yea how comfortably should any of us have died (I appeal to any gracious
heart here) suppose God should have taken thee away but this time two years,
and he should have said thus to thee, Go and be gathered to thy fathers in
peace, within these two years such and such things shall be done for England,
as we now live to see; would not we willingly have dyed? would it not have been
comfort enough against the fear of death but to have had revealed to us what
should have been done in after time to our posterity? what mercy then is it
now, that it is not only revealed to us but enjoyed by us? That is the second
Note.

But thirdly, 3.
What was this promise? This promise was that Israel should be a multitude,
that the number of them shall be as the sand of the sea shore. We shall
examine the excellency of the mercy of God in this promise by and by. Only for
the present, enquire we a little why God would express himself in this, that
his grace should be manifested, in this to multiply them as the sand of the sea
shore.

If we compare Scripture with Scripture, we shall find that God therefore
promises this, because he would thereby show, that he did remember his old
promise to Abraham, for that was the promise made to Abraham that God would
multiply his seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
sea shore; and now God along time after comes in with renewing this promise.
Hence we are to observe this Note.

That the Lord remembers his promises though made a long time since. Obser.
God is ever mindful of his Covenant, as it is, Psalm. 111. 5.

When we have some new and fresh manifestations of Gods mercy, our hearts
rejoice in it, but the impression of it is soon gone. Many of you when you
have been seeking God, have had many manifestations of his love, and God has
entered into Covenant with you, and for a while you have been comforted, but you
lose all your comfort again within a short time: Oh remember, God is ever
mindful of his Covenant, so we should be.
God is ever mindful of his Covenant, though made 20. 40. years ago, he
remains the same still, be you the same still; be you ever mindful of your
Covenants. When men are brought into the bond of the Covenant, their
consciences are awed with it, and they walk very strictly, and they clare not
in the least thing go from the Covenant at first: But after a few months or
weeks are over their heads, they forget their engagement, their Covenant they
made with God, there is not such a strong bond upon their spirits as there was
before. Oh my brethren, know that this is a great and sore evil in you; God is
ever mindful of his Covenant, so you should be. And as of his Covenant, so of
his threats too, by way of proportion: God remembers his threats that were
made many years ago; we are affected with Gods threats for the present, but
within a while, the impression is gone. But let us know, time alters not God
as it does us.

But yet we must enquire a little further, Why God pr^mised to Abraham to
multiply his seed
because it is often in Scripture that the children of Israel should be like
the stars of the heaven and as the sand upon the Sea shore; Why did God
express this covenant to Abraham? what was the matter?

Thus, Observe.
Nothing lost in being willing to lose for God.
First, Abraham he left his fathers house and all his kindred at Gods command,
and upon that first God made this covenant wi^h him that he would make his seed
as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the Sea. As if God should have said
to Abraham; Abraham be willing to leave your fathers house, I will make a great
house of you, a great family of yours.

Secondly, you shall observe that afterward God confirmed this covenant to
Abraham, and that with an oath. It is very observable, when he came first out
of his country, and left his fathers house, God made this promise of the
increasing of his seed, but not with an oath; but afterward in Genesis 22 16. God
renews this promise of multiplying his seed, and that by an Oath; for says he,
By my self have I sworn, for because thou have done this thing, and have not
witheld thy son, thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens, and as the
sand which is upon the Sea shore. Mark here, It was upon Abraham's being
willing to offer up his son Isaac, his only son Isaac. Abraham was willing at
Gods command to offer ^ ship own son, and upon that God promises to multiply
his seed as the stats of heaven, and as the sand of the sea. Yea he comes in
with an oath, By my self I swear, says the Lord, that I will do it, because
thou have done this.

We have two most excellent notes from hence.

First, Observe
there is nothing lost in being willing to lose for God. Abraham was willing to
lose his fathers house, the comfort of his family for God: I will make thee a
glorious family as the stars of heaven, says God.

Again, Abraham was willing to lose one son, his only son for God. Art thou
willing to lose one son for me* thou shall have ten thousand sons for this one
thou losest, yea though it be lost but in thy intention. Thou shall have thy
own son, and yet have ten thousand sons besides. Oh let us not be afraid to
part with any thing for God: Gods people they know how to make up in God what
ever they lose for God: But God will not only make it up in himself, but will
make it up even in the very thing it self, the creature it self thou losest
for God. Art thou willing to lose a little of thy estate? Thou may with
comfort expect (so far as if thou knew all thou thy self would desire) to
have it made up in abundance, even in that very way. You know the promise, He
that forsakes father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands, or houses for
my sake, shall have an hundred fold in this world, and in the world to come life
everlasting. How has God fulfilled this this day in many of our eyes, and too
many of our experiences! how many have you known who have been willing to part
with that they had, and to put it out (as it were) to the wide world; God has
made it up not only in himself, but in the very thing it self, and thereby
taught them and all the world to be willing to venture for God, to part with
any thing for him and his cause.

Secondly, Observe.
When we are willing to lose for God, then is the time when God will renew and
confirm his Covenant with us. Then God confirmed his covenant with Abraham when
he was willing to part with his son, to be deprived of all his seed. The way
to be made sure of what we have is to be willing to part with it. You all
desire to be sure of your estates, oh that we could in these times, wherein we
see nothing sure make our estates sure! this is the desire of every one. Would
you make sure of your estates? sure! illing to employ your estates for God and
for a good cause: This is the way to have God to renew his covenant to you for
an assurance of that way. Here is the best assurance office in the world.

But how comes this in at this time, and to his people in Hosea his Prophecy?

Thus it comes in now, because the Lord by the Prophet would answer an
objection of the people. They might have said thus, What Hosea, do you thus
threaten judgment, the destruction of Israel? why, you promise mercy to Judah,
and Judah is but a handful to us, we are the ten Tribes, and with us are the
chief, the greatest part, almost all the seed of Abraham, and yet you threaten
our destruction, it can never possibly be: What will become of Gods promise
then? Did not God promise Abraham, that his seed should be as the stars of
heaven, and as the sand on the sea shore? you seem to go cross to God, God
says that he would multiply that seed, and you take a course to make men
believe that the seed of Abraham should be brought into a narrow compass and
be nothing. Thus doubtless they were ready to plead against the Prophet. The
Prophet answers thus.

What do you say, what will become of Abraham's seed? Know that God can tell
how to provide for his Church and fulfill his promise made to Abraham
whatsoever becomes of you, for you are mistaken in thinking you alone are the
seed of Abraham; for you shall know that Abraham has not only a carnal but a
spiritual seed; all those that shall come to join in the faith of Abraham, and
subject themselves to the God of Abraham, they shall be the seed of Abraham,
and so they shall be the children of Israel as well as you, and thus God will
make good his word. And so the Apostle, Romans 9. does quote this Scripture about
Gods casting off of the people of Israel threatened here by Hosea (ver. 25. As
he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people that were not my people:
This is the very Text that the Apostle there quoteth, though all the words are
not quoted, and it is a very good thing to acquaint your selves with the
Scripture, and to see how one Scripture looks toward another, and specially
in the new Testament to see how the old Testament is quoted.) This I say the
Apostle applies to the Gentiles; and the holy Ghost (who is the best
interpreter of Scriptures) there shows, that it is at least in part fulfilled
in so many of the Gentiles coming in, and being converted to the faith of the
true Messia.

There are this and many other excellent Prophesies concerning the glory of
Israel, that were made good in part in the first times of the Gospel; but that
was but as the first fruits of the fulfilling of those promises and
Prophesies; the accomplishment of them is yet certainly to come, when the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and the Jews be converted; then not
only the spiritual seed, but the very carnal seed of Abraham shall have this
promise made good, and shall be multiplied and come into the faith too. Romans
11. 26. The Apostle speaks there of a general salvation of Israel, that was
yet to come after the fullness of the Gentiles. So it appears plainly, that
those Prophesies concerning the glory of Israel, though they were in part made
good in the first times of the Gospel, yet there was a further accomplishment
of them after, when there should be a fullness of the Gentiles come in, and
then Israel should be saved too.

I might spend a great deal of time in showing how many promises concerning
the excellency of the Church were made good in part in the first times of the
Gospel, and yet that but as the first fruits, and to be fully made good
afterward. And certainly this promise (as we shall afterward come to know) it
is not yet thoroughly fulfilled: though it was in part made good at the calling
of the Gentiles, there is a further degree of it to be accomplished another
day, of which hereafter.

From hence (the words being thus opened to you) take these observations as
they do immediately spring from them. Obser.


First, that all believers, though of the Gentiles, are of the seed of Abraham,
they are of Israel, and therefore have the same privileges with Israel, the
same in effect, yea (as we shall see afterward) better. They are all the heirs
of Abraham, who in Romans 4. is said to be the heir of the world, they have the
dignity of Israel, to be the peculiar people of the Lord, to be the treasure,
to be Gods portion. Whatsoever you read of Israel, of excellent titles and
appellations about Israel. they belong now to all believers, though they be the
children of the Gentiles. A comfortable and sweet point to us of the Gentiles

Secondly, God has a time to bring in abundance of people to the profession of
the faith, to bring in multitudes, even as the sand of the seashore. He will
do it, and he has ways enough to accomplish it. Though there is for the
present this reproach upon the way and people of God, The reproach of the
fewness of the godly will in time be taken away.
that they are but a few, a company of poor mean kind of people, a handful,
and what are they in comparison of the rest? This reproach (my brethren) will
be wiped away, and we may yet expect that before the world be come to an end,
that the greatest part shall come in and embrace the faith of Christ, and come
to be godly too.

(...) full vision, in which he saw a man of Macedonia, appearing to him, and
praying him to come over to Macedonia and help them; one would have thought
that when Paul had gone to preach there, all should have come flocking in, and
there should have been a glorious work done, that he should have brought in
a great number to the faith: But when he came to Macedonia, he was feign to go
into the fields by a rivers side to preach, and only a few women came there to
hear him (there was all the Auditory he had) and amongst them, there was but
one poor woman wrought upon. God opened the heart of Lydia, Here was all the
great do that was upon such a mighty call; and yet we know how gloriously God
went on with Paul. This I note to confirm you in this, that though the
beginnings be very small, yet we may expect a glorious increase afterward. As
it was with the Church at the beginning, so it will be here: That which Bildad
said of Job, Chap. 8. 7. may well be applied to the Church, Though the
beginning of it be small, yet the latter end of it shall greatly increase.

But thirdly, Obser.
As God has a time to multiply his Church, so it is a great blessing to the
Church of God when it is multiplied. It is a fruit of Gods great grace and
mercy to make the Church to be a numerous people: As the multitude of Subjects
is the glory of a Prince, Prove. 14. 28,
so it is the glory of Jesus Christ, and therefore it was prophesied of him,
that the Church should come in as the dew of the morning. Psalm. 110. 3.

Thus it began in the Primitive times in the Apostles days, and presently
after multitudes came into the Church. I remember Jerome Writing to Cromatius,
says that there might be computed for every day in the year (except in the
first of January) five thousand Martyrs: therefore the Church was grown to a
numerous multitude. And Tertullian speaks in his time that they were become so
numerous then, that in his Apologetiques he tells the Heathen that they had
filled their Cities, and that if they would they had strength enough to make
their party good against them, but they were patient and submitted themselves
to their Tyranny.

I know many make this of Tertullian an argument that men must lay down their
necks, and suffer their throats to be cut, if those that are above them will
it, and if they cannot obey actively, they must obey passively any thing that
is acording to the will of such as are over them. Why (say they) did not the
Christians so in the Primitive times? Yes, the Christians did so, they though
they were under Idolaters, and were commanded to deny Christ, which was utterly
unlawful; yet though they could not obey actively, they obeyed passively, they
did subject and submit themselves to all their rage; and though they had
strength, yet they would not resist. Why should not Christians do so now? You
are exceedingly gulled with this argument many times: true, we are bound to
obey authority actively or passively, and yet this argument does not serve the
turn. There is a great deal of difference between authority abused, and men
that are in authority commanding; here the difference lies not in authority
abused, but in that which is no authority at all. For there is no authority
that we are subject to now, but (as I have said heretofore) according to the
Laws and constitutions of the Country where we live. Answer to the argument
from the sufferings of the Primitive times against resisting tyranny.
Not to the commands and mere wills of men till it be brought to a Law are we
bound in conscience to submit, no way, neither actively nor passively; though
it be a good thing that is commanded, Conscience does not bind to it,
earatione, to yield to it, because it is commanded, till it be brought to a
Law. Now when things are brought into a Law, and be according to the agreements
and covenants of the place and country wherein we live. And then suppose this
authority be abused, and there be an ill Law made, then I confess (if that Law
be of force) we must either quit our selves of the Country or else submit or
suffer, for then the power of God is in it, though it be abused, and we are to
be subject to all powers. When then it comes once to be a power, to be a Law,
it is authority, though abused, and we must yield obedience to it either
actively or passively. But we must enquire whether it be a power; It is not
because the man that is in authority commands it, except he command it by
virtue of that authority, which is according to the nature and condition of the
fundamental constitutions of the Country where he lives.

Now in the Primitive times they submitted themselves to suffer when they could
not do the things that were commanded (as to deny Christ) because by the
constitutions of that Country they had such a kind of power given to them, a
legal power to proceed against them; so that they had a power in their way
given them, and they had authority, but they abused it in that they did. And
therefore the Christians were so willing rather to suffer any thing than to
resist, and were ours the same case we should do so too, if once it come to
pass that mischief be established by a Law, though it be mischief, yet if we
cannot obey it actively we are bound to suffer or else to quit the Country,
one of the two, if it be urged upon us: We may seek what we can to get it
alleviated, but we must either do or suffer if once it be framed into a Law,
otherwise we are not bound in conscience, bound we may be in regard of
prudence, and in regard of preventing other disturbances, but conscience does
not bind to wills of men, but binds to Laws.

Thus much still, for the satisfaction of Conscience in this case.

But to come to what I brought this in for. The Christians were wonderfully
increased at this time. Now we know this is the point; We are to rejoice when
the Church is increased, and to esteem it as the great blessing of God when
they are made as the sand upon the seashore. There is an admirable place for
this in Psalm. 72. where there is a large prophecy made of the Kingdom of
Christ and of his Glory in this particular, ver. 8. He shall have dominion from
sea to sea, and from the rivers to the end of the earth, then ver. 11. All
Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations shall serve him: and ver.
17. His name shall endure for ever, and shall continue as long as the sun,
and men shall be blessed in him, all Nations shall call him blessed. Now mark
upon this, how the Saints rejoice and bless God, What shall all Nations come
in and serve Christ? shall there come multitudes in and join with the Church?
We should rejoice in multitudes joining to the Church
Oh blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel who only does wondrous things,
and blessed be his glorious name for ever and ever, and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory, Amen and Amen says the Church of God then, let all the
Saints send forth their echo. Amen, yea and Amen to this, that all the earth
shall be filled with the glory of Christ, this is that they are affected with,
this is that they desire much, as if they should say, this is a blessed thing
indeed.

My brethren this is a good and consely sight in a gracious eye to see
multitudes come in and to flock to Christ and to his Ordinances. It is true
indeed, the spirit of Antichrist that is in many makes them that they cannot
look upon his but with a malevolent eye, and their hearts do vex, and rage,
and fiet at this, as much as at any thing, they love scattering of them up and
down, but to see people come flocking to Ordinances, to see multitudes come in
and join themselves to Christ, this they cannot endure.

The same malicious spirit that was against Christ, that we read of in the
Acts of the Apostles, yea, and in the Gospel too, we find it still in such
kind of men. Mark that Text, Act. 13. 44, 45. There it is said that almost
the whole City came together to hear the word of God, to hear a Sermon. Now
the Pharisees when they saw the multitude they were filled with envy: Why what
hurt was there done? They saw no hurt done, but merely saw the multitude, and
they speak against those things that were spoken by Paul contradicting and
blaspeming: When they saw the multitude, they could have borne it otherwise.

Mark again the vile spirits of the Pharisees that envied at the multitude
that followed Christ himself: not only did they envy at the Apostles, for
they might be factious and singular men in their esteem, but what say you to
Christ himself? John. 12. 19. The Pharisees said, behold, perceive ye how ye
prevail nothing? behold, the world follows him.

Certainly the same Pharisaical spirit has been a prelatical spirit in our
days. We know it has been matter enough for a godly, painful, conscionable
Minister to be outed of all he has at an instant, and his mouth to be stopped,
merely upon this, though they had nothing against him, no, not for their own
Laws, but because he was a popular man, and multitudes followed him. What a
dangerous thing has it been of late times for men to be popular, that is, to
be such as multitudes shall come and flock to the word preached by them.
Certainly it is an evil spirit, for the promise of God to his Church is, that
there shall come multitudes and join with the people of God in the way of his
Ordinances.

Yea but it may be they do not envy at all that multitudes should follow that
that is good, Object.
but it is the humor and pride of such men to have multitudes to follow after
them. Ans.
Take heed first of putting this off with such a plea. Consider whether it will
hold at that great day. The Devil himself did never plead against Christ or any
of his ways, but with some color or other. And surely these men they judge
thus by looking into their own hearts, because they know that if multitudes
should come to them, it could not be but their hearts would be lifted up, and
so they judge accordingly of others.

But suppose it be so (for men are men) that they through corruption should
have any such workings of pride, yet do they say anything that is not
justifyable? do they preach any thing that is not according to Christ? If they
do not, then thou should encourage that which is good, and for that which is
evil leave it to the coming of Christ, except thou can by prayer and
instruction help it, have it I say till then. It is worse to envy at
multitudes now then it was for the Jews to envy Paul for multitudes following
him, for they thought they could contradict him in what he said, and therefore
for multitudes to follow such as should preach false doctrine (as they thought
Paul did) they had some color to contradiet it, and to envy at the multitudes
following of him. But here it is nothing else in the World but merely because
multitudes come to hear the world, for though men first preach in corners
privately, where they have but a few auditors, they will cry out of that, well,
if they preach publicly, and multitudes come to hear them, then they cry out
of that too. Nothing at all will please them, nothing can please envious and
malicious spirits. Malice of Satan envyina multitudes coming to the word.
If we keep our selves retired, that has exceptions enough, and then if we
come in a public way, they have exceptions at that too. Here the gross
malice of Satan appears, because when the thing it self cannot be excepted
against, he runs to the intention of the heart. and to men's inward aims, and
brings an argument of that which he knows no man can confute him in: For who
can say that that is either true or false that men have inward aims of pride,
and vain glory, and selfe-seeking in multitudes, flocking after them?

Here is the wisdom of the serpent too, because if they go upon other
objections they may be answered by all the world that there is no such thing as
they pretend, but put them from those, and you may be sure to have such
objections as no man can answer: Oh but (say they) their hearts are lifted up
and they have ill aims and ill intentions. Who can answer this objection? no
body can confute this. Nay suppose we profess before the Lord and Christ as we
desire to stand before him, and answer it at that day what our aims are, this
will not serve the turn. Why then (my brethren) if men will choose such an
argument as cannot possibly come to be answered before the coming of Christ,
and so make a stumbling block, there is no help but men must stumble and fall,
and many do stumble and fall, and break their necks.

How ever let wisdom be justified of her children; Let the Saints rejoice in
this, that multitudes come in to the ministry of the word and to the
Ordinances of Christ. Be careful and wise in this, and give no just occasion,
and therefore give all due respect that possibly can be to those you have the
most relation unto.

This you see is the promise that there shall come in such multitudes to the
Church. But mark then how the promise runs;

As the sand of the sea.

Rabbin Ezra makes an allusion from hence, as the sand (says he) keeps the
waves of the sea from breaking in, Quando, flanctus maris volant obruere, and
submergere (...), vident Isra elem and red^unt and frangantur in seipsis, and
non possunt dominari munde
and drowning the world: so Israel, so the Saints keep the world from being
drowned by the waves of Gods wrath.

I do not say that this is the intention, but surely the intention of God is
mainly this, to signify the multitudes that should come into the Church: Only
this allusion we may make use of, as being a comfortable and pretty allusion,
and it is a truth that Israel is as the sand of the sea, not only in respect
of multitudes, but as the sand to keep in the waves of Gods wrath from
drowning the world: and indeed were it not for the Church of God, the waves of
Gods wrath that are abroad would overflow all the world, and the world would
quickly be confounded. So says he,

When the waves of Gods anger seem as if they would overflow all the world;
they do but see Israel, and they return back presently, they retire and are
not able then to overflow the world as they do desire.

The Fifth Lecture
HOSEA. July. 4. 1642.
I. the middle part of the 10. verse. and so on. And it shall come to pass,
that in the place where it was said unto them, Yea are not my people, there it
shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.

Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered
together, etc.


ACcording to the division of the Chapter that Luther makes in his Comment upon
this Prophet, we are already in the second Chapter; for he makes the second to
begin at this tenth verse. From that to the end, we have the promise of mercy
to Israel that was to come, and both to Israel and Judah together. Some part of
Gods promise of mercy to Israel we finished the last day; now we are to
proceed.

And it shall come to pass in that place, etc. In that place.]

This according to some has reference to the very land of Canaan it self,
that God will have a very glorious Church there, specially in Jerusalem before
the end of the world come, and many Prophesies seem to incline that way, as
Zach. 12. 6. Jerusalem shall be inhabited again, even in Jerusalem. This
cannot be meant only of their return out of Captivity that was in Cyrus his
time, for the Text says, In that day thee feeble among them shall be as David,
and the house of David shall be as the Angel of God, and God will pour upon
them the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and the like. It shall be in that day when Jerusalem shall
be inhabited, even in Jerusalem. The return of their Captivity at first was not
so glorious, there was not such a glorious spirit put upon them then; for if
you read the story of it, Lect. 5.
you shall find that even all that while they were in a contemptible condition
before the nations about them. But God speaks here and in other places of a
glorious return of their captivity, and coming into their own Land. The Jews
have a tradition, ( Buxtorfius has it in his Synagoga Iudaica) That there is a
time that all the Jews where ever they dye, shall come through Meatus terrae,
and rise again at Jerusalem; and therefore some of them when they think they
have not long time to live, they will sell all their possesions, and go and
live near Jerusalem, at least to prevent the trouble of coming through those
Meatus terra that they speak of. Thus they are deluded in their conceits.

But yet more generally, In that place.

Whereas the place of my people was confined into a little and narrow room,
hereafter it shall be enlarged, and even among the Gentiles that shall be made
spiritual Israel, where I was not known, among the Heathen, even there shall I
come to be known, and I shall have a people there, and not only people, but
sons, the sons of the living God, and that so apparently, that it shall be said
unto them. Ye are the sons of the living God.

Thus Saint Peter seems to interpret this place, in the 1 Pet. 2. 10. speaking
of the Gentiles whom God would have a people among them, says the Apostle,
Which in times past were not a people, but are now the people of God. Generally
Interpreters do conclude that the Apostle had reference to this very place in
Hosea: And so we may build then upon this interpretation howsoever, that it is
the intention of the Spirit of God, that God would call home the Gentiles to
himself, and so they that were no people should become his people, his sons: It
should be said in that place where before it was said that they knew him not,
that now they are his sons. Yea the Heathen shall be brought in, so as they
shall be convinced of the vanity of their Idolatry. We worshipped dead stocks;
our gods were dead stones and stocks that we were vassals unto; but now we see
a people that is come in to the profession of this Christian Religion, they
worship the living God, their God is the true God, certainly here are the sons
of the living God. Obser.
This is the scope of the holy Ghost. For observation. 1. It is a comfortable
thing to consider that in those places where God has not been known and
worshipped, that afterward in those places, God should be known and worshipped.
That such nations, such Countries and Towns that have lived in darkness and
Idolatry, should now have the knowledge of the true God, that the true God
should come to be worshipped amongst them, this is a blessed thing. England was
once one of the most barbarons nations in the world, and in that place where it
was said you are not my people, where there was nothing but a company of savage
barbarous creatures that worshipped the Devil; how in this place, in England
is it said, even by the nations round about us, surely they are the sons of
the living God! And so many times in dark corners in the Country where they
never had the knowledge of Jesus Christ, but were nuzled up in Popery and in
all kind of supesticious vanity, God is pleased to send some faithful Minister
to carry the light of the knowledge of Christ unto them, and efficaciously to
work faith in their hearts, and now, oh what an alteration is there in that
town! the like of a family. It may be said of many a house and family, A
comfortable thing to have Religion set up in Towns and families, where once it
was not.
in which nothing but blasphemy, and atheism, and scorn of Religion, and
uncleanness, and all manner of wickedness has been, now it is a family
filled with the servants and sons of the living God. As it is a grievous
thing to think of a place wherein God has been truly worshipped, that
afterward the Devil should come to be served there, so it is a comfortable
thing to think of other places wherein the Devil has been served, that God is
truly worshipped there. Some stories report that the Turks having possession
of the Temple at Jerusalem, there where was the Arc, and the Cherubins, and
the Seraphims, there now are Tygres, and Bears, and savage creatures; But on
the other side to consider that in places where there have been none but
Tygres, and Bears and savage creatures, they should now be filled with
Cherubins, and Seraphims; this is a comfortable thing. Secondly. It shall be
said they are the sons of the living God.

It shall be said so. Obser.
God has a time to convince the world of the excellency of his Saints. They
shall not only be the sons of the living God, but it shall come to pass
that it shall be said they are the sons of the living God: all about them
shall see such a luster of the glory of God shining upon them, that they shall
all say, Verily whatsoever other people have said hertofore, whatsoever the
thoughts of men have been, these are not only the servants, but the sons of
the living God. We have an excellent prophefie of this in Zachar. 12. 5. The
governors of Judah shall say in their heart The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall
be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God. Not only the people shall be
convinced of this, but the Governors of Judah, they shall say in their hearts,
our strength is in the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the Lord of Hosts their
God. Howsoever they were heretofore scandalized, as seditious, and factious,
and as enemies of the State, yet now the Governors of Judah shall acknowledge
that their strength is in them, and in the Lord their God, that this Lord of
Hosts is their God. That time will be a blessed time when the Governors of
Judah shall come to be convinced of this; when God shall so manifest the
excellencies of his Saints, as that both great and small shall confess them to
be the sons of the living God. The world shall one day be convinced of the
excellency of the Saints.
It is promised to the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 9. that the Lord would
make them that said they were Jews, and were not, and said they were the Church
and were not, but were of the Synagogue of Satan, to come and how before their
feet, and to know (says he) that I have loved them. There is a time that
ungodly men shall be forced to know that God does love his people. And one
thing amongst the rest that will much convince the men of the world of the
excellency of the Saints, will be the beauty of Gods ordinances that shall be
set up amongst them, that shall even dazel the eyes of the beholders. For this
you have an excellent promise, Ezekiel. 37. 28. The heathen shall know that I the
Lord do sanctify Israel. How shall they know it? when my sanctuary shall be in
the midst of them for evermore, then they shall know that I the Lord do
sanctify Israel, when the beauty of my ordinances shall appear in them, then
they shall know it.

And if God be not only satisfied in doing good to his people, but he will
have the world know it, and be convinced of it; Let the people of God then not
be satisfied only in having their hearts upon God, but let the world know that
they love God too. You must do that that may make it appear to all the world,
that you are the children of the living God. Let your light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in
heaven. It is one thing to do a thing that may be seen, and another thing to
do a thing that it may be seen. And yet Gods people may do both, not do good
only that may be seen, but (if they keep still the glory of God above in
their eye, as the highest aim) they may desire and be willing too that it may
be seen to the praise of God. But this I confess requires some strength of
grace to do it, and yet to keep the heart upright. The excellency of grace does
consist not in casting off the outward comforts of the world, but to know how
to enjoy them, and to overruled them unto God: so the strength of grace does
consist, not in forbearing of such actions as are taken notice of by men, or
not to dare to aim at the publishing of those things that have excellency in
them; but the strength of grace consists in this, in having the heart enabled
to do this, and yet to keep it under too, and to keep God above in his right
place.

Thirdly, It shall be said they are sons, etc.

It is a great blessing unto Gods children that they shall be accounted so
before others. Obser.
Not only that they shall be so; but that they shall be accounted so. Mat. 5.
9.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God,
This is a blessing not only to be Gods children, but to be called Gods
children. We must account it so, and therefore we must walk so as may convince
all with whom we do converse that we are the children of God; and not think
this sufficient, well, let me approve my heart to God; and then what need I
care what all the World thinks of me. God does promise it as a blessing to have
his people called the children of God, then this must not be slighted. You
shall find it often in the Gospel that Christ made a great business of this to
make it manifest to the world that he was sent of God, he would have them to
know that his Father sent him, and that he came from him: So the people of God
should count it a blessing, and walk so as they may obtain such a blessing
that the world may know that they are of God.

Further. In the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there
it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.

Mark, It is not said thus, that in the place where it was said they are not
my people, it shall be said to them they are my people. No, but further, it
shall be said they are sons, and sons of the living God: this goes beyond
being his people. Hence then the observation is, That

The grace of God under the Gospel, it is morefull, and large, and glorious,
then the grace of God under the Law.

For this is spoke of the estate of the Church under the Gospel, They were
Gods people indeed under the Law, but the sons of the living God, this is
reserved for the times under the Gospel. Sometime they under the Law are called
by the name of sons; Sonship revealed by Christ.
but it appears by this Text that in comparison of that glorious sonship
that they shall have under the times of the Gospel, that they in former times
were rather servants then sons. There is very little of our adoption in
Christ revealed in the Old Testament, No, that was reserved for the Son of
God to reveal, for him that came out of the bosom of the Father, and brought
the treasures of his Fathers council to the world, the revelation of these
things were reserved to the time of his coming, both adoption and eternal life
was very little made known in the time of the Law, therefore Saint Paul says,
that life and immortality were brought to light through the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.
10.

2. Sons, 2.
Because in the time of the Gospel, the spirits of the Saints are of son-like
dispositions, they are ingenuous, not mercenarie. In the time of the Law God
carried on his people in offering rewards, especially in outward things: but in
the time of the Gospel we have no such rewards in outward, but the Scripture
speaks of afflictions most, there is not spoken so much of afflictions in the
time of the Law, but much outward prosperity there was then: but in the time of
the Gospel more affliction, because the dispositions of the hearts of people
should not be so mercenary as they were before, they should be an ingenuous, a
willing people in the day of Christ's power.

3. Sons, Because of the son-like affection to be much for God their Father
out of a natural (...), that they should have more then in the times of the
Law. I suppose some of you have heard of the story of Craesus his son, though
he was dumb all his days, when he perceived a soldier striking his father,
his affection brake the bars of his speech, and he cried out to the Soldier
to spare his rather. This is the affection of a son, and these affections
does God look for from his children, especially in the time of the Gospel,
that they should hear no wrong done to him, but though they could never speak
in their own cause, yet their should be sure to speak in their Fathers cause.

4. Sons, Because they have not such a spirit of servility upon them as they
had in the time of the Law. Christ is come to redeem us that we might serve the
Lord in holiness and righteousness before him without fear all the days of
our life, ^. ^^m. 1. 7.
to take away the spirit of fear: Hence the Apostle says, We have not
received the spirit of fear but of love, and of a sound mind. Romans 8 153
And Heb. 2. 15. Christ is come to redeem those who through fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. The spirit of a son is not be spirit
of fear, We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the
spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. It is unbeseeming the children
of God, especially in the time of the Gospel, to be of such servile spirits as
to fear every little danger, to be distracted with fear, and presently to be
amazed. Has not God revealed himself to us as a Father to his children that
we must not fear? He would not have us fear himself, Sons must not fear.
not with a servile sear as men do, and therefore surely not to fear men be
they what they will be. We are sons.

Again, Not only sons, for so we might find in Scripture, where the people of
God under the Law, perhaps are sometimes called so, but elder sons, sons come
to years. It is true, they were before us, and so in that respect we are not
elder; bnt sons that are come to our inheritance, that is it I mean that we are
such sons; Not children under tutorage, not under Schoolmasters and
governors, as they were in the time under the Law. You know what comparison
the Scripture makes of the difference between the Church in the time of the
Gospel, and that in the time of the Law. In the time of the Law it is true
indeed they were children, but how? they were children that were under tuttors
and Governors, they were not as yet come to years, they were but as young
children that were put out to school. But now as the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 15.
Chrst has redeemed us from being under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons: mark, that we might receive it, so that now the state of
the Church is like unto a child that comes to be of age, and so is freed from
his Tutors and Governors, and comes to his inheritance, sui juris, as it were,
so is the state of the Church now.

Therefore the Saints now are not to be dealt withal, as if still they were in
their childish condition. Now how were the Jews dealt withal, becausethey
were in their childish condition? Thus, they had outward external ethings to
gain them to serve God, they worshipped God much in external things: As we
deal with children, we give them apples and fine things to get them to do
what we would have them do, so God dealt with them: And as children when they
begin to learn, they must have a great many gayes in their book; so God taught
the Jews with outward ceremonies, which afterward the Scripture calls but
beggarly rudiments, poor things. Children you know are pleased much with gay
things, and they that would bring in Jewish ceremonies, or ceremonies of their
own invention in the Church, they make account the Church is in her childish
condition still, as if gay things would please them, therefore they must have
pictures, and Images, and such things to please people, this makes the people
of God beneath themselves as if they were yet children, and were to be pleased
with such things as these. No, now in the state of the Gospel they are come to
the adoption of sons. And so children you know are pleased as with fsghts, so
with hearing of music, and pipes, and such things, so men would bring such
things still into the Church in the time of the Gospel. I remember Just. Martyr
in the 107. quest. ad orthodoxos, in answer to that about musical instruments,
he says that they are fit for children and fools, as Organs and the like, and
therefore he says, they were not in use in the Church. (...).
One of the most ancient Writers we have after the Apostles time gives this for
a commendation of them. And indeed for the childish state of the Church those
things are fit, but now when they are come to the adoption of sons, other
services that are more spiritual, are more suitable and honorable, as a man
that is grown to be a man, would think himself wronged much to be taught as a
child, to be put off with gay things; so should the people of God under the
gospel think it a great wrong that has been done to them, when men have
sought to teach them with gayes and poor things, we are not still children, but
so grown up to the adoption of sons as to receive our inheritance, and
therefore are to have the privilege of such.

Again. In that place where it was said, ye are not my people, it shall be
said, etc.

Israel that was cast off from God, now shall be brought in more fully then
ever he was before. Thence the observation is,

When God is pleased to be reconciled to a people, Observe.
he is as fully theirs as ever, yea sometimes more fully. He comes rather with
more full grace then ever formerly he did.

People before, but sons now. O what an encouragement is this to all
apostatizing souls that have fallen off from God! Come in, come in, and be
reconciled to God, and thou shall not only find God as good as ever thou did,
but thou shall find him much better and much sweeter then ever thou did in
all thy life. It is seldom we are so. When men fall out one with another,
though possibly they may be reconciled, yet it is seldom that they are so
fully reconciled, so fully one as they were before; they are but as a broken
vessel sodered together, that is very weak in the sodering place; or as
garments that have been rent, and are mended, soon torn and quickly ready to
fall in pieces in the place where they were mended; It is not so between God
and a penitent soul.

Again, sons, not only of God, but of the living God. There is much in this,
that the people of God under the gospel should be called the sons of the
living God: The life of God is the glory of God: he swears by his life: by
this he is distinguished from the heathen gods, that he is the living God.
Life is the most excellent thing in the world; Augustine therefore says, that
the life of a very fly is more excellent then the Sun in the Firmament: and
certainly it is the glory of God, that he is the living God. And as God is the
living God, so he is the object of our faith, and so he is the happiness of
his people. Trust in the living God; my soul pants and thirsts after the
living God, O when shall I come and appear before God.

But why is God called the living God in reference to his Church here? Why God
is call (...) the living God in reference to his Church
(...) thing we must enquire after.

This is a treasure of comfort to his people that he is called the living God
in reference to his Church. God would hereby declare to them that all that is
in him shall be active for the good of his Church for ever, he will show
himself not only to be a God, but a living God, he will show all his
attributes to be living attributes for the good of his people. Did God show
himself active for his people in former times? much more may his Church in the
time of the gospel expect the Lord to manifest himself to be active amongst
them. Therefore we make use o^ what we read of Gods activeness for the good of
his Church in former times, to plead with God to show himself as much active
now. You shall see how the Church made use of the former activeness of God,
Isa. 51. 9. Awake, Awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake as in the
ancient days, in the generations of old. Art not thou it that has out Rahab
and wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it which has dried the sea, the waters of
the great deep? etc. Thou have been active heretofore for thy people, oh be so
sti^. If they might make use of former times, much more in our times of the
gospel may we make use of former times, and plead with God, O Lord have thou
not shown thy self glorious in defense of thy people, in helping thy fervants
in their great straits, and in destroying thine enemies? wilt not thou be so
still? In the times of the gospel, we may expect more activenes of God then
ever he manifested since the world begun. Therefore when God would set out the
state of the Church of the gospel, mark how he takes that title to himself.
Revel. 4. 9. The 4. living creatures (mentioned in the verses before, by which
is meant the state of the Church under the gospel) they give glory, and honor,
and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who lives for ever and ever: and
ver. 10. The 24. Elders fell down before Him that sat on the Throne, and
worshipped Him that lives for ever and ever, and Chap. 5. 14. both join
together, The 4. living creatures and the 24. Elders fell down and worshipped
him that lives for ever and ever. And Chap. 10. 5, 6. The Angel which stood
upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up his hand and swear by him that
lives for ever and ever. Thus the attribute of Gods life is made use of for
the state of the Church in the gospel, to show how active God will be for
them. Thence Heb. 12. 22. the Church is called The Cities of the living God.

Now then if we expect that God should be a living God unto us, it becomes not
us to have dead hearts in his service. If God be active for our good, let us be
active for his honor. A living and a lively Christian is beautiful in the
eyes of God and man. Let us labor not only to be liviing, but to be lively
for God and his cause. Abundance of service, and good, may living and lively
Christians do in the places where they live, specially in these times. But oh
what a few are there who are active and stirring, and are carried on by the
spirit of wisdom and zeal, for God and his cause! Away now with out cold and
dead wishes, and luskish desires, let us up, and be doing, Christians must be
living and lively.
and the Lord will be with us. The adversaries are lively, so says the
Psalmift, mine tnemies are lively, and they are strong, Psalm. 38. 19. We may
well make use of that expression too, our enemies they are lively and strong;
shall they be more lively and active for the Devil, and for their lusts, then
we for the living God? As God is the object of our happiness as he is the
living God, so we are the objects of Gods delight as we are living too. God is
not the God of the dead, but he is the God of the living.

We should be lively and active, for we live upon the bread of life, and drink
the water of life, we have lively Oracles, lively ordinances, therefore life
and activity is required of us. Romans 12. 11. Be fervent in spirit serving the
Lord, (...).
be burning, boiling up in your spirits, for you are serving the Lord, the
living God, be boiling up in your spirits; dead spirits become not the services
of the living God.

Grace is called the Divine nature, and God (we know) is a pure act, and it is
called the very life of God. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Ephesians. 4. 18.
It is impossible then but a Christian must needs be active, seeing his grace
is the very life of God in him.

By being lively and active, we shall prevent abundance of temptations, that
otherwise will befallus: a dead luskish spirit is liable to a thousand
temptations: as when the honey is scalding hot and boiling, the flies will not
come to it; when it is set in the window and grows cold, then the flies come to
it: so when the spirits of men are boiling hot for God, Beelzebub the god of
flies with his temptations, comes not then upon them, but when their spirits
begin to cool, and grow dull and heavy, then comes Beelzebub, then comes all
manner of temptation upon the soul. The breath that comes from life, we know
it is warm breath, but artificial breath that is cold; the breath that comes
from the body of a man, that is hot, but the breath that comes from a pair of
Bellows, that is cold, because it is artificial breath: so when men are cold
in the services of God, it is to be feared that their breath in praying and
other duties, it is but artificial breath, it is not the breath of life, if it
were living, it would be warm. That was the reason why God would not have an
ass offered him in the Law in sacrifice, but his neck must be broken, because
the ass is a dull creature, God loves not dull creatures in his service.

I remember I have heard of a people that worshipped the sun for their god,
they sacrificed to the sun a flying horse; the reason was this, because they
would offer to the sun somewhat suitable to it; they honored the sun for the
swiftness of his motion, and a horse you know is a swift creature, and
therefore somewhat suitable, especially having that emble me upon him, with
wings. They that would honor the sun as a god for swiftnes would not offer a
snayle, but a flying horse; so if we do honor God for a living God, an active
God, let us not offer snayles to him, dull, heavy, sluggish services, but quick
and lively services.

That which the Courtiers of Nebuchadnezzar flatteringly said to him, that in
the name of God say I to you, Live for ever, Joh. 6. 57. says Christ there, As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me
even he shall live by me. Christ was active, exceeding active in his way, in
the work he was sent about; Why? because the living Father sent him; so letus
consider, that in all our services and employments, it is a living God that
sets us about them, and we shall be active as Christ was.

I am willing a little to enlarge this because of the necessity of it in regard
of our present times, and give me leave to do it by telling you what this
activeness is that I would put you upon in these three things. 3 Things wherein
Christians must be lively.


First, stay not for company in any good cause. An active spirit will not stay
till he see others to accompany him, but if he must go, rather then the cause
should fall he will go alone. Mark that saying, Isa. 51. 2. I called Abraham
alone and blessed him: 1.
Be not discouraged, if God give thee an active spirit and others will not
appear, God calls thee alone, and he will blesset he.

Secondly, when you have company do not lag behind, but he willing to be
foremost rather then any cause of God should suffer by your lagging; 2.
do not stay to have others go before you. Hence in Pro. 30. 31. amongst the
comely goings of many things there, the going of the he-goat is said to be very
comely, why? because the he-goat uses to go before the flock. Those that out
of love to the cause of God are willing (if they be called to it) to go before
the flock, they go comely in the eyes of God.

Thirdly, do not forbear the work till all difficulties about it be first over.
That is a sluggish spirit that will not set about the work till they can see how
all the difficulties about the work are or may be removed. You must up and be
doing, be doing presently, fall to the work, and then when you are working,
wisely to prevent and avoid the difficulties that come in it; As those active
spirits did that we read of in Nehem. 4. 17. when they were at work, with one
of their hands they wrought, and with the other hand they held a weapon; they
did not stay the building of the wall of Jerusalem till all their adversaries
were quashed; but prefently they fell to it, and with one hand they wrought in
the work, and with the other held a weapon. This is an active spirit.

Further, we must not be active in a sudden mood, and upon a mere flash, and so
gone, Active and yet solid.
but in a constant solid way; Active, yet solid. Many indeed are stirring and
active for the present, but as the flame of a wispe of straw that makes a
noise, and a great stir for the present, but soon after there remains nothing
but black dead ashes. But we must be considerately active; Therefore observe,
the Scripture says (speaking of the Saints specially in the time of the
Gospel) that they are lively stones (you know the place of Peter) What a stone,
and yet lively? A stone of all things is the most dead thing, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and so it is used to set out a dead spirit in that story of Nabal, when
Abigail came to tell him of the business of David, the Text says, that his
heart dyed within him, and became as a stone. What is this but to show, that
though we must be lively and active, (...) must be solid, firm, and
substantial in our activeness; and again, that when we are solid, firm, and
substantial, yet we must be active. There are many that know not how to be
active solidly, and therefore grow slight and vain in their activity: and many
others striving to be solid and substantial, they quicly grow dull: many
through a kind of affected gravity, they would forsooth be accounted solid and
wise, and so become at last dull, and heavy, and of very little use in the
Church of God. Take heed of either, and labor to compose both together, that
is acceptable to God, to be living stones before him.

Ver. 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be
gathered together, etc.

Here you have a promise both to Israel and Judah together. Great was the
enmity between Judah and Israel heretofore. They worshipped the same God, but
in diverse manners. One worshipped God according to his own institution, Judah
did. And Israel worshipped the same God, but after their own ways, according to
their own inventions, so as might best suit with their politic ends. There
was a great deal of bitterness and vexation between these two people, though
worshipping the same God; and God here makes it a great matter to bring these
two together, that they should be gathered together in one. For that here we
have the promise: First, that there shall be an union: Secondly, that there
shall be an union under one head.

First, that there shall be an union. Hence then the first observation is this:

The enmity of such as seem not much different in matters of Religion, and yet
do differ, is sometime exceeding great and bitter.

There shall be an union between Judah and Israel says God. Here is a mercy,
Obser.
here is a wonderful work of the Lord. In that God does I say make this so
great a matter, this observation does spring forth of the Text clearly, that
many times between such as profess the same Religion, and seem not to differ
much, and yet do differ, their oppositions are most bitter and ineconcileable,
and requires a mighty work of God to bring them in and reconcile them.

It appears it was so between Judah and Israel. I will give you but one Text
for it, 2 Chr. 28. 9. The Prophet Obed tells the children of Israel, when he
came to reprove them after the slaughter committed by them upon the children of
Judah, says he, Ye have slain them in a rage that reaches up to heaven. What
a rage was this this? and yet thus the people of Israel were enraged against
the people of Judah, their opposition was very bitter, yea, more bitter were
they many times one against another, then they were against the Heathen, the
Philistims, and Assyrians, and Egyptians that were round about them, they were
nothing so bitter against them, as they were one against another.

Thus it has been, and (until that blessed time come that here is spoken of
in the Text) thus it will be. You know the Calvinists and Lut he rans, though
they agree together against Papists in the main fundamental things, yet ^h the
bitterness of their spirits one against another! A Lutheran is scarce so
bitter against a Papist as he is against a Calvinist. Luther himself
complains, Non solum hosts palam impij persequuntur nos, sed etiam hi qui
fuirunt dulces amici nostri, qui anobis acceperunt doctrinam Evangelij, fiunt
infencissimi hosts nostri persequentes nos acerime.
Not only open wicked men are our enemies, but even our friends, and those that
at first received the doctrine of the Gospel from us; even they persecute us
most bitterly. And he complains in particular of Zuinglius; Zuing. (says he)
accuses me of my wickedness, of any cruelty, so that the Papists do not tear
me so much as these my friends. Nihil est scelerum aut crudelitatis, cujus me
non reum agat, adeo ut nec papistae me sic lacerunt hosts mei, ut illi amici
nostri. Ep. ad Mich. Stifelinum.
Again, speaking of Corolost adius, Infensior mihi est quam ulli hactenus
fuerint inimici. Luther. ep. ad Spalatinum.
He is more deadly against me, more set against me then ever any of my enemies
were. Even he that God did ufe together with Luther for great ends and
purposes for the furtherance of the Gospel, yet such bitterness was between
them.

And has it not been so amongst us? Those that are Protestants and such as are
nicknamed Puritans, though they do agree in all the fundamental points
against popery, yet because there is some difference in matter of discipline
and ceremonies, Oh what bitterness of spirit is there? and it is so much the
more sinful in those who say themselves that discipline and ceremonies are but
in different things, they themselves are specially to be blamed for
bitterneesse on their side, because the conscience of the other is bound up and
cannot yield, yea, not only such as do contend against popish discipline, but
such as do go a further degree in reformation of discipline it self, yet
because they are differing in some few particulars, oh the bitterness of spirit
that is many times even among them!

These are times that call all the people of God to see what they can agree in,
and in that to join against the common adversary, and not to tear one another
by dissentions. God may justly give us over to our adversaries, if we agree not
among our selves, and they may chain us together: Perhaps a Prison may make us
agree, as it was said of Ridley and Hooper; though Ridley stood much against
Hooper in point of ceremonies, and they could not agree, yet when they came to
Prison they did well enough there. A prison will make men to agree.
The Lord deliver us from that medicine of our dissentions, that we be not
made so to agree; Yea that we be not sodered together by our own blood.

Secondly, 2.
God has a time to gather Judah and Israel both together, that is, to bring
peace to his Church: God has a time to gather all his Churches together in a
way of peace, that there shall be an universal peace amongst his Churches.

For thought it is true it be meant here of Judah and Israel literally, yet
Israel and Judah is to set out to us all the Churches of God that shall be
afterward among the Gentiles: and as God will fulfill this Scripture
literally, so he will fulfill it in the spiritual sense, to bring Judah and
Israel, that is, all the Churches of God to be under one head. Isa. 11. 13.
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not envy Ephraim. Ephraim envyed
Judah, because Judah challenged to himself the true worship of God, and Judah
on the other side envyed Ephraim, because he was the greatest, there was
vexing spirits one against another: this shall not always be, says God, but
the envy of Ephraim shall depart, I will take away this envious, this vexatious
spirit. Those two staves the holy Ghost speaks of in Zach. 11. 10, 11. 14. the
staff of beauty, and the staff of bands, they were both broken, but God has
a time to unite together again, and for that mark that excellent prophecy in
Ezekiel. 37. 16, 17. 22. 24. There you shall find fully set out Gods bringing
Judah and Israel together, and joining those sticks together again. Son of man
(says the Text there) take thee one stick and write upon it, for Judah and
for the children of Israel his companions, and then take another stick, and
write upon it, for Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of
Israel his companions; and join them one to another into one stick, and they
shall become one in thy hand. And then ver. 19. this is interpreted of the
union of them, Behold I will take the stick of Joseph which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and will put them with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick,
and they shall be one in mine hand: And verse. 22. I will make them one Nation in
the land upon he mountains of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all:
And in the 24. ver. that King is said to be David which we shall afterward show
more fully, when we shall come to show this head that they shall be under. Now
this God has never yet fulfilled, that the ten Tribes, and Judah and Benjamine
should come together, and be set in one stick, he has never set together the
staff of bonds that was broken, and yet this must be done, and it is the great
blessing of God upon his Churches, the bringing about of this union one with
another. Mark that Text for this purpose, Ier. 33. God having promised having
promised there in the 10. ver. that in the latter days he would bring Judah
and Israel together, and build them up at first: then in the 14. verse. Behold
the days come, says the Lord, that I will perform the good thing which I have
promised unto the children of Israel, and to the house of Judah. What is that
good thing that God had promised to the houses of Israel and Judah? That good
thing (my brethren) is the building them up together as they were at first;
that is the good thing. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren
to live together in unity: It is like the precious ointment upon the head that
ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of
his garments, as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even (...) the
Churches of God where there is this (...) here is God commanding blessing, The
(...) of the Churches (...).
that (...) powerfully; comes efficaciously, and blessing of life, and life
for evermore. O who would not then love union and peace in the Churches! Zach.
14. 9. The Lord shall be King over all the earth, in that day shall there be one
Lord, and his name one. The Churches now, they have one Lord, they all
acknowledge God and Christ to be their Lord, yea but this Lord has not one
name, though they all pretend to Christ, and that they will honor Christ, and
set up Christ, yet this one Lord has many names. But here it is prophefied
that there shall be but one Lord, and his name shall be but one neither. And
Zeph. 3. 9. Then will I turn to a people of a pure languag that they may all
call upon the name of the Lord and serve him with one consent. (...)
The word in the Original is, one shoulder; all the people of God shall have
but one shoulder that they shall set to the service of God. O blessed time when
they shall come so to be united as to have but one shoulder! And the greater
will this blessing be of Iudahs and Isreal's gathering together, if you consider
these two things (I beseech you observe them) and I go no further then this
very Scripture I am now opening to you.

First, that they shall have this perfect union together even then when Israel
shall be as the sand of the sea: 1.
when there shall be such multitudes coming in and flocking to the Church, yet
then they shall be united into one, and then there shall be peace in the
Churches. It is not a hard matter when there are but very few of a Church,
perhaps half a dozen or half a score, for them then to be of one mind, and to
agree in one lovingly together, and to have no divisions nor dissentions among
themselves; but when a Church grows to be a multitude, and a great many, then
there lies the difficulty. When did ever any Church though never so well
constituted at first, but increase in divisions and dissentions, as they
increased in number and multitude?

You see you find it very hard when you have any meeting in any society, when
any business concerns a great many, you find it I say a very hard thing so to
agree together as to be of one and the same mind. A hard thing to a agree wh^
there are many.
An instrument, as a watch or any thing that has many wheels, is sooner out of
frame then that which has but a wheel or two. So when a great many come
together about any business, it is mighty hard to bring them to be united in
one. There are few families that have many persons in it, but quickly
dissentions and brablings grow among them: perhaps where there are two or three
in a family they keep well enough together: but where there are many, where
there are but seven in a family, they cannot so well agree, nor so long a time
together as the seven Devils did in Mary Magdalen, they agreed better and
longer then many a seven in a family: But God has made this promise to the
Church, that though it shall increase as the sand on the sea shore, and that
multitudes shall come flocking to the Church, yet they shall be all gathered
together into (...) under one head, and they shall have peace, for certainly
that is the^^ (...) of the holy Ghost here.

Secondly, 2.
They shall agree in one, not only when they are multitude, but when they shall
come to enjoy their full privileges, and the full liberty that Christ has
purchased for them, even then there shall be a blessed agreement. For it is
spoken here of those times when they shall come under one head, and Christ
alone shall rule them, and not men's inventious; Christ will grant his Church
those privileges that he has purchased for them, and rule them according to
those, and then there shall be a blessed agreement among them all. Men now
think it impossible that the Church should have those liberties Christ has
purchased without dissentions, oh say they, grant them but such and such
things, let them have but such liberty as they speak of, and we shall have
nothing but brabling and divisions; what shall every man be left to do what he
list? why then we shall have nothing but breaches in the Church, and
heart-burning one against another. No, Christ has never purchased so much
liberty for every man to do what he list in things apparently unlawful against
the common principles of Religion, In those there may be compulsion. But that
liberty that Christ has purchased, is the lawful use of the things of
indifferency, and the lawful use of his ordinances. And though now men think
that even in such things that are in themselves indifferent, if men be left at
their liberty, there will be such heart-burning, and such dissentions, and no
peace at all in the Church; they are much mistaken in this, for the only way
to have true peace in the Church, is to leave things as Christ has left them,
and to force nothing upon men's consciences that Christ would not have forced,
this is the way of peace; and the special way of dissension (we have had
experience of it) has been and ever will be, the urging upon men's consciences
those things Christ would not have urged, this is it that makes the greatest
rent and division in the Church. Urging things indifferent the cause of
divisions in the Church
The urging of uniformity in all indifferent things as necessary to unity is a
most false principle, you will find it so. It is a principle that many have
been led by, but it is an extreme, false, and corrupt principle, and is and
will be found to be the cause of the greatest distractions. When this time
comes that is here prophesied of, there shall not be any such need of any
Antichristian chain, to chain the servants of God together, but they shall be
one without any such doings. It is true, Papists and Prelaticall men, they cry
out of others; there are such divisions among them say they, none of them can
agree, there is more uniformity and unity with us than there is with them,
every one there among them runs up and down and does what he pleases.

Mark these two Answers to that.

First, They have little cause to brag of their unity if we consider all; for
in the mean time though many thousands of Christians, and hundreds of
faithful, painful, and conscionable Ministers of God that did more service to
God and his Church then ever they will ^o, though they be banished out of their
country, and put (...) ^^remities, and endure sore afflictions for (...) ^^ch
of unity with them at all, though (...) things they have caused many (...)
(...). This is no breach of unity with them.

But suppose by their power they could have brought all to an uniformity, in
their own inventions and innovations as they desired. What then? they have
little cause to brag of that unity neither. Certainly there the remedy would
have been worse then the disease, and work a greater mischief. Their bragging
then of unity would have been no other but thus, as if a couple of prisoners
chained to a block, and kept close all day, should see others go abroad in the
streets at a distance, and they should cry out to them, Why do you not take
example by us? you keep at a distance one from another, do you not see that we
keep close together from morning to night? pray take example by us, and do not
go so distant one from another. Would not such an argument be most ridiculous?
What is the reason of their union but their choine? Certainly there is the same
argument in these men's pleading for that uniformity that they force men to by
such a kind of Antichristian chain.

What breach of unity is it if in a broad street one goes a little distant from
another? and so what breach is it if in matters of indifferency one take one
way and another another? It is the corrupt and perverse spirits of men that
think they cannot have unity, and yet have things as Christ have left them.
Christ needs no such things to cause unity in his Church, the spirit of his
people that shall love truth and peace is enough to cause that unity he would
have. And O that this time that this gathering together were come, of all
Churches to be made one, and be under one head! for abundance of mischief is
done now among the Churches, and in the world by the spirit of division and
dissension. The Devil delights (especially that devil that is the spirit of
division) to live in the region of the Church. There are some devils especially
that are spirits of pride, (as the dumb devil) and some of dissension, and some
of one kind and some of another; and I remember Cajetan has a note upon that
place of the Gospel, where our Savior Christ cast the devils out of the
possessed man, Mar. 5. 8. 9
they besought him that he would let them enter into the swine, and that he
would not send them out of that Region, because (says he) they have several
Regions where they most haunt, and they that are in such a Region, they are
loath to be put out of it, but would feign keep their place. Whether that be so
or no we will not say, but this we say, that if their be any Religion in the
world that the unclean spirit of division loves to be in, and is loath to be
cast out; it is the Region of the Church, for their he does the greatest
mischief. But Christ has a time to cast this unelean spirit out of the Region
of the Church, and that so, as he never shall return any more.

This point in regard we meet with it so fitly, and is so fully agreeable to
the necessity of our times, I cannot tell (though I go a little beyond the
ordinary way of exposition) how to get off from it.

This union of the Churches is that which will be the stability of it. You have
an admirable place of this, Isa. 33. ^^. Thine eyes sball see Jerusalem a quiet
ation habit. O that our eyes might (...) blessed (...) behold Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, then we should be will (...) hold Simeon to say, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Mark then what follows, a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be
taken down, nor one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall
any of the cords thereof be broken, but there the glory of God will be unto us
a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall no galley with oar, neither
shall gallant Ship pass thereby. The kingdoms of the world though they seem to
be built upon mountains, yet God will toss them up and down, and they shall
come to nothing: but the Church when it is made a quiet habitation (observe it)
though it be but a tabernacle and set upon stakes, yet this tabernacle shall
not be taken down, The blessedness of union.
nor one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, though it be tied by
lines, yet not a cord thereof shall be broken. Yea in this the glory of the
Church does consist, for so says the Text there, when it is a quiet
habitation, the glory of God shall be there, God shall dwell among them as a
glorious God.

No Church more honorable then the Church of Philadelphia, for that is the
Church the Adversaries must come and bow before. Rev. 3. 9. and that Church
carries Brotherly love in the very name of it, for so it signifies.

Cant. 6. 9. My dove, my undefiled is but one, the only one of her mother.
What follows? The daughters saw her and blessed her, yea the Queens and the
Concubines, and they praised her. When Christ's dove and undefiled comes once to
be but one, the daughters shall see her and bless her.

Esaias, 11. 7. 8. etc. There you have a promise of Judah and of Ephraims joining
together. Mark what follows, Chap. 12. 1. In that day thou shall say, O Lord,
I will praise thee. ( Observe, In that day.) And again, ver. 4. In that day
shall you say, Praise the Lord, proclaim his Name, declare his doings among
the people, make mention that his name is exalted, Sing unto the Lord, for he
has done excellent things; cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Zion. Then
indeed God does excellent things, when he makes Ephraim and Judah come to be
but one. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Yet show I unto you a more
excellent way, What is that way? In the Chapter following he falls upon the
commendation of Love, where you have the highest commendation of it that is in
all the book of God; that is the more excellent way. Cant. 3. 9. There the
Church is compared to the Charet of Solomon: The pillars of it ( says the
Text) were all of silver, the bortome thereof gold, the covering of it of
purple, and the midst thereof being paved with love. Then indeed does the
Church ride in triumph in her Charet, when there is much love and peace in the
midst of it.

It is true (my brethren) considering the weakness and peevishness of men's
spirits (yea of good men as well as evil) we may wonder how ever this shall
come to pass; Is it possible that this shall ever be so? Indeed it must be a
mighty work of God to do it. We must not think to effect it by struggling one
with another, and to say (...) will make them be at peace and unity, or they
shall sma^^ (...) pull them together by Law. This will not do it, (...) for the
accomplishing of this great thing. Ier. 33. 3. Thus (...), Call unto me and I
will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou know not.
What are those great and mighty things that we must call to God for? Amongst
others this is one principal one, ver. 7. I will cause the captivity of Judah
and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them as at the first,
and so make them bochone. And then ver. 9. It shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise and an honor before all the Nations of the earth, when they shall hear
of all the good that I do unto them. Mark, joy, praise, honor, yea a name of
joy, praise, honor, follows upon this blessed union, and that before all the
Nations of the earth. For the accomplishment of this. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly! Yet let us further observe the difference between the scattering of
the wicked, and the scattering of the Saints. Judah and Israel they were
scattered, but, now they shall be gathered together.

There is a great deal of difference between the scattering of the Saints,
Obser.
and the scattering of the wicked: When God scatters the Saints, he scatters
them that they may be gathered; when he scatters the wicked, he scatters them
that he may destroy them, Psalm. 68. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered: How scattered? As smoke is driven away; so drive them away. Smoke
you know is driven away and scattered, so as it comes to nothing. Psalm. 144. 6.
Cast forth lightning and scatter them, shoot out thine Arrows and destroy
them. This is the scattering of the wicked: but as for the Saints, they may be
scattered, but it is to spread abroad the gospel by them in the world. Acts 8.
4. The Text says, They that were scattered abroad by reason of the persecution
of Saul, went every where preaching the word: but within a while our God shall
come and all his Saints with him, and he will gather together the outcasts of
Israel, with abundance of mercy: so Micah. 46. In that day says the Lord, I
will gather her that is driven out and her that I have afflicted; and Esaias, 54.
7. For a time, for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies
I will gather thee. God will gather his people with great mercyes. God has (my
brethren) fulfilled this in a great part, in our eyes even this day. Many of
those that were driven out of their places and Countries, those that were
afflicted, and those the land could not bear, God has gathered together these
outcasts of Israel.

Let every one take heed how he hinders this work of the Lord, and how he
adds affliction to those that have been afflicted.

Again further. They shall be gathered together in that day, That is, in the
time of the Gospel, when that shall prevail then Judah and Israel shall be
gathered together. Then, The more the Gospel prevails, the more peace there
shall be. Obser. The Gospel is not the cause of divisions
The Gospel is not the cause of divisions then, of seditions, of factions; No,
It is a gospel of peace; the Prince of it is a Prince of peace, the Embassage
of it is an Embassage of peace. It is next unto blasphemy, if not blasphemy it
self, to say that since the preaching and profession of the Gospel, we had no
peace, but it causes act (...) and divisions among the people. It is true,
people that are in the dark (...) and quiet together, as it is said of the
Egyptians, when they were in the dark for those three days together, they
stirred not from their stools, there was no noise among them; shall the light
be blamed because afterward when it came, every one stirred, and went, one, one
way and another, another? so when we were in gross darkness, we saw nothing,
we knew nothing; Now light begins to break forth, and here one searches after
one truth, and another after another, and yet we cannot attain to perfection;
shall we accuse the light for this?

Yea but we see too apparently that those that seem the strictest of all, that
would worship God (as they say) in the purest manner in his Ordinances; yet
there are woeful divisions and distractions even amongst them. How then is the
Gospel a Gospel of peace? But a word in answer to this; To satisfy your
consciences, that the Gospel may not be blamed, for indeed where the Gospel
comes, there is promised peace. Consider this one reason that may be given for
it. Because so long as we are here we are partly flesh and partly spirit. Yet
those that have the Gospel prevail with their consciences, they come to be of
this temper, that they cannot move any further then they can see light for, and
their consciences will give them leave.

But now other men they have more liberty, they indeed quarrel not one with
another, why? because they have wide, checker, lyther consciences, and having
ends of their own they will yield to any thing for the attaining of those
ends; The reason why godly men are not so yielding as others.
so that here they have this advantage, that if they see that the contention
will bring them more trouble then they conceive the thing is worth, they will
condescend though it be against light of conscience. But other men upon whom
the light of the Gospel has prevailed have that bond upon conscience, that
though all the world should differ from them, they must be content to lie down
and suffer, they cannot yield, though you would give them all the world they
cannot go against that light. But indeed they may search, and it may trouble
them that their apprehensions of things should be different from the
apprehensions of their brethren, and that they cannot yield to that which their
brethren yield too. It is true, they should be humbled, and suspect their
hearts, and look to themselves, and fall down before God and pray, and use all
means for advice and counsel, and consider of things again and again. Well,
but suppose they have done all this, and yet the Lord does not reveal to them
any further light, though it be a sad affliction to them yet they must lie down
under it, for they cannot yield, one known truth is more then all the world,
therefore unless others will bear with them in their infirmity, they must
suffer whatsoever men will lay upon them.

True indeed, the world calls this stoutness, and stiffness, and being wedded
to their own opinion. But they know it is otherwise, they can appeal to God and
say, Lord thou know what a sad affliction it is unto me that I cannot see
what my brother sees, and that I cannot yield to what my brother yields to,
thou have hid it from me: I (...) wait upon thee till thou shall reveal it, and
in the (...) and not make disturbances in the places where I come, but pray,
(...) for light, and that thou would incline the (...) of my brethren unto
me, (...) they may not have hard thoughts of

Do but thus, thou shall have peace with God, and in thine own heart howsoever.
But again mark, Judah and Israel they shall be gathered together.

So soon as any are converted to the faith, Obser.
they are of a gathering disposition. They desire to gather to the Saints
presently. Every child of God that is converted is a gatherer, The Saints love
to gather together. (...)
as Solomon is called Ecclesiastes, so in the Greek, but the Hebrew word is
interpreted by some a soul gathered, because it is in the faeminine genger.
None in the world love good fellowship so much as the Saints of God. They fly
as doves to their windows, and doves you know use to fly in great flocks,
thousands together. The more spiritual any one is, of the more joining and
uniting nature he is. Thousands of beams of the Sun will meet together in one
better then the beams of a candle will do. The Saints of God in the Apostles
times when they were converted, it is said, they were added to the Church, they
gathered presently. So in Esaias. 66. (it is an observable place) ver. 20. the
Text says, They shall bring their brethren as an offering to the Lord out of
all Nations, upon horses, and in chariots, and. in litters. How comes this?
There shall be many that dwell a great way off. they shall not make that their
excuse for their not joining to the people of God, because they are afar off,
It is a great journey; No, but there be horses to be got: But it may be some
cannot ride? Then get Charets: But some perhaps are so weak that they can
neither ride on horses nor in Chariots, then they will get litters, and litters
you know are to carry weak and sick persons. This shows the intention of
spirit that is in the people of God to be gathered to the Church, either to be
carried on horses, or in Chariots, or in litters, one way or other they will
come and join themselves to the people of God. For there is the presence of
Christ, and the protection of Christ, and the comunication of Christ in their
union and communion, and where the carcass is, there will the Eagles resort. O
they love alife to be going toward Sion, gathering one to another, as in Psalm.
84. 7. They walk from strength to strength, and at last they all appear before
God in Zion. From strength to strength, that is thus: From one place of the
Country perhaps there comes half a score, or twenty, to go toward Zion, and
perhaps before they come to such a town or turning, they meet with half a
score more, and so they grow stronger; when they are a mile or two further,
perhaps they meet with another town coming, and they join presently and are
stronger, and so they go from strength to strength comfortably together till
they come before God in Zion

They shall appoint themselves one Head. Although they be multitudes, and be as
the sand of the sea, yet this is no great matter, unless they come under one
Head, and a right Head too. It is not multitudes that is a sufficient argument
of truth. A multitude coming under one Head, under Christ as one Head, they are
the true Church. The Papists they give this Note of the Church, Universality,
that there are so many Papists in the world. We must not regard people how
(...) they are, but under what Head they are: They shall be gathered undermine
Head, look to the Head they follow; for so S. Paul tells us that there shall
be an Apostasy before the revelation of that man of sin, 2 These. 2. 3. And
Rev. 1. 3. 3.

All the world wandered after the beast: and ver. 2. The dragon gave him his
power, and his seat, and great authority: and Rev. 17. 1. The whore sits
upon many waters; and ver. 15. these many waters are interpreted to be peoples,
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. The whore does sit upon them, that
is, does use them vilely, and basely, sits upon the very consciences of them in
a base manner, as if a whore should sit upon you and keep you under. And who
does she sit upon? upon peoples and multitudes. It is not an argument then of a
true Church though they are multitudes, though they be as the sand of the sea,
though they be gathered together, for they must be gathered under one Head,
under Christ. Secondly, Neither is Unity a sufficient argument of the verity of
the Church. They shall be gathered together. they shall be joined together in
one way, with one consent; yea but if it be not under one Head, it is like
Simeon and Levi, brethren in iniquity. It is not enough that we be one, unless
we be one in Christ; and that is a blessed union: For a great deal of unity
there shall be under Antichrist, Revel. 17. 13. These have one mind (says the
Text) and they shall give their strength and power to the beast. And Chap. 18.
5. Her sins reach unto heaven. Their sins cleave together, and so get up to
heaven. A union of persons, and a union of sins there is amongst them. The
Turks have as little dissension in their Religion as any; (...).
they are allunited in one. But well may that garment have no seame, that has
no shape. And a notable place we have in Ps. 83. 3. 4. 5. etc. They have
consulted together with one consent, they are confederate against thee. There
are two or three things exceeding observable in this Scripture about the union
of the wicked: First you have ten Countries join together against the Church;
there is the Edomites, the Moabites. etc. And it was not by accident that they
joined, but in a deliberate way, They consulted together, and not only
consulted together, but consulted together with one consent, or heartily, for
that which is translated there with one consent, the word in the Hebrew is,
(...) ^micus ^^aro, sed ^agis amica Vetas. Potius quam aliquid regno Christi
and gloriae ejus decadat, ruat non solum pax, sed (...) and terrae. Luther.
with heart together, their very heart was in the consultation; but mark, it
was against thy hidden ones, so ver. 3. Let them consult together, let ten of
them consult together, and consult with their hearts, yet the Saints are Gods
hidden ones. Esaias 54. 15. They shall surely gather together, but not my me;
whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall forthy sake. My
brethren, Peace, though we should all desire it, yet so as not to have it too
chargeable: Peace is then too chargeable when it costs us the loss of any
truth. Take heed of any such costly Peace: There may hand join in hand together
in wickedness, yet they shall not be unpunished, Pro. 16. 5. And Nah. 1. 10.
While they are folded together as thorns, they shall be devoured as stubble
fully dry. Wicked men they are as thorns to prick the people of God, yea they
are thorns ^^lded together, there is a peace amongst them: yet though th^^ be
folded ^^gether, they shall bedevoured, they shall be (...) division that comes
by truth, is beter then the union that comes by (...) a noble speech of Luther,
Rather then any thing should fall of the Kingdom of Christ and his glory, let
not only peace (...), but let heaven and earth go too: so we should love
peace,

The Sixth Lecture July. 1642.

HOSEA 1. the middle of the 11. verse. And appoint themselves one head, and
they shall come up out of the land.


FRom the tenth verse to the end, you have heard that God promises mercy to an
Israel that he will in time raise up: although for that Israel to whom the
Prophet spoke, they shall go into captivity and shall not return as Judah did.

Secondly, Mercy to Israel and Judah both together, and that first, In the
multitude that shall be gathered, secondly, In the excellency of the state of
the Church at that time above that which was before; before they were People,
but then they shall be Sons: Thirdly, In the unity of them, Israel and Judah
shall be both gathered together under one head. Some time was spent in the last
exercise about unity, and the excellency of the unity of the Churches; wherein
we labored to convince you that uniformity in judgment, and practice is not
necessary for unity in the Churches, for unity of hearts. It is a false
principle that runs in the world, that all men must needs be brought to
believe and do the same thing or else there can be no peace. If we would have
light let in to us, we must so prise it as to be willing that in the discussion
of truths there should be some hazard of some differences in lesser things. If
a man have a house closed on every side with a thick brick-wall, and he is so
desirous to keep his house safe and strong, that he will rather all his days
sit in the dark, then be at the trouble to have a hole dug or a few bricks
broken to let in any light, we would accuse that man of folly. It is true
indeed, we must not be so desirous of light as to break so much of the wall as
to endanger the house, we must keep that safe; but yet it is hard to let in
light but there will be some bricks taken away, and there must be some trouble.
A child when he sees the workman with his tools breaking the wall and making
a deal of rubbish, he thinks he is pulling down the house, but a wise man
knows it is but a little trouble for the present to let in light that shall be
for the beauty of the house afterward.

Unity in the Churches is lovely. But it must be under one head.

They shall be gathered together and appoint themselves one head.

Agreement in error is far worse then division for the sake of truth. Better
to be divided from men that are erroneous, then to agree with them in the ways
of their arrour. A company gathered without the covenant of peace, without the
observance of Gods law is a headless multitude, says Bernard, it has much of
Babylon, but little of Jerusalem.

What is this Head?

I find both the Jews and diverse of the ^^cyents, Theodoret, Cyrill and
others, that would make this head to be Zerubbabel, and only to have reference
to the return of the people from their Babylonish captivity.

But this certainly cannot be upon these two reasons, to name no more.

First, Vbi sive saedere pacis, sive observantia legis, sive disciplina and
regimine Acephala multitudo congregata fuerit, non est civitas sed confusis,
Babylonem exe hibet, de Jerusalem nihil habet.
Because both Israel and Judah are here to join together and to return out of
the land: there it was Judah and not the ten Tribes that were delivered from
their captivity. Secondly, Compare this Scripture with others that are but a
Comment upon it, and we shall find that Zerubbabel cannot be meant, Ezeck. 34,
and 37. (you may read the Chapters at your leisure) In those Chapters we have
expressions such as plainly appears they are but Comments to this Text of
Hosea (for Ezekiel prophesied after Hosea did:) and especially in the 37. Chap.
we have a prophecy of the union of all the Tribes together, Judah and Israel,
and ver. 24. David my servant shall be King over them, and ver. 25. My servant
David shall be their Prince for ever. That one head that they shall have when
they come together shall be David. And so in Chap. 34. ver. 23. I will set one
shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David: and ver.
24, I the Lord will be their God and my servant David, not Zerubbabel, Now by
David we are to understand Christ clearly, for so in other palaces, as Esaias,
55. 3. I will give unto you the sure mercies of David, they can only be meant
of the sure mercies of Christ, and so it is interpreted by S. Paul, Acts 13.
34. Therefore then we conclude certainly this is meant of Christ; Bern. Ser 5.
de ded c. Eccles.
and they shall appoint Christ to be their Head.

This is then the first great point that we have in this Text, a head-point of
Divinity indeed, that JESUS CHRIST, is the head of the Church.

And secondly, 1. 2.
he shall be so appointed. We shall show you what the meaning of that is when
we come unto it.

JESUS CHRIST It is he that is the head for the Church, Christ the head of the
Church. Obser. The honor of the Church is in Christ their Head.
and shall appear so hereafter further then now he does. The Church is not a
headless multitude, it is a community of Saints that has a glorious Head.
That body cannot be contemptible that has a Head so honorable. It is he that
is the brightness of the glory of his Father, in whom all fullness dwells,
yea, the fullness of the Godhead bodily. It is he by whom all things consists,
that is the beginning of all things, he that is the head of Angels themselves,
Col. 2. 10. You are complete in him which is the head of all principality and
power.

The Head of Angels, how?

First, How Christ the Head of Angels.
because the Angels are joined together with the Church, and are part of the
Church triumphant, and so Christ is their Head.

Secondly, 1. 2.
Yea the Angels have influence from him. That Grace which they have from God,
which is beyond naturals; it is from Christ, for Christ is canalis gratiae, the
channel of grace from God. Their establishment in their condition it is from
Christ, for it is not due to them in a natural way, yea the glor^ they (...)
with the Church, it is above that which is due to their naturals, and (...)
from Christ.

2. H^^ the head of all men, 1 Cor. 11. 3. The head of every man is Christ.

The head of every man, how? What are all men in the world the body of Christ?
if he be the head, then it seems they are all the members.

No, though Christ be the head of Angels, 2. How Christ the Head of every man.
yet Angels are not said to be members of him, yea in the same place of the
Corinths, God is said to be the Head of Christ, and yet Christ is not a member
of God. So that he may be the head of every man, and yet every man not a member
of Christ.

The head of every man in regard of that superiority that Christ has over
every man, and some kind of influence even from Christ comes to every man;
he inlightneth every man that comes into the world.

Thirdly, 3. How Christ the Head of all things.
Yea, he that is the head of his people, of his Church, is the head of al
things. Ephe. 1. 22. God has given him to be head of all things to the Church.
Mark it, it is a most admirable place, that Christ is the head of all things.
But how? To the Church, for the sake of the Church, as aiming at the good of
the Church especially. Sure it is the honor of the Church to have such a head,
that is thus the brightenesse of his Fathers glory, the head of Angels, 2, The
strength of the Church in Christ their Head
the head of every man, the head of all things for the good of his Church. And
as their honor consists in it, so secondly it is their strength.

Christ is the head of the Church in regard of the strength that the Church
has by him. An oppressed multitude cannot help it self if they have no head,
but if God shall please to give them strength and a head, and that in a legal
way, if they have hearts they may deliver themselves from oppression, this God
has done for us; if therefore God does not vote us to misery and slavery, if
we be not a people given up of God to ruin, we may have help.

The Church is a communion of Saints oppressed here in the world, their
strength is in heaven, it is in their Head, that has received all power to
exercise for them, in him is their strength, to him do they cleave, for him
they bless God even the Father, because he is their strength.

Thirdly, He is their head because the Saints do hold all upon Christ, all that
they have they hold in Capite, 3. The Church holds all on Christ.
as the best tenure of all, the Tenure upon which the Saints hold all their
comfort all their good in this world, it is in another way then other men hold
it: other men have what they have through the bounty and patience of God; but
the Saints hold all in Capite, in their head, in Christ, in the right they have
in him.

Fourthly, 4. Safety in Christ. Lutherus apud illus Satan est, sed Christus
regnat and vivat.
Their head, because their safety is in him: though the Church, all the members
be under water, yet all is safe when the head is above water, our head is in
Heaven. It is a speech of Luthers; He says he was even as a Devil to them they
did so accuse him, but let Christ live and reign, Christ is above, the head is
above water.

Fifthly, Their head in regard of his compassion to his Church and people.

The meanest member here below, if wronged, Christ is sensible of it.

When but the toe is trodden upon, 5. Christ the Head has compassion of the
members.
the head cries why do you hurt me? Christ the head cries, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And observe, the meaner and poorer the Members of Christ
are here in the Church, the more is Christ sensible of their sorrows and
afflictions, and the more will he appear for them, when he shall appear a head
yet more gloriously then ever he has done. For this that forenamed place Ezekiel.
34. from the 16. ver to the 26. is very notable. You shall find there Christ
is said to be one shepherd to his people and a Prince to them; but mark what
is promised, That he will bind up the broken, and bring back again that which
was driven away, and strengthen that which was sick, but as for the fat of the
flock and the strong he well destroy them, and feed them with judgment; and he
will judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the hee-goats, he
will judge between the fat and the lean cattle; he will judge those that
thrust with side and with shoulder, and push at the diseased with their horns,
until they have scattered the sheep abroad.

When Christ shall appear, he will not show such respect to the jolly spirits
of those that were in the Church, to your brave, stout, jolly hearts, that
would carry all before them with force; No, he will look to the poor of the
flock, and those that thrust with the side, and pushed with the horns, and
scattered the poor, and the lean; they shall be judged.

My brethren, have you not known times when stout-hearted and cruelhearted men
have thrust with the side, and pushed with the horn, and scattered up and down
in diverse Countries thousands of the weak ones and tender conscioned
Christians? Well, but here is a promise, that Christ our head will come, and
he shall be one shepherd, and he shall show his tender affection toward the
poor afflicted of the flock, he shall take away from the land the evil
beasts, as you have it there in the 25. verse. He is the head in regard of his
compassion.

Sixthly, 6. Christ the Head in regard of Guidance.
Christ is their head in regard of guidance and direction. The body is to be
moved and guided by the head: so all truths, all doctrines of Religion must
hold on Christ; they hold on Christ in Capite, Colos. 2. 19. The Apostle
rebuking worshipping of Angels and other false opinions, he says, that they
did not hold of the head; All Doctrines in the Church therefore must hold of
the head, and must not be obtruded upon the Church, but as they come from the
head and hold there.

Seventhly, 7. Christ the Head in regard of his Rule.
And that principally, and which we must stick upon a while, which is intended
here in the Text most of all. Christ is the head in regard of his rule, in
regard of his government; and therefore he that is called one head here is
called a Prince in those two forenamed Chapters, Ezekiel 34 and 37. It would spend
time needlessly to show you in Scripture how Governors are called heads, that I
suppose you are all acquainted with.

This therefore is the maine thing that we are now to open unto you, how Christ
is the head of the Church in regard of his rule and government.

There are many things of concernment in this point. 4. Things in church
Government belonging to the Headship of Christ.
I shall desire to decline what possibly I may, all things that are
controversall, especially with our brethren, and only speak of what I think for
the present you are fit to bear

First then, There are four (...) especially of the government of Christ in his
Church, for which he is to be accounted the head.

First, All Offices and Officers in the Church hold upon Christ and are from
him as from the head. 1. All offices hold on christ the Head
As (you know) it is in a civil body, the Offices of a civil State holds of
the King; holds upon him in a legal way, the power of the King being regular,
it regulateth all power in all other Officers; that which is done, is done (you
know) in the name of the King. So all the Officers and Offices in the Church,
are in the name of Christ, they all hold on him.

First, Three differences between civil Government and church Government.
That there can be no officer nor offices in the Church, but such as Christ
himself has appointed, for they must hold of him, they must be by
institution. I beseech you observe the difference between Officers in a Civil
State, and Officers in a Church. A Civil State because it directly reaches
but to the outward man, has liberty to appoint what officers it please
according to the rules of prudence and justice; to appoint more or less
according to the necessity of the Country and place. 1.
But it is not so in the Church, there we have no liberty to go according to
the rules of prudence merely, to erect any office, because we think it may make
for the good and peace of the Church; I say, therefore to erect any new office
that is not erected before in the Word, we have not that liberty, we cannot do
it, we are too bold if we shall do it, for such an office will not hold of the
Head. In the State none can erect new Offices; new Courts, but the supreme
power, the supreme Legislative power; So in the Church, none can erect new
Offices, but only from the Head. In the Civil State God leaves a great deal
of liberty; there may be change of Officers, those that are good now, perhaps
they may seem not to be so fit afterward, and those that are in one Country
may not be so fit for another. But the Officers of the Church they must be all
the same in all places, where they can be had, and no more but those that are
appointed by Christ.

Again, further, the difference between the Civil State and Church State in
their Offices and Officers is this: 2.
The Civil State may limit their officers as they think fit. They may choose
one into an office, but he shall go but so far, he shall have power but in so
many things, this shall be the object of his power, when he is come hither,
there he shall stop, though he that was before him had more power, yet he that
comes after him may not have that power, the Civil State may limit that, if
they see it fit. But now in the Church State it cannot be so. And upon this
ground, because they hold upon the Head.

Indeed the men that bear any office in the Church, are designed unto it by
the Church, but they do not hold of the Church, they hold of Christ the Head,
therefore it is not in the power of the Church to limit them being in it, but
they must go to the Word, for their office once taken upon them, (whether it be
the office of Teachers or of Pastors) they cannot then be limited by any power,
but what the Word says is the office of a Teacher or of a Pastor, that they
must do; they cannot have the rule so propounded to them, as, You shall go but
thus far, and you shall do so much of the office of a Teacher and no more, but
when they are once (...) they are in without any limitation of the power of
their office: it is only from Christ the Head.

Yea further, In a civil State there may be alteration, raising the dignity of
the office, 3.
and making of it lower then before; but in the Church no such thing, the
officers of the Church are always the same, no raising, no depressing, why?
because they hold upon the Head. Others depend upon man's prudence, but these
are institutions by Christ, and hold of the Head.

2. 2. All Ordinances hold to Christ the Head.
Christ is the Head in regard of rule, because all Ordinances hold on Christ
too, and all Laws. I will put both together, Ordinances and Laws, and
Institutions do hold upon Christ the Head. It is not in the liberty of man to
erect any new spiritual Ordinance in the Church, no nor to make Laws in the
Church that are spiritual, that shall tend to the spirits of men, (according as
I shall open it by and by.) No new Ordinance, no new Institution can be in the
Church. In the civil State there may be thousands of new Institutions. What the
nature of an Institution is.
I call that an Institution that has an efficacy in it for the attaining of
such an end by virtue of the Institution, not by virtue of any naturalnesse
that is in the thing. As for example to instance in Divine Institutions. The
Sacrament is an Institution, and therefore is a virtue, a spiritual efficacy
to be expected from that and by that, through the strength of the Institution
more then it has in it in any natural way. So in preaching the Word, and
Ecclesiastical censures, there is more to be expected, more efficacy to work
upon the soul, for the spiritual man, by virtue of the Institution, then there
is in the natural things that are done there.

So for Laws. Christ makes a law in the Church, it being an institution there
is to be expected a spiritual efficacy and virtue to go along together, with
that thing that Christ commands, beyond what it had before it was commanded.
Now then in rhis way no man in the world can make any Church institution, no,
nor Law for the Church, so as to appoint any thing, to have any spiritual
efficacy by virtue of that institution beyond what it has in a natural way. We
must take heed of being so bold, that when Christ has made an institution, an
ordinance, and revealed it to us, for us to think we may imitate Christ and
make another Ordinance, or another institution like that, because Christ has
done so, because we find such a thing in the Word therefore we may do so too;
No, this is too bold, this is to set our post by Gods post, for which the Lord
did charge the people, Ezekiel. 43. 8. In Esaias 33. 22. it is said, The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King in this thing. But yet
you will say, how is that opened further? (for indeed it needs opening) that
there can be no new institution, nor no new Law made in this sense, but all
must hold of Christ?

For the opening of that I shall afterward come to speak more fully about the
power of Governors and what their authority is, but thus much for the present.
No man can make any new Institution in the Church.
We are to consider that there are some things belonging to the Church (I
beseech you observe) that are common with all other societies, (...) to them,
that is natural and civil, and there (...) ^^wer of man may come in, there the
(...) may order things. Those things I say that belong to the Church, that yet
are not so proper, but belong to other societies too, there man's reason may
come in. As for instance.

First, A Church is a spiritual society and community, they must meet
together, and if they do meet they must meet in some place: This is common to
all societies in the world, if they will meet they must meet in a place. Yea
Secondly, if they meet in a place; this place must be determined where it shall
be. This also is common to all societies.

Thirdly, This likewise is common to them with all other societies, that what
they do in that place must be done decently and in order, all things ought to
be managed in an orderly decent way. As if there be many things to be done, one
thing must be before another, one thing must not exclude another; if they come
together, they must come together as befitting men in a decent way. Therefore
that rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order, it is
not properly an institution, it is nothing but the dictate of right reason, so
that if we had never found such a sentence, such a maxim in Scripture, as let
all things be done decently and in order, it had been a truth that we were
bound in conscience to.

Again, If men will come and meet together, it is natural and common to all
societies, that they should be decent in their garments and otherwise.

But then you will say, When comes it to an Institution? I mean an
Institution that is forbidden, that none must meddle withal, that is proper to
Christ. What makes an institution so as if man presume to do it, it is
unlawful.
Thus, when any man shall by virtue of any Law, any imposition, put more into
the thing then God, or then nature has put into it, when they shall make their
institution to put any efficacy into it for the worship of God more then God
has, this we call sinful. As for instance

Suppose we should instance only in garments. That all that meets together in
Christian Assemblies, should meet decently in decent garments, Ministers and
others, 1.
the light of nature tells us, and there may be law if men will be refractory
to compel them unto it, to meet so as they may meet decently in regard of
their garments. But now if it come thus far, that we leave natural decency, and
such or such a garment shall be made decent for Gods worship because it is
appointed, whereas if it were not appointed it would not be decent at all. When
I say all the decency does not depend upon what God has put into it, or what
is natural to it, but depends merely upon the institution of man, for take away
that institution it would not be decent; as in some kind of garments, put case
men were left to their freedom, that there were no institution, I put it to
your Consciences whether it would be decent to wear them: If it would not be
decent, then it seems it is the institution that puts all upon it; and now here
we must take heed. This then puts more upon that creature then nature or the
God of nature has put upon it, then in way of common prudence (I say were it
not for an institution, that seems to go further, that seems to entrench upon
an ordinance) would be done. 2.
Further, There is more put upon (...) then nature has put into it, when there
shall be expected by virtue of an institution, some kind of spiritual efficacy
to work upon the soul, then it comes to be sinful. As thu when that creature
by virtue of the institution, and appointment shall be made, and esteemed, or
accounted of more effectual to stir up my mind, or to signify such a thing,
as purity or holiness, then another creature that has as much in it naturally
to signify the same thing, and to stir up my mind; this is to imitate Gods
institution, which is too much boldness in any man. As, when God does appoint
a thing in his Church, a Ceremony or the like, he will take some thing that
has a resemblance to put men in mind of such a holy thing, that has some
kind of Metaphor or likeness in it. But when God has taken this creature and
separated it from others, this creature must be expected to have more efficacy
to signify the thing to my soul, and to stiree up my soul to think of his
holiness, then any creature in the world not so appointed, though other
creatures have as much in them naturally to do it. This is Gods institution.
Now man's institution, that comes near to Gods, where there is a setting our
post by his post, is when man shall take one creature from thousands of others,
and all those thousands have as much in them naturally, and put into them by
God, to put me in mind of holiness, and to stir up my heart; now this
creature shall be separated from the rest, and by virtue of an institution put
upon it, there shall be expected more efficacy in this to stir up my mind, and
to draw my heart nearer to God then other creatures that only do it in a
natural way, here I say is intrenching upon that which belongs to the
government of Christ.

Therefore I beseech you my brethren be not mistaken in this, because I know
you are ordinarily led by that speech of the Apostle, let all thing be, done
decently and in order. Understand it aright, It is true we must do so and it is
a sin, not to do things decently and in order, in the worship of God: but this
does not at all countenance any institution of man's when it comes to be
spiritual, to draw the heart nearer unto God, or God nearer unto the heart, by
virtue of man's separation of it from common use.

I might instance in other things, in places, That there should be a convenient
place for Gods worship, the light of nature will tell us: but when any man
shall set one place aside separated from another, and shall make the worship of
God to be better, and have more efficacy to draw men nearer unto God, or God
nearer unto men, then another place that has as much natural decency and
fitness in it as that place has; here it comes to have the evil. 2. What
comes from Christ the head, binds conscience in another manner then man's laws
can do.
By these few instances you may judge of all things, when they do come to be
institutions in Gods worship, and beyond the rule of the Apostle, Let all
things be done decently and in order,

This is the second thing of Christ's government, that all Ordinances, all Laws
in the Church must hold on him the Head.

The third thing in Christ's government in the Church is, that those Laws that
he makes for the ordering and government of his Church, do not only hold on
him (...) such a virtue and efficacy in them coming from the head, that they
do bind the consciences of men, because they come from him that is the head of
the Church, they do lay bonds upon consciences, and that primarily in another
way, and more efficaciously then any law of any man in the world can. Yea they
lay such a bond upon conscience, that though a thing be commanded that has no
other reason for the command but merely the will of Christ, and that we cannot
see to what other good the thing does tend, but merely because Christ will have
it, yet we are bound to obey, yea and that in secret; Yea so far as the rule
goes, we are bound to do what is required by it, though we should suffer
never so much prejudice to our selves. Here is the binding power of Christ in
binding conscience. But there is no law of man does in this way bind
conscience, perhaps these things, with some others that are to be delivered may
at the first naming of them seem to be somewhat tickle points: yet I know
there is a necessity, and a kind of absolute necessity to inform the
consciences of men in them, especially in these times, and because they fall so
full here in my way I could not out of conscience omit them: and yet still if
you diligently observe, I hope we shall carry on all so as to speak modestly
and yet safely and fully too. I say therefore, the laws of men are different
from the Laws of Christ. It is a part of the head-ship of Christ to lay bonds
upon the conscience. But what will you say then to that Text of Scripture (I
suppose it is in every one of your thoughts, and would be ready in every one of
your mouths if you were from the Assembly) Romans 13. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God. Whosoever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. Yea ver. 5. You must be subject not out of fear of
wrath, but for conscience sake. Answer to that place. Romans 13. brought to prove
humane laws to bind conscience.
This Text seems to imply that the laws of men do bind the conscience; And
we find it by experience how this is urged by many upon every thing, there is
no kind of institution of man whatsoever (except we can apparently show, it is
contrary to the word of God) but they think by virtue of this Text the
consciences of men are bound; and so they fly upon men, that they are not men
of conscience, that they will not obey authority. In that they do not submit
to authority, they sin against their consciences, etc. You shall have many men
that will jeere at those that are so conscionable in Gods commands that seem
to be but little things (and in themselves are little things) oh they dare not
disobey because they are bound in conscience, they will jeere at the
scrupulosity of their consciences there. But when it comes to man's commands,
then they must obey in the least thing whatever it be, though in its own nature
it be never so indifferent; yet they must obey for conscience sake.

I shall desire as fully and as clearly as I am able, to satisfy Consciences
in this very thing. To open therefore that Scripture unto you.

First, you must observe, that every one is bound to be subject to the higher
powers: (Mark) It is not to the Man first, but it is to the Power: Let every
soul be subject to the higher power, where ever this power lies.

It is not to the will of a man that has power, but it is to the power of that
man.

Now the power, the authority is that, that man has in a legal way. The first
must be understood.

Secondly, We must consider in what they must be subject: The laws of men are
of three sorts. Some perhaps command that which is simply unlawful, that we
all yield the Scripture does not bind us to be subject, there we must obey God
rather then man.

But secondly, there are other things that are commanded, that are lawful, and
they are of two sorts. Either such things as do tend by the rules of justice
and prudence to the public good, to the good of the Community of which we are
members: and there we are bound to obey for Conscience sake.

But still this not according to that obedience we owe to Christ our Head, this
is secondarily, not primarily, because commanded by man, but because the rules
of Justice and Prudence does require this for the public good, of which we
are a community; and then because there comes a Law of Christ to us to walk
and live according to the rules of Justice and prudence: so we are bound for
conscience in those things, but not primarily, and so they cannot be said to
bind conscience, so as Christ's Laws do.

There are other things that are commanded by man (and that especially concerns
our question) and these are such things as indeed are neither here nor there
for the common, for the public good, the good of the community does not at
all depend upon them, and there is nothing in them but merely the satisfaction
of the wills of those that are in authority above us.

Now here is the Question, How far those Laws bind men, and bind Conscience?
Indeed many poor Christians that are conscientious have been extremely snared
in these things.

To that I answer: That though such things should be commanded to be done, yet
it they be not done.) so be it they be not omitted out of contempt, nor so as
may bring scandal upon the authority that does enjoyne them; and those that
do omit them shall patiently and willingly submit to what punishment the Law
of the Land shall require) in such things this man's conscience shall not, nor
need not bind him over to answer before God, that he has sinned against that
rule, You will say, How do you prove that? How does it appear? For that must
needs be made out.

I will make it appear from the Text, from the nature of subjection that is
required in the Text, and from Reason.

First, this Text here in Rom, 13. gives this as the ground why we are to be
subject, Because (says the Text, ver. 4.) he is the minister of God for thy
good. So that that which is the special ground of our subjection, is, because
they that are in place are ministers for our good. But here is then an abuse of
their power, if they will command what is not indeed tending to the good of the
public, but merely the satisfaction of their own minds.

But suppose it be an abuse, the Text says we must be subject.

(...) You must do the thing for conscience (...) be subject, we must not
resist, but be subject: The words are, We must be subordinate for conscience
sake, (so it may be translated) Here is all that is required, that I must be
subordinate and not resist, (...).
that is, though there be a thing commanded by authority, though this authority
should be abused, yet I may not resist, I must be subject. If then out of that
reverent respect I have to authority, though I do not do the thing, 1.
yet I do not forbear out of contempt: It is a thing exceedingly prejudicial
unto me, and it is not for the common good, but yet I am so careful that
authority shall not be despised that I will keep it secret. 2, 3.
I will not refuse to do it, so as shall be ascandall upon authority.

And yet further, if authority shall so far urge upon me as to inflict
punishment because I do not do it, I will patiently bear it. Now when these
three things are done, here is that subordination to authority that the Apostle
in that Scripture requires. And the reason why this of necessity must be
granted, is, because otherwise all the Christian liberty that the Scripture so
much speaks of, may be utterly taken away in regard of the practice, that it
is in the power of man wholly to deprive us of it.

This Scripture cannot be so understood, that all that liberty we have in all
things in their own nature indifferent should be so under the power of men, as
that we for the practice, and for our conscience too must be tied that we
cannot have liberty, no not in secret, certainly that is that which is against
the judgment of all Orthodox Divines of the Reformed Churches.

But it may be said, who shall be Judge whether things be tending to the
public good yea or no? Every one must judge of his own act, but yet at a two
fold peril.
will you take upon you to judge your self?

To that the Answer is thus plainly, that indeed those that are appointed by
Law have the power to judge legally, and authoritatively to judge so as to bind
others. But every man has liberty so far as concerns his own act to judge at
his peril. And that a two-sold peril,

First at his peril, 1.
lest he judging himself should sin against God in this, that he should judge
that not good for the public, which indeed is good; that he should perhaps
judge that to be of an indifferent nature that justice and prudence requires
of him: Here he mis-judgeth at his peril, he sins against the Lord,
against the rules of justice and prudence, and indangereth his own soul if he
go amiss in this.

Secondly, 2.
If he mis-judge it is at his peril that comes by the Laws of men, that he is
in danger then to suffer what the Laws of men shall inflict upon him: And so
submitting this way, his conscience may have some ease; and yet no gap open at
all to liberty, or any disturbance to any lawful authority for all this. This
is necessary for men to know that they may understand 3.
aright how to answer that question about Laws binding of conscience. You
hear it is the prerogative of Christ our Head, so to be our Lawgiver, so as
to lay bonds upon conscience in such a manner as no man can do the like. That
is the third.

Fourthly, 4.
Christ is the Head of the Church (in regard of some) even personally, so as to
come and rule in the world in a glorious manner personally, and so they think
this may be interpreted, that Christ shall be a head (how said to be appointed,
we shall speak of when we come unto it) that he shall come personally, and
rule and govern things even in this world.

As Christ in his own person did exercise his Priestly and Prophetical
offices, so they think in his own person he shall exercise his Kingly power
and office. Which opinion, because the further discussion of it, I suppose
generally you are not able to bear yet, therefore in modesty I will forbear,
and though out of modesty I shall for the present forbear, yet out of
conscience I dare not altogether deny it, but so we will leave it, to see what
truth may be in this, we must expect to have light let in by degrees.

In these four things then we have the rule of Christ, three determined of, the
fourth only propounded, which Christ in time will show further light unto us
in. Christ is then the Head.

Now from all this there follows three consequences that are very useful.

1. Hence we learn that the seeking after the right government of Christ in
his Church is not a light matter, it does concern the Head-ship of Christ.

2. Not a light matter to seek after the right government of Christ.
By what has been said we shall come to be instructed to know what is properly
Antichristian and what not.

3. We shall come to have light how far the King may be said to be head of the
Church. These things you will find needful for conscience to be informed in,
and I shall carry them on too I hope with modesty, fullness, and safety,

First, Quae pericula ecclesiam exceptura sunt Christum caput agnos centem
tempora nostra satis ostend unt, quia Christum totum praedicauius caput nostrum
Ana themati and omnis generis suppliciit subsecicimur,
I say it follows from hence that it is not a light matter to seek after the
right government of Christ in his Church, it concerns a head-ship of Christ.
The head-ship of Christ in a special manner consists in that there are some
other things in which it does consist, which perhaps may be spoken of
hereafter, but here in this place especially that.

Indeed in the primitive times there the greatest contention was about the
Doctrines of Religion, what Doctrines should hold upon Christ and what not, and
the people of God did there suffer most for contending about the doctrines that
held upon Christ the Head, they would not receive a Doctrine but what held on
Christ, and what was obrtuded upon them, not holding upon Christ the Head they
did reject. And Luther upon this place has this speech, he tells us how much
the Church in after time did suffer for this very thing, and says, What kind
of dangers did inviron the Church, and do inviron it for acknowledging Christ
to be the head, these our times do sufficiently testify. And further, because
we preach Christ to be the whole head, therefore we are subject to Anathemas,
and to all kind of punishment. And in these latter times it is like that the
great contention will be, rather about the head-ship of Christ in the point of
his government then in the other, the other being so clear unto us; and the
sufferings of the people of God will be so much the more grievous, because that
this is accounted such a little thing, such a poor business: And further,
because this does not seem to be altogether so clearly revealed in the
Scripture, as other Doctrinall points that hold upon Christ the ^ead. And
Christ the rather has so disposed of things, that this shall not be so clearly
revealed, because he intended to suffer Antichrist to rise to his height: and
it cannot be imagined that if the Doctrine of Christ's government in his Church
had been clearly and demonstratively laid down, so as there could have been
no gainsaying of it, I say it cannot be imagined how it is possible for
Antichrist to have risen to that height that he has; Christ because he
intended to bring about many passages of his providence, and many great works
of his that way in suffering Antichrist to arise; therefore he has left this
point so in the word as is subject to many doubts, and may occasion many
objections against it.

But the nearer the time comes for Antichrist to fall, the more clearly this
shall be revealed.

Secondly, 2.
By this that has been said we may learn what to account Antichristianisme,
and what not: for there are many amongst us that cry out against every thing
that displeases them, that it is Antichristianisme, that it is
Antichristianisme, and yet understand but very little what Antichristianisme is.

But by this that has been said, What is to be accounted Antichristianisme,
what not.
you must know that Antichristianisme is not every error: It is true in a
large sense Antichrist is as much as against Christ, and so every sin, every
error is against Christ, and in Antichristianisme, if you take it so. But you
are to know the Scripture speaks of the Antichrist, and of Antichristianisme
in a special acceptance. What is that?

This my brethren is Antichristianisme, that which shall oppose Christ as a
Head, and set up another head-ship; here is the propriety of Antichrist and
Antichristianisme; as in all those four things named before.

First, 1.
Whosoever shall obtrude any Doctrine upon the Church to be believed, by their
own authority, he is guilty of Antichristianisme, not whosoever shall preach or
hold an error in the Church. But when any shall presume to obtrude upon the
Church, any Doctrine that holds upon humane authority, to be urged upon the
authority of those that do impose it, this I say is properly Antichristianisme,
for it does oppose Christ in his head-ship.

Secondly, 2.
The intrusion of such offices and officers in the Church as merely belonging
to the spiritual man, such as are properly Church offices, that do not hold
upon Christ the Head, but only hold upon them, this is Antichristianisme.

Thirdly, The imposing of any Ordinance, any new institutions that are, as has
been opened, 3.
upon the Church, belongs to Antichristianisme.

Fourthly, 4
The imposing of laws so to bind conscience as the Laws of Christ do, here is
Antichristianisme.

This is Antichristianisme, and that not only because these things are
directly against the head-ship of Christ, but because these things do set up
another head too; and so the word Antichrist may signify as well for one to be
in stead of Christ (for so (...), the Greek signifies, sometime as well, for,
as against as of his fullness we receive grace for grace, it is (...), in the
Greek, grace for grace) so Antichrist is one that shall set up h^mselfe as
head of the Church in stead of Christ, one that shall claim unto himself that
head-ship that is proper to Jesus Christ, and not to be communicated to any
from Jesus Christ. This is Antichristianisme.

Now the Apostle faith that there were many Antichrists in his time, and this
mystery of ungodliness, of inquity did work then; but now it comes to grow to
a height in that great Antichrist of Rome, (for you know) in these four are
the special things wherein he is the Antichrist; Because he obtrudes
Doctrines, Articles of Faith upon the Church by his own authority; He makes
all Offices of the Church to hold on him; And appoints Laws, Ordinances and
Institutions likewise to hold on him; And claymeth the binding of Consciences,
so as is proper to Jesus Christ.

And all those that hold thus on Antichrist, and are thus abettors of him in
these things, these are guilty of this greatsinne of Antichristianisme.

That for your right information about the sin of Antichristianisme.

The third consequence. 3
You say Christ is the Head, but you know the King is called the Head of the
Church, in what sense are we to understand that? Or how may we come to
understand aright that Oath that is given, of Supremacy.

These things (my brethren) are necessary for information of Conscience, and
the burden lies upon us to make out these things as clear to you as we can,
that you may go along with the more freedom of spirit and conscience in your
way, and yet give every one their right too.

You are to know that the Oath of Supremacy came into England thus: In the time
of Popery, the Pope claymed unto himself the Head-ship of the Church: He being
excluded, then came in that Oath to acknowledge the King or Queen the Head of
the Church. But now you must know, first, that this title, The Head of the
Church, as it has been attributed to the King, has been much abused, and it
has given some advantage to our adversaries, for the King is not the Head of
the Church, neither as Christ is, nor as the Pope claymed it:

Not as Christ: Christ is the Head to govern unlimitedly. No limits or bounds
are set to the Government of Christ, but only his own mind, his own will. It
is not so with any Prince in the world, he is not so the Head to govern. But
all Governors have a twofold limit; They are limited by Laws of God, they
are limited by the Laws of man too.

Neither is he the Head, as the Pope challenges unto himself, How is that?
you will say. In the forenamed four things, the Pope challenges holding of
doctrines, and holding of offices, and the like, upon him. Offices do not so
hold upon any Governors, upon the King or others, as the Pope challenges to
hold upon him. How does he challenge them to hold upon him? Thus, that all are
in him virtually, and so to be derived from him to others. And indeed in a
(...) part do many of our Prelates say that (...): that is, that all the
offices hold on (...), and ^o go from them unto others: and hence it is they
account all other Ministers but their Curats, and they must not pray but as
they will, and do nothing but what they will, Why? because they are but them
substitutes, as if all offices were virtually in them, and so came from them
unto others; whereas every office in the Church, even the meanest, holds upon
Christ the Head.

Now it is true, in the civil State in some sense it may he said that the
officers of the Commonwealth are in a kind virtually in the King, he being
the supreme, but you must not think that all are thus virtually in him in
Church affairs, for if they were virtually in him, then he could himself
dispense those things that others by virtue of their office, can but that he
cannot, as to give the Sacrament and the like.

But how is he the head then, or in what sense may we quiet our Consciences in
acknowledging the King to be the head of the Church?

Only thus he is said to be the head, because he is the supreme to govern in
a civil way, not only the Civil State, but even affairs that belong to the
Church too. We do not deny the power of Princes even in affairs that belong
to the Church. And because he is the supreme in that civil power, to govern
in a civil way by civil Laws, so as to see Christ not dishonored, so as to
keep out Idolatry, to protect the Church, to punish enormities that are there,
to defend it from enemies. In that sense he is said to be the head, but that
title of supreme Governor being understood in a civil way is more proper. That
the King has power in Church affairs, and how.
To make that a little out unto you; that there is some supremacy in this, not
only in the civil State but in Church affairs: For we must not exclude the
King quite out of all Church affairs, as some would do, no we do not; but
though we would inform your consciences aright, yet we would not by any
means take away any lawful power God has put into him. Now that he has
power even in Church affairs, there are many reasons that fully move me to be
persuaded in it.

The first that I shall name, I think it will least prevail (though it be the
most ordinary) with them that make most doubt of it, therefore I will not stand
upon it, only name it. We know that all along among the Jews in the time of the
Old Testament, the Governors there, and Kings and Princes had power in
affairs that belong to the Church as well as to the State.

But this I say I do not think to be the greatest strength in this point,
especially to p^^swade them that make any scruple of it, they will us that the
power there was but Tipicall and the like, and sobindeth not now.

There are therefore other reasons that persuade the same thing.

The first is this, because I find that in the Prophets, 1.
where we have a Prophecy of the state of the Church in the times of the
Gospel. God does promise that he will make Kings to be their nursing fathers,
and Queens to be their nursing mothers. Now if they be to be nursing fathers of
the Church, surely they must have some influence by their power into it.

Secondly, 2.
That place in Romans 13. spealtes indifferently and faith, he is the Minister
for thy good. It does not say for thi^; good or that good, (...) this civil
good or Ecclesiastical good, but he is the Minister for thy good, for all good
unto thee so far as his power can reach.

It is a hard thing you know (if men will put us unto it) to show in the New
Testament the power that Kings had, because there was then no King but
Heathens, 3.
yet says he, they are Ministers for thy good, and speaks to Christians.

But thirdly, and that which yet may seem to have more in it, I find this in
the New Testament that Saint Paul when he was accused by his brethren in
matters of Religion, he did appeal unto Caesar. Act. 25. 9. who was a Heathen
Magistrate, his accusation was in matters of Religion, in questions about their
Law, and about one JESUS that was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

And yet in his answer to those things he appealeth unto Caesar, therefore
there is somewhat that Caesar has to do in over-looking of the affairs of
the Church, that concerns the ways of Religion.

But you will say, How can he be a competent Judge? Can Caesar a Heathen be a
competent Judge in matters of Religion? Is it possible? Or suppose that a
Governor be wicked, can he be a competent Judge in matters of Religion?

I answer, the wickedness of a Governor, though he be a Heathen, yet loses
not his power, he has still a true and a lawful power; yea he has some
oversight of things that concern Church affairs.

How can that be? Quest.


Christianity gives not the authority, Ans.
but enables to execute that authority, a Heathen Magistrate has authority, it
is his duty to see that Christians be not wronged, and if he does not it is his
sin, but if he becomes a Christian, he is the better able to do what he ought,
but this puts not the power into him.

But if a man be wicked, Quest.
and understands not the things of the Church, how can he be a judge?

Thus, Ans.
though the King be not a competent judge of the Principles upon which the
Church goes, whether right or no, he has not skill to do that being such a
one: yet he may have ability to judge between man and man, whether one to the
other does wrong yea or no, and that in matters of Religion. As thus; though he
does not think the Principles upon which they go to be right, yet he can judge
whether according to those Principl^ they do right one to another, whether
according to their Principles, they do not wrong one the other. And this is a
great matter to be able to judge and to punish with civil punishment when any
of the Church wrongs his brother against the Principles that himself does
profess.

As for example, though he be not a Physician, he does not understand the
difference between the poison and a wholesome Medicine, yet when things are
brought before him, he may be a competent judge, by evidence so as to condemn
a Physician that has poisoned a man instead of giving of him wholesome Physic.

And that objection against his competency in judging in the affairs of the
Church has no more power then if it should have been objected that he must
not judge upon a Physician, whether he has poisoned a man or no, because he
himself is not a Physician. Thus we have done with these three consequents
that follow upon the opening of the headship of Christ in point of his
government. And now we see more clearly how Christ is head and none but Christ,
and what glory we are to give to Christ as the head of the Church.

There is one thing more belongs to the head-ship of Christ which must not be
passed by, though it be not so fully aimed at in the text as what has already
been said, and that is the influence of spiritual life, that comes unto the
Church by Christ the head, as the animal spirits come from the head to the
members. And this is the very reason, first, why grace in the Saints is of such
a beautiful and glorious nature as it is, because it comes from Christ the
head. The excellency of grace in the Saints above what was in Ada^.
Secondly, This is the reason of that power and efficacy that there is of grace
in the Saints, because it comes from Christ the head. Thirdly, this is also the
reason why grace in the Saints is of such an everlasting nature, and that
beyond that of Adam. It has more beauty then the grace Adam had, and it has
more power and efficacy then the grace Adam had, and it is of a more
everlasting nature then that was, upon this ground, because the grace of the
Saints holds upon Christ the head, and has an influence from Christ, God-man
in a special and peculiar way, such an influence as Adam had not. This is the
excellency of grace in the Saints.

And to conclude this point of the Head-ship of Christ. The rather has God the
Father thus advanced Christ to be the Head, because he was willing to stoop so
low, to be as a worm under foot, for so he says of himself, Psalm. 22. 6. I am
a worm, and no man. Christ was low in his own eyes, and submitted himself to
such a condition, and now behold the Father has advanced him, for so it is
said, Ephesians. 1. 22. God has made him head over all things, has made him head
over principalities, and powers, and dominions, over Angels, and over all men
and all things in the Church, has advanced him to this high and glorious
dignity, we see somewhat of it now, and we shall see more gloriously the
head-ship of Christ hereafter.

In this God the Father does show that as he has dealt with his Son, so he
is willing to deal with the Members of his Son, in a proportion. His Son that
was willing to be so low and under foot, is now advanced to such a high glory
that all must stoop, and yield, and submit unto him.

Let us be willing to lie low, and though it be under foot, to be trodden upon
by the wicked and ungodly of the world; though we cannot expect to be advanced
to be head, yet we may expect to be advanced to glory and dignity.

You know what God said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. When thou were little in thine own
eyes then I made thee King.

The less any of us are in our own eyes, the more are we like to be advanced
by God, for God wlll observe a proportion between his dealings with Christ the
head, and his dealings with all his Members.

The Seventh Lecture
HOSEA 1. 11. the latter part of the verse And appoint themselves one Head,
Lect. 7.
and they shall come up out of the Land for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

They shall [appoint] themselves one Head.


Ephesians. 1. 11. It is said, God gave Christ to be Head over all things to the
Chnrch. How then it is said here that they shall [appoint] to themselves one
Head?

It is true, God the Father has advanced his Son, and extolled him above all
things, and has given him to be Head over all: but yet when the Church, when
the Saints shall choose this Christ to be their Head, when they shall come in
freely, and willingly submit themselves unto Christ, lifting him up above all,
honoring his ordinances, laws, institutions, depending upon him for light; They
are said to appoint Christ to be their Head.

As, though Gods eternal Decree has made himself to be the God of his Saints,
yet when the Saints do choose God to be their God, God does account himself to
be made their God by them: they make God to be their God in choosing of him. So
though Christ by the Father be appointed to be the Head over all, yet the act
of the Church in choosing Christ, and coming to him freely, and submitting
unto him as to the Head, is accounted even an appointing of Christ to be Head.

This is that happy work which the Saints have been doing, and which we are to
do, and they will do to the end of the world, appointing Christ a Head.
Though there be some special time that this Text has reference unto (of which
by and by) yet in all Ages of the Church, when the Saints do choose Christ to
be their Head, they are said to appoint him.

Let us join in this blessed work, an honorable work for creatures to appoint
the Lord JESUS to be Head over them. Let us say as Hushai did in another case,
2 Samuel 19. 18. Him whom the Lord, and this people, and all men of Israel choose
for King, his will I be, and with him will I abide.

So, He whom God the Father shall give to be Head over all things, him whom the
Saints have in all times chosen for their Head, it is he that shall be our Head
and our King, his will we be, and with him will we abide.

Let us give Christ the pre-eminence above all, prizing his government, his
ordinances above all the comforts we have in this world, Psa. 137 6. (...)
If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy, The words are in the O^^nal, If
I make not Jerusa^^^ (...) ^end above the head of my joy;

Whatsoever is high in our thoughts, as a head, let Christ be above it;

Christ in his ordinances must be above the head of our joy. For otherwise he
is not a Head unto us. If you invite a man of quality to your table, though you
provide never such cheer for him, yet if you should set any people of mean
quality above him, he would not regard all your courtesies. When you tender up
any thing unto Christ, when you seem to entertain him with the greatest
respect, yet if there be any thing you set above him, especially if a vile lust
be set above him, he cares not for all your entertainment.

We read in that Col. 2. 19. (the place we made use of in opening the former
point) that there were some blamed for not holding of the Head; What is that?
because they gave more honor to Angels then was due unto them.

It is spoken about the worshipping of Angels, though never such glorious
creatures, yet by over-prizing they come, not to hold of the Head. What, is the
giving undue honor to Angels enough to take us off from Christ the Head?
Certainly then the prostrating our selves before our vile and base lusts, does
much more take us off from holding Christ to be the Head.

Let us look at all the offices and ordinances of Christ, as holding upon him
the Head (as you heard before) that so we may have a more reverent esteem of
them. Let us depend upon him for influence of life, and not depend upon means.
Let us manifest in our conversation the spirit and life that we have received
from such a Head as Christ is, that we may not be a dishonor to this our head.

I remember Chrysostom in his Comment upon that first of the Ephesians, We
must not dishouour Head. (...)
says, in this regard we must be better then Angels, yea greater then
Archangels, and he has three most excellent expressions about this, that
Christians should take heed of dishonouring Christ their Head.

First, says he, suppose a man had a precious Diadem upon his head, or a crown
of gold, that would be some argument unto him to make him take heed of doing
things unworthy of that ornament that is upon his head: and we (says he) have
not a Diadem, we have not a crown of gold upon our heads, we have Christ
himself to be our Head, therefore let us do nothing unworthy of this our head.

Secondly, he has this expression. O the honor (says he) that God affords
unto us in this! the thought of this were enough to terrify us from sin, more
then the setting of hell it self before our eyes. And indeed so it is.

The right understanding of Christ to be our Head, and we having so near an
union with him, is of power to terrify us from sin more then the sight of
hell, if it were before us.

Thirdly, he goes on further. Says he, What, is Christ your head? do you know
next unto whom this your head does sit in heaven? Is he not placed at the right
hand of the Father above all principalities and powers? And shall the members of
this head be trampled upon by the Devil? God forbid.

And yet so honor the head as to give the honor likewise to all that are unto
him, to those that he has placed for the administration of any ordinance of
his unto us.

We must not under pretense of giving Christ all the honor, dishonor those
that are set over us by Christ. We have a notable expression of the Apostle
Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 12. where reproving the dissentions of the Church of Corinth:
There are some (says he) that say we are of Paul, and others we are of
Apollo, and others said, we are of Cephas, and others we are of Christ. Why,
are these all blamed? how could those that said that they held of Christ be
blarned? It is apparent that the Apostle blames them all, as well those that
said they did hold of Christ, as those that said they did hold of Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas. How is that?

Thus. Among the Corinths there were some that made divisions, some were for
some officer, others for others; we are for Paul said some, we for Apollo said
others, and we for Cephas, and for our parts (said others) we are for none of
them all, we are neither for Paul, nor for Apollo, nor for Cephas, but we are
for Christ, what are men? what are officers? what are Ordinances? what are all
those to us? Christ is all in all unto us, he is our head, and we are complete
in him, and we hold upon him, we are for neither of all the other. These are
blamed as well as the other. We must so hold upon Christ, as yet to give all
due honor to the Ordinances, to the Institutions, to the Officers and Offices
of Christ. Yet I confess when any that are in Christ's stead to dispense his
ordinances unto us, if they prove to be wicked, of all people in the world they
are the most contemptible, and a just judgment of God ^t is upon them. Esaias,
9. 15. The ancient and honorable, he is the head, and the Prophet that
teacher^^ lies, he is the tail,

Mark, The Prophet there speaks against those that were in place and power,
though they were naught, yet still they retained the name of ancient and
honorable, but the Prophet that teaches lies, a contemptiblename is put upon
him, he is the tail, no generation in the world more contemptible then those
when once they degenerate.

But you will say, though they should be vile in their lives, yet the
wickedness of them that are in office does not hinder the virtue and efficacy
of the Ordinances, it depends not upon them. True, the efficacy of no Ordinance
depends upon men, and it is not either because the Minister is vile, or
Communicants are vile that communicate with you that can hinder the virtue of
an Ordinance. If the Church contract no guilt upon themselves by retaining such
in place, and by not casting out such as do come into communion with them.
Take but that for granted that there is no guilt contracted.

It is not the wickedness then of the Minister or of the people that hinders
the efficacy of any Ordinance at all. But if it prove that there be guilt
contracted upon the Church through the negligence of their duty this way, then
the case is the same with those of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. 6. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, what is that whole lump but their Communion?

But was not Christ the Head before because now it is said, Quest.
They shall appoint themselves one Head? It is spoken of a glorious time when
the Jews shall he called again, and (...) and Judah shall join together.

Now they shall appoint themselves one Head, Christ to be their Head.

Christ was the head to the Fathers under the Law, how now is he appointed
their head? Ans.
Christ indeed was a head to the forefathers, but now in the times of the
Gospel, especially at these times that are spoken of here, at the calling of
the Jews, and that glorious time that shall be then, Christ will appear to be
a Head in another manner, to govern in another way, far more gloriously then
now he does, and far more influence of grace and light will come from him unto
his members then now. Though Christ has always been a head to his Church, yet
there is a time coming when the seventh Trumpet shall be sounded (spoken of
Revel. 11. 15.) when that voice shall be heard that yet was never heard, The
Kingdoms of the earth are the Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for
evermore. A time coming wherein Christ shall say unto his people; Rev. 3. 21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I
also overcame and am set down with my Father in his Throne. The Throne that
Christ sits upon now, is his Fathers Throne; he does not call it his, and at
the day of judgment the Scripture tells us that he shall give up the Kingdom
unto his Father. There is a time therefore for the Throne of Christ to be here
further then it has been, Rev. 19. 6.
which Christ has promised to those that do overcome. A time coming when
there shall be heard the neise, not only of many waters, but as a mighty
thunder, saying, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. He shall be a
head another way.

Now if it be true that Christ himself is appointed by the Church to be head,
then the officers and Ministers of the Church should not think much to be
appointed in their places by the Church too. It is true, their offices hold on
Christ the head, but the designation of persons it must be from some Church
work or other. Who of the Church, should do it, we do not now list to enter
into any such controversy, but that there must be more then a civil act to
make any man that was not before in the place of a Pastor or teacher of a
Church, now to be so, somewhat to make my conscience to yield and submit unto
him as an officer that JESUS CHRIST has placed over me, some Church-work
certainly there must be in this: Christ himself would be appointed a head by
his people, that they might submit to him the more cheerfully, and give glory
to him with the more freedom of spirit. And as for all such as shall thrust
themselves upon a people, no marvel though they complain of want of respect
from them, or of their going away from them. Igna charitatis combucenrendi,
s^at ha^etiti Luther.
They never did any thing toward the appointing them officers over them. They
sholl appoint themselves a head.

Not force Christ upon others by fire and sword. Heritiques are to be burnt
with fire (says Luther) but with what fire? the fire of charity.

They shall appoint to themselves. Let others do what they will, let others
choose what head they please, yet the Saints will appoint to themselves the
Lord Christ to be their head, they will bless themselves in Christ, he shall
be a head unto us, whatsoever he be unto others.

Others it may be will choose unto themselves other heads, but the Saints say
as they in Micah. 4. 5. All people will walk every one in the name of his God,
and we will walk in the name of our God for ever and ever

Other people they will walk in their ways, and choose to themselves such as
they may have most liberty under, they perhaps think the government of Christ
to be too strick for them, but for us we will bless our selves in our Christ,
we will never prostitute our consciences so to men, to lusts and humors as we
have done, it is Christ shall be our head and we will submit unto him, it is he
that is our Lawgiver. Secret a mea mecum (it is an Hebrew proverb) my secret
is with my self, what good we find in Christ it is to our selves; Let Christ
be a stumbling block and a rock of offense to others, to us he is precious,
Cant 5. last.
he is one of ten thousand, he is altogether lovely.

They shall appoint to themselves one Head. But one; The Church is not a
Monster or diverse heads, It has but one head.

There cannot be a ministerial head of the Church, Christ is always present,
and has left his laws with his people. If we consider the difference between
Ecclesiastical power and Civil power, we shall see it clear that there
cannot be a ministerial head of the Church (indeed there is a contradiction in
the very mention of it: There can not be universal officer in the Church as in
the State and why;
a ministerial head? it is absurd to speak it) It is true in the civil
power, it is not against any institution of Christ that there should be one
head over all the world, nor against any law: But for to have one head over the
Church, yea to have any general officers over all the Churches (to challengde a
head-ship) it cannot be. The reason is, because there can be no delegation of
power that belongs to the Church. There may be a delegation of a civil power,
one man may be King over many Countries, and he may appoint substitutes under
him, and delegate them that they shall officate under him. There is no such
matter in the Church, there is no delegation of power from one to another.
Grant but once delegation of the teaching power here you stablish
Non-residency; grant but delegation of the ruling power and you presently
establish a Papacy. There is no such thing therefore.

Again, the civil power is by way of coaction, a Magistrate is not always
bound to give a reason of his injunctions, he may by way of compulsion require
obedience, But Church power is to deal with conscience; and therefore every
one that has any power must officiat himself, and deal with the consciences
of men to persuade and to instruct.

These two things being granted it is impossible that there can be a head over
all the Churches, yea or over many. But one; We must join nothing with JESUS
CHRIST, in the way of his head-ship. As Alexander said to Darius, when he sent
unto him that he would be willing to divide the Kingdom; No, says Alexander,
there is but one Sun in the firmament, and there can be but one King in a
Kingdom. So says Christ, but one head He head alone or no head at all; nothing
must be joined with him as head;

Indeed the heathen gods (...) to divide their honors, and to. have but some,
and other to have some other: and hence the Senate of Rome rejected Christ from
taking in him to be a God, after they consulted about it, for said they, if
Christ come to be acknowledged a God he will not share with the rest, he will
have all himself, and so upon this reason they refused him, Thus do many reject
Christ for a head, and for a God, because Christ will not share with others; he
must be but one. And a special help is here to our faith in looking up to
Christ for help and protection when all means fail (I beseech you observe it)
What, does Christ require of us that we should make him head alone and join
nothing with him as head? Then we may well expect from him in all our wants, a
protection, and that he alone should help us; or otherwise, the condition of a
Christian were the worst condition in the world, were worse then the condition
of a heathen: For the gods of a heathen would be content to have but part of
the honor of the heart and life because they could help but in part. If a
heathen god should require the whole soulto be lifted up above all, and he
alone to be honored and worshipped as a God, and yet when it comes to a matter
of help and protection, he could do nothing without some other joined with
him, a heathen might well reason the ease with him as doing him wrong,
certainly Christ will never wrong his people, so as to challenge from them,
that they should lift up him alone, and join no other with him, and yet when
it comes to their help and succor that there should be need to call in others
besides himself to their help. Therefore as Christ does challenge it from us
to make him our head alone, so we may challenge it from Christ to help us
alone when there is no other help for us.

Thus we have finished both the head-ship of Christ, and the Churches
appointing him to be that head. Now follows the next mercy, the next blessing,
and that but in a word, and then we come to the conclusion of this Chapter.
They shall come up out of the land.

Aterrenis affectibus, So Jerome, he makes it a coming up from their earthly
senses, earthly affections. A vita miserabili, so Luther upon the place, makes
it a coming up from their miserable life and condition.

But rather thus, Come up out of the land, that is, out of their captivity.

Judah and Israel they shall join together in coming to Jerusalem, and so
join in the same kind of worship, as they were wont to come out of all parts
of the country to worship at Jerusalem, and there were united in one kind of
worship, so they shall now come from all parts of the world where they are
scattered, and join in the same way of worship, yea and it is very probable in
their own land. There was a time when the people of God did sing songs of
praise in the wilderness, Exodus, 15. But the time shall come when they shall do
it in their own land; and this shall be a blessing of God upon them. Isa. 26.
1. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, We have a strong
City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulworkes. It shall be sung in
the land of Judah,

Ezekiel. 20. 40. In the mountains of the height of Israel, says the Lord God,
there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land serve me, there
will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the first
fruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.

Ezekiel. 37. 21. I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen
whether they begone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into
their own land. This blessing has God granted unto many of his servants this
day; who never thought to have seen their own land, their own good land: but
God has bin pleased to gather them up that they are come not only into their
own land, but they find the arms and hearts of the Saints open to embrace
them, and call them to public employments.

It was not long since that the land could not bear them; we hope that the
time may come ere long that the Lord Christ may so rule and that in our land,
that it will as hardly bear wicked and ungodly men as it has borne the
Saints, though it were hard to say that there should be so much violence used
even to keep them from some sins, as has been used here against the Saints to
keep them from their God, yet time may come ere long that wicked men may be
glad to fly (though not forced unto it) out of their own choice, into another
land, because they cannot have the enjoyment of their lusts so freely here: As
the Saints have been forced to fly out of their land that they might serve the
Lord and keep their consciences clear.

But we let this pass, and come now to the close of the Chapter to the
Epiphonema of it all. For great shall be the day of Jezreel.

They shall appoint themselves one head, and come up out of the land, for
great, Licet, so Tremelius turns it, although the day of Jezreel be great: and
indeed the Hebrew particle (...) signifies quamvis as well as quia, Observe.
It may be translated [ although] as well as [ for] And he translating it so,
although the day of Iezreel be great, he takes it in this sense, that is,
although the people of Israel shall be brought into great affliction, yet God
will be so merciful then when his time comes, as they shall be gathered
together again, and appoint themselves one head, and come up out of the land.
And from such an interpretation of the words there might be an excellent
meditation raised, and that is this. That the greatness of the misery of the
Church is no hinderance to the course of the freeness and abundance of Gods
mercy to it.

Although the day of Iezreel, their day be never so calamitous, never so
afflictive, never so grievous, yet they shall come up out of the land and
appoint themselves one head. The greatness of the Churches misery is no
hinderance unto the Churches delivery: Why? because their deliverance depends
upon a God who does delight not only to manifest some power, but the
excellency, and the glory, and the choice of his power in their deliverance.
For that take this Scripture, Isa. 62. 8. Where speaking of these very times
that we shall hear of afterward, of Gods being merciful unto his people, he
says, The Lord has sworn by his right hand: and we have not only mention
thereof Gods right hand and swearing by it, but the arm of God too; Mark
that, The arm of God and the arm of his strength:

There is Gods hand, Gods arm, Lect. 6.
the arm of his strength, and God swears by it. The greatness of the
Churches affliction is no hinderance to the deliverance of it.
Surely when God delights to put forth such power for the deliverance of his
Church, it is no great matter whether the afflicted estate be great or small.
It makes no great matter for the hinderance of the Churches delivery, no more
then if you should see two bubbles of water rise up, and one has a little
thicker skin then the other. Now there is as much difference in the difficulty
that the thick skin bubble makes when a mighty Cannon or piece of Ordnance shall
be shot off with a mighty Bullet to resist it, from the thinner skin bubble, as
the greatest and forest affliction that the people of God were ever under in
this world makes a difference in the difficulty of their deliverance (when they
have to deal with an infinite God) from the least affliction that ever the
Church was in. The difference is no more. If a child indeed should see the
thicker skin bubble, he might think it is harder to be broke then the thinner
skin, but if a Cannon should be shot off, nay if it be but a Fillip, it makes
no difference. Now the afflictions of Gods people they are to this right hand
of Gods power, and the arm of his strength, but as a bubble of water before a
mighty Cannon. Yea if there be not help at all to deliver Gods people in time
of affliction yet God can create help, He will create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and their people a joy. Yea suppose their condition be such as yet never was
the like since the beginning of the world, yet Isa, 64. 4. Since the beginning
of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the care, neither has the
eye seen what God has prepared for them that wait for him. And as the
greatness of the Churches deliverance is no hinderance of Gods power in
delivering them, so it should be no hinderance to the work of our faith. Common
prudence and reason will go a great way to uphold us under some affliction, but
when the affliction comes to be sore, and grievous, and long; prudence and
reason then sinketh under the burden; but then should faith lift up it self,
and cast an eye upon this right hand of Gods power, this arm of his strength
that he has sworn by, and exercise it self in the glorious acts of it. For
certainly faith is appointed for such a time as this, when the Church is under
grievous extremities. The ordinary afflictions of the Church do not call for
such a work of faith, but when they come to extraordinary that requires such a
power of God for their deliverance, then there is called for a work of faith
proportionable, as Alexander when he was in great danger, Now (says he) there
is a danger fit for the spirit of Alexander to encounter withal. Iam periculu^
pa^ animo Alexitiri.
So when the Church comes to be in any great danger, all the members of it
should say, here is a danger, here is a trouble fit for the spirit of
Christians, fit for the spirits of those that are able to exercise the most
noble and glorious acts of faith.

This glorious exercise of faith, I may even say we are scarce yet for the
present put to it, for reason and sense sees much help, they see that the cause
of God at this day has the better of the adversary; reason I say and prudence
may see far this way. Let us not look upon every difficulty as a thing that
calls for such a mighty glorious work of faith, whereas men by reason and
prudence, and may carry themselves under such difficulties much better then
most of us do. But we do not know but the Lord may call us unto such
difficulties and dangers as requires such a faith as has such a kind of work
as I have spoken of. Let us therefore lay up this Instruction for the time to
come. Again, for great shall be the day of Jezreel,

If the words be read thus (as they are in your Bibles) and yet have reference
to the calamitous time, and grievous extremities of the day of Jezreel, then
there will be these two excellent meditations from thence. The first is,

That Gods bowels of compassion do work toward his Church because of the
greatness of their affliction. Obser.
When their afflictions shall be very great, and the greater they are, the more
do Gods bowels of compassion work toward them. We know the misery of Gods
people in Exo. 3. was a marvailous quickening argument to the compassion of God
(as I may so speak) I have seen, I have seen (says he) the affliction of my
people, and their sorrows, and therefore am come down to deliver them.

If the greatness of the affliction of the Church move the bowels of Gods
compassion, then let not the greatness of affliction hinder our faith. Let not
the greatness of trouble reason down our faith, but rather let it reason up
our faith, for so indeed it should; and so the Saints of God heretofore have
done, by the greatness of the trouble we must reason up our faith as thus: It
is ^^me for thee O Lord to work, for men have almost destroyed thy law; yea the
high time is come for thee to have mercy upon Zion, Afflictions should raise
our hearts.
for thy people begin to favor the dust thereof. What, was this a good
argument, Have mercy upon me, and pardon my sin for it is very great, to move
God withal? Surely then this is a good argument, Deliver us in our
afflictions, for they are very great: for sin makes a great deal more distance
between God and us then afflictions: yet if the greatness of sin shall come to
be put as an argument for Gods mercy and compassion to work, much more the
greatness of afflictions. Yet this is the grace of God in the second Covenant
that even the sins that before made the creature the object of hatred, those
sins come now to make it an object of compassion. So afflictions that before
were part of the curse, they come now to be arguments for the moving of the
bowels of Gods tender compassion toward his people. Another note (if you read
it so, for great is their affliction) is this, the promise is the only support
of the soul, Obser.
and that which carries it through the greatest affliction.

Afflictions are as lead to the net, the promise is as the cork, the promise
keeps above water when the lead pulls down. But I leave these meditations,
though I find many interpreters run this way. And I rather take it as a
further expression of Gods wonderful mercy unto his Church.

For great shall be the day of Jezreel, That is, God has a great day of mercy
for Jezreel. That is the meaning, they shall appoint themselves one head, they
shall be gathered together and be made one, they shall come up out of the land,
why? for God has yet to come a great day of mercy to his pepole, A gr^^^ day
of Jezreel.

And herein therefore God makes use of the name of Jezreel in a good sense.
They that carry it the other way would carry the signification of the name
thus, for great is the day of scattering, of the scattered people, so Iezreel
signifies (as you heard in the beginning of the Chapter) But Jezreel
signifies likewise the seed of God. Before God made use of their name in the
worse sense, that he would scatter them according to their name; now he makes
use of their name in the best sense, they are the seed of God, and there is
great mercy from God for them.

When God is reconciled unto a people, Obser.
he takes all in the best sense and makes the best acception of every thing, as
he does here of the name Jezreel.

We have only these two things to consider of in this expression.

1. That the Saints of God, and the Church, they are Gods Jezreel. That is,
they are the seed of God.

2. That there is for this seed of God a great day.

1. They are the seed of God. The seed of the blessed, and there is a blessing
in them. They are the precious seed that God preserves in the world, and has
done ever since the beginning of the world. They are that seed that preserves
the glory of God in the world. Were it not for a few gracious, holy people in
the world, where would the glory of God be? What would become of it? Those that
are godly, however contemptible in the world, they are the precious seed that
God reserves in the world for great and glorious ends. They are the seed to
preserve the continuation of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the blessed
truths of God; as Isa. 6. 13. The holy seed shall be the substance thereof.
Though they shall be under great afflictions, yet there shall be a holy seed
that shall be the substance thereof, and there shall be his blessing. The godly
are precious seed. Filibatur nomen ejus.
Psalm. 72. 17. His name shall endure from generation to generation: the words
are read by Montanus, His name shall be childed, that is, so continued as
families are continued, one generation after another, one begets another:
and so shall the name of Christ continue in the world, and so it has done. And
though seed be but a handful in comparison of the harvest, so the Saints of
God then were, and yet are but as a handful in comparison of the glorious
harvest that shall be, yet they are very precious before God, and God will make
the world hereafter know that they are the precious ones of God, Isa. 61. 9.
All that see them shall acknowledge them that they are the seed which the Lord
has blessed.

Seed (you know) a man will be careful of that what ever becomes of his other
corn. In the time of dearth the husbandman will rather pinch his own belly,
then have his seed-corne to be spent. So in times of common calamity, of common
dearth, yet Gods care is over his seed; the Saints are (as I may say) Gods
seed-corne to preserve his name in the world, to other generations that are to
come, he will not therefore have them destroyed.

Seed is the most precious of the corn, which is most winnowed and made
clean, and so are the Saints, the clean ones and the most precious ones.

God perhaps does winnow them and fan them more than he does others by the
fannes and winnows of afflictions, why? because they are his seed.

Perhaps other corn that has dross in it, the husbandman will give the
fowls and the cattle that, he bestows not much winnowing upon it, but the
corn that is for seed he winnows that, he would not willingly have a dernell
amongst it. It may be thou complainest thou art more winnowed, more fanned then
other men, perhaps thou art more precious in Gods eyes, thou art to be reserved
as seed, as the seed of the blessed.

The wicked indeed they are seed too, but a corrupt seed, a seed of evil
deers, Esaias, 1. the grandfather was an enemy unto God, yea the great
grandfather, and the father, and the children after him continue enemies to
God. And God in mercy unto his Church does many times cut down the wicked
before they do seed too much. As you that have gardens, if they have weeds in
them, and you see the weeds come up and grow to seed, you think then that it is
time to pull them up, you will not suffer them to seed. God looks upon many
families and sees wretched and sinful men as a seed of evil doers, and sees
they are ready to seed, and if they be not cut down suddenly there will be a
wretched brood of wicked ones in such a family. The wicked are corrupt seed.
This is the reason of Gods sudden cutting down of many wicked families.

But to come to the point that is chiefly intended, that is, That this seed of
the Lord shall have a great day. Great shall be the day of Jezreel.

The men of the world they have their day in which they ruffle it out, and they
have all the doings. Saint Paul seems to speak of this in 1 Cor. 4. 3. he
says there that he did not pass for man's judgment, the word is, (...), for
man's day. Now men have the day, they have all the bravery in the world, well
says Saint Paul, I do not pass formans day, I expect another day, besides
man's day. I know not how it comes to pass to be otherwise translated, you
translate it judgment in your books, but in the Original it is day, Man has
a day.

As men have a day, so shall Gods Saints have a day too. We use to say many
times when we see the Malignant party jocund and merry, surely they hope to
have a day. My brethren be joyful in the Lord, God has a day for you, and a
great day too, Great shall be the day of Jezreel. The beginning of Gods mercy
to his people is called a day of small things, Zach. 4. 10. and that must not
be despised, Let no man despise the day of small things. It was the beginning
of the reformation and deliverance of the people of Judah from their captivity.
1.
But God has a day of great things, and certainly that day shall be honorable.
A day first in which the glory of God shall exceedingly appear, wherein God
shall be (as I may so speak with holy reverence) as it were in his robes: As we
know Princes upon great days put on their robes, so the King of glory shall
have a day for his people, wherein even he himself will put on his robes, Ps.
102. 16. When the Lord shall build up Zion he shall appear in his glory. It
seems while the Church is in affliction, while the witnesses prophecy in
sackcloth, God is as it were clothed in sackcloth, In all their
afflictions he is afflicted, but because God has a day, a great day to his
Churches, he will reserve his robes till then, and when that day comes he
will put on his robes, for when he shall build up Zion (says the Text) then
the Lord shall appear in his glory. A great day it shall be for Jezreel, for
the seed of the Lord.

Secondly, 2,
It shall be a great day, for this day shall be the riches of the world. Mark
that place in Romans 11. 12, speaking of the Jews, If their fall (says he) be
the riches of the world, and their diminishing the riches of the Gentiles, how
much more their fullness? It was a rich mercy to the Gentiles when they were
brought out of darkness, and called into the knowledge of Jesus Christ, here
was riches to the world of the Gentiles: But God has a greater day then that,
for it is spoken here of a day that is to come, that is, their fall was the
riches of the Gentiles, much more their calling in again.

So then there is such a day of calling home the people of God, as shall be the
riches of the Gentiles, the riches of all the world.

Yea Thirdly, 3. That place Dan. 12. 2. opened, not understood of the general
resurrection at the last day and why.
Great shall be this day, for it shall be as a day of resurrection from death
to life: so Dan. 12. 2. Many of them that sleep in the dust shall awake, etc.
It is not spoken of the great resurrection at the last day of judgment, for
First, It is spoken but of some that shall arise:

Secondly, The greatest glory that is here put upon the just, is but to shine
as the stars in the firmament, but at the last day the Saints shall shine as
the sun in the firmament, more and above the stars. Yea,

Thirdly, This that is here revealed to Daniel must be sealed up as a great
secret till the appointed time come; but for the Resurrection at the last day
that is no great secret, that they knew well enough, it is not as a secret to
be shut up and sealed from men till the time appointed come. But this
Resurrection here spoken of, it is to be sealed up as a great secret that was
not known in the world, nor should be much known till the appointed time
should come. And then Lastly, It was promised to Daniel in the 13. ver. that he
should stand up in his lot, as a peculiar and special favor that God stould
bestow upon him. Now it is not such a peculiar and special favor for a Saint
to stand up at the great day, at the last day, this was a favor to Daniel as
an eminent Saint, that he should stand up thus in his lot. Therefore this
Resurrection is the same with this great day of Jezreel, wherein there shall be
such a glorious work of God in calling Israel and Judah together and the
fullness of the Gentiles, that it shall be as the Resurrection from death to
life; so the Apostle calls it likewise in that Romans 11. 15. What shall the
receiving of them be but life from the dead?

4. Great shall be the day of Iezreel, for this shall bring refreshing to all
the Saints, this is the time of the refreshing, Act. 3. 19. There shall be such
things then as will refresh and revive the spirits of all the Saints. Yea,

5. It shall be the day of restitution of all things. Acts 3. 21. Until the
times of rest it (...) of all things come, which God has spoken by the mouth
of all his Prop^^ since the world began. I know it is ordinary carried by many
another way, concerning the last day; but that it cannot be so, it appears,
because that then there shall not be the restitution of all things, but the
annihilation of many things. Further, this speaks of a restitution of all
things, that was spoken of by the mouth of all the holy Prophets. Now the holy
Prophets spoke but very little concerning the day of Judgment, of another life
to come, we read but little of it in the Prophets; and therefore the Apostle
in 2 Timothy 1. 10. says, that life and immortality was brought to light through
the Gospel. Not but that it was known somewhat before, but it was very darkly
known, there was very little spoken of life and immortality in the Prophets;
But this speaks of a time that all the holy Prophets spoke of as an argument
that was the general theme of them all. And indeed there is no argument
whatsoever that is more general among the Prophets, then this great argument of
this great day of Jezreel.

Again, 6. A great day, for it shall be a new creation; a new heaven and a new
earth shall be made when this great day of Iezreel shall come. 6.
Esaias, 66. 17. Behold I create new heavens and a new earth: And in ver. 18. if
you observe it, you shall see what this new heaven and this new earth is: But
be glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create, for behold I create
Jerusalem are joycing, and her people a joy. Those are the new heavens and the
new earth that are to be created: and this is meant of the Church plainly, for
the Text, ver. 21. speaks of building houses, and inhabiting them, and of
planting vineyards, and eating the fruit of them, upon these new heavens and
this new earths creation. And 2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless according to this
promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Now where is this promise? This is usually taken for the
Kingdom of heaven hereafter. But where is this promise? We do not find it any
where but in that place I named before, Esaias, 65. Now it is apparent that
promise does speak of an estate of the Church here in this world; and there is
spoken of a new earth, as well as of a new heaven; if it were only spoken of
new heavens, it had bin another matter, but it speaks of a new earth likewise,
therefore meant of an estate in this world, a new creation of a new heaven and
earth, that is, there shall be such glorious things done by God, as shall
manifest a creating power, as if God did now make new heavens and a new earth.
7.
7. Great shall be the day of Iezreel, for it shall be as another world, when
this day comes. Heb. 2. 5. 6. 7. 8. Unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a certain place
testified, (this certain place is in Psa. 104.) saying: What is man that thou
art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? Thou have made
him little lower then the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and
did set him over the works of thy hands, thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet. This is clearly interpreted of Christ, (as verse. 9.
and so on) that all things must be subjected to hi^^ man, What is man that thou
should regard him? That is, that thou (...) advance the nature of man so far
as to unite it even to thy Son, and pi^^ things in subjection under his feet.
This the Apostle interprets of Christ.

But says he, we see not yet all things put under him, that time is yet to
come, for, says he, We speak of things that concern the world to come.

Therefore (mark my brethren) there must be such a time wherein all things, all
creatures must be put under subjection to Christ, and this is in the world to
come. Not in that world to come where the Saints shall reign gloriously in
heaven, it cannot be meant of that, for the heavens must depart as a scroll,
and many things shall then rather be annihilated, and the Kingdom must then be
given up by Christ to God the Father, so the Apostle says, 1 Cor 15. that is,
when the Saints shall reign gloriously with Christ in heaven.

But here this place speaks of a time when all creatures must come under
subjection to Christ, and it is called the world to come, why? because of the
great change there shall be of things, it shall be (as it were) a new world. As
we call this world from Noah's time a new world, and when we speak of the other
world we call it the old world; so the Scripture calls it, 2 Pet. 2. 5. God
spared not the old world: And Chap. 3. 6. The world that then was being
overflowed with water, perished. So this world that we live in is as the old
world, and there is this day of Jezreel, in which there shall be such a
glorious change, all things being put in subjection under Christ, that it shall
be as it were a new world, God has made an excellent world in which there is
much beauty and glory, and yet his enemies have the rule here; what then will
that world be that God intends for his Saints?

8. Great shall be the day of Jezreel. 8.
It shall be such a great day that all former things shall be even forgotten
because of the luster and glory of that great day. As Isa. 65. 17. The former
heavens and the former earth shall not be remembered nor come into mind; And so
Jer. 3. 16. In those days says the Lord, they shall say no more the Arc of
the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they
remember it; at that time they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, and
all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to
Jerusalem, neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of their evil
hearts ( mark my brethren) In those days the house of Judah shall walk
together, ver. 18. It is apparent that it is spoken of this great day of
Iezreel; for now God says he will gather Judah and Israel together, and here
he says that they shall walk together, and that then former things shall be
forgotten; they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord; heretofore even
the Temple it self the glory of Jerusalem was but as the place of Gods feet,
and the Ark of God was but Gods footstool. 1 Chronicles. 28. 2. It was in mine
heart ( says David) to build a house of rest for the Arc of the Covenant of
the Lord, and for the footstool of our God; and Isa. 60. 13. I will make Zion
the place of my feet glorious. But now in this great day, Jerusalem that was
but Gods foot stool, the place of his feet, shall be Gods Throue; a great day
certainly this shall be when all things shall be thus forgotten.

In the last place, a great day, because it shall be a day after which there
shall be no night. And that you will say will be a great day indeed, after which
the Saints shall be raised to such a state of prosperity and happiness that
shall never fall again, that shall never come to be darkened any more. The
Churches here many times have had some little release, they have had their
days of peace for a while, but it has soon grown to be night, and a dismal
night of darkness. But when this great day shall come it shall be a day that
shall never have night, for so God promises here to his Jezreel, to make it to
be an eternal excellency, and to make Jerusalem an everlasting joy, and Dan. 2.
44. God shall in the days of those Kings set up a Kingdom that shall never be
destroyed, that is, the great day of Jezreel.

The first thing that shall be done in this great day of Iezreel, shall be the
deliverance of the Churches from woeful affliction which they shall be found to
be in a little before. For so the Scripture tells us, Dan. 12. 1. that before
this day there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a
nation even to that same time, and at that time thy people shall be delivered.
I might tell you much how some of the Ancients have spoken of this, that though
it be a point that seems to be somewhat strange to us, Ego autem and qui sunt
per omnia orthodoxae sententiae Christiani, etc.
yet it was one of the most ordinariest things that was known in the primitive
times. It was then so generally acknowledged, that I remember Just in Martyr
(who was but 30. years after Saint John) has such an expression as this, There
is no man (says he) that is of the Orthodox faith in all things, but he does
acknowledge it. And Lactantius in his 7. book, cap. 15. 24. 28. and diverse
other chapters he spends in showing the glory of this great day of Iezreel, but
withal he shows that a little before there shall be most grievous times that
shall fall out, such times says he, as that all right shall be confounded, Vt
jam nostra haec tempora quibus iniquitas and malitia usque ad summum gradi^m
crevit, so licia, and prope aurea possint judicari. Si tum forte su^rint boni,
undeque practae sint scel^ratis, ac divexentur, soli autem mali opulenti sint,
boni vero in omnibus contumeliis atque in egestate, confundetur omne jus and
leges peribunt, nihiltunc quispiam habebit, vi omnia possialebunt. Lactant. l.
7. c. 15.
the law shall perish, no body shall know what is his own, the wicked they shall
have the pre-eminence, and the Saints they shall be persecuted, so that (says
he) though in this our time wickedness is grown to such a height, that a man
would think it could increase no higher, yet in comparison of the time a little
before that great day, these times may be called Golden ages.

These expressions he has, So that great times of affliction will be before
that great day; and it is therefore called a great day, because God appearing
so gloriously in the deliverance of his Church at that day. The Scripture
speaks of wonderful thing that God will do, and show himself marvaylous as he
did in the people of Isreal's coming out of Eg^^t. Who knows but that God now
sends abroad so much of the light of his Gospel, and is so working in the
hearts of men, and gives us such a time of reviving, and calls home so many
young ones as he does purposely because this great day is at hand, and because
before this day we may have a day of dismal darkness? and by this he will
prepare people for those times, God will have a great seed that he intends to
be in the world, therefore so many young people are converted and are so
forward, because I say God means to prepare them by this light that we now
have, for this seed, for this great day. And you that are young may expect to
go through some difficulties and hardship before this great day comes, but be of
good comfort, you may hope to live to see all the glory of this great day, and
God gives you now time that you may lay up, and be fit seed for such a glorious
day as this, that you may not when sufferings come, be found among the number
of the fearful ones, spoken of in Rev. 21. 8. that shall have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone; Those that through base
cowardliness and compliance shall yield to base vile superstitious vanities
shall be cast out amongst dogs when that great day comes. God now gives you a
day that you may see the evil of superstitious vanities, that you may have
truths revealed to you with more freedom then formerly, I say who knows but
this may be to prepare you for that darkness that may come a little before
this great day of Jezreel.

Secondly, 2.
a great day in subduing the adversaries of the Church. Though they shall come
to have a great deal of power a little before; yet when that great day of
Iezreel shall come, they shall be cert^inly all subdued and brought under. Rev.
19. 13. Christ when he shall come in this great day he shall have his garments
dipped in blood, in destroying the wicked and ungodly, and Rev, 15. the Saints
when they see the wicked destroyed as the Egyptians were in the sea, the Text
says that they sung the song of Moses. What was this song of Moses, but the
praising of God for the destruction of their adversaries in the Sea? God has
another Sea to destroy the wicked, and God has a day for his Saints to sing
over the song of Moses again, and especially for the destruction of Popery. My
brethren be not troubled to see Papists make a concourse and flock together,
Romannm nomen horet animus dict re, sed dicamq^ia futurum est toll^tur de
terra. Lactant. l. 7. c. 15
be not troubled at it, for when this day shall come, God will so order things
that his adversaries shall come and flock together, but it shall be that they
may be destroyed, for God has a great feast and a great Sacrifice, and he will
sacrifice them especially. And therefore Lactantius that I spoke of before, and
is one that lived 1300. years since, says he (speaking then of this day) I
have a thing to say, but I even tremble to speak it, but I must speak it, and
what was it? Romanum nomen (says he) de terra tolletur; those are his words,
the Roman name shall be taken off from the earth. He in those primitive times
proph^sied of the destruction of Rome. Perhaps though he did not see it so
clearly, yet God might so order it, as though he understood it not, God might
intend it for these times. God will destroy the enemies of his Churches then.
Yea. Ezekiel. 28. 24. there is a promise to the Saints that there shall beno more
a pricking bryar, nor any grieving thorn of any that are round about them that
despise them, and in another place God says that he will take away the
Canaanite out of the Land.

Further,.3
the third thing that shall be done in this great day, is the glorious presence
of Christ among the Saints, let it be personal or what it will, we determine
not, but thus far we may confidently affirm that there shall be a more
glorious presence of Jesus Christ among his people, Lect. 7,
then ever yet was since the beginning of the world. Rev. 21. 22. The Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb, shall be the Temple of it: and Chap. 22. 3. 4. The
Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him,
and they shall see his face, and Ezekiel. 48. the last words of the Chapter, The
name of Jehovah-shammah, that is, the Lord is there.

Fourthly, the glory that shall be put upon the Saints at that day, shows it
to be a great day. Glory shall be put upon them, first in regard of their
admirable gifts and graces they shall be heightened and enlarged, the weak
shall be as David, and they that are as David shall be as the Angel of God at
that day. The bowing down of their adversaries before them, The high esteem
that they shall have, even in the thoughts and judgments of many great ones of
the world, they shall be called up to heaven, that is, those that are in
highest place and dignity, shall call them up and honor them in that day, yea
the Text says, The Kings of the earth in that day shall came in, and bring
their glory to the Church. Therefore it is apparent, that place Rev. 21. 24.
cannot be understood of heaven, for it is said, the Kings of the earth shall
bring their glory, they shall not bring their glory to the Church, when the
Church shall Terra aperiet f^cunditat^m suam, and ub^rrimas fruges sua spont^
generabit, rupes montium me^^e sudabunt, perrivos vina decurrent, f^umina lacte
inundabunt, ominu natura Letabitur; erepta and liberata a dominio mali, and
impietatis, and eroris; non hestia per hoc tempus sanguine alentur, non aves
praeda sed quieta and placid a crunt omnia. Lactant. l. 7. c. 4.
glorious, fruitful times, so I remember Lactantius speaks of that time, that
the rocks them selves should issue forth honey and precious things; but that we
cannot say, yet that there shall be a wonderful change of all things, and all
creatures brought to a further happiness (even the sensitive creatures as well
as others) then they had before, the Scriptures are clear euough in it. And
literally we are to understand many Scriptures that tend this way concerning
the fruitfulness of the earth, and the outward external glory that there shall
be in the creatures. As upon a great marriage feast or Coronation day, all the
servants of the Prince are in their best array; so when Christ his Bridegroom
shall come and meet with his wife, with his Spouse, all creatures shall be put
into Tun^ qui erunt in corporibus vivi, non morientur, sed per mill annes
infinitam multitudinem generabunt, and evit s^boles eorum sancta, and Deo
charre. Lactant. ibid.
that they shall be as the sand of the sea. But this I have spoken of before at
large. Now put all these things together, and Great shall be the day of Jezreel.

Yea, but shall these things be so? shall they be so?

Though flesh and blood may reason against these things, yet I may apply that
place, Zach. 2. 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, for he is raised
up out of his holy ha^^^tion. Flesh may say, How can these things be?

But let all flesh be silent, for God has made known in his Word, the great
things that he intends to bring to pass. And Zach. 8. 6. Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, if it be marvaylous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in
these days, should it also be marvaylous in mine eyes? says the Lord of Hosts.

It may be applied to this as well as the other. These things may seem
marveilous to your eyes, especially because we have been but little acquainted
with them, but they are not marveilons in the eyes of God. Yea we find it out
of the Word that these things were to be kept hidden till the appointed time
should come, till we draw nearer to that great day; we are not to wonder why
these things have not been opened unto us, for God tells us Dan. 12 that they
were to be sealed up even to the time appointed, and Rev. 10. 11. God tells
John that he must prophe sie again before the Kings of the earth, that is,
before the time of the fulfilling of all things, that book of the Revelation
shall be made out as clear as if John were come to prophecy again before men.
And we hope it is coming, because God begins to let in light that way, and
the morning star seems to begin to arise.

In Zach. 14. 6. you have mention of a day, that we may apply to the present
day that we have now. And it shall come to pass (says the Text there) that
the light shall not be clear nor dark, but it shall be one day which shall be
known to the Lord, not day nor night, but it shall come to pass that at
evening time it shall be light. Mark what shall be in that day, ver. 8. And it
shall be in that day that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; and ver.
9, In that day shall there be but one Lord, and his name one; and then ver. 20.
In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses holiness to the Lord; and
ver. 21. In that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the
Lord of Hosts. Certainly my brethren these Scriptures speaks of a glorious day
that is a coming, but yet in the beginning of it is just like such a day as we
have now for the present, wherein the light is neither clear nor dark: It is
true, not long since it was dark, now this darkness begins to be a little
dispelled, but it is not clear yet, many things for the present darken the
light, and there is opposition and many dampes upon the hearts of Gods people,
and things go not o^^s we desire; but blessed be God it is not night with us,
though it be not (...) day it is not dark as it was, though it be not as
clear as we desire; therefore this is now a day which is neither clear nor
dark, but even as it were twilight. Well but it shall be one day that is one
special day, and indeed it is our day now, it is the greatest day that ever yet
England had. It shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, a day
wherein the Lord has great thoughts and purposes to do great things, and
certainly this our day is known to the Lord, great things God is about to do
for his Churches, and laying a foundation of glorious things for the good of
his people. And then mark, though it be neither day nor night, yet at the
evening time it shall be light. What a strange expression is here? It shall be
a duskie cloudy day all day, and then a man would think that at evening it
should be quite dark, what to be cloudy at noone and to be darkish at three or
four of the clock in the afternoon, what then will it be in the evening?
surely then it must needs be more dark: No, though it be not clear now,
though it be a cloudy day and part of it dark, In the evening time it shall be
light.
yet at the evening time it shall be light: When it shall be least expected to
have light, and when we shall most fear darkness, when we shall be ready to
conclude, O our day is gone, once indeed God did bring a day to England, a
comfortable day though it was a little dark, yet there was a glorious light in
comparison of what we had before, but now it is grown toward evening, the
evening begins to shut upon us, we looked for light but behold darkness.
Perhaps many will be complaining, if they see things go on with any difficulty
and opposition they will be ready to have their hearts sink within them, and to
cry out, now our day is gone and the evening is coming, and we must look for
darkness, yea and fear a dismal darkness. Now my brethren, be of good
comfort, for at evening time it shall be light; when we think it shall be
evening, when it is most unlikely to be light, then shall the light of the Lord
break forth most gloriously: For whenever this day of Iezreel comes, there
must be such a glorious work of God as may magnify his name before the eyes of
all men, and therefore at evening it shall be light.

And in that day living waters shall go out from Jerusalem: We have had some
drops of living waters in this our day, but there is a day a coming wherein
living waters shall even flow out of Jerusalem.

Now to wind up all. There is a day for the Saints, a rest for the people of
God, a day wherein God will deliver them from all afflictions. I have met with
one, that speaking of the Sabbath, that the Jews might kindle no fire upon
their Sabbath, because that rest was to signify the rest of the Saints, he
applies it thus: That was (says he) a type that there is such a time of rest
for the Saints, that they shall be delivered from all fiery trials, all their
afflictions shall be gone and taken away: Great shall be the day of Iezreel.

The consideration of this (me thinks) might be a strong argument to draw in
all people to the ways, Exhor^at. to come in to embrace godliness, to joy^e
with the Saints.
to the love of godliness and Religion; to come and join with the Churches in
appointing Christ head over them.

All you wicked ones that has forsaken the Lord hitherto, come in and join
now, and submit unto Jesus Christ as your Head, for great shall be the day of
Iezreel. There is a great day for the Church of God, a day of glory, a day of
abundance of wonderful mercy of God to the Churches. They shall have their
day; come you in and embrace Religion, that you may partake of their glory.
Certainly the Saints of God shall have the better of it: shall have the day of
all the world, let the world strive against them what they can. Every man
desires to follow the stronger party and to cleave to that: would you cleave to
the stronger part? Cleave to the Saints of God, to the Church, for certainly it
is the stronger part; It is a going up, it is rising, and will rise more and
more till it be risen unto the height. Though there be some opposition, yet it
is such as shall make the glory of the day so much the more.

Those men that (...) shall stand to plead for Antichrist, and to oppose the
work that God is about, certainly they are men borne out of time, borne in an
ill hour. Your Papists and superstitious people that heretofore stood for that
way, they prospered in their way, because the day of God was not so near, but
the day of his patience in permitting Antichrist to continue, was then. But
do thou come now? what superstitious now? what opposing the work of God now?
when God is coming out to fight against Popery and superstition, when God is
about to do such great things for his Churches as he certainly is, Thou
fightest against God, and God will fight against thee, and thou shall be
thrown upon thy back, Thou art borne in the worst time that possibly could
be, worse then all the adversaries of the truth in former times. And if there
be such a day, let us be willing to suffer for a while,

Thirdly, Let us study these things. These things are useful for people in

Mark that place, Ezekiel. 40. 4. It is spoken of the glorious times of the
Gospel, especially of these times I am speaking of; where God says to the
Prophet, Behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine
heart upon all that I shall show thee. And what did God show him? he showed him
the measure of the Temple and all the glorious things that there should be in
the Church in future times. So I say to you my brethren concerning that I have
spoken of the great day of Jezreel; behold with your eyes, look into Gods book
and see what is said there (for I have named but little) and hear with your
ears, and set your hearts upon what has been set before you. So in Isa. 41.
20. You have a place somewhat like this, speaking of the mercies of God to his
Church in latter times, says the Text, That they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done this,
and the Holy One of Israel has created it.

Mark how one word is heaped upon another, that they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand what God would do for his people. And when God came to
reveal the glorious things he intended for his Churches in future times in the
book of the Revelation (which is the special book that declares this unto us.)
Mark how the Lord begins; It is said that God gave this first to Christ;
secondly Christ to the Angel, thirdly the Angel to John, and then there is
pronounced a blessing to him that reads and hears the words of this prophecy
and understands it. What a solemn way of blessing is here! There is not such
an expression in all the book of God: where have you a blessing so solemnly
proclaimed to the reading and hearing of any of the books of God as to that
book? Therefore though they are things that seem to be above us, yet certainly
God would have us to inquire into these things. It is the fruit of the purchase
of the blood of Christ to open these seals.

Rev. 5. 9. we read that there was no man in heaven nor in earth that was able
to open the book and to loose the seals thereof, only the Lamb that was
slain and that has redeemed us unto God by his blood, he was only worthy to
open the seals. It is a fruit I say of the slaughter of Christ and of his
blood, and therefore cry to him for the opening these things to thee. And
though thou be very weak in regard of parts, and think with thy self,
How can I understand such things as these? know that it is Christ that through
his blood comes to open these seals, and seeing it is a fruit of his blood,
it is no matter whether thou art weak or strong if he come to open them to
thee: as Ier. 13. 2. says God to the Prophet. Call unto me and I will show
thee great and mighty things which thou know not; so I say to you, be a
praying people, call upon God and he will cause you to understand great and
excellent things that you have not known.

Isa. 60. Arise, arise, shake off thy dust, for the light is come and the glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee, So I may say to the Churches now, Arise arise
shake of the dust of your earthly affections, for the light of God is now ready
to arise upon you; Now sur sum corda, now lift up your hearts above the things
of the world.

We read in Rev. 4. of the four living creatures that appeared unto John,
the first was like a Lion, and the second like an Ox, and the third had a face
as a Man, and the fourth was like a flying Eagle. They are (according to the
interpreta^ion that reverend Brightman gives) to set out unto us the four
states and conditions of the Church. The Primitive times were Lyon-like for
their valor: the second age like an Ox to bear the burdens of Antichrist,
the third had a face as a man, that stood for their liberties and would not be
under such slavery, and they are but times: and then the fourth as an Eagle
that sored aloft: In the state of the Church hereafter they shall be like an
Eagle, have heavenly hearts, no such drossy, base, earthly hearts as we have
now. Labor we even now to be so that we may be fit for that day.

Bride groom against his coming. How shall we prepare? The clothing that
then shall be, shall be white linen, which is the righteousness of the
Saints. That great Doctrine of our justification by the righteousness of
Christ shall be the great business of that day, in which the glory of the
Saints shall much consist, and they shall be clothed with that, it shall be
clearly understood of all men, they shall be ashamed to rest upon duties and
ordinances as now they do. Let us study the Doctrine of the righteousness of
Christ aforehand, for that is like to be our clothing at that day, that is the
white linen of the Saints which shall be their glory. Let us prepare our Lamps
and keep them all burning and shining, the oil not only of ju^^^cation, but
sanctification, active, stirring in our hearts, that so we may (...) to
entertain the Bridegroom whenever (...) (...).

And all of you labor now to instruct your children in the knowledge of God
and of Christ, bring them up in the fear of the Lord that they may be seed for
that day. Acquaint them with these things, for though perhaps you may be dead
and gone before this great day, yet they may live to see it; therefore
catechize them, and instruct them, and drop into them those Principles that may
fit them for the meeting of JESUS CHRIST their Bridegroom,

To conclude all. Let us be all praying Christians. It is that which is charged
upon us in Isa. 62. 6. All you that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence
and give him no rest, till he establish, till he make Jerusalem apraise in the
earth. God has a day to set up Jerusalem as the praise of the whole earth, Oh
be praying, praying Christians every one of you, and give God no rest till he
effect this. And remember God of all his promises, search the Prophets, search
the book of God, and urge God with his promises to the Church in this way. And
you that are the weakest, be not discouraged in your prayers, and you may be a
means to further and hasten this great day of Jezreel. Psalm. 102. 17. The
Psalmist had spoken before of Gods building up Zion, and certainly that Psalm
is a Prophecy of the glorious times of the Church that shall be, mark what
the Text says, The Lord shall regard the prayer of the destitute, and shall
not despise their prayer; speaking of those that shall live in those times a
little before this day of Iezreel shall be, The Lord shall regard the prayer of
the destitute: the word that is translated destitute, (...)
it signifies in the Hebrew, a poor shrub in the wilderness, a poor shrub
that the foot of every beast is ready to tread down, and that poor shrub that
perhaps is despicable in the eyes of the world, and despicable in his own eyes,
yet says the Text, the Lord shall regard the prayer of that poor shrub. Is
there ever a poor shrub though never so destitute, so despicable in the eyes of
the world or in thine own eyes? yet be thou a praying Christian, a praying
soul, praying for those things, and God will regard thy prayer, he will not
despise thy prayer. Perhaps thou art ready to despise thy prayers thy self, but
God will not despise them, let all our hearts be lifted up, and let us all cry
with the Church, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. O let this day come, for great
shall be the day of Jezreel.

HOSEA, CHAP. 2.
The First Lecture.
CHAP. 2. VER 1. 2. Say (...) your brethren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah.

Pled with your mother, plead; for she is not my Wife, neither am I her
husband, etc.


SOme join the first verse of this Chapter to the end of the former: and
(according to a sense that may be given of the words, agreeable to the scope of
the latter part of the former Chapter) it may seem more fit to be made the end
of that, then the beginning of this.

In the latter end of the former, God was in a way of promising mercy to his
people, that those that were not his people should be his people, and those
that had not received mercy should receive mercy. Now he calls upon all whose
hearts were with God, to speak to one another of this great favor of God to
his people, for their mutual encouragement, and for the praise of his Name. As
if he should say, Well, you have been under dreadful threats of God, your sins
have called for dreadful things; but my grace is free, and it is rich and
powerful, therefore you that were not my people, and have deserved to be for
ever cast off from being my people, you that had not obtained mercy shall
obtain mercy; Say to your brethren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah, that
is, O you that are godly, speak one to another, and tel^ one another, for the
quickening of one another hearts; of this great favor of God of his free
grace, Oh say, Ammi, Ammi, the people of God, Ruhamah, Gods mercy: We were not
his people, but now Ammi again, God has promised to make us to be his people;
we were rejected from mercy, but mercy is come again, now Ruhamah, O the mercy
of God, O that free grace of our God, that we that have been: so vile, so
provoked the eyes of his glory, we that have so sinned against mercy it self,
yet mercy should thus follow us, to make us his people, and to save us from his
wrath! Obser. A good thing to speak of Gods loving kindne^^^^.
It is a good thing to speak of the loving kindness of our God. Psalm. 92. 1.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to be telling of the
goodness of God in the morning, and his faithfulness every night. That Psalm
is appointed for the Sabbath. It is a work of the Sabbath to be speaking one to
another of the goodness of God: Especially in this case, when a people were
afraid that they should have been for ever rejected, that now God should call
them again, 1, (...) ct
Ammi, my people, and say now again that he will have mercy upon them. Psalm.
145. 4. 5. One generation shall praiss thy name to another, and shall declare
thy mighty acts; I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy
wondrous works.

Mark what the ways of God are toward his Church, when he comes in the ways
of mercy; they are wondrous works of God, they are the mighty acts of God, they
are such wherein the honor of God appears, yea they are the honor of his
Majesty, yea they are the glorious honor of his Majesty^ There is Majesty,
honor of Majesty, glorious honor of Majesty, mighty works of God, wonderful
works of God. When these appear, these are to be declared indeed; And for them
to be able to say to one another, Ammi and Ruhamah, it was to declare the
wonderful works of God, and the glorious honor of his Majesty. Yea it
follows further in that Psalm, verse 6.

Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts, and I will decla^e thy
greatness. And verse 7. They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great
goodness. E^ucta^u^t, so Arias M^ntanus renders it, they shall not be able to
keep it in, but break ^orth in the memory of thy goodness.

Happy are those people that God g^ants such subjects of discourses unto, that
they may say one to another, to their brethren and sisters, Ammi, and Ruhamah.
It was not long since, that when we met with our brethren, we could not have
such a subject of discourse as this is, but usually when Christians met
together after their Salutations, their first question was; Oh! what shall we
do? what shall we do? what course shall we take? All the News almost that was
in the Kingdom, and the subject of discourses (specially among the Saints) was
this, Such a Minister silenced in such a place, such a one banished in another
place, such a one imprisoned in another place, such a one High-Commissioned in
another place, such signs of the wrath of God upon us, we are afraid that God
is going, if he be not quite gone already, we are afraid that he will not only
reject us from being his people, but reject us from being a people upon the
fac^ of the earth.

But blessed be God, he has changed the subject of our d^scourses. Now Gods
ways have begun to be toward us as if he intended to make us again to be his
people. Now we may when we meet together have plentiful subjects of discourses
about Gods grace and mercy, to say Ammi, Ruhamah, O the Lord manifests
goodness to an unworthy Nation and we have hope that yet he will own us to be
his people, we have hope that yet he will show mercy to us though never so
unworthy. Who would have thought ever to have seen and heard of such things as
we have seen and heard? who would have thought ever to have seen the hearts
of the adversaries so daunted, So discon^se of Gods mercies, as our hearts may
be sanctified by that discourse.
their power so curbed, their rage so quelled, the wicked in their own works
so ensnared; their hopes so disappointed? who would ever have thought to have
seen the Saints so rejoicing, their liberties so enlarged, their hearts and
expectations so raised? This is the free grace of God: Ammi, Ruhamah, we have
obtained mercy, God has dealt with us in abundance of grace.

This we must not discourse of when we mere, Chap. 2.
as matter of news only, but we must speak of it to the praise of God, for
the sanctifying of our hearts. Our brethren in Ireland have another subject of
their discourses at this day. When a brother or a sister meet this is the
subject of their discourse, Oh my Father, my mother taken such a day by the
Rebels and cruelly masacred, such a kinsman, such a kinswoman taken such a day
and fearfully murdered, such houses were fired, such Cities and Towns were
taken, and with what gaftly visages do you think they look one upon another,
when they are thus relating these sad things? Esa. 9. 8
The word of God came out against England, but it has lighted upon Ireland. O
unworthy are we of these mercies we enjoy, if when we meet together our
discourses be frothy and light, about vain and trivial things, when God has
given us such a subject of discourse as he has done by such gracious, and
wonderful, and glorious ways of his mercy toward us in this latter age.

Say to your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah. The mercies of God are
to be inculcated upon our spirits, Obser.
we should not only tell them one to another, but again and again inculcate
them upon our hearts. Indeed Gods mercies at first they seem to take
impression upon our spirits, but the impression is soon vanished.

Say to your brethren. This is (according to some) Let Judah to whom God showed
special mercy, say to Israel, to the ten Tribes that were more threatened then
Judah, for Judah was not so threatened as Israel was, to be cast off from being
the people of God. Let Judah rejoice in this, that their brethren are received
again to mercy.

A gracious heart should rejoice in Gods mercies toward others. Obser.
Gods mercies are an infinite Ocean, there needs no envying there, no grieving
for that which others have. Indeed when one man is richer then another, another
is ready rather to envy him then to rejoice: A Courier is ready to envy the
favor that another has, why? because these are narrow things.

But when we come to Gods mercy there is room enough there, that soul that
has been made partaker of mercy, counts it a great happiness that any way
the mercy of God may be magnified.

Say to your brethren and sisters, etc. These whom God has received unto
mercy, Obser.
we should receive into brotherly affection. Has God showed mercy to such and
such, well may we account them our brethren and sisters then. If God takes
them to mercy we must be ready willingly to take them into brotherly society.

But now if we take these words as the beginning of the second Chapter, then we
shall see them carried in some different way. And taking of them so (as most
do) I shall first show you the scope of the Chapter in the parts of it, and
then show in what sense the words may be carried, as the beginning of this
Chapter.

The scope of thi^^ ^ond Chapter is much according to that of the first, viz.
(...) show unto (...) their sin and their danger, and secondly to promise
Gods abundant grace and mercy again. Le^ct. i
The first is especially from the beginning to the 14. verse, and the second,
from the 14. verse to the end of the Chapter. Yet this is not an exact
division. neither can we give an exact division of this no more than we could
give of the other. Why? Because things are so intermixed; for they are the
patheticall expressions of a loving, and yet a provoked husband, and therefore
when he is coming to ^^^^vince his spouse who has dealt falsely with him, and
to show her her sin and danger, whilst he is manifesting of his displeasure,
the bowels of his compassion begin to yerne, and he must have some expression
of love in the midst of all; then when he has had some expressions of love,
he falls again to rebuke her and to show her her sin again, and then his bowels
yerne again, and he comes to expressions of love again. We have found it so
in the former Chapter, and shall find it so in this: For though the beginning
of this Chapter to the 14. verse is specially spent in convincing of sin and
threatening of Judgment, yet in the sixth and seventh verses there is promise
of mercy and favor, and expressions of love, and then in the eighth verse he
goes to threatening again, and in the 14. ver. begins to express mercy again.

As God does in this case, so should we. When we rebuke others that are under
us, we should so rebuke them, as yet to manifest love to them, and when we
manifest love, to do it so as yet to take notice what is amiss and to reprove
them. Many parents know not how to rebuke their children, but they do it, so as
that there is nothing but bitterness; and they know not how to manifest their
love but they do it so as that there is nothing but cockering and immoderate
indulgency. God mixeth both together.

Say to your brethren, etc. Take it for the beginning of the first part of this
second Chapter, for the showing of them their sin, and rebuking them, What
then must be the sense and scope of the words, Say to your brethren, Amm^, etc.

Then it is carried thus. Some thing must be supplied for the making up of the
full sense. As if God should have said, Oh Ammi, you whom I have reserved to be
my people, you to whom I have showed mercy, there is yet remaining a handful
of you, while you remain to be may people, and others cast off, and you
obtaining mercy, and others rejected, let it be your care to exhort, persuade,
convince, use all the means you can to bring your brethren and sisters on to
that grace of God you have received: Say to your brethren, say, it is not
expressed what they should say, but by that which follows we may understand
what the meaning of God is, when he says Plead with your mother, etc. that
is, you that have received mercy and are my people, there is a remnant of you;
do not you think that so long as you escape and are well enough your selves, no
great matter what becomes of others, oh no, but let your hearts be much toward
your brethren and sisters, let your bowels yerne toward them, oh seek if it be
possible to draw them unto God that they may receive mercy too, labor to
convince them, say and speak to them that they may not yet stand out against
God and be obstinate; say to your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah,
you that are Ammi, and you that have received mercy do you speak to your
brethren and sisters. And this affords unto us many excellent Observations.

As First, That in the most corrupt times of all, God does use to reserve a
people, Obs. 1.
to deliver some from the guilt of the general corruptions of the place where
they live. Obs. 2. Reliqui mihi septem milliaonon ait relicta sunt vel
reliquer^nt se, sed reliqui reliquiae per electionem gratiae. August, de bono
perfev. l. 2. c. 18.
For so this Ammi and Ruhamah, were a remainder, that God did deliver thorough
his grace from the general corruptions of the place where they were; for
otherwise they had not been fit to have said to their brethren or to have
spoken to their sisters in this sense.

Secondly, those whom God delivers from the guilt of general corruptions are
to be acknowledged the people of God, such as have receiv^^ mercy from God in a
special manner; It is free grace that has made this difference between you
and others; Augustine in his second book concerning preservation, has a good
note upon that Scripture, 1 King. 19. 18. I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, God says not, there are left 7000, or they have left themselves, but I
have left; It is the special work of God to preserve any for himself in evil
times.

Thirdly, the Lord takes special notice of such who are thus by his grace
preserved in evil times. Ammi, Ruhamah, There are a people amongst these that
are Ammi, my people, that have obtained mercy from me, mine eyes are upon them,
my heart is toward them; there are a number that have kept their garments
undefiled even in Sardis, and I will remember this for ever for their good.
Obs. 3.
Noah was a just man, prefect in his generation, Genesis 6. 9. and what then?
Chap. 7. 1. Come thou and all thy house into the Ark, for thee have I seen
righteous before me in this generation.

Fourthly, Obs, 4.
Such as keep themselves from the corruptions of the times wherein they live,
they and only they are fit to exhort and reprove others.

Those that are not guilty themselves as others are, are fit to speak to
others, to say to their brethren and to their sisters. They are fit to exhort,
who perform the duties themselves that they exhort unto. Turpe est doctori cum
culpa redarguit ipsum. Obs. 5.
We say it is a shameful thing for one to be teaching if he be guilty himself;
he cannot with freedom of spirit, say to his brethren and sisters.

Fifthly, It is the duty of those whom God has delivered from the corruptions
of the times, to seek to draw all others to God; to seek to convince others
of their evil ways, and so bring them in to the truth. We ^eade Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin to lie upon him. Surely those who have
obtained mercy, have the impression of Gods mercy upon their spirits, they are
far from having hateful hearts; now it is hatred for any to suffer sin to
lie upon his brother, and not to do what in him lies to help him. It is
desperate pride for men to triumph over others in their falls, and it is wicked
cruelty to suffer others to lie down when they are fallen if they can raise
them. (...)-faring men who are delivered themselves from shipvvrack, and all is
(...) with them, if they see another ship ready to sink in the sea; and those
on shipboard shoot out to have them come to help to save them, though they be
never so far remote, yet if it should be known that they decline to go out
to help them, all the seamen would cry out shame on such, and be ready to
stone them for etting a Ship sink when they might have helped: Certainly the
same case-it is with those to whom God has show ed mercy, if others lie in
their sins they do not what they can for their help.

6. Say to your brethren and to your sisters. Obs. 6.
The nearer the relation of any is to us, the more should our compassion be
toward them, in seeking to deliver them from their sins; There is more
likelihood of prevailing with your brethren and sisters. Has God converted
you, and have you a brother or a sister not converted, or any of your kindred?
go and say to them, tell them of the danger of their evil ways, tell them of
the excellency of the ways of God, exhort them to come in, to make trial of
the blessed ways of God.

When a brother speaks to a brother, or a sister to a sister, it is the
bringing a hammer of gold to work upon gold, Obs. 7.
and of silver to work upon silver.

Lastly, Say to your brethren and sisters. Exhortations unto and reprehensions
of others should be with much love and meekness. Say to your brethren and
sisters, yet look upon them as brethren and sisters, though they have not yet
obtained the like mercy that you have. Saint Paul, 2 These. 3. 15. speaking of
one that walks inordinately, from whom we are to withdraw in respect of any
private familiar society, yet says he, admonish him as a brother. Those who
reprove and admonish others with bitterness of spirit and evil speaking, are
like a foolish fowler who seeks to get the foul, but he goes on boysterously,
and makes a noise; the way (if he would get it) is to go on quietly, softly,
and gently; so the way to gain a brother, is not by boisterousnesse and
violence, but sofness, and gentleness. It is observed by some of the Jews out
of that 25. Exodus ver. 3. where the matter of the Tabernacle is said to be
gold, and silver, and brass: you do not see nor hear of iron to be required
for the building of it; No, iron, rigid, severe, hard dispositions are not fit
either to be matter of the Tabernacle themselves, or to draw others to be the
matter of it.

Yea but if saying will not be enough to do the deed, then there follows
pleading. That is the second. Say to them, admonish them, exhort them, but what
if that will not do? do not leave presently, but Plead, yea and Plead with
your mother too, not only with your brethren and with your sisters, but with
your mother.

Plead with your mother, plead, for she is not my wife, etc.

Plead, Litigate, so some, Contendite, strive, the old Latin has Iudicate,
Judge your mother. (...)
It may seem to be a hard and harsh phrase at first, but we shall labor to
acquaint you with the mind of God in it.

Here is an exhortation even to the private members of the Church, to all, one
o^ other, to plead even with their mother, to plead even with the Church of
which they are members, and so to plead as to deal plainly and to tell her
that she is not the wife of God. Plead with her,

First, here we see Gods condescension, that he will have us plead the ease
betwixt others and himself, Obs. 1.
as Esaias, 5. 3. Judge between me and my Vineyard, faith God. This shows the
equity of Gods dealing. Plead the case, perhaps some of you might think. I
deal hardly with your mother in so rejecting of her, in bringing such
judgments upon her. No, not so, but plead you the case, plead rather with her
then complain of me for my dealing with her.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
Plead with her. When exhortations and admonitions will not do, we must
strengthen our selves and falla pleading. If there be any way more powerful
then exhortation and admonition we should take that way, and not presently give
over, for though it is not said here, Plead with your brothers and sisters,
yet they are included in this when he says, Plead with your mother.

Thirdly, It is a hard thing to convince Idolaters of their sin, and of the
Justice of God coming against them for their sin. Plead with your mother,
plead, she will not acknowledge it, she will stand it out, and say she has
not done so ill, she is not worthy to be cast off, you had need plead and
plead hard with her, she will stand out else: Idolaters have so many
distinctions, so many evasions, so many shifts and pretenses, that it is a
thousand to one ever almost to prevail with them. When you deal with Papists
about worshipping of Images they will have such distinctions of worship,
Idolaters hardly convinced.
perse, and worship per accidens, of honoring the creature, Propter se, and
propter aliud, Proprie, improprie, and a hundred of such kind of distinctions
and evasions, till they distinguish out the truth, and scarce understand
themselves what they mean by their distinctions. Hence Idolaters scorn at
judgments threatened, they think only a company of foolish and timorous
people fear such things, they cry out, say they, that we are Idolaters,
Idolaters and grievous judgments of God are coming ^^on us, a company of
foolish melancholy people they fear their own (...). Was it not so heretofore
when we were going on in the ways of Idolatry space? Was it not the jeere and
scorn of all such spirits? If any did seem but to make a question about
Idolatry, they would never be convinced of such a sin, nor never fear any
judgments hanging over our heads, Though God has prevented it through his
grace, and has showed his prero^ation in the ways of his mercy, yet certainly
there was sign enough of dreadful wrath hanging over us, and what yet may be
we know not.

Fourthly, Obs, 4.
Plead with your mother, plead. It is a (...) of forensecall word, and
carries with it such a kind of pleading, as must be a convincing, a powerful
pleading. God loves to have people dealt withal in a convincing way. The Lord
does not cry out to the Prophet or to these other good people that were free
from that Idolatry that the people of Israel were generally corrupted withal,
he does not say, I say, bid them go and terrify them, and cry out of the^
(...) speak bitterly unto them; but (...) and plead^ the cause with them,
seek to convince them, doc not go and (...) upon (...) (...) them.

God loves to have people dealt withal in a convincing way, Let not therefore
any think it enough either Minister or other, that they can speak terribly to
people, and cry out of the sins of the people, but let them labor to
convince them, to deal with them as rational creatures, and to take away
their secret objections and their secret shifts, and to make their sins
plain before their consciences. A convincing Preacher and a convincing
Christian is such a one as may be very useful, and do abundance of good to
the Church of God.

Fifthly, Plead with your mother. It is very fit that God should have some to
plead for him, Obser. 5
to plead his cause as well as the devil has to plead his. The devil never
wants pleaders. When was there ever such an ill cause came to a Bench, or to
any society in any public way, but found some that would plead for it? A
shame that the worst cause in the world should have pleaders for it, and many
times the cause of God suffers by men's being mute that should plead for it.
God will take this very ill at their hands.

It is true, God says, he will plead his own cause, and we are bound to
pray according to that of the Psalmist, that God would arise and plead his
own cause. And indeed if God had not risen and pleaded his own cause better
then we did, his cause would have been in the dirt before this.

Though it is true, God is raising up his own cause, no thank to us; we have
cause to lay our hands upon our mo^thes as guilty, in that we did so basely and
cowardly let the cause of God suffer, and God appearing so immediately and
gloriously, is the rebuking of us because we did not, we would not before
stand up to plead^ his cause.

Sixthly, Obser. 6
When any have found mercy from God, the sweetness of that mercy so warmeth
their hearts, that they cannot endure to see that blessed God be dishonored.
Plead you Ammi, Ruhamah; what, my people, those to whom I have showed mercy,
what though it be your mother, what though it be any dear to you, what though
they be great ones, though they be a multitude, yet plead, plead for me
against them, this note is grounded upon the title that God gives them who
should plead Ammi, and Ruhamah, those that are Gods people, those that have
found mercy from God.

Gods mercy is so sweet, it does so inflame them, that they must plead for God
against any in the world.

Seventhly, Obser. 7
Plead with your Mother. That is, with the Church, called a Mother, because as
the Mother is as it were the root from whence children come, divides her
self into branches; so the community of a Commonwealth or a Church, any
community, is called in Scripture a Mother, and the particulars they are as
several branches that grow from that root, they are as children. Therefore
you have such expressions in Scripture as the daughters of Jerusalem
oftentimes, and there is no great difference between calling Jerusalem, that
is, the State, Mother; or Jerusalem, that is, the Church, Mother, for indeed
the Church and State were mixed both together. From this expression we learn
that it is lawful for children to plead with their parents. Though it is true,
this aims at a higher thing then what is between natural children and their
parents, yet from the expression this is intimated and implied, That it is
lawful for children to plead with their parents. If children see their
parents in an ungodly way, they may lawfully plead with them, Children may
plead with parents.
and their parents are bound to hearken to their pleading Gods cause. It is a
speech of Tertullians, the begetter is to be beloved, and we may add, he is to
be honored, but our Creator is to be preferred. Amandus Generator, sed
praeponendus Creator.
Children must give due respect to their parents, yet so as preferring the Lord
before them; and if the parents go against God, even their children must plead
against them. As it is a great sin for parents to prefer their children
before God, so it is a great sin for children to prefer their parents before
God. Do not think I come to set children against their parents in this, be but
content to hear to the end (though I will not be long in this observation) and
you will be convinced I suppose of it, that it is fit for children to plead
with their parents when they go from God.

Thus we see it was with Jonathan, 1 Samuel 19. 4. there you shall find that he
pleaded with his father when he saw him so furious and in such a passionate
mood as he was in, and in such a cruel way toward poor David, Let not (says
he) ^he King sin against his servant: Let not the King, he gives him very
respectufll words, and shows his due honor to his father, Let not the King
sin against his servant, and then goes on and tells his father of the good
service David had done, and that David did not deserve such ill usage from him.
Thus when children shall see their Fathers or Mothers to be in a f^^ous rage or
passion, it is fit enough for them, if they come in an humble and subm^ssive
way, in a beseeching way, I be seech you father or mother, consider that by
these distempered passions, in stead of helping your self, you sin against
God, you have known it by experience that you have often in such passion so
broken out, that many sins have broken from you, and you have grieved for it
afterward, oh do not again that which your Conscience has so often checked
you for. If children should come thus in an humble and submissive way to plead
with their parents, they do no more then their duty, and their parents are
bound to hearken to them in it.

I confess they should be very careful in keeping their due respect to their
parents, and not speak mallapertly, but with all reverence and submission to
them, and to speak privately too, if possibly it can be, not to divulge their
parents weaknesses. You know Cham was cursed for discovering his fathers
nakedness, though he was drunk he did not show his due respect at that time to
his father; but if he had sought to cover his fathers nakedness, and after had
come and pleaded the case with him, certainly he had not been cursed, but
received a blessing.

Yea and there is a great deal of reason that children should plead with heir
parents, and that you should give them leave so to do, because you know,
children are the worse for your sins, God thr^tneth to visit the sins of
the parents upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation there are
many threatenings against children for the sins of their parents, therefore it
concerns your children that they should plead with you, and that you should
suffer them. For you say, Sirrah what have you to do with me? What does it
concern you? Yes, the child if he does it in modesty and humility may say, O
father it does concern me, I may fare the worse for your sins, God may come
upon me for them, therefore give me leave I beseech you to plead the cause of
God with you. And if you will not give your children leave in this, they may
rise up as witnesses against you another day. If children in an humble and
submissive way plead with their parents, and they will not hearken unto them
then, a very good pleading will be for them to burst out into tears before
their parents, and it is a very suitable and powerful pleading, that when
children cannot prevail in an humble and submissive way, then to burst out
into tears before them.

We read in the story of King Edward the sixth, when Cranmer and Ridley came to
him, and were so earnest to let him give way to his sister the Lady Mary to
have Mass, he stood out and pleaded the case with them, and told them it was a
sin against God, they used many carnal arguments to persuade the King, but
he withstood them a great while; at length when King Edward (who was but a
child about 15 years of age) saw he could not prevail with pleading against
those grave men, he burst out into tears, and that so prevailed with them,
that they went away and concluded that the King had more Divinity in his little
finger, then they had in all their bodies, and so yielded to him. Certainly in
such pleadings the heart of a parent must needs be much hardened if he will not
break and yield to his child. You that are parents, look upon your childrens
pleading with you, and consider with your selves, what does God send one out of
my loins, out of my own womb to come and plead the cause of God with me, to
draw me from the ways of sin, and to do good to my soul for ever, surely it
is a mercy to have one out of my own bowels to stand for the cause of God;
surely God is in it, I see this child in other things walks humbly and
obediently unto me. As indeed you that are children, that plead with your
parents, you need be careful so much the rather to be obedient to them and not
take upon you in an unseemly manner to check and reprove them; and then it
cannot but convince the heart of a parent. What a blessing will it be to your
children if you that have received your natural life from your parents, should
be a means of the spiritual and eternal life of them.

Thus much for the expression. Plead with your Mother.

Now for that which is chiefly aimed at, Plead with your mother, that is, the
Church and State. Hence the Note is,

Those that are Godly should not only sacrifice themselves to do good to
themselves or friends in private, Obs. 9.
but they are to labor to do good to the public too. Not only say to your
sisters and to your brethren, but plead with your mother. There are many
narrow spirited men, who if they can discharge as they think their consciences
with their families, and can plead with their servants and children, or some of
their own near acquaintance perhaps, they have done enough, though for the
public they take no care at all. We must endeavor the good of the public.
Hence it is apparently employed, that all those that are members of any Church,
ought to be men of knowledge; why? because they are such as are called upon to
plead with their Mother. It is not for an ignorant Sot to plead with a Church
of God; and yet such should be all the members of every Church, Obs. 10.
as in some cases they should plead with their mother.

Lastly, which indeed is the maine Observation of all, God gives liberty to
some private members of Churches, Obs. 11.
yea it is their duty in some cases to plead with the whole Church. This we
must speak unto a little more.

Gods ways and his Cause are so equal, that private Christians, though they be
very weak, private members may in some cases plead with the whole Church.
yet they may be able to plead it with a Church. It is true, there is a great
deal of disadvantage that a poor, weak, private Christian has, when he is to
deal with a whole Church, where there are many godly and learned: but where as
there is a disadvantage one way, so the advantage is as much the other way, in
regard that the Cause of God is one the one side, and not on the other. The
goodness of the Cause is as great an advantage as the abilities and number on
the other side is a disadvantage.

And sometimes particular members of a Church have no other way to free
themselves from the guilt of the sins of the Church, but only by pleading
with them; except they plead, they are many times inwrapped in the guilt, and
therefore of necessity they must do it, though they be never so weak,

Yea and sometimes God has blessed the pleading of some few, and of weak ones
too, with a multitude. Perhaps you may have heard of that notable Story we have
in Ecclesiastical Histories of Paphnutius, who being in the Council of Nice
where there were 318. Bishops, and the business was about the marriage of
Ministers, and generally they cast against it, that those that were single
should not marry: only Paphnutius, one man, comes and plead against them all in
that case, and God so wrought it that he carried the Cause, and he, one man,
convinced all these 318. Bishops. Therefore this is no discouragement for one
man to stand up and plead against a great many. One man may prevail against
many.
So Petrus Waldensis in the Story of Waldenses, though he was but one at first,
yet he stood against many thousands, and God blessed that which he did for the
conversion of thousands. And Luther you know he stood against all the world
almost.

Yea and though this one man may be but a private man, a weak man. God may
bless that which he says sometimes more then that which more learned men
shall say. I remember I have read in the Centuries this Story: A company of
Bishops being met together, there was a Philosopher that stood out against the
Christian Religion, and so reasoned against them all, that be seemed to have
the better of it: amongst them there was one, a very godly and holy man, but a
very weak man; he seeing the Cause of God like (...) suffer, desired leave to
speak and encounter with this Philosopher; all the rest being troubled at it,
thinking that Gods Cause would suffer more by him, knowing he was a very weak
man, but yet knowing withal that he was a very holy man, Hactonus verba
audivi and verba rededi, sed cum divina virt^^ accessit, ultra r^spondore non
potui.
none would oppose, but let him speak: So he begins with the Philosopher,
reciting many Articles of the Faith, Tell me, says he, do you believe these
things are so? (and spoke with Majesty and authority) do not so reason the
case about these Articles of our Faith, but do you believe? Presently the
Philosopher acknowledged himself overcome: Hitherto (says he) I have heard
words, and returned words, but now I feel the Divine power, and I cannot
further answer; and so yielded to be a Christian upon the pleading of this poor
weak man, yet a very holy and godly man. God has blessed the pleading of weak
ones, though it be against those that are very strong, therefore they must not
be contemned.

I remember Oecolampadius has such an expression as this, says he, Conte^^
neretur eccl^siae Christi, sivel vnum puellum ejus divino Spiritu lequentem non
audiremus, etiamsi totus orbis illi reclamet.
Christ should be contemned and dishoncured, if we should not hear, were it
but a child speaking with his Spirit, though all the world should be against
it. And in Esaias. 11. 6. there is a promise that in the times of the Gospel, the
spirits of men should be so brought down, that they should not stand upon their
greatness and learning, but the Text says, A child should lead them; that
is, the humble temper that God would have under the Gospel.

But it may be said, Will not this argue self-conceit? What, for one man, a
private man to plead with so many, with a Church? it is a sign that such a one
is very well opinionated of himself, that should think that what he
apprehends should be sufficient to stand against the apprehension of so many
learned and godly men as are in the Church. How can this be freed from
arrogance and proud conceitednesse.

I answer, Not so, it may be conscience, and not self-conceit, for the rule of
conscience is not the abilities, Orcolam padius.
nor the holiness, nor the multitude of others, but it is that light that God
does let in to convince according to his Word. Object. Ans.
Nay further, I suppose I may convince you that this pleading for God, may
proceed from much self-denial, and the not pleading may proceed from very
vile, sinful self-respect.

How will that appear? Quest. Ans.


Thus. For a private man when he sees the truth of God to suffer, certainly if
he be an humble and an ingengous spirit, it cannot but be exceeding grievous
unto him to think, that he must contest with such a multitude of able and Godly
men, No pride but selfedenyal to plead against the sins of others.
more able then himself, it cannot but be to him a very hard work that God
puts him upon. He would rather a hundred times, if he did look at his own
quiet and ease, sit down: For, think he, if I come to speak, then by this I
shall be endangered to be accounted self-conceited, I shall have the accusation
of pride, I shall displease many of my friends, I shall make a great
disturbance in my self, I am sure to my own peace, whatsoever I do to others,
and how much bette^ were it for me to sit still and be quiet. An humble spirit
would reason thus; but only? Conscience puts him upon it; I shall contract
guilt to my self, if I be not at least a witness for Gods truth, therefore
though I shall suffer so much in it, yet rather then the truth shall suffer,
rather then conscience shall plead against me, I will plead though never so
much to my disadvantage.

Now if such an one carry it humbly and quietly, certainly he is rather to be
accounted a self-denying man in it; for it is a very hard task.

Whereas on the other side, self-love is more like to think thus; It is true,
these things are right, I see they are not according to the truth of God.

Conscience indeed would have me speak, but I shall trouble my self, and what
will they think of me on the other side, where there are so many able and godly
men? surely I shall be thought a conceited fool, and therefore I were as good
hold my peace, and sleep in a whole skin, and be quiet.

Thus because they have so much self-respect, and love their own quiet, and
cannot endure to suffer any trouble, they will leave the truth to suffer, and
their consciences to be pleading with in against themselves; rather then thus
to plead for the cause of God.

Certainly they that are charitable should rather take things in the better
part then in the evil. It is true, it is possible that men may through pride
of spirit be pleading with others (I shall speak a word of that by and by) but
yet you may perceive it in the carriage of such a one, in the general course
of his way. Now if in the general course of the way of a man, he does carry
himself humbly and submissively, that you see him yeeldable as much as ever he
can in all lawful things, and then when he comes to plead against an evil he
is not sudden, he is not rash, and he pleads not against every light evil
neither, but when he comes he comes with a great deal of trouble in his
spirit, and carries it with all quietness and humility, It is your
rigidnesse, and that spirit which does not beseem a Christian, that is not the
spirit of Christ in this thing, for to judge of this to be pride. For certainly
under this false judge meant the cause of God has suffered exceeding much. Obj.
You will say, How can it be imagined, that one man should see more then many,
more then others that are able?

To that I answer. Ans.
In a community where there are many, though they should be godly, yet many of
them may have their spirits biased with prejudice, with selfe-ends, and so not
come to see the truth though they be more able.

Again perhaps though they may be moreable in most things, yet in some one God
may leave them. The truth is not always seen best where there is greatest
natural abilities, no nor always where there is most (...).
Yea, though they may be more able at other times, yet for some one time God
may leave a man in a thing that he is very able in it another time. And perhaps
a great many of them for the present may have so much distemper of spirit, as
they may not speak according to what they think themselves. Therefore it may be
useful for some one man to be pleading with many others.

I beseech you consider of this, it is very useful. Men must not think that
God does dispense the knowledge of his truth always according to natural
(...). For want of this consideration many are led into much evil.

For thus they think with themselves, If a man have more abilities to
understand natural things then others have, therefore he must needs have more
abilities to understand spiritual things then others have. There is a mistake
in this. A great learned man that has great abilities, understands the rules
of nature, yet a poor weak man may have the mind of Christ more then he has.
For the promise is to them that fear God. Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear him. It may be another man has more abilities, but
this spirit may be more soild, may be more distempered then the poor weak
man's. Mit. 11. 25
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even so
Father, for it seemed good in thy sight.

If multitudes had been an argument against the truth, then in the Primitive
times, when Christian Religion began, certainly very few should have followed
JESUS CHRIST. Yea, and there is not more disadvantage and disproportion between
one or two private members of a Church and the whole Church, then there was at
that time disadvantage and disproportion between the whole Church then and all
the world. And if we mark Saint John, 1 John 5 16.
We know (says he) that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness. We know. What a singular spirit was here? here was singularity
indeed, if you talk of singularity; you are afraid you should be counted
self-conceited, and singular in differing from others. We know that we are of
God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness.

Thus we see the thing a little cleared, as this point had need be, but we have
not done with it, we must not let it go so. There must be some rules given for
this, or otherwise we should wrong the point in naming it.

Christians may plead, private members may plead with their Mother, yet they
must observe these rules.

First. 1.
They must not plead with her for every light thing. For the Scripture gives
us this rule, That Love covers a multitude of infirmi^ies; We must not stand
pleading for every infirmity with our brother, Rules to be observed by private
Christians who plead with the Church.
but rather pass by many and cover them, much less then with the Church.

But if there be that which is notorious, or if I be called unto it, that I
cannot have communion with them, but in my communication with them, I shall be
wrapped up in the guilt except I testify the truth. Certainly then I am bound
to plead,

The second rule is, 2.
it must be orderly done, that is, if possibly it may be, you must make the
Officers of the Church to be your mouth in pleading, I say if it can be. If it
come to such a way of rebuking or declaring the evil to the Church, it should
rather (if it can be) be by him whom God has appointed to be his mouth to the
Church. For you do it in Gods name, therefore the most orderly way to do it
(if it may be done) is by him that is Gods mouth.

Thirdly, It must be so as you must manifest all due respect to that society
you are of, 3.
to that Church, showing in your carriage, that you are apprehensive and
sensible even at this time of that distance that is between you and that whole
society whereof you are a member.

That the spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, in that
case: But if it should prove that the Church should continue, if the evil be
notorious and great as requires departing, and the Church after all means used
and all patience should continue in it, in such a case, you may desire to be
dismissed from it and depart. But in as peaceable a way as possibly can be, yet
continuing in due respect unto the Church for all that, though you should
depart, only leaving your witness behind you. The Papists cry out against us
for pleading against them, and say it is an ill bird that will defile its own
nest, and they tell us the curse of Cham is upon us for discovering our parents
nakedness.

They are to know this, that there is more liberty for a member of a Church to
plead with a Church then for a child to plead with his parent. Though there
be liberty for a child, yet there is more liberty for the member of a Church.
For a parent though he should be never so evil, yet he does not lose his right
over his child. Though your parents should be very wicked, yet know, that
their wickedness does not discharge you of your duty; that all children should
take notice of But a Church may so fall off from God, as the members of it may
be free from their duty to it, and therefore may have more liberty to plead
then a child with his parent. That but only in answer to them. And certainly
so far have they fallen from God, as they have discharged those that plead
against them.

Well but if a member, a particular may plead with a Church, a whole Church, No
Officer in a Church member be he never so great, but he may be pleaded against
by a private member.
with their mother; Certainly then, there is no one Member of a Church so high
but he may be pleaded withal, even by private people in that Church. Colos. 4.
17. Say to Archippus, look to thy Ministry, It is an Exhortation to all the
Church to say to Archippus and admonish him to look to his Ministry. For
though the officer of a Church be nearer to Christ the head (of which you heard
before) then other members are, as the Arm is nearer the head then the hand;
yet if the arm shall send forth any thing to the hand that it has not from
the head (as in a flux of putrid humors that rests in the arm) then it
would be the strength of the hand to resist those ill humors that the arm
sends forth. So if any Officer of the Church shall send forth that which he did
not receive from the head, to any Member, but some putrid humor of his own, It
is the virtue of that Member to resist the receiving of any such humor.

Certainly it is the pride of many that think it scorn for any private people
any way to have to do with them. It is I say a pride in men which thorough want
of that right order that should be in all Churches is grown to that height,
that those that take to themselves as proper the name of Clergy, they think it
such a dishonor to them for any other that is not a Clergyman (as they speak)
to speak to them or admonish them of any thing, or to reason with them about
any thing, or when they have preached, to come to them for further satisfaction
in somewhat that they have delivered, or if they be negligent in their duty, to
tell them of it though never so submissively and meekly, their pride makes them
rise so high.

And for that observe, because they do it upon that ground that they are the
Clergy, which signifies Gods inheritance and Gods lot, and so contemning
others as inferior. You shall find in Scripture the people are called Clergy
in distinction from the Ministers, and never the Ministers in the New Testament
from the people, the word (...) is not attributed to them to my remembrance,
but I am sure it is attributed to the Congregation, to the private members by
way of distinction from them. That you shall see in 1 Pet. 5. 3. (...)
Be not Lords over Gods inheritance. Do not Lord it over Gods Clergy, over
Gods Lot, so the words are, Now in that he says do not Lord it, certainly that
is spoken to the Officers of the Church, and they must not Lord it over Gods
inheritance, that is, over Gods Clergy, for so I say the words are. The word
(...) therefore, from whence Clergy comes, is you see attributed to the
people. And we shall find in Scripture, Acts 18. 25. that Apollos an Eloquent
man and mighty in the Scriptures, and a man of a fervent spirit, yet the Text
says, that Aquila and Priscilla, that were private people, took him unto them
and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly. Where have you an Apollos
now, an Eloquent man, a Scholar, a great Clergy man, but would scorn and
contemn that a poor man and his wife should take him home and instruct him in
the way of God more perfectly? Yet Apollos an Eloquent man and mighty in the
Scriptures took it well and was willing to receive further instruction from
these people: And we find Cant. 5. that in the time of reformation of the
Church, the Church went to the watchmen, the watchmen beat her, she had
more relief from the daughters of Jerusalem then from them.

But we must not leave this so neither. It is true, there may be a notorious
abuse of both these, and it is exceeding hard for a people to understand their
liberty without abusing of it, Private people must take heed they abuse not
their liberty.
either against the Church or against the Officers of a Church. This power may
be abused in people very much in too much pride, arrogance, mallapertness, a
spirit of contention in some, taking a delight in contradiction. There are many
people I say that are of such a humor that it is their very delight to be in a
way of contradiction, and they think they are no body except they have somewhat
to say against their officers or against what is delivered, and upon that very
ground will go quarrelling, not out of mere conscience, but that it may appear
to others that for their parts they have a further reach than other men; It is
true, such things are delivered, generally they are received: yea, but men must
know that they look into things further then others do: And if they be in a
community, they conceive that every one would think them no body if they stand
still and say nothing, therefore that they may appear to be somebody, they
will speak, they will have somewhat to find fault withal, though they scarce
understand what they say, or whereof they affirm, and show it they will in a
virulent spirit, in a domineering way, and brave it to the faces of those that
God has set over them. Certainly this is a gross and abominable thing giving
it may be reproachful terms to such: Whereas the Rule of Christ is, Rehuke
not an Elder, (1 Timothy 5. 1.) but entreat him as a Father, do not you think
presently that because you may plead with them, that Gods cause may not suffer
by your silence; that therefore you may rebuke them in an undecent and unseemly
manner. You may indeed in an humble way go as acknowledging the distance
betwixt you and him, he being an Officer, and so inEreat him as a Father. Do
many of you so when you go and reason the case with a Minister, whom you your
selves will acknowledge to be Officers of Christ, yet it may be sometime
through bitterness of spirit you will be casting them off from being Officers
of Christ before you have sufficient warrant for it: and therefore the Apostle
says in the same Chapter ver. 19. Against an Elder receive not an accusation
but before two or three witnesses; Mark, you must not receive an accusation,
much less a condemnation, for the credit and honor of the Ministers of Christ
are very dear and precious unto him, therefore take heed how through a violent
and turbulent spirit you cast any dishonor upon those that Christ has set
over you. Thus I have endeavored to discover the truth unto you, and so
limited as I hope it may be for edification, and not for hurt at all to any.

Plead with your Mother. But what is this pleading? She is not my wife,
neither am I her Husband.

It has much bitterness in it indeed if it be considered of, yet it is in as
fair terms as can be set out. She is not my wife.

He does not bid them say to their mother she is a whore, Obj.
but she is not my wife. You will say, why? what difference is there between
her not being his wife and her being a whore? May we not call things as they
are?

It is true, Ans.
the thing is the same, but hence the Spirit of God teaches us an excellent
note, that those who plead against others must not give ill terms, especially
when those they plead against are superiors, you may declare your minds fully,
but in as fair, modest, comely, the least provoking terms that can be. It is
a foul evil in many if they see Ministers or Churches do things they ought
not, presently to give reviling speeches, nothing is in their mouths but there
is one of Baals Priests, and Antichristian, they cry out of every thing they
dislike as Antichristian, whereas you are to study with your selves if there be
any term more mollising then other to make use of that term, although the
fault you plead against might bear a harsher term if rebuked by one in
authority, yet you who are but private Christians should be very careful in
the fairest, gen^^st terms that may be to erprove what you dislike. Again,
^^ee is not my wife.

For that point, that a people that have been Gods people, may prove not not to
be Gods people, that we have already met withal in the former Chapter. We shall
not speak of it as then we did. Only now we have it more fully, that a Church
may come to be un-churched.

Here is a difficult case, that is, when a Church may come not to be a Church.
It is through Gods providence more then I did make account of when I began this
Prophecy of Hosea, though I had spent some time in it before, yet little
thought to have met with so many things so fully presented to me as I have
found, that does so nearly concern us and the times.

I would not violently draw on any thing but what is so presented to us, as
that I should be injurous to the Scripture and to you not to take notice of it:
We have already met with as tickle points as can be almost, and this also is
exceeding difficult. I desire in this to go as I have done, your own
consciences witnessing with me as in the other, without the least spirit of
contention and division, or meddling with controversies, but laying the truth in
the principles of it plain before you.

When may a Church come to this, that had God before to be her Husband, now not
to have God to her Husband.

I confess for the Church of the Jews I cannot find any thing to pitch upon
certainly when they did cease to be a Church but only this; When a Church
comes to be unchurched.
e^^er when God did send them a bill of Divorce by some extraordinary men (as
ever they had some amongst them, some Prophet) or that they did wholly leave
off from being under the pedagogie that God put them under: For I find this
that their Idolatry was not enough to cut them off from being a Church
actually. It is true their Idolatry was that which did deserve it. They broke
the marriage bond by their Idolatry, but God did not always take the advantage
of that, he did not always send them a bill of Divorce when they did commit
Idolatry. These ten Tribes had been Idolaters a long time before God had said
to them they were not his wife. Therefore barely Idolatry did not cut off, no
not the Jews. Neither do I think that all Idolatry (if it be through ignorance)
cutteth of a Church now in the time of the Christians. The Lutherans certainly
are guilty of Idolatry by consequence, and so other Churches may be through
ignorance, and yet they not cease to be Churches. Therefore in the time of the
Jews, I say I do not find any particular sin that did actually cut them off so
long as they did keep under the pedagogie of the Law, unless God by some
extraordinary messenger sent them a bill of Divorce, they yet remained the
people of God, Isa. 15. 1. Where is your bill of Divorce, says God? It is true
you have deserved it, but where is it? I have not given you a bill of Divorce,
therefore they were a Church. But for the time of the Gospel this I think may
very safely be asserted, that so long as there is a Communion of Saints
imbodied, holding forth the profession of all fundamental truths, and joining
in all Ordinances, so far as they are convinced, so long there is a Church. Any
communion of Saints imbodyed, holding forth the profession of all fundamental
truths, and are willing to set up ordinances so far as they know to be Gods
mind they should set them up, A Chuch may continue a true Church though with
much mixture.
this multitude though it should have abundance of corruptions, though many
wicked be mingled amongst them, yet they are a Church of God, though they
should not set up all Ordinances, though perhaps through ignorance they are not
convinced that such an Ordinance is an Ordinance, yea though they be convinced
that it is an Ordinance, and yet perhaps they are not convinced that it is Gods
mind they should set it up, though this should be their error, yet this
communion of Saints imbodyed, remain0th a true Church of Christ.

But thus. Though it be a true Church of Christ, yet it may be such a Church,
that perhaps you, nor I, nor another cannot have communion withal.

You will say, A Church may remain a true Church, yet so corrupt as in some
cases we cannot have communion with it.
How is that possible for any Church to be a true Church of Christ, and yet we
may not have communion with it?

So far communion we may have as to acknowledge it to be a Church, and to have
communion in some duties, but it may be a true Church of Christ, and I may
acknowledge it so, and yet not have communion in all Ordinances. In what cases
may that be?

First, If this Church shall so mingle any Ordinance, any work of their
public communion, as I for the present cannot join without contradicting
guilt upon me, 3 Cases.
as not seeing Gods will in it, I cannot have communion





Nay further, A man may be of a Church, and perhaps they may not be so ill, but
it may be lawful to have communion with them in many ordinances, and yet for
those that are free, In a cases though I may have communion yet I may no^ ^oyne
as a constant member.
and are not by any special call of God tied to such a place, they are bound
in consciences in some cases not to join with them as a member of them in a
constant way. As thus.

First, when I cannot enjoy all Ordinances with them, but God opens a door to
another place where I may have communion in all Ordinances, I may receive
Sacraments with them upon occasion, and yet not be constantly with them as a
member of that Church.



but outward accommodations that shall cast the balance on the one hand, and
the purity and power of the Ordinances on the other, if I shall rather choose
the one then the other, it will be apparent that I love my body better then my
soul: In this case Conscience bids me to show more respect to my soul then
my body.

This can be no controversy, for it is generally acknowledged by all that if
one will but remove his house from one parish to another, he may go and join
with that parish. But that which I affirm is not so far as that, I do but
suppose that a Man is free and not yet actually joined, he is then if he be
free to regard more the purity and power of the Ordinances then outward
accomodations. Obser.
Let her therefore put away her whoredoms.

The end of all pleading and exhortation, Pleading must not before contention
but for reformation.
is reformation, and not contention.

Plead with her; to what end? Let her put away her whore domes. Plead with her
that she may reform, ^oe not plead for contentions sake. There are many Men
that will rebuke others, and plead with others, but what for? merely in a
spirit of contention, merely that they may brave it over them, that they may
upbraid them, shame them, and not out of love to reform them, they care not
whether they reform or not; Quest. This may be known.
if they have vented their gall and malice they have what they would have.

But how will you know that? how can you know a Man's heart?

Thus. You shall know that Men come not to plead for reformation but for
contention, first, if they rather make it appear that they are glad of the
sins of their brethren and do not grieve for them. You shall have many a Man
come in a sury and rage to rebuke Men they have advantage against, 1 Cor. 54.
but not with a spirit of sorrow and mourning; if you came to plead and rebuke
them for reformation, you should have come with a mourning spirit, You should
have mourned that such a one should be taken away from you,

Secondly, When Men are partial in their pleading, when they will rebuke
others and that sharply too that are afar off, but such as are near to them
they are careless of. Ezekiel. 18. 32. Turn ye, turn ye that ye may not dye;
(say your books there) turn your selves and live. Now the word is Reverti
facite, (...)
for so it is in Hiphil, Do you make to return, and so it may well be read.
So Arias Montanus reads it, make others to return.

You must plead so as to desire reformation, not that you may get the victory
and have the better of it by your pleading, but with bowels of compassion to
seek Reformation you must not cut as an enemy to conquer, but as a Chirurgian
to heal: Therefore before you go to rebuke and to plead you must go to
prayer, that God would bless your rebuking, and your exhortation to your
brethren, and when you have done pray again to God for a blessing upon it. And
look after your reprehensions, and see what becomes of them; and if they do
not prosper to Reformation, then mourn, and cry to God for your brethren; and
if it do prosper, then bless God that you have converted a soul. Thus it was
with the Tribes on this side Jordan, when they pleaded with the Tribes on the
other side Jordan, you shall find in the story that when they heard the answer
of their brethren they blessed God when they saw that their brethren were free
from sin: Ioshus, 22. 33.
so you should do, you should go and plead with your brethren, perhaps your
brethren may have the better of it and may convince you that that which you
apprehend to be a sin is not a sin, now many men perhaps are angry and will
not be convinced that it is no sin, then I shall go a way with the shame,
what dloe I rebuke him of a sin, and it is no sin? Many a man holds on in
an argument what he has begun, and is loath to yield that it is not a sin,
whereas he should be glad to yield it. If a Minister plead or preach that men
do any thing that he conceives is a sin, if another should come and convince
him that it was no sin, it is a vile spirit in any Mnister not to bless God
that he is mistaken, why? Because now the g^^ilt of his brother is removed in
his heart. If I had not been mistaken, it is true, my credit had been somewhat,
but I am mistaken, the sin is removed from my brother, Oh blessed be God that
my brother is not guilty, though I am mistaken; if we plead against others with
such a spirit as this, God will bless us.

The Second Lecture.
HOSEA The latter part of the second verse and verse 3. Let her therefore put
away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her
breasts.

Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day wherein she was borne, and
make her as a wilderness, etc.


PLead with your mother, and plead so as to tell her plainly that she is no
more my wife, she has her bill of Divorce, she is now none of mine. Well it
seems then there is no hope, no help, God has left us, forsaken us, he
has said we are no more his wife, we have our bill of divorce and we must be
gone. Not so neither, but now it follows, Let her put away from her sight her
whoredoms, and her adulteries from betweeen her hreasts.

Herby insinuating at least, that her condition, yet notwithstanding the
greatness of her sin and the fearfulness of the threat, is not altogether
hopeless, but he would have those that plead with her, yet to exhort her and
to bid her put away her whoredoms. It is true, when a man puts away his wife
for whoredom, and gives a bill of divorce, he will never take her again, upon
no terms. Jer. 3. 1. Will a man when he puts away his wife, return unto
her again? As if he should say, no certainly, no man will do it; Yet return
unto me says the Lord, and I will receive you again.

Gods mercies are beyond man's. Obser.
It is a most excellent and useful observation that we have from hence. There
is no such dreadful threatening against any in the word of God for any of their
sins (only we except that sin against the holy Ghost) but there is a door of
hope left for those sinners. Lect. 2.


Here seems to be the greatest sin, of Idolatry and forsaking of God as could
be, the most dreadful threatening, she is not my wife, she is divorced from
me. Yet here is insinuated a hope of mercy.

I will give you one Text which is as notable for this as any I know in the
book of God, Hope for mercy even when God seems most to reject.
that is in Judges 10. 13. 14. compared with ver. 16, In the 13. and 14.
verses, says God, You have for saken me, and served other gods. What then? I
will deliver you no more. I am resolved against you now, I have delivered you
often, but now I will deliver you no more; Go your ways, Cry unto the gods you
have chosen, let them deliver you in the time, of your tribulation. One would
think this people to be in an ill case, of whom God says thus much; For
observe these four things here. First, God charge them with the greatest
sin that could be, they had forsaken God and turned themselves idols.
Secondly, This great sin is aggravated with the most aggravating circumstance
almost that could be, employed here, this they had done notwithstanding God was
wonderful merciful to them, and had often delivered them, yet they had still
forsaken him and served other Gods. Thirdly, Here is one of the most peremptory
resolutions against showing mercy that we can imagine, says God, I will
deliver you no more, now I have delivered you so often. Fourthly, Here is a most
bitter Sarcasme, a biting, upbrayding, taunting speech for their serving other
gods.

As if he should say, what do you come now? Now do you cry and howl to me now
you are in trouble, in your prosperity I was no God for you, you le^t me then
for other gods, and now I will be no God to you, to other gods I leave you, go
now and cry to those other gods, and see whether they will help you. Put these
together and one would think this people were in a hopeless condition. Is
there any help for this people yet? Are they not a lost people? Is not
repentance too late for this people? No, for all this, repentance is not too
late for such a people as this, for mark, the Text says in the 15. ver. And
the children of Israel said unto the Lord, we have sinned, do thou unto us what
seems good unto thee, and ver. 16. They put away their strange gods from
among them, and served the Lord. They do not now lie down sullenly in their
sins and say, there is no help, therefore we were as good go on in our
sinful ways, but they venture to put away their strange gods, and cry unto
the Lord, and tell him that they had sinned. What then? the Text says, The
soul of the Lord was grieved for the misery of Israel. Though he had thus
pronounced against them, yet his soul was grieved for them, they were not the
same they were before.

It is true, I will deliver you no more, you impenitent ones, I will deliver
you no more, but God did not say he would not give them repentance; but when
they had put away their strange gods, though they had grieved Gods Spirit with
their sins, yet God was grieved for their affliction now, and though God had
thus threatened them, yet his bowels now do yerne toward them, and he comes
in again with mercy; and subdues their enemies under them, the children of
Ammon were conquered, and God gives them twenty of their Cities, as Chap. 11.
33.

God never threatens any people, but the condition of mercy upon repentance,
it is either expressed, or employed. It is therefore the frowardness and the
fullness of the hearts of sinners, to give over all upon the thought of the
greatness of their sins, or the severity of Gods threatening against them, O no,
you great sinners, that have been guilty of many horrible sins, come in and
repent, I may say to you as Secaniah did to the people in another case, of a
grievous sin, Ezra. 10. 2. There is hope in Israel concerning this thing.

It is the cavil of many carnal hearts against many faithful and Zealons
Ministers, that they do nothing but preach judgment, and they threaten
damnation, and say people shall be damned, and go to hell, and the like.

This they speak against them, not mentioning at all the conditions upon which
damnation and hell is threatened. Certainly there can scarce a Minister in the
world be found that threatens damnation or hell absolutely, but upon those
terms of impenitency. I will give you one Scripture to show you the most
absurd perverse spirits of men in this kind, how they will take a piece of the
words of the Prophets and separate the threatening from the condition, on
purpose that they may cavil at the word, it is in Jer. 26. 4. says God to the
Prophet there, Thou shall say to them, Thus says the Lord, If you will not
hearken to me to walk in my Law which I have set before you, ^o hearken to the
words of my servants the Prophets whom I sent unto you; Peoples perverseness
against Ministers threatening Gods wrath against sin
then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make their City a curse to
all the nations of the earth. See how fairly the words of the Prophet go, If
you will not hearken to me to walk in my laws, and the words of my Prophets
whom I sent unto you, then I will do so and so. The Prophet delivers his
message as fair as can be. But see now their perverseness in the 8. ver. It
came to pass that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord
commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the Priests and the Prophets
and all the people took him, saying, Thou shall surely dye. What is the
matter? Why have thou Prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying. This house
shall be like Shiloh? They leave out, [ if,] whereas he said, If you will not
return and hear the words of the Lord, this house shall be as Shiloh; They
come and lay hold upon him with violence, Why have thou said this house shall
be like Shiloh? and leave out the other. This is the perverseness of the hearts
of men.

Well then, the conclusion of this Observation is this, that the worst pleading
against any for their sins, it is not to sink the hearts in despair, but to
turn their hearts toward God that they may receive mercy; Let her put away
her whoredoms.

Secondly, Let her put away her whoredoms. After such a kind of pleading that
included a most dreadful threatening in it, She is not my wife, yet God
exhorts. Hence the Observation is this.

While God is pleased to speak to a people and call upon them, and exhort them
to turn unto him, Obser.
the condition of that people is not desperate. Exhortations from God do argue
that the condition of a people may be hopeful.

So long as the King is but speaking to a Traitor, especially giving of him
good counsel, While exhortation continues there is hope.
there may be hope: If he turn his back upon him, and will speak no more,
then he looks upon himself as a gone man. Many people are troubled that God
does so continue exhorting by his Ministers and others, and they cannot be at
quiet. If thou have such a quiet as God should leave exhorting and drawing thee
from thy sins, woe to thee, thou art a lost creature. Make much of
exhortations and threatenings.

Come we now to the Exhortation it self, Let her put away her whoredoms out
of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts. It is in the
plural number, her whoredoms, and her adulteries. They were many, she must
put them away all. If a wife that has been naught shall be contented to
forsake diverse of her lovers and retain but one there is no reconciliation, all
her adulteries must be put away.

But the words are not only in the plural number, but those that understand
the Original, well know, that there is somewhat in the words to extend the
signification beyond the plural number, and that is the duplication of the
radical letter, in the first word the second radical letter which is [(...)]
is double, Geminatio apud Hebraos auget.
and in the second word the third radical Letter [(...)] that is double.

It is the note of Tarnovius upon the place, says he, the doubling of these
radical Letters show the exceeding multitude of those whordomes and adulteries
that Israel was guilty of at this time. And indeed when once there is giving
way to superstitious vanities there is growing to notorious whordomes and
adulteries without measure, without number, ubi sistendum. We never know where
to stop, if once our worship be corrupted.

Let her put away out of her sight. The eye is the receiver of much uncleanness
into the heart, and by it the uncleanuess of the heart is much expressed. The
Scripture speaks of eyes full of adultery, Let her put her adulteries out of
her sight, let them be abominable now in her eyes, those things that before
were delectable, let them now be detestable. Let them cast away their Idols as
a filthy menstruous cloth, and with indignation say, get ye hence.

Or from before her face, so it is in the Hebrew, noting her impudency in her
idolatry, that it appeared in her very face. Though men at first may be a
little wary, yet at length they grow to manifest outwardly their Idolatry in
their very face. But what we shall meet with afterward.

And because Israel did not according to the exhortation of those that pleaded
with her, put thus her whordomes out of her sight, God did put Israel out of
his sight, for so we have it, 2 King. 17. 22. 23. The children of Israel walked
in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did, they departed not from them.
Promises could not draw them, threatenings could not derer them. Until the Lord
removed Israel out of his sight.

They might have prevented this; if they had put their whoredoms out of their
sight, God would never have put them out of his sight.

And from between her breasts. Whores use to discover their filthyness much in
their breasts, either in the nakedness of their breasts, or in those ornaments
they hung about their breasts, Ibive^ae and viae quibus ab utero ad mamillas
accessio fit Ille (cultus scilicet vtl ornatus) in auro, and argento, and
gemmis, and vestibus deputatur, iste, in curae eapilli and cutis, and earum
par^ium corporis quae oculos trahunt, alteri ambitioni: crimen intendimus,
alteri prostitutionis. Tertul. de hab. mul. c. 4.
as they were wont to do in those Countries, for the int^sing of their lovers.
Her breasts. Hypocrates says there are veins that go from the belly to the
breasts, and that is the reason he gives of the temptation to lust that is in
the breasts. The whoredoms of the breasts in the nakedness of them has been
condemned, not only in the Churches of God, but amongst the heathen. Terrulian
in his book de habitu muliebri has this expression:

Women adorn themselves immoderately with gold, and silver, and precious
apparel, this is, says he, crimen ambitionis, the sin of ambition; but for
them to seek to adorn themselves solicitously careful about their hair, and
their skin, and those parts that draw the eyes, this is crimen prostitutionis,
it is the sinnne of a prostituted whore so to do.

Yea besides, Tertullian in another book of his, De velandis verginibus, brings
the Heathen, rebuking Christian women in those times: The very women of Arabia,
Iudicabunt vos Arabia soeminae Ethnica, qua non caput sed fac^em quoque ita
totam tegunt, ut uno ocu^lo^liberato, contentae sint luce frui dimidia potius
quam totam facien^ prostituer^. Tertul. de. vel. virgin. cap. 17.
says he, shall judge you, for they do not only cover their faces, but even
their heads, rather then they will have their nakedness appear, they will let
the light but into one eye. Now if the Heathen did so, if they would not have
their nakedness in any thing appear, much more should Christians cover those
parts that are incitements to lusts. That which is the Bedlams madness, and the
Beggars misery, namely, Nakedness, that is the whores pride, and the strumpets
glory.

Let her put away her whordoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from
between her breasts. That which is intended especially here, is, that they
should not be content merely with change of their hearts, to say, Well, we will
acknowledge the Lord to be the true God, and our hearts shall wholly trust in
him, but for these external things what great matter is there in them? Oh no,
they must abstain from all appearance of evil; from the badges of Idolatry,
there must not be so much as the garb and dress of a whore upon them, they
must take away their adulteries from between their breasts.

The breasts of the Church are the Ordinances that are there, for out of them
do the Saints suck sweetness and spiritual nourishment. So they are called in
Isa. 66. 11. That you may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of
consolation. Now certainly it is an evil thing for any thing that is whorish
to be upon the breasts, to be in the Ordinances of the Church, to think to
adorn them withal as whores do their breasts. No, the breasts are so near
the heart that it is pity any thing should be upon them but Christ himself;
it is most fit that he should lie there. Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my
wel-beloved unto me, he shall lie all night between my breasts, Myrrh we know
is a bitter thing, but though Christ were as a bundle of myrrh, and brought
many afflictions that add bitterness to the flesh, yet the Church would have
Christ to lie between her breasts and she would rejoice in Christ, Christ was
sweet to the Church though with afflictions, As a bundle of myrrh is my
wel-beloved. So many faithful Ministers of God have been contented, yea
joyful to keep Christ between their breasts, and in the Ordinances, though as
a bundle of myrrh, though he has brought some afflictions to them, yet
rather then they would endure any expression of that which is whorish upon the
breasts of the Church, (...).
upon the Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments, Christ Jesus a bundle of myrrh
between their breasts has been delightful to them.

I find another reading of the words in the Septuagint Translation.

Whereas we read it, Let her take away her whoredoms from her sight, I find
that they read it as a speech of God, (...), etc. Cyril in Hol. c. 2.
I will take away her whoredoms from my face. And Ciryl reading the words
according to the 70. he has an excellent note from thence. God (says he)
threatens that he will take away her whoredoms from his face; as when a
member of a body is so putrified that it cannot be cured by salves and
medicynes, it is cut off, and so the disease comes to be cured: so God
labors to cure the people of Israel by admonitions, by exhortations, by
threatenings, by promises of mercy, and when all would not do, then he
threatens to cure them by another way, that is, by cutting them off by the
Assyrians; I will send an enemy against them and he shall take them out of
their own land, and carry them into a strange land, and then they shall be
far enough from their calves, far enough from Dan and Bethel, so I will take
their whoredoms from before my face. Thus many times does God take away the
sins of a people or of a particular person from before his face.

As for instance, Thou drunkard, thou unclean person, thou have had
exhortations, threatenings, many merciful expressions from God toward thee from
thy sins, to take away thy sins from thee; that will not do; God comes
with some noisome vile disease upon thy body that thou shall not be able to act
thy sin any more, and God takes away the act of thy sin at least that way
in such a violent manner by his judgments: and so sometimes men and women that
have estates, and will be proud, and vain, and make their estates the fuel of
their lusts, when the Word cannot take away their sins and the expression of
their wickedness, God by some violent judgment takes away their estates, that
they shall not be able to commit those sins that they did before though they
would never so feign.

This is a dreadful taking away of sin. Yea when God shall come so to take
away the sin of men and women as to take away their souls together with
taking away their sin: for so it is threatened, Job. 27. 8. What is the hope
of the hypocrite when God takes away his soul? Thou that would not suffer
the word to take away thy sin, thou must expect that God will take it away
another way, even by taking away thy soul. Ezekiel. 21. 29. It may be said of
some sinners as there God threatens, The time is come (says the Text) when
their iniquity shall have an end. God will suffer them to live no longer to sin
against him: he will take away their sins, but so as to take away their
souls, they shall not sin any more against God in this world.

Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day wherein she was borne.

There is much in these words, and because they are so exceeding suitable unto
us (God still bringing points to hand suitable to our times) so long as this is,
you must give me liberty to insist a while upon them, and not run over them
so fast as otherwise I would do. I must not slightly pass over those truths
that are so clearly presented, and so nearly concerning us.

Lest I strip her naked, etc, It seems by this that Israel had once been in a
very low condition when she was borne, a very pitiful estate. But God had put
many ornaments upon her, and now he threatens to bring her again into the same
condition, and to strip her naked.

In the day wherein she was borne. This I find Interpreters to refer to
diverse conditions of Israel, but most refer it to the time of their deliverance
out of Egypt: that is called here by God, the day wherein she was borne.

We must inquire first what was the condition of Israel in the day wherein she
was borne. Secondly, what ornaments God had put upon her afterward; and then
we shall come to see the strength of the threat, that God would strip her
naked, and set her as in the day wherein she was borne.

For the first two we shall not need to go far, we have them fully and most
elegantly set out unto us in Ezekiel. 16. That Chapter may be a Comment upon this,
what Israel was in the day wherein she was borne, and what ornaments God had
put upon her.

In the third verse, Thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, Thy birth and thy
nativity is of the land of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an
Hittite, ver. 4. And as for thy nativity in the day thou wast borne, thy ^avill
was not cut, etc,

We must a little open the expression there, or else we cannot open this Text
in Hosea. Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite,

When thou were borne thou were in this condition. What, their father an
Amorite, and their mother an Hittite, Abraham was their father, and Sarah their
mother; why here an Amorite, and an Hittite?

Secondly, Because there were other nations besides Amorites and Hittites,
the^^ were the Jebusites and the Perizites; why rather an Amorite and Hittite
then a Jebusite and Perizite? These two questions must be answered. First,
Abraham was their father, yet because they were in such a disposition, so like
to the Amorites and Hittites, In what sense Isreal's father is an Amirite and
mother an Hittite.
so vile and so wicked, now they deserve not to have the honor of Abraham's
being their father, but to be called the children of the Amorite and the
Hittite. As John Baptist calls the Pharisees the viperous, the serpentine
brood, so those that are like the devil are called the Children of the Devil.

Secondly, Why the Amorite and Hittite rather then others?

For the first, the Amorite; because the Amorite was the chiefest of those
nations in Canaan that were driven out. All the five were called by the name of
Amorite: The sins of the Amorites are not yet full.

Secondly the Hittite, because they seemed to be the vilest of the five, and
for that, there is a Text of Scripture that seems to infer so much. Genesis 27.
46. I am weary of my life (says Rebekah) because of the daughters of Heth. She
only mentions the daughters of Heth, and those that were now called Hittites
were of the daughters of Heth: And says she, What good will my life do, if
Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth? Why, there were other daughters
besides them, but those were the vilest, therefore she only mentions them.

Yea, but what was Israel at this time when they were delivered out of Egypt
(for that is the time wherein she was borne that is spoken of here) were they
in so ill a condition, as that their father was an Amorite and their mother an
Hittite at that time?

There are two most useful Observations that flow from hence, before we
proceed any further in the explication of the words.

Israel though they had been 400. years in Egypt under grievous afflictions,
yet they continued exceeding abominable and wicked. The fire of their
affliction did seem to harden their hearts, as much as the fire of the furnace
did harden the bricks: Their hearts were clay, foul, dirty hearts, and were
hardened by their afflictions.

And secondly, Obser.
when God came to deliver Israel out of Egypt, God found them to be in a very
wicked condition then; then their Father was an Amorite, and their mother an
Hittite, then they were thus vile when God came to deliver them, in the day
wherein they were borne, (for their deliverance is their birth.)

Oh the freeness of Gods grace! God often told them that his grace was free,
Obser.
and so indeed it was if he found them thus as he did, for so you shall find
if you read the story of the people of Israel, that when God sent Moses unto
them, they were a very wicked and stubborn people, even at that very time when
God came with his deliverance.

Let us then raise up our hearts and look up to the free grace of God even
toward us. We are vile, we are wicked, mercies, christisements have hardened us;
and yet all this hinders not the free grace of God for the deliverance of a
people. God has begun in a way of deliverance to us; and when did he begin it?
Lect. 1.
Certainly England was never since it was borne, since it was delivered out of
spiritual Egypt, out of the bondage of Popery, it was never in a worse
condition then when God came in with his mercies of late to us: Then if ever it
might be said of us that our father was an Amorite, and our mother an Hittite,
we were then in the very high way toward Egypt again when God came with his
free grace to deliver us. As he dealt with his own people, so he has dealt
with us, magnified be the free grace of God toward us an unworthy people.

Further, Thy Navill was not cut. That is the expression how he was in the day
wherein he was borne.

First, Thy navil was not cut, what is the meaning of that.
Thy Navill was not cut, The loathsomenesse of their condition is set out by
that. Naturallists observe that the nourishment that the child has from the
mother, it is by the navill: as afterward the child sucks of the breasts and
so is battned, but all the while it is in the womb, it is nourished by a
string, in the navill that draws nourishment from the mother.

Now Israel even when God did deliver them from Egypt, had not their navill
cut, that is, they did even still seem, nay, not only seem but still they did
draw their nourishment from Egypt; they did batten themselves and suck out the
Egyptian manners, and customs, and superstitions; and in their growth up they
did seem rather to have their nourishment from Egypt then from God, so God
himself charge them, Ezekiel. 23. 8. Neither left she her whoredoms brought
from Egypt, says the Text, her navill was not cut, she drew, she sucked still
the Egyptian manners, customs, and superstitions.

It is not thus in part with us? Let me a little speak of this by way of
allusion at least. Is our navill cut to this very day? It is true, God has
delivered us from Popery, from Egypt, as he did Israel, but still do not we
continue sucking, drawing nourishment from our old superstitious ways of
Popery? we seem to live still upon them, and to have our hearts delighting in
them. Oh how just were it with God to come in a violent way and cut our navill,
even by the sword! it is mercy he comes not thus to cut it, and so to take
from us all those secret hankerings that we have after the old Egyptian
customs.

Yet again, seeing it is such a full allusion, we may apply it to those that
seem to have a new birth to be borne again, those that seem now to make very
fair profession of Religion, and to forsake many evil ways that formerly
they have delighted in: but yet their navill is not cut neither; they do
secretly suck sweetness and battning from their former lusts; the curse of the
serpent is upon them, upon their bellies they do go and dust they do eat,
their bellies do even cleave to the dust. Neither wast thou washed in water.

This also sets forth the woeful condition of Israel when he was borne, he was
not washed. The infant when it comes first into the world, comes from blood
and filth in which it was wrapped, that (as Plutarch says) it is rath^r (...)
a child killed, then a child born: so bloody and polluted it is, that were it
not that there were a natural affection stirring in parents, they would even
loath the fruit of their wombes. It is true, parents may see that with their
bodily eyes, but there is more polution in their souls; they are wrapped up in
original sin and filth, more then their bodies are wrapped up in blood and
filth in the womb.

Therefore infants are washed, but thou wast not washed, thou wast let go in
thy filth. I have read of the Lacedaemonians, that when their children were
borne, they used to throw them into the river, to consolidate their members and
parts of their bodies, as they say, to make them strong, that was the custom
of that barbarous people.

Thou wast cast out in the open field. What is the meaning of this? We cannot
understand it fully without examining what the custom of the people was in
those times. We find in Histories that the custom of diverse of the Heathen
was, when their children were borne, to observe by their countenance, by the
making of their members, whether they were like to be useful to the
Commouwealth or not; and if not like they threw them away, and if they were
like to be useful they nourished them up. They nourished up no other children
but those that they judged by their countenance or making, would do good to the
Commonwealth: We find it in diverse Histories. Strabo tells us that the
Indians and Brachmanes had certain Judges appointed for that very end; Strabo,
l. 15.
their Office was, that when any child was borne, to judge by the countenance
and parts of the body of the child, whether it were like to do any good in the
Commonwealth, AElian variar. Hist. li. 11.
and so either to save it or cast it out. So likewise AElian in his Various
Histories tells us of the Thebanes, that there was an express Law made among
them in these words, That none of them should cast out their children, noting
thereby that it was wont to be the custom a^^ngst them. Ne cui Thebano lic^at
infontem expouere. Nunquam apud eos infans natus exponitur.
So Clemens Romanus tells us that indeed the Jews, as a thing peculiar to
them, amongst them the children are not cast out.

So that the holy Ghost alludeth to the way of the Gentiles and barbarous
people, and tells Israel that they were as a child cast out, such a one as
the countenance and feature promised no good, Thou were cast out in the open
field, because they never hoped to have any good of thee, and indeed (as if God
should say) if I had regarded what I saw in you, I might have past this
judgment upon you too, there was little hope of good from you. But what though
the child be cast out in the field, yet there may come some by, accidentally
(as Pharaohs daughter did) that may pity the child, and have compassion on it.
No (says God) thou wast not only cast out, but worse then so, thou wast cast
out, and so cast out as no eye pityed thee. You have sometimes bastards and
poor childred laid at your doors, and left there, some in baskets and
otherways, yet when you open them and see a child, and a child weeping, there
is some pity in you, and you will take care some way or other that it may be
fed and brought up. But says God to Israel, You were cast out in the open
field, and no eye pityed you, that is, all the heathen were against you, and
others in the land rose up against you, Lect. 2.
the Egyptians they came out to destroy you, you had the sea before you, and
them behind you, none had pity upon you. This was the condition wherein you
were borne.

Now see what ornaments God had put upon them. They were in a sorry condition
you see when they were borne. But mark, that forenamed place of Ezekiel. ver. 8.
I took the (says God) and entered into covenant with thee, and then becamest
mine. That is the way of a peoples becoming Gods, his entering into covenant
with them. The Lord has begun to enter into Covenant with us, and we with him
in former Protestations, and if any farther Covenant binding us more strictly
to God be tendered to us, know that God in this deals with us as he did with his
own people. We are as children cast out in the open field, and no eye pityeth
us; but many plot against us, and seek our ruin. If God will be pleased now
to enter into Covenant with us, and give all the people of the Land hearts to
come close to the Covenant, to renew their Covenant with him, and that to more
purpose then in former Covenants, the Lord yet will own us. The Covenant of God
was the foundation of all the mercy the people of Israel had from God, and we
are to look upon it as the foundation of our mercy; and therefore as in the
presence of God willingly and cheerfully to renew it with him.

After Gods taking this people to himself as his own, it follows. ver. 11,
12. I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands,
and a chain on thy neck; And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in
thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. Thus wast thou decked with
gold and silver, and thy raiment of fine linen, and silk and broidred work,
and thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty. Thus God did with
the people of Israel, he had added to what they had when they were born.
Miserable they were when they were borne; but the mercies of God toward them
are thus set out, And nowhee comes to threaten that he will strip them naked
and set them as in the day wherein they were born.

Yet further for the opening of this, we must know that it was the custom
among the Jews, when any married, what they brought to their husbands, and
their dowry was written down in a table: and if afterward he should divorce his
wife, except there could be proved some gross and vile thing against the
woman, though she should go away, yet she was to go away with her Table, with
her dowry and what she brought, she must not go away naked. But if there could
be proved some notorious villainy that she had committed, then she was sent
away Sine Tabulis, naked without those tables wherein her dowry and other
things were written, and destitute of all things, as being unworthy of them,
because she had played the harlot.

Thus God threatens this people. She is not my wife, but unless she put away
her whore doms from before her face, and her adultery from between her breasts,
I will strip her naked as in the day wherein she was borne. She shall be se^^
^ay without any tables, naked and wholly destitute. And thus you have th^^
^pening of the words. The Observations follow.

The first is, The beginnings of great excellencies are sometimes very low and
mean. This plainly rises up from the opposition of her condition when she was
borne, and what she had gotten from God afterward, I will strip thee naked and
set thee as in the day wherein thou were borne. Therefore it is clear she was
born in a very mean condition, and gotten up to a very excel lent condition,
though now they be high and glorious, yet once they were very low and mean. God
many times raises up golden pillars upon leaden Bases, and the most glorious
works of God have had the lowest beginnings. This beautiful frame of heaven
and earth was raised out of a Chaos of confusion and darkness. This is true,
personally, or nationally, and that in regard of outward conditions or
spiritual. How poor, and low, and mean, have many of your beginnings been
even in the world? who could ever have thought that such low beginnings could
have been raised unto such high things as some of you have been raised unto
in the world? It was not long since when you came hither to this City (which
may be said to be the day wherein you were borne for your civil estate, though
not your natural) you were low enough, mean enough, you had but little to
begin withal; you came hither with your staff, and now behold two bands.

It is sometimes so likewise in regard of the spiritual estate. You may
remember not long since, Oh what darkness and confusion was there in your
minds and hearts; what poor, low, mean thoughts had you of God and the
things of his Kingdom, what unsavory spirits, when at first God was pleased to
work upon you? Oh what a poor condition were you in then? though you had some
light put into you, yet you were as a child newborn wrapped up in filth and
blood, many noisome distempers and boisterous lusts there were in your hearts,
as it is usual with new converts, like a fire newly kindled where there is a
great deal of smother and smoke that afterward wears away. But now behold
the shining of Gods face upon your souls, Oh the abilities that God has given
you to know his mind and do his will! Oh the blessed communion that you have
with God, and the sparkling of that divine nature! the glory and beauty of the
divine nature is put upon you. So for Nations, we will not go further then our
own.

How low and mean were we at first? we were a most rude, barbarous, and savage
people, almost as lived upon the earth. Brittons had their name from hence, in
the old Britain language, Birth signifies blew colored, because those that
lived here, instead of brave clothes, as you have, they with woade besmeared
their bodies with blew, they were from thence called Britains; for [ tania]
was added as it is usual in other Languages for the signification of such a
Region or Country, as Mauritania, Lusitania, Aquitania, etc. so that Brittania
is as much as to say, The Region of the blew colored people, so called because
they were thus painted: The best food that they were w^nt to eat (Historians
tell us) was barks of trees and roots. Hollinshed in his Chronickle says
there were old men that he knew who told of times in England, that if the good
man in the house had a matterres or flock-bed, or a sack of chafe to rest his
head on, he thought himself as well lodged as the Lord of the Town, for
ordinarily they lay upon straw pellets covered with canvace, and a round log
under their heads instead of a bolster, they said pillows were fit only for
women in childbed, and in a good Farmers house it was rare to find four
pieces of pewter, and it was accounted a great matter that a Farmer could show
five shillings or a noble in silver together. And Camden in his Britania tells
of Ailesbury a Town in Buckinghamshire, that there was in it a Manor of the
Kings, and the condition of holding certain lands there, was, that the
possessor or holder of them should find straw for litter of the Kings bed when
he came there, And Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward tells of his father
whom he says kept good hospitality for his poor neighbors, and found a horse
for the Kings service, brought him up at learning, and married his sisters with
five pound or twenty nobles a piece for their portions. This was the poor and
mean condition of these times. And Jerome contra Iovinianum, and Diodorus
Siculus tells us concerning the people in Ireland, our neighbors, that the
best delicates they used to eat in former times, were the flesh of young
children, and paps of women; and the ships they used to have were sallowes
wreathed together, and bows twisted, and covered with the hides of beasts,
Portenta diabolica p^nenumero. Egyptia^^ vinc^ntia
and the wives they had were common to all their brethren and parents. As for
their Religion, they offered to the dev^ll man's flesh, they worshipped Apollo,
and Jupiter, and Diana. And Gildas one of the ancientest Historians that
relates the conditions of these British people, he says the Idols they had
were such horrible, devilish, monstrous things, that they did even overcome
the Egyptian Idols in number; and no people had so many Idol-gods, and so
monstrous as the Egyptians, and yet these went beyond them. So says he.
Afterward, no people in the world more rent and torn with Civil wars then
England has been. And in the times when Popery was here profeit and
established, Oh the bondage we were under then! outward and spiritual bondage.
Our bodies, our souls, our estates, our consciences were in miserable
thraldom.

It is the most sordid, miserable slavery that it is possible for a rational
creature to be under, not only to be bound to practice, but to be bound to
believe for truth the dictates and determinations of men, yea and that upon
pain of eternal damnation, to believe what they say, as the Articles of Faith
upon which Salvation or Damnation depends, for Conscience to be under them, so
as I must not question or scruple any thing; if any man that is a rational
creature should think there is any such distance between man and man, he
debaseth himself beneath a man, and advances the other above a man. Better it
is to be in slavery to another to scrape kennels, then to be in this slavery.
And to have the Scriptures kept from us, the Epistle that God has sent from
heaven to us, that which enlightens the world, revealing the great counsels of
God concerning eternal life; this is worse bond^ then to be ch^^^ed up in dark
holes all the days of our lives, to have no Ordinances but according to the
lusts and humors of vile men, Lect. 1.
how great a slavery is this? The manifestation of the least suspicion of the
falsnes of the vilest errors, dislike of the basest practices, was enough to
confiscate estate, to imprison, yea to take away life. Was not this a low
condition, a base slavery that England was in? could any bear it but such as
were slaves to their own lusts? But now what ornaments has God put upon us!

No Nation under heaven more renowned then we have been, our renown has gone
thorough the earth, England, O Angliquasi Angeli, and Albion, from our
happiness, we see now (by our selves) that glorious excellencies have many
times low beginnings.

A second observation hence is, Obs. 2.
when we have any excellency, and beauty upon us, it is Gods mercy that is all
our beauty. I will strip you naked and set you as in the day wherein you were
born. If you have any excellency it is my mercy. Gods mercy is a peoples
beauty and glory, We have nothing belonging to us but shame and confusion, but
misery, if we have any ornaments, it is mercy, free mercy: therefore in the 14.
ver. of that 16. Ezekiel. Thou were perfect in beauty, How? through my comeliness
which I had put upon thee, says the Lord. Let God take away but his mercy, we
are quickly left naked, and poor, and miserable; like the ragged walls in the
Court when the King goes away, and all the rich hangings are taken down, what
a difference is there in their look from what was formerly? the beauty of the
walls were the hangings when the King was there. So if we have any thing that
makes us beautiful, they are the hangings that God has put upon us; his
mercies are those hangings of gold, and silver, and needle work, and when they
are gone, we are poor, and ragged, and miserable.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
Lest I strip her naked, etc. God had said before that she was not his wife,
she was guilty of whoredoms, yet it seems she was not yet stripped naked; she
was left with Gods ornaments upon her, notwithstanding her whoredoms. Hence the
third Observation is,

Though sinners deserve great evils, to be stripped of all comforts, yet God in
patience and clemency continues them a long time. They may be under fearful
threatenings, and yet retain many comforts; yea the truth is, it is possible
for a people to be cast off from God, and yet to continue for a while in
outward prosperity. The tree that is cut up by the roots, yet may have the
leaves green for a while. Saul who was rejected of God, 1 Samuel, 13. 14, yet
after that (if you read the Story you shall find it) that God suffered Saul
to prosper exceedingly in overcomming the Phylistims and the Amalekites

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
The mercies that God bestows upon a Nation, the ornaments that God puts
upon a people that are but common favors, not spiritual graces, they are such
as a people may be stripped of. Great mercies that a people have, they may
wholly loose. Here is the difference between true spiritual graces, whereby
JESUS CHRIST does adorn his spouse, when Christ, not only takes in an outward
way a people to himself, but marries them to himself in a spiritual way, he
decketh the soul with such ornaments, Lect. 2.
bestows suchmercies upon them, as shall never be taken away. Such a soul
has no cause to fear that ever it can be stripped as in the day wherein it
was born, you need not fear that you shall ever lose the jewels given you at
that marriage day. It is true, common graces and gifts you may be stripped of and
made naked; as it is usual in many professors that have not truth at heart,
yet have excellent gifts, as of prayer and the like, but afterward they prove
naught, God takes away their gifts from them, they have not that gift of prayer
they were wont to have, though they have excellent words, yet a man may
perceive a shuffling in them, and such an unsavoriness mixed with their gifts,
that it breeds loathing in others to join with them. As when the King goes
away from his Palace, the hangings are taken down; so when God departs from
a soul (as from such he may) then their hangings, those excellent gifts are
taken from them. But those gifts that are spiritual they are never stripped of
them. We read in Ezekiel. 46. 17. when a King gave gifts to his servants, Gifts of
hypocrites will vanish
they were to return to him again at the year of Jubilee, but when he gave
them to his sons, they were to be their inheritance. There are many that are
outwardly in the Church Gods servants, they have many gifts, but God will take
them away and strip them naked of those gifts: but then there are his children,
they shall have their gifts as an inheritance for ever. It is true, God may
stay a while, as when the King is gone from Court, if there be any thought of
his return again the hangings do continue, but if the message come, the King
will not be here this twelve months, or a long time, or it may be never any
more, then the hangings are taken down; so though these gifts of the Hypocrite
may stay a while, Obs. 5.
yet they will vanish at last. The fifth Observation. --

Continuance in sin, and especially the sin of spiritual whoredom, is that
which will strip a Nation from all their excellencies, from all their orments
and beauty; the continuance in that sin especially; for so the words imply, Let
her pnt away her adulteries from between her breasts, lest I strip her naked.
etc. If she continue thus, certainly naked she shall be.

This always brings nakedness meritoriously, but if continued in,
effectually, it makes them naked. Exodus 32. 25. You may see there what made the
people naked at that time, the Text says, that Aaron had made the people
naked, that is, Aaron by consenting to the people to make the Calfe had made
the people naked: naked, that is destitute now of Gods gracious protection,
deprived of those favors from God that formerly they had. And as the Priest
had made them naked, so you may find it in 2 Chronicles. 28. 19. that the King made
them naked too. The Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel,
for he made Judah naked and transgressed sore against the Lord. He made Judah
naked, that is by countenancing Idolatry, by syding with those that were
Idolaters, even he made Judah naked at that time.

Here we may see who they are that are like to strip us, if ever God should
come to strip us. We have many amongst us that see false burdens of all the
miseries and troubles that come upon the nation; they cry out presently of the
Puritans, and of others that they say are factious and seditious spirits, and
turbulent, Who they are that bring evil upon the nation.
and all must be laid upon them. Certainly whosoever has eyes in his head may
easily see who makes us thus naked as we are, and if we be made more naked, who
will be the cause of all? Those that stand against the way of Reformation,
those that will keep their whoredoms in their sight, and their adulteries
between their breasts, those that will not be willing that the Church shall be
purged from that filth and whorish attire that it has; these are they that
make us naked. We read in Lamen. 2. 14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and
foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine iniquity to turn
away thy captivity; but have seen for thee the false burdens, and causes of
banishment. Mark it, the Prophets have seen vain and foolish things, they
have not discovered thine iniquity, they have not dealt (...) inly with thy
people, neither have they told them the reason of their captivity, but they
have seen for them false burdens and causes of banishment, The Prophets say
it is a company of these precise and strict ones, that will not be obedient to
authority, and will not do what is commanded in such and such things, and
(when there were ways of corruption in Gods worship) they would not submit to
such and such orders. The Prophets lay the blame upon them, but they see false
burdens, says the Text, and false canses of banishment. We have many such
Prophets amongst us who see false burdens and causes of banishment, and they
cry out of those that certainly are the causes of our peace and of the good of
the kingdom. Tertullian tells us that in the Primitive times, if they had but
any ill weather, or any trouble at all, they would cry out of the Christians as
the cause of it, and presently the voice was, Adleons, let the Christians be
dragged to the Lions, and devoured by the Lions; it has been so amongst us.
But may we not answer as Elijah answered Ahab, when Ahah told him that he was
the man that troubled Israel, I have not troubled Israel, but it is thou and
thy fathers house. May we not well say to them as Jehu to Iehoram when he
asked him whether there was peace, What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy
mother Iezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? Those have been popish,
certainly they have endangered us of being stripped of all. Who were the
causers of the first disturbances amongst us, even of all the persecution here
of Gods Saints, and of all the discontent among the people? Who were they that
persuaded the bringing in of an Arbitrary way of government? Who were the
cause of laying such things upon the people that they could not bear? Who were
the causers of the troubles in Scotland, and sending of books thither full of
superstitious vanities? was it not the Prelaticall faction? Who are those that
hinderthe Reformation at this day? Certainly, if it were as apparent that they
that are called Puritans had been the cause of such charge to the Kingdom and
disturbances to the State as the Prelatical faction has been; it had been
impossible for them to go in the streets but they would have been stoned to
death.

I speak not this as though we should do the like, Lect. 1.
but I speak it to show what the virulencie of their spirits would have been
to them if it had been apparent that they had been such charge to the
Kingdom, and such disturbers of the State. The truth is, we may charge our
Papists, and charge others that are of that way) and we know who are next to
them) we may well charge them as the cause of stripping of us naked as we have
been.

It is clear enough, those that put not away their whoredoms from them, but
continue still superstitious and Idolaters, they are they that endauger a
people to be stripped naked.

A sixth Observation that presents it self fully and clearly without any the
least straining, Obser. 6.
is, That it is time for people then to plead, when there is danger of
desolation. Plead with your mother, plead, why so? why should we not be quiet?
Lest I strip her naked and set her as in the day wherein she was borne. What,
you are in such a condition as you are in danger to be stripped naked and to be
left desolate as a wilderness (as it follows in the Text) Is it not time
then to plead? Oh plead with God, and plead with those that are in authority,
and plead one with another, and plead with all, stir up your selves and do
what you can; It is time for every one to appear in times of danger.
let there be no sluggish spirit, no neutralizing spirit. It is not time for
any to be newters now. It is time now for all to come and plead, not so much
time now to dispute of things, but now time for every one to stand, and appear,
and plead, not only verbally, but otherwise as God calls them to it. Luke 3. 9.
When John says, The axe is laid to the root of the tree, what then? then
every one comes and says what shall we do? you (says he to some) that have
two coats impart to him that has none: and to the soldiers when they say
what shall we do? do you no violence to any man, and be content with your
wages. Mark, when the Axe is laid to the root of the tree, every one comes in
then and says what shall we do? You that are women and inferior, do you
pray, and cry, and further your husbands in all good, be not you backward, do
not you dravv them away when they would be liberal and forward, and adventure
themselves, thorough your niceness and daintiness. And you that are men of
estates, if you ask what you should do? It is apparent, He that has two
coats let him impart to him that has none, be willing to part with much of
your estates in such a cause as this. And so soldiers, if you ask what you
should do, behave your selves so as you may convince others, offer no
violence, but according to an orderly way, and be content with your wages,
perhaps it may not come in so fully afterward, yet let it appear that it is
the cause that strengthens you rather then your wages.

Thus every one should be of an inquiring spirit when the Axe is laid to the
root of the tree. When we are in danger to be stripped of all, it is not time
then to stand about curiosities and niceties.

Seventhly, Obs. 7.
Lest I strip her naked, etc. I have sent my Prophets already before, and they
have offered mercy and denounced threatenings: Well, I will now come another
way, I will strip her naked, etc. The observation is,

That those that will not be convinced by the word, Lect. 2
God has other means to convince them, he has other ways then the word; if
the word will not convince them, pleading will not do it it seems, and
convincing arguments will not do it, well then, stripping naked shall do it:
As the expression is usual in Scripture, Then you shall know that I am the
Lord, when I do thus and thus. GODS works will convince when his word will not.
As you use to do with those that are of a sleepy disposition, if you call up
a servant that is sluggish and sleepy, he answers Anon, and then falls down
and sleeps again, you call him again, and he answers and then sleeps again, at
length you come up and pull the clothes of him and leave him naked, and that
will awake him. So God, he calls upon them to leave their whoredoms and
Idolatries, and to repent, he threatens, and he offers mercy, and they seem
a little to awake, but to it again. Well, says God, I will come another way,
and strip you naked, and that will do i^.

Eighthly. Obs, 8.
Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day wherein she was borne. Lest
I do it. Whatsoever the means be of stripping a Nation naked, it is God that
does it. It is God that gives, and it is God that takes away. But let that
pass.

9. It is a grievous Judgment for one that is advanced from a low degree to an
high to be brought thither again. Obs. 9.
Lest I strip her naked and set her as in the day wherein she was borne. Thus
Job aggravateth his misery.

You have it in the 29. and 30. Chapters of Job, The candle of God shines upon
my head, I washed my steps in butter, and the rock powered me out Rivers of
oil, my glory was fre^h in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand, etc. But now
(says he) they that are younger then I have me in derision, whose fathers I
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock. etc. Thus he
aggravateth his judgment because he was brought into a low condition having
once been in a high one. The like aggravation of misery have we Lameat. 4. 2.
The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers? and verse. 5. They that did feed delic ately are desolate in
the streets, they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils,

Thus the Scripture is clear in it, and your experience is enough to confirm
it. For a man that has been a bondslave in the Galleys, and after he should
be ransomed by the liberality of his friends here in England, if he should be
taken and brought back again to the galleys, oh how tedious and grievous would
it be! but if he had lived long here, and flourished and gotten preferment and
lived bravely, and had grown a great Merchant, and then after this to be
brought again to the galleys, how sad a thing would this be! it would be very
terrible to him. If some of you that have been beggars heretofore, A sad
condition for one advanced high, to be brought down low.
if God by some way or other should bring you to the same poverty you were in
before, oh how tedious would it be! you would rather venture the loss of your
souls and God and all, then be brought into such a condition, and we see it
that many men that have been raised from a low estate to an high, are so
afraid of returning to a low estate again, that they will venture soul, and
conscience, and God and all, rather then they will endanger themselves in the
least degree in their estates.

Hence it is very observable that the chief curse that God threatens the
people of Israel with, is that they should return to Egypt again, that the
Lord would bring them back to the condition wherein once they were.

You shall find that whole Chapter, Deuteronomy. 28. is spent in denouncing most
dreadful curses upon the people; now for the conclusion of all, as the chief
curse of all the rest, says the Text, there ver. 68. The Lord shall bring thee
into Egypt again, with ships, and there you shall be sold unto your enemies
for bondmen and bond-women, and no man shall buy you.

Were it not a sad thing for us who have been acquainted with the glorious
light of the Gospel, and with the blessed privileges that come in thereby, for
us to be brought into Popish bondage and thraldom again? As Ezra. 9. 8. we may
use his words, Now for a little space grace has been showed from the Lord our
God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place,
that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
bondage; And shall we (as in ver. 14.) again break thy commandments, and
join in affinity with those abominations? As for our selves who have had now
of late a little taste of the sweetness of our outward privileges and our
liberties, for us to be brought into the bondage that we not long since were
in, it would be a very sad thing. Who could endure to be under that bondage
that he was in three or four years agon, under every Parator, Promoter,
Pursevant, Commissary, Chancelour, and tyrannical Prelate as formetly? we could
not have met together and enjoyed the liberty of such exercises as these; no,
you could not have met in your families to pray, but one or other would have
been upon you and endangered your estates. The bondage was intolerable, we may
well complain it was a yoke that neither we nor our fathers could bear.

The last Observation, Obser.
and the way to prevent all is, When God has delivered a people out of misery,
and bestowed upon them great mercies, it is their duty often to think of the
poor condition which once they were in, and to use all the means they can that
they may not be brought thither again.

God loves this, that we should remember and seriously take to heart, what
once we were, so it is here, Lest I strip her naked and set her as in the day
wherein she was borne; as if he should say, I would have you consider what
condition you were in when you were borne, what a low condition it was, and
consider of the danger you are in to be brought thither again, and to look
about you, and to seek to prevent it if you have the hearts of men in you.
This we shall find in Deuteronomy. 26. 1. 2. When thou art come into the land which
the Lord gives thee for an inheritance and possessest it, thou shall take of
the first of all the fruit of the earth, We must lay to heart our low
coudition we once were in.
and thou shall put it in a basket, and shall go unto the place which the Lord
thy God shall choose; and ver. 5. Thou shall speak and say before the Lord thy
God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
became there a nation, and the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us
and laid upon us hard bondage. And Isa. 51. 1. Look to the rock whence you
are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence you are dug. It is very useful
for us to consider of our former low condition. It was a speech Master Deering
in a Sermon that he preached before Queen Elizabeth, he has this bold
expression to her, If there were a time that you thought your self Tanquam
ovis, as a sheep ready to be slain, take heed that the words of the Prophet
be not now true that you be not Tanquam indo mita Iuvencula, as an untamed
heifer. You may note the difference between the spirits of men in former times
in their plainness and boldness; and if there were an excess that way, how far
the other way are our Court Sermons now? Qeen Elizabeth was once in a very low
condition indeed, and she thought her self to be as a sheep appointed for the
slaughter. It is usual for men raised up from a low condition to forget God
and themselves, Asperius nihil est humilicum surgit in altum.
and to grow proud and scornful.

Nothing is more sharp then a low thing when it gets up high; so there is
none that have more proud and scornful spirits then those that are raised from
the dunghill and gotten up high, they know not then where they are; As the
Proverb is, Set a beggar on horse back, and he knows not how nor whether to
ride.

Thus it was with Saul, the way to humble Saul was for him to consider what he
once was, and that is the way to humble us all who are subject to be proud of
our prosperity that God has raised us unto. When thou wast little in thine own
sight, then thou were made the head of the tribes of Israel. There was a time
that he was little in his own eyes, and I beseech you observe the difference
between the spirit of Saul when he was in a low condition, and his spirit when
he was raised. When Saul was in a low condition his spirit was low, therefore
1 Samuel 10. 27. you shall find that though there were some children of Eelial
that would not have Saul to reign over them;

What? (say they) how shall this man save us? and they despised him and brought
him no presents. But Saul (the Text says) held his peace. And Chap. 11. 12.
When Saul had gottensome credit and honor by his victories, some of the people
said, where are they that said, shall Saul reine over us? Bring the men that we
may put them to death. No, says Saul, There shall not a man be put to death
this day. O how meek was Saul! what a quiet spirit had he before he got up
high! But afterward when he got up and had many victories, then what a furious
and outrageous spirit had Saul! You know the story of the four-score and five
Priests that must be slain in the City of Nob, and the whole City, men,
women, and children, sucklings, Oxes, Asses, and sheep must be put to the
sword, Why? because one of them did but give a little refreshing unto David.
What a strange spirit is here in Saul, different to that he had when he was low.

Is it not so with many of you? when God has brought you low, you seem to be
humble, and meek, and quiet then, and then you are content with every thing,
and prize every little mercy. Oh the tenth, the hundredth part of that will not
serve your turn now, you would have been glad of then, and blessed God if you
had had it; But now you know not your selves, your hearts are raised up as:
your estates are. Well it is good for you to look to the condition that once
you were in, when you were low; As we read of Agath^cles, that King, that
was a Potters son, and after advanced to a kingdom, he would always be
served at his table in earthen vessels, to put him in mind of that condition he
was in before: certainly if in any place in England it be seasonable to speak
of this, it is here in London, where many that have been Potters children, and
in a low degree, have been raised up high, and have gotten great estates. Let
them remember in what condition once they were, that they may be humbled, and
so may prevent that danger of being brought thither again. Many put others in
mind of it in a taunting way, I know what you were not long ago, I know
what your father was, etc. But do you put your own souls in mind of this in
an humbling way? This is the way to continue mercies.

But now apply we it a little to our selves for the general and then we shall
conclude all. Let us work this upon our hearts. Look we back to what we
were lately, and let us check our hearts for any discontent in our present
estate. Not long since would not many of us have been willing to have laid
down our lives to have purchased that mercy we have had this year or two? God
has granted to us our former mercies, and raised us from our low condition of
free cost hitherto. God has been before. hand with us; and what if those
mercies that are to come will be at some what a dearer rate then those we
have had already? Those mercies we have had already have been very precious
and sweet; but surely they that are to come are more precious and sweet, and
therefore we may be content though they cost us dear.

Yet how vile are the spirits of men in forgetting the condition the sad
condition they lately were in, forgetting the Taxes and Monopolies, and
uncertainty of enjoying an thing that was your own; and now if there be but a
little charge coming, you presently fall a murmuring and repining, Oh these
are heavy burdens, the Parliament burdens the kingdom and the Couutrey, and
as good have ship money and other taxes as these burdens. Oh unworthy,
unworthy are you to live to see the goodness of the Lord in these days:
unworthy to have thine eyes open to see what God has done, and thus to murmur.
Thou should magnify Gods mercies, and not murmur at his proceedings.

We have a notable parallel to this Numb. 16. in the story of Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, those murmurers, when they were but in a little strait, they come
to Moses, and say, ver. 13. Why have thou brought us up out of a land that
flows with milks and honey? What land was that, that Moses brought them up
out of, that they said flowed with milk and honey? It was the land of Egypt,
the land of their bondage^ indeed they were promised a land of Canaan that
should flow with milk and honey, and they put that upon the land of Egypt;
though they had been in bondage and slavery in Egypt and were now going to
Canaan, Lect. 1.
yet when they did but endure some trouble in the way, and had but some
opposition, and were put to some straits, then Egypt was the Land that flowed
with milk and honey, and who would come out of Egypt? So though God be
bringing us to Canaan, to a blessed Land that flows with milk and honey, yet
because there are some straits in the way, some difficulties, some oppositions,
that may cost us somewhat; now how do men cry out we were better before, you
talk of Reformation and such and such things, but for our parts would we
might have but what we had before, and be as quiet as we were then, why will
you bring us out of a Land that flows with milk and honey? Oh base murmuring
and discontented spirits that forget what once they were, and rather prize the
bondage they were in before, then are thankful for Gods present mercies.

For us not to look back to Gods former mercies, it goes to the very heart of
God. God has an expression that it frets him to the very heart: You have it in
Ezekiel. 16. 43. Because thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, but have
fret^ed me in all these things. It is a thing that frets God at his heart to
see a people so unworthy of mercy, when God comes in such ways of mercy to
them as he does. My brethren, God has done great things for us whatsoever
others say and think: Let them murmr, and repine, and say what they will,
let us say God has done great things for us: Let us lay to heart the condition
we lately were in, that so we may be stirred up now to seek after God, that
we may never be brought into that condition any more, if they would have it
again, much good may it do them, but for us let it be our care to seek God,
and to use all lawful means to prevent our bringing back to it again.

For even the very straits we now are in are an aggravation of our former
misery and present mercy, it should not therefore make our former misery or
present mercy seem less, but greater.

How is that you will say?

Thus, If now we have so much help and power to hinder a malignant party that
seek our ruin, yet they have so much strength and resolution, what would have
become of us if this had been before, when we had no way nor no means to help
us? If men complain now, what would they have done then? Therefore whereas we
make use of our straits, to make us think that our former misery was less,
and we are now in a sadder condition then before, rather let us make it an
aggravation of Gods mercy toward us, and if we be in such straits now when
God has raised up such means beyond all our thought to resist the flowing in
of misery upon us, Lord whether were we a going? what would have become of us
if the stream which has been so long a swelling had broke in upon us when
there was no means to have resisted it? We may well see now that if their
intentions and resolutions be so strong for mischief as will not be hindered,
notwithstanding the present strength God has granted us to oppose them, surely
they had most vile intentions, Lect. 2.
and dreadful things were determined against us, which would have brought us
low indeed, and have made us the most miserable people upon the earth, if God
had not come in so mira culously for our help as he has done at this day.

Therefore as we read of Jeremiah, Chap. 37. 18. Let my supplication, says he
to the King, I pray thee be accept able before thee, that thou cause me not to
return to the house of Jonathan the Scribe, lest I dye there. So let us
present our supplications to the King of heaven, that we may not be sent back
to that condition we were once in, that God may not strip us and leave us
naked. We have many blessings, Lord do not strip us, do not strip us of all
the ornaments thou have put upon us.

And would you not have God strip you of your ornaments? be you willing to
strip your selves of your ornaments. Ezod. 33. 5. God calls upon the people
there. Put off your Ornaments from you that I may know what to do unto you.

This is true and seasonable at this time in the literal sense, you are called
now to strip you of your Ornaments. Strip from your fingers your goldrings now
when there is need of them, perhaps one gold-ring that you have upon your
finger would serve to maintain a soldier a month or five weeks or more, and
yet you may have the benefit of it again afterward. Strip your Cup-boards from
that pompous show of plate that was wont to be upon them. It is much if you
should not be willing to have your fingers stripped naked when we are in danger
to have the State stripped naked of all our comforts and ornaments: Is it such a
great matter to have your cup-board naked of plate now? what if a white cloth
were upon it, and all that glistering show taken away, were that such a great
matter now when God is about to strip us naked, and set us as in the day
wherein we were borue? certainly all of you that shall keep your plate now for
the pompous decking and adorning of your cup-boards you cannot but be ashamed
of it in these times, surely you must rather keep it up in your trunkes and
hutches, it cannot but be both a sin and a shame to see such glistering pomp
and glory in such times as these are.

Strip your selves of your ornaments that God strip you not; and not only
outwardly, but strip your selves of your ornaments by your humiliation, for
that is the meaning of that place in Exodus; Oh come and humble your selves,
and come now with naked hearts before the Lord, open your hearts before God,
bring them naked and sincere before him, lest he strip you and the Kingdom
naked! Cry unto God for mercy, O Lord thou know what a vile heart I have
had, a base time-serving heart, yet Lord I desire to take away all those clokes
now, and to rend and bring this heart naked before thee, though it be a filthy
heart, yet open it, Lord thou know those vile things, those innovasions,
those superstitions, those horrible wickednesses that were in danger to be let
into the Church and Comman-wealth, yet they were things that could go down
very well with me, I could make shifts to swallow them, and I had distinctions
to color them, but Lord it was my base heart that I could not trust thee, but
now here I open it naked before thoe.

O Lord for these Ordinances of thine in the purity and power of them that
others spoke so much of, they have bin things unsavory to me, I had no skill in
such things, Thou know I had a neutrelizing spirit, I looked which way the
wind blew; how just were it for thee to give me upto be of a desperate
malignant spirit! Now Lord I come as a naked wretched creature before thee, in
the shame and guilt of my sin, and here I acknowledge thou may justly strip
me naked of all the comforts of my estate, and leave me in the most miserable
condition that ever poor creature was left in; And now my heart is open before
thee, do but show me what I shall do, and if thou do reserve any of my
estate and comforts which I have forfeited, in testimony of my humiliation for
my former sins I bring it before thee, and am willing to give it up for the
public good, and to prevent that evil and mischief that I am sure my sins
call for, for my sins cry for wrath against the Land, that thou should strip
it naked; and if all had been such base spirits as I have been, what would
have become of the Land by this time? In testimony therefore of my humiliation
for my sins, here I bring in this of my estate, though indeed if I had not been
guilty of such sins, yet out of common prudence, and respect to my own
security, I might bring some part in, but here is so much the more of my
estate, because my conscience tells me of my former guilt. And Lord for the
time to come I am resolved to do the uttermost I can for Thee and thy Cause.
And those Worthies that carry their lives in their hands for me, God forbid
that I should have the least hand in betraying them, in withdrawing my hand and
assistance from them. Lord here I give up my self to thee, and my estate, I
surrender it to thee in an everlasting Covenant.

This is to come with a naked heart indeed before the Lord.

Were it not better that we should be willing to strip our selves naked, then
that God should do it by violenee, that God should send Soldiers into our
houses to strip us naked, as they have dealt with our brethren in Ireland? they
took not away their estates only, but all their clothes, and sent them in
droves as naked as ever they were borne. We know we have deserved the like.
If you will not strip your selves of your super ^^uities, God may justly by
them strip you naked as ever you were born; and not only bring you into the
same condition you were in, but into a far worse, for so he threatens in that
28. Deuteronomy. You shall not only be carried back again into Egypt, but there you
shall be sold for bond^men, and no man shall buy you; they should be in a worse
condition the when they were first in Egypt. So if there be any of you that are
willing to sell your consciences in hope of preferment; Oh the other side may
get power and prevail, and so out of hope to be, preferred, to sell your
consciences, you may be disappointed, not only be brought into as ill but into
a far worse condition; and perhaps though you would have sold your selves, yet
no body will buy you; if the Papists corn to have the power of your bodies
and estates, you may miss of that preferment that you think of. So says
Ezra, Chap. 9. 14. after he had spoken of Gods mercy in giving them liberty,
and remitting their captivity, Shall we (says he) yet continue in sin, and
break the commandments of the Lord, would he not be angry with us till we were
utterly destroyed?

And certainly if God do not awaken the hearts of people now, if God do not
give the people throughout the Kingdom a heart to stick to the Cause of the
Truth, and to those whom they have entrusted with their estates, liberties and
lives in every good way, it were the heaviest judgment of God that ever was
upon a Nation since the beginning of the earth, it would never be paralleld,
that ever a people should have such an opportunity put into their hands to help
themselves, and to vindica^e themselves from slavery and bondage, yet out of I
know not what respects to betray all those that have ventured their lives for
them, and to have their blood shed; I say it were such an example as were not
to be paralleld since the beginning of the world.

Therefore I beseech you my brethren let us lay this to heart, and the Lord
make known to us all what is to be done in such a time as this, that we may not
be stripped naked, and set as in the day wherein we were borne.

The Third Lecture.
HOSEA part of the third verse and verse 4. And make her as a wilderness, and
set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.

And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children of
whoredoms.


IN the first part of this second Chapter, we have already showed part of Gods
threatening, even to strip his people naked as in the day wherein they were
borne, to bring them into as low and mean a condition as ever they were in.

Now that which was more generally expressed the last day, we have in the latter
end of this third Verse more particularly set forth unto us. And make her as a
wilderness, and set as a dry land.

God would bring this people that dwelt in the land of Canaan flowing with
milk and honey; that were in regard of the beauty that God had put upon them,
excellent for beauty, now to be as a wilderness.

In the former Chapter you heard that the state of the Ten Tribes was set out
by Hoseas wife, her name was Gomer, ad this Gomer was the daughter of Diblaim.
Gomer signifies perfection, and what Diblaim signifies I told you then.

But now there is another signification of this Diblaim, Lect. 3*
that we are to refer unto this expression of the Lord in this place, that he
will make her as a wilderness, for you shall find Ezekiel. 6. 14. that there is
mention made of a desolate country and a wilderness that was toward Diblath,
to which this that the Prophet speaks of the mother of Gomer may seem to have
reference.

Diblath then, it appears, was a place where there was a very desolate, waste
wilderness, and Gomer was the daughter of this Diblath, from whence Diblaim,
that is, Though the ten Tribes were as Gomer in regard of their beauty,
perfect, for so they were; yet she was the daughter of Diblath, or Diblaim,
that is, she came forth out of a low and mean condition, and was even brought
out of a wilderness, now she shall be brought again into the same estate
wherein she was, for I will set her as a wilderness.

As a wilderness. The Church of God is in it self Gods garden, a garden
enclosed, and so it is called Cant. 4. 12. As a garden enclosed is my sister,
my Spouse. It is the place of Gods delight, not a place for beasts to come
into, but enclosed, they are to be kept out of it; a place where very precious
fruits do grow, that are very pleasing to God, Psalm. 133. 3
a place that has the dew, the showers of Gods blessing, the dew of Hermon,
the dew that descends upon the mountains of Zion, there God commands his
blessing, even life for evermore. But now she must come to be a wilderness.

For first, the hedge, the pale, the wall of Gods protection shall be taken
away from her, and she shall be laid open, liable for all wild beasts to come
in and to devour her. They loved liberty, and were loath to be enclosed, though
it were in Gods garden, though it was with the pale and wall of Gods
protection; Well, seeing you will have liverty, you shall have liberty, and
this pale and wall of my garden shall be taken away, and your condition shall
be like the condition of the beasts in the wilderness. Anima Idololatriae
dedita, nullos profert fructus, est que inutilis prorsus ut desertum in quo
nihil noscitur Vatab. (...). Psalm 1. 3.


Again, you shall be as a wilderness. There shall no good grow among you.
There was no good grew amongst you, that was your sin; and there shall no good
grow among you, that shall be your plague and punishment.

The blessing of God shall be taken away from you, you shall not have those
showers of blessing as formerly you were wont to have, but you shall be as a
wilderness, Jer. 17. 5. 6. Cursed be that man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, and departs from the Lord: Why? For he shall be as the heath
in the desert, and shall not see when good comes, and he shall inherit the
parched places of the wilderness in a salt land.

Vatablus interprets this judgment upon the hearts of Idolaters; they are dry,
unsavory; they are destitute of all spiritual good.

And I will set her as a dry land.] So the Septuagint read it, I will order you
so. Your sins bring you out of order, but Gods plagues order that which sin
does disdorder. At a dry land. This is contrary to the blessing of a godly man,
for he is said to be as the tree planted by the river of water.

The graces and comforts of Gods Spirit are compared to waters in the
Scripture, Psalm. 87. 7. All my springs are in thee, All my comforts, all the
gifts that I have, all the graces that I have are in thee. But now God will set
them as a dry land, he will take away his gifts, and take away their comforts
from them, and so leave them wast and desolate.

The Observation then from hence is, Obser.
That sin is of a wasting nature: sin lays wast Countries and places
that people live in. We have a most remarkable place of Scripture for that,
Zach. 7. 14. They laid the pleasant land desolate, They, who are they? you
shall find it ver. 12. Those that made their hearts as an Adamant stone, Sin
lays wast Countries.
lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of Hosts had sent
in his spirit by the former Prophets, They made the pleasant land desola^e.

We cry out of those that make stripe and waste, and there are actions
commenced against them. O let not us lay waste this pleasant land, this good
laud of ours, this garden of the Lord. It is indeed as an Eden, as a Paradise,
our forefathers have left us this our land as Gods garden; let not us through
our sins leave it to our posterities as a wilderness and a dry land, Psalm.
107. 34. there is a threatening that God will make a fruitful land barren for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Sin has heretofore laid wast as
pleasant and fruitful Countries as ours. Those that travel in Germany, their
hearts even bleed within them sometime to see where famous Towns have stood,
now the places are overgrowne with nettles, they are laid wast as a
wilderness. And in this God threatens after the manner of great Kings who
when their Subjects obey them not, threaten to lay their Countries wast and to
destroy their Cities, as Ecclesiastical Stories tell us of Theodosius, that
had laid great taxes upon the City of Antioch at which they were much grieved,
and imagining it seems that the Queen had a special hand in it, they pulled
down the brazen statue of the Queen that was in the City in a kind of anger
upon this, Theodosius threatens to lay the City and Country wast as a fruit
of his displeasure. It is a fruit of the anger of a Kings according to their
power, to manifest it that way, not only upon particular men, bnt to lay whole
Countries wast.

God is the great King, and he threatens this against his people for their
sins, that he will lay them wast as a^wildernesse. God had rather that the
wild beasts should eat up the good of the land, then that wicked stubborn
sinners should enjoy it: God had rather have a land under his curse, to have
nothing but thorns and briars brought forth of it, then that wicked wretches
should partake of the sweetness and fruit of it, for sin does not only pollute
the sinner, but the land, and puts both the sinner and the land under a
curse.

And s^ay them with thirst. In the 36. Psalm. ver. 8. We have a full expression
of the plentiful provision of Cods people that dwell in the house of the Lord.
^he Text says,

They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fullness of thy house, and thou
shall make them to drink of the river of thy pleasures, O what a sweet promise
is here to those that dwell in Gods house, and walk with God as beseems
those that are in his house! they shall have fatness, and drink of the river
of his pleasures: but here is threatened slaying with thirst, that God will not
only take away those rivers, but even drops of water, they shall not have a
drop to cool their tongues, but shall be slain with thirst.

There was a time wherein God had such pity upon his people, that he would
cause water to gush out of the rock, rather then their thirst should not he
satisfied: But now God threatens that he will make the heavens as brass, and
the earth as iron, and though a little water might save their lives, they
should not have it, He will slay them with thirst. Oh what an alteration does
sin make in Gods administrations of his ways toward us!

It is a great judgment thus to be slain with thirst. I knew my self a man
once that lying in a burning fever, professed that if he had all the world at
his dispose, he would give it all for one draught of beer. At so low a rate is
the world at such a time as that is. If the want of a little beer or water to
satisfy thirst for a little while be so great a judgment, Oh what is it then
for all good to be eternally with drawn from all the faculties! Cum in fu ga
aquam turbidam and cadaveribus inquinatam bibisset, negavit unquam se, bibisse
ju cundius, ^unquam scilicet ( ut Cicero lib. 1. Tuso. aiit) sitiens bibisset.
I have read of Darius, that when he fled from his enemies, and being in great
thirst (though those Kings had a delicate drink that was peculiar to them
which they called Coapsis, and others (...)) he met with a dirty puddle of
water with carry on lying in it, and he sucked in that and drank very heartily
of it, and professed, that it was the sweetest draught that ever he drank in his
life.

This meditation may be very useful upon this evil of thirst, that if a little
puddle water can afford so much comfort when the faculties are in such a
disposition as they are fit to draw out that comfort that is in this puddle
water, Oh then what comfort and goodness is there in an infinite God when he
shall communicate to his creature all that good that is communicable, and when
all the faculties of soul and body shall be in a full disposition, to receive
all the good that is communicated, and not put into a disposion by reason of
want, but by reason of the excellency of the faculty raised to such a height,
and enlarged to receive what good God himself has to communicate to his
creature?

But further, it is observable. Though God did bring them into a wilderness,
and set them in a dry land, yet if they might have some drink, though but
water to refresh them in this wilderness, and in this dry land, it were not so
much. Obser. God brings wicked men into straits, and there leaves them destitute
of all succor.
Though they were in a scorching Country, in the wilderness, parched with
heat, might they have but some refreshment there, the judgment were not so
great: but they shall be in a wilderness, in a dry land, and there they shall
be scorched with heat, and then God shall deny them all succor, all help. He
will slay them with thirst.

God uses thus to deal with wicked men, to bring them into extremity, and
there to leave them destitute of all succor, of all help,

We have an excellent Scripture for this, Ezekiel. 22. 20. I will gather you in
mi^e anger, and in my fury, and what then? I will leave you there and melt you,
says God. This may be a Comment upon this Text. I will bring into the
widernesse and set them in a dry land and slay them with thirst.

The Saints may be brought into great extremity, but God leaves them not
there. God makes their extremity his opportunity for mercy, he brings
refreshing to them then, they never have more sweet refreshings from God, then
when they are in the greatest extremities in regard of trouble and affliction.
God promises, Esaias, 4. 6. that he will be a shadow for them in the day time
from the heat, and a covert from storm and from rain.

This is Gods peculiar mercy to the Saints; perhaps they have no shelter now,
but when the storm comes they have a shelter then, and they have a shadow
when the heat comes; in their extremity they have comfort.

But it is otherwise with the wicked, the wicked perhaps may have many shelters
before the storm comes; but when the storm comes, then they are
destitute, they may have many shady places before the heat comes, but when the
heat comes, then they are left fuccourless, then they are slain with thirst.
When wicked men are in prosperity, then there may come one blessing after
another (I mean that which is in it self a blessing) heaped upon them, but
when they come into adversity, when they have most need of comfort, then they
are left destitute.

This slaying with thirst is applied by some spiritually; I will bring a
spiritual famine upon them. When they shall be in a wilderness, in a dry
land, when they shall have most need of comfort for their souls, they shall be
deprived of it. Many men in the time of their health and prosperity have many
sweet promises of the Gospel revealed unto them, many blessed manifestations of
Gods free grace and goodness in his Christ made known unto them, but they
slight and disregard them: But when God shall bring them into the wilderness,
when God shall cause them to be under the torment of a scorching conscience,
when conscience shall be burning, and scalding, then perhaps they may long, Oh
that I had one drop of water, one promise out of the Word to comfort me! Oh
that I might have but never so little refreshing! Oh that I might hear again
those things I have heretofore heard and neglected! But then God may deny one
drop of water to cool their scorching consciences and stay them with thirst,
slay their souls with thirst at that time: And thus many poor creatures are
slain with thirst, that did so little regard those rivers of consolation, that
in the time of their prosperity they might have had.

Ver. 4. And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children
of whoredoms.

I confess at the first view, looking upon this verse I thought I might
quickly pass it over, the rather because we had some such expressions in the
former Chapter, where God threatened that he would have no more mercy upon them:
But the Scripture is a vast depth, and there are many excellent treasures in
it, there is always aliquid revisentibus, something for those that come to see
again and look again, and this something will appear to be much, that we
shall see out of these expressions further then before has been observed.

And I will not have mercy] This Particle [ And] has much in it, it is a most
terrible And. This conjunction many times in Scripture is as a pleonasme, and
does not serve for much use, but here in this place it is of great use, and it
is filled with terror as full as it is possible for such a little particle to
hold.

I know there may be many curiosities sometimes in observatious of particles,
of conjunctions: but we shall not meddle with any curiosity, but speak of that
which is plain, and the intention of the Holy Ghost here. I say this And is a
most dreadful And; mark the conjunction, you had four Ands before, says
God, I will strip her naked, [And] set her as in the day wherein she was borne,
And] make her as a wilderness, [And] set her as a dry Land, [And] slay her
with thirst. Is not here enough? Oh no, there comes a fifth And, and that is
more terrible then all the former four [And] I will have uo more mercy upon
her children.

This adds terror to all the rest. Suppose that all the other four had
been, and if this had not come, there had not been such a grievous
threatening, If God had said, I will strip her naked and set her as in the day
wherein she was borne, and I will make her as a wilderness, and set her as a
dry land, and slay her with thirst, yet if there might be mercy in all this,
their condition had not been so miserable, but (says God) I will do all
these, And I will have no more mercy upon them. Oh this has that terror in
it, that it is impossible for the heart of a man that apprehends it to stand
under it.

And for the opening of this I shall show you how that all the former four not
only may stand with Gods mercy, but they have stood with Gods mercy; that God
had heretofore showed mercy to them when they were in such a low condition in
which they were borne, when they were in the wilderness, when they were in a
dry Land, yea when he did slay them, he showed mercy unto them. But now he
says, he will do thus and thus, and show no mercy unto them. So that then
though this And be conjunctive in Grammar, yet here in Divnity it is a
disjunctive, and a most dreadful disjunctive to part them and mercy a sunder,
yea and to part many of them and mercy eternally asunder.

To show you therefore the sour former, that though they were in such a
condition heretofore, yet God did show them mercy; now what a condition is
that God will show them no mercy. As

First, In the day wherein they were borne, that (as you may remember) I showed
you out of the 16. Ezekiel. what a low and pitiful condition the people of
Israel were in, they were cast out in the field, and they were in their blood,
and not washed, and the like: But mark in the 8. ver. I passed by thee and
looked upon thee, behold the time was a time of love, and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness, yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into
covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine. Here are the highest and the
fullest expressions of Gods grace that could be. First, I looked upon her, and
then the time was a time of love, and then, I spread my skirt over thee, and I
entered into covenant with thee, and thou becamist mine: Here are all these
expressions of mercy, even at that time when they were cast out as forlorn in
the open field, and no eye pitt^ed them: but now they are threatened to be cast
out into the open field again, and no eye to pity them in heaven or in
earth, no, nor the eye of God to pity them: now God threatens to cast them
off for ever, so as he will see them in their blood, but it shall be no more a
time of love, but a time of wrath, and he will no more enter into covenant with
them, neither shall they be his.

2. When God brought them into the wilderness, God there showed them mercy,
for that you have a marvellousfull Text, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He found them in a
desert land, and in the wast howling wilderness; but mark, he led them about,
he instructed them, he kept them as the apple of his eye. Though they were in a
wast howling wilderness, yet they were as dear to God as the apple of his
eye. Yea further, ver. 11. As an eagie stirreeth up her nost, fluttereth over
her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings,
so the Lord alone did lead them. It is the note of Paulus Fagius, citing for it
Rabbi Solomon upon this, as the Eagle carries her young ones, not as other
birds, for other birds it is observed carry their young ones in their claws,
the Eagle bears hers upon her wings, and this is the reason that is observed,
because the Eagle is more tender of her young ones then other birds are, why?
for other birds carrying their young ones in their claws, if any shoot at them,
they hit the young ones, and kill them first, but may miss the old one; but
the Eagle carries hers upon her back, upon her wings, that whosoever shoots at
her young ones, they must shoot through her first: So says God, I carried you
in the wilderness as the Eagle carries her young ones upon her wings, that if
any shoot at you to hurt you, they must shoot through me first before they can
come at you. This was Gods mercy to them when they were in the wast howling
wilderness, here is not such an And, they were in a wilderness, yet God had
much mercy upon them.

a dry Land, in this wilderness they wanted water, yet (though they were ready
to murmr) he made them suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the
flinty rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. You will say, when did God make them suck honey out
of the rock? we read indeed that water gushed out of the rock in a dry land,
but here the Scripture speaks, that he made them suck honey and oil out of the
flinty rock. It is a note of Chrysostom speaking upon this very thing, of Gods
making them suck honey and oil out of the rock: Not, says he, that there
was indeed honey or oil came out of the rock, but because they being in the
wilderness, and in such great want, the water that came out of the rock was to
them as sweet and delightful, as if it had been honey or oil.

Thence he gathered that note, that want and necessity will make every thing
very sweet and comfortable, water will be as honey and oil to them that want.
When you are at your full tables, This wine pleases you not, and that beer
pleases you not; but if you were in necessity, water would be as wine, it
would be as honey and oil to you.

Yea but what say you to the fourth And, He will slay them with thirst? God
slew his people, yet for all that at that very time he showed abundance of
mercy to his people; when God did come with his sword in his hand, yet with
abundance of compassion in his heart. The Scripture is in Psalm. 78. 34. Mark
what the Text says there, When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God, and they remembered that God was their
Rock. Well, they sought him, and they remembered this, that God was their
Redeemer, but did God redeem them at that time? Yes, verse 38. He being full
of compassion for gave their iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea many a time
he turned his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath, Or as the old
Translation has it, He called back his anger, which here he will not do: He
was full of compassion, and forgave their iniquity, and called back his anger,
though he did slay them at that time.

He denies to do it here, he lets out his anger here to the full, and will
not call it back, I will have no mercy upon them: And it is observable in this
Scripture that yet the Text says before that, they did but flatter God with
their mouth: though they did but flatter God with their mouth, yet such was
Gods mercy toward them, that he calls back his anger.

My brethren, God has a high esteem of his worship in a Nation; though it
should be but external (but we must not rest in that) yet many times external
humilliation and worshipping of God in a Nation has been effectual to
deliver them from external judgments.

Therefore we have much cause to be encouraged, in that God does stir up our
Nation at this day, yea and those particularly that are going in that
expedition and service for the Kingdom, that God does stir them up to go
forth worshipping of him.

Our adversaries come against them with Oaths and curses, and they go against
them with fasting and prayer, not externally only, but we hope internally many
of them, and thousands that join with them in our Nation. And if God will show
so much mercy to them when they did but flatter him with their mouth, surely
then when as there are so many true worshippers of him, yea those that are the
instruments of the work; we have much cause to think that God will show mercy
to us, and that if anger were come out against us, yet God will call it back.

Thus then we see that so long as Gods people be Gods people, though they may
be brought to great troubles (we cannot be secured from troubles) yet still
there is mercy for them; so long as they are his people, so long as the knot
is between God and them, and they are in Covenant, there is mercy for them.
But now when they are cast off, now there comes an and, I will do thus and
thus, bring them into these extremities, and I will show no mercy to them,
there shall be judgment without mercy. The observation then from hence is,
Obser.
when God comes upon the wicked with wrath, he comes with pure wrath. Wrath
without mixture of mercy, and this is intolerable. We have a remarkable place
for this Isa. 7. 5. An evil (says the Text) an only evil, Wrath upon the
wi^ed is pure wrath with out mixture of mercy.
behold it is coming. Mark, there may come an evil to the people of God, that
which materially is evil, but it can never be said of Gods people that an
evil, an only evil is coming: If an evil come, there comes a great good
together with that evil: but now it is upon the wicked, an evil, and an only
evil is coming. God threatens Psalm. 75. 8. that he has a cup in his hand,
full of mixture, the mixture of that is an aggravation of the wrath that is in
it: but here there is a cup in Gods hand without mixture, and the want of
mixture is the aggravation of the evil of this cup.

When wrath is pure, then it is grown beyond anger, and grown to hatred:
murmuring way that God brought them into the wilderness because he hated them.
Deuteronomy. 1. 27. But now God threatens to bring them into the wilderness and to
hate them indeed, according to that Hosea 9. 15. All their wickedness is in
Gilgal, for there I hated them. David prays Psalm. 6. 1. that God would not
rebuke him in his wrath, neither chasten him in his hot displeasure; but what
then? Have mercy upon me O Lord: So long as God shows mercy he does not
chasten in his sore displeasure: but when God comes with afflictions and
denies mercy, then he comes in sore displeasure indeed, it is hatred.



There may be evils (that materially are so) upon the godly, but yet they
shall come upon them when it shall be seasonable for them: but when they come
upon the wicked it shall be when they are most unseasonable for them: As a
husbandman if he would cut his Tree so as only to lop it that it may grow and
flourish again, he will be sure to do it in due time, as in January or
February, Judgments upon the wicked at times most unseasonable for them.
but if he would cut it that so it may dye, he will lop it when it flourishes
most, at Midsummer. God indeed lets wicked men grow up and flourish to the
height of their prosperity, and then he comes and loppeth them because then
he knows they must die and perish. It were better to be lopped in January, in
winter time before you flourish, then you may live for your good; but if you
stay till the summer, you die for it. You have an excellent Scripture, Zeph. 2.
4. They shall drive out Ashdod at noon day. In those Countries that were
exceeding hot and scorching, she pheards and others that had their business
abroad, used to keep their houses at noon day, or get into some shady places
and sleep. Now when God threatens a judgment in wrath, and denies mercy,
says he, they shall drive out Ashdod at noone day, in the worst time that
possibly Ashdod can be driven out, in the midst of scorching. Because God
intended to destroy them, he drives them out at noone day.

Again thirdly, When God comes upon the wicked and denies mercy, he
regards not the proportion of any affliction or any evil, whether it be
enough or not enough for them, what is that to him? When he comes upon his
own people he weighs out his wrath. Never did any skillful Physician or
Apothecary more carefully weigh out to every dram what the potion should be
that is to be given to a child, God proportions afflictions to his childdren,
but not to the wicked.
then God does weigh out every affliction that he sends upon his children.
The difference is just as if you should go to the Apothecaries to take
ratsbane to poison or kill vermin, you do not weigh out how much you should
take, but give them it at adventure, and let them take as much as they will,
and let them burst: but if you take any thing for your child, if it have any
strong virtue in i^, or without composition, it may be poison, you will take
heed, you will not take a dram, a grain too much, but will be sure to weigh it
out exactly.

Thus though when God comes to his children he weighs out their
afflictions, yet when he comes with judgments upon the wicked, he cares not
how much, how many or great they be, whether suitable to their conditions or no,
whether they can bear them or no, whether their backs break or no, he comes
with judgments upon them to destroy them.

Fourthly, Hos. 7. 14. Ezekiel. 8. 18
When afflictions comes without mercy upon the wicked, howling. He tells
them though they cry aloud, yea cry with tears he will not hear them,

Fifthly, God commands all creatures that they should deny help to

Sixthly, There is the curse of God mixed with every judgment to drive

Lastly, One judgment is but the making way for another, yea all judgments

Wherefore all ye Saints of God who are under any affliction at any time, be
patient and quiet, be contented under it, for though your afflictions before
and grievous, Lect. 3.
yet God delivers you from such afflictions as these wherein he says he will
show no mercy.

But further. I will not have mercy upon her children.

Her children.] The judgment of God in punishing the sin of the fathers upon
the children we spoke somewhat of in the Chapter before, we will wholly let
that pass now: and only consider children in another way then we did before,
in a political consideration, for certainly that is the meaning of the Text, I
will not have mercy upon her children; that is, I will not have mercy upon the
particular people that belong to Iezreel. Private and particular people are
called the daughters of Jerusalem, the daughters of such a Country. So that the
whole community together with the officers and Governors they are as the
Mother, and the private and particular people they are as the children. So that
when God says he will have no mercy upon her children, he does not only
threaten the State and the Church, the Governors and the whole Community thus,
but he threatens every particular person of them, though you that are in the
multitude perhaps think you may escape in the crowde; No says God, I will
look to every one of you of the multitude of the private and particular
persons of Israel, and my wrath shall not only come out against those that are
in higher places, but it shall come out against you also, I will slay her
children.

It is true indeed, the heads and governors of places are usually most
invelved in the guilt of the sins of nations, and their judgments are usually
most dreadful when God comes with national judgments. As Number. 35. 3. 4.
The Text says there that Israel joined themselves to Baal* Peor, and the anger
of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and the Lord said unto Moses, take all
the heads of the people, and hang them up before the sun. The Lords anger was
kindled against the people, but he bade Moses especially look to the heads, and
take them and hang them up be^^re the Lord, that the fierce anger of the Lord
might be turned away from Israel.

Certainly execution of wrath upon great ones, upon such as have been heads in
evil, is a Sacrifice exceeding well pleasing to God. But though God ay^^e at
them especially in national judgments, yet the multitude and private people
must not think to escape, and that upon these grounds.

First, Because many times it is for their sins that God suffers their
Governors to do so much evil as they do, Gods judgments against people, as
well as against Governors, and why.
As, Israel had sinned, and God was wrath with Israel, therefore David did what
he did in numbering the people. When you see your Governors do that which is
naught, lament for your own sins; do not spend your time only in crying out
against them, but look to yourselves, it is for your sins that God has left
2 Samuel 24. 1.


Chron. 20. 33. it is clear there, Howbeit the high places were not taken
away, why? For as yet the people had not prepared their hearts to seek the God
of their Fathers. Why? should they have pulled down the high places? no, but
they should have been in a preparation for the pulling of them down.
Certainly this is the great cause why our high places are not pulled down, why
Reformation has gone on no better then it has, and why we have so much evil
remaining amongst us, because the people have not prepared their hearts, they
are not in a disposition to receive the mercy that our governors have hearts
to bring unto us.

They have hearts to work for us, but when we speak to them of what is fit to
be done, their answer is, but is England in a fit disposition to receive such a
thing as that is? so that the truth is, although you are ready to cry out of
your Governors, you say, they have power in their hands, why do they not
reform things? yet the guilt in great part devolves upon the people, they are
not in a fit d^sposition to receive such reformation: therefore God threatens
the child^en, the people here.

Again further, It may be it is from you that the Governors that are evil are
so much encouraged and abetted in that which is evil: though you do it not,
yet you so much encourage them as the guilt redounds upon you.

Yea lastly, If you do but obey them in any thing that is evil, in doing of
that, the guilt devolveth upon you, for you should not do it, but rather obey
God then man.

Many think to make this their plea, they are commanded to do thus and thus,
and Governors would have them do it, and it is Law and the like, and they
think upon this plea they may do any thing in the world. This will not secure
you, God may come with judgment without mercy upon the children as well as
upon the Mother. And if Gods wrath should come in national judgments against
England, let the people know that they are like to smart most dreadfully, for
never was their a time in our days, nor in our forefathers days, that so
much depended upon the people as at this day; never were they called to that
help as now they are called to at this day.

So that the people now may have reformation, Much depends now upon the people.
they may have blessings, if it be not through their own default. As Cant. 7.
1. The Church is there described in her beauty, and it begins at her feet,
How beautiful are thy feet? And Cant. 5. There Christ is described in his
beauty, and it begins at the head, His head is as the most fair gold.

God sometimes makes use of the people to be great means, and perhaps the
beginning of means to bring beauty to the Church, though they cannot perfect
it. Heretofore private persons could do little: Alas though they were under
grievous oppressions, they knew not now to help themselves.

Many men that had purses, and strength, and heads, and hearts and all, yet
they knew not what to do, but to make their moan one to another, and to
heaven; but now it is otherwise, now you may do somewhat else besides making
your moan one to another, yea besides making your moa^e to heaven: for you
that have purses now you may see ways to employ them for the public good,
for Religion, for liberty, you that have strength of body may know what to do,
you that have head-pieces, I mean parts, you are called to help, you may join
together for God and the good of your Country, you may do much more then
heretofore could be done.

Wherefore now if you should desert the Cause of God, and desert those that you
have trusted, you must expect the most dreadful wrath of God, and that without
mercy, even upon the people that ever was upon any nation since the beginning
of the world, for never any nation that we know of, had more depending upon the
people then there is at this day upon the people of England, O consider of it,
and oh that all the people of the land did but know what God would have them to
do in such a time as this?

Again, Obser.
I will not have mercy upon her children: upon particular private persons in
the society. One note more upon that, It is a dangeraus thing for men in any
society to do as the most do: If they be in a civil society to give their
votes and to do as the greater part does; if you be in a Church society, to do
as the greater part does without any examination of it, this dangerous. For
though the greater part, the community may do that which is evil, you shall
not be excused by that, for you to say, why what could I help it, when the most
does it? God comes upon private and particular men, upon the children, even
every one of them: And why?

For they are the children of whoredoms.

That is either passively or actively, passively, because they were begotten of
whoredoms and brought up, their education has been in whoredom, they have
had it from their parents, Or else they are the children of whoredoms
actively, they live in the same whoredoms their Mother did.

From hence,

First, Obser.
There is little hope of children brought up in wicked education, who have
wicked parents also. If the dye have been in the wool it is hard to get out
of the cloth. If wickedness, if evil principles have been dropped into
children, there is little hope of them for good, especially of those children
that have been brought up in ways of superstition and Idolatry, little hope of
children ill educated.
their hearts being so soyled, and defiled, and hardened in superstitious and
idolatrous ways, they seldom come to any good. Therefore that which has been
mentioned is very good, namely of ways to take the children of Papists to
bring them up in the education and knowledge of the truth.

Yet Secondly, Obser.
This shall not excuse children, though they be the children of whoredoms. It
is no excuse for them to say they had it from their Parents, and they did as
their Parents have done, and as they bade them, and according as they brought
them up. No it excuses not at all, for the wrath of God comes upon them that
are the children of whoredoms.

Then what a mercy is it for us to be brought up in the truth; to have Parents
that do profess the truth, and for our education to be in the way of truth?
It is a mercy that we do not consider of to give God the glory of it: How
dangerous is it to have superstitious Idolatrous Parents, and to have such kind
of education! there is not one of ten thousand that alters his religion: If
they have Turks, or Jews, or Papists to their parents, and such education, it
is not one of ten thousand I say that alters his religion. Therefore it is
like our condition would have been the same if God had not cast it that our
parents should be such as profess the truth, and our education according to
the truth. Bless God for this. And you that are parents do you look to your
children, and bring them up in the truth. Children who have gracious principles
dropped into them, and those watered by prayers and tears, there is hope of
them* and not of them alone, but of the nation where they live.

Lastly (which is the observation which mainely we are to consider of) When
Gods judgments come abroad in the world, Obser.
let the children of whoredoms look to it, God threatens he will have no
mercy upon them, or they are the children of whoredoms. The children of
whoredoms are the butt of Gods wrath when his judgments come abroad in the
world.

Isa. 27. 4 Fury is not in me, says the Text, that is, it is not in me
toward my Saints; When judgments are abroad let the children of whoredoms, not
the children of the Bride-chamber fear.
though I come out in a kind of fury, yet it is not in me toward them, what
then? Who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go
thorough them, I would burn them together. When my wrath comes against the
briars and thorns, I will go through them, and burn them together; but for my
children, fury is not in me toward them: When Gods wrath is abroad in the
world, let not the children of the bride-chamber fear, but let the children of
whoredoms fear and quake, let briars and thorns fear, but not the fruitful
trees in Gods garden: Godjudgements know how to make a difference between men,
they are dis stinguishing things when they come abroad: God sends not his
judgments hand over head, but puts into them a distinguishing quality. God
has a chamber of rest and safety for his people, wherein he will hide them
till his indignation be over-past; but for the children of whoredoms,
superstitious, Idolatrous, wicked and ungodly people, they are the people of
Gods indignation, they are like Idumea, the people of Gods curse, as you have
it, Isa. 34. 5.

There are a people this day amongst us who are certainly the people of Gods
curse, and let them look to it as well as they will. Rev. 14. 8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen ( says an Angel there) and mark what follows. ver. 9. And
another Angel followed, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast
and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is powered out without mixture
into the cup of his indignation. It is according to that in the Text here, God
will have no mercy, they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God without
mixture, without mixture of any mercy at all. And further, He shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for
ever and ever, And they have no rest day nor night that worship the beast and
his image.

Here is a dreadful threat against the children of whoredoms, against such as
follow the ways of the great whore of Babylon. Blessed are they that in these
times have testimony in their own consciences, that it has been their care
above all things to draw themselves out from the guilt of all superstitious and
Idolatrous vanities, and to keep themselves (according to that light that God
has discovered to them) pure from the pollutions of that man of sin. Blessed I
say are these, they need not fear this day; but for those that have involved
themselves in the guilt of those pollutions, they have need to humble their
souls before God, and to cry mightily, for wrath is going out against the
children of whoredoms. This Text here spoken of, is not meant only of hell
hereafter, but it is meant of judgment even in this world: And above all times
that ever yet have been since Antichrist began, it is a most desperate thing to
be a Papist in these days, because now is the time for God to make these
children of whoredoms the very Butt of his wrath and indignation.

We hear of wars, and rumors of wars, and a great deal of stir there is
abroad: My brethren, keep your hearts chaste to God, and fear not, for God has
another manner of people to deal withal then you; you shall be sealed first,
before the wrath come out. Though I cannot excuse you altogether from suffering
some afflictions, these children of whoredoms may bring some trouble upon the
Saints for the present; yea perhaps some of you may have your blood spilt, but
God has mercy to bestow upon you, but for them there is wrath, and wrath
without mixture, God says he will have no mercy upon the children of whoredoms.

Let such as are going forth then in this Service, for Religion and Liberty, go
forth with courage and undauntednesse of spirit, why? for they fight against
none but those that God fights against. Who are they but the children of
whoredoms that they go to fight against, those who have showed themselves to
be open fighters against God and his truth, such as are most abominable
swearers, cursers, and blasphemers, such as make no other use of the light of
the Gospel that they have, but only to scorn and contemn it, such as are open
despisers of God and his truth, and of his people? Certainly if there be a
cursed generation upon the face of the earth, these are the people, whose
mouths are full of curses, and certainly Gods curse is upon them who are so
full of cursings themselves. If there be any of you here that are now, or
hereafter may go forth in this service, your spirits should even rise with
indignation against such monsters upon earth, and go against them as David
against Goliath, What shall this uncircumcised Philistine defy the host of the
living God? Thus your hearts should rise if you have any love to God and his
truth; Shall a company of cursed monsters that do nothing but blaspheme, and
curse, and swear, and defy God and his servants, and his Tabernacle, and
worship; shall these uncircumcised Philistines go on thus defying God and his
truth? If you have the hearts of men within you, especially of Christians, me
thinks you should not be able to bear it, but go forth against them with
fullness of spirit and resolution, certainly God will make them a prey to you,
they are not only such as not only have put off Christianity, and are become
Atheists, but they have put off all kind of humanity, and are rather turned
monstrous beasts, or devils. Fear them not, though their hearts be full of
pride and rage, and though they beast never so much what they are, or what they
have done, or what they will do; I say fear them not, for this is part of the
curse of God that is upon them that though God fights against them, they will
not see it, they shall not see it, because God intends to destroy them;
though judgments are out against them, Revel. 9. 21. Chap. 16, 9. 11.
yet they will not repent. You shall find it diverse times in the book of the
Revelation, that those that followed Antichrist, though they were tormented,
all the judgments of God were against them, yet they repented not. This I say
is the curse of God upon such, God will not give them repentance unto life, for
they are the children of whoredoms, whom God intends to have no mercy upon:
therefore the higher their rage rises, the higher your hearts should rise
against them.

But we must go on to the 5. verse.

For their mother has played the harlot.

Their mother, that is, the State and the Church, for they were both involved
in one, has played the harlot. This [ For] has reference two ways; either it
may have reference to those words, I will not have mercy upon them, for not
only they are, but their mother is defiled with whoredoms, she has played the
harlot: or secondly, it has reference only to the latter part, they are the
children of whoredoms, for their mother has played the harlot: either it
refers to the reason why God will not have mercy upon them, because their
mother has played the harlot: or secondly to the reason why they are the
children of whoredoms, for their mother has played the harlot. And from both
these references we have very useful observations for us.

The first, Obser.
God cannot endure a succession in wickedness, I will not have mercy upon
them, their mother has played the harlot, they are children of whoredoms
themselves, and their mother has played the harlot, there is a succession of
wickedness among them, and that I cannot bear. The ground is, because those
that keep up a succession of wickedness from the mother to the children, and
so go on downward, they are guilty of all the wickednesses that went before
them in that line; Else how can that be understood where Christ says he will
require all the blood from Abel to Zacharias upon that generation; succession
for si^ne i^ dreadful.
but because they continuing in that way of sin, kept up the succession of that
sin, and so that generation was guilty of all the sins of that kind that went
before even unto Abel. So the father is a whore-master, and the child he
proves to be one too, and so goes on, the child is not only guilty of that
sin of his own, but of his fathers, and of his grandfathers, and he is
guilty of all that kind of sin that is gone before, even up to the beginning
of the world; why? because he keeps up the succession of that sin in the
world. This is a most terrible thing to consider of, enough to wound the
strongest heart in the world, especially of those that know they have had
wicked Parents.

Again, For their mother has played the harlot, consider this word For, as
having reference to the reason why they are children of whoredoms, for their
mother has played the harlot. The observation is,

Children usually go according to their parents, which way their parents go,
commonly the children go. It is a usual thing where there are profane
parents to have profane children, if the parents swear to have swearing
children, if the parents be superstitious to have superstitious children; if
parents be scorners of Religion, to have children scorners too: we find it true
in experience, in that new nickname that is brought up on the godly in room
of the former, it is as frequent in the mouths of children as in others,
because children go according to what their fathers formerly did: I will give
you one notable Text of Scripture for this, it is 2 King. 2. 23. When Elisha
the Prophet was going up to Bethel, there came forth little children out of the
City and said unto him, Go up thou bald-head, go up thou bald-head. The thing
that I note it for is this, that not only the children did it, and so were
destroyed, (for two she-beares came out of the wilderness and tare 42. of
them) but what children were they that did this? If you observe the Text, you
shall find that they were the children of Bethel; and what place was that?
That was one of the places where the calves were set up, and it was a place of
much superstition, and the children were as superstitious as their parents: A
place that had the name, the house of God, but a place exceedingly abused, and
no place did more degenerate from the name then it, it was a Bethaven, a house
of vanity and wickedness. It was the place that was most superstitious, and
those were the children that scorned at the Prophet: But we need no other proof
but only experience, yet there is one notable Scripture further for it, Jer. 7.
18. The children (says the Text) gather wood, their fathers kindle the fire,
and their mothers kneaded the dough: the children joined you see: Pelagius
thought that there was no sin came into the world but only by imitation,
children imitating their parents. Certainly imitation is of great power and
force to prevail with the hearts of children. You that are wicked parents, had
need to look to it what you do before your children. He that sins before a
child, specially a parent, sins doubly, Qui peccat coram puero his peccat.
for a child will be ready to imitate it. What, will you not only sin against
God, and be enemies unto him, but will you leave a succession, that when you
are dead and gone, some must out of your loins, and from your bowels,
blaspheme God after you are rotten in your graves? Suppose you that are parents
had a plague sore upon you, would you go among your children, and breath upon
them? this cruelty is much worse, will you go into your families, and breath
infection into your children, and so make them like you, and guilty of your
sins, and of the plagues of God together with you? oh cruel parents!

On the otherside, as therefore children of whoredoms, because their mother
has played the harlot, why then should not children be gracious and godly, who
have gracious and godly parents? Why should it not be said, This child is a
godly child, for his mother was a gracious woman, and his father a godly man?
You that have godly parents, let this be your Encomium, You are godly and
gracious children, and you had godly and gracious parents, this will be your
honor before the Saints. But how vile is it, when it may be said, Here is a
wicked wretch, yet he had a godly father, and a godly mother; here is an
unclean and filthy liver, yet he had gracious parents? It is no wonder to say
thus, This man is filthy, for his father was filthy, and his mother was a
harlot; but to look upon one, and say, Here is a whoremaster, yet his father
was a godly gracious man; Here is a harlot, yet her mother was a holy woman; O
how vile is that! I remember a speech of that reverend Master Bolton, who died
not long since; It is repo^ted, that upon his deathbed he had his children
come to him, and he speaks thus unto them, I do believe, says he, there is
never a one of you will dare to meet me at the tribunal of Christ in an
unregenerate condition. So let me say to you that are evil children of Godly
parents, let me in their names speak to you, How dare you, with what face do
you think you shall dare to meet with your godly father and gracious mother
before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ? at that day if your godly father
stand at the right hand of Christ, how dare you appear before that face in the
guilt of those horrible wickednesses that you now live in? Certainly the
thought of this has power to daunt your hearts.

She has done shamefully. The word in the Hebrew (it is in Hyphil, and so it
may be translated transitively) signifies, pudef aciens.
She has made ashamed, as well as done shamefully; and so I find it according
to some thus rendered, She has made ashamed her husband, she has made
ashamed her children, she has made ashamed her self, and all these three may
be meant. Yea I conceive the intent of the holy Ghost is to express them all.

Her husband first, the Church is the Spouse of Jesus Christ, Christ is the
husband of the Church, and you know the Scripture says that the woman is the
glory of the man. I remember I gave the meaning of that heretofore; So the
Church being the Spouse of Christ, should be the glory of Christ: the woman
should be the glory of the man, but yet being wicked and filthy, she makes her
husband many times ashamed. The evil of the wife is a shame to the husband, so
the evil of the Church is a shame to Jesus Christ. The Church in Scripture is
called the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. If our brethren be enquired after,
they are the messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. Isa. 4. 5.
Upon all the glory shall be a defense.

It should be so, but when it comes to be defiled, it shameth Christ, their
wickedness reflects upon Christ. Christ is said to walk in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. Every Church is a Candle-stick, and it should
be a golden Candle-sticke, but if it come to be a filthy rustie Candle-stick,
The Saints must take heed they be not a shame to Christ.
it is a dishonor unto Christ who walks amongst them.

Wicked men do not shame Christ, but godly do. My brethren let us take heed
of that, It is an evil thing to bring shame to our selves, and one to another,
but to bring shame upon JESUS CHRIST is the greatest evil. Many of you perhaps
are ashamed of Christ, take heed you be not a shame to Christ. They are ashamed
of Christ that are ashamed to appear in the cause of Christ; but as for you
that are so, Christ has more cause to be ashamed of you, for you are a shame
to him.

It is true, I cannot deny it but many Churches of God, and that of late have
brought some shame to Jesus Christ by their dissentions and fractions, and they
must take shame to themselves, and they have taken shame to themselves, they
have acknowledged it to the glory of Christ, and in that regard in some measure
have washed off that shame that they have brought to Christ.

Again further, a shame they are to their children. Wicked Parents are a shame
to their children; when a child appears forward, towardly, and hopeful, and
it be said, Would you not wonder to see him so forward? the father of him is a
beastly dr^nkard, a filthy whore-monger, of a vile and malignant spirit; Wicked
parents are a shame to their children.
now the child is ashamed to hear of the evil of his father, and of the evil
of his mother. As foolish children are a shame to their Parents, so wicked
Parents are a shame to their children. You that have gracious children take
heed you be not a shame to them, and so a shame to your selves.

And then a shame to her self, she has played the harlot, she has done
shamefully. Wherein had she done shamefully? I will only mention one
particular. Certainly that shame of hers was especially in subjecting Religion
to carnal policy. For what did she do? what was the great sin of the ten
Tribes? It was this, because they were afraid that if they did go up to
Jerusalem to worship, the people would then depart from the house of Jeroboam,
to the house of David, therefore out of political regards they would have the
worship set up at Dan and Bethel, there they would have Calves, they must not
go up to Jerusalem the place which God had appointed to worship in, but at Dan
and Bethel. This was a mere politic fetch, for they could not but acknowledge
that God did require that they should worship at Jerusalem where the Temple
was, and there was no other reason why they would worship at Dan and Bethel,
but merely out of State policy that they might prevent the people from going
back to the house of David, and indeed they did profess so much themselves.
Here then they did shamfully.

The Observation then from hence is, that for governors or any to subject
Religion to policy is a shameful thing. It is shameful to make Religion an
underling, and to make policy the head. Perhaps they call this wisdom, a
prudentiall way, we must be careful and wise to foresee inconveniences that
may follow. But what if God give it another name? God may give it a name of
base temporizing, a name of folly and wickedness: to subject Religion to
policy it is shameful, because it abaseth that which is the great honor of
any Country, it makes it an underling: what is the excellency of man but
Religion? what is the excellency of a Country but Religion? and what has
England been glorious for more then for Religion? Now to put the excellency of
a thing under any inferior, this is shameful, to put the Crown that is for
the head under ones foot is a dishonor to it: although a thing has in it self
but little excellency, if it be brought beneath it self under other things
that have not so great an excellency in them, it makes it vile.

And shameful also it is because it holds forth this, that we dare not trust

Shameful it is again because it is gross folly, for there is no such way to

What cause had they then to be ashamed of this, that God should take that
which they thought to help themselves by, and make that the very thing that
should cause their ruin? And certainly it will be so, they that are of the
deepest and politikest ferches and reaches, if they think to secure themselves
and preserve their peace, out of that principle, so as Religion must come
under, and must be serviceable, it will appear at last they do shamefully,
God will make them ashamed of it one way or other, it will be the only way to
undo themselves and us. I confess in matters of Religion there are some
commands that are affirmitive precepts: These though they do ligare semper,
yet not ad semper, there is not a necessity that at every time and instant they
should be urged, so that it may be that a people may be in such a frame that
men cannot but by degrees bring in a reformation to the height of it, and then
it is not carnal policy to bring in such ways of God gradually, as are
commanded by affirmitive precepts; but negative precepts bind semper and
adsemper, and the State must look to that, that they do nothing against Christ
out of policy that they do not hinder by any positive Law the way of Christ,
for though Christ may be willing to forbear some Ordinances for a time, and he
does it out of mercy to a people, he says he will have mercy and not
sacrifice, but Christ will never bear that there should be any thing done
against him in that time. If they should out of any State policy to preserve
peace, or to gratify an evil party, sacrifice any part of Religion, or any
godly person, this will prove a shameful thing, Christ accounts it so, and
whosoever does so will be ashamed of it at the last.

Now my brethren, why should not God be trusted? let us look at Religion in
the first place, and so pray we that those who are our reformers who have
power in their hands may never prove to be guilty of this shameful way of
putting Religion under policy. I will give you a notable example in Scripture
about it. It is Josh. 5. When Joshua had brought the people of Israel over
Jordan (that you know was the very beginning of their entrance into Canaan) now
as soon as they were brought unto the borders of the Land, they were to
encounter with all their enemies, and you may imagine that when Joshua had
passed the river the, people might think that all the Country would be about
their ears, one would think then that policy would have taught them to lay
aside all thoughts of Religion, and to look to their enemies that were at hand,
if ever they were outrageous they would be then, and therefore now let us mind
nothing but arming our selves against them: But mark now God goes another way
to work, as soon as they were gone over Jordan, and were upon the borders of
the Land of Canaan, they must go and circumcise themselves, and you know when
they were circumcised they were sore that they could not fight. Simeon and Levi
destroyed a whole City when they were circumcised, they were not then in a
posture of fighting or defending themselves, but lay at the mercy of their
enemies. But this was Gods wisdom. Nay further, they must go and keep the
passover too, they must mind and tend Religion: And mark you shall find in
the latter end of the Chapter, that after they had been circumcised and kept
the Passover, then appears one to Joshua with a drawn sword, and says he, I
am the Captain of the Lords Hosts. Then the Captain of the Lords Host appears
to fight for them when they had once obeyed; whereas had they neglected
Circumcision and the Passover, and thought of fighting only, they, might have
missed of the Captain of the Lords Hosts to have fought for them, and what
would have become of them then? So you see God would have us mind Religion in
the most dangerous times, and though we think we must mind our peace and
safety, and lay our hands upon our swords ^or our defense, yet let us be
careful of our Religion, and then we shall have a Captain of the Lords host
come and fight for us.

Mark 8. 15. we are charged to take heed of two sorts of leaven, The leaven of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and the leaven of Herod. The leaven of the Scribes
and Pharisees is corruption in Church affairs, the leaven of Herod is corruption
in Religion too, but in order of the Commonwealth, in bringing under things of
God to the affairs of the State, for in this Herod was like Jeroboam, he was
afraid of his kingdom as Jeroboam was, he had many ways and plots to keep
himself in that kingdom as Jeroboam had, and many did cleave to Herod in his
plots, as Israel clave to Jeroboam in his, therefore says Christ, take heed
not only of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees but of the leaven of Herod.
And it may be the Lord saw us to prone of sinful compliances, even ready to
have sacrificed much of his worship and many of his Saints for the obtaining
peace in the State, Lect. 4.
and so to have fallen off from that reformation that both God and his people
expected, hence he has taken the work into his own hands, he will bring
about his own work, though it may cost us dear, who knows how much blood?

The Fourth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 5. She that conceived them has done shamefully; for she said, I
will go after my lovers, that give me my bread, and my water, my wool, and my
flax, mine oil and my drink.


GOds threats against Israel to make her as a wilderness and as a dry land, to
slay her with thirst, in the 3. verse, to show no mercy to her children, in the
4. ver. The reason because her mother had played the harlot, in the beginning
of this 5. ver. we finished the last day. Only in a word to give you one note
from that title of Mother here, that we observed not before.

The Community of the Church and civil State is called Mother, in way of
distinction from private people, and private people are as the children of that
Mother, so we opened it in the second ver.

The Observation is,

The Community of a State and Church should be to particular persons as a
Mother. Obs.
They should have the affection of children to it, they should take much to
heart those things that concern it, the sufferings of State or Church should
be the sufferings of all particulars. There are children of Belial that are
risen up among us, Every one should have such an affection toward the Church
and State as children toward the mother
that are even taring the bowels of our Mother, a viperous generation that
seek to eat out the bowels of her Mother, let our hearts break for this, as
Psalm. 35. 14. I bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his Mother. Let not
us lift up our heads and be jolly now, but for the present bow down heavily as
those that are called (though in some respects to rejoice,) yet in many others
to mourn this day for our Mother. Yea let our hearts rise against these vile
monsters that join with a Malignant party to bring such woeful confusion and
trouble even to our Mother. We may say to them justly as Saul said unto
Jonathan passionatly, You children of the rebellious and perverse, why have you
chosen to join with them for the confusion of your Mothers nakedness. Let us
do what we can to help. Shall we see her bowels torn and not stir at all?
She calls now to us to come and help her, and let us know that if it go ill
with her, it cannot go well with us.

If the Mothers breast thorough some incurable disease must be cut off, the
tender Father takes away the children and will not suffer them to behold the
torture of their Mother; Who knows but that this has been Gods end in taking
away his dear children in former times, because he would not have their
tender hearts to see so much sorrow and evil as should befall their Mother?
And what God has reserved us to see in the sufferings of our Mother we do not
know. Howsoever let not her suffer by us, let not her suffer for want of our
help, let not her suffer without us, let not us be so unnatural as to be every
one shifting for himself, for the private and particular, neglecting the
public, the community, neglecting our Mother that should be as dear to us as
the bowels out of which we came.

She has done shamefully. We should have the affections of children to her
though she has done shamefully.

But further, Here you have the amplification of her whoredoms, she has
played the harlot, and so played as she has done shamefully: The latter end of
the verse is by way of probation of this amplification, for how does it appear
she has done shamefully? for she has said, I will go after my lovers, etc.
For the first then, this amplification of her whoredom, her whoredom is such
as is shameful, Hence first observe.

That sin, Obser.
but especially whoredom is a shameful thing. Pro. 13. 5. A wicked man is
loathsome, and comes to shame: Pro. 14. 34. Sin is a reproach to a nation,
or to any people; Sin of its own nature let it be what it will be, it is
shameful: Much more then whoredom, to play the harlot, for all sin does
drown a man, it brings him beneath the excellency of a man, it is contrary to
the image of God in man, to that wherein true honor, beauty, glory does
consist. It makes men vile. I will give you but one Text for it, Dan, 11. 21.
And there shall arise a vile person. Who was that? It was according to
interpreters, Antiochus Epiphanes, the great King of Assyria, and yet a vile
person. Josephus tells us that the Samaritans when they were in danger of
suffering from him because he thought them to be Jews, they wrote to him in
this manner. To Antiochus the mighty God; and his very Epithet, Epiphanes, is
as much in our English as Illustrious, Antiochus the Illustrious, the famous,
bright in his glory: He that was so illustrious and so great a Prince, that was
written unto as the mighty God, yet in the Scripture language being wicked he
is a vile person.

It is a special note of one that is fit to dwell in Gods Mountain, Sin causes
shame.
of one that is a Saint, Psalm. 15. 4. to be able to see the vileness of sin
thorough all the glory of the world, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned.
Sin is a shame because it deceives a man, The way of the wicked shall deceive
him, What profit have you now of those things where of you are ashamed? It is a
good sign of grace to be able to see into the deceits of sin, so as to be
ashamed of it. But though all sin be shameful, yet whoredom especially, and
that either bodily or spiritual.

First bodily, the expression of shamefulnesse though especially it aymeth at
their Idolatry, yet it has its rise from bobily whoredom, if that were not
shameful, the expression could not be full; that she had played the harlot,
and done shamefully, Pro. 6. 32. Whosoever commits adultery with a woman,
lacks understanding, he that does it destroys his own soul; a wound and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. It makes one
to be as one of the fools in Israel. And I (says Tamer when Amnon defiled
her) whether shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee thou shall be as one
of the fools in Israel. 2 Samuel 13. 13. Amnon though a Kings son, though a
brave gallant, yet by his uncleanness he makes himself as one of the fools
in Israel, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Thou shall not bring the hire of a whore, nor the
price of a dog into the house of the Lord; they are joined both together, for
Scripture language makes those to be dogs who are unclean and filthy. When
Ishbosheth charged Abner with the sin of uncleanness, 2 Samuel 3. 8. Am I a
dogs head, says he, that thou chargest me with a fault concerning this woman?
Many Adulterers go very fine and spruce, many young wantons are bravely dressed,
but in Gods esteem they are as dogs thorough their uncleanness. It is not a
harsher title then the spirit of God gives them. I have read of a people
amongst the heathen that condemned this sin with death, and with a shameful
death according to the nature of the sin, the death was this, they would have
the adulterers or adulteresses head to be put into the paunch of a beast, where
lay all the filth and uncleanness of it, and there to be stifled to death, a
punishment fit for so filthy a sin. And as this sin is ever shameful, so
especially the more lovely any yoke fellow is that is forsaken, and the more
vile and foul the whore is, so much the more shameful is the sin: Athenaeus
bringes in Plato, bewayling himself in his own condition, that he was taken so
much with a filthy whore. It is more shameful for Christians then for
heathens, because they know that the covenant of marriage is the covenant of
God, as Pro. 2. 17.

But further, corruption in Gods worship is most shameful, for that is aimed
at especially here. The shamefulness of corrupting the worship of God is
expressed in that most famous Text we have for this purpose. Exodus 32. 25. Aaron
made the people naked unto their shame, how was that, but by false worship
though it was of the true God? In false worship, there is shame because in that
a man subjects his conscience to vile things.

Conscience that is not to be subject to any creature, only unto God himself
is here made subject to low and vile things. Indeed it is not shameful to
subject our consciences to God in the use of creatures though never so mean
appointed by himself, but those that do subject unto creatures in ways of
false worship not appointed by God, subject not their consciences to God but
unto those creatures, and that is shameful.

In false worship though there may seem to be a great deal of humility, yet
there is notorious pride and presumption, False worship (...) shameful thing.
and therefore much shame.

For a creature to take upon him by his own fancy and conceit to raise up
creatures higher then ever God has raised them, to put higher respects upon
creatures then ever God has done, this is boldness and presumption, yea to
presume so far as by his own fancy and conceit, to raise up the creature so
high as that God himself according to the humors of men must come to be nearer
men, and to be more present with these creatures then otherwise he would. Thus
men presume to bring God to be under their fancies, and is not this shameful.

Further it is extreme folly, for we contradict our selves when we think to
honor God and yet go against him, when we put high esteem upon such things
as are abominable and detestable. Mark that excellent Scripture for this,
Ierem. 44. 4. I sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising early and
sending them, saying, O do not this abominable thing that I hate. Mark, God
cries out with a kind of shrieke, all my servants the Prophets I sent,
saying, O do not this abominable thing; It is a delightful thing (...) your
eyes, but abominable in Gods. And Ezekiel. 22. 3. they are called by a word that
signifies the very excrements that come out of a man they glory in them, (...)
but he says, they defile themselves by them.

When God opens their eyes they will see false worship a shameful thing, and
when they do so, God will show them the Excellency of his own.

You have an excellent Scripture for this, Ezekiel. 43. 10. 11. Son of man show
the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities,
and if that they be ashamed of all that they have done, that is, of all their
false worship, what then? Then show them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the commings in thereof, and
all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and write it in their sight that they may keep the whole for me
thereof, and all the ordinances thereof and do them.

Mark my brethren, you see how God stands much upon forms, all the forms
thereof, and the form thereof: Let not us slightly account of any thing in
Gods worship, of circumstances for God stands much upon his own form in his
own worship. Many who have no Religion but a form, yet neglect Gods form. Men
love to stand much upon their own forms, let them know God stands much upon
his forms, and it is no hinderance but a furtherance to the power of Religion
to keep close to Gods form, and if we would come to know what are Gods
Ordinances (we cry out, O that we could but know what is the right way) this is
one way for you to know: First, be ashamed of what you have done, be ashamed of
your former false worship, and then God will show you the Ordinances of his
House, and the true beauty of his true worship: till then there are so many
distinctions, and evasions, and objections that they never come to understand
it: when God humbles the heart, and makes ashamed of what has been naught
before, all the distinctions, and evasions, and objections vanish away as the
mist before the sun.

And the more excellent the Lord is, and those Ordinances are from which we do
depart, the more shameful is that ^^lse worship that our hearts do decline
unto.

She has done shamefully, why? she has forsaken such a husband, she has
forsaken the Lord JESUS CHRIST who is so lovely, she has forsaken the blessed
Ordinances that God has appointed, The more full of beauty Gods Ordinances
are, the more shameful it is to decline to waves of false worship.
and turned her self to vanities of her own. Cant, 5. 16. Christ is there
said to be altogether lovely, there is lovlinesse enough in Christ to satisfy
the soul for ever. And Ezekiel. 7. 20. As for the beauty of his ornament (speaking
of Gods Ordinances in his Temple) he set it in Majesty, but they made the
images of their abominations, and of their detestable things therein.

Oh how shameful was this! This shows the shamefulnesse of it, because God
set the beauty of his ornament in Majesty. The Ordinances of God that he
appointed himself, they are Gods ornament they are the beauty of his ornament,
they are the beauty of his ornament set in Majesty; and shall these beautiful
glorious things be forsaken, for vanities of our own inventions? This is
shameful.

She has done shamefully for she has said thus and thus; Here is employed,
that the thing done was not only shameful, but that she was shameless in
that she had done. She has played the harlot, and done shamefully, for she
has said, etc.

From hence the Observation is,

Sin, Obser.
especially whoredom either bodily or spiritual, being let alone to grow to a
height, will grow to an impudency; those that continue in these, will grow
not only to do shamefully, but to be shameless in their doings, Ier. 6. 15.
Were they ashamed they committed abomination? No, they were not all ashamed,
neither could they blush. At first sin may seem to be a little shame-faced,
but afterward it grows brazen-faced; modest a little at the first, but bold,
and impudent, and daring afterward. True, indeed if men should be told
beforehand what they would do afterward, they would be ready to say as Hazael
to the Prophet, Am I a dead dog that I should do this? Their hearts would even
shake at the thought of it: yet when sin has hardened their hearts but a
while, they will do it, and that with open face too. Whoredom you know at
first, it is that that every man blusheth at, but within a while, unclean ones
can make their boast of their filthynesse, But especially spiritual whoredom,
the corruption of Gods worship at first may be a little modest, but see to what
a height it grows if in time this be not prevented. I will give you a notable
example of this, and that is of Solomon himself. At the first we shall find
Solomon very modest in the matter of Idolatry. 2 Chronicles. 8. 11. the Text says
there, that he brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the City of David to
the house he had built for her, for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the
house of David King of Israel, why? because the places are holy whereunto the
Ark of the Lord has come. Mark how careful Solomon was of any pollution, of
any thing that had any seeming holiness in it; My wife shall not so much as
dwell in the house of David, I have so much respect to the Ark of God, to the
worship of God, to those places that are holy that my wife shall not so much as
dwell there; But oh what did Solomon grow unto afterward^ he suffered Idolatry
most shamefully, as we shall find 1 King. 11. 5. there the Text says, that he
went after Ash^oreth the goddess of the Zid^nians, and after Mileom the
abomination of the Amorites, and built a high place for Ch^mosh the abomination
of Moa^ in the hill that is before Jerusalem, just there he built it too, as if
it had been in defiance to the Temple of God and his true worship, and that for
Molech the abomination of the children of Amm^^; and thus he did says the
Text, ver. 8. for all his strange wives which burnt incense, and sacrificed
unto their gods.

This shamefulnesse he was grown unto* And thus we see it in experience; how
fair are men in their ways of superstition at first? At first it is only
decency, that is all they plead for; well, afterward it rises from decency to
significancy, that is a little higher, to put them in mind. Thirdly, from
significancy it rises to efficacy, to stir up the dull mind of man:
Fourthly, from efficacy, it rises to necessity, that now it must be done, and
the worship of God cannot be without it, and there shall be no ordinance, no
administration at all without it. Decency, significancy, efficacy, and
necessity, thus it rises to be shameful at last. So amongst the Papists in
their traditions, Omnes libros tam veteris tam novi testamenti nec non
traditionis ipsas pari pietatis affect^ ac reverentio suscipit ac veneratur
Idem honor debetur imagini and exemplari.
surely at first only they would come with this argument, What, will you not
regard them as you would do other books and other Histories? they are the
traditions of our forefathers; but at length they came to this, in the fourth
Sexion of the Council of Trent, the Synod does take and honor the books of
the old and new Testament, and the traditions of the Fathers, with equal^
affection of piety and reverence as they do them. To this shamefulnesse they
grew to at last. And so for worshipping of Images, why, it is it for the
decency of Churches to have them, and they are but to put you in mind at the
most; but at length they came to this, these are the very words, the same
honor is due to the Image and to the Exemplar.

Lastly, from this amplification that she has done shamefully; When men do
grow shameless, impudent in evil, there is little hope of them.

I will have no mercy upon them, Why? For they have done thus, they are grown
thus impudent. It is a good thing to keep the bridle of shame as long as we
can upon our children and servants, and any of our inferiors* therefore take
this one instruction with you, be not too ready to rebuke and chastise your
servants, your children, in reproachful manner before others, left you bring
them to that, that they shall see they have no honor to lose, and then there
is little hope of them: Evermore keep such a hand over your children and
servants as they may see they have some respect to lose, Governers and parents
must take heed of putting their servants (...) children to too much (...).
that they may not be so ashamed by you, as for them to think they cannot be
worse, they cannot be more disgraced, there is no such way to bring them to
grow desperate as that is. It is very great wisdom in Governors to keep the
bridle of shame still, and not to let those raines go, and this is the reason
that your Bride-well or Goale-birds seldom or never come to good, why? because
they have no bridle to keep them in, they have lost all their honor and they
can lose no more, and there is no rational creature but would have honor,
there is not the meanest servant you have but has a kind of respect to
honor, and that will do more then blows except they be grown to be very
beasts.

But how does he prove that it is shameful? Thus, For she has said, I will go
after my lovers that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flaze, mine
oil and my drink.

For she has said: Hence first. Deliberate sins are most shameful sins.

This is a proof of her shamefulnesse, because that which she has done she
has done upon deliberation, Obser.
she said she would do thus and thus, she considered before what she would do,
and yet she would do it. Wickedness committed de industria, ex consilio, of
purpose resolved upon, this is very shameful. Gal. 6. 1. It is said of Godly
men that they may be overtaken with a fault: If a man be overtaken with a
fault. It is one thing to be overtaken with a sin, (...).
and another thing to overtake a sin; a gracious heart may have sin
overtake it, but it is a shameless heart that overtakes sin.

Secondly, She has said I will go. Whoredom either bodily or spiritual is
usually very wilful: as if she had said, let all the Prophets say what they
can, let them talk out their hearts, I will have my mind, I will follow my
lovers still. Thus it is with bodily whoredom. Those who are guilty of this
usually grow extreme wilful. Prove. 2. 19. None that go unto her return
again; Obser.
neither take they hold of the paths of life: It is a most dreadful Scripture
against all adulerers and unclean ones, There is none, says the Text, make it
out how you will, there is none that go unto her return aagain; neither take
they hold of the paths of life, those are the words of the Holy Ghost, I leave
the words with you. So Pro. 23. 27. A whore is a deep ditch, and astrange
woman is a narrow pit: they cannot easily get out, nor will they easily get out
they are so* plunged in, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Eyes full of adultery that cannot cease
to sin: why cannot they cease to sin? it is not because they have a heart
but no power, but their wills is brought into that bondage and subjection that
they cannot will otherwise: therefore Ezekiel. 47. 11. we find that though the
waters of the Sanctuary were very healing, yet says the Text, the miry places
and the maershes were not healed, miry, filthy, unclean hearts are very
seldom healed by the waters of the Sanctuary, Aelianus variar. histor^*
I remember AElian reports that there was a whore that did boast that she
could easily get scholars away from Socrates, but Socrates could get no scholar
from her, none of her followers. It is true, that a whore is prevalent, and
when she has once gotten them it is almost impossible to get them away from
her. Therefore that place Heb. 6. that speaks of that sin that is impossible
to have repent anoe, Tertullian interprets it to be no other but the sin of
uncleanness: The Author of this Epistle (says he) knew no promise of second
repentance to the adulterer and fornicator; that is his expression, showing how
ordinarily those that are guilty of that sin and are given up to it, grow
wilful in it: And therefore in Ephesians. 4. 19, these two are put together, being
past feeling, and having given themselves over to laciviousness and want
onness, wantons usually grow past feeling.

And for spiritual adultery, that usually is very wilful too, for those that
are left by God to that way of false worship, Bodily and spiritual whoredom
makes men very wilful in their uncleanness.
to Superstition and Idolatry, they seldom return again but grow exceeding
wilful in that wickedness.

You have a notable Text for that, Jer. 44. 16. 17. the people say there, The
word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord we will not hear, but
we well do whatsoever comes out of our own mouth, to burn incense to the
Queen of Heaven. We will go on in that way to burn Incense to the Queen of
heaven talk as long as you will.

And so you have it Jerem. 20. 10. Go ( says God) pass over the Isles of
Chitrim, and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider deligently, and see of
there be such athing; Has a nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods?
Men are settled in the ways of Idolatry, and will never give over the
worshipping of their gods; but you have forsaken me: therefore be astonished O
ye heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the
Lord. So Micah. 4. 5. All people will walk every one in the name of his god:
Their hearts are set upon it, they will do it.

Spiritual whoredom does mightily besot the heart. I suppose you know the
sext, it is a very famous one, Esaias 44. 19. 20. None considers in his heart,
neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burnt part of i^ in
the fire, yea also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have roasted
flesh and eaten it, and shall I make the residue thereof an abomina^^? shall I
fall down to the stock of a tree? He feeds on ashes, a seduced heart has
^urned him aside that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie
in my right hand. And so Rev. 16. 11. where, those that were given up to
Antichrist, though they were tormented, they blasphemed the God of heaven,
because of their pains and their sores, and they repented not of their deeds.

Thirdly, Obser.
wilfulness in any sin, but especially in these sins, is a very great
aggravation of it: I will have no mercy upon them, I will give them up, why?
They have done shamefully, and they have said, I will go after my lovers.
There are a great many who in their passion think it a brave spirit to say, I
will, and I will, and I will, and I care not, say what you can, or whatsoever
becomes of it I will do, or I will have this and this: Especially men in
place and of estates are not able to endure the controlling of their will in
any thing, and therefore when their wills are but crossed, they burst out into
outrageous speeches, and fall a blaspheeming, and swearing, and saying they
will have their wills, though it cost them their lives.

Thus we find it in the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 8. 19, when Samuel from God
came and told them in a long narration what hardship they should endure in
having a King that was not them according to Gods mind, they (...) him all
that he said, and they do not stand to answer any of Samuels arguments, but
presently they break out into this resolution, Nay, but we will have a King.

Those whom God leaves to hardness of heart, and intends ruin to, he
usually gives them up to this wilfulness in their evil ways.

The Scripture records Pharaoh for a famons example of one hardened and prepared
for ruin. He was of a most wilful spirit. Exodus 15. 9. you shall find his
wilfulness expressed four times there in that one verse, I will pursue, says
he; and then again, I will overtake, and thirdly, I will divide the spoil; and
then fourthly, I will draw my sword: and there are two other expressions that
come to the same effect, that are equivalent to the former even in the same
verse, My lust shall be satisfied, my hand shall destroy them. Put all these
six expressions that you have in that one verse, together, and where have you
such an expression of a wilful creature as Pharaoh was? and what became of him
you all know.

Only one more example I find in Scripture paralleld to this, and that is the
King of Babylon; Egypt and Babylon were two the most eminent for Idolatry and
persecution of the Church that ever were in the world, and these are the two
most famous examples for wilfulness that ever were, Esa. 14. 13, 14* you have
in these two verses five times I will. 1. I will ascend into heaven. 2. I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God. 3. I will si^ upon the mount. 4. I will
ascend above the heights. 5. I will be like the most high. And what became of
him afterward you all know, yea the next wo^ds tell you, Yet thou shall be
brought down to hell, etc.

These two little words, [ I] and [ Will] do a great deal of misch^efe in the
world. Luther I remember npon Psalm. 127. says, I am of that opinion, says he,
Ego in ea opinio^e sum, Monarchias long diutius dura^uras, s^ Monarchae hoc
unum pronomen Ego omisissens. Luther in Psalm. 127.
and verily persuaded, Monarchies would longer time by far endure, if those
that are high Monarchs and States would but omit this one Pronoun, I, this same
Ego. It is true, in public ways they express themselves in the plural
number, We, but private resolutions are in the singular number, I. This for
that little word, I.

The second is Will, I will, that is a little word too; But I may say of this
little Will, this little word, as James says concerning the Tongue, It is
indeed a little member in the body, but it sets the whole world on fire, and
it self is set on fire of hell. So it is true that this same little Will it is
but a little word, but it sets whole Kingdoms on fire, it sets whole
Towns and Cities on fire, and it is it self s^ton fire of hell, Bernard has
an expression, Take away Will once, and there will be no hell. O the mischief
that it does in the world! I will only say these two things to those that keep
such ado with these two little words, I, Will.

First, That which thou do so much pride thy self in, and think thy self
such a man that can say, I will and I will, know, It may be as heavy a
judgment of God upon thee as can befall thee in this world, for God to give
thee up to thy will. Toll voluntatem and non erit infernus* Bern.


There is nothing wherein God does more let out his wrath upon the children of
men here in this world, then in this, in giving them up to their will.
Therefore tremble at this when thou have so many expressions, I will and I will
do this. I will give you a Scripture or two for it, suitable to the business:
shevving the wilfulness of those that had their will in ways of false
worship, perhaps some of you may be set upon this, that you will have this, and
let men say what they can, you will have this used: The place is, Ezekiel. 20. 39.
Go (says God) serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if you will
not hearken unto me. Go, says he, you will not hearken to me, you hear out
of the word what should be the way of my worship in the purity of it, oh say
you, that is novelty, a new thing, and you will not have it thus, Its a
fearful judgment for a man to he given up to ones own will
you answer not any arguments, but you cast it off, and say, you will not have
it, well says God, go and serve your idols, if you will not hear me, if you
beset upon your will, go and serve your idols, and take your fill of your own
ways. And Psalm. 81. 11. My people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would
have none of me, they were all upon their will, they would not, and they would
not: Mark what follows, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and
they walked in their own counsels. You will have your own counsels, and your
own will, and so God gives you up to them, and then woe to you, you are undone.

Secondly, you that are set upon your wills in that which is evil, know God is
and will be as wilful toward you as you can be toward him. Mark that notable
Text, Jer. 44. 25. that sets out the notorious height of wickedness that
was in the people of those times who were so wilful, You and your wives have
both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand that which is evil,
you will not say only you will do it, but will do it indeed. Well says
God, you have done so, you have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled
with your hands, saying, We will surely perform the vows we have vowed, we
have vowed it, and we will do it, we have vowed to burn incen use to the Queen
of heaven, and to pour out drinke-offerings unto her; you will surely
accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows; you will go on in your
false ways of worship; mark what follows in verse. 26. Therefore hear ye the
word of the Lord, I have sworn says the Lord, you have vowed, and I have
sworn, I have sworn by my great Name, that my Name shall no more be named in
the mouth of any man of Judah, in all the land of Egypt: and verse. 27. Behold,
says God, I will watch over you for evil, and not for good, and all the men
of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be confirmed by the sword and by
the famine until there be an end of them. God will be as resolute as you for
your hearts, as the stoutest sinner that lives: you will, and God will, who
shall have their will think you? Answer to this you stout hearted that are
far from God, answer to this you stout children, and stout servants, and
stout wives, you will and you will. A wilful man never wants woe. If you
will be resolute in any thing, my brethren, be resolute in that which is good,
be resolute in the work of repentance: say with David, Psalm. 32. I will
confess my sins, indeed I had many thoughts to come and shame my self, and
open all unto God, but I could not get it off, at length I grew resolute, and
said I will and I have sworn to keep thy righteous Precepts; and as they Mic.
4. we will walk in the name of the Lord our God; and as Joshua, I and my Louse
will serve the Lord, do you what you will, we are resolute that we will
serve the Lord. This is a blessed wilfulness indeed. Oh that (...) ^outnesse
and wilfulness of many people might be turned to this resolution for God and
for his truth! especially carry this note home with you, you that have had such
often expressions of your will, you will and you will, and turn it unto the
willing of that which is good, I will follow my lovers, says the Apostate,
from God; I will follow my Beloved, who is altogether lovely, let every
gracious soul say.

Fourthly, For she said: She professed what she would do. Professed sins are
shameful sins. It is an evil for sin to lie lurking in any ones heart, but
for sin to break out into open profession, this certainly is a great evil:
This is to prove that she had done shamefully, Professed wickedness is
shameful wickedness.
because she said she would do so and so. There is a great deceit in the
hearts of many men, they are ready to say, I were as good say so as think so,
I say so, and perhaps others think so, it were as good for me to speak it as
to keep it in my heart. My bre thren there are two deceits in this kind of
speaking.

First you suppose that when you speak so, that therefore it is not in your
heart, and you make this comparison of what is in other men's hearts, and in
your mouths, as if the evil were in your mouths only, and in their hearts
only, as if the comparison lay thus, they think and do not speak, and you
speak and do not think. Here is the deceit, for if you speak you have it in
your hearts too, you both speak and think, for so the Scripture tells us,
that out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; if you speak
maliciously you have a malicious heart, if you speak uncleanly, you have an
unclean heart, if oaths be in your mouths, you have a profane heart.

Secondly, here lies the deceit, as if you should have less in your heart
because you vent it; as your passionate people will say, I were as good vent my
mind and then I shall be quiet. Thou deceivest thy self; the venting of the
corruption that lies in thy heart will never lessen it but increase it.

It is not with the corruption of our hearts, as it is with liquor in a
vessel, that the more is let out the less is within it; but as it is with a
fire in a house, that when it is kindled within and burstech out, there is not
less within because it bursteth out, no, the more it bursteth out and flames,
the more still b^rneth within: and as it is with water in a fountain, when it
bursteth out of the fountain, there is never a whit the less water in the
fountain, it may rather have the less by stopping, and fire may be lessened by
smothering. Know therefore that professed wickedness it is aggravated
wickedness. It is true, secret sins may be more dangerous in regard of the
cure, but they are more abominable to God in regard of the open dishonor that
is done to him by them. The aggravation of the blood that was shed by the
people, that God speaks of, Ezekiel. 24. 7. it is set out thus, The blood that
was shed, says the text, it was not poured upon the ground to cover it with
dust, that it might not cause fury to come up to take vengeance, you did not
conceal the blood, you did not cover it, but set it upon the top of a rock;
what then? Not being co vere^, but being professed and lad open, this did cause
fury to come up with vengea^^^ against them, Gods anger would have been against
them if they had shed blood though they had covered it; but to shed blood and
not to cover it, it causes the fury of the Lord to come with vengeance. So you
know he says in that place of Isa. Chap. 3. 9. They declared their sin as
Sodom, and hid it not: Woe unto her soul, says he, woe unto them when they
shall presume to declare their sin as Sodom. And as I said before, God will be
as wilful in punishing a sinner, as a sinner is wilful insinning; so here God
will be as professed in plauging, as thou shall be professed in sinning for thy
heart. That you shall see in that forenamed place of Ezekiel. they did not cover
the blood, well mark it, says the Text, I have set her blood upon the top of
the rock that it should not be covered; Woe therefore to the bloody City, I
will even make the pile for fire great, etc. I will be as professed in my plagues
and punishments as you are professed in your sins.

My brethren, (...).
if we will be professed in any thing, let us be professed in that which is good,
let us do that as openly as we can, 2 Cor. 9. 13. the text says there that God
is glorified for their professed subjection to the Gospel, for their subjection
of profession, so the words are. It is not enough for to subject to the Gospel,
but there must be a professed subjection to it: therefore Romans 10. 10.
Confession with the mouth is there made as necessary to salvation as believing
with the heart, they are put together. There may be times that confession may
be called for as well as believing, and as necessary to salvation. I remember I
have read of one Gordius a martyr, who when his friends came to him, and would
have him keep his heart to himself, and only with his mouth to deny what in
his heart he believed was true, Oh no says he, Adaras Iovis aut Veneris
adorare ac sub A^tichristo fidem occul tare. Zuin. ep. 3.
it is fit for my mouth that was made for God should speak for God: And
Zwinglius is of the opinion that we may even as well worship the Altar of
Jupiter or Venus as hide our faith and profession when we live uuder
Antichrist, such a speech he has. The way to honor Religion and bring it into
credit, it is for those that are godly to profess what they do.

I knew once one that was noble both in birth and grace, and having to do
oftentimes with those of his rank, greatones, that would be scorning at
Religion under the name of putirrnisme, he would usually take this course, when
he was to come into such company he would begin himself and own himself to
be one of those that they called a Puritan, and so he prevented them, and by
that means prevented much sin in them, and much scorn of Religion by thus
owning of it. It is certain, that the best way for the honoring of Religion it
for every one to own it, though there be ignominous terms put upon it. If
ever we were called to profession of what we do believe, we are now called to
it in these days. Certainly God professes for us, God does not only respect
us, but he does professedly, he does it openly, in the eyes before the faces of
our adversaries. Let us not only have God in our hearts, but profess his name
openly before the faces of our adversaries. It is time now to do it. It is not
enough to have goodness at the heart, but we must profess it.
It had beenewell if. you had professed heretofore when Gods truth called for
it. It may be many of you may be found to be guilty in betraying the truth of
God for professing no sooner then you did, but however betray it not now for
want of profession, be willing now to profess of what party you are, that as
we read of Jonah Chapter 9. when he was in the storm, and the mariners
awaking he says unto them, I am an Hebrew that fear the God of heaven, which
made the sea and the dry land, and so he goes on in making an open profession
of himself.

My brethren, if we be not in a present storm, yet the clouds grow black,
therefore awake you sluggards, you that are secure awake out of your security,
and now profess what you are, I am an Hebrew that fear God, whatsoever they
talk of such and such men under such ignominious terms and titles, I am one of
them, and I am willing to appear so.

Many times you will be like Nichodemus you will come to JESUS by night, you
are afraid to be seen: You would give in money to the Parliment, and help to
forward that work God has in hand, but only you are afraid to be seen. I
know there may be possibly some occasion to keep some men in from appearing,
but not many, the cases are very rare; Ordinarily, certainly it is not enough
to do it, but to do it professedly, let it be declared who you are, and what
side you take,

She said I will go after my lovers.

If you say we live in wicked and evil times, it is dangerous to appear, I may
not only keep my heart right, but I will do as much as another, but why
should I appear?

The worse the times are, Ans. 1.
the more thou should appear. Mark. 8. 38 Whosoever shall be ashamed of me
in this adulterous generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he
comes in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, If the generation
were holy, it were nothing to appear, not to be ashamed or afraid; but we
must not be either ashamed or afraid in the midst of an adulterous generation.
2. Why should wickedness have this advantage, that it dares appear, but
godliness dares not?

3. If all should reason as you do, what would become of the Cause? why should
others venture themselves more then you? What is your flesh, your estate, your
liberty more then theirs?

4. You must appear for examples sake, to provoke others. This is a duty as
well as any. 5. If the adversaries prevail, they will find you out, except
you mean to give up your consciences to them, and then you will escape no more
then others; to be sure you will not have so much peace as others who have most
appeared. Fifthly, I will follow after my lovers,

Who are they? Either first they who they were in association withal, as the
Egyptians and the Assyrians, (and so I find some Interpreters carry it) or
thef^ Idols, and that is especially aimed at, but the the other may bear an
Observation, and perhaps both may be included.

It is a dangerous thing, very sinful and vile for the people of God to join
in aff^^ciation with Forraigners that are of a different Religion, Association
with those of a different Religion is dangerous.
to think to have help from them. The people of God, Jer. 42. were set upon
this, to have their association with Egypt, and they could not be brought from
it; and if you read that Story, it will appear to be very vile and dangerous;
they seemed to yield unto God, that they would do what he would have them,
and they would not go into Egypt if he forbade it; but in Chap. 43. when
Jeremiah had told them the mind of God, that they should continue in the land
of Judah, and not go down into Egypt, Then spoke Azariah, and Joha^an, and all
the proud men, saying unto seremiah, Thou speak falsely, the Lord has not
sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there. They are loath to break
off their association with Egypt. I remember Gwalter in his Comment upon Hosea,
though not upon this Text, tells a story of the Grecian Churches, that in the
year 1438. because they were afraid of the Turks breaking in upon them, they
sent to the Bishop of Rome, that they would be under his subjection, merely
that they might have the help of the Latin Churches to keep them from the rage
and tyranny of their adversaries; but within a few years they were destroyed,
Constantinople and the Empire were subdued, so as Heathenisme and Atheism
prevailed, and this is the fruit says he of seeking the association of others
in a sinful way. But because this is not the chi^^ thing that is aimed at we
pass it by.

She said she would go after her Lovers, Obser.
that is, her Idols. What those were we shall see by and by.

Idolaters use to keep good thoughts of their Idols. They call them their
Lovers, they look upon their Idols as those that love them; and hence they used
to call them Baalim, from Baal, a husband. So it should be the care of the
Saints, evermore to keep good thoughts of God, to look upon God as their Lover,
as one that tendereth their good. Idolaters do so to their Idols, shall not
the Saints do so to the true God? My brethren, let us not be ready to entertain
hard thoughts of God, it is a dangerous thing. Gods great care is to manifest
to us, and to all the world that he loves us, and he has done much to
manifest to us here in England, We must keep good thoughts of God.
and to our brethren of Scotland, that he loves us and them. In Revel. 3. 9.
the Text says of the Church of Philadelphia, that God loved them. Forty years
ago Master Brightman interpreted that Text of the Church of Scotland;
Philadelphia signifies as much as brotherly love: You know how they are joined
in Covenant one with another, and we see that those that said they were Jews,
they were the Church, the Church, but proved themselves to be of the Synagogue
of Satan, are forced to bow before them; and if they were not mad with
malice, they must needs acknowledge that God has loved that Church. And since
God has done great things for us, to manifest that he is the lover of England,
let us then keep good thoughts of God.

Seventhly, Idolaters highly prize the love of their Idols. They do not only
maintain good thoughts of their Idols, or think that their Idols are their
lovers, Obser.
but they set a price upon them, they said I will follow my lovers, I must make
account of their love, they must do me good for ought I know more then any
thing you speak of.

It is true both of bodily whoredom and spiritual whoredom, I will only make
use of one Scripture to daunt the heart of whore-masters and unclean wretches
that so much prize the love of their whores and whore-masters. You prize their
love, but what get you by it? you get Gods hatred by it. You rejoice that you
have the love of your whores, and upon that God hates and abhors you. Mark
that good you will say. Thus, Pro. 22. 14. The mouth of a strange woman is a
deep pi^, he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. What get you by
this? your whores embrace you, and God abhorres you. If there be any
whore-master, any unclean wretch in this Congregation, either thou art an
A^heist or this text must strike thee at thy heart. Art thou in that way and
yet not repenting, thou art the man that this day God tells thee to thy face,
that he abhorres thee.

But how then should we prize the love of JESUS CHRIST our husband? Cant. 1.
4. The remembrance of thy love is better then wine.

The Church prizeth the love of JESUS CHRIST more then men in the world prize
their delight in wine. If we prize Christ's love, he will prize ours.
And my brethren do you prize Christ's love, and Christ will prize yours, and
that is observable, according to the degree and way of your prizing Christ's
love, so Christ will prize your love. Cant. 4 18. you have there the same
expression of Christ's love to his Church, answerable to what hers was before,
Thy love is better then wine says the Church to Christ, How much better is thy
love then wine? says Christ to the Church:

Eighthly, I will follow my lovers. In bodily and spiritual whoredom there is
a following hard after those things they commit whoredom withal. Obser.
I will follow them and not only say they are my lovers, but I will express
it by following of them. The heart of whore-masters and Idolaters do follow
hard after their uncleanness in bodily and spiritual filthynesse.

First for bodily filthyness, observe whore-masters how they follow their
lovers, Josephus in his Antiquities tells us this strange story of one Decius
Mundus, that offered to give so many hundred thousand Drachmies, that came to
six thousand pound English money to satisfy his lust one night with a whore,
yet could not obtain his desire neither. Will not you be content now who have
been guilty of spending a great part of your estate, in a way of uncleanness,
now to do as much for Religion, for God, and Christ, and his Kingdom, as ever
you have done for your whores? If there should be any in this place that have
been profuse for their uncleanness, and yet now are strait handed in these
public affairs, such as these are fitter to be taken out of Christian
congregations, and to be shut up in slies.

For spiritual whoredom, I shall show you how superstitious and Idolatrous
people as they prize their idols, so they follow hard after their lovers.

You know that story of the children of Israel when the Calfe was to be set up,
upon proclamation all the men and women took off their earrings and their
jewels, and brought them to Aaron to make the Calfe. What a shame will it be to
us if we should keep our eare-rings, and our jewels, and things perhaps that
have not seen the sun a great while, that we should keep them now when God
calls for them! Let women do that for God and his truth, for your own
liberties and posterities that they did for their Idols.

Though you have care-rings, and jewels, and rings that you prize much, yet let
them be given up to this public cause. And it were a shame that gold-rings
should be kept merely to adorn the fingers when the Church and State is in such
necessity as it is. Away with your niceties now and your fineness and bravery,
and look to necessities, and to the preservation of the lives and liberties
both of your selves and your children, If you should see a malignant party come
with their spheres and pikes, and your children sprawling upon the tops of
them, and their blood gushing out, what would your gold-rings, what would all
your niceties and braver do you good?

I will give you for this (because it is a point of such concernment) four
notable expressions in Scripture about Idolaters eagerness and earnestness of
spirit in following after their Idols.

The first is Isa, 57. 5. The Text says there, that they were inflamed after
their Idols, they were on fire after them.

The second is, Jer. 50. 38. They were mad upon their Idols.

Thirdly, You have a text more suitable to that I am speaking of; It is Isa 46.
6. it is said there, that they did lavi^h gold out of the bagga. They did not
only give their gold rings that were of no use, and part with that which they
could well spare, but they did lavish gold that was in the bag: they would
not only bring some of it, but they did lavish it, for so the word is; and
they lavished not their silver but their gold, and that not a piece or two out
of a paper, but out of the bag, they brought their bags of gold, and did
lavish gold out of them, and this they did for their Idols, Oh what a shame is
it then that any should be penurious, and not come off full in the public
cause of the Church and Commonwealth?

The fourth Text is Jerem. 8. 2. and there we have five expressions together of
the pursuance of the heart of Idolaters after their Idols, the like we have
not in all the book of God in one verse. Speaking of their Idols. First he
says, whom they have loved. Secondly, whom they have served. Thirdly, after
whom they have walked. Fourthly, whom they have sought. And Fifthly, whom they
have worshipped: and all this in this one verse, O how are the hearts of people
set upon the ways of Idolatry! I remember Cambden reports of a King of
England, Canutus, that spent as much upon one cross, a^ the revenues of the
Crown came unto in a whole year, he was so profuse in charges about his
superstitious vanities.

Master Calvin in a Sermon of his upon that Text seek ye my face, has this
expression. Foolish Idolaters when they endure much in their pilgrimages spend
their money, waste their bodies, and abused in their travail, yet they go on,
and think all sufficiently recompensed, if they may see and worship some Image
of a Saint or holy relicke: Shall the beholding, says he, some dead carrion or
apish Idol have more power to strengthen them then the face of God in his
ordinances shall have to strengthen us?

My lovers that gave me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil
and my drink.

What were these Idols? The Idol that gave their bread was Caeres, she was the
goddess that the Heathens did worship for corn. For their water, Luna, the
Moon was the Idol they worshipped for their drink, and all moist things.
(...).
For their wool and flax Ashtaroth was their god: And for their oil Fryapus.
The seventy translate that which we say here wool, clothes; and that which we
say flax, they linen; and they likewise for the fuller expression add a word
or two more, and all other necessary things.

So they, though their Idols gave them all, flax, and wool, and hemp and all
things. Observe from hence.

Idolaters have a great many idols to supply their several wants. Obser.
My lovers, in the plural number. The idols of the Heathen do not supply all
good, but one one thing, and another another thing. And that is the difference
between the true God and Idols. The excellency of the true God is, that he is
an universal good, we have all good, flax, and oil, and bread, and wine, and
all in one, in our God, in our lover. And that is the reason that God
chalengeth the whole heart. Idols are content with a partial obedience,
because they are but partial in bestowing of good things, but God justly
requires the whole heart of his worshippers, because he is an universal good
to them.

My Lovers that gave me my bread, etc.

Mark, The end that Idolaters ay me at in their worship is very low.

They follow their lovers and are very earnest, for what I pray? for their
wool, and their flax, and their bread, and their water, their oil and their
drink. These are the things they aim at; they desire no more, they look no
higher, may their flesh be satisfied, give them but-liberty to sport on the
Lords day, to have their feasts, their wakes, merry meetings and they care for
no more. Their spirits are vile, and accordingly is their worship. Therefore
their worship is external, it is bodily, because their aims are at external
and bodily things. As a man's end is, so is a man, either base or honorable.
There are many men that cry out as if they aimed at God and Religion in many
things they do, they make a noise about Religion, and God, and Christ, and his
Ordinances, and the public good, but the truth is, their aims are at gain
and credit, and at their wool and their flax, and herein they show the
baseness of their spirits, like the lapwings that make a loud cry, as if they
were come near their nests, when their neasts are somewhere else. The en^es of
false worshippers are very low and mean.
Whatever their cry be for God and the public good, but if you mark them,
their neast is in their wool, in their flax, in their profit in their honor
and preferment, in these outward things. But the end of the true worshippers of
God is a great deal higher, they soar aloft, there is a spiritual height of
soul whereby they are raised upwards by the grace of God. A godly man's feet
are where a wicked man's head is, that which he accounts his chief good, a
godly man can trample under his feet. He looks at God himself, at his
service, he worshippeth the high God: he is a child of Abraham, not Abraham but
Abraham, what is the signification of that? Pater excelsus; A true child of
Abraham has a high spirit.
a high Father, for he is the father of children of high spirits, not only of
Children that are believers, but of those that have high and raised spirits, so
Abraham signifies a high father. Cleopatria told Marcus Antonius, that he was
not to fish and angle for gudgeons and trouts, but for Castles, and Forts, and
Towns; so I may say of a Christian, he does not fish and angle, especially in
matters of Religion, for wool, and flax, and oil, he has no such low and base
ends, but at God, and Christ, and heaven, and glory, and imortality, he looks
there; he serves God not for these things, he desires these things, that by
them he may be fitted more to serve God. One that has been acquainted with
the free grace of God in Christ will serve God for himself without indenting
with him, he will be willing to go into Gods Vineyard, and not indent for a
penny a day. You that will indent with God in his service and will have your
penny, you who have such low and mean spirits, God may give you your penny and
there is an end of you.

But further mark, Obs.
there is another observation flows from hence.

There ends are ^ow, they look no higher then corn, and flax, and wool, and
oil. Men love that Religion that brings them most corn and wine, etc.
Hence it follows, that that way of Religion that men can get most bread, and
wool, and flax, and oil by, that is the way that most people will follow,
because the hearts of most people are low and base, and they aim at no higher
things. That way of Religion that most estate is got by, that can please the
sense, that is the Religion that pleases most people. It is the speech of one
Pamchtius an Heathen, Make me a Bishop, says he, and though I be now a Heathen
yet I will be a Christian as well as any other: Fac me pontificem et Christi
anus ^ro.
He saw in what pomp the Bishops lived, and by that he thought it was a fine
thing to be a Christian. By outward pomp and glory Antichrist draws many
followers, they go where they can have most wool and flax, they can get most
preferment that way. I remember a story I have read of AEneas Silvius, he
observed the reason why the Pope prevailed against the Council, though it was a
general council, which he said was above the Pope, though afterward when he
came to be Pope himself his mind was changed, but how came it to pass that
the Pope always prevailed? this is the reason, says he, the Pope has a great
many places of preferment and honor to give, the general council has none,
the general Council can enquire after the truth, and present the word, and can
tell what is Gods mind, but it has no honor, no promotion, no preferment to
give, therefore alas the general Council prevails little; the Pope gets
all, and all because he has Bishoprics, Novi homin^m non ex vna canoni catu
nebilem commonstrantem digito delicatiorem penem and vin. m quod, prestan.
i^simum erat oppositum haec in quit sunt quae faciunt ut hoc vitae genus
dejerere non libeat. Triobojare Beneficium.
and Cardinals places, and livings, and great honors to bestow. Luther in his
Comment upon Hosea, and upon this Text tells a notoble story of one that he
knew that lived like a Noole man by his many Ecclesiastical preferments, who
when he was at his table, and bread and wine was brought to the table, that was
excellent bread and wine, he (pointing to it with his finger) said these are
the things tha^ make me that I cannot leave this kind of life, and so after he
came to be a Bishop, who had several Canon-ships before. So certainly these are
the arguments that prevail most in the world, arguments taken from bread, and
flax, and wool and oil, are stronger arguments then any taken from the
Scripture, then any thing taken from the honor of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, When men can come with Saul's arguments, 1 Samuel 22. 7. Will the son of
Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all Captains of
thousands, and Captains of hundreds? what will you follow him? can he
prefer-you? O no, he can do little for you; so I say when men come with this
argument, you go along in this way, I pray what will this bring you in? what
preferment will you get this way? you may get preserment in the other way, this
draws, this prevails. It was a speech, not many years ago, in a public
Commencement at Cambridge, made by the Vice-Chancelour, speaking to the young
Scholars, wishing them to take heed of being Puritans, what can you get in that
way says he? you shall live poorly, perhaps you may have some three
halfe-penny ben^fice in following that way; but in the other way come to be
children of the Church, and then you may be sure to have good benefices, you
may come to be Prebends, to be Deans, to be Bishops: Thus he persuaded the
young scholars to take heed of Puritanisme. There is a mighty strength in this
Argument upon the hearts of most. Magis soliciti de meroquam de vero (...)
magis amantm^n di deliti^s quam Christi divitias.


Hence the poverty of Christ is great scandal and offense to most people, when
they see that Religion will not bring them flax, and wool, and oil, but that
they must live poorly, they scandalize at this exceedingly.

It is reported in the story of Charles the great, that he having war with an
heathen King, Aygolandus King of Africa, because this King would make peace
with Charles, he made some profession as if he would be a Christian, and
Charles was very glad of this, and got him to his Court to parley with him;
being in his Court he saw 30. poor people that Charles fed, who were halt, and
may med, and blind, and in a very poor garb, Charles the great did it on
purpose, because he would have poverty before his eyes continually, that he
might not be too high in, and proud of his prosperity. Now when Aygolandus saw
them, who are these says he? These says Charles are the servants of God: nay
then replied he, if your God will keep his servants no better, I will be none
of his; I thought to be a Christian, and to serve your God, but seeing those
that serve him have no better food nor no better raiment then these, I will be
none of those servants. Thus it is with many, thought their consciences are
convinced which is the best way, yet because of the want of flax, and wool,
and oil, they will not come off.

Further observe,

It is a shameful thing for men to make Religion to be in subjection to their
wool, Obser
and corn, and oil. They have done shamefully in this. Many will do this, It
is a shameful thing to subject Religion to corn, wine, and flax, and wool.
but this is very shameful. Before I showed that it is shameful to subject
Religion to politic affairs, to the public State of a Kingdom, but now to
subject Religion to our own base sensualities, to our own particular ends, for
profit and preferment, oh this is very shameful. Gain gotten this way, it is
filthy lucre, as the Scripture says of it, yet hujusmodi lucri dulcis odor,
the smell of this gain is very sweet unto many. What, is thy Religion
serviceable to gain, to a trade, to sensual lusts? what is this but to stop
the holes of a mudd wall with diamonds and precious pearls? That were a folly
you will say, that because you have a hole to be stopped in a mud wall, to put
in diamonds and pearls to stop it, and to make such precious things serviceable
to such base ends, thou do as much, thou would have that which shall be a
content to thy flesh, and thou will make Religion subject to that, thou art as
base and vile in this. Religion my brethren is the glory of a man, the glory of
a nation, and shall we turn this glory into shame? It is a base thing in
Magistrates to subject the acts of justice to their base ends, for gain and
profit; for a Judge, or a Justice of peace, or a Prelate to show most favor
where there is most flax, and wool, and oil, where Butts, or rundlers of
Sack, or the like are to be got, this is baseness in them: But to subject
Religion to such base ends as these, this is the villainy of all baseness. A
generous spirit is far from this. It is observed of the generous spirit of
Luther, that when a Papist was vexed at him for his preaching and writing,
faith a Bishop, there is such a stir with this Luther, why do you not stop his
mouth with preferment? As it has been the speech of a Bishop here in this
land, that hearing that a Kinsman of his was a zealous Preacher; ^erm^ns illa
bestia non cura^ aurum.
well falth he, let me alone, I will silence him; and indeed he did, How? He
gave him two livings, and that silenced him presently. So here, why do you not
stop this Luthers mouth with preferment? He presently answered, That Germane
beast cares not for money, he is above money. He called him beast in his anger,
whereas he might have called him an Angel, because his spirit was above these
things, his mouth would not be stopped with them. Some men's lust of malice goes
beyond their lust of covetousness, like those Cockatrices, Quasi vero deus
nolit darelanem ecclesiae suae aut satius sit asathana pe^era.
Jer. 8. 17. that will not be charmed, it is a shameful thing then that our
zeal for God should not go beyond our lust for gain, to subject your
Religion to flax, and wool, and oil, it comes from a base diffidence in
God, as if he would not provide for us such outward things, therefore Luther
has this expression in his Comment upon Hosea. They followed their idols for
bread, and wool, and flax, and oil, as if God would not give bread to his
Church, or as if it were more safe to go to the Devil for it, as if we could
not have wool enough, and flax enough, and oil enough from God. Oh let us
trust God for all, for our clothes, for our meat and drink, for our estates,
for our children, God certainly will feed his Church. And yet those men that
have hearts so base themselves, they think it impossible for any man but to be
taken with such arguments: They may talk of Religion and conscience say they,
but I will warrant you they may be taken off with money, and preferment, places
of profit and honor. They think it impossible for men to stand against these
arguments. It puts me in mind of that speech that Balaak used to Balaam, Did
not I earnestly send unto thee to call thee, wherefore came thou not unto me?
Am I not able to promote thee to honor? As if he should have said, Thou art a
strange man indeed, did not I send thee word that I would promote thee to great
honor, and give thee silver and gold, or whatsoever thou would have? What
will not preferment and money tempt you? I thought this would have tempted any
man in the world. Thus many think that whatsoever men's Spirits are, they may be
taken off with promotion and money: But let all such know that there are a
generation of men in the world of true generous Spirits, that are above all
these things, and take as much delight, and have as much sweetness in denying
these places of honor and preferment, and gain, as those that offer them have
in the enjoying of them. It was a notable speech Plynie had concerning Cato (It
is in his Epistle Dedicatory to his natural History) speaking of what a
notable spirit he was, Cato (says he) took as much glory in those dignities
and honors that he denied, as he did in those he did enjoy, Certainly it is so
with the Saints, the true generous spirit of Christians take as much content in
those places of preferment they deny for Christ, as in any gain they enjoy.
There is no tempting of such men.

Let us pray therefore for those that are entrusted by us, not only for civil
things, but for matters of Religion, that temptations for bread, and corn, and
wool, and flax, and wine, and oilemay never tempt them, that the preferment,
and gain may never byasse their spirits, may never sway them.

These means have been assayed (certain it is) totempt some of them with, such
ways have not been left untryed by some, and have prevailed, but thorough Gods
mercy he has preserved others, and he has made the world to know that Christ
has a people to whom Religion and the public good is more dear then all the
flax, and wool, and wine, and oil in the world, then all the estates, and
high places, and great preferments that can be offered them. And now the Lord
our God keep this in their and in our hearts for ever.

The Fifth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 6. 7. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make
a wall, that she shall not find her paths.

And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them; and
shall seek them, but shall not find them: them shall she say, I will go and
return to my first husband; for then was it better with me then now.


THe last day (you may remember) we spoke of that reason that God gives in
the former verse, why he would show Israel no mercy, because that she has done
shamefully, and said she would go after her lovers that gave her her bread and
her water, her wool and her flax, her oil and her drink.

There are yet one or two observations (that time would not give us leave to
speak of the last day) in those words. I will only give you a hint of them,
and pass suddenly to these two verses.

The first is this, Obsre.
Prosperity and success in an evil way is a great hardening of the hearts of
men in their evil. I will follow after my lovers, for they give me bread,
Prosper^ty in evil ways hardens.
and water, and wool, and flax, and the like. I remember Eusebius reports that
Maximilian the Emperor in an Edict of his against the Christian, crying out of
Christian Religion as an excrable vanity, and seeking to confirm the Heathens
in the worshipping of their idol gods. Behold says he, how the earth brings
forth fruit for the husbandman in abundance, how our medows are adorned with
flows and h^rbs, and moistened with the dews of heaven, what health we have,
and what quiet and peaceable lives; and thus he goes on in seeking to conform
the hearts of Idolaters in their wicked ways. Prosperity in a wicked way is
exceeding hardening. That story of Dyonisius is famously known, having committed
sacr^ledge against their Idol-gods, robbing their Temples, yet his voyage being
prospetous, after he had ended his journey, he boasted himself that though he
did not worship the gods as others did, yet he prospered as much as they. In
that year when those Innovasions in Gods worship were principaly brought in
amongst us, especially in that Diocese of Norwich, is proved to be a very
fruitful year; and one Commissary among the rest in his Court, after the
harvest was taken in, speaks to the Contrymen in this way, Do you not see
how God prospers us? What a plentiful harvest have we had this year? This
is since you began to worship God with more decency then you we^^ wont to do.
Thus attributing all the goodness of God to that way. Let it be all our
prayers, that God will never prosper us in asinfull way.

Further, It is very observable how often this word My is iterated: Give me My
bread, and My water, and My flax, and My oil, and My wool, nothing but My. We
noted the last day, what hurt those little words, those particles [ I] and [
Will] do: Now we are to consider what evil there is in this particle [ MY]

Hence the observation is, Obs.
That carnal heatts look upon what they enjoy as their own, and think they
may use it as their own; and especially such as are Idolaters. Though they
will acknowledge that that they have comes from the Idols, (as here they did,
for they said their Lovers gave it them, yet when they had these things, they
thought they might do with them what they would, then they were theirs, Mine,
and mine, and all is mine.

Thus it is usual for carnal spirits to acknowledge in the general that that
they have comes from God, but when they have it, then it is their own they
think; they little think that God reserveth the propriety of what they have
after he has given it them. You mistake if you think that that is all the
acknowledgement you owe to God for what you enjoy, that you had it from God;
God reserveth propriety in all that he gives, unto us.
but you must acknowledge like wise that God reserveth his propriety after he
has given it you. God does never give any thing in that way that one friend
gives to another; a friend may give you a gift, yet when you have it, it is
your own, and you may use it as you please, your friend parts with his own
propriety. God never gives any thing so, as to part with his own propriety;
though he has given it you, yet you cannot say it is Mine, in respect of God,
it is still his. There is no such bond upon conscience as to use all the
comforts we have for God as this, and see that all comes from him in the way of
a covenant of grace. I say this it is that will lay a bond upon conscience, to
make use of your estates, and of all you enjoy for God, and not think to
employ them for your own ends: It is not the slight acknowledgement that
Idolaters have, that all comes from God, will do it; Carnal men look upon
that they have, coming from God through second causes, and no further; but a
Christian looks upon that which he has as coming from God in a covenant of
grace, and this engages the heart strongly to use all for God, from whom all
is received in such a way.

Verse 6. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a
wall, that she shall not find her paths, etc.

These two verses are the workings of Gods bowels of mercy toward his Elect
amongst Israel, in the midst of the most dreadful threatenings against her.
They are as it were a Parenthesis of grace (in the Chapter) to the Elect,
though mingled with some severity.

They are indeed the Epitome of the whole Chapter, for I told you in the
division of the Chapter at the beginning, that those were the two parts,
declaring Isreal's sin, with threatening judgment, and yet promising mercy
unto the Elect, unto some amongst them. The first part is from the beginning to
the 14. verse, the second from the 14. verse to the end; Only this 6. and 7.
ver. comes in the midst, as it were a parenthesis, and contains the sum of
all the other; for he was in a threatening way altogether in the 4. and 5.
verses, and you shall find him in the 8. verse. and so on, going in a
threatening way again: Only in this 6. and 7, verses is abundance of grace,
though mixed with some severity, as you shall see in the opening of them.

For the explication of the words.

Therefore. This must have reference to somewhat before, and answers to a
Wherefore, Therefore, Wherefore? Because I have dealt with you by the way of my
Prophets; in convincing, in admonishing, in threatening, and all this will not
do, therefore I will deal with you in another way.

Therefore behold.] That way of mine that I now speak of, it is a singular way,
you shall find much of the grace of God in this way, a wonderful way that I
will deal with you in now, Behold.

I will hedge up thy way.] There is a twofold hedge that God makes about his
people; There is the hedge of protection to keep evil from them, and there is
the hedge of affliction to keep them from evil.

First, the hedge of protection, that you have in Isa. 5. 5. where God
threatens that he will take away the hedge from his vineyard, he will take
away his protection; and so it is said of Job, that God had hedged him about;
but that is not the hedge here meant, it is the hedge of affliction. I will hedge
up thy way, that is, I will bring fore and heavy afflictions upon you, but yet
in a way of mercy, these afflictions shall be but as a hedge to keep you from
evil, they shall not do evil to you, or bring evil upon you.

I will hedge ^p thy way with thorns.] That is, I see you will be going on in
these ways of Idolatry and false worship, I will make them difficult to you,
you shall go through thorns; if you will go to your Idols, you shall not get
to your Idols, but you shall be pricked. It is a Metaphor taken from a
husbandman, who when the cattle will break over pastures, makes thick hedges
that they shall not get over, they shall be pricked, it shall be with much
trouble if they do go over. So I will deal with you says God. Or when a
husbandman sees passengers make a path in his ground too broad, and so spoil
the grass or the corn, he lays thorns in the way that they cannot go into
his corn; or if they do, they shall go with some trouble: so says God, I
will hedge up your way with thorns.

And make a wall.] Maceriabo Maceriam, I will wall a wall, so the words are. It
may be they will get through the thorns, but though they do get through I have
another way to deal with them, I will come with stronger afflictions and they
shall be of more power to keep them from their same, they shall be as a wall,
and though they get through the thorns, they shall not get over the wall.

That she shall not find her paths.] Mark the change of the person, that is
observable, I will ^^dge up thy way, first, and then I will make a wall, and
she shall not find her paths; the person is changed, and so we have it often
in Scripture, that is to signify some kind of perturbation of spirit, that
manner of speech is usual amongst men when their spirits are troubled, they
speak sometimes in one person, sometimes in another: And indeed the Lord here
speaks after the manner of men, as if his Spirit were troubled at the
perverseness of his people. Besides the change of the person here is to
express some indignation of God against their perverseness, therefore he
speaks as if he would turn from them, and rather speak to some body else, as
if he should say, I speak to these, yet they are stubborn and stout, well I
will speak to all that are about them, to all the beholders, take notice of
their stubbornness, and perverseness, and judge between them and me.

And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not over take them; and
she shall seek them, (...) Vadam. (...) persequa. (...)
but she shall not find them. In the 5. ver. it was but I will go after my
lovers, Vadam, but here it is, she will follow, from that root which
signifies persequor, to follow with eagerness, it is not only sectari, but
insectari, the word is the very same that is used for persecutors, who eagerly
pursue those that they do persecute. Psalm. 7. 5. David speaking of his enemies
following of him, the same word is used that is here, save me, says he, Lest
the enemy persecute my soul, It is the same, and so the Seventy turn it.

Yea, and beside the form of the word, it being (in Piel) that signifies to do
a thing auxiously, and diligently, carefully, whereas (in Call.) it signifies
only a bare doing of a thing: but when it comes into form, as those that
are skillful in the Hebrew tongue know that fignifieth to do a thing with
care, that solicitiousnesse, and diligence, so therefore it is turned by
Polanus, anxie prosecutus est, She has prosecuted or followed with a great
deal of care. So that this is more then the other, for it seems that after she
had some affliction she grew worse for a while, and was more eager upon her
Idols then she was before.

But she shall not over take them. Though she be never so much set upon that
way of evil, yet I will take a course to keep her from it, she shall not
overtake them. Yea

She shall seek them, (...) S^udiose qua^rens^
but shall not find them. The word signifies to seek with a great deal of
endeavor, not only to seek in ones thought and mind, but to go on to walk
up and down that we may find it, is by the Seventy turned by diverse words
that signify a seeking more then ordinary. Summae conatuam. bulatione and
pedibu^^


But shall not find them. Let them be never so set upon their ways of Idolatry,
yet I will keep them from them.

Then shall she say, I will go, etc. This shall be the effect of it. (...).
One would think all this were nothing but threatening, oh no, it is mercy, for
it is for this end, that she might at length say, I will go and return to my
first husband, etc.

You may take them in the meaning of these versus, and the scope of them in
this short paraphrase: As if God should say, Oh you Israelites, all you have
grievously sinned against me in forsaking me, and following of your lovers,
sore and heavy evils are ready to befall you, even you my elect ones, upon
whom my heart is for good, you have involved your selves in the common guilt of
this wickedness, therefore even you must expect to be involved in the common
calamity that shall come upon the nation, and when you are under those
calamities, know that I know how to make a difference between sinner and
sinner, though guilty of the same sin, though under the same affliction, that
what shall be for the destruction of some, shall be in mercy to others, it
shall be but to hedge up your ways, to keep you from further sinning, to make
your ways of sin difficult, that so your souls might be saved: and although
your hearts will be a long time perverse, and will not come in and submit to
me, yet I will so order things in the way of my providence, that at length I
will so work upon your hearts, that you shall come in and return unto me, you
shall bethink your selves and remember what sweetness once you had in my ways,
and you shall take shame to your selves, and acknowledge that it was then far
better with you then it is now, and so I will remain to be your God, and you
shall give up your selves to worship and serve me for ever. This is the meaning
and scope of the words.

Now then having the words thus opened and paraphrased, take the several
observations, for they are exceeding full, and very sweet and suitable.

First, Obser.
from the general the observation is,

Though such as are in covenant with God may for their sins be involved in the
same judgment with others, yet God will make difference between them and
others that are not in covenant with him: God will have other ends in his
afflictions toward his people then he has toward others, though the
difference be not in the things that they suffer, Isa. 27. 4
yet the difference is very broad and wide in the ends for which they suffer.
When the briars and thorns are set before God, it is that they may be
destroyed, the fire of Gods anger passes through them to destroy them; but
when God comes to his people, though some anger be stirred up for a while, yet
all the fruit thereof it is to take away their sin. ver. 9.
See what difference God makes between some and some even under the same
affliction, in that 24. of Jer. ver. 5. I do not know a more remarkable place
in the Scripture for this purpose, says God there, speaking of the basket of
good figs, I will acknowledge them that are carried captive of Judah, whom I
have sent out of this place into the land of the Caldeans for their good. The
difference of Gods aims in afflicting his Saints from his aims in afflicting
the wicked.
Though they be carried into the Land of the Caldeans, I will acknowledge them
there to be my people, and it shall be for their good. Well now there was
likewise a basket that had very naughty figs, and they were carried away
captive too, both went into captivity, what does he say of them? I will deliver
them (says he, verse. 9.) to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for
their hurt. I will (...) at their hurt when I deliver them into captivity.

This should be a mighty support unto the Saints under all their afflictions,
though the affliction be the same to sense and view with that of the wicked,
yet you see the difference is broad. It is true, may the troubled heart say,
there may be different ends of Gods afflicting some and others; he may afflict
some for trial, and others for their sins; but what will you say if an
affliction come upon us for our sins? Is there a difference here? Yes my
brethren, though your afflictions come upon you from your sins, if you be in
covenant with God, the difference still may hold, for so it is here, those
afflictions that here are spoken of, God calls the hedge and the wall, they
were fore afflictions, and they were for their sins, for their perverseness, and
yet God intends good and mercy to them in those afflictions: Here is the
virtue of the Covenant of grace, it takes out the sting, and venom, and curse
even of afflictions, that are not only for trial but for sin, they are to
keep you from greater misery; if God bring some misery upon you (it so
appears unto you) yet being in covenant with him, this is the blessing of God
upon you, that those troubles are to keep you from greater misery that would
befall you. That for the general.

Now for the particulars, as the words lie, Therefore behold. This inference
therefore I told you it was as if God should say, thou will still go on,
notwithstanding all admonitions and means that I shall use by my Prophets,
therefore behold I will do thus and thus, From hence we may observe, first,
Obs. 1.
There is even in the Saints such a slavish disposition remaining that they
will stand out against God along time even against admonitions exhortations,
convictions, and threatenings of his word. Not only the reprobate will do so,
but such is the perverseness of the hearts of men, that even the elect of God
will many times do so, this is a sore and grievous evil that it should be said
so of them, for if there be ingenuity in the spirit of men, the very notice of
the mind of God is enough to cause the heart to yield, and surely grace does
make the heart of a man ingenuous, and God expects that there should be melting
of spirit at the very notice given of his displeasure, There remains much of
slavi^h disposition in the godly.
yet behold even in the hearts of the godly many times there remains so much
slavishnesse, that they will not come in but upon Gods dealing very hardly with
them, they must have many afflictions, they must be whipped home before they
will return home, God must send the dog many times to worry his sheep before
they will come in. This God complains of Jer. 2. 14. Is Israel a servant? is he
a homs-borne-slave? why is he spoiled? ver. 17. Have thou not procured this
unto thy self? So it may be said of many, even of the Saints when we see how
the ways and dealings of God are toward them, yea even God himself speaks
thus, What, is such a one a servant? is he a slave? is not such a one my child?
how is it then that he must be dealt with like a slave, like a servant?

Secondly, Therefore, because one means will not do it, namely my Prophets
admonishing, and threatening, therefore I will do thus and thus, therefore I will
consider of some other way to deal with you. The observation is. Obser


When one means will not keep from sin either those that we have to deal
with, or our selves, we must not rest there, but set even our brains on work
to look after other means. What will not this do it? Is there any things else
that possibly may do it? That means then shall be used. Thus God (as we may
speak with reverence) even studyes his administrations toward his people when
he is frustrated in one, and if that do not do it, he bethinks with himself,
is there any thing else will do it? if there be any thing in the world can do
it, God studies what may do his people good.
it shall not be left unattempted. God does not presently cast off his people,
because they stand out against him in the use of one means. It is true, for
others that are not in covenant with him, God is quick with them, and if they
come not in presently, he cuts them off, and will have ^o more to do with them,
but for his own people though they stand out long, yet God tries one means
after another, and after that another.

This is the grace of God toward his own.

It should be our care to imitate God in this, when you are to deal with
others that are under you, with your children or servants, do not satisfy your
selves in this, I have admonished them, and threatened them, and persuaded them,
What then? yet they will not come in: What will you have no more to do with
them then? Will you cast them off presently? You should study what further
course may be taken, study their dispositions, What do I think will work upon
them if this do not? will fair means? will foul means? will any thing do
it? if any thing will, you should labor to deal with them that way. So for
your own hearts, when you are convinced of the evil of your own hearts, it is
true your consciences will not be quiet unless you use some means against
that sin that is in your heart, well, but I have used means, I have laid
the word to my heart, the threatenings, the promises to my heart, and I have
followed Gods ordinances: will it not do? will not my heart come off? Is there
no other means to be used? what do you say to the afflicting of your soul?
Try that; you have laid the word to your heart, and you find it does not
work, try the afflicting of your souls in humilliations, fasting, and prayer,
for the overcoming of your sins.

Thus God does, when admonitions and exhortations of the Prophets will not
do, yet says God, I will try another way, I will bethink me of some other
course, I will hedge up their way with thorns, and I will see whether I can
bring them in that way. These two from the inference Therefore.

From the note of attention, Obs.
Behold, we have an excellent useful observation that naturally springs up.
A mercy to have stumbling blocks laid in the way of sin.
For God to make the way of sin to be difficult to sinners, is a most singular
mercy. Howsoever always it does not prove so, but take it at the worst, yet it
is better for the way of sin to be hedged with thorns, and to be made difficult
to us, then to have the smoothest way that possibly can be. As it is one of
the greatest judgments of God upon wicked men to lay stumbling blocks before
them in the way of righteousness; so it is one of the greatest mercies of God
to his children to lay stumbling blocks ^^d difficulties before them in the way
of sin.

It is an (...) way of Gods dealing even with reprobates, with those he hoth no
love unto, that in the ways of godliness, in the way to life, he in his just
judgment lays stumbling blocks before them, and they appear very difficult
to them, the hedge of thorns compasses about the way of righteousness to the
wicked, therefore you shall find it in Pro. 15. 19. that the way of the
slothful man is said to be as an hedge of thorns; that is, a slothful man
(who is a wicked man there) he looks upon any duty that he should perform as
compast about with an hedge of thorns, God in his just judgment suffers
difficulties at least to appear to him in the way of his duties, that makes
him to have no mind to them. Now this is a grievous judgment of God to cause
the way of his fear to appear so difficult, and so scare them from it, What
should I meddling with such and such ways? I see I must suffer thus and thus,
there are these and these stumbling blocks that I must go over, these and these
troubles that I must meet withal, I were better sit still and be quiet, I
shall never be able to go through. Such stumbling blocks God lays in the way
of godliness before the wicked, and they stumble at them and fall, and break
their necks. On the other side, God in abundance of mercy casts stumbling
blocks in the way of sin before his people that they cannot get over, if they
stumble, it is but to break their shins and to save their souls. But when the
wicked stumble, they break their necks, and damn their souls. But now the
ways of God are plain to the righteous, Prove. 8. 9. They are all plain to him
that understands, and right to him that finds knowledge. Gods ways are
very plain to the godly, and sins ways are very difficult; O in^aelices et
miseros quando relinquit Deus homiones sibi ipsis nec resisti^ eorum fureri et
cupiditatibus: sed vae illis ad quorum peccata connive^ Deus. Luther.
but on the other side, to the wicked Gods ways are very difficult, and the
ways of sin are very plain. Oh unhappy men, says Luther, when God leaves
them to themselves, and does not resist them in their lusts! woe, woe to them
at whose sins God does wink, when God lets the way to hell be a smooth and
pleasant way. That is a heavy judgment, and a sign of Gods indignation
against men, a token of his rejection of them, that he does not intend good
unto them. You bless your selves many times that in the way of sin you find
no difficulty; if a whore-master, or a malicious man, who would accomplish his
own ends, find all things go on as he desires, so that he has not any rub in
his way, no not so much as a prick, he blesses himself. Bless thy self? If
thou knew all, thou have cause to howl, and wring thy hands, for the curse
of God is upon thee, a dreadful curse to make the way of sin pleasant. On
the other side, perhaps many of Gods Saints when they find the ways of sin
somewhat difficult to them, they are troubled at it, that they cannot have
their will. Troubled? thou have cause to bless God who has thus crossed thee,
for it is an argument of much love to thee. There is a Behold put to this, that
God should be so merciful to them, to make their ways of idolatry and
supersition difficult to them.

From hence these three observations: Obser.
I will hedge up her way with thorns.

First, there is much bruitishness in the hearts of Gods people. Not only
slayishnesse that was before, but bruitishness too: That is thus, they must not
only be dealt withal as slaves (hardly) and so be brought home, but as brute
beasts, they must have some present evil upon them, or otherwise they will not
return out of their evil way, except their sin be for the present grievous and
troublesome to them. It is not enough (you know) to threaten brute beasts, but
they must have some present evil upon them, if we would keep them from such a
place we would not have them go unto. Much brutishness remains in the h^arts
even of the godly.
A man that has some understanding, though he has a slavish spirit, yet he
may be kept for fear of future evils; but when a man comes to this, that
nothing but present evils will keep him off, he is worse then a slave in this,
he cannot be kept from sin by the exercise of his reason, God must also deal
with him as a brute beast, God must come and let some present evil be upon him
to prick him, or else he will go on in an evil way. This is brutishness, even
in the hearts of the Saints.

Secondly, Obser. 2.
hence we may see the pronenesse of men's natures to Idolatry the way must be
hedged up to keep men from it. It is not enough to forewarn men of it, but all
means that can be used is little enough to keep off men. How wicked then is the
way of many amonst us, who seek to make the way of Idolatry too smooth, and
plain, and open as they can! yea in stead of stopping such as have inclinations
to it, they lay before them the inciting and intifing occasions which add to
their own propension such delectation as puts them on forward with a swift
facility.

Thirdly, Obser. 3.
Afflictions to the people of God, are Gods hedges to keep them from sin. The
command of God is one hedge, and affliction is another. Therefore sin is
called by the name of Transgression, Transgression, what is that? That is,
going beyond their bounds, going over the hedge; a man that sins goes over
the hedge. And we find, Eccles. 10. 8. He that breaks the hedge a serpent
shall bite him.; Afflictions are ^ods hedges.
It is true, in regard of the hedge of Gods command, he that will venture to
break that hedge, must expect a serpent to bite him, must expect the biting of
Conscience, the anguish and horror of that: But when that hedge is broke, God
comes with another hedge to keep his people from sin, so you have it expressed
in Job 33. 17, 18. speaking of afflictions, By them, says he, he withdraws
man from his purpose, and he keeps back his soul from the pit. As suppose a
beast be running to such a pasture, perhaps he does not see the hedge, and it
may be if he should run a little further, he would be plunged in a pit, and
there destroyed, but now the husbandman sets a hedge there, and when the
beast comes just to the hedge, to the thorns, then it is withdrawn from what
it was about, and so the life of it preserved; so it may be with a man that is
running to such a place, when he meets with something that hinders him, he
is drawn from his purpose, and his soul is kept back from death.

You use to deal thus with your children, if you live in the Country near
ditches and pits of water, you will hedge about the pits, for fear your
children should fall into them and so the hedge keeps the Children a^ive.

As afflictions keep the Saints from sin, as a hedge to them, so the
difficulties in Gods ways keeps the wicked from God. When difficulties
therefore do fall out, it should teach us to consider what way we are in, why?
for God uses to compass about sinful ways, with difficulties, on purpose to
keep his people from them. Well, I am in a way going on in it, I am sure I am
compast about with difficulties, it may be these difficulties are but Gods
hedges to keep me from sin; how shall I know that? for sometimes
difficulties are but trials of our graces, and they may be such as call for the
stirring up of our graces to break through the hedge, so Pro. 8. 19.
difficulties are said to be a hedge of thorns; they lie in the ways of Gods
people that are blessed ways, then the work of the Saints should be to stir
up their graces, and to break thorough the hedge, though they be pricked, and
their flesh torn, that is, their excellency, that they can break thorough
those difficulties, faith will carry through all difficulties in Gods ways.

Therefore here is the trial, when I meet with difficulties, I must not
forbear because there are difficulties, but I must examine, Is it the way of
God or not? If it be the way of God, then lay aside the thought of
difficulties, if I have a rule for it let the difficulties be never so many,
and the hedge never so thick, yet I must break through, and God is so much
the more honored by it: but on the otherside, if upon examination I find the
way I am in is not warrantable by God, then I must know that Gods end in laying
difficulties in the way, is to stop my going on in it, and it is desperateness
in me to seek to break through, in seeking to break through I may break my
neck, therefore I must look to it that I have warrant from God for those ways
I am in.

Oh that men would think of this when they meet with difficulties in their
ways! I might show how the Saints have many times met with difficulties in
their ways, and yet have gone on with strength; That of Jacob is one of the
most famous examples we have in the Book of God, the difficulties he met
withal, and that in the way that God himself bad him go in. God bade him
return to his Father Isaac, and yet he met with six or seven prodigious
difficulties, that one would have thought should have made him doubted whether
he was in Gods way or not, and have caused him to return back again. First,
Laban pursues him, and intends mischief against him; and Esau he in that
journey comes to meet him with a purpose to destroy him, If our way be Gods we
must break through all difficulties
his wives nurse dyed, and Rachell her self dyed in that journey, he had his
daughter Diana defloured, his two sons committed that horrible wickedness,
in murdering the Sechemites: All these fell out in Jacobs journey; he might
have said, Am I in the way that God would have me? Yes, Jacob was in his way,
he had an express warrant from God to go that journey. Difficulties
therefore must not discourage us, but we must break through them; especially
in these times. It were a low and poor spirit, to be kept from a good way
because of ^^ew thorns, because of some difficulties that we meet withal in
the way.

If we know it be Gods way, go through it in the name of God, let the
difficulties be what they will. But if they be not warrantable by God, let the
difficulties we meet withal stop us, for God intends them to be a hedge to
keep us from sin.

Again, it should make us be content when any affliction befalls us; why,
because it is more then we know that God intends abundance of good to us; It
may be, if this affliction had not befallen thee, thou had undone thy self:
If this affliction that thou do sor riggle to get out of, and think thy
self so miserable under it, if it had not befalne thee, thou might have
fallen into the pit and been lost, therefore be not troubled so much at the
affliction, but examine whether it be not a hedge that God has set, to keep
thee from a further misery. But it seems that this will not serve, there must
be a wall, as well as this hedge. Hence the observation is this,

The perverseness of man's heart is such, Obser.
that he will break through many difficulties to get unto sin.

We read of Idolaters, who would cause their children to pass through the
fire to their Idols, that was more then a hedge of thorns. We see it often that
men's hearts are so strongly bent upon their sins, that though it were to pass
through a great deal of trouble, though they prick and tare themselves, yet
they will have their sin. Wicked men will suffer much for their lusts.
As that notable story that Ambrose tells us of, of one Philotimus who brought
his body to grievous diseases, by uncleanness and drunkenness, and the
Physicians told him, that if he did not abstain he would certainly lose his
eyes, there was no help for him; as soon as ever he hears this, he answers
thus, Valeat lumen amicum. Farewell O pleasant light, rather then I will deny
my self in this, I will never see light more; he would venture the loss of his
eyes, rather then lose the satisfaction of his lusts. Thus it is with many, O
what do they venture for their lusts! What an argument should that be to us to
venture much for God, to endure hard things for the blessed God: though there
be some hardship between us and our duty, break through all to get to that
duty; wicked men will break through great difficulties to get to their sins.
There need be a wall as well as a hedge. Well, if there be need of a wall, I
will have a wall, says God, I will wall up her way, though she may make a
shift to break down the hedge, she shall not break down the wall, it is too
strong, and too high.

Hence the Observation is,

God when he pleases will keep men from their sins in spite of their
hearts, Obs.
they shall not have their way, they shall not have their desire do what they
can. When God sees Men set upon their wicked desires, if they be those that
belong not to him, perhaps God may damn them for their wicked desires, and yet
they shall not have them neither; they shall go to hell for them and never
come to accomplish them. Saul, how desperately set was he to mischief^ David?
but God made a wall that he could not get to have his desire do (...), Many,
especially great Men, how strongly are they set upon their desires! they must
have it, and they will have it, and they must and must, nothing comes from
them but must and will; well, they may be deceived, God knows how to cross
the most stubborn and stout hearts that live upon the earth, that they shall
not have what they would have in this world. I will make a wall. God does thus
make a wall about men's sins, God keeps many from thit sins in a way of
violence whether they will or no.
by sending sore and heavy afflictions, as about the drunkards way, when God
brings some grievous disease upon his body, perhaps he is so stopped that he
cannot drink, that is a wall about his sin, that he cannot go to it
according to his desire: so the unclean person, God brings such a disease upon
him, that he cannot have the pleasure of his lust, though he would never so
feign: so when God brings poverty upon others, that they caunot follow their
ambition and pride, doc what they can, these are as walls to them; but God does
not always do this in a way of mercy. Obser.


I will make a wall. First, a hedge, and then a wall. Hence observe when lesser
afflictions will not serve to keep men from their sins. God usually comes with
greater and sorer; I see some of them will break through the hedge, I will make
a wall therefore, that is, I will come with stronger and greater afflictions,
and so keep them off. Levit. 26. 18. If you will not for all this, says God,
turn unto me, I will punish you seven times more, and I will break the pride
of your power; you think there is a power in your hand, and there is pride in
your power, for power raises the heart up to pride; I will break it, I will
never leave till I have broke your hearts in spite of you; and you shall find
ein that Chapter four or five times mention of seven times more. This is after
the hedge, then there comes a wall.

And they shall not find their paths.

Hence,

God is able to strike men with blindness that they shall not see their way.
Obser.
Though there be an evil way of mischief before them, yet God knows how to
strike them with blindness, though there be nothing to hinder them in it, God
can strike men with blindness one way or other, that they shall not be able to
see their way before them. We have this, this day exceedingly fulfilled in our
eyes, how does God blind and befot our adversaries, that they cannot see their
way? the truth of that Scripture, Job 5. 13. is this day before our eyes. He
takes the wise in their own craft inesse, and the counsel of the froward is
carried head long. How has God taken wise men in their own craftiness? and
the counsel of froward men, their spirits are froward, because they are crossed,
they are vexed, and their counsel is carried headlong; God takes away their
understanding, and does baffle them in their own counsels. A notable Text we
have in Psalm. 75. 6. The stout-hearted are spoiled, God strikes wicked men with
blindness.
they have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their
hands. They are cast into a slumber, and know not what in the world to do,
they know not how to make use of that power they have in their hands; It
follows further in that Psalm, At thy rebuke O God of Jacob, both the
charet, and horse are cast into a dead sleep.

A strange expression, that a Charet should be cast into a deep sleep; the
meaning is, they can no more tell how to make use of them, then if they all lay
for dead, or asleep. Let us not be afraid of the power of adversaries; suppose
they had power in their hand, God can strike them with blindness, and they
shall grope to find the door, they shall be baffled in their own ways, they
shall not tell how to make use of their own power. Isa. 29. 14. Behold (says
God) I will proceed to do a marvailous work, even a marvailous work and a
wonder: What is it? The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid: This is a wonderful thing that
God will do; yea, and he will mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of them,
so you have it, Isa, 19. 11. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the
counsel of the wise counselors of Pha^aoh is become bruiti^; and verse 12.
Where are they? where are thy wise men? And again verse 13. The Princes of
Zoan are become fools, the Princes of Noph are deceived; and verse 14. The
Lord has mingled a perverse spirit it in the midst thereof, they have caused
Egypt to err in his work, as a drunken man that staggereth in his vomit. Here
is the judgment of God upon Men, when he list he can blind them in their way
that they shall err in their work, and they shall stagger in their own
counsels and designs as a drunken man in his vor^it, they shall not find
their paths, they shall not know in the world what to do.

Well, Thus God deals with wicked men: But now let us consider this in
reference to the Saints, to Gods own people, they shall not find their paths;
then the Observation is,

It is a good blindness for men not to see the way of sin: It is promised
here in a way of mercy, that they shall not find their paths; this darkeness,
it is not the shadow of death, but the way of life. It is rich mercy. I have
read of one Maris, a Bishop of Calcedon, a blind man, to whom Julius the
Apostate giving some opproptious words, and calling him blind fool, because
he had rebuked Julian for his Apostasy; the good man answered thus, I bless
God that I have not my sight to see such an ungracious face as thine: So many
may bless God for their bodily blindness, because, it may be it has
prevented abundance of sin that might have been let in at the casements of
their eyes; But especially for blindness, not to see the way of sin, if we
may call that blindness; It is a mercy that God does not grant to all, it is a
singular mercy to the Saints: For you shall find there are abundance of people
exceedingly quick-sighted in the way of sin that can find the path there,
and yet are exceedingly blinded in the way of God, and cannot find the path
there: On the other side, that Saints are blinded in the way of sin, but are
quick-sighted in the ways of God. How many men are wise to do evil, as the
Scripture says, they are able to see into the depths of Satan, they are
profound to damn themselves, they can find out such objections against the
(...), and answer such things that are said against (...) devises and
contrivances how to get to their sinful ways, but when they come to the ways
of God, as blind as Moles, they cannot see such necessity of such strictness,
they cannot understand, men of great parts, great Rabbis, of great
understanding otherwise, they have no skill in the ways of God. I thank thee,
O Father Lord of heaven and earth (says Christ) that thou have hid these
things from the wise and learned, and have revealed them unto babes: Whereas on
the other side, you shall find that the Saints are able when they come to Gods
ways, to see far into the excellency and glory of them, they have
understanding there, though they be but weak otherwise, they can see into the
great mysteries of God, It is a good blindness not to find the paths of sin.
into the beauty of his ways, so that it dazeleth all the glory of the world
in their eyes, they are not easily catched with temptations, but can see into
the subtilties of the devil that would draw them out of Gods ways; but when
they come to the ways of sin, there they want understanding, and it is Gods
mercy to them to do so; there they are but bunglers, they do but grope as
blind men, they are not their crafts masters, they are not cunning artists in
those ways, but as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1. 1^. We have not received the
spirit af the world, we cannot shift for our selves as the men of the world
can, we cannot be so cunning to contrive such plots, and tricks, and devices
for our own ends as the men of the world can, but we have received the Spirit
of God, we can understand things there (through Gods mercy) to eternal life.
There are many men cunning for their own destruction, they can find every
secret path of sin, though sin be a labyrinth, they can go up and down in it,
find out ever by-path in that way. When the ways of God are propounded to
wicked men, there is a mist before their eyes, they cannot see, and when the
ways of sin are propunded to the Saints, God in mercy cafteth a mist before
their eyes that they cannot see. Eccles. 10. 15. The fool knows not how to
go to the City; wicked men they know not the path to the Church of God, to the
Ordinances of God, they talk much about such and such Ordinances, and setting
up of Christ in the way of his Ordinances, but they do not see the way of it,
they know not what the true worship of God means; No, a fool does not
understand the way to the City of God, he cannot find out that path.

But the Saints, though they know not the ways of sin, yet they can find
out the paths of God, they know the way to the City, Possidonius tells us a
Austin, that when there was wait laid for his life, thorough Gods providence he
mist his way, and so his life was preserved, and his enemies disappointed. So
many times when you are going on in such a way of sin, perhaps you little
think what danger there is in it; God in mercy therefore casts a mist before
your eyes, and you miss that way and save your lives.

Ver. 7. She shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them,
etc. Obs.
The Observation is,

Until God subdues the hearto himself, men will grow worse and worse in their
sins; yea, even Gods Elect ones to whom he intends mercy at last, yet till
God comes with his grace to subdue their hearts, they may grow worse and
worse: they would before go after their lovers, and now here comes
afflictions upon them, yet still they will follow their lovers, and that with
more eagerness of affection, and with more violence then before. Afflictions
in themselves are part of the curse of God, and there is no healing virtue in
them, but an inraging quality to stir up sin, till God sanctify them by his
grace, and God may suspend for a time the sanctifying work of his grace to
those he intended good to at last. Isa, 51. 20. The Text speaks of some whose
afflictions were not sanctified, That they lie as a wild bull in a net in the
streets, and they were full of the fury of the Lord; They were full of the fury
of the Lord, and yet lay like a wild Bull in a net, in a raging manner. This
distemper of heart proceeds from two grounds.

1. When outward comforts are taken away by affliction, the sinner having no
comfort in God, he knows not where to have comfort but in his sin, if
conscience be not strong enough to keep from it, he runs madly upon it.

2. Because he thinks that others look upon him as one opposed by God for his
sin, therefore that he may declare to all the world that he is not daunted at
all, nor that he has no misgiving thoughts, (though perhaps he has nipping
gripes within) yet he will put a good face upon it, and follow his ways more
eagerly then formerly.

A second observations; She shall follow, but she shall not overtake,

A man may follow after the devises of his own heart, Obser
and may be disappointed; he may not overtake them. There is a great deal of
difference betwixt following Gods ways, and our own ways; there was never
any in the world that was disappointed (if he knew all) in following Gods
ways, but he got, either the very thing he would have, or something that was
as good, if not better for him: but in the ways of sin, in our own ways we
may meet with disappointment; why should we not then rather follow God then
follow our own desires? The desires after sin, as they are Desideria futilia,
so they are Desideria inutilia, as one speaks; as they are foolish, so they
are fruitless desires, they do not attain what they would have. How has God
disappointed men in our dayes^ they have not overtaken what they greedily
sought after; Our adversaries blessed themselves in their designs, they thought
to have their day, they propounded such an end, and thought to have it, but how
has God disappointed them! But whether God has done this in mercy to them,
(as it is spoken of here) that we know not, we hope God has crossed some of them
in a way of mercy, though perhaps he may deal in another way with other of
them.

But further,

Disappointment in the way of sin is a great mercy. Obs.


As satisfaction in sin is a judgment of God, and a fearful judgment, so
disappointment in sin is a mercy and a great mercy, Prove. 14. 14. there you
shall find, That the back-slyder in heart shall be filled with his own ways: A
dreadful threatening to back-slyders and apostates; when God has no intention
of love and mercy for backsliders, God will give them their own devices, they
shall have their fill in their own ways; you would have such a lust, you
shall have it, you shall be satisfied to the full, and bless your selves in
your own ways. This is the judgment of God upon backsliders: but for the
Saints, when they would have such a way of sin, God will disappoint them, they
shall not have it. We account it ordinarily very grievous to be disappointed of
any thing, and many times I have had this meditation upon it; What, does it
trouble the hearts of men to be disappointed almost in any thing? Oh what a
dreadful vexation and horror will it be for a man to see himself disappointed
of his half hopes! Remember when you are troubled at any disappointment, what
will be the terror then and anguish of spirit if it should prove that any of
you should be disappointed of your hopes for eternity! But those whom God does
often disappoint in the way of sin, they may have hope that God will deliver
them from that great disappointment.

And again yet further, She would have her Idols, but God will take them
away, she shall not have them says God, though she follow after them, and
have a great mind to them, yet they shall not overtake them. God will remove
them from their Idols, or their Idols from them, (that is the meaning) they
should not come to their Dan or Bethel, they should either be removed far
enough from their calves, or the calves from them.

Thus it should be with Governors, Obs.
they should take such a course as to take away Idols and superstitious
vanities from those that will be worshipping of them, and sinning against God
by them; Either take them away from those vanities, or their vanities from
them, they should not so much as suffer those things to stand to be inticements
and snares for the hearts of people, though they be very brave, and abundance
of gold and excellent artificial work be about such things, yet Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
Thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therein, but thou shall utterly destroy it, and thou
shall utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing. You shall not look upon the
bravery of the work of their Idols, and upon the great cost that is bestowed
upon them, and therefore spare them because of that, oh no, but take them away,
that men may not be ensnared by them; So God will do.

Further in the fifth place, Obser.
They shall follow after their lovers, but shall not overtake them. Idolaters
hearts are after their Idols when they cannot get them. When we cannot enjoy
all ordinances, vet our hearts must be working after them.
Though they cannot get them, yet they will be following of them. It is of an
excellent use for us, so it should be with us in the pursuing after Gods
ordinances; though perhaps for the present we cannot enjoy the Ordinances of
God, yet be sure to keep our hearts working after them. Many deceive themselves
in this, they think, we would have all the Ordinances of God, but we see we
cannot, and so upon that we sit still and mind no more seeking after them,
neither do they labor to keep their hearts in a burning desire after them;
and hence many times it is, that the opportunities of enjoying them are let
slip.

But now if thou can not have the beauty of an ordinance, if thou keep thy
heart in a burning desire after it in the use of all means for the attaining
it, know then, that the want of an ordinance is an ordinance to thee.

You shall find in the English Chronicle of Edward the first, that he had a
mighty desire to go to the holy land, and because he could not go thither, he
gave charge to his son upon his deathbed that he should carry his heart
thither, and he appointed 32000. pound to defray the charges of carrying his
heart to the holy land, out of a superstitious respect he had to that place,
though he could not attain it his heart should. Thus should our hearts work
after Ordinances.

And now we come to the close, and that is the blessed fruit of all this, she
shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and she shall
seek them, but she shall not find them.

What follows after all this? Now comes in the close of mercy, for says
the Text, Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband, for
then was it better with me then now. Now they shall return, at length they
shall bethink themselves.

Hence we have likewise many sweet and excellent Observations.

As First, Obs.
In times of affliction the only rest of the soul is to return to God.

They keep a rigling, and a stir, and a shifting up and down to provide for
themselves, yea but they could find no rest in what they did, but as a poor
prisoner that is shakled keeps a stir with his chains, but instead of getting
any freedom he galls his legs: but when the poor soul after all shiftings, and
turnings, and vexings, comes to think of returning to the Lord, and of
humbling and repenting it self before him, now it finds rest. Return to thy
rest, O my so^le; so the words are. Remember after all your afflictions here is
your rest in returning to the Lord.

Secondly, Obs.
Then they shall say, that is when they are so stopped in their way that they
cannot tell in the world what to do, when they are hedged, and walled, and
cannot overtake their lovers, then they shall return to the Lord.

Hence the Observation is, so long as men can have any thing in their sinful
way to satisfy themselves withal, they will not return to God: There is that
perverseness of spirit in men: Only when men are stopped in the way o^ sin,
that they can have no satisfaction nor no hope, then they begin to think of
returning to God.

This is the vileness of the spirits of men, they never or very rarely will
come off to God till then. As the Prodigal, what shift did he make? he goes
to the farmer, to the swine, to the husks to fill his belly, and it is likely
if he had had his belly full of them he would never have thought of going to
his father, but when he came to the husks and could not tell how to fill his
belly there, when he was in a desperate estate, then he begins to think of
returning to his father. So you have it Isa, 57. 10. Yet saidest thou not,
where is no hope, thou have found the life of thy hands, therefore thou wast
not grieved; thou wast not brought to such a desperate stand as to say the is
no hope, that notes that till men be brought to such a stand that they can
say, certainly there is no hope or help this way, they will seldom think of
returning to God. Cum ne mi ni ob trvdi po test, itur da me.
Thus is God infinitely dishonored by us, It is very strange how the hearts of
men will hanker after their sin this way, and that way, till God take them
quite off from hope of comfort by it, they will never have a thought to return
unto God; God is feign to be the last refuge, we account our selves much
dishonored when we are the last refuge, when no body will I must. It seems
God is saine to yield to this, when no body will give satisfaction to the soul,
Obs.
then men come to God, and God must.

But you will say, will ever God accept of such a one? Mark the next
observation; returning to God, if it be in truth, though it be thus after we
have sought out for all other helps, yet God is willing to accept of it.

This is an observation full of comfort, the Lord grant it may not be abused,
but it is the word of the Lord, and it is a certain truth, that returning
after men have sought other means, and can find no help, though they are
driven to it by afflictions, yet it may be accepted by God. It is true, man
will not accept upon these terms, but the thoughts of God are as sarre above
the thoughts of men as the heaven is above the earth. It is true indeed some
time God will not, nay God threatens Pro. 1. 28. though they call upon him he
will not answer, though they see^e him early, yet shall not find him. God is
not thus gracious to all, therefore you must not presume upon it: God some time
at the very first affliction hardneth his heart against men, that he will never
regard them more, for his mercy is his own; but those that are in covenant
with him, though they come to him upon such terms, yet they may be accepted of
him; therefore take this truth for helping of you against this fore
temptation, when you are in affliction, which will be apt to come in, Oh I cry
to God now in my affliction, I should have done it before, surely God will not
hear me now.

This may be a temptation; I confess I cannot speak in this point without a
trembling heart lest it be abused, but the Text presents it fairly to you, and
you must have the mind of God made known unto you though others abuse it, God
accepts of us when we come to him in our affliction.
Psalm. 88. 9. Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, Lord I have called
daily upon thee: This is spoken of Heman, and God did accept of him as it is
apparrent in the Psalm, yet he cried by reason of affliction; and Psalm. 120. 1.
In my distress I cried unto the Lord and he heard me; though it were in my
distress, yet the Lord heard me.

Only take this one note about it,

It is true, Though our being stopped in all other ways may make us cry to
God, and God may hear us, but when God does hear us, he works more then crying
out by reason of that affliction; though at first our affliction be the thing
that carries ns unto God, yet before God has done withus, and manifest and
any acceptance of us, he works our hearts to higher aims then deliverance
from our affliction.

Again further, I will go and return.

A heart effectually wrought upon by God is a resolute heart to return to God.
As they were resolute in their way of Idolatry, I will follow after my lovers;
so their hearts being converted, they shall be as resolute in Gods ways, she
shall say, I will return to my first husband.

When God will work upon the heart to purpose, he causes strong arguments to
fasten upon the spirit, and nothing shall hinder it, no not father, nor mother,
nor the dearest friend. Perhaps the Lord begins to work upon the child, and
the father scorns him, and the mother perhaps says, What shall we have of you
now? a Puritan? This grieveth the spirit of the child, yet there are such
strong arguments fastened by God upon his heart, that it carries him thorough,
he is resolute in his way, he will return.

Further, Those who have ever found the sweetness of Christ in their hearts,
have yet something remaining, that though they should be apostates, will at
length draw them to him. Christ has such hold upon their hearts as at one time
or other he will get them in again, there will be some sparks under those
embers that will flame and draw the soul to return again to Christ.
Therefore if any of you ever had any friends in whom you were verily persuaded
there was a true work of grace, though they be exceedingly apostatized from
Christ, do not give over your hope, for if ever there were any true taste of the
sweetness that is in Christ, Christ has such a hold upon their hearts, that
he will bring them in again one time or other.

Further, I will return to my first husband, for them was it better with me.

There is nothing gotten by departing from Christ. Obser.
You go from the better to the worse when ever you depart from him; What fruit
have you in those things, Romans 6. 21.
whereof you are now ashamed? I the Lord (says God, Isa, 48 17.) teach to
profit; sin does not teach to profit, you can never get good by that, but the
Lord teaches to profit. It may be you may think to gain something by
departing from Christ, Nothing got by departing from Christ.
but when you have cast up all the gain, you may put it into your eye, and it
will do you no hurt. Job, 27. 8. It is a notable place. What is the hope of
the hypocri^e, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? Perhaps a
hypocrite that is departed from God, a back-flider, that was forward before in
the way of godliness, and now like Dema^ he has forsaken those ways and
cleaved to the world, he thinks he has gained, and perhaps is grown richer,
and lives braver then before, yet what hope has this back-slyder, this
hypocrite, when God takes away his soul? then he will see that he has gotten
nothing. As it is said of the Idolater, Isay, 44. 20, A deceived heart has
turned him aside, he feeds upon ashes, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor
say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? What shall there be more in a lust
then in the blessed God? then in JESUS CHRIST who is the glory of Heaven, the
delight of Angels, the satisfaction of the Father himself? Can a lust put thee
into a better condition then Christ, who has all fullness to satisfy the soul
of God himself? certainly it cannot be.

Again, Obs.
There must be a sight and an acknowledgement of our shameful folly, or else
there can be no true returning unto God; I will go and return to my first
husband, for then it was better with me then now. As if the Church should say,
I confess I have played the fool, I have done shamefully, I have loft by
departing from Christ, it was better far then it is now. Ier. 3. 25. We lie
down in our shame, and our confusion covers us, for we have sinned against
the Lord our God, says the Church there; so it should be with all that come in
to return to Christ, they must lie down in their shame.

This I note as very seasonable in these times, we have many now who not long
since have been very vile apostates, they have gone with the times, they saw
preferment went such a way, and their hearts went that way; Now they see they
cannot have preferment in that way they went, and God of his mercy has changed
the times, they will be Converts: We have in England many parliamentary
Converts, but such as we are not to confide in.

Why should we not confide in them? Object.
If they will repent and return, God accepts them, and why should not we? It
is true, such an one was before an enemy, and followed superstitious vanities,
but now he is grown better, and preaches against them, and why should not we
receive him?

To that I answer, Answ.
It is true, if deep humiliation have gone before that reformation, if together
with their being better they have been willing to shame themselves before God
and his people, to acknowledge their folly in departing from God, and be willing
to profess before all that knew them, and have been scandalized by them.
Humiliation must go before reformation.
It is true, God began with me, and showed me his ways when I was young, I
began to love them, and to walk in them: but when I saw how the times went, and
preferment went, the Lord knows I had a base time-serving heart, I went away
from God, they were no arguments that satisfied my conscience, but merely
livings and preferment, and now I do desire to take shame and confusion of
face to my self: Woe unto me for the folly and falsenesse of my heart, it is
the infinite mercy of God ever to regard such a wretch as I. If they do thus
take shame to themselves, and acknowledge their folly, this were something. We
read in the Primitive times of one Ecebolius, who when he had revolted from the
Truth, he comes to the congregation, and falling down upon the threshold,
cries out, Calcate, Calcate insipidum salem, tread upon me unsavory salt, I
confess I have made my self unsavory salt by departing from the Truth, let
all tread upon me. This was a sign of true returning when this went before, we
have done foolishly, it was better with us then now.

Again, I will go and return, for it was better with me then it is now:

Hence,

Though acknowledgement must go before, Obs.
yet returning must follow that. It is not enough to see and acknowledge, but
there must be a returning: For as reformation without humiliation is not
enough, so humiliation without reformation suffices not. Lect. 6.
And I speak this the rather, because these are times wherein there is a great
deal of seeming humiliation, and we hope true humiliation: but you shall have
many in their fasting days will acknowledge how finfull, In vain to be humbled
except we reform.
how vile, how passionate they have been in their families, how worldly, what
base selfe-ends they have had, and they will make such catalogues of their sins
in those days of their humiliation, as causes admiration: the thing itself is
good, but I speak to this end, to show the horrible wickedness of men's hearts,
that after they have ripped up all their sins, with all aggravations,
acknowledged all their folly of their evil ways against God, yet no returning,
after all this as passionate in their fam^lies, as froward, as peevish, as
perverse as ever, as earthly as ever, as light and vain in their carriage as
ever. They will acknowledge what they have done, but they will not return.
Remember humiliation must go before reformation, but Reformation must follow
after Humiliation.

But the chief point of all is behind, Obs.
that is, The sight of this, how much better it was when the heart did cleave
to Christ, over it is now, since departure from Christ, it is an effectual
means to cause the heart to return to him. This is the way that Christ
himself prescribed, Rev. 2. 5. Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent.
Thou were in a better condition once then now thou art, oh come in and return,
and that thou may return, remember whence thou art fallen.

I will give but a little glimpse of what might be said in this point more
largely.

The reasonings of the heart in the sight of this may briefly be hinted thus:

Heretofore I was able through Gods mercy to look upon the face of God with
joy. The reasonings of heart in a repenting Apostate.
When my heart did cleave to him, when I did walk close with God, then the
glory of God shined upon me, and caused my heart to spring within me every
time I thought of him: But now, now, God knows, though the world takes little
notice of it, the very thoughts of God are a terror to me, the most terrible
object in the world is to behold the face of God. Oh it was better with me then
it is now.

Before this my apostasy I had free access to the Throne of Gods grace, I
could come with humble and holy boldness unto God, and pour out my soul
before him, such a chamber, such a closet can witness it: But now I have no
heart to pray, yea I must be haled to it, merely conscience pulls me to it;
yea every time I go by that very closet where I was wont to have that access
to the throne of grace, it strikes a terror to my heart; I can never come into
Gods presence but it is out of slavish fear. Oh, it was better with me then,
then it is now.

Before, Oh the sweet communion my soul enjoyed with Jesus Christ! one days
communion with him, how much better was it then the enjoyment of all the world!
But now Jesus Christ is a stranger to me, and I a stranger to him.

Before, oh those sweet enlargements that my soul had in the ordinances of
God! when I came to the word, my soul was refreshed, was warmed, my heart was
enlightened; when I came to the Sacrament, oh the sweetness that was there! and
to prayer with the people of God, it was even a heaven upon earth unto me: but
it is otherwise now, the Ordinances of God are dead and empty things to me. Oh
it was better with me then, then it is now.

Before, oh the gracious visitations of Gods Spirit that I was wont to have!
Yea, when I awaked in the night season, oh the glimpses of Gods face that were
upon my soul! what quicknings, and refreshings, and inlivenings did I find in
them! I would give a world for one nights comfort I sometimes have had by the
visitations of Gods Spirit, but now they are gone. Oh it was better then, then
it is now.

Before, oh what peace of conscience had I within! whatsoever the world said,
though they rayled and accused, yet my conscience spoke peace to me, and was a
thousand witnesses for me: but now I have a grating conscience within me, oh
the black bosom that is in me, it flies in my face every day, after I come
from such and such company; I could come before from the society of the Saints,
and my conscience smiled upon me: Now I go to wicked company, and when I come
home, and in the night, Oh the gnawings of that worm! it was better with me
then, then it is now.

Before, the graces of Gods Spirit, how were they sparkling in me, active and
lively! I could exercise faith, humility, patience, and the like: Now I am as
one bereft of all, unfit for any thing, even as a dead logg. Before God made
use of me and employed me in honorable services, now I am unfit for any service
at all. Oh, it was better with me then, then it is now.

Before I could take hold upon promises, I could claim them as mine own, I
could look up to all those blessed, sweet promises that God had made in his
word, and look upon them as mine inheritance. But now alas the promises are
very little to me: before I could look upon the face of all troubles, and the
face of death, I could look upon them with joy, but now the thought of
affliction and of death, God knows how terrible they are to me. It was better
with me then, then it is now.

Before in all creatures I could enjoy God, I tasted the sweetness and love of
God, even in my meat and drink: I could sit with my wife and children, and see
God in them, and look upon the mercies of God through them as a fruit of the
Covenant of grace; Oh how sweet was it with me then! But now the creature is
an empty thing unto me, whether it come in love or hatred I do not know. It
was better with me before then now.

Before I was under the protection of God where ever I went, but now I do not
know what danger and miseries I am subject unto daily, what may befall me
before night. God only knows.

Before the Saints rejoiced with me in my company and communion, now every one
is shy of me.

Before I was going on in the ways of life, now these ways I am in, God
knows, and my conscience tells me are ways of death. It was better with me
then, then it is now.

Now then put all these together, as I make no question these thoughts are the
thoughts of many Apostates; if we knew all that were in their hearts, we
should find such thoughts as these. As the Prodigal, when he was feeding upon
the husks, he began to bethink himself; What, is not there food enough in my
Fathers house? every servant there has food enough, and here I am ready to
starve, I feed upon husks, when there is bread enough in my Fathers house; So
may many Apostates say, Alas! before I had s^eetnesse enough, and was satisfied
with those abundance of pleasures that were in the house of God, in his Word
and Ordinances, now I feed upon husks, and amongst swine, Oh that it were with
me as it was before! As Job speaks in another case concerning his afflictions,
Job 29. 3. Oh that it were with me as in mo^eths past, as in the days when God
preserved me, when this candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness. Before I had some afflictions, but I could walk
through all afflictions by that light which I had from God; Oh that it were
with me now as it was then, as in the days of my youth, when the secret of God
was upon my tabernacle, when the Almighty was yet with me! It may be said of
many Apostates, as Lam. 4. 8. They were once as polished Sap^irs, but now they
are become as black as a coal.

But ^h that you had hearts to say, let me return, let me return, because it
was otherwise with me heretofore then it is now! Oh that this day there might
an Angel meet thee, as he met with Hagar when she fled from Sarah* the Angel
sad to her, Hagar, Sarahs maid, whence come thou, and whether will thou go?
So I say, oh Apostate, whence come thou, and whither will thou go? Mark,
Hagar, Sarahs maid, whence come thou? Do thou come from Sarah? from
Abraham's family where God is worshipped? where the Church of God is? and
whither go thou? can thou be any where so well as there? So I say to thee,
Thou who were a forward professor before, Whence come thou? Do thou come
from such Ordinances, from such communion with the Saints? Obser.
What have thou gotten by those base ways? Thou can eat, and drink, and
laugh a little, and have some esteem with such as are carnal; Oh whither will thou go? Oh that God would show you this day whither you go!

There follows yet another Observation,

Seeing there is so much grief and shame in complaining of our apostatizing
when ever God awakeneth us, it should teach all that are not yet Apostates to
take heed what they do, that they may never bring themselves into such a
condition that they may not be forced to complain. Oh it was better before
then it is now. It is a note of Caution to you who are through Gods mercy in
his way, you are now well, know when you are well, and keep you well. And you
young ones who are beginning to give up your names to God, take heed you do not
decline from what now you do, that you do not apostarize and fall off from
God afterward, lest this be your condition that you shall be brought to at
best, for this is at best, thus to lament the change of your condition, perhaps
you shall go on, and God will never cause you to see your shame and folly,
till you be eternally undone; but at best you must be brought to this shame and
confusion of face, to acknowledge how much better it was with you before then
now; how much better was it when I lived in such a family, under such a Master,
in such a Town, Oh it was better then with me then it is now! Oh the precious
days that once I had when I was a young one, those days are gone, and wheth^r
ever they will come again, God knows.

Yet further, when the judgment passes on Gods side, that it was better
before then now, then the soul is in a hopeful way. So long as the judgment
holds for God and his ways, though thou be an Apostate, though perhaps
thy heart be drawn aside from God, and thy affections be unruly, thou art not
in a desperate condition, there is hope of thee. There are two sorts of
Apostates. There are some Apostates, who though they are so through the
unrulinesse of their affections, and the strength of temptation, yet they keep
their judgments for Gods ways, and acknowledge Gods people to be best, and
his Ordinances to be best, and themselves in the danger. But now there are some
Apostates, who do so fall off from God and his ways, that they begin in their
very judgments to think that those ways they professed before were but
fancies, and that the people of God are but a company of humerous people, and
bless themselves in their own ways, and think that they are better now then
they were before: oh this is a hideous thing. If thy judgment be once taken,
that thou think the ways of sin to be better then those ways of God that
before thou professedst, then Lord have mercy upon thee, thou art a gone man,
we do not know that God will do with thee, but in the judgment of man thou
art even a gone man.

I remember Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward has this passage. I have
known (says he) many Apostates, but I never knew any more then one that proved
a scorner, and yet returned again. Take heed therefore, says he, of apostasy.
Though a man may fall off from God, and possibly return; but yet if he fall
off, so that his judgment is taken that he is become a scorner, that is a
woeful condition, such a one scarce ever returns. Many such Apostates you
have in England, and I would challenge you all to give me one example of any
one that ever returned again that so fell. I know many scorners are converted,
but they that have been forward in professing, and then fall off, and prove
scorners, where have you any of them come in?

You have a notable place for this, Levit. 13. 44. there you shall find when
the Priest shall come and see a man that has got the leprosy in his head, the
Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean, for the plague says the Text, is
in the head. You shall observe in all the Chapter, when the Priest found
uncleanness in any other thing, he was to pronounce it unclean, but if the
leprosy be in the head, he shall pronounce the party utterly unclean, for the
plague is in the head, there is not that utter uncleanness any where as when
the plague is in the head, So I may say here, when a man falls off from the
ways of God by some strong temptation or unruly affection, this man is
unclean, verily he is unclean; but when it comes to the head, that his
judgment is against the ways of God, and so comes to contemn them and
those that follow them, and to think his own ways better, this man is utterly
unclean, for the plague is in his head, The Lord deliver you from that plague.

The Sixth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 7. 8. For then it was better with me then it is now.

For she did not k^ow that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silve^, and gold, which they prepared for Baal, etc.


THere remains only one Observation from the 7. ver. and the taking a hint of
a meditation from thence concerning our present times, Obser.
of which briefly.

Upon return unto God, Apostates may have hope of attaining their former
condition; to be as well as ever they were, I will return to my first husband,
for then was it better with me then now, by returning, I hope to recover to be
as I was then, that is the meaning.

In this, Gods goodness goes beyond man's abundantly, Ier. 3. 1. Will a man,
when his wife has committed adultery and he has put her away, will he return
to her again? But thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again to me says the Lord: Hence ver. 22. the Holy Ghost exhorts to return
upon this very ground, Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings. Is there any backsliding soul before the Lord? God now offers
to heal thy backslidings, thou know that it is not with thee now as
heretofore it has been, lo God tendereth his grace to thee that thou may
be in as good a condition as ever; O that thou would give the answer of the
Church there, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God; truly in
vain is Salvation hoped for from the hills, or from the multitude of the
mountain truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. It is true, God
might justly satisfy thee in those present ways of Apostasy wherein thou art,
as sometimes he does Apostates, Pro. 14. 14.
The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, he shall have
enough of them, and Pro. 1. 31. They shall eat the fruit of their own way,
Lect. 6.
and be filled with their own devicss. But behold wisdom it self calls thee
now to return again, and makes this fair promise, Pro. 1. 23. Turn ye at my
reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit unto you. There is not only a
possibility of being received into thy former condition, Apostates seeming
mercy must observe three things.
but Christ does woo thee, and calls after thee, he promises to pour
forth his spirit unto thee, yea and there would be triumph in heaven upon thy
returning.

But let me say thus much to thee, though there be a possibility of coming
again into as good a condition as thou wast in before, yet first there had

It is not an easy thing for one who has that fearful sin of Apostasy settled
upon him by God to believe that ever God should receive him and return in the
ways of mercy and comfort as before.

Yea second, Though there be a possibility to be recovered to mercy, yet Let me
be (says he) but as one of thy hired servants.

And know lastly, that if you do not return upon his gracious offer, God may
give thee up for ever, take thy fill and there is an end of thee; He that will
be filthy, let him be filthy still. Yet further, this expression does strongly
present occasion to digress a little in the comparing our present times with
former times, to examine whether we can say, it was better with us heretofore
then it is now? In these days there is much comparing our present times with
times past, and diverse judgments there are about present times, some
complaining and crying out of the hazards and dangers we are in, in these
present times, much better was it heretofore say they then it is now. To such
as these let me say, first as the holy Ghost says, Eccles. 7. 10. Say not
thou, what is the cause the former days were better then these? thou do uot
enquire wisely concerning this thing. Certainly, those people who make such
grievous complaints of present times, comparing them with times past, do not
wisely enquire after this thing. It is true, there are many sad things for the
present amongst us, things that our hearts have cause to bleed for, such
misunderstanding between King and Parliament, some blood shed already, and
danger of shedding much more; yet perhaps if we enquire wisely concerning this
thing, we shall find, that notwithstanding all this, we have little cause to
complain that it is worse with us now, in comparison of what was before,
Consider, first* that which men do most complain of, which makes the times
hardest now, it is but the breaking out of those mischievous designs that lay
hid long before, Examination whether times before were better then they are now.
and would have done us a great deal more mischief if they had been kept in;
Now they break forth, and break forth as the desperateness of the hopes of
those who had such designs; because they could now go no longer underhand,
but being brought into a desperate pass, they are feign to see what they can
do in ways of violence, and this certainly is better then that mischief
should work secretly under board.



England, that never yet was put into their hands.







The weakness of the argument taken from the opinions and practices of learned
and godly men.
for their own ends, that they may thereby hinder Reformation now. This you
know is the great argument that prevails with most; What, were not those
Prayers composed by learned godly men, as Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and others?
and can we be wiser then they? did not they seal their profession with their
blood?

My brethren, we need go no further to show the weakness of this argument,
but only to show how it was in the Church in those times, and you will find
that you have cause to bless God that it is not so with you now as it was
then, and if that will appear, then the argument you will see can no further
prevail with rational men.

Certainly those first Reformers were worthy Lights and blessed instruments for
God, I would not darken their excellency, but weaken the argument that is
abusively raised from their worth. It is reported of Mr. Greneham that famous
practical Divine, who refusing subscription, in a Letter of his to the Bishop
of Ely, gives his reasons, and answers that Prelates objection against him,
namely, that Luther thought such Ceremonies might be retained in the Church;
his Answer is this, I reverence more the revealed wisdom of God, in teaching
Mr. Luther so many necessary things to salvation, then I search his seeret
judgments in keeping back from his knowledge other things of less importance:
The same do I say of those worthy instruments of Gods glory in the first
Reformation, and that it may be clear to you that God kept back his mind from
them in some things. Consider, whether you would be willing that should be done
now that was then; As in the administration of baptism, we find that in the
book of Lyturgy in King Edwards time, which was composed by those worthy men;
first the child was to be croft in the forehead, and then on the breast, after
a prayer used, then the Priest was to say over the child at the Font, I command
thee thou unclean spirit, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, that thou come out of this infant, thou cursed spirit remember
thy sentence, remember thy judgment, remember the day is at hand wherein thou
shall be burnt with everlasting fire prepared for thee and thy Angels; and
presume not hereafter to exercise any tyranny over this infant whom Christ has
bought with his precious blood. Then they dipped the child thrice in the
water, the Godfathers and the Godmothers laid their hands upon the child, and
the Priest puts a white vestment over it, called a Crysome, saying, Take
this white vesture for a token of thine innocence, which by Gods grace in this
holy Sacrament of baptism is given to thee, and for a sign whereby thou art
admonished as long as thou live to give thy self to innocence. Then the
Priest must anoint the Infant upon the head, saying, Almighty God, etc. who
has regenerated thee by water and the holy Ghost, who has given thee
remission of all thy sins, vouchsafe to anoint thee with the unction of his
holy Spirit. Would you now have your children baptized after this manner? yet
these learned holy men thought that to be a good way. So at the burial of the
dead, the Priest casting earth upon the corpse shall say, I commend thy soul to
God the Father Almighty, and body to the ground: and in another prayer, Grant
to this thy servant; that the sins he committed in this world be not imputed
to him, but that he escaping the gates of hell, and pains of eternal
darkness, may ever dwell in the region of light.

You will say, things are otherwise now. True, therefore I say there is no
strength in that argument, that those men that composed that liturgy were
worthy lights in the Church; for they were but newly come out of Popery, and
had the scent of Popery upon them, therefore it is too unreasonable to make
that which they did the rule of our Reformation now, as if we were to go no
further then they did.

The like may be said of the Primitive times, which many plead for the
justification of their superstitious vanities, for the Christians then came but
newly out of heathenisme, and lived amongst Heathens, and therefore could not so
soon be delivered from their heathenish customs. I could relate to you sad
things there were in Qu. Elizabeth's days, in K. James his days, but I must
not take too much liberty in this digression, only let us hereby learn not so
to cry out of evil times that we are fallen into, as to be unthankful for
present mercies; let us bless God for what we have had, and look unto the
rule for further reformation.

For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal, etc.

The Spirit of God returns here again to convincing, upbraiding, accusing,
threatening Israel. The sin of Israel went very near to the heart of God, and
God speaks here as a man troubled in spirit for the unkindness,
unfaithfulness, unreasonableness of the dealings of his Spouse with him, it
runs in his thoughts, Cre^o vera and purfecta fide quod Deus creator,
gubernator, and susteu. ator sit omnium creaturarum quod idem ipse operatus si^
omnia, operetur adhuc and inaeternam operaturus sit. Buxtorf. synag. Iudaic. c.
1.
his heart is grieved at it, and he must vent himself, and when he has told
his grief and aggravated his wrong, he is upon it again and again, still
convincing, upbraiding, charging Israel for dealing so unfaithfully and
treacherously with him, all showing the trouble of his spirit.

For she did not know, etc. These words depend upon the 5. ver. (for the 6. and
7. they are as a parenthesis) She has done shamefully, for she said, I will
go after my lovers that give me my bread, and my water, my wool, and my
flae^^e, etc. For she did not know, etc. She did thus and thus, for she did not
know that I gave her corn, and wine, etc. What was Israel worse then the Ox or
the Ass that knows his owner and his Masters crib? It is impossible but Israel
(that was the only people of God in those times, where God was most, nay we
may say only known in the world) should know that God was the cause of all
the good they had, certainly they could not be ignorant of that, for in their
Creed (as Buxtorfius and others make mention) they had 13. Articles, and this
was the first Article, I believe with a true and perfect faith, that God is the
creator, the governor, the sustainer of all creatures, Benedictus sis Domine
Deus noster rex mundi quod fructum vitis condidisti Synag. Iud. c. 7.
that he wrought all things, still works all things, and shall for ever work
all things. And at their feasts they had these expressions, Blessed be thou O
Lord our God King of the world that do create the fruit of the vine. The Mr.
of the feast himself came in (he did not set a boy to it) publicly to bless
God for the fruit of the vine, and yet here the Text says they did not know
that God gave them wine. When they came to take bread they had this speech,
Blessed be thou O God that art the King of the world, Benedictus esto Deus qui
and dulcia and been volentia crearis, etc. Buxtsynag. Iud. cap. 7.
that bring forth bread out of the earth; And at the end of their feast
this, Let us bless him who has sent us of his own, of whose goodness we
live. The question answered, and blessed be he of whose goodness we live, Yea
they used to bless God solemnly for the sweet and fragrant smell of spices
and herbs. This was their constant way, and yet God charge them that they did
not know that he gave them bread, and wine, and ^^le, they did not lay it to
heart.

We shall see afterward of what great use this is unto us, to show what
profession they made of acknowledging that God gave them all, and yet God
charges them that they did not know it.

That I gave them, what? Corn, wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and
her gold.

Here God expresses himself more largely then they did before in that they
received from their Idols, they talked in the 5. verse. of receiving from their
Idols bread, and water, and wool, and flax, etc. but here is wine, and oil,
and silver, and gold, more then they had from their Idols. God sets out his
mercy to them, to upbraid them.

And they prepared them for Baal.

We must enquire here first what this Baal was. The name of him [ Bagnal] it
signifies a Lord (and from thence signifies a husband) because they
attributed such dominion that their Idols had over them, (...)
acknowledging their Idols to be Lords, What Baal was.
therefore they called them by the name Bagnall, their Lords: And because they
chose them as their husband, therefore also they had this name, it is all one
with Bell too, for the Chaldee put out that letter [(...)] and the pricks being
altered it is all one Baal and Bell.

Now this Baal either was some special Idol, or else a general name given to
all Idols; sometimes it is a name given generally to all, in the plural number
Baalim. Jer. 9. 14. They have walked after the imaginations of their own
heart, and after Baalim. But it likewise notes a special Idol, an Idol that
was the same with that of the Zidonians, which they called Jupiter Thalassius,
or their sea Jupiter, that idol was called Baal in a special manner,

1 King. 16. 31. you may see how the worship of Baal came into Israel at that
time. It is true, the worship of Baal had been in Israel a long time before, in
Judge. 2. 11. you shall find there that they served Baal, yet the idolatry of
Baal was often cast out by the people of God, but in that place of the Kings
you shall find how it came in afresh, the Text says, that Ahab took to wife
Iexebel the daughter of Eth-baal King of the Zidonians, and went and served
Baal, and worshipped him; That was the occasion that Ahab matching with a
Zidonian, to the end that he might ingratiate himself with his wives kindred,
he would worship his wives God.

And this Baal has diverse additionall names. Sometimes you shall find in
Scripture called Baal-zebub, or Beelzebub (it is all one, for Baal and Bell is
the same, only changing the points) and that signifies their god of flies, and
the reason why Baal had that name, was, because in those Countries they were
extremely perplexed with flies, and they attributed the power of driving them
away, and of helping them against the molestation they had by them to their god
Baal, hence they called him Baalzebub; you may see how much they attributed to
their god for deliverance from flies, we have other manner of deliverances by
the goodness of our God then this, yet for this Baalzebub was one of their
principal gods, therefore it is said of Christ, that he cast out devils by
Beelzebub the prince of devils, which is by the god of flies, Mat. 20. 25.

He is called (...), Belzebul, which is as much as the dung, god, Zebel in
the^^y ^iac signifying Stercus, dung.

Then there was Baal-perazim, that addition was only from the place, the
Mountain where he was worshipped.

There was also Baal-berith, Obs.
that signified only the covenant they entered into with that God. So that it
seems the very Idolaters did bind themselves to worship their god by solemn
covenant or very strong arguments, to teach us to be willing to bind our
selves in worshipping the true God by all the legal bonds we can, God
provideth for the bodies of his people.
(...)
Si opus est corni pa^e, si opus est aqua, si open est vin^, si opus est nummo,
si opus est jumento, a Deo petere debet, nan a daemoniis and idolis: qui Deo
sitiunt, undi que debent sitire, and anima and carne. Nunquid animam tuam Deus
fecit, and carnem damonia fecerunt? qui fecit ambas res ipse pascet amlias.
Aug. in (...). longs for thee, (...)
to make God to be the God of our Covenant, as their god here was. It is
needless to name more who had this name.

I shall afterward show how God himself had once the name of Baal, for the
word signifying the name of husband or Lord was as due to God as to any other,
and God himself took that name. But here we are to understand it of their
Idols.

They prepared them for Baal, they made them for Baal, so the word is. It
imports these two things.

First it imports that they did sacrifice these thing to their Baal, for so
facere, to make, is as much many times as Sacrificare, to sacrifice; And Bella
mine takes advantage from this word, when Christ says, Hoc facite, do this, he
draws an argument that the Lords Supper is a sacrifice, for the word to do
is used sometime to sacrifice.

But secondly, they prepared them, that is, of their gold and silver they made
Images of this their Idol god Baal, they would not spare their gold and
silver, but laid aside and prepared it to make images of Baal, and they thought
that gold and silver thus laid out as good as any in their purses.

The Observations.

First.

It is God that supplyeth all the outward good of his people.

They did not know that I gave them, etc. I gave them all the corn, and wine,
and oil they had, I did not only give them mine Ordinances, but I gave them
corn, and wine, and oil, and gold, and silver.

It is the Lord himself that supplyeth all outward good to his people, he does
not only prize the souls of his people, but he takes care of their bodies
too, and outward estates. Psalm, 34. 20. He keeps all his bones.

Yea, he takes care of the very hair of their heads. The bodies of the Saints
are very precious in the eyes of God, the most precious of all corporal things
in the world: The Son, and Moon, and Stars, are not so precious as the
bodies of the Saints, how much more precious are their souls?

We have an excellent note of Austin upon Psalm, 63. 1. where the Text says,
My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, etc.

Upon this he has this Note: If the flesh has any need of bread, of wine, of
money or cattle, seek this of God, for God gives this too, for mark,

Those who thirst for God must thirst for him every way; not only their souls
^^rst for him, but their flesh must thirst for him; for says he, did God make
the soul, and did the devils or any idols make the flesh? No, he that made
both soul and flesh, he feeds them both, therefore all Christians must say,
My soul longs after thee, and my flesh also. If then we can trust God for
our souls, and our eternal estates that he will provide for them, we must
trust him for our bodies also, for our flesh, for our temporal estates, that
he will provide for them also.

Secondly thus. All that we have, Obj.
all our supply that we enjoy in this world, it is the free gift of God.

They did not know that I gave them corn and wine, etc. All of us live upon
the mere Alms of God, the greatest man in the world is bound to go to Gods
gate and beg his bread every day; though he were an Emperor over all the
world, The greatest man in the world must beg his bread at Gods gate every day.
he must do it to show his dependence upon him, that he lives wholly upon
alms: Men think it hard to live upon alms, and because they have
maintenance, so much coming in by the year, such an estate in land, they
think they are well provided for many years: But what ever estate thou have,
though by thy trading thou have gotten so much by the year coming in, yet God
requires this of thee, to go to his gate, and beg thy bread of him every day;
so Christ teaches, Give us this day our daily bread; And certainly if we did
but understand this our dependence upon God for all outward comforts in the
world, we could not but fear him, and seek to make peace with him, and keep
peace with him, and it would be a means that our hearts would be enlarged to
give to others who need our alms, and seeing every man and woman of us is an
Almes-man, and an Almes-woman.

Thirdly, It is our duty that we owe to God to know and take notice of God as
the author of all our good. Obs.


They know not, that implies they ought to have known.

This is a special duty of that worship we owe to God: it is the end of Gods
communicating all good to us, that he may have active glory from his rational
creature as well as passive glory, and there is no creature else in all the
world that God has made capable of knowing any thing of the first cause but
only the rational creature, therefore it is the excellency of such that they do
not only enjoy the good that they have, but they are able to rise up to the
highest and first cause of all their good: There is a great deal of excellency
in this. It is observed of Doves, that at every pick of corn they take in
their bill they cast their eyes upward; and in the Canticles you shall find
the eyes of the Church are called Doves eyes, because they look so much up to
heaven upon every good they receive: They have not dogs eyes, the men of the
world have dogs eyes, dogs you know look up to their Masters for a bone, and
when they have it they presently look down to the ground; so the men of the
world, they will pray to God when they want, but when they enjoy what they
would have, they look no more upward but all downward.

This taking notice of God to be the Author of all our good, and to give him
praise, is all the rent we pay to God for what we enjoy, therefore it is fit we
should do that; and if we do any thing for God, be sure God takes notice of
that to the uttermost, yea though it be himself that enableth us to do it, yea
though it be but a little good mingled with a great deal of evil, God takes
notice of it, and will reward it, surely then we should take notice of the good
that he gives out to us.

This sweetneth our comforts to see that they all come from God, and for that
observe the difference between the expression of Jacobs blessing, and Esaus
blessing; The sweetness of a comfort is, that it comes from God.
when Isaac came to bless Jacob, he expresses himself thus, Genesis 27. 28.
God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine, etc. Now when he comes to bless Esau, mark his
expression then verse 39. Thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and
of the dew of heaven from above, but he never mentions God in that; It is
not Esaus blessing. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of
the earth, though it is true Isaac meant so, but yet he does not mention the
name of God so in Esaus as in Jacobs blessing, Certainly my brethren, the seed
of Jacob count their blessing to be a double, a treble blessing, that they can
see God in it: carnal hearts do not much regard God, if they can have what
they would have, if they can have their flesh satisfied in what they desire,
from what hand it comes that they do not much care; but a gracious heart, a
child of Jacob, rejoices more in the hand from whence it comes, then in any
good he can possibly enjoy. Fourthly, They did not know.

God does a great deal of good in the world that is little taken notice of,
Obs.
or laid to heart.

Many of Gods dispensations are invisible, the Angels, Ezekiel. 1. are described
with their hands under their wings. God does great things sometime so invisibly,
as he cannot be seen; And when he does great things that we might see, yet
through onr neglect, stupidity, and drossinesse of our hearts, we do not see
them.

The most observing eye that is in the world, that takes the exactest notice of
Gods mercy, and has the greatest skill to set forth the riches of Gods
goodness to himself and others, yet alas it is but very little that he takes
notice of, no not of that he might do. It is with the quickest sighted
Christians as with a skilful Mathematician, a skillful Mathematician takes
notice of and understands many parts of the world, and is able to set out the
several parts distinctly to you in such a Climate, in such a Country, but yet
when he has done all, he leaves a great space for a Terra incognita, for an
unknown world, and that unknown world for ought we know may be five times
bigger then the known world; So they that have the most observant eye of Gods
mercies, and take the most notice of them, that can best set out the mercies he
bestows, Many and great are Gods unknown mercies.
spiritual mercies, temporal mercies, preventing mercies, past mercies,
present mercies, delivering mercies, etc. yet when they have done all, they
must leave a great space for the Terra incognita, for the unknown mercies of
God.

The truth is, those mercies of God that are obvious to our knowledge every
day, one would think they were enough to melt our hearts, to break them in
pieces: but besides these mercies we take notice of, there are thousands and
thousands of mercies that we know not of. As we daily commit many sins that we
know not of, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.
so daily we receive many mercies that we know not of likewise; And as in our
confession of sins, we should pray to God first to pardon our sins we know, and
so to name them in particular; and when we have done, then, Lord forgive us our
unknown, our secret sins; So in our thanksgiving, first bless God for the
mercies before us, and when we have done. Lord blessed be thy name for all thy
unknown mercies that I have little taken notice of.

We soon grow cold and dead if we do good; and men take no notice of us,
neither what we know, nor what we do is any thing to us except others know it
too, but this is the vanity and pride of men's hearts, it is Gods prerogative
above his creatures, to do all for himself, for his own glory, and yet he
does much good in the world that none knows of; we are bound to deny our selves
in that we do, not to seek our own glory; The most excellent piece in the
most excellent of our works is our selfe-denyal in it; why should we not then
do all the good we can do cheerfully, though it be not known? we should do
good out of love to goodness it self, and if we would do so we should be
encouraged in doing good secretly.

Fifthly, and which comes yet more fully up to the words, They did not know,
etc.

In Gods account men know no more then they lay to heart and make good use of.
Obser.


The Schools distinguish of want of knowledge, there is Nescientia, and
Ignoratia; Nescience is of such things as we are not bound to know, We know no
more then we lay to heart.
it is not our sin not to know them; but Ignorance is of such things as we
are bound to know, and that ignorance is twofold; there is an invincible
ignorance, let us take what pains we can, we can never know all we are bound
to know; and there is an affected ignorance, when we do not know, because out
of carelessness we do not mind what is before us, and when we have minded it
so far as to conceive it, yet if we lay it not to heart as we ought, still in
Gods account we know it not, if we digest not what we know into practice, God
accepts it not. As God is said not to know when he does not approve, I know
ye not, says he, so when any man has a truth in notion and it does not get
into the heart, when it is not embraced there, God accounts that that man
knows it not; Therefore you have in Scripture such an expression as the Seer
is blind; It is a strange expression, it seems to be a contradiction, such a
thing as we call a Bull: philosophi sumus factis, no^ verbis, nec magna
loquimur, sed vivimus. Cypr. de patienti^.
The Seer is blind: But it is not so here, because God accounts those that
have never so much knowledge, yet if it do not sanctify the heart so as to
give him the glory, they are blind, blind as a Beetle; The knowledge of the
Saints is another kind of knowledge then other men have.

We have, says Cyprian no such notions as many of your Philosophers have, but
we are Philosophers in our deeds, we do not speak great things, but we do
great things in our lives.

1 These. 4. 9. You have an excellent expression for this, you are taught of God
to love one another, what follows? And indeed so you do, That is an evidence
that you are taught of God when it p^evay leth with your hearts, when it may be
said, indeed so you do: Who is there in the world but knows that we should
love one another? but men are not taught of God to love one another until it
may be said of them that indeed so they do.

There is nothing more obvious to the understanding of a man then the notion of
a Deity, that there is a God, we may as it were grope after him as the holy
Ghost speaks; but yet 1 John 2. 4. He that says he knows him, and keeps not
his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; Any man who ever he
be, though the greatest Scholar in the world, if he says he knows God and
keeps not his commandments, he has the lie told him to his teeth, he does
not know God at all, though this of God be the most obvious thing to be
understood that possibly can be, and yet Christ says no man knows the Father
but the Son, and to whom the Son shall reveal him.

Hence it is when a soul is converted, Mat. 11. 27.
you shall hear these expressions, I never knew before, I never knew what an
infinite Deity meant, I never understood the infinite sovereignty and Majesty
of the great God, I never knew what sin meant before; yet if you had asked
him before, he would say, I know God is a Spirit, that he is infinite and
eternal; I know that sin is the transgression of the law; I never knew that
Christ was before, yet before he would have told you that Christ was the son
of Mary, Hoc morbo didici quid sit peccatum and quanta majestas Dei. Gasper,
Olevianus. Verb^ sensus denotant affectus.
and came into the world to dye for sinners. I remember an expression of a
Germane Divine, when he was upon his sick bed, In this disease says he, I have
learned what sin is, and how great the Majesty of God is; This man though a
Preacher, and doubtless he could preach of sin and of the Majesty of God,
yet he professes he knew not these things until God came powerfully upon his
heart to teach him what they were.

The Hebrews say, words of sense carry with them the affections, or else they
be to no purpose: when men have notionall knowledge only that comes not down
into the heart, they are like men that have weak stomachs and weak heads, when
they drink wine all flies up to the head and it makes them giddy, but if the
wine went to the heart, it would cheer and warm it: so all this man's knowledge
flies up to his head and makes him giddy, whereas if it were digested and got
to the heart, it would warm and refresh, yea (...)

The Text says of Elies sons, 1 Samuel 2. 12. that they knew not the Lord;
they were Priests of God, yet they were sons of Belial, and know not the
Lord. Be not offended at great Scholars who have skill in the tongues, Arts
and Sciences, do not you say these men that are great and knowing men, would
they do thus and thus, if things were so as you speak; they are not knowing
men, God says that Elies sons did not know, the Lord, the things of God are
hid from them. I thank thee O Father Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, etc.

Sixthly, They did not know that I gave them, etc.

Affected ignorance coming thorough distemper of heart is no excuse, Obs.
but rather an aggravation.

It is a high degree of ingratitude not to prize Gods mercy, but not to take
notice of Gods mercies, Affected ignorance is no excuse.
Oh what a high ingratitude is this! That which shall be part of Gods charge
against sinners can be no excuse of their sin, it is a part of Gods charge
that they did not know, therefore their ignorance cannot be their excuse. God
threatens to cut people off, to have no mercy upon them for want of knowing as
well as for not doing, They are a people of no understanding, therefore he that
made them will have no mercy upon them, and he that formed them will show them
no favor, Esaias 27. 11. Graviter O homo peccas, si divitias dei longanimitatis
contemnis gravissime si ignoras. Ambro^
Obser
Ambrose has this expression, Thou do sin greatly if thou do contemn
the riches of Gods long suffering, but thou sinnest most of all if thou do
not know it.

From the word [ for] as depending upon the 5. ver. (for so it does,) The
Observation is,

The not taking notice and considering of Gods mercies, and laying them to
heart, is the cause of vile, and shameful evils in men's lives.

Therefore they did shamefully, therefore they went after their lovers, because
they did not know, the cause of almost all the evil in the world it is from
hence, They that know thy name will trust in thee, those who know the Lord will
fear him and his goodness.

Esaias 1. 4. Ah sinful nation, says God: God fetches a sigh under the burden
of it, his spirit is laden and troubled with it, Ah sinful people, etc,

What was the matter? The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib,
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, they were more stupid
then the brute creatures. Oh sinful soul, this is the cause of all thy
inordinate walking, of all thy profaneness, of all the ungodliness in thy
ways, because thou do not know, thou do not consider, thou do not lay to
heart the ways of God toward thee.

Ier. 2. 5. God charge his people that they were gone from him, and ver. 7.
that they had made his heritage an abomination. What is the reason that is
given of both these? It is in the 6. ver. They did not say, Where is the Lord
that brought us up out of the land of Egypt? etc. They did not take notice of
what the Lord had done for them, therefore they were gone far from him, etc.

If thou had but a heart to lay to heart what God has done for thee, it is
impossible that thou should go so far off from God as thou do. For these
deductions are easy and obvious to any from such a principle.

1. Justice, common equity requires living to God, seeing we live by and upon
God.

2. Common ingenuity calls for requiring good with good; the Publicans and
Heathens will do good to those that do good to them.

3. If all be from God, then all still depends upon God.

4. How much good is there in God from whence all this good and mercy comes,
when God shall show another day to men and Angels how he was the fountain of
all good! it will confound those who have not laid it to heart.

8. She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her silver and her gold.

God is more bountiful to his people then the Idols can be. Obs.


The Idols by their own confession gave them but their bread, and water, and
flax, and oil, etc. but God gives them wine, and silver, and gold. God gives
them better pay a great deal then the Devil does; yet the Devil usually has
more servants to follow him then God has, though his wages be less and
worse. It is usual for men to get soldiers from adversaries, by giv^ng them
more pay: This is the way God takes, he offers a great deal better pay to
those that will follow him, then they have that follow the Devil, yet God can
get few to follow him. This shows the vileness of man's heart against God.

9. She did not know that I gave her, etc. which she prepared for Baal.

When men get abundance, then they soon grow wanton. When I gave them corn,
Obser.
and wine, and oil, and multiplied their silver and their gold, then they
followed Baal. This is the reason of so many solemn charges of God, Take heed
when thou art full, that thou do not forget the Lord. As they that are
nearest the sun are the blackest, Prosperity makes men grow wanton.
so those to whom God is nearest in regard of outward mercies, are many times
blacker then others. It is observed, that the fatter men's bodies are, the less
blood and the fewer spirits they have; so the fatter men's estates are, many
times the less spirit they have to any thing that is good; God has less
spirit from them, sin has much more.

We read of the sun melting the Manna that fell down, but the same Manna was
able to bear the fire; so many a man's heart is able to bear affliction, and
the affliction does good, prepares for much good, as Manna was prepared to be
eaten by fire, but prosperity melts them, makes them useless. Many men when
they were poor and in a low condition, were very useful; but when they grow
high and rich, they are of very little use in the places where they dwell.

Trajan the Emperor was wont to liken a man growing to a great estate, to the
Spleen in the body; for as the S^leene grows big, the body grows less: so
when men's estates grow bigger, they grow less useful. Euagrius notes it as a
special commendation of Mauritius the Emperor, but notwithstanding his
prosperity he retained his ancyent piety: it is a very rare thing to see men
advanced to high places, do so.

10. I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and I multiplied her silver and gold
which they sacrificed to Baal.

Even those creatures that wicked men abuse to their lusts, God gives them.

Though he does not give them for that end, yet those creatures that they use
for such an end are given of God. Obser.
If thou be a drunkard, that wine or drink that thou do sacrifice to that
lust of thine, who gives it thee? Is it not God? thou have a good estate more
then other men, and all the use thou make of thy estate is merely that it
might be but as fuel for thy lusts, who gave thee this thy estate? Is it not
God? God gives thee clothes and thou sacrificest them to thy pride, thou have
more money then others, and so can vent thy malice more then others, from
whence have thou this? Thou have more strength of body then others and thou
ventest it in uncleanness, where had thou this? consider this, and let this
meditation prevayle with thine heart to stop thee in thy sinful way, let it be
seconded with the next; viz: Obs.
That is a most horrible wickedness and abominable ingratitude, for any man to
take Gods creatures and abuse them against God.

What, An evil thing to fight against God with his own creatures.
I gave them corn, and wine, and multiplied their silver, and their gold, and
have they prepared these for Baal? God speaks of this as of a monstrous sin,
as if God should say, let all my people lament my condition, that I should do
so much for them, and they do nothing for me but all against me, sacrifice all
to Baal: As perhaps many of you have been kind to some of your friends, and
have raised them, and made them, as we use to say; they have wanted nothing,
but you have been bountiful to them, if now these men should turn your
enemies, and that estate they have got by you, they should use it to do you a
mischief, would you not call in your neighbors and friends, to join with you
in lamenting your condition? What, did you ever hear of such an example, that
I should do so much for such, and they turn all against me? you tell it as a
most lamentable story to your friends; God does so here; he makes this his
grievous complaint.

This is as if a bird should be shot with an Arrow, whose feathers came out of
her own body; we would even pity a bird in that case. Many men make no other
use of their estates but to turn them against God; they are not as the
slothful servant that hid his talent in the napkin, if it were but so it were
not so much, but they take their talents and employ them against God. Would it
not go to your heart if one should sue you in law, and bear the charges of
the suit out of your own estate? We use to complain such a man sueth me, and
it is my own money he goes to law with; So thou go against God, and he
is feign as it were to bear all the charges:

It is not against the light of Nature? the very heathens: the publicanes and
sinners will do good to those that do good to them: Thou art worse then a
publicane and sinner, will thou do hurt to God that does thee good? When Julius
Caesar saw Brutus come to give him a stab in the Senate house, he cried out,
What thou my son, will thou do it? But suppose that Julius Caesar had given
him the dagger with which he stabbed him, (...).
then O thou my son, what stab me with that dagger I gave thee? If when
Jonathan gave David his sword and bow, David should have turned against
Jonathan and killed him with his own sword and bow, would not the unkindnesse
or rather the abominable wickedness have pierced deeper into his heart, then
any swords or arrows possibly could? If you can find any creature that is not
GODS to fight against him withal, you may do it, but if all you have is from
him, it is horrible wickedness to take that and to sacrifice it to Baal.
Certainly God gives it for other ends, to go cross to Gods ends is an evil
thing: When God aymeth at such a thing, for us not to join with God in the
same end he aymeth at is an evil, but for us to aim at a quite contrary end,
that is horrible wickedness indeed.

They sacrificed to Baal.

When once superstition and Idolatry has got into a place, though there be
much done against it, yet it is not easy to get it out.

It is from hence that God does so often complain of Baal, Obs.
yet you shall find in Judge, 2. (I think that is the first place it is
mentioned that they served Baal) but it appears that they fell off from Baal,
yet they fell to him again, for in Judge. 8. 33. After Gideons death it came to
pass that the children of Israel turned again and went a whoring after
Baalim, and made Baal-berith their god; It speaks as if it were a new thing
now that they should fall to worship Baal after they had left worshipping him;
After his death. And 1 Samuel 7. 4. The children of Israel did put away Baalim;
and yet if you read Chap* 10. 22. they fall a confessing that they had sinned,
because they had forsaken the Lord and served Baalim; though they had put him
away before, yet he had got up again; So in that place before named, 1 King.
16. there Ahah would serve Baal, it is brought in there as a new thing, as a
novelty, because Baal had been so much suppressed, 2 King. 10. you find that
Iehu sought to destroy Baal and all his Priests, but yet Baal was not got out
for all this, but he got in again, for in 2 Kin. 23. 4. the Text says, that
Josia who was long after that time, caused the vessels that were made for Baal
to be taken away and burnt.

This is a marvailous use, and seasonable for our times. If superstition be
opposed, though it be cast out as we think in a great degree, yet if there be
not a thorough Reformation, it will wind in one way or other again.

If we think it enough to cut things short, and to take away their strength,
and their enormities, we deceive our selves; if there be nothing done but so,
they will grow up again; it is but cutting the weeds a little; if branch and
root be not taken away, they will up again; Baal will put up his head one way
or other.

I remember Cluverus a late Historian, yet much approved of, brings in one
that gave this council concerning Rome, because it was much annoyed with
Wolves; says he, there is no way to save Rome from Wolves, but to cut down the
woods wherein these Wolves breed and live, for otherwise they might kill and
kill, but they would breed agaiue. So sometimes when childrens heads are
overrunne with vermin, the way to destroy the vermin is to shave the hair
quite of off: So certainly, this is the way to destroy superstition from
amongst us, to take away the places and revenews of those men that have been
maintainers and upholders of superstitious ways of worship; Let us by cutting
down the woods, and shaving off the hair destroy these Wolves, and if they
will needs be Priests, let them be Shavelings.

Which they sacrificed to Baal.

Lastly, Idolaters are very liberal to their Idols, Obs.
they are willing to sacrifice gold' silver, corn, wine and oil, and all to
Baal, but of that before.

The Seventh Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 9. 10. Therefore will I return and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my
flax, given to cover their nakedness.

And now I will discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none
shall deliver her out of mine hand.


IN the former verse, Israel is accused for abusing her silver and gold, etc.
in the service of Baal; now it follows, Therefore I will take away my corn in
the time thereof, etc. if there be a therefore, we must enquire wherefore it
was, because they did prepare their corn, etc. for Baal, Therefore I will
return.

1. What is the meaning of returning.

2. What the meaning of the time and season thereof, I will take away my corn
in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof.

3. What that phrase imports, I will recover my wool.

For the first therefore. I will return, that is, I will change the way of my
administrations toward them, I will go out of my way of mercy, and turn into
my way of judgment, I will go back again; I was in a way of judgment toward
them, and they cried to me, and I turned into a way of mercy, but I will go
back again into a way of judgment, I will return, Arias Montanus has a good
note upon the place, Whereas God has heretofore bid them not to be afraid of
all the tokens of the Southsayers that is, Lect 7.
when they say by Astrology some signs of death that might follow, they were
afraid; be not afraid, says the Lord, but know your corn, and wine, and oil
depends on me, not on the second causes; though second causes make against, yet
fear not, for I will give you come, and wine and oil; but now it is quite
contrary, though second causes promise all kind of plenty whatsoever, that
there shall be abundance of corn, and wine, and oil, yet I will take away
your plenty, there shall be a dearth of all things amongst you.

I will take away my corn in the time thereof: that is, first in the times of
harvest just when their corn is to be taken in, and in the time of their
vintage, I will then take it away, whereas I might take it away in the seed, I
will let it grow till the harvest, and then take it away.

2. In the time when they have most need of it, when they are in the greatest
straits, and know not what to do without these creatures,

3. In tempore suo, so some, In the time I have appointed, though I have let
them go on and enjoy the creatures in abundance, yet my time is come that I
will take away all.

And will recover, the word signifies, I will snatch it away, I will spoil you
of it; (...)
and it has reference to two things.

First, I will recover it as out of the hands of usurpers, you have my corn,
and wo^l, and flax as usurpers, but I will recover them out of your hands, as
a man that has his goods taken away from him usurped, he by some means or
other recovers his goods again; so says God, you have my corn, and wine, and
as you have carried the matter, you are but usurpers, I will sue you for them,
you shall not enjoy them long.

Secondly, I will recover, it has a reference to prisoners and bondslaves,
when the enemy shall get any of ours into their power, and make them
bondslaves, a greater power goes against the enemy, and recovers them out of
his hands, and gets them again; As Abraham recovered Lot and his goods, Genesis
46. 14. Or as if mariners should get those gally-slaves the Turks have gotten:
and recover them out of their hands, as if he should say, these creatures of
corn and wine, etc. they are in bondage, and I will recover them out of your
hands, you know the creatures groan under their bondage while they are in the
possession of wicked men, 8. Romans my creatures are in bondage to you, and they
cry to me, and I will recover them out of your hands. There are many precious
and choice truths to be presented to you out of the words. Obser. 1
First, Therefore I will, etc. Whence observe,

Though God gives mercy out of free grace without cause in our selves, yet he
takes not away mercy without cause, there is a therefore for taking away mercy,
but we have many mercies given without a therefore: When God takes away mercy
we have cause to look into our selves to find out a therefore, but you may
find out thousands of mercies that God gives to us, and you shall find never a
therefore for them. It is not so great a wonder that thousand thousands are in
misery as that any one enjoyes mercy, for misery hatha therefore in our selves,
for mercy there is reason only in the breast of God. Obs. 2.
Secondly, I will return. Sin causes God to change the way of his
administrations toward his people. Though God be in ways of mercy, yet sin
may put him out of those ways, and make him return and go in a way of
judgment agnine: how much better were it for sinners to return, then that
sinnne should cause God to return? Oh sinner, return out of thy evil ways,
if God return, it will be a sad return. Not long since God was in ways of
judgment against us, and lately he has come into ways of mercy, and now he
seems to return again to his former ways of judgment. Ier. 14. 9. Why art
thou as a man astonished? A man astonished stands still; or if he moves, it is
up and down, as if he knew not which way to go, though we have suffered hard
things, we cannot yet say God is returned, but he seems as a man astonished,
and knows not which way to go. Thus God is pleased of himself after the
manner of men, to speak; let us cry to him that he may not turn out of his
way of mercy, into those sad ways of wrath that he seems to be looking toward.

I will take away my corn, and my wine.

Abuse of mercy causes the removing of mercy, 11 Zach. 17. Woe to the idol
shepherd that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon
his right eye, his arm shall be dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened. Has God given any a right hand, any abilities? take heed God does not
strike that right hand, or right eye, any quickness of parts, let them take
heed that thorough abuse it be not put out: Abuse of mercies causes God to take
them away.
how many shepherds when they were young had many excellent parts, great
abilities, but having abused them to their lusts, God has taken them away! So
in children, there is no such way to lose your children, as to abuse them, if
your hearts be inordinately set upon them, God takes them away. I will tell you
of a special passage of providence concerning this, and I speak it the rather,
because I was an eye and ear witness of it, living not far from the place, A
godly man desiring his friends to meet to bless God for his blessings in a
plentiful Harvest, after dinner was done comes in a little child, who was
indeed a very lovely child, Oh says the father, I am afraid I shall make a God
of this child; by and by the child was missing, and presently they went to
look him, and he was found sprawling drowned in a pond. Consider this ye
parents who have your hearts inordinately set on your children.

Again, I will take away my corn, and my wine, and my wool, and my flax.
Mark, before they made them their own, in the former verse, they said they are
theirs, now God challenges them for his, here we have, My, My, My, repeated on
Gods side, as frequent as before it was on theirs.

Fourthly, Obser. 4
God keeps the propriety of all that we have; though God gives all, yet he
keeps the propriety of all in his own hand: God has another propriety in our
estates, then any Prince in the world has.

Subjects have propriety in their estates, and enjoy them with as true a right
as their Sovereigns, but no creature has any propriety in what it has in
reference to God, this great Sovereign of all the world holds the propriety of
all his hands, Gratiarum actio ipsa confessio donum est acceptum, quanto magis
ipsa dona. Luther. postquam locuplitati sumus bane ^idesam particulam addimus,
ego geci.
Obs. 5.
not only what we have, but what we do, and what we are is all Gods: yea
says Luther, even our thanksgiving to God for gifts is a gift of God: It is
therefore a very vile thing to attribute to our selves what is Gods, when God
has enriched us we add this odious particle, says Luther, I have done it,
yea, says he, men do so often say, Feci, Feci, I have done, I have done it,
that Fiunt faeces, they are as dregs before the Lord; By this you may see they
are not your goods that you abuse it is a great argument to be bountiful and
free for good uses; because what we have is Gods. I will give you a notable
Text for this, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. For all things come of thee, and of thine own
we have given thee. David thought not much of his bounty toward the Temple,
because all was Gods.

Therefore I will take away. This [Therefore] has not only reference to the
abuse of them, but to that in the 7. ver. and she shall follow after her
l^vers, but shall not overtake them, etc. then shall she say, I will go and
return to my first husband, for then it was better then now. God makes this to
be a means of working that frame of spirit in them of returning to their first
husband. And from hence the note is.

Fifthly, The taking away those good things we enjoy, is a means of making us
return to God, it is a special means of conviction, to convince us of sin,
when God comes with some special work of his against us, it works more upon
us when we see some real expression of Gods displeasure, when God takes his
mercies from us then when we hear the threat, now we come to be sensible of
our sins. You that are tradesmen and run into debt, and your Creditors tell
you they will come upon you, yet you go on, till the Bailife comes into your
shop and seizes upon all, and goes into your house and takes away your bed
from under you, and all your goods; when you see all go out, then you think
of your negligence, and then the husband and wife wring their hands. So though
God threaten you for the abuse of the creature that he will take it away, yet
you are not sensible of it till God indeed takes away all, and then conscience
begins to be awakened and fly in your faces.

When David saw God taking away his people, then his heart smote him for
numbering them; he was told of the evil of that way of his before by Ioab, but
he goes on in it. When Samuel prayed for rain in wheat harvest, and there
came thundering and lightning, then the people feared exceedingly, and
acknowledged their sin in asking a King. Those who have abused their estates in
these times, when the enemy comes, what gratings of conscience will they have?
Then these thoughts will arise, Have I used my estate for God? have I done that
I might do? have I not satisfied my lusts with those things God has now taken
from me? There is usually a grating of conscience for the abuse of any thing,
when God takes it away.

When God takes away a wife, if the husband has a tenderness of conscience,
his first thoughts are, Have I performed the duties of my relation to my wife
as I ought? have I not neglected my duty toward her? and this causes sad
thoughts. When God takes away a mercy, then conscience troubles for the abuse
of that mercy*
Obser. 6


And when God takes away a child. Have I done my duty toward this child? have
I prayed for it, and instructed it as I ought?

Again, I will take away your corn in the time thereof, and your wine in the
season thereof. This presents this truth to you.

That there is an uncertainty in all things in the world; Though they promise
fair, yet they are ready to fail us, when they promise most. A husbandman
that has a good seed time, promises much to himself, it comes up and
thrives, and yet at harvest it is all blasted. Habak. 3. 17. Though the labor
of the olive fail, The phrase is, Though the Labor of the olive lie, that is,
the olive promised fair, it grew up, and looked very fair, and ripened, but
it did lie, that is, it did not perform what it seemed to promise, for in the
time thereof it vanished and came to naught. I had certain information from a
reverend Minister, of a strange work of God this way; The thing was, in his
own Town there was a worldling who had a great crop of corn; a good honest
neighbor of his walking by his corn, says he, Neighbor you have a very fine
crop of corn, if God bless it: Yea, says he, I will have a good crop,
speaking contemptuously and before he could come to get it into the barn, it
was blasted, that the corn of the whole crop was not worth six pence. Here we
see the uncertainty of the creature in the time thereof, when it seems to
promise never so fair, when we are ready to take it into the barn, it
depends on God, as well as when it is under the clods. Oh the blessedness of
Gods servants, who are sure of their good for time to come! We may promise our
selves certainty, even for the future in the things of Christ; but for outward
they are never sure, no not when men have them in their hands. Many things fall
out between the cup and lip, as we have it in the proverb.

I will take away my corn in the time thereof, and wine in the season thereof.
Hence Observe.

God lets out his displeasure many times to those that provoke him, Obs. 7.
when they make account of the greatest mercy, when they are at the greatest
height of prosperity, when afflictions seems to be the farthest off from them,
then it comes heaviest upon them: When they think least of it, when they
think all sure, then God comes upon them by his displeasure, when his
displeasure shall be most bi^ter to them: for that is the strength of the
point, he will not only take them away in the time thereof, but when the
affliction shall be most grievous to them.

That in the 20. of Job, ver. 22. is a most notable Scripture for this, In the
fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits. A man may seem to have
sufficiency of the creature, and may have his fullness of sufficiency, yet God
says he shall be in straits in the fullness of his sufficiency, I can give you
another admirable work of providence in this very things wherein you may see
God to come in sore affliction at such a time, when it is most bitter: it came
from that worthy Divine Doctor Preston, it was in the Town where he was born;
There was a man who of long time had no child, but when God gave him one,
wrath from God when wiked men least think of it.
at the weaning of it he called his friends and neighbors to rejoice with him
for this great mercy: and the Nurse going to dandle the child in her arm, and
wearing a knife in her bosom, the point of the knife being upward, while she
was dandling of the child, runs into the belly of the child, at that time when
all his friends were about him to rejoice with him. When men think the
bitterness of death to be past, (as Agag did) the curse of God comes on them.
Ps. 78. 30. While the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God fell upon
them.

I have read of Pope John the 22. that he said he knew by the position of the
Stars he should live a long time, and boasted that he could cast his nativity,
and the same night by the fall of a chamber he had newly built for his solace,
he was s^ain. Another example in this kind I have heard credibly reported of a
drunken fellow in an Inn was swearing most dreadfully, and one comes in and
says, Sir, what if you should dye now? says he, I shall never eye, and going
down the stairs when he went out of his chamber, he presently feldown and broke
his neck.

There is likewise a history of one Bibulus a Roman, that riding in triumph in
all his glory, a tyle fell from a house in the street and knocked out his brains.
As on the contrary, Gods ways and dealings with the Saints are such, as what
time their condition is most sad, God comes in with mercy to them, when they
are in the most dark condition and gloomish, Gods face shines on them; so when
the wicked are in their prosperity, God smites them, When the irons entered into
Joseph's soul, God delivered him. When the Apostle had received the sentence of
death in himself, God comforred him 2 Cor. 1. 9. When Abraham was lifting up
his hand to slay Isaac, the Angel of the Lord stayed his hand.

As it is observed in nature, a little before day break it is darker then
before, so a little before the happiness of Gods people, Obs. 8.
there are some great afflictions. Zech. 1. 7. At the evening time it shall be
light.

I will recover. From this phrase of [recovering] observe, First, when men
abuse mercies, they forfeit their right in their mercies, they come then to be
but usurpers; they are not usurpers of mercies, merely for the use of mercies,
but for the abuse of them; they are not charged for their right to use them,
but for their not right using them, there is great difference between these two.

It has been taught by many, how far wicked men have right to the creature.
that all wicked men have no right at all to use any creature, but are to
answer as usurpers before God. But certainly there is a mistake. It is certain
man has forfeited all, but God has given a right to all that they do enjoy in
a lawful way, a right by donation. They have not such a right as the Saints
have, a right in Christ, once being in Christ we may challence of God all
things that are good for us. Another man has right, but how? as a malefactor
is condemned to dye by his offense, being condemned, he has forfeited all his
estate, and all the benefit of a subject; But if the King be pleased to allow
him provision for a day or two, till the time of execution, he cannot be
challenged as an usurper, for that he has, he has it by donation, and it is
such a right that all wicked men have; all wicked men in the world are under
the sentence of condemnation, and have forfeited their right, and all the good
of the creature, only the Lord is pleased out of his bounty to give such and
such enjoyments, they shall have such and such houses, and such and such lands
for a time, till the day of execution comes.

This might daunt the hearts of wicked men: you look upon your selves as great
men, you have your shops full, you have large estates, you are like some
malefactors, who have a better supper before execution then others. But still
your not right using may make you usurpers before God. You give your servant
order to buy such and such commodities, suppose your servant run away with your
money, or bestow it on his whores, etc. if he run away do you not follow him as
a thief? you trust him with such a stock, to keep such markets, now he has
right to use your estate; but if he run away with your estate, and use it
against you, if you meet with him again, you will say, what a thief are you to
run away with your Masters estate, and abuse it against him? I will recover,
etc.

All the time the creature serves wicked men, Obs. 9.
it is in bondage, and God looks upon it with a kind of pity. God has made
all things for his own praise, and he gives the children of men many mercies,
but it is for his own glory; but when these creatures which were given for the
glory of God, are abused to thy lust, Substanti^ caro nostra incorporetur
Sanctis nt in ^is ad gloriam resurgat, non peccatoribus, in illis enim resurg^t
ad ^ehenam.
the creature groans under thee. Thou drinkest wine, but the creature groans
under thy abuse; never any gally-slave did groan more under the bondage of the
Turks, then thy wine and thy dishes on thy table groan under thy abuse, Romans 8.
22.

As God hears the cry of the widow and fatherless, so he hears the groans of
the creature.

Cornelius a Lapide tells a story that he heard of a famous Preacher, showing
this bondage of the creature, brings in the creatures complaining thus, Oh that
we could serve such as are godly! Oh that our substance and our flesh might be
incorporated into godly people, that so we might rise into glory! but if our
flesh be incorporated into the flesh of sinners, we shall go to hell, and would
any creature go to hell? The very creatures shall be in hell eternally, when
wicked men consume them on their lusts, being incorporated into their bodies.
Certainly, the creature one day will have a kind of revenge upon ungodly men,
and diverse think that hell will be a turning all creatures into a Chaos, into a
confusion again as it was at the first, and the wicked put into that, and so
tormented there, there shall not be an annihilation, but God shall take away the
beauty, comfort and glory of the creature, and whatsoevershal be for the
torment of ungodly men shall abide, and so they shall be tormented eternally by
the creatures they do abuse.

As in such a building as this is, there is lime and stone, and mortar, but now
the art of man puts a beauty upon them; but suppose all the art of man were
taken away from this building, at an instant, what would become of us then? it
would bury us in the rubbish of it; now it is useful and delightful, but if
the art were taken away, it would be our destruction. So the creatures of God
have much of Gods wisdom, power and goodness in them, which God suffers
wicked men to enjoy; but God will take away all his wisdom, beauty and
goodness, so that nothing but the confusion and rubbish of the creature shall
be upon the wicked to all eternity.

I will recover my wool and my flax given to cover their nakedness.

Whence observe,

God gives his blessings to us, not for luxury, but for necessity; I gave them
to cover your nakedness. Obser.
Therefore when our Savior teaches us to pray* it is for daily bread, or
bread which is for our substance, so much bread as serves for our substance,
(...).
and that but for a day neither. Most are abusive in their desires, after, and
use of the creature, they look at bravery rather then necessity; As Cyprian
has an expression, It is not the heat of their clothes, nor calor, but color,
the color is rather regarded by many. God looks now especially that we should
cut of our superfluities, when our br^thren want necessareis.

To cover your nakedness. It seems that our nakedness needs a cover. Sin
has made nakedness shameful. (...).
Hence therefore our bodies are called vile bodies; those bodies that we study
so much to pamper and adorn, they are bodies of vileness, as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 3. 21. yea, of that vileness with an article, or of the
vilensse; to be proud of our clothes that cover our shame, that cover our
nakedness is an unreasonable thing.

Would you have your bodies adorned? labor for godliness, and then you shall
have bodies like the glorious body of JESUS CHRST; you may have bodies that
shall not need a covering.

Lastly, Obs.
when abundance is abused, it is just with God that we should want necessaries,
I will take away their corn, etc. how many are there who have lavished out
their estates, upon whom you may see Gods judgment so grievous, that they want
a piece of bread; now you often tell your lavish wasting servants, they will be
glad of a crust before they dye; It proves true often of Masters and Mistresses
also, who out of pride and delicacy of spirit, will be so fine and brave above
their ranks, that God does blast them that they have not to cover their
nakedness. Those in the third of Isa, who had that gorgeous and brave attire,
are threatened with baldness, and grinding with sackcloath, ver. 24. and such
as come to misery by their wasting superfluity have none to pity them. I have
read of Alfonsus a King of Spain, who when a Knight falling into want and
being arrested for debt, there was a petition to the King to succor him, I
says the King, if he had spent his estate in mine, or in the commonwealths
service, it were reason he should be provided for, by me or the commonwealth,
but seeing he has spent all in rio^ousness, let him suffer.

Consider this you who are so loath to part with your estates for the public,
you murmr at every thing that is required of you for that, but you are
profuse in expenses for your lust, God has ways to bring you low enough in
your estares.

Ver. 10. And now I will discover her lewdness.

And now, that is, when I recover my wool, and flax, I will discover her
lewdness, I will take their covers from their own eyes, and from the eyes of
others. Wicked men, and especially Idolaters have diverse covers for their
lewdness. There are especially three covers that these people had for their
lewdness. The first was their outward prosperity: do you speak so bitterly
against us, as if we were Idolaters, as if we had forsaken God, are we not in
as good a condition as Judah, who you say has not forsaken God?

Secondly, Their external worship is that yet they kept something according

Thirdly, They had other services which were not Gods, yet they did cover

I will discover their lewdness.

The word lewdness, (...)
that comes of Nabal, that signifies to fall, it signifies the falling of the
spirit low, poor, vile, and unworthy things. Hence the Hebrews use that word
for a fool, one that has a vi^e spirit, set upon base contemptible things, is
Nabal, a fool. Hence that speech of Abigail concerning her husband, as is his
name, so is he, he is Nabal, and folly is with him. (...)
The Seventy turn this by another word, that signifies uncleanness, the
mixture of their spirits with vile things that make their spirits to be
unclean. The English word Lewd comes from Loed an old Saxon word, which
signifies one that is of a servile disposition, of an under spirit; some are
of servile spirits naturally, they are born to a kind of servility, and
bondage, they are inclined to baseness, and vileness, by their natural genius:
others are of more sublime spirits naturally, as if they were borne for great
things; these people are lewd, they have vile spirits, forsaking the blessed
God, and his glorious ways, (...).
turning to vanities that can do no good. So we say of many, they are lewd
base fellows, that is, they are of such sordid dispositions, that they seek
only after such things as have no worth in them, and satisfy themselves in
things beneath the excellency of a man, unbeseeming a rational creature to
take content in. Act. 18. 14. we find this word lewdnes, the Greek word
translated there lewdness does elegantly set forth the disposition of a lewd
man, namely, such a one as is easily drawn to any wicked way.

I will discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers. In the sight; this
is a great aggravation of their shame. God will cast filth on them, not before
those that are strangers, but those before whom they would be honored. It is a
note of Calvin upon this, that seems to reach the meaning of the holy Ghost,
alluding to the way of whores, who having great men for their lovers,
favorites with Princes at the Court, they rest on their power, and confide in
their greatness, they care not what their husbands can do against them, and so
grow proud against their husbands, because their lovers have great power. There
was a remarkable example of this here in England, that you may remember, it
were but to ^ake in a filthy dunghill to mention it.

I will take away their confidence, though their lovers be never so great, the
Assyrians, and Egyptians, whosoever they be, they shall have no power to help
you, but I will discover their lewdness before their face. From hence take
these observations.

First, all wickedness, and especially Idolatry, has many covers for it;
except we look very narrowly to those that are superstitious and idolatrous,
we shall not see the evil of that sin. Some covers are subtly woven, but it
may be said of them all as Isa. 28. 20. The bed is shorter then that a man can
stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower then that he can wrap
himself in it.

Secondly, Obser.
Prosperity in a sinful way is a great cover; though it be a very vile and
sinful way, yet prosperity is a cover to it: This glisters so in many men's
eyes, that the filth of sin is hid, many a foul hand is under a fair perfumed
glove, an ill complexion may have a painted face, and prosperity is no other to
wicked men, Prosperity hides much filth.
then a painted face to a foul woman. As a painted face is no argument of a
fair complexion, so neither is prosperity of a good condition. Crooked
diseased bodies, half rotten, may have fine cloths. Green leaves on a tree may
hide the rifts, the mossiness, and blackness of the body which appears in
winter.

Many men are abominable false in all their ways, cruel, and bloody in their
hearts against God and good men, their spirits are invenomed, and they have
given up themselves to most horrible sins, yet so long as they have power about
them all is covered, were all their prosperity taken from them, and all their
glory and greatness, and nothing but their falsehood, and hatred of the ways of
God appeared, what dreadful creatures would they be? There is many a man that
is taken with a strumpet, when she has painted her self bravely like
Iezebel, but if he should see this whore whipped up and down the streets, and
full of botches, how odious would this strumpet be in his eyes? take away her
bravery, and she is to him the Ioathsomest creature upon earth.

Thirdly, Obser.
Retaining some truths in the way of worship is a great cover to much falsenes.
When some of you are to pay a great sum, you can shuffle in a brass six pence
or shilling, or a light piece of gold: so some, though they retain many
errors, Lect. 6.
yet because they keep some truths, they think to cover much superstition.
False wares will be helped off amongst good, and a man that uses to lie will
sometimes tell some truths to put off a lie. Re^taining some good covers much
evil.
A man that is a base selfe-secker, will many times deny himself; many times
you shall have the proudest spirits that are, to be as crowching and subject
to those that are their superiors as any, and so by seeming humility, cover a
great deal of pride. So the evil of ceremonies, and false discipline, pass
without much contradiction, you must not trouble your selves about these
things, and why have not we as wholesome soule-saving doctrine as in any Church
in the world? because of this the corruption of the other is covered, much
hypocrisy is covered under excellent gifts, the gifts are gifts of Gods
Spirit, but they oftentimes cover much vileness.

Further observe, Obser.
Outward pompous devotion in Gods worship is a great color of notorious
Idolatry, as gilded Crosses, painted Churches, pompous Ceremonies: how has it
covered the most desperate hatred to the power of godliness that ever was?

I will discover thy lewdness.

God has a time to discover wickedness, Obser.
it shall appear one day in its colors, vile and abominable wickedness shall
not always go uncovered. God will not discover her infirmities, neither should
we; we should do as God does, Lewdnes of men must be discovered but not their
infirmities.
discover the lewdness of men, but not their infirmities Love covers a
multitude of faults, if they be but infirmities. And when you discover the
lewdness of others, take heed you do not discover your own lewdness in the
mean time. Many when they go about to discover the lewdness of other men, do
it with such bitterness of spirit, and with rejoicing, that they have got any
advantage against those that are religious, if they hear any reports against
such, whether true or false they care not, they relate it confidently,
something will stick. This is for men to discover their own lewdness, when
they cry out against the lewdness of others. Those who are wise and
understanding, are able easily to see it; but if we would not have God
discover our lewdness, let us get such a cover as shall never be uncovered*
You may have many shifts to cover your sins that are not large enough, but I
will tell you of a cover that is large enough to cover all: What is that? The
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he whose transgresison
is forgiven, whose sin is ^overed. There is a cover that covers from the eyes
of God and man for ever.

I will discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers.

I will take such a way to manifest her vile lewdness before her lovers, that
she shall neither prevail with them, nor be upheld by them.

Whence observe,

When God discovers men's lewdness, Obser.
they shall do little hurt. 2 Timothy 3. 6. But they shall proceed no farther, for
their folly shall be made manifest to all men. There are many who have
secretly gained on the spirits of other men, by fair pretenses, that they will
do nothing but thus and thus, and they seek nothing but the public good,
Lect. 7.
and they desire the furtherance of the Gospel, but when opertunity shall
serve, there shall be a ciscovering that their intentions go another way then
their words seemed to import, and then they shall proceed no further, for they
shall be vile and contemptible in the eyes of those with whom they prevailed
before.

Again, further, I will do it in the sight of their lovers.

When God sets himself against his enemies, Obser.
he will go through his work in the face of all those that seeks the
contrary, do what they can. God needs no shifts, no tricks nor devices to
carry on his work, but he can carry it on in the sight of his adversaries, he
will carry on his work, and shame them in the sight of their lovers, God
carries on his work in the face of his ^^^mies.
and bring them down low, do what they can. God can make use of the wisdom
and policy of men, and he can make as much use of their indiscretion, as he
has done of late. The great works of God amongst us of late have been carried
on with a high hand in the sight of those that have been our adversaries; what
discoveries have there been of the filth of men? how has their nakedness been
made naked? what charges in their conditions? what contempt has God cast in
the face of those that were the great champions sor lewdness, and that in the
very face of their lovers? Their lovers looked on them, and had as good a heart
to them as ever, there was little or no change in the hearts of their lovers;
and though their lovers were as eager for them as ever, yet their shame has
been discovered. This Scripture is as clearly made good this day, as any
Scripture in the Book of God. Again, In the face of their lovers.

Dishonor before those we expect honor from, Obser 2 Samuel 15. 30.
is a sad, a great evil. Oh, says Saul, Honor me before the people. Saul
cared not much if he were dishonored before strangers, but he would be honored
before the people. It is such a thing to be dishonored before those that we
would be honored before, that the stronger a man's spirit is, the more
intolerable the burden is; one of a mean and low spirit, does not much care for
dishonor any where, but a man that has strength of spirit indeed, counts it
the worst thing that can be to be dishonored before those that love him.

This we find among many Tradesmen that are civil at home, It is very
grievous to be dishonored before those we love.
but if they get among strangers, oh how lewd are they in an Inn! those that
love God and the Saints, are most afraid to have their evil discovered before
God and the Saints, for a gracious heart desires honor from them most. One
that is godly can bear disgrace, any contemptuous abuse from many of those
that are profane, rather then from one that is godly. Wicked men care not for
dishonor among the Saints, because they care not for their love. If dishonor
before lovers be such a shame, what will dishonor before God at the great day
be, and before the Saints and wicked men too who were your lovers? I will
discover their lewdness in the sight of their lovers.

When I take away their corn, and wine, and flax, and these things, their
lovers will be ashamed of them.

The way of carnal friends are to esteem of men when they are in prosperity,
but when they are down in adversity, then they contemn them.

Huntsmen when they would single out a Deer, they shoot her first, and as soon
as the blood appears, all the rest go out of her company, and push her from
them. It is so with carnal friends, if a man be in affliction, if they see
their friend shot, they look aloof from him. We have had woeful experience of
this of late, when many godly Ministers were persecuted, those who before had
seemed to be their lovers, grew strange unto them. In a sunshine day, men that
pass by look on a dyall, but in a dark stormy day, a hundred may ride by it
and never look to it. Carnal friends grow strangers in time of adversity.
When we are in a Sunshine day of prosperity, men will look toward us; but
if the gloomy day of adversity come, then they pass by without regard to us.
I^ a man of fashion come to a house, the dogs will be quiet, but when a beggar
comes in rags, they fly upon him. It is apparent by this, that men in their
prosperity are not regarded for any thing in themselves, but for their
prosperities sake, for their moneys sake, for their clothes sake. Suppose any
of you have a servant goes up and down with you, and you know whither soever
you go, the respect that is given, is not for your sake, but for your servants
sake, you go to such a house, and they use you kindly, only for your servants
sake, you take it very ill. This is all the respect that men have from false
lovers, it is not for any good in them, it is for their prosperity, for their
servants sake; O how vain is respect from the world! If you be gracious, God
will not deal with you thus; if you have your estates taken from you, God will
not despise you as carnal friends do. Psalm. 22. 24. For he has not despised
nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted. When the Saints are afflicted,
God does not hide his face from them, but when they cry to him he hears them.

Yet further we see here, carnal hearts have a great deal of confidence in
many things they trust to, Obser.
in time of danger they will not believe but they shall escape. Let us not be
troubled at the confidence our enemies have, they doubt not but to prevail;
this is from the curse of God upon them; their case is never so desperate, but
they have something to shelter themselves in their own thoughts: Oh what a
shame is it that any thing is rather trusted in, then God! the husbandman casts
seed-corn that costs dearer then any other corn into the ground: The Merchant
trusts all his estate to the winds and waves of the sea, and if they sail, all
is gone; you trust servants with business of weight. If you go to Westminster,
you trust your lives in a boat half an inch thick, God is not trusted so
much, that blessed God who is the only true object of soule-confidence.

Lastly, when God sets himself against a generation of men, or any particular,
all the means in the world shall not help. Ezekiel. 9. the Prophet had a vision of
six men with weapons of war in their hands; there were six principal gates in
Jerusalem, and God would set these six men with weapons in their hands at each
gate, that if they run to this, or the other, or any gate, the man with the
weapon in his hand should be sure to take them, they should not escape.

Amos, 5. 8. Seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion; Why are these
named seven stars and Orion; the one is the extreme of cold, and the other of
heat; The Lord has the power of both: if they escape the heat, the cold shall
take them; if the cold, the heat shall take them: and I likewise, says the
Lord, can make both these helpful to you as I please.

Hence there is such blasting of means, for the cursing of those whom God sets
himself against; let us not be afraid of the great assistance that our
adversaries have, though they have great assistance, they are in Gods hand, and
none can deliver out of Gods hand; all their strength is but as tow and flax
before the flame of fire. If God be in a way of mercy, none can take out of his
hands, Isa. 43. 13. There is none can deliver out of my hand, I will work, and
who shall let it?

Wherefore it is a fearful thing to fall into the hand of God when he is in a
way of wrath, and it is a blessed thing to be in his hand when he is in a way
of mercy, for none can deliver out of either. Christ holds the stars, not only
Ministers, but all his Elect in his hand, and none can take them out. I will
give you a notable example in Gods preservation in times of danger: In the time
of the Massacre at Paris, there was a poor man, who for his deliverance crept
into a hole, and when he was there, there comes a Spider and weaves a cobweb
before the hole; when the murderers came to search for him, says one,
Certainly he is got into that hole: No says another, he cannot be there, Job.
8. 14.
for there is a cobweb over the place; and by this means the poor man was
preserved. The hope of the wicked, Job says, is as the Spiders Web; yet if God
please he can make a cobweb to deliver his people.

The least things shall deliver when he will, and the greatest means of
deliverance shall not deliver when he pleases.

The Eighth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 11. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her
New Moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.


THe Lord proceeds still in his threats against Israel, in this verse we have
as sore a threat as any, for it is in part spiritual.

Her mirth, (...), so the Seventy read it, the word signifies the right
temper, the right posture of the mind, when the mind is in a right frame,
then it may be merry; James 5. 13. (...).
Whosoever is merry (says S. James) let him sing; there the word though not
the same, yet signifying the same thing; who ever has his mind in a right
frame, let him sing. No man can be truly merry except his mind be in a right
frame.

I will cause [ all] her mirth. Lect. 8.
God many times takes away from his Saints much of the matter of their mirth,
but never takes away all. This is a dreadful threat to cause all their mirth
to cease.

I will cause it to cease.

I will turn it away, so the Seventy. I can soon have all their mirth down,
they shall never be able to rejoice more if I please; it is gone all with the
turn of a hand.

It appears that Israel, though an apostatizing people, though a people of
Gods wrath, designed to dreadful judgments, yet was a merry jocund people,
they went on still in their mirth and joviallity.

That which is here employed, is more fully expressed in Amos Chap. 6. 4. who was
contemporary with Hosea, and he was the Prophet of the ten Tribes as Hosea
was, now see there how Amos sets forth the mirth of this people, They lie
upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the middst of the stall, they
chaunt to the sound of the Violl, and invent to themselves instruments of
music like David, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointment. This was their condition when they were under such fearful
guilt and in such dreadful danger.

Sensual men, W^^kel men though under God^ wrath yet w^ll be jocund and merry.
while they prosper, they look upon themselves as above the word, and bless
themselves in the satisfying of their own carnal desires, as if it were but a
poor low and mean thing for them to be under the power of the word, to fear
sin and threatenings, it is too low for such brave spirits as they have; But,
come let us sing away all care, let us live merrily, let us take our pleasure
for the present, and crown our selves with rose-buds.

This is the disposition of carnal hearts under all their guilt and danger;
They swim delightfully in that River of Jordan, and suddenly fall into the Dead
Sea; they spend their days in pleasure, and in a moment go down into hell.
This is all the portion of their cup they receive from the Lord: They have a
little joy here, this is all they are like to have, and therefore they will
take their fill of what they have.

But this will not hold.

I will cause this mirth to cease.

Sin and mirth can never hold long together; Obser.
there must be a separation between them. The union that there is between
sin and mirth at any time, it is a forced union; God never joins them
together, and if you will join those things God never joined, your joining
cannot hold: Sin is of such a canker-fretting nature, as it will soon fret
out all the varnish of mirth and joy that is upon it. (...)


If you will not take away sin from your mirth, God will take away mirth from
your sin. It is indeed the happiness of the Saints that they shall have
everlasting joy, the pleasures at Gods right hand are for evermore, but the
pleasures of sin must cease.

Thirdly, Obs.
when afflictions come upon the wicked they are all Amort, their joy, their
mirth is gone. We say of fire, it congregates things of the same kind, and
separates things that are of diverse kinds. So it is with the fire of
affliction, it congregateth things of the same nature, as thus, sin and
horror, trouble, anguish, sorrow, vexation, accusation of conscience,
condemnation, these are of the same kind; sin and these are Homogenall; now
when affliction comes, it congregateth all these; Here is sin, yea but
sorrow, and anguish, and horror of conscience seems now not to be together
with your sin, but when the fire of affliction comes it joins all these
together. On the other side, sin and joy, and prosperity, and peace, these are
Heterogeneall, things of another kind, now when the fire of affliction comes,
it separates these Heterogeneall things; then the hearts of the wicked sink as
lead, they lie down in sorrow, the candle of the wicked is blown out, all their
mirth and joy it is but the light of a candle, affliction makes all to be but
as a stinking snuff. And indeed ungodly men when affliction comes are men of
the poorest spirits of any men, they quickly dye, they succumb, they fall down
under the least weight of affliction; They seem to have brave spirits, to
out-brave the word of God, but they have poor, mean, and low spirits when
they come to bear Gods hand upon them; Affliction takes away all their good,
that they conceive and understand good. There is nothing within them to support
them, there is nothing but darkness and blackness within, nothing but guilt
and gnawings of the worm; And they look upon every suffering they endure but
as the beginning of eternal suffering; And there is the venom and curse of
God goes together with their affliction, which drinks up their spirits.

Oh the happy advantage the Saints have in their afflictions over that the
wicked have in theirs! They have spirits indeed that well may be called brave
spirits, Difference between the spirits of the wicked and the godly in their
affliction.
that can stand under the greatest weight of affliction, and that with joy, in
the midst of them; Paul can rejoice in tribulation, yea and glory in it too.
They have comfort in the creature, but they are not beholding to the creature
for comfort; they depend not upon the creature for comfort, their joy is a
great deal higher; That is precious light indeed that no storm can blow out.
See an example of a brave spirit that way, that in the midst of affliction can
have the light of joy, Habak. 3. 17. Although the Figtree shall not blosome,
neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stals; What then? Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation: All their joy shall not cease; perhaps
in times of affliction, in sad dismal times, they may abate somewhat of their
outward joy, but all their mirth shall not cease, there shall be joy within,
though none without.

Lastly, I will cause all the mirth to cease.

All our mirth depends upon God, Obs.
he can take it away when he pleases. God is called in Scripture, The God of
all consolation; Joy is Gods propri^ty, he gives it when he will, and takes it
away when he will.

Tou have an excellent Text for Gods hand in taking away joy from the hearts of
men when he pleases, it is Lamen. 3. 65. Give them sorrow of heart, (...)
thy curse upon them: Mark it; Now that word that is translated sorrow of
heart (I especially take the note from thence) A word that comes from that that
signifies a helmet, or a shield to fence of any thing, or to cover a thing as a
thing is covered by a shield and helmet; And it does note to us that disease
which Physicians call Cardiaca passio, a kind of disease whereby the heart is
so oppressed, and there is such a stopping, that it is as it were covered sicut
scuto, as with a shield, there is a lid as it were put over the heart, a shield
to keep out all things that should comfort, and to fence off all things that
may be taken to be any refreshments to the spirits; let the most precious
Cordials in the world be given to those that have that disease, they cannot be
refreshed by any of them, and so the heart comes to be suffocated with sorrow.
This is the meaning of the word here, Lord give them sorrow of heart; Put them
into such a condition, as that their hearts may be so stopped and stifled with
sorrow, that what ever means shall be used to bring any comfort to them, let
it be kept off, that no creature in the world may be able to afford the least
refreshment to them; They were wont to shield and fence off thy Word: when thy
word was used to be delivered to them, wherein the treasures of thy mercies
were, and they heard the sweet promises of the Gospel opened, yet they fenced
off thy word as with a shield; Now when they are in affliction let their hearts
be choked so, and let there be such a fence put upon their hearts, that though
there be never so many promises brought to them, they may be fenced off by the
secret curse.

As, Do we not find many wretches who have lived under the Gospel, and fenced
off the treasures of mercies opened to them, when they have been in affliction
they have been in horrible desperation, and whenever any thing out of the
Gospel has been spoken to them for their comfort, they have had strange kind
of fences to put off such things; As those that read the story of Spira, may
wonder what a cunning fencer he was to fence off all comfort that was brought
to him. This was from the Lord, Lord give them sorrow of heart, that is, Lord
put such a shield upon their hearts, as all comfort may be fenced of from them.

We see (my brethren) how we depend upon God for comfort, we all cry out for
comfort, let us know and take to heart our dependence upon God for it, God can
fence our hearts from comfort when he pleases, let us take heed we do not
fence of his word form our hearts.

I will cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days.

These two are put together, for the hearts of men when they enjoy a more
liberal use of the cheature then ordinary, and are amongst cheerful company
are warmed, raised and inflamed at such times, If the heart of a man be
gracious, and he feasts in a gracious way, his heart is warmed, and cheered,
and enlarged in things that are good; so the heart of the wicked when they are
at their feasts, all their lusts are warmed, and their spirits are raised and
strengthened in the things that are evil. You have a notable example of the
cheering and raising of the hearts of men in good things in the time of feasts,
2 Chro. 30. 21. the feast that Hezekiah made for the people of Jerusalem in
that great Passover, the Text says that they kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days with great gladness, and verse. 23. the whole Assembly took
counsel to keep other seven days, and they kept other 7 days with gladness.
Now mark how their hearts were raised, and mightily up upon this, Chap. 31.
ver. 1. When all was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the
cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and
threw downs the high places and the Altars out of all Judah and Benjamine, in
Ephraim also and Manasseth, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Their
hearts being up, and their feasts being in a gracious way, they were so
inflamed, that now they took upon them a mighty courage in doing great things
for God.

It were well if it were always so with us when God calls us to feasting, (as
sometimes he does, though not now) that our hearts were always up in our
feasting, warmed and enlarged to do much good. It is that which has been the
honor of this City, that in their Companies feasting yearly, they were wont
heretofore usually when they had rejoiced one with another, when their hearts
were up, to consult together what good to do for their countries in which they
were borne, and then to resolve to send the preaching of the Word to such a
great Town where most of them were bred, and to such another Town. This was a
gracious feasting, and for this they were much envyed at: And though these
feasts were prohibited upon other pretenses, yet the hindering this good done
at those times, lay in the bottom of that prohibition.

Feasting also warms the lusts, The wickness of men at feasts.
and desperately inflameth wicked resolutions of ungodly men. When a company of
ungodly men met together in a Tavern, and there have drunk and eat liberally,
how desperately are they set against the ways of godliness! then they scorn and
jeer godly Ministers, and Parliament, and Christians; they are then as if they
were above God, their tongues are their own, and who shall control them? and
all when their lusts are heated with wine and good cheer. Mark that Scripture,
Ps. 35. 16. With hypocritical mockers at feasts, they gnashed upon me with
their teeth. Here is scorning and violence, gnashing upon the Psalmist with
their teeth, and this at their feasts. Hos. 7. 5. In the day of our King, the
Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine, he stretched out his hand with
scorners. They brought bottles of wine, and when his lusts were heated with
wine and good cheer, then he joined with them in scorning the ways and
worship of GOD; they scorned at all those that would go up to Jerusalem to
worship according to the institution, these must be so precise that they will
not join with us, as if we had not the worship of GOD among us, they tell
tales to Jeroboam and the other Princes of the godly who would not yield to
their idolatrous ways of worship, they scorned at their preciseness; Now
says the Text, The King stretched out his hand with scorners, takes them by
the hand, and encourages them in that way, and tells them he will take a
course with them, not one of them shall be suffered to live in his dominions.

Their hearts were put all agog with their feasts, but God has a time to take
away feasting times from a people, a time when those who have delighted
themselves so in the use of the creatures, shall have all those merry meetings
and brave times cease, never feast more, never meet with such merry company
more; Animula mea vagubla blandula, quo vadis, non amplius joco^ dabis.
As that Pope Adrian said when he was a dying, O my soul whither art thou
going? thou shall never be more merry.

For Kingdoms also, though there be times for feasting, yet there is a time of
mourning; and God seems this day to be coming to us to take away our feasts,
to call upon us to spend our times in another way; It were good for us to do
what we can to prevent God, by humbling our selves in a voluntary way, to take
away our own Feasts, and to change our Festivities into Humiliations. The
times call for fasting now, rather then feasting; We must not then feast when
God calls for mourning.
and it is a most dreadful sin then for men to give liberty to themselves for
feasting, when God calls for mourning and fasting. It is not at your liberty to
feast when you will.

Isa. 22. 12. is a most dreadful place, that might make the hearts of those
who are guilty in this kind tremble. Verse. 12. And in that day did the Lord of
hosts call to mourning, and to girding with sackcloath, and behold joy and
gladness, slaying oxen, killing sheep, drinking wine. Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till you die, says the Lord God of Hosts. While
the bread is taken away from our brethren, and the land is so miserably
spoiled, and when such a black cloud hangs over our heads, here is no time
for Festivities. Whatsoever your customs have been, at this time now coming (I
mean that which you call your Christmas Festivity) you are certainly bound now
to turn it into a time of mourning; For if we should grant it lawful for men
to appoint Holy Days that way, for feasting, (of which more by and by) yet
certainly it cannot be but a sinful thing, so to set those days apart, as
whatsoever providence of God falls out, yet they will continue what they
themselves have set. You will all grant this, that if it be lawful to keep
this time of Festivity, yet this not that that God himself has set apart and
enjoined. We never have it required by Christ, or by his Apostles, that at such
a time, just when the year comes about, that we should have solemn days of
Festivity. Well then, at the most, if we suppose it lawful, it is but the
institution of man; if it be man's institution, then certainly it must give way
to Gods work, to providence. For man to put so much upon his institution,
because he has appointed such a day when the year comes about to rejoice in,
that whatsoever work of God falls out in the mean time, that calls for
humiliation and fasting, yet he will hold to his own institution; what is this
my brethren but to make the commandments of God to be of none effect through
man's tradition? It is apparent breach of that Scripture. For this is certain
now that it is the commandment of God that you should mourn and fast, if then
because of man's institution you will put by the command of God, and now spend
time in feasting and rejoicing, which ought not to be but in such times when
God shines upon a Kingdom in ways of mercy, know this is sin unto you. If you
can say that God shines upon us now in present extraordinary mercies then we
may feast. I confess they are extraordinary mercies in regard of what we may
hope to be the event and effect of them; but for the administrations of God
toward us, they are such as if ever they called for fasting, they call for it
at this day. Therefore here by Gods works amongst us, we know we have Gods
will revealed to us, namely to fast; the other at most is but man's institution
and tradition. Now the traditions of man must yield to the commandments of God.

With what conscience now can you take such a plentiful use of the creature,
and suffer your brethren to want clothes and bread? If God have yet granted to
you such a comfortable estate that you have so much to spare as to feast, know
you are bound in conscience then to lay out that in relieving your brethren who
have been so cruelly used, therefore God brings them to you to be objects of
your compassion. It would be very acceptable to God if so much as any of you
have usually spent in feastings, or intended to spend in these twelve days,
you would set it now apart for the relief of those who want bread, and set the
time apart also for mourning in your families, that God would pardon the sin
of these times formerly committed. And now not only feasts in private Families
should cease, but the feasts of Companies in your public Halls likewise.

What abundance of poor plundered people might be relieved, if all that were
spent in one year in the feasts of your companies, were laid aside for their
use! These are times for mercy, not for festivity; if we will not cease our
feastings, let us know, God has thousands of ways to take away feasts from a
kingdom, and to bring cleanness of teeth among us, I will take away their
feasts, says the Lord.

The main thing in this verse to be opened to you, is, what these feasts of the
Jews were.

In the opening of all these we shall be put upon the opening of much Scripture,
and therefore I shall not make have out of this verse.

The words here are Feasts and solmne Feasts; (...)
they are Feasts both in your English, but the words in the Hebr. differ much,
the first comes from a word that signifies to rejoice and leap, the second
from a word that signifies a stated, a settled time. Our English word Feast
comes of the Greek (...) a gods, as the heathen so called, that which the
Latins call Vesta, the goddess both of earth and of fire.

The Jews had their Civil feasts, and their Holy feasts.

Amongst their Holy feasts, some were of Gods appointment, and some of their
own.

Of Gods appointment, some were more solemn, some less.

Their Civil feasts were times wherein they took a more liberal use of the
creature, in rejoicing one with another upon some specially occasion, this they
called a Good day, not a Holy day, so you have it, Esth. 8. 17. The Jews had
joy and gladness, a feast and a good day, so they were wont to express the
day of feasting, facere Bonum diem, to make a Good day to their brethren, it
will appear by examining that Text of Esther, that that day thought it was set
to be kept every year, yet it was but as a good day to them, and could not be
said to be a holy day; we do not read of any religious solemn exercise that
they had for the day: Such a day I take to be our fifth of November, a Good
day, not a Holy Day, wherein we have a more liberal use of the creature then
at other times, and remember the mercies of God with thanksgiving: But we know
the day is not set apart for this end, so as it is unlawful to be exercised in
any other thing, and we shall show afterward, how that days cannot be set
apart Annually, or be made holy by men.

Their Religious feasts which they presumed themselves to make holy, were
[their] feasts rather then Gods, and for that you have the example of Jeroboam,
he appointed a feast even of his own head; it is in 1 King. 12. 32, 33. And
Jeroboam (says the Text) ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the
fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast which is in Judah, so he
offered upon the Altar which he had made in Bethel, We must not presume in way
of imitation to God to devise things in his worship like to his former
institutions.
the fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised
of his own heart, and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel. Mark
here, Jeroboam is rebuked for appointing a feast of his own heart, like the
feast God had appointed; this is no excuse that he would be an imitator of God.
This reason many think will justify their superstitious way, they do but
imitate what God did, as thus, God had an Ephod for the Priests, therefore they
will have a holy garment; God had a Temple consecrated, they will have one so
too God had his feast days and holy days, they will have theirs too in
imitation of God. This very thing that Jeroboam did, he is rebuked for, that
he would set up a thing like unto Gods.

Where God has set his stamp upon any thing, we must take heed we presume
not to set our own stamp. Suppose any one should take a piece of silver, and
should set just the same stamp as near as he can that the King does upon his
coin, be it but a twopence, the silver is his own; well, but if he come to
be examined, Why do you thus? What hurt says he is there in it? I have done no
more then the King, I have done but as he did; Why, may we not follow his
example? will this answer think you serve his turn? It is as much as his life
is worth: Just such a plea is this, they will do such and such things in Gods
worship, why? God has done so before, and they do but imitate God; There is
as much strength in the one as in the other. Therefore that word here [ devised
of his own heart] in the Hebrew comes from a word that signifies to lie, (...)
Mendat^s*
Jeroboam did lie, Isa 44. 25. He frustrateth the tokens of the liars, it is
the same word: Jeroboam indeed in setting this day apart, he did it under a
pretense to honor and worship God, but though it might seem to make Gods
honor and worship better then before, yet the Scripture puts the lie upon it,
so the word is; I think this was the reason he set it apart in the eighth
month, the Feast of Tabernacles was the fifteenth day of the seventh month; now
he would not alter the day, but have it the same day that Gods was, but in the
eighth month, for the Feast of Tabernacles was appointed for this end, to
praise God for the in-gathering of the fruits of the earth, and it was as upon
our September; Now because upon the fifteenth of September perhaps all the
creatures were not gathered in, there might be some remaining abroad, therefore
Jeroboam might have this device, he would stay till every thing be gathered in,
till they had it in their barnes, and in their vessels; when they had it all
fully in, and it was fit to eat and drink, then says Jeroboam, now it is the
time to praise God, you praised God before when you were taking in of the
fruits, but you have not taken them all in, you cannot come to use them, but
now having them all in, and now being able to make use of them, now is the time
to praise God.

This was Jeroboams wisdom, and he thought to make a Feast to take the people
rather then Gods Feast. There are no superstitious men but will have some
argument and plea for their ways, to take the hearts of people to embrace
those ways rather then Gods simple, plain and pure Ordinances. Well, but
though Jeroboam did it under this pretense, yet he lies still; so those men
that will take upon them to sanctify days, or places, or garments, or any
gesture that God never did, though they say they do it for Gods honor, to
make Gods worship more glorious and decent; yet it is a lie: Just as those who
will make Images, brave golden Images of God, O say they, it is for the honor
of God, but mark what the Text faith, Hab. 2. 18. What profits the graven
Image that the maker thereof has graven it, the m^lten Image and a teacher of
lies? If Images be lay men's books, they are books that have abundance of
err^aes in them, they are full of lies.

Here now arises the Question about man's appointing Feasts, whether there may
he holy Feasts (taken so in a proper sense) by man's appointment? Jeroboam is
accused for it plainly: and Gal. 4. 10. there is a charge upon the Galatians,
and that very severely. You observe days, and months, and times, and years, I
am afraid of you le^t I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

It appears by this that peoples hearts are mightily set upon their Feasts,
their days, and months, and years, they were loath to be taken off from them,
so that the Apostle speaks with a deal of bitterness of spirit, I am afraid
of you that I have lost my labor; and indeed when godly Ministers take pains
amongst people whose hearts are set upon such things as these, for the most
part they loose their labor, little good is done.

Yea will some say, to observe the Jewish days after they were abolished by
God, that was sinful and dangerous, but we do not keep Jewish days.

But mark what these men say, God abolisheth his own, and yet they think he
gives liberty to man to set up others. If this were so, that upon Gods
abolishing his own, men should have liberty to set up theirs, then the
Christians are under a more heavy bondage and grievous paedagogie then ever the
Jews were, for it is better to have a hundred days of Gods appointing, then
one of man's, it is more honorable. Further, if God appoint, there needs no
scruple, as there is if man appoint; yea, if God appoint, we may expect a
special blessing, and efficacy, and presence of God, we cannot expect such
things in man's appointment. Now if this were so, when God has taken away
Jewish Ceremonies, man might lawfully appoint others as he pleases, and when
God has taken away Jewish days, man might appoint other days, we may pray to
God with good reason to bring us under the pedagogie of the Law again, rather
then to be thus under man's power.

Thus far we grant, that upon any special work of God, the very revolution
of the year has a naturalnesse in it to put me in mind of such a thing, and
so far as there is a naturalnesse in it, there is good in it, I may make use
of it. Therefore I dare not say that is altogether unlawful at such times to
have some outward rejoicing, when God does not call for mourning some other
way, (except the argument from the extraordinary abuse there has been of it
may be of force) Nay that there may be advantage taken of the peoples leisure,
to preach the word, and to hear Sermons upon such days we deny not. We know
that Christ was in the Porch of the Temple at the feast of Dedication, which
was one of the days of their own appointing, not that he was there to
countenance or honor the Feast, but because he had been there before at another
Feast of Gods appointment. Now there being a multitude of people at that time
also gathered together, he takes advantage of the concourse of the people to
come to the out-porch to preach to them. So much therefore as we may grant, we
will not deny.

For the understanding of this point, the setting apart days, I suppose there
are these two things will be questioned.

First, Why may not governors of the Church set apart days, as well as
appoint times for preaching, or as well as others of themselves will appoint
such times, as once a week so much time set apart for a Lecture?

Secondly, We may appoint fast days, and days of thanksgiving, these are set
apart by man, how comes it to pass then that this can be clear that a man
may appoint a time for preaching constantly once a week, and he may appoint
times of fasting, and days of thankesgiving, and yet not have this liberty, to
make a day that may be properly called a holy day?

We must clear that point from this objection, or else we do nothing; and for
the clearing this we must know there is a great deal of difference in these
three things, the right understanding of which will clear all the matter.

Between deputation, and dedication, and sanctification of a thing.

I may depute a creature to be made use of to help me in holy things, and yet
still this creature is not sanctified by its deputation, Why a day may not be
made holy as well as time set apart for a Lecture.
and so we do a time for a Lecture, such an hour in such a day deputed, but
the time is not made holy by it the place is deputed, but is not made holy by
it.

Yea I will appoint such a garment that I have when I am in such a service such
a day to wear, but yet the garment is not made holy by it. A creature is not
made holy merely by being made use of at holy exercise or in a holy thing. As
thus, suppose I go to read the holy Scripture, I make use of a candle to
read it by, I do not make the candle holy by this, because I make use of it.
If the making use of a creature in a holy duty did make the creature holy, then
it would fall out generally in all creatures. I make use of the very light and
the air when I am reading and speaking holy things in public assemblies, I
do not make the light and air holy, because I make use of them in holy things;
so I make use of this hour to preach in, though I make use of it in a holy
duty, I make it no further holy then a man does his spectacles that he uses to
read the Scripture by. A deputation is this, when such a creature as I shall
think most commodius for such a service shall be put a part for such a service,
or when such a creature, as I have use of for such a service, will be a
natural and useful help to me, to appoint it for that service upon that
ground.

The second is dedication, that is when I give a thing out of my own power,
What it is to dedicate a thing.
for a pious use, that I cannot make use of for any thing again. As when a man
has given so much of his estate to build a School or an Hospital, it may be
said to be a kind of dedication, he has devoted, given so much of his estate
to that end, so that he cannot make use of it himself to another end. Now we
do not so set apart the time of preaching, as that we cannot make use of this
time for any other end, we may as we see cause alter it, where it is from 9.
to 11, we make it from two to four, whereas if it were a thing that we had
dedicated, that is given out of our own power then it cannot be changed by us.
That is a second degree, this is not sanctifying yet.

Now sanctification is beyond dedication, that is when any creature or time is
so set apart for holy things as it must not be used in any thing but that that
is holy; What it is to sanctifi^ a thing.
and though the same holy actions be done at another time, and with the use of
another creature, they shall not be accounted so holy as at this time, and when
this creature was made use of.

This is the proper sanctification, and the setting apart of any day thus, that
is, such a day God gives to me to make use of for my occasions, if I shall
thus set it a part, so devote it for such a business, as it may not without
sin to me (whatsoever falls out) be used to any other occasion.

And secondly, when I have set it apart I shall put so much in it as if the
same holy actions be performed to another time, they shall not be accounted so
holy as at this time, although that time has as much natural fitness in it,
now I sanctify time to my self, but thus I cannot do without sin.

You shall find that there are these two things in all holy feasts, and indeed
in all things that are accounted holy.

First, it was a sin for them to make use of that time for any other thing,
or any other ways then God had appointed: Secondly, the actions that they did
at that time were such as were more acceptable to God then if they had done the
same thing at another time. Yea it was so in their very days of humiliation,
that were once a year, a day of Expiation, this day must not be used for any
thing else; and if they humbled themselves or fasted upon another day, that
would not have been so acceptable to God as upon this day.

So we shall see it in all superstitions of men when they set apart either
days, or places, or things, they put these two upon them.

As for places, They say we appoint a place for people to meet in a religious
way; yes, but when comes it to be superstitious? Thus first when it comes so to
be set apart, so as I shall make conscience of using it to any other use but
this; Secondly, when I shall be persuaded in my conscience that God accepts of
service done him in this place better then in any other though as decent as
this. So for superstitious garments. You will say, may not Ministers be decent?
I have heard a great Doctor give this argument for a surplice; sometime says he
I ride abroad to preach and my cloak is dirty, is it fit for me to come into a
Pulpit with a dirty garment? and therefore there is always appointed somewhat
to cover it; it is decent.

Suppose it be so, but if it be so that this garment must be made use of for
nothing but such a holy exercise, and secondly if I think the wearing of it
does honor the service, and that God accepts of the service performed in such
a garment rather then in another, this is superstition; as in one place in
Suffolk when that garment was lost, there was a strict injunction to the poor
country men that there might not be any service or sermon till they had got
another: for which they were appointed ten days, and this being upon a friday,
there were two Sabbaths without any service, therefore it is apparent they put
the acceptance of the duty upon it. So for days, for any man to set apart a
day, so that it shall be a sin, that a man's conscience shall condemn him
before Ged as sinning against him, if he do any thing upon that day but such
holy duties. Secondly, That though the same holy duties be done upon another
day, they shall not be accounted so acceptable to God as done upon that day,
this is superstitious. Yer certainly of this nature have many of our days
been, for if you opened your shops, what a deal of disturbance was there in
the city! It was a profaning of the day, every Proctor and such fellows had
power given them to molest you: 2. did not they account it a greater honor to
God for to have service read that day then to have it read upon an ordinary
teusday or thursday? yea preaching upon a Lecture day that was not one of their
holy days, they accounted not so acceptable unto God as service upon that day.
Here comes their institution, their institution puts upon it more then God puts
upon it, so it comes to be sinful.

So if you should set apart this time you call Christmas, so as you should make
conscience of doing any other service or work that day, and besides, you
should think that to remember Christ and to bless God for Christ upon another
day is not so acceptable to God as to do it upon that day, here comes in the
evil of thus putting man's institution upon days.

Well, but this is not cleare^ except we answer another objection. But does not
the King and Parliament command days of fasting and days of thanksgiving, and
are not they of the same nature? Will not you say it is sin for us to open
shops upon these days.

I answer, How it may be lawful to set apart fasting days and how not.
our days for fasting and thanksgiving have not those two ingredients in them,
for first, if God by his providence call any particular man to any particular
business in his family, then (let this man take heed he do not appear in a
way of contempt) he need not have his conscience condemn him though he spend
all that day in that business. They may set apart a day to be spent publicly,
yet with this limitation, not to enjoyne every particular man, that whatsoever
Gods providence calls him to in particular businesses, he must leave off all,
and make as much conscience of doing this as upon the Lords day.

You will say, upon the Lords day, if we have any extraordinary thing fall out,
we may go a journey or do business, as a Physician may ride up and down,
works of mercy may be done, therefore this makes no difference between Gods
day and these of man's appointment.

I answer, Though a Physician do a work of mercy upon the Sabbath day, yet he
is bound to do it with a Sabbath days heart, as a work of mercy; whatsoever
calls him off from those services that are Gods imediate worship, he must do
that thing with a Sabbath days frame of heart, he is bound in conscience to
do it so, and he sins against God if he rides up and down to Patients with
such a heart as he may do it upon another day, he may follow it as a business
of his calling upon another day, but not so now; but if he do it with a Sabbath
days frame of heart as a work of mercy, he keeps the Sabbath in that. But if
there were a necessity upon a Fast day to ride, a man's conscience need not to
condemn him before God, if he went about that work as the work of his
calling at that time. It is not therefore so dedicated but Gods providence may
take us off to do other civil actions, and that as the works of our calling.
Secondly, Neither is it so sanctified as if the same works done at another day
were not so acceptable to God as done upon this day. As our fast days set upon
the last wednesday of the Month, to think that the work done upon another
day were not so acceptable to God as done upon that day, this is a
sanctification of the day, and such a sanctification is sin. The same answer
may be given for days of thanksgiving. Besides, yet there is another thing
considerable, that is in the stating of the time. Though men may thus depute
and appoint days to worship God, yet they cannot state any such days, but
only as Gods providence calls them to it, according to the present occasion.

Therefore it were certainly a sin if a state should appoint once every year to
be a fasting day in a religious way, God did so, but men have no power to do
so, the reason is this, because they do not know but God may call them to
rejoicing upon that day, they have not the liberty of the time. All that we can
do is this, when God calls us to fasting, we must appoint days of fasting;
when God calls us to rejoicing we must appoint days of rejoicing. Therefore to
appoint the time of Lent as a religious fast is sinful, and the Statute it
self threatens a mulct upon that man that shall call it a religious fast; for
civil ends it may be, but stated fasts which are not limited by providence,
are certainly evil; and so for these monthly fasts that are now enjoined, if we
should say we will have a fast once a month upon this day these twelve
months, or these two years, I persuade my self the State should sin: but to
have it as long as Gods hand is upon us, as long as the occasion lasts, and
Gods providence calls us to it, that is justifiable.

Our Brethren in Scotland wholly deny both stated Fasts and all other days:
Nay they will scarce agree to this monthly fasting we have, because they are so
loath to yield to any stat a jeiunia. And I remember I have heard of a speech
King James once made in Scotland, blessing God that he was borne at such a
time, and was a member of such a Church; and the reason he gives is this: For,
says he, the Church of Scotland exceeds in this all other Churches. England
though it has pure doctrine, has not pure discipline; other Reformed Churches
have pure doctrine and discipline, but they retain the observation of many
holy days; but the Church of Scotland has pure doctrine and discipline, and
keeps no holy days, and therefore says he, it is a purer Church then any in
the world.

Thus I have endeavored to show you how far things may be set apart, and how
far not, when it comes to be a sin for any one to sanctify a day.

By this we may see what a mercy it is to be delivered from those men who have
robbed the Kingdom of so many days as they have, and put so many
superstitious respects upon them, and so have involved us in much guilt, bless
God for delivering us from them, and for those days that God gives us liberty
to exercise our selves in his worship, let us know our liberty in them. Thus
much for those Feasts that are called their Feasts, that were of their own
appointment.

Her new moons.

The ordinance of God in the new moons is in Numb. 28. 11. In the beginning of
your new moons you shall doc thus and thus, The feast of new moons opened.
etc. It was Gods ordinance that the Jews at the beginning of every month
should have a holy day, when they had a new moon they should keep that day holy
to God.

That which the Latins call Calends, were their new moons.

The holy solemnity of these days was in three things. First, the offerings
that were there appointed by God particularly for that time, were many and

Secondly, At these times they were wont to repair to the Prophets for
instruction, to know the mind of God. That you have 2 King. 4. 23. where the
husband of the Shunamire said to his wife, wherefore will thou go to him to
day? it is neither new moon nor sabbath. Indeed if it were new moon or sabbath
you may go, but while it is neither, why will you go? That implies that this
was a thing in use among the Jews to repair to the Prophets for instruction,
and to hear Gods word from them upon those days.

Thirdly, yea it was unlawful to buy and sell upon those days, Amos. 8. 5.
When will the new moon be gone that we may sell corn? they were weary of it,
it seems, because they might not buy and sell in it.

These three things we find in Scripture upon their new moons. Benedctus esto
conditor t^us O l^ na, benedictus aesto Dominus tuus.
Now Euxtorphius who relates to us the Jewish way, he tells us of three other
things they were wont to do in their new moons.

First, Those that were most devout among them, used to set apart a day for
fasting and prayer to entreat God to bless the new moon to them.

2. As soon as there was an appearance of the new moon, one steppeth up and
cries, O thou Creator of the moon, be ever blessed, and so he goes on in the
benediction of God for this creature.

3. They used to leap and to reach toward the moon so soon as they saw it, Ter
subsiliunt s^elum ver sus quod quanto sublimius possunt, taute melius est,
lunamque alloquentes. Quemadmodum inquiunt not ^e versus sub^ilientes attingere
^e non possumus, sic hosts nostri omnes nos ad malum attingere nobi^que ^^eere
non poterunt. Buxtorf. Synag. Iudaic. c. 17.
speaking after this manner: We reaching to the moon, we cannot reach it; so
all our enemies that reach at us, are as unable to reach us to our hurt, as we
that.

But why did God appoint this feast of the new moon?

It was appointed for these 4. ends.

Ier. 44. 17. 18. 19.
if they had any changes of times and seasons, God caused it, rather then this
creature, and as the heathens, so they called the Moon the Queen of Heaven,
and they would not be taken off from offering cakes to the Queen of heaven,
they attributed all their prosperity to her, as we read in the Prophet. Now
from this, God would take them off, therefore he appointed this solemn feast of
the new moon,

2. God would hereby teach, that the bringing of any light unto us after
darkness is merely from himself, and he must be acknowledged in it. The

3. God would teach them this also, that the beginnings of all mercies are

And lastly, which is more, this aimed at Christ, as all other Ceremonies of
the Law did. It pointed out our condition in our depending upon

But when they come to abuse these Feasts, says God, I will take them away,
you shall have no more; and therefore Isa. 1. God professes a loathing of
their feasts, and amongst others of their New Moons. Not but that they were
holy in themselves, but when they came to abuse them, by adding their own
superstitious vanities, or else had not the due end for which God appointed
them, then God is offended. Now says God, you acknowledge darkness to be from
me, and light to be from me, and change of time to be from me, but what use do
you make of your time? You seem to give up the mercies you receive unto me,
but you do not honor me with them, nor for them.

You seem to think of the Messiah in these things, but your hearts are not with
him, but all your ways are after your lusts. I loath your feasts. Just as if a
man comes to God, and prays devoutly, Lord lead me not into temptation, and
as soon as he has done, he presently goes into wicked company, God loatheth you
for going quite cross to your prayers; you pray, Lord give us this day our
daily bread, as if you should say, Lord I depend upon thee every day for my
bread, and for a blessing upon all my outward estate; and as soon as you have
done, you cozen, and cheat, and go presently to the Devil for your bread: God
loatheth these prayers of yours, as God loatheth their New Moons, because when
he appointed such a worship for those and those ends, yet they went quite
contrary.

Yet there are two things exceeding observable about these New Moons. We often
read of these things, but we pass them over and do but little mind them.

First, God will have the glory of his creature, of the New Moon, and that
solemnly, yet it must be at that time when the Moon is very little, scarce any
at all, it must not be at the full, when the Moon is most glorious, God does
not call to be glorified in that creature when it is fullest of glory; but when
that creature is (as we may say) in the meanest condition, when it has but a
little light beginning, scarce any at all, then God will be glorified. This is
the instruction and moral lesson from hence, which is no strained one, but I
think intended by God himself, in appointing this feast, in that God will have
the glory due to him from this creature in the beginning of its light, rather
then at any other time. We are taught in this,

That there is a great deal of danger when we are giving God the glory of the
creature, Obser.
of sticking in the creature, and not passing through the creature speedily
enough, and going from it to God. God is very jealous of his glory this way.
God has made many glorious creatures indeed, and he would have his glory from
all his creatures, he would have us give due esteem to his creature; but when
we esteem it for any excellency there is in it, God is jealous lest any of his
glory should stick in the creature, therefore he calls for it at that time when
the creature is most mean. That is the reason that Gods Ordinances are so
plain, we have but plain bread, and plain wine, and a plaintable, and no brave
pompous attire, because God saw that when we are to deal with him
spiritually, if we had pompous things we would stick there; and we see men
that are taken so with pompous things, they give not God that glory that is due
to him, but they stick much in the creature, and honor it rather then God. It
seems that the Heathens making the Moon to be their goddess, especially
looked at it when it was most light, as appears, Job 31. therefore Job to
clear himself from that idolatry, says, If I beheld the Sun when it
shined, or the Moon walking in brightness: They used to worship the Moon thus
when they saw it walk in brightness, because they could not reach the Moon,
they kissed their hand, and so bowed to the Moon in acknowledgment of a Deity,
therefore Job would free himself from that, If I beheld the Moon walking in
brightness, or if my mouth have kissed my hand, that is, says he, I have not
worshipped this creature. This is it I note it for, that when the creature is
most glorious, there is danger of giving God the less. It is thus with us many
times, God has many times more glory from us when our estates are little, then
when they are very great; there is many a man, who when he has been in full
light of prosperity never minded God, bus when God has brought him into
darkness, then he has given God glory, and then it has been indeed most
acceptable, because then he sees Gods hand helping him without the creature.

Further, God had most glory from the Moon when it had the least light, so God
may have glory from us though our light be extinguished, it is no great matter.

shall observe what difference there is between the Feasts of the new Moons by
Gods appointment under the Law, Lect. 9.
and the Feasts of the new Moons as they are set forth to us in Ezekiel. I lay
this for a ground, that those Chapters in Ezekiel. from the fourth and so on,
though they seem to speak of the Jews ceremonies, and Temple, and Feasts, yet
the scope of those texts is to set out the glorious condition of the Church of
God in the time of the Gospel; As in Isa. 66. 22. Then they shall worship me
from Sabbath to Sabbath, and from Moon to Moon, that is, their constant
worship shall be in comparison as a Sabbath, and they shall not only worship me
at the beginning of the Moon, but all times, their worship shall be so full and
so constant: Therefore though in that place of Ezekiel. there be speaking of new
Moons and other Feasts, yet it is to set out the condition and blessed estate
of the times of the Gospel under those shadows and types, the Prophet speaking
according to the Jewish language in that way. This being granted, let us
compare the institution of the Feast of the new Moon, In Number. 28. with what is
laid in Ezekiel. 46. in Number. 28. they were to offer for a burnt offering two
Bulloks, one Ram, and seven Lambs, but in Ezekiel. 46. 6, In the days of the
new Moon there should be but one bullock and six lambs. God himself had said,
that in their new Moons they should offer two Bullocks and seven Lambs, yet
when the Prophet would set out a more glorious condition of the church, he
says, they should not offer so much as they did before, they should offer but
one Bullock and six Lambs.

What are we taught from this? We are taught by this two excellent lessons,
Ezekiel. aim at some special time more then other, there is a glorious time of
the state of the Church, when there shall not be such occasion of blessing God
for delivering us from darkness as there has been.

The Ninth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 11. I will cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new
moons and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.


OF the Jewish new moons the last day, God threatens likewise to take away her
Sabbaths. Sabbaths.]

Plutarch thought that the Sabbath of the Jews was from Sabbos, (...)
Iovialiter vivere.
a name of Bacchus, that signifies to live jocundly, and bravely, and merrily.
Indeed the Sabbaths that many keep have such a derivation, their Sabbaths are
sabbaths of Bacchus, to be merry, and to eat, and drink, and play, is the end
of all their Sabbaths.

But the word has a better root. God would have us upon the Sabbath rest from
all other works, that we may be free to converse with him: therefore it is so
much the more inexcusable if when we have nothing else to do we shall deny to
converse with God as he requires of us. If a friend should come to your house
to converse with you, and he should know you have no business to take you up,
yet you will scarce see him, or spend a little time with him, will he not take
it ill? If indeed you could have such an excuse that your business is
extraordinary, though your time be less you spend with him, it would not be so
ill taken; but when he knows you have nothing to do, and yet you deny time to
converse with him, will not this be taken for a slighting him? Thus you deal
with God; Had you indeed great occasions and businesses to do upon that day,
though you did not so converse with God in holy duties, it were another matter;
God might accept of mercy rather then sacrifice. But when he shall appoint you
a day to rest, wherein you have nothing to do but to converse with him, yet
then to deny it, this is a sleighting of the Majesty of God.

Now the Jews had diverse Sabbaths, amongst others these were principal ones.
The Sabbaths of days, and the Sabbaths of years.

The Sabbath of days, every seventh day they had a Sabbath, and it was kept
unto the Lord. Now this Feast of theirs had so me what in it Memorative,
somewhat Significative, and somewhat Figurative. It was a Memorial, a Sign,
Why a Sabath was ordained.
and a Figure. A Memorial of two things.

1. Of the works of Gods Creation. After God had finished his works of
Creation, then he rested, and sanctified the seventh day, and Psalm. 92. being
appointed for the Sabbath, the Argument of it is the celebrating the Memorial
of Gods great works.

2. Of the deliverance out of Egypt, in remembrance of the rest that God did
give them from their bondage. So you have it Deuteronomy, 5. 15. Remember that thou
wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out
thence, through a mighty hand, and by a stretched-out arm: Therefore he
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day.

Secondly, it was Significative, a Sign, Exodus, 31. 17. It is a sign between
me and the children of Israel for ever: And verse 13. It is a sign betweeue me
and you, that I an the Lord that do sanctify you. God made it a sign, that
as this day was by his command to be sanctified, set apart from other days, so
God had set apart this nation of the Jews from other nations.

Thirdly, It was Figurative, it did figure out or typific the rest that did
remain for the people of God, Heb. 4. There remains a rest to the people of
God, both here in the time of the Gospel, and in heaven eternally.

Now we are to know there was some speciality in this day of rest, What
special things in the seventh day Sabbath above other Sabbaths,
in this sabbath of the Jews more then in any other sabbath. As,

First, in the Antiquity of it. It was the most ancient of all the days, set
apart for an holy use, being from the time of the Creation.

Secondly, it was written with Gods own finger in the Tables.

Thirdly, God rained no Manna upon this day, and that even before the Law was
given in Mount Sinai, for the honor of this day.

4. The whole week does take denomination from the Sabbath. Luke 18. 12. I
fast twice in the week, twice a Sabbath, so the words are in the Greek. So
Mark 16. 2. The first day of the week, the first of Sabbaths, so the words.

5. This Sabbath is called an everlasting Covenant by way of eminency, as if
nothing of Gods Covenant were kept if this were not. (...)
Exodus 31. 16. Ye shall keep the Sabbath for a perpetual Covenant.

Yea 6. God puts a remembrance upon this day, and not upon any other sabbath.
If a friend who would feign converse with you, send to you three or four days,
Quartum pra^eeptum egregium prae septum, and ad omnem virtutem excitandam
utile, p^etatem vero praecipue. D^esiderium dierum. Veni spon sa m^a.
or a wecke beforehand, I pray think of that day, I will come to you then and
converse with you, we will enjoy communion together; now if when he does come
he shall find you emplyed in unnecessary businesses, will he take it well? God
does so with you, says God, I desire to converse with your souls, and I
appoint you such a day, think of it, remember that day that you and I may be
together, and converse sweetly one with another; if God find you then occupied
in unnecessary businesses, he will not take it well.

This Sabbath the Jews rejoiced much in, and blessed God for it, Nehem. 9. 14.
as a great mercy. And Philo Iudaeus speaking of the fourth Commandment says,
It is a famous precept, and profitable to excite all kind of virtue and piety.
And the Hebrews say we must sanctify the Sabbath at the coming in and going
out, and bless God that has given us this Sabbath: Yea it is called by some
of the Hebrews, the very desire of days; And Drusius tells of a Jew, who
when the Sabbath d^y approached, was wontto put on his best clothes, saying,
Come my. Spouse, etc. as being glad of tharday, as a Bridegroom of his Spouse.

It is not my work to handle the point of the Sabbath Day, or Lord's Day now,
but to open it as we have it here in the Text, to show what kind of Sabbath
the Jews had; only observe this one thing about this Sabbath; If you compare
Numb. 28. 9. with Ezekiel. 46. 4. you shall find that the offerings in the time
of the Gospel prophesied of, were more then those were in the time of the Law.
In Numb. you find but two Lambs, but in Ezekiel you find six Lambs and a Ram
for the Sabbath: This by way of type shows, that in the settled times of the
Gospel, Gods worship upon the Christian Sabbath should be solemnized more
fully then it was in the time of the Law.

The next is the Sabbath of years, and they were of two sorts. There was one
to be kept every seven years, and another every seven times seven, every
fiftieth year. Every seventh year there was a rest of the land; as every
seventh day there was a rest of the labor of their bodies, so every seventh
year there was a rest of the land. Exodus 23, 10. Six years thou shall sow thy
land and gather in the fruits thereof, but in the seventh year thou shall let
it rest analye still, rhey must not prune their Vines, nor gather their vintage
one year in seven. The meaning of the rest of the seventh year.
The Sabbath of days signified that they themselves were the Lords, therefore
they ceast from their own labors: But the Sabbath of years, the resting of
the land signified that the land was the Lords, at Gods dispose, and that they
were to depend upon the providence of God for their food in the land; God would
dispose of the land, when they should plow, and when they should sow, and
gather in the fruits thereof as he pleased.

We must acknowledge (that is the moral of it to our selves) that all lands
are the Lords, and the fruit that we enjoy from the land it is at his
disposing. If any man should ask, what should we eat that seventh year,
seeing they might not plow, nor sow, nor reap, neither have vintage, nor
harvest? The Lord answers them, Levit. 25. 20. 21. I will command my blessing
upon thee in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.
God you see will not have any to be losers by his service. Let us trust God
then, though perhaps you have now one year in which you have no trading; People
cry out, Oh this twelvemonth we have had no trading in the City, we can get no
rent out of the Country neither. Do not murmr, trust God; It may be God has
been beforehand with many of you, you have had full trading formerly that may
preserve you comfortably now: If not before, trust God for the next; the Jews
were feign to trust God every seventh year, they had nothing coming in for one
year in seven. If once in all your life time God take away your trading upon
extraordinary occasion, do not murmr, do not give less to the poor now; I
speak to those whom God has blessed in former years, so as that they are not
only able to subsist, but to give too; See for this Deuteronomy, 5. 9. Beware thou
say not in thine heart the seventh year is at hand, and thine eye be evil
against thy poor brother, and thou give him ^ought, and he cry unto the Lord
against thee, and it be sin unto thee. If now because you have not such a
full Income as you were wont to have in your trading, if a company of poor
distressed plundered people come among you and desire your help, if you deny
to relieve them, if they cry unto God against you, it will be sin unto you.

Now this rest of the land was to put them in mind that there was a time
coming when God will free them from labor; Now they were feign to eat their
bread in the sweat of their brows, but God would supply them once in seven
years without the sweat of their brows in ^illing the land, showing that
there was a time where in God would bring his people to such a rest that they
should have full supply of all things without labor.

But further, besides this there was a second thing, in this seventh year all
debts that their brethren owed to them were to be released. Deuteronomy. 7. 15. it is
called there, the Lords release, the Lord is merciful to those that are in
debt. God knows what a grievous burden it is for his people to be in debt,
it is indeed an inconceivable burden; rich men who are full-handed do not
understand what a burden it is for men to hang upon every bush, to be in debt
to every man they deal with, they cannot sleep quietly, they can have but a
little joy and comfort in their lives, the burden is so grievous.

Now God in mercy to his people that they might not all their days go under
such a burden, and so have little joy of their lives, therefore he granted
this favor to them, that once in seven years their debts were to be released:
But it was the debt of an Hebrew, Deuteronomy. 15. 30. Forraigners debts they were not
bound to release: By that we are to learn this instruction, that there should
be more pity and commiseration shown to those that are our brethren in the
flesh, or our brethren in regard of Religion and godliness, in regard of their
debts then others.

It is true, there is a complaint of many that are godly, that they have little
care and conscience in paying their debts: the justness of that complaint I
know not, but there may be a slothfulness in many, if not unfaithfulness, and
if there be carelessness and unfaithfulness in some, it is enough to cast an
aspersion upon all that are godly: but though those that are godly should be
more careful of paying their debts then others, Mercy to the poor in regard
of their debts.
but if they cannot, you are bound to be more merciful unto them then to
others, because they are godly, and not to seek to take advantage the rather
upon them, because they are godly, this is a vile and a wicked heart, to take
advantage so much the rather, if thou see them godly and laborious in their
calling, and it be merely a providence of God, and not any negligence of
theirs, thou art bound to show much commiseration unto them. In that forenamed
place, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware there be not an evil heart in thee, to be less
merciful to thy poor brother because of the seventh years rest of the ground,
or because the debt was to be released that seventh year, but (verse 10.) thou
shall surely give it him, and thy heart shall not be grieved, because for this
thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that
thou put test thy hand unto.

Notwithstanding there must be a cessation of plowing, and sowing, and vintage
in the seventh year, yea and notwithstanding thou were bound to release thy
debt in the seventh year, yet you must do this, and not do it grudgingly, you
must not murmr and say, what does God require of us that we must neither plow
uor sow, and that we must release our debts and give too, nay and give, and not
have our hearts grieved too, that we must not complain of this? Oh my
brethren, God loves exceedingly cheerful givers, and hearts enlarged with
bowels of compassion, he does no: love hearts grumbling and objecting against
giving. Many men have no quickness of understanding in any thing else but
against works of mercy, how quick are they in their objections, and can find
such subtle ways to save their purses that a man would wonder at it, against
this there is a solemn charge, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. Thou shall open thy hand wide
unto thy brother, to the poor and needy in the land.

The third thing to be done once in seven years was the release of servants
too, they must go free, and they must not be sent away empty neither, as ver.
18. of that Deuteronomy. 15. It shall not seem hard to thee when thou sendest him
away free from thee, you must give them liberty, as ver. 14.

It is true, we are not bound to the letter of this, every seven years to do
thus, but there is a moral equity in it, when servants have done you faithful
service, you must not think that it is enough that you give them meat and
drink, and cloth, but you must be careful of your servants how they should
live after they are gone from you. Iubilee opened.
This was the first sabbath of years.

But the second was most famous, and that was the rest that was every seven
times seven years, the fiftieth year, which was called the year of jubilee,
from that trumpet that they were wont to proclaim that year by, which as the
Jews tell us was a Rams-horne. In this year there were diverse of the same
things done that was in the seventh year, as the release of debts, the release
of servants. But there are some things observable that were done at this time
beyond what was done every seventh year.

As for servants, the release of them was not only of such servants as had
then served seven years, yea if they had served any time, they were then to be
released, but besides there was order taken by God for release of some servants
that would not be released in the seventh year, for when the seventh year
came, though all servants might then be released, yet there were some that
would not be released, It is an observation of Jerome. when (...) is written
without vau, then it signifies the fiftieth year, but when it is with van, then
it signifies eternity, but this Pagni^^ rejects, for it will not hold.
and there was an order taken by God for that, Exodus 21. 6. if there were a
servant that loved his master and would not go free, then his Master should
bring him to the post of the door, and with a nail bore his ear, and then the
Text says, he should serve him for ever: Now that [ for ever] is by
Interpreters interpreted but for a time of Jubilee, and then he should have
rest. Here it is to be understood of the 50. year, the year of Jubilee.

There are some kind of spirits that are so slavish that when they may have
liberty they will not, they deserve to have their ears bored, to be slaves to
the fiftieth year, if not for ever. Many amongst us this day have such spirits.
God offers us a release from bondage, how many of us love servitude still! It
is just with God that we should have our ears bored, and that we should be
slaves even for ever, but we hope there will be a Iubile come at length for our
deliverance, God would have a Iubile even to deliver those that were of the
most servile spirits, and might justly be left to serve for ever. It is true,
when God began with us in the beginning of our Parliament, like the seventh
year God offered to us a release, and we refused it then, and since we deserve
that our ears should be bored; but God is infinitely merciful, though we be of
servile spirits, and know not how to pity our selves, we hope the Lord will
pity us, and grant us out of free and rich grace a Iubile, even to deliver
those who have a mind to be bondslaves; I am sure God does so spiritually. If
God should not deliver those that are minded to be slaves, he should deliver
none.

It was a great mercy so to provide for servants, that they might be delivered.
The greater, because servants then were not as they are now, there was a great
deal of hardship that servants endured then more then now, they were bought and
sold, not only other nations, but the Hebrews were bought for servants also, so
you shall find it, Exodus 21. 2. Besides, servants were in such bondage then, as
if the Masters did beat them with a rod until they killed them, The hard
condition of servants in former times.
yet they must only be punished, they must not have blood go for their blood,
yea though he died under his hand, yet he was but to be punished, and if the
servant lived but 2. or 3. days after, the Master was not to be punished at
all, so you have it, Exodus 21. 20, 21. If a man smite his servant with a rod,
and he dye under his hand, he shall be surely punished, notwithstanding if he
continue a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.

Oh that servants would consider of this, and bless God for the liberty they
have now more then servants had in former times! It was so likewise with the
Romans, the word [ servant] comes a Servando, because the Romans used to have
such for servants as were preserved in time of war, that should otherwise have
bin put to death, whether they were those or others, yet the condition of all
was very servile both amongst Jews and Romans, which may justly rebuke the
pride of servants now, if they be but crossed in their minds in the least thing,
they make such a complaint as if they were exceedingly wronged. Let servants
rather bless God for their condition, then murmur at a little hardship they
endure, for the hardship of servants in former times was another manner of
hardship then any you can endure who have the hardest masters. Hence it is that
in the day of Iubile the servants did so rejoice; Jewish antiquities tell us
that nine days before their release, the servants feasted and made merry, and
wore garlands, because of their freedom approaching.

The second thing extraordinary in the day of Jubilee, was, that not only
debts, God win Jewish antiq lib. 3. c. 10.
but lands were released. Lev. 25. 22. The land shall not be sold for ever. And
there were diverse reasons for this, why the land must not be sold for ever, but
must return to the first possessors in the year of Jubilee.

Reasons why land must return in the year of Iubile.
Lev. 25. 23. For the land is mine, says God, for ye were strangers and
sojourners with me: God would hereby teach them that they must not account
themselves absolute lords of the land, the land is mine; and you that are the
greatest landlords of all are but as strangers and sojourners with God, the
land is still Gods. And verse. 28. If a man be not able to redeem his land,
nor his kinsman for him, it shall remain unto the year of Iubile, and in the
Iubile it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession. If he could
redeem his land himself or a kinsman for him, he was to redeem it before; but
if a man should be so poor as he could not give any thing to redeem it, yet in
the year of Iubile it should return unto him.





But further, this year of Iubile aimed at a higher thing, it was a type of
Christ, to set out the blessed redemption that we have by Christ. The trumpet
of the Gospel which the Ministers blow is a trumpet of Iubile. That place Isa.
61. 1, 2. seems to have reference to a Iubile, there the Text says, that
Christ was appointed to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord;
now that acceptable year was the year of Iubile, there was the opening of the
prison, and the releasing of them that were bound. Psalm. 89. 15. says the
text, Blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound, that hear the
Jubilee. Oh blessed are our ears who live to such a time as we do, to hear the
trumpet of Iubile blowing in one congregation or other almost every day! now we
have a release of our debts and bondage, this is the joyful sound. We are all
by nature in debt (sins you know are called debts in the Lords prayer) every
soul is bound over to Gods eternal justice to answer to the law, for not
obeying the law; now comes this Iubile and releaseth all debts. And we are all
bondslaves, in bondage to sin, to the law, and to the devil, now comes the
Gospel, this Iubile, and releaseth our bondage, sets us at liberty. 3. We have
forfeited our right to the crea ure, yea to heaven it self; now the Gospel
comes and restores all, we have right now to the comforts of this world, and to
heaven. Canaan was a type of heaven, and the loss of their inheritance, there
was a type of the loss of heaven, and the bringing them again to the possession
of it, a type of the restoring of right to heaven; Oh happy are they then who
hear this joyful sound, not only with the ears of the body, but who have it
sounding in their hearts, and that by the work of the spirit of God in them.

In this year of Iubile there is one thing further very remarkable, and that is
the time when this trumpet that was to proclaim this year was to blow, Lev. 25.
9. the trumpet was to blow upon the tenth day of the seventh month. What
remarkable thing is there in this, that the trumpet must be blown the tenth day
of the seventh month? yes, there is this remarkable in it, the tenth day of the
seventh month was their day of expiation (the day of their atonement, their
public fast) This day appointed every year for all Israel to afflict their
souls before God, The trumpet of Iubile to blow on their fasting days and way.
to humble themselves for their sins, and to seek for mercy from God (as we
shall show you more largely when we come to open the solemnity of that day) I
only mention it now to show that the trumpet of Iubile was to be sounded upon
that day. It is a strange thing that upon that day wherein they were to afflict
their souls before God, and to mourn for their sins, the trumpet of Iubile was
to sound, that was to proclaim joy and mirth, things of a contrary nature to
humbling and mourning. Yea but this affords us diverse excellent instructions. As

First, God would have his people so to mourn as to know their joy is coming.
Chichester? God shows that the mourning of his people does make way for joy.
Yea further, then indeed is the sound of the trumpet of Iubile sweetest,
trumpet of Iubile is blown in congregations, if it meets not with hearts
afflicted sensible of sin, they are not delighted with the sweet sound of
this trumpet, it is not melody in their ears, it rejoy ceth not their hearts:
But let a poor soul be brought down and made sensible of the evil of sin,
and Gods wrath, then let but one promise of the Gospel be sounded forth, how
sweet, how joyful is it!

Again, pardon of sin is the only foundation of all Jubiles. For this tenth day
of the seventh month, wherein the trumpet of Jubilee was to be sounded, was a
day of Atonement. What is that? A day of covering (for so the word is) of
pardon of sin to the people of God. Many men keep a continual Jubilee, live
merrily and bravely, do nothing but eat, and drink, and play, and dance, and
laugh, and cannot endure these fadde melancholy people. What is the foundation
of this thy Jubilee? Art thou sure there is an Atonement made between God and
thy soul? Art thou sure thy sin is pardoned? Is this the foundation of thy
rejoicing? Know it will not last, it is not Gods, but the Devils Jubilee, except
there be an atonement made between God and thee as the foundation of it.

Yet further, in that the sound of the Jubilee was at that time when the day of
Atonement was. Note this,

When God has pardoned us, then our hearts are in a fit frame to pardon
others. Now comes the Jubilee, and now you must release your lands, your debts,
and forgive those that owe you any thing. This is the day wherein God
testifies his mercy in pardoning your sins, and they might well say, Now
Lord command us what thou will in showing mercy to our brethren, we are ready
to pardon, to release them, to extend the bowels of our compassion toward
them, for thou have pardoned our sins. The reason of the rigidnesse, of the
cruelty, the hardness of the hearts of men, and straitness of their spirits to
their brethren, is this, because God has not witnessed to their souls the
pardon of their own sins, an atonement between God and them.

Their solemn feasts.

Among their feasts, they had three that were especially very solemn feasts
more then others: And they were The Feast of The Passover. Pentecost.
Tabernacles.



These three were very solemn, especially in this one regard, wherein they are
all three united in one thing, that is, upon these three Feasts all the Males
were to ascend up to Jerusalem to worship, to the place which God did choose,
and so you have it, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Three times in a year shall all thy males
appear before the Lord thy God, What to be learned from that law, requiring the
Jews to go thrice a year to the place that God chose.
in the place which he shall choose in the feast of unleavened bread, (that was
the Passover) and in the feast weeks, (that was Pentecost) and in the feast of
Tabernacles.

But how could the ten Tribes then keep these Feasts? for they went not to the
Temple.

You may as well say, how had they an Ephod? of which Chap. 3. Jeroboam was
wise enough to keep the feasts, though not in that way God appointed, he could
tell them the going to the Temple was but circumstance of place.

From this connection of these three together in this solemnity, upon which
these three were especially called their solemn feasts, there are diverse things
to be noted.

First, we may see a reason why there were sometimes so many believers
Jerusalem. An argument is brought by some from that place, Acts 21. 20. to
prove that there may be in one Church more then can possibly assemble together
in one Congregation, for the Text says there, Thou see how many thousands of
Jews there are which believe, how many millions it is in the Original; now say
they, there could not be so many millions to join in one Congregation: The
answer to this is clear, that the time of which this place speaks, was when
the people of the Jews were all assembled together at Jerusalem to keep the
feast of Pentecost, for Chap. 20. verse. 16. the Text says, that the Apostle
hastened, if it were possible for him to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost;
now reading the story on, it plainly appears, that in that journey in which he
did so hasten, he did get to Jerusalem at the day of Pentecost, and being there
at that time, no marvail that they said, Do thou not see how many thousands
of Jews there are that believe? For all the males of the people of the Jews
were got together at Jerusalem, according to the institution, so that they were
there by reason of that Law that as yet they submitted to, they were not in a
Church state at Jerusalem, therefore there is no strength in that objection
against congregationall Churches.

Secondly, where there is a national Church, there must be an uniting of

Thirdly, there are some Ordinances that cannot be enjoyed but in the

For the first, which was the Feast of the Passover, was in the latter end of
our March, and the beginning of April; the Feast of Pentecost was fifty days
after, the Feast of Tabernacles was about the middle of our September. It was
indeed a very laborious thing for them to go up to Jerusalem to worship, but
God did so commiserate and pity them, that they were not to go in the winter
time. That is the reason of that phrase in Acts. 27. 9. Sailing was dangerous,
because the Feast was already past, that is, the Feast of Tabernacles was past,
which was about the fifteenth of September, and so it began to be winter. God
would be so indulgent to his people that they should have the Summer time to go
up to Jerusalem in. If it would be an affliction to go up to Jerusalem in the
winter, and therefore God would favor his people in that; Oh what an
affliction is it then to fly from Jerusalem before our enemies in the winter
time? We had need pray the more hard now for those that are in danger of the
enemy, that God would be merciful to them in this.

Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Ye shall not appear before the Lord empty; Noting thus much,
That when ever we come to acknowledge Gods mercy for any thing, we must come
with full hands, and liberal hearts, with hearts ready to distribute, or
otherwise we do but take Gods Name in vain.

An^onites and Moabites; the West, the Phylistims; the South, the Egyptians.
Idumeans; the North, the Assyrians, to whom the Prophet seems to have
reference, Zach. 1, 18. Now they might say, shall our males go up to Jerusalem
three times a year, why then our enemies that lie close in our borders, (for
they lay as near them as York, or any other shire is to us) may come upon us
and destroy us; therefore God laid in a caveat and provision for the
encouragement of them, Exodus 34. 24. he tells them there, None shall desire thy
land when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in thee
year; God took care that none should desire their land.

Let us go on in Gods service, and he will take care to deliver us from our
enemies. Many times out of slavish fear of the danger of enemies, and what
disturbance they are able to make amongst us, we are ready to betray the cause
of God, and neglect his worship. Let us learn from hence to go on in Gods
ways, and not fear any hurt our enemies can do us, God says that he will
take care when they are all at Jerusalem in the exercises of his worship that
none should desire their land.

Now for the opening these several Feasts, in it you may be helped fruitfully
to read much Scripture in the Old Testament, for much of it is spent in things
concerning some of these.

The first was the Passover. The Feast of Passeoever.
You have the history of it Numb. 28. 16. 17. and in diverse other Scriptures:
That Feast was in the beginning of the year. It is true, our Scripture was the
beginning of their Annus Civilis their year for Civil affairs, but the Month
Abib, which was the middle of March, and part of April, was Annus
Ecclesiasticus, the Ecclesiastical year, and it was so appointed, upon their
deliverance out of Egypt when God commanded them then to celebrate their
Passe-over, he told them that that Month should be unto them the beginning of
months, the first month of the year.

Noting thus much, That deliverance from great evils are mercies that we are
highly to prize; the Jews were to begin their year in memorial of the mercy
they had upon that Month.

For the name [ Passeover] from God sending forth destroying Angels that yet
passed over the houses of the Israelites that night; he went thorough the land
and destroyed all the first borne of the Egyptians, but saved the Israelites,
this Feast was also called the Feast of unleavened bread, Luc. 22. 1. because
they were to go out of Egypt in have, and could not have time to leaven their
bread, but took only a little flower and water together, and so carried it
upon their backs; Josephus tells us that they took only a little flower with
water together that might serve them with a great deal of sparing but for
thirty days, there was all they had for so many thousand thousands only for
so many days, God put them to it, to depend upon him.

We are ready to murmr if we see not enough to serve us many years, if our
armies have not enough for so long time: they had but a little meal and water
that might serve them for thirty days, and they knew not where to have more
when that was spent; no marvel that it is said of Moses, Heb. 11. 27. by
faith we went out of Egypt. This bread is called the bread of affliction, Deuteronomy.
16. 3. and it was unleavened bread, not only to typifie that we must not have
our hearts leavened with malice, but to put them in mind of that sore
affliction they were in, not only when they were in Egypt, but when they went
out of Egypt, that they had then but a little meal and water to serve them for
thirty days.

Now this Passover was partly Memorative, and partly Figurative.

Memorative, First to remember the deliverance of their first borne.

Secondly, to remember their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt.

When others are smitten (that is the moral signification) and we pass over,
Obs. 1.
this is a great mercy.

Again, Deliverance from bondage, and in that outward man and bondage in
respect of Religion and conscience is a mercy for everto be celebrated. God is
pleased now to offer us this mercy of deliverance from both these bondages,
certainly we are a people devoted to misery if we shall not take Gods offer of
mercy.

We have been in bondage in our estates and liberties, God offers us
freedom, and freedom also from Antichristian bondage which is worse then
Egyptian bondage. The Text says when they were delivered from the bondage of
Egypt Moses sang, Apoc. 15. 1
and in the Revelation when they were delivered from Antichristian bondage they
sang the song of Moses.

We were long since delivered from a great part of this bondage, now the Lord
ostereth to deliver us altogether. Obs. 1.
But to let that go.

They were to eat this Passover with their staves in their hands, When God
offers deliverance we should not be sluggish.
this was to note their hasty going out of Egypt. We should not when God
offers us mercy of deliverance, go forth slowly. This is our misery at this
day, the Lord offers deliverance and we lie slugging on our beds, and are
like that foolish child the Prophet speaks of that sticks in the birth: We
have stuck these two years in the birth, whereas we might have been delivered
long before this. It concerns us all to consider what the cause is, and to
lament it before the Lord that we may make our peace with him.

But further. Obser.
In thanksgiving for a mercy we are ever to remember what we were before that
mercy. They must eat unleavened bread at this Feast, the bread of affliction,
they must remember the afflictions they were in before they had this mercy,
whereof this Feast was a Memorial; when we bless God for a deliverance, we
must really present before our souls the sad condition we were in before we
were delivered.

Further, The special thing that is aimed at in the Passover, was that it
should be a type of Christ, who was that paschall lamb that was to take away
the sins of the world, he that was roasted in the fire of Gods wrath for our
sins, as that Lamb that was to be eaten in the Passe-over was roasted in the
fire: And if ever the Angel of Gods vengeance do pass over us, it is thorough
the blood of that Lamb sprinkled upon our hearts, which was signified by the
sprinkling the blood of the Lamb upon the posts of their houses. In the Lords
Supper we celebrate in effect the same Feast of the Passe-over they did: and by
this we may learn this excellent note.

There is little comfort in the remembrance of outward deliverances, Obser.
except we can see them all in Christ.

They were in this Feast to remember their deliverance out of Egypt,
Deliverances looked upon in reference to Christ are sweet.
but withal they were in it to have a figure and type of Christ, that sweetened
their remembrance that made the Feast a joyful Feast, when they could see
their deliverance out of Egypt as a fruit of Christ's sufferings, when this
Lamb that was to put them in mind of it, did put them in mind likewise of
Christ the paschal Lamb.

In all deliverances from any kind of affliction, if you would have the
remembrance of them sweet unto you, you must look upon them all in the blood
of Christ, and so remember them, and then your hearts will be enlarged to
bless God. The Jewish additions to their Passover.


This was the Ordinance of God in the Passe-over, but besides Gods Ordinance,
the Jews added diverse other things.

The first thing observable that they added, was earnest prayer to God for the
building of the Temple; which many of them observe to this day. Those who writ
of the customs of the Jews tell us, that because the Temple is destroyed where
they were to go up thrice in the year to solemnize these Feasts, therefore
they pray so earnestly and mightily for the Temple in this manner: They cry
altogether to God, Lord, build thy temple shortly, very quickly, very quickly,
most quickly in our days: Templum tuum brevi, valde cito, valde cito, in
diebus nostris, citissime, nunc aedifica templum tuum brevi. Misericors Daus,
Magne Deus, benign Deus, pulcher Deus, dulcis Deus, virtuose Deus, Iudaica
Deus, nunc aedifica templum tuum brevi, valde cito, in diebus nostris, valde
cito, valde cito, nunc aedifica, nunc edifica, nunc aedifica, nunc aedifica,
nunc aedifica templum tuum cito, robuste Deus, fortis, vineus, potens Deus,
etc. Buxtorf. de Synag. Iud. c. 13.
and then they go over it again, Merciful God, great God, kind God, high God,
sweet God, with diverse other epithets, Now build thy Temple quickly, very
quickly, etc. Now, now, now, five times together, ^o Euxtorfius tells us. They
teach us how much the Temple does concern us. Here is only their mistake, they
rested in the material Temple, they did not consider that This Temple was a
type of Christ, therefore as earnestly as they prayed for the building of their
material Temple, so we are to pray for the building up of the mystical body
of Christ, now Lord, build quickly, do not defer it, even in our days do it.

A second thing they added was the manner of casting out of unleavened bread,
in this they observed three things, their inquisition, their extermination,
their execration, first with a candle they would narrowly search every corner
of the house, to see if they had the least crumme of leaven, if any were found
they cast it out with solemnity, and then they used to wish a curse upon
themselves if there were any left in their houses that was not cast out.

This moral Observation we may be taught from it, it should be our care when
we are to receive the Sacrament, to make narrow inquisition, to get the candle
of the word, and to search every corner of our hearts, every faculty of the
soul, to see if there be no leaven in it. 2. Whatsover we see to cast it out
of doors. And 3. to be so much set against sin, as to be willing to take a
curse upon our selves, if we should willingly let any known sin be in our
hearts, and to acknowledge that God might justly curse us in his Ordinance, if
we be false in this.

Thirdly, they used to show forth all their brave rich things, if they had any

The fourth thing they did was, after the Passe-over was at an end, they would
fast three days, to humble themselves for their faylings in keeping that
Feast. This was not Gods Institution, but it was their custom, and we may
learn this from it, (though not to bind our selves to that they did) too
look back to our receiving the Sacrament, and to bewail all our miscarriages;
I believe if things were examined to the quick in our receiving the Sacrament,
you would find matter enough to fast and pray for the humbling your souls
from your miscarriages.



The next is the Feast of Pentecost. The Feast of Pantecost.
This Feast is called also the Feast of Weeks, because there were seven weeks
to be reckoned, and then at the end of them it was solemnly to be kept, you
shall find it, Levit. 23. 15. There you have the Feast of the Passe-over, and
in that the first day of seven, and the last day of seven was solemnly kept;
now they were to count from the morrow after the first Sabbath, seven Sabbaths,
that is, seven weeks complete; the first Sabbath of the Passe-over was the
fifteenth day of the month Abib, and then the next day from that they were to
count seven weeks, and at the end of seven weeks was the Feast of Pentecost to
be kept. Now in this first day wherein they began to count their weeks (for the
preparation to this Feast of Pentecost) you shall find that the first fruits
were to be offered up to God, it was a kind of distinct Feast, called the East
of the First Fruits, in which they were to bring a sheafe of the first fruits
of their harvest unto the Priest to be offered to God; And the reason was,
because new their harvest began: As Soon as ever the Passe-over was killed, and
they had kept the first Sabbath of the Passe-over (for they were to keep it
seven days) they began their harvest, they must not put a Sickle into the
corn, nor reap any thing of their ground until they had kept the Passe-over;
it affords auto us this instruction. We cannot enjoy any sweetness nor any
blessing from any fruits of the earth, No blessing ^o be enjoyed from the earth
but through Christ.
but through the blood of Jesus Christ: After they had solemnized the memorial
of the blood of Christ, then they might put a Sickle into the corn and reap
it, and not before, and as soon as they had solemnized the remembrance of
Christ in the Passe-over, they might go with comfort and take the fruits of
the earth and rejoice in them, but not before. Now this was in the month of
Abib, that is part of our March, and part of April, then began their harvest,
and thence it has its name, for Abib signifies an ear of corn. Now their
harvest began so soon in the land of Canaan, not only because it was a hot
Country, for it is observed that Africa was a hotter Country then theirs, and
yet their harvest began not so soon; Hereditatom elegantiae.
but because of the blessing of God upon that land, therefore Ier. 3. 19. it is
called a goodly heritage, because of the timely bringing forth the fruit; the
words translated goodly heritage, signifies an heritage of comeliness; the same
word that is here for goodly, signifies a Roe-Buck, to which this land was
compared, and so it may be said to be a land of a Roe-Buck, because of the
speedy and swift ripening of the corn. Obs. 1.
The observation is, It is the blessing of the Church to have their fruit ripe
betimes, Timely fruit is pleasing to God.
not to stay too long before they be ripe, for Canaan was a type of the Church.
You young ones consider of this; the Lord loves to have the fruits of Canaan
ripe betimes; if you grew in the wilderness, though you did not bring forth
fruit in your young time, God did not so much regard it; but if you live in his
Church, in Canaan, the Lord expects you should beg in betimes, in the very
spring of your years you should bring forth fruit un to God. Men do much
rejoice in timely fruits, they are lovely: Yea and God rejoices in them too,
Micah. 7. 1. My soul desires the first ripe fruits, this is true of God
himself. Your parents and Godly friends may say, our soul desires that grace
may spring up betimes in these young ones, so it may be said of God, the very
soul of God desires to see the first fruits; fruit in young ones is that which
is pleasing to Gods soul.

We may further note, Obser
when we have had communion with God in holy things, then we may have a holy
and more comfortable use of the creatures. As before we noted when we have
solemnized the blood of Christ, then we may enjoy sweetness from the comforts
of the earth; so now, when we have enjoyed communion with God in his
Ordinances, then it is a fit time to have a holy use of the creatures, yea then
you must be careful of having a holy use of the creatures; as soon as ever
they came from the Passe-over the first day they were to celebrate the first
fruits unto God,

From whence,

Thirdly, Obs.
After the blood of Christ is sprinkled upon the conscience, then men will be
ready to dedicate things unto God. Then as Zacheus said, Half my goods I give
to the poor; here are my goods, here is my estate, does the Church, does my
brethren stand in need of help? Lo we are ready to offer them up unto God.

Fourthly, Obs.
The first of blessings are to be offered up unto God. God gives them a charge,
that the first of the first of all the fruits of their land should be offered
unto him, Exodus 13. 19.
all that comes afterward should be the more blessed. Learn this you young
ones, dedicate the first of your years unto God, the very first of your first,
the dawning of your years.

Now as soon as they had dedicated their first fruits, Obser.
when harvest was done, then comes the Feast of Pentecost: then they rejoiced
in the consummation of harvest. If you dedicate your young days unto God, when
the consummation of your years comes, how may you keep a Feast of Pentecost!
The Jews first deditated the first fruits, fifty days before, and then at the
fifty days end they kept their joyful Feast of Pentecost, so might you if you
dedicated your young years unto God, On the other side, what a sad thing will
it be for old men that but now begin to think of God and Christ; it is well
you do so; but you cannot do it comfortably as you might have done, if you had
begun in your younger years. If the Jews when their harvest was done had
brought two loaves unto God, might God say, why did you not bring the first
fruits unto me? God might so upbraid you, but however come into God and he will
not upbraid you, he upbraideth no man, but yet the comfort will not be so much
because your consciences will upbraid you.

Fifthly, Obser.
note this, Happy is the man that when he comes to reap the fruit of his
actions, shall have a feast of joy. Thus is was with the Jews, the very
beginning of their harvest was with a Feast, and the conclusion with a Feast
toe. All the actions of our lives are a sowing of seed, if you sow sparingly
you shall reap sparingly, and happy those men when they come to reap, that both
the beginning and conclusion of their reaping shall be a joyful feasting. Many
sow merrily, but they reap horror and anguish; but when the Saints come to
reap, they shall have a Feast of joy. At thy right hand are joys and pleasures
for evermore.

6. Obser.
At the fiftieth day then they were to solemnize the mercy of God in giving to
them the fruits of the earth for their harvest.

Hence this Note,

Much praise is due to God for the Fruits of the earth, for outward comforts,
How much praise then is due for JESUS CHRIST, and all spiritual mercies in
him? Though we ought to bless God for the things of the earth, yet we should
be so swallowed up in blessing God for his word and Ordinances, and spiritual
mercies, as in comparison our hearts should be above the Fruits of the earth.
Therefore it is observeable, that in Ezekiel where there is a Prophecy of the
state of the Church, set out by the Jewish way of Feasts, though there be
mention of the Passover, and new moons, and Sabbaths, and of the Feast of
Tabernacles, yet there is no mention of the Feast of Pentecost, no mention of
keeping a Feast for blessing God for these things. Not but that they should do
so, but that their hearts should be so carried up with abundance of spiritual
mercies, that then all for Christ, and for heaven, and for eternity, their
hearts should be wholly set upon spiritual things.

7. Obs.
It was a great engagement to them to use the creatures, when in the first
beginning they had dedicated them unto God, and in the conclusion of harvest
they had solemnized his mercy in giving them the creatures. For God did thereby
teach them that they might be further engaged to use all creatures for his
service. As it is a mighty engagement to any man if God give him a heart to
dedicate the beginning of a mercy unto God, and when he has got the mercy
fulfilled, then in a solemn manner he blesses God for it, to make use of this
mercy for Gods honor. Certainly the reason why many are so loose in their
conversations, and do not employ the creatures of God to his glory, is,
because they do not in a solemn manner bless God for that they enjoy. As in
your trading, suppose you have some comfortable Incomes, perhaps you take these
comforts, and thank God in a slight manner for them, how do you use them
afterward? only for your selves and for the flesh. But when you hear of
Incomes of riches flowing in upon you, if you can then presently take the
first. Fruits and give some part to Gods service as a testimony of
thankfulness, and in your families and closets in a solemn manner give God
the glory for the good success you have had in your estate, this will be a
mighty engagement to you to use your estates for his service.

8. Mark at the first, in their preparation, they were to bring but a sheafe,
but afterward, Levit. 23. 17. they were to bring two loaves; in the first they
were to offer one he-lambe without blemish, but afterward seven lambs, and a
young bullock, and two Rams, etc. both burnt-offerings, and sinne-offerings,
and peace offerings when they had received the full harvest.

Thence learn, Obs.
though you be forward to give God glory when you are young, the first fruit of
your years, yet when you come to be old, you should flourish in the Courts of
Gods house. First they offered but a little unto God, afterward abundance. Do
you so? I appeal to all old men that are here this day, if God did give you
any heart to give up your young years to him, bless God for it; but now when
you are old, are you as forward as ever you were? You ought to be not only so,
but much more abundant in the work of the Lord. Nay cannot others witness
against you, that there was such a time wherein you were more forward, and that
now you begin rather to temporize? The LORD forbid this should be spoke of any
old men.

God expects more afterward then at the first fruits; and though nature may
decay, yet their is a promise that in their old age they shall flourish in the
Courts of Gods house, and shall manifest the graces of his Spirit much more.
We are ready at the first Fruits to offer unto God some what, when his mercy
comes first; but when mercy comes afterward more fully, we should be more in
our offerings.

You will say, The difference of burnt off^^ing, sinoffering, and peaceoffering.
what is the meaning of this, that there is a burnt offering, a sin-offering,
and a peace offering in the Feast of Pentecost? what is the difference of these
three offerings?

The difference is this; The burnt offering was in testimony of their high
respect to God, they wholly had respect to God in the burnt offering; that is,
they tendered up something to God as a testimony of the high and honoraable
esteem they had of his Majesty, it was wholly to be given up to him.

Now in the other they had respect to themselves, the sin-offering was not to
offer a sacrifice merely to testify respect to God, but to be a typical
signification of Christ's sacrifice for sins; they were to look through their
sacrifice to Christ, and their sin-offering was to be an atonement for their
sin.

The Peace Offering was in thanksgiving for a mercy, or when they would
petition to God for a further mercy. All this must be done in the day of
Pentecost. But besides this end of Pentecost, to solemnize the mercies of God
in their harvest, there is an other that is constantly affirmed by the Jews,
and I find many Divines making no question of it; but I find it not so
clearly laid down in the word.

They say God in this feast did solemnize the giving of the law, Lect. 9.
and this is their ground, because fifty dais after their coming out of Egypt
was the time of Gods giving the Law, and so they say Pentecost was appointed to
bless God for giving the law. The Jews say that God dealt with them, as a King
should deal with a poor man in prison, first he releaseth him of his bondage,
and withal tells him, that after such a time he will marry him to his
daughter; now say they, will not this man count every day, and long until this
time come? So when God did deliver us out of Egypt, he told us that after such
a time he would give us his law, and marry us to his daughter, which is the
law, and this is the reason why we count so disigently the very weeks, nay the
days, as longing for that time when we are to be married to the law, when the
Lord shall grant to us such a mercy.

From whence we may note, Obser.
that we are not only to keep Gods law, but to rejoice in Gods law; not only to
look at what is commanded as a duty, but as a high privilege, and so bless God
for the law. It is a higher thing to love Gods law, and rejoice in it then to
obey it; Great peace shall they have that love thy law; David professed that he
loved the law of God more then silver and gold, that it was sweeter to him then
the honey and the honey comb. The Jews at this day do much rejoice when the
law of God is read, and in their Synagogues when the law of God is brought out,
they lift up their bodies in a kind of exlatation, rejoicing that God gave this
law unto them.

Further, the time of their Pentecost was the time of the descending of the
holy Ghost upon the Apostles: as God at that time gave the law by Moses, so the
Spirit at that time came by Christ, to show that we are in the Gospel to
receive the Spirit of God, to enable us to fulfill the law. They had the letter
of the law, but in comparison of what we have, they had not the Spirit, but now
the holy Ghost is come in a full measure; as he then came upon the Disciples,
so he comes now in the time of the Gospel in a fuller way then formerly, there
is a continual Pentecost.

But the works of God do not of themselves sanctify any time, except we take
that note with us, we may run into a thousand absurdities; if we argue thus,
because the Jews had such a time we may have such a time, or because there
were such blessings at that time, therefore we may sanctify that day. No,
the works of God do not sanctify any time of themselves, it must be the Word,
some institution or other, either the Word written, or some immediate dictate
of the Spirit that must sanctify any day. Certainly the work of our
redemption it self is not enough to change the Sabbath, if we had not s^ me
footing for a new institution. We usually give this ground for a change of
the day, because of the greatness of the work; but though the works of God be
great, though never so great, it is not for us to sanctify a day, it must be
an institution of God, or else we sin in sanctifying any set and stated time
for any such work, for Christ's resurrection, or sending of the Spirit, except
there come an institution, though the work be as great as any thing God ever
did for the Jews, it will be but will worship in us, and God will not be put
off with this, What is not this as great a work as that the Jews had, and may
not we celebrate the memory of it as they did? but God will say, Who required
these things at your hands? Thus far you may do, that is, bless God for those
works all the days of your lives, but to sanctify any particular day for
them, certainly that cannot be done without sin; we have our warrant for the
Lords day as well as the greatness of the work, because of the practice of the
Apostles who were inspired by the holy Ghost.

The next is the feast of Trumpets, only one particular about it at this time,
because providence makes it so seasonable. In the seventh month, (which was
the first month of their Annus Civilis) there were three feasts.

Festum Tubarum, Expiationis, Tabernaculorum.

The first was the feast of Trumpets; now there was a threefold use of
Trumpets among the Jews. 1. For the calling of the congregation together, as
we use to do with bells. The feast of trumpets.
2. The calling of them to war. 3. For the solemnizing of their feasts. This
feast of trumpets you have, Numb. 17.

There are four ends given by Divines of the feast of Trumpets, Non licet
iniquas observa^iones agere Kalendarum and ^ciis vacare gentilibus, neque lauro
aut viriditate arborum cingere do^mus. Omnis enim haec observatio paganismi
est. Canon. 74.
some I confess are very improbable, but there are two very probable. The one
is, this feast was to celebrate the New-yeer with them; as upon every new
month, that was called the feast of the new Moon, to celebrate the beginning
of the month, so in the beginning of the year they had a feast to celebrate
the beginning of the year, that was this feast, for it was on the first day of
their civil year; so that it is very probable that feast was appointed to
bless God for the new year, as well as they had one to celebrate the new
month. It was Gods insti^ution for that time to have the New-year consecrated
by that feast, yet this can be no ground for us now to consecrate the beginning
of every new year unto God: that was Jewish, and it is ceast, if we will have
any consecration of a new year, it must be by virtue of some institution or
other, let (who can) show the institution: we must not think because it has a
show of wisdom, Cavendae potiusquam Kalendae. S^atuit ^niversalis Ecclesia
ieiunium publicum in isto die fieri. Al^huvinus de divinis d (...). c. 4.
and it seems to be reasonable to us, therefore it may be this is not enough
in matter of worship, you must strictly tie your selves to an institution in
matters of worship, in consecrating of times. As it is Jewish, so it is
Heathenish, the Heathens consecrated their new year to the honor of their god
Ianus, and we read in Concilium Antisiodorense, in France in the year 614. it
was the judgment of that Council that it is not lawful to observe the
festivities of the Gentiles, to keep their worship and observation of their
Calends, (that is, the beginning of their months) to adorn houses with laurel
and bays, for all these practices says the Council) savor of paganism. And
likewise an ancient writer says, that the Kalends of January are rather to be
taken heed of, then to be accounted Kalends, and so to be sanctified; And
further, he says, the Church has appointed a solemn feast to be upon that
very day, because o^ the notorious abuses there were wont to be upon that day.
And Polydore Virgil says, that these solemnities of Laurel and Bays, and
masks, and mummings, and such vanities, they all come from the Heathens
Bachanalia, and Saturnalia, that were wont to be at that time of the year.
However therefore we put them upon Christ, and think we honor him, and call it
the Circumcision day of Christ, yet by those customs we dishonor him, for
they are rather Heathenish then Christian, To do it, I say, because we think
to consecrate ^ine; though there may be some natural reason of rejoicing, yet
no ground for consecration.

Let no man object and say, these solemnities have been a long time in the
Church. It is true, these are ancient, but from whence comes the antiquity? It
comes from hence, because Christians being newly converted out of Paganism,
they would keep as much as possibly they might of the Pagan customs, only
they would give them a turn, turn them to Christian solemnities, but the rise
was from their Pagan customs: therefore all the argument of antiquity, either
for these, or Ceremonies, or Prelaticall government, it comes from this ground,
because their pagan customs were so, and they lived among pagans, and having
been lately pagans, they savored and smelt of Heathenisme still. So now, many
plead that such things were in the first Reformation: no marvail they retained
them, for they were but newly come out of popery, and they savoured and smelt
of popery. Indeed to plead the antiquity of these things, which men must show
when they are put to it, is one of the greatest arguments against them. Thus
was they Feast of All Saints turned from the Feast Pantheon, and so the Feast
of the Virgin Mary, which they call Candlemas, the Heathens had the festivity
of their goddess Febru (who was the Mother of Mars) upon that day, from whence
the name of our month February comes, they did then celebrate that time with
Candles, and such things, as papists do now. This antiquity have you for
celebrating of Candlemas.

The like may be said for the argument of antiquity for the Prelates. O say
some, such a kind of government has been ever since Christian Religion has
been in England. Grant that there has been some kind of Bishops ever since,
but from whence came they? We find in Histories, that when the Pagans were here
in England, they had their Flamins, and their Archflamins, London was one, and
York was another, and when they were converted to the Christian Religion, yet
still keeping some of their Heathenish customs, instead of their Arch-flamins,
they made Archbishops, and of their Flamins, Bishops, and that in their very
places, as London and York, and some say Chester, they kept their Bishoprics
still. This is the very ^^und of the antiquity of them; therefore my brethren,
let not us be put off with such arguments as these, men delude you, they baffle
you by these arguments.

The Tenth Lecture. Lect. 10.

HOSEA 2. 11. And all her solemn Feasts, etc.


WE began the last day to speak something of the Feast of Trumpets, you shall
find the institution of it in Leviticus 23. 24. You shall have a Sabbath, a
memorial of blowing of Trumpets, Now there were diverse ends of Gods institution
of this Feast, I have spoken of one; the second reason of that Feast, the
Hebrews think, was a remembrance of Isaacs deliverance, when he should have
been sacrificed, and the Ram caught by the horns to be sacrificed in his
stead; they drew it from this argument, because that Feast is called A
memorial, (say they) to remember the deliverance of Isaac, and it must be by
the Trumpets of Rams horns, to call this to remembrance, the deliverance of
Isaac, and a Ram sacrificed in his stead; this is the Jews opinion of it, but
it seems to be far from the meaning of the holy Ghost. A third reason of the
Feast of Trumpets, some say, ( Cajetan amongst others) was instituted for a
memorial of Gods giving the lay by sound of the trumpet; that is not likely
neither, because this Feast was not kept at the time of Gods giving the law, if
there were any time for the celebration of giving the law, it must be at the
Feast of Pentecost.

A fourth, it was for a celebration of a memorial of Gods goodness to them in
the time of war, for all the mercies of God unto them in their wars, which was
declared by the blowing of the trumpets. But I rather take another reason, to
be a maine and principal reason of Gods institution of this Feast, to be a
preparation to the Feast of atonement and expiation, and therefore (says
Calvin) it is called a memorial, Levit. 23, for this reason, to put them in
mind to humble themselves before God, to afflict their hearts in the day of
atonement; and secondly, a memorial before God, that God may remember them for
mercy, so the Jews observe from the seventh day of the first month, unto the
tenth day, there was more then ordinary exercises in giving of alms, in
praying, in going to their synagogues, they were very devout for those ten
days in way of preparation for the day of Atonement, of Expiation. From whence
note,

It is of this use to us to prepare for the day of Fasting; Ministers should
blow their trumpets to the people to prepare them for that day: God has
accepted of those poor kind of fasts that we have kept, abundance of mercies
we have received on them; there is scarce any one Fast day that is kept, but we
presently hear good news after it; if we had kept Fast days as we ought, if we
had been prepared as we should, O what might we have obtained of God by this
time! if God accepts such poor things as we do, (as God knows they are poor
and mean) if we had every time a trumpet blown before us to prepare us for the
day of atonement, what atonements might England have made with God before this
time! The day of Atonement Festum expiationis: eight things especially
observable in it.
to read understandingly those things you read about the Feast of Trumpets.
The next Feast was the feast of Expiation, in the tenth day; I thought not to
have spoken of that, because the Feast of Expiation is a Fast rather then a
Feast, but that is meant here as well as any of the other, for this reason,
though it were a Fast, yet the Hebrew word here that is translated solemn
Feasts, signifies only a settled, stated, solemn time.

And Secondly, It was a great mercy to them to have such a day of Fast; though
the day of atonement, be a day of afflicting themselves, yet it is the cause of
rejoicing to a nation, that God grants them such a day of atonement; it is the
special means to make way to the joy of a nation, and therefore this is
included amongst the other: now the history of that, you have in these two
famous Scriptures, Levit. 16. and Levit. 23. In this day of atonement, the
tenth day of the seventh month, there are diverse things very observeable, and
useful for these times.

Levit. 23. 27. 29. 32. God appointed one day in the year for all the Jews to
afflict their souls, to make an atonement between God and them, in a day of
Fast, and they were charged to be sure to afflict their souls then, and that
soul that did not, God threatened to cut it off.

to go into the Holy of Holies, where he was to go but once a year; Levit. 16.
the beginning and the latter end compared together; you shall find it. This
may teach us thus much; Obser.
If ever we are to look upon JESUS CHRIST in the presence of God, to go into
the Holy of Holies, making intercession for us, it is in the day of atonement,
in the day of public Fast of the Kingdom, then are we to exercise our Faith
upon Christ, as entering before God into the Holy of Holies for us, after we
have charged upon our souls our sins, and afflicted our souls, we must likewise
cast up an eye of Faith, beholding Jesus Christ our high Priest at that day
before the Father making intercession Lev. 16. 20. When he has made an end of
reconciling the holy place, the Tabernacle, and the altar, etc. the Priest was
not only to seek to make reconciliation between God and the people, but to
reconcile the holy places, even the Holy of Holies had a kind of pollution in
it, and must be reconciled then, and the Tabernacle, and the Altar, all of them
had a kind of pollution upon them: so infectious is the sin of man, Obs.
and all these were to be (...) a day of atonement.

(...) teaches us, That in a day of Atonement, of F^sting, we are then (...)
special care to sc^^^ mercy from God, to be ^^conciled to us in regard of all
our holy things, our holy duties, and offerings; we are to seek then to get the
best services that ever we performed in all our lives, to be cleansed, that God
may be pacified in regard of the filth and uncleanness that has cleaved even
to them. You are not in the day of a Fast, only to confess your notorious
sins to God, those that in their own nature are sinful, but you are then to
examine all your holy duties, and to humble your selves before God, and to seek
to make peace with God, in regard of the uncleanness that has been in them.
This few think of, they (...) the day of a Fast confess such sins as are vile
in themselves, but to be made sensible of the uncleanness of holy duties, that
is little thought of in the day of their Fasts.

4. In their day of Atonement, the Priest was to lay the sins of the
congregation escape goat was this, The Priest must come and confess the sins of
the congregation, laying his hand upon the head of the goat, and then he must
send this goat into the wilderness.

The meaning is of great use to us; Jesus Christ he is the escape goat, and we
are in the days of our humiliations to come and lay our hands upon Jesus
Christ, and to confess all our sins over him, and look upon all our sins as
laid upon him. Now the escape goat was to be sent into the wilderness: What is
that? That is, sent into a land of forgetfulness, so as the Jews should never
come to see that goat again that their sins were laid upon, it signified to
them, that their sins were now so forgiven them, that they should never hear of
their sins again. Thus are our sins upon Christ, as we shall never come to
see, nor hear more of them, In the day of our Fasts we should thus exercise
our Faith upon Christ.

A fifth thing that was to be done, was to sprinkle the blood of the slain It
is the blood of Christ that is upon, and before Gods mercie-seat, that procures
mercy from thence for us.

The sixth thing. In the 16, of Leviticus, ver. 12. the Priest must take a
censer full of burning coals of fire from off the Altar, and his hanfull of
sweet incense beaten small. This he must do in the day of Atonement; to teach
us, That in the day of our solemn Fasts, we must be sure to get our hearts
full of burning coals from the Altar, full of affection and zeal, full of
mighty workings of spirit to God, although you that are godly, and so are
Priests to God, at other times come with few coals from the Altar, a little
affection, your affections are scarce heated, but in a day of Atonement you
must come with your hearts full of coals, and be sure it be fire from the
Altar, do not satisfy your selves in natural affections then, but be sure
you be full of spiritual affections; and then full of incense.

What was that? it typically represented our prayer, you must be sure spice^
beatou small, what is that? the prayer^ that we are to send up to God, in the
day of Atonement, must come from much contrition of spirit, our hearts must be
beaten small to powder, when the hearts of men are beaten to powder, then they
are able to send forth such incense, as is a sweet favor in the nostrills of
God. Many of you in the day of a fast seem to be full of prayer, but is this
prayer a sweet incense to God or no? how shall I know that? by this, God has
appointed the incense, upon the day of atonement, to be that, that must come
from spices beaten, if thy heart be beaten to powder, and thy prayers be but
the savor, and the odor of thy graces that are as spices, and heated by the
fire of Gods spirit: then here is the incense that pleases God. First, graces,
which are the spices, the contrition, that is the beating small, then the fire
of Gods Spirit to cause the incense to rise up in the nostrills of God as a
sweet savor.

Further, a seventh thing in the day of atonement was, the cloud of the incense
must cover the Mercy seat, ver. 13. and then the blood both of the bullock,
and the goat, must be sprinkled upon the Mercy seat, and that seven times,
and ver. 15. the blood of the goat must be sprinkled not only upon the Mercy
seat, but before the Mercy seat; what is the meaning of this? must our mercy
seat be clouded in the day of atonement? we had need have it appear to us, and
not be clouded; yes, in the day of atonement it must be clouded, but clouded
with incense; the incense that was sent up, was a type of the sweet perfume of
the merit of Jesus Christ; Now in the day of atonement we must look up to the
mercy seat, as clouded with the merit of Christ, clouded, that is, the merit
of Jesus Christ round about it, as a cloud, and covering the Mercy Seat, to
teach us that no man must dare to look upon the Mercy Seat of God as it is in
it self, but he must have the incense of the merit of Christ round about it,
the reason was given why the Lord must have the incense as a cloud to cover the
Mercy Seat, lest he die; if he had entered into the holy place, and there
looked upon the Mercy Seat, and not clouded by the incense, he must have died
for it; those men that think to come into Gods presence, and look upon God out
of Christ, and think to receive mercy from God out of Christ, they die for it,
this is the damnation of men's souls, to look upon God as merciful out of
Christ, mercy is an attribute of God, but if we dare (who are sinful
creatures) to look upon this attribute of mercy, and not have the incense of
Christ merit, it is the way to destroy our souls. O how many thousands are in
hell for this! many who are afflicted for their sins, and cry to God to forgive
their sins, and believe he is merciful, and think to exercise their faith upon
God as merciful, and yet not looking upon the mercy seat as clouded with the
merit of Christ, it proves the destruction of their souls. In a fast, when you
come to look upon God, you must not look upon God as the Creator of heaven and
earth, or as merciful in himself barely, Non solum periculosum sed horribile
est de deo extra Christum (...) Ps. 128.
but look upon Gods mercy in his Son, and so exercise your faith, or else you
can never make an atonement, but rather will procure Gods wrath. It is not only
dangerous, but horrible, once to think of God without Christ, says (...).

Again, the blood of the Bullock and the Goat must be sprinkled seven time
(...) the mercy seat, when we come to make our atonement with God, we must
exercise our faith in the blood of Christ, and sprinkle it seven times, again
and again upon the mercy seat; we looking upon God when we pray to him as a
God of mercy, and we present our selves in our humiliations before the mercy
seat, but know this, that the mercy seat will do us no good, without the blood
of Christ; faith must take this blood of Christ, and sprinkle it, tender it up
to God his Father, for the atonement of our souls and procuring mercy to us;
and not only so, the blood of the Bullock and the Goat must be sprinkled upon
the Mercy seat, but before the Mercy seat; we must not only think there can be
no mercy obtained from God, but by the blood of Christ, but we cannot so much
as have access to Gods Mercy seat without the blood of Christ, we must not
dare to enter but by the blood of Christ, by him we have access to God; we
must all know, that all sinners are banished from the presence of God, and must
not have access to Gods presence as they are in themselves.

Lastly, this day diverse times is called A Sabbath of rest, that is, A Sabbath
of Sabbaths, so it is in the Original, as one of the principal Sabbaths that
they had; I did not handle it amongst the Sabbaths, because it comes in now
more fully amongst these solemn Feasts; there must be more rest in the days of
atonement, then in other of their solemn days: There was that permitted in
other solemn days, that was not permitted in that day; this may teach us, that
in the days of fasting, above any days, we must get our souls now separated
from the world, there must be a rest in our hearts, a rest from sin, a rest
from the world, it must be a Sabbath of Sabbaths unto us.

Now notwithstanding God had given this solemn charge for this day of
atonement, yet Theodoret tells us, that in his time they did so degenerate, that
they spent this day in sports, and made it a day of mirth, God grant that the
ordinariness of our days of atonement do not grow to this abuse, as in some
places it is amongst us; the most solemn things that ever God gave charge of
yet in time degenerates, this is the wickedness of men's natures.

One note more from this Feast of Expiation, it is very probable that the
Grecians did use yearly in expiation of their Cities, in this manner from this
we find amongst the stories of the Grecians, that yearly they were wont to have
a kind of Expiation, in imitation of the ways of the Jews (the Devil is Gods
Ape) for their Cities, there was this custom amongst them, certain condemned
persons were brought forth, with garlands in manner of Sacrifices, and these
they were wont to tumble down from some steep place into the middst of the Sea,
and so offer them up to Neptune the God of the Sea, Suida^.
with these words, Be thou a (...) for us; The like was used by them in the
times of public infection, when they had a public plague in their Cities,
they used such a custom to make an atonement between them and their gods,
there were certain men brought to be sacrificed to their Gods, for an expiation
for there whole City, and they were caled (...) this word was used to signify
that that man that was to expiate for all the sins of their Cities to their
gods, ing all their sins upon him, was as filth and (...)-scouring; and from
these two words it is probable the Apostle in the first to the Corinthians 4.
13. has that expression, by which we may come to understand the meaning of
those two words there, We are (says he) made the filth of the world, and
offscouring of the people; (...)* in these alluding to the manner of the
Grecians, We for our parts (says he) are made as despicable and odious in the
sight of the people, and are as much loaded with the curses of the people, as
those condemned persons that had all the sins and curses of the people put upon
them, and so were offered to their Gods for expiation.

The Feast of Tabernacles. The Feast of Tabernacles.
The history of this Feast is Leviticus 23. 34. and soon; In this Feast the
Jews were to take boughs off the trees, and make booths of them; and those
that write the history in their manners, they tell us, they used to carry
boughs in their hands, because they could not make booths and Tabernacles for
all the people, therefore some of them thought it sufficient to carry boughs in
their hands, and those boughs they carried in their hands they used to call
Hosanna; Do thou fold, or prepare the Hosanna, Necte Hosannam.
so they used to speak, therefore when Christ came to Jerusalem, they cried,
Hosanna to the Son of David; the meaning was not a prayer, Save us O thou Son
of David, as some would have it; but Hosanna to the Son of David, that is, we
hold forth these boughs to the honor of the Messiah, the Son of David, the
Feast of Tabernacles was to point at the Messiah; now for those boughs, ver.
40. there was a command of God, they should be goodly trees, palm trees, or
willowes of the brook, but why so? it noted that thereby they were to
acknowledge Gods goodness to them, that whereas they had lived forty years in
the wilderness, in a dry place, they were now brought to a fruitful land,
that had much water, which was a great matter in those hot countries, and
therefore they were to bring the willows of the brook, and goodly trees, those
that might most testify the goodness of God to them in delivering them from
the wilderness, and in bringing them to a land, filled with sweet and pleasant
brooks: Things observable in this Feast are, First. The end why God would have
this Feast kept, he aims at these three things chiefly.

any certain habitation, any settled condition, but to be as men that dwell in
tents, removing up and down, and so seek after a City that has foundations,
as it is said of Abraham.

At this Feast the Jews were wont to read the Book of Ecclesiastes,
principally because it speaks so much of the works of Gods providence. All the
while Gods people dwelt in boothes and Tabernacies, God himself would dwell in
a Tabernacle; God would never have a house built unto him, God suites himself
to o^r condition, we must suite our selves to him.
till he had brought his own people to be settled in houses of their own; and
therefore when David began to think that he had a house of Cedar, and
therefore surely God must have one too, God tells him, Did ever I speak of a
house for me? as if he had said, As long as my people went up and down in
booths and Tabernacles, I was content to have a Tabernacle, and a booth for my
dwelling, thus God is willing to suite himself with the condition of his
people; Is the condition of his people in a fleeting way, then I will be so
too, says God; If your conditions be afflicted, and unsettled, I will be so
too; In all their afflictions, God was afflicted, in all their unsetlednesse,
God seemed to be so too.

Indeed afterward when Gods people came to be in a settled estate in Jerusalem,
then God would have a house built him; God would hereby teach us, That if
himself be content to be in a condition like us, then we must be content to be
in a condition like him, as thus; when we are afflicted will God be afflicted
with us? when we are unsettled, will God be (as it were) unsettled with us? then
let us not think it much, if afterward God be in an afflicted way, his truth
and his Gospel be in a suffering way; let us be willing to suffer with God;
when God is magnified and praised, then our hearts should be enlarged too, and
rejoice in his praise; we should consider the condition that God is in the
world, and we must suite our selves with that. Again, would God have them once
a year to celebrate the remembrance Obser
and that after they came to Jerusalem? From hence note. It is good to remember
our low estates, to have a real remembrance of our low and mean conditions we
had heretofore; does God now bring us into a more settled condition then
heretofore? Let us not forget in what an afflicted condition we were in, how
unsettled, how ready we were to fleet up and down; If God should grant his
people, that they should think themselves settled in their own kingdoms, yet let
them never forget the time, when they were unsettled in this and other
countries, there has been a great part of the people of God, whose thoughts
have been, what shall become of them, and whether shall they go, and perhaps to
this day many have such thougts, unless there be some special mercies of God
prevent it, yet may be the condition of thousands in the land, before a year
go about; If God should prevent you, ever remember your fleeting condition once
you were in; It was Gods great care of the people of Israel, that they should
never forget their dwelling in Tabernacles.

Thirdly, Note the time of their Feast of Tabernacles, they were to dwell in
booths, upon the fifteenth day of their month, it was but five days after
their day of atonoment, so that being so presently after the day of public
atonement; this lesson may be learned.

After our humiliations for our sins, Obser.
and making up our peace with God, it is good to keep our hearts low with the
meditation of the uncertainty of all things in the world. You have been
humbling your selves, and making your peace with God, yet when your hearts are
comforted with the hope of your alonement made, keep your hearts low, take heed
of pride; the feast of Tabernacles must be kept, presently after the feast of
Atonement; this is one special means to keep your hearts low, to have a real
remembrance of the uncertainties of the comforts of this world. This lifts up
men's hearts to conceive some excellencies in things here; therefore go into
your boothes, and work your hearts down, keep your feast of Tabernacles.

Tabernacles, but they must go forth from their houses and abide in booths.

It is a good way to keep those men humbled, Obser.
that are raised from a low condition to a high, even actually to go into
those houses that are low and mean, go into the houses of poor men, look into
the cupboards, see what provision they have, this will be a means to humble
your hearts, when you consider, This was once my condition.

A second end of this feast was, A second end of the feast of Tabernacles.
to bless God for all the fruits of the earth they had received, when they had
received all in, their Vintage and all. As the feast of Pentecost was to bless
God for their first fruits, and their harvest, but now all the fruits of the
earth, Vintage and all were gathered in. Now they were to join all together,
and to bless God for all the fruits of the Earth. That this is Gods end, is
clear in Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14. Thou shall observe the feast of Tabernacles, after
thou have gathered in thy corn and thy wine, and thou shall rejoice, etc.
because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, therefore thou
shall surely rejoice.

From hence there is this lesson.

It is useful to remember what a poor condition we were once in, and the
uncertainty of all things that we have; even when we have got our riches into
our houses, when all things are in our possession, it is not so much to think
how uncertain they are, when they are growing in the field, but after the
Vintage was gotten in, then they were to keep the feast of Tabernacles, to
remember the uncertain condition of all things in the world, this we are very
loath to do, it is unsuitable to our natures, and therefore this feast of
Tabernacles was much neglected among the Jews until such time as they (...)
been in captivity, after God had carried them into Babylon, and the^^ b^ought
them back again into their own Country, then they kept the feast of
Tabernacles, more solemnly then ever they had done, as we find Nehem. 8. 17.
Since the day of Joshua the son of Nun, they had not done so, they never kept
the feast of Tabernacles so solemnly from their first coming into Canaan, as
then they did, now being come out of prison they could remember the uncertainty
of all things in the world; men forget the uncertainty of all things in the
world, but if they be driven from house and home, and lose all, then they
remember what they have heard and confessed; of the uncertainty of all worldly
things: some of our brethren who are plundered and driven from their
habitations, if God should ever restore them to their habitations again, then
their hearts would be enlarged in blessing God, then they would be more
sensible of the uncertainty of the comforts of the creature then ever before.

Thirdly, The Feast of Tabernacles had an aim at Christ and the state John 1.
14. he dwelt amongst us; (...).
he came and pitched his Tabernacle amongst us, it is in the Greek, and the
state of a Christian likewise, is an abiding Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5. 1. If our
earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, till we go where JESUS CHRIST
is gone before us, to prepare mansions for us, John 14. our dwelling is in
Tabernacles.

In the offerings that God appointed to offer in this their feast, Numb. 29.
12. there are some things very observable, but hard to find the meaning of,
the feast was to be kept seven days, the first day was a great day, and the
last day a great day, the first day there were 13. bullocks to be offered, and
14. lambs, the second day, there was but 12. bullocks, and the third day but
11. and the fourth day but 10. and so every day one decreased, (as you may see
there) and the last day, there was but one offered,

Now diverse Expositors have sought to find out the meaning of this. I do not
find any such thing in all the Scripture, as this is, but only in this place,
Calvin confesses when he speaks of this, that for his part he does not
understand the meaning of it, and rather then to make guesses of it, and
uncertainties, I will says he be silent in it, and yet he ventures upon a
conjecture a very unlikely one, therefore I shall not name it. That which is
most likely seems to be in two things. The first is, they must offer every day
less and less, that is (says another interpreter) to show their increase in
sanctification, that they should grow to more and more perfection, every day of
their feast, and so have less need of Sacrifices then they had before, and so
it will afford a good note to us, that when we come to keep days to God,
every day we should grow more and more in sanctification, and have less and
less sin to answer for, then we had before.

Another interpretation that is given, is, that it was to show the cessation of
the sacrifices of the Jews, that they were to decrease day by day, and this I
take rather to be the meaning, because the last day is but one bullock that
was offered, and yet the Text says, that that was the great day of the Feast,
when there was fewest sacrifices to be offered. Ioh. 3. 37. The last and the
great day of the feast, Jesus cried, if any man thirst, let him come unto me;
there is somewhat to be noted about Christ there, though it is true, it was the
feast of dedication, which was their own Feast, from whence many would prove
the lawfulness of holy days, yet the truth is, upon examination you shall
find there is scarce strength enough, from that place to prove it, though it
be lawful to take the advantage of such times, but it will appear there, that
it was the Feast of Tabernacles, as in 2 Chro. 8. 9. Their Feast of the
dedication of the Temple, was at that time that the Feast of Tabernacles was;
one thing is to be observed from Christ's being there at the Feast, the last and
the great day, Jesus cried, if any man thirst, let him come unto me; Why did
Christ upon the great day of the Feast cry out thus, If any man thirst, let him
come unto me to drink? one reason may be, because when men are most strongly
possessed with the uncertainties of all outward things in the world, then they
are fit to entertain the gospel, then fit to hear of JESUS CHRIST, when
their hearts are taken off from the world, and they look upon all things here
as unsettled, the conclusion of that feast is a special preparation to the
Gospel. Esaias, 40. 6. 7, etc. The preparation to the good tidings of the
Gospel, is the Proclamation that All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse
thereof as the flower of the field: yea the withering of the grass, and the
fading of the flower must be proclaimed again and again. And then seasonably
and acceptably it follows, ver. 6. O Zion, that bring good tidings, behold
your God.

Tremelius thinks that the reason of the expression of CHRIST at this time
was, from the custom of the Jews at this Feast; at the feast of Tabernacles
the Jews were wont with great joy to bring store of water out of the River of
Shiloh to the Temple, where being delivered to the Priest, he powered it out
upon the Altar, together with wine, and all the people sung that of Isaiah,
with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation; though it were
their own invention, Christ takes a hint upon it, they accustomed themselves to
draw water, and power it out, Christ says, what do you stand upon this
ceremony of yours, this your custom will die and perish in the use of it, but
come to me and there you shall have water, I am the well of salvation, a spring
of grace shall be continually in the heart of that man that believes in me.
One note more is observable in this Feast, we have a prophecy that in the
times of the gospel, the feast of Tabernacles should be kept then, that is in
the truth of it, not in the ceremony. In Zach. 14. 16. there is a Prophesy that
when Christ comes, the very truth of the feast of tabernacles, then all people
shall worship the true God, and keep the feast of Tabernacles. Why is it there
Prophesied that all people shall come and keep that feast? the reason may be
this, this feast is named, because in the times of the gospel, men shall
acknowledge their outward comforts to be from God, and (...) ^ertainty of all
things here, and that they are strangers and pilgrims (...) in the times of the
gospel, this shall be made more evident to the hearts of people, then ever
before, the more JESUS CHRIST shall be known in the world* the more shall the
hearts of men be taken up with the knowledge of God in every creature, and of
the uncertainty of every creature, and have their hearts taken of from the
comforts of the world, and never account any settled condition here, but account
themselves pilgrims, and strangers; that is a sign that the Gospel has
prevailed with your spirits, if you have your hearts taken off from the
creature, and you look upon your selves, as strangers in the world, and look
for an abiding City, then do you keep in an Evangelicall sense this feast of
Tabernacles.

Or secondly, if it be meant of the glorious settled condition God in the latter
days shall bring his Saints unto, yet then they shall remember with
thankfulness, what their poor unsettled condition once was.

Thus you have had a view of the chief of the Jewish Feasts, which God
threatens here shall cease.

There are only these three Observations to be drawn from altogether. Obs.


First, Even those things that are appointed by God himself, if once they be
abused, God will not own them, but then they are accounted ours rather then
Gods, her sabbaths, why not my sabbaths? why not Gods sabbaths? God did appoint
them, but because they had abused them, God would not own them; her sabbaths,
and her solemn Feasts. The Ordinances of God, though never so good in
themselves, if you pollute them, God rejects them, they are your ordinances
then and not Gods, look then that all ordinances be, Obser.
as God would have them.

Secondly, It is a grievous and lamentable affliction upon any people, for God
to deprive them of his sabbaths and ordinances, his ordinances are included in
their solemn Feasts, nay (says God) you will go on in your wickedness, and
would put me off with your sabbaths, and solemn meetings, and with those
things that were once my ordinances, you will satisfy me with them, though you
continue in your wickedness, no, you shall be deprived of them, you shall have
no more sabbaths, no more solemn Feast days; it is a sad affliction for a
people to have no more sabbaths.

How many of you neglect solemn meetings of Gods people? time may come when
God will rend these privileges from you, and then your conscience will grate
upon you, O the sabbaths that once we had! O the solemn meetings that once we
enjoyed! but our hearts were vain and slight; we did not make use of them, and
now they are gone, now perhaps thou art cast into a goal, or into a dungeon,
and there thou keep thy sabbaths and think upon thy solemn meetings. O
how unworthy is this land of sabbaths? how did we set our selves to persecute
those that kept sabbaths? there was never any such a thing in any Christian
nation: other places though they are somewhat loose upon their sabbaths, yet
they never persecute them that will keep sabbath: how justly might God have
taken away our sabbaths? let us acknowledge Gods free grace; what reproach has
it been in England to assemble to hear Sermons? how justly might God have
taken away these solemn Assembles from us long before this? let us pray that
what ever judgment God sends upon us, he will not take away our Sabbaths, nor
our solemn assemblies, but that we may still enjoy those we have, and enjoy
them to better purpose then ever we have done.

3. Obser.
God has no need of our services; If God call upon us to worship him, it is
for our good, not for any need he has of what we do. What do I care, says
God, whether I have any Sabbaths kept or no? I can provide for my glory, what
ever becomes of your duties; I need them not, I can be glorious without you.

But these threats are but to take away things that are spiritual; carnal
hearts think if they may live and prosper in the world, what care they for
Sabbaths, and for solemn meetings? Tell them of taking away Ordinances, tell
them of truth of Gods worship, what is that to them? Let us have our peace, our
trading, and our outward blessings, and truth will follow, O no, a gracious
heart will rather reason thus, O Lord, let us have thy Ordinances, let us have
thy Gospel, and then for our Vines and Fig Trees, our tradings, and our outward
blessings, we will leave them to thy dispose; if thou will give us thy
Sabbaths, and thy Ordinances, we will trust thee for our Vines, and for our
Fig Trees. But if the Lord be so angry to deny us his Ordinances, how can we
ever think that he will be so merciful to us, to continue our peace, or our
civil liberties? No sure, if Truth be gone, Vines and Fig Trees will not stay
long: The next words therefore are, I will destroy her Vines and her Fig Trees.
The Lord may suffer those places that never had Sabbaths and Ordinances to
prosper in their Civil ^eace a long time, but where these have, and the wrath
of God be so incensed as to take away these, it cannot be expected that outward
peace and plenty can hold long there, First seek the kingdom of heaven, says
Christ, and all these things shall be added unto you: No, (say they) let us
first seek the kingdom of earth, and the things of heaven will be added to
us; which shows the sleightnesse of their account of heavenly things. As the
paper and the thread in a shop, is given in to the commodity, it is added, if a
man bargain for the paper and thread, and think the commodity will be given in,
what a folly were it? Many men have their thoughts altogether upon the things
of this life, and they think the Gospel will be given into the bargain, as if
they have peace, they shall no question have truth, as if the Gospel were the
paper and thread, and the things of the world were the commodities. It is your
wisdom if you would enjoy outward peace, let your hearts be for Ordinances,
cry to God for Ordinances, and then God will take care you shall sit under your
Vines, and under your Fig Trees peace.

The Eleventh Lecture. Lect. 11.

HOSEA 2. 12. 13. And I will destroy her Vines and her Fig Trees, whereof she
has said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make
them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.

And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt incense to
them, and she decked her self with her eare-rings and her jewels, and she went
after her lovers, and forgot me, says the Lord.


GODS threatening Israel, in taking away spiritual mercies; their Sabbaths, and
Ordinances, their solemn Feasts, you have in the former verse; but because
they might not be much sensible of such a judgment, to be deprived of
Sabbaths, and solemnities of worship, would not be so grievous to many, but the
destroying of the fruit of the ground, the spoiling of their land, the loss of
those things wherein their riches and outward comforts lay, would be more
grievous, therefore God joins this threat with the former, And I will destroy
her Vines and Fig Trees; In these two, Vines, and Fig Trees, there is a
Synecdoche, by these are meant, all her outward prosperity; I will not lop
their Vines, I will not cut down some branches of their Fig Trees only, but
destroy them.

If God stays long before a judgment comes, Obser
he comes fearfully indeed, he comes with destroying judgments, then he
strikes at the very roo^e of all a peoples prosperity, and leaves them
hopeless of ever recoveriug themselves; It concerns us to humble our selves
under Gods hand, when he does but cut off some branches of our vines and
fig trees, of our outward comforts, lest ere long there follows a destroying
judgment, a cutting to the very root: Does God come in your families, and cut
off a branch or two, a child or two? Humble your souls before him, he may cut
down the tree, stub up the root ere long, he may come to the Mother, or the
Father, and so root out the family: So in a Nation, it is a very remarkable
place that you have, Ezekiel, 21. 27. I will overturne, overturne, overturn,
when was this spoken, and to whom? It was spoken unto Israel, and to Israel
when they were in captivity, and yet God threatens them thus even there, I will
overturne, overturne, overturne,

Whereof she has said, these are the rewards that my lovers have given me;
(...)
The word that is translated reward, signifies Merces meretricia, it comes of
the Hebrew word that signifies hired with wages, but such wages as are given to
harlots, and yet she is so impudent as to make use of that very word, these are
my rewards; the word she uses here might upbraid her, but so impudent does
Idolatry make men to be; If we be guilty of whoredom, we have our rewards of
whoredom then, (say they:) Whoremasters use to give rewards unto their whores;
whoredom is a costly sin to many a man; Many men secretly wast, and consume in
their estates, and their neighbors wonder how they come to be so low;
Uncleanness is as a Gangrene, as it will consume the body, so the purse, it
beggars many men, when the world little thinks of the cause.

Secondly, Obser.
These are my rewards, these that you call Idols, give me liberal rewards, I
have what I served them for.

God may suffer men in wickedness to prosper, to gain their hearts desire.

Thirdly, Obser.
It is a dangerous thing for sinners to look back to their sins committed, and
then to bless themselves, as if they had gotten by them; Indeed, before a sin
is committed, the sinner by temptation may be persuaded there is much gain to
be had in that way; and in the very act of commission, the sinner may find some
flashie false contentment and delight, but usually after the act is over, when
the sinner looks back, he sees nothing but shame, guilt and horror; Sinners
scarce dare look back to their sins after they are committed, except such as
are most desperately hardened in their sins, they dare not think of what they
have done: but here you see, they look at what they have done, and bless
themselves, as if they had got a goodly reward by it: As the sight of the evil
consequences of sin is a means to humble, so the apprehending of gayning by
sin, is a special means to harden in sin. Judas thought it a brave thing to
get the thirty pieces, yet when he saw the evil fruit that his sin produced,
he looked with horror upon his sin, his soul sunk under the burden of it: If
a Judas looking after sin, has his spirit filled with horror, what hope is
there then of such a one, as looking after it, blesses himself as a gainer by
it! If a man either prospers at that time he sins, or prospers more a little
after he has committed a sin, then he did before, or so prospers as that he
conceives his sin to be some way isntrumental to bring in that gain that was
got: this hardens exceedingly.

Fourthly, Obser.
These are the rewards that my lovers have given me.

It is a provoking sin to attribute the blessings of God to our own wicked
sinful ways, and thereby to harden our hearts in those ways. It is too much to
attribute any of Gods blessings to second causes, to our lawful endeavors, to
our industry, to our care, to any instruments, but to attribute them to our
wickedness, It is a vile thing to attribute Gods blessings to our ways of ^in.
this is abominable, God expects glory in the acknowledgement of every mercy,
and improvement of it unto him: where then there is not only a denial of this
to him, but a giving it to his enemy, to wickedness, to the Devil, whom he
hates, this goes exceeding near to the heart of God. It is a great part of our
sanctifying of Gods name in the use of all the creatures, to acknowledge him in
all, that all depends upon him, and thereby to be quickened in his service: but
to think all depends upon that which is contrary to God, and therefore if we
want what we would have, to begin to think we have not served our lust enough,
and to be put on to serve them more, this exceedingly provokes. I Will give you
one notable example of this wretchedness of man's heart, and indeed it is a
very dreadful one, I had very credible relation from a Minister, who being at
Hamburgh, he was told this story. There was a consultation of many of the
Ministers of Germany at that Town in the time of the sorest distresses and
calamities that were in Germany, the Ministers were Lutherans, they consulted
to find out what might be the cause why the hand of God was so heavy upon
Germany, in those parts where they lived, that so they might reform what was
amiss, and make their peace with God, the isse of their consultations came to
this, that the reason of their calamities and troubles that were upon them, was
because the Images of their Churches were not adorned enough: because there was
not cost enough bestowed upon them, they were not decked as they thought they
should have been: and therefore for the preventing of the continuance of those
calamities in those parts of Germany, they unanimously consented to improve all
the strength they had to beautify and adorn the Images in their Churches more:
this was a sad thing for Ministers who professing against Popery, as the
Lutherans do, they indeed keep Images in Churches: But could it be thought that
they should be thus vain, yea wicked, as to attribute the want of their Vines
and fig trees to the want of their superstitious vanities, and to bring up
their consultations to this conclusion, that if they were more zealous of the
one, they should the more prosper in the other? was not this a sore and
grievous evil, going near to the heart of God?

Many attribute the increase of their estates to their lying, to their
overreaching, their swearing, and rejoice in this, this I have got by these
ways; Zeph. 1. 9. God threatens to punish those that leap on the threshold,
and fill their masters houses with violence and deceit: That is, the servants
of great men, who by oppression and by fraud bring in gain to their Masters
houses, and then they leap upon the threshold for joy, applauding themselves in
the success they have had in their wicked ways: It is usual in whatsoever
ways men are, if they meet with any prosperous success, to bless themselves, as
if this success came in the rather because of those ways, let the ways be never
so wicked: Of late have not some made the world believe they have had great
success, and have made an argument that their ways have been good, and God has
blessed them, because they have done as they have, though we know their ways to
be such as brings most fearful guilt upon themselves, and their families, and
we have all cause to have our hearts tremble within us, to think of them; and
if it be through seducement, and not through a worse principle, to pray to God,
O Lord forgive them, for they know not what they do: and for the success they
boast of, who would not if he might wish such success to his Enemy?

But if Idolaters can encourage themselves in those ways they are in, Obser.
from what good they suppose they have by them, for their rewards; how much
more then should the Saints encourage themselves in the rewards that they have
from their lover, from the Lord Christ? Psalm. 129. 56. This I had (says David)
because I kept thy word; this is the reward I have had from my lover; I bless
God, I have in some measure got my heart to break before the Lord, and to melt
after him, and the Lord has come in mercifully to me, though indeed there be
no worthiness in what I have done, yet the Lord has been gracious, he has
encouraged his poose servant in his way; these and these mercies the Lord has
given me as a fruit of seeking him; he has not said to the seed of Jacob,
seek ye me in vain; I have sought for comfort, for peace, and at last it is
come, I will call upon the name of the Lord, as long as I live; we should
consider of Gods mercies we have, and rejoice in them as the love tokens that
come from our beloved; These are the rewards, these are the love tokens that
come from our dearly beloved. Hereafter when the Saints shall come to heaven,
how will they bless God, and bless themselves in their God, for those
glorious things, those blessed rewards that they then shall receive from their
beloved, and enjoy for ever with him! then they shall triumphingly say, the
world said heretofore, What profit is there in serving of the Lord? But blessed
be God, that I went on notwithstanding in the ways of God, and now I see there
is profit to purpose; O these joys! O this glory! O this crown! this
happiness! these are the rewards that I have from my beloved. Obs.


A fifth, What soever is got by sin the curse of God is in it.
what any man gets by sin, or looks upon as gotten by sin, or uses as a means
to harden himself in sin, the curse of God is in it, and it will rend it from
him, he shall not ever enjoy it; I will destroy their vines and their figtrees,
whereof they have said, these are the rewards that my lovers have given me, 1
Kings 21. 16. you shall find that Ahab blessed himself in getting Naboths
vineyard, by the device of Iezebel, the text says, He rose up to go to take
possession, but verse 9. Thus says the Lord, have thou killed, and also taken
possession? in the place where the dogs licked the blood of Nabeth, shall
dogs lick thy blood, even thy blood; What, you have got an estate now, you
have got the vineyard, you have got possession, how got you it? by wickedness,
though you bless your selves in it now, as a reward of your vile ways,
certainly the Lord will either force you in the anguish and terror of your
souls, to vomit up those sweet morsells again, you shall not hold them, or
some fearful judgment of God upyou, will rend them from you; that which many
have got by unjust and sinful ways, they have indeed rejoiced in for a while,
but after a while that estate has been in their consciences as drops of
scalding lead in the very apple of a man's eye; so terrible has it been unto
them.

For this I will only give you an example, a late one, that came to my own
hands in restoring that that was wrongfully got many years ago, from one
near my self, I shall the rather name it because the party desired that the
thing might be made known to the glory of God, He sends that that he had
wrongfully got; diverse years after, with a letter with these expressions; Many
a throb of conscience had I about it, many an ^king heart, and many promises
have I made of restitution, and thousands of times have I wished unto you your
silver again; An example of trouble of conscience for ill gotten goods.
what shall I do? to keep it, it is to continue in sin; to give it to the
poor, alas, it is not mine own; or at least the evil purchase of gain
hourded up in the stuff of my iniquity; to send it home, the owner is dead, I
would to God I had sent it before, that it might not have layne so hard upon
me; but seeing that is past, and cannot be recalled, here I sent it you, I ask
God forgiveness, and pray you fail not to pray for me; Sweet Jesus forgive
me: It was kept diverse years, but was biting all the while in the conscience of
the poor man, and at length it must break forth in such expressions as these
are.

Consider of this, every one who has got any thing by a sinful way, and have
blessed himself in it, this is the reward I have got by such a cunning device,
and such an unjust and deceitful way, you got it cleverly, and have enjoyed
it, and been merry with it, well, one day it may thus lie grating in your
conscience, O then how rerrible will it be to you! this is the best way to be
rid of the rewards of sin, when they begin to cause aching in your consciences,
cast them out your selves, all your praying to God for forgiveness will never
ease you without this way; if you be able to restore, but if you will not do
it this way, God may come by some hideous judgment, and force them from you in
spite of your hearts, and then how terrible will it be to you, when you look
upon them as going from you, as being rent by God from you! O now I must part
with all that gain, and sweetness that such and such ways of sin have
brought me in; the gain, the sweet is gone, but the guilt, the curse, the
dregs, the filth, that remains upon my spirit, and for ought I know must stick
by me to all eternity; Gods judgments will be upon you one day, but as
strainers to let out whatsoever is sweet, and delightful to you, and to keep
in the filth and dregs; Remember this, you that have got rewards by sinful
ways, your rewards of sin may now delight you, but there is a time you shall
have rewards for your sins, that will not please you. I will make them as a
forest.

God threatens his people to make them as a forest, (...) that is (...)
the Seventy they read it otherwise, I will put those things as a witness;
you will say here is a great difference; I will make her as a forest, and I
will put those things as a witness; Those things, that is, those rewards; they
rejoice in the rewards that they have had of their iniquity, but I will make
them to be as a witness against them; Certainly there is a truth in this,
Those things that you rejoice in as got by sin, the Lord will make them to rise
up, and witness against you; be sure now you cast them out, they will be
witnesses against you another day else; A man that is guilty, would be glad,
when he knows one that would witness against him, were dead, or out of the
way; have you got any thing by a sinful way? have you got any thing by a
sinful course? put it out of the way, for otherwise it will be a witness
against you, either upon your sickbed, or at the great day of Judgment; but
how can thesee-two readings be reconciled, I will make them as a witness
against you, Lect. 11
and I will make her as a forest? It is true, the words in the English seem to
be very wide one from another, but there is an easy mistake that might cause
the Seventy to read those words, so as to render them thus, I will put them as
a witness, for [(...)] signifies a forest in the Hebrew, and [(...)]
signifies to witness, so it is used, Zach. 3. 6. Montanus reads those words,
Contestabatur Angelus; now those that are skilful in the Hebrew know that there
being no more difference in the words then in those letters which are so like
one another, one is [(...)] the other is [(...)] there might easily be a
mistake in that regard; but we take it as it is here, I will make her as a
forest. The Church is Gods garden, hedged in with Gods protection, but God
here threatens to take away the hedge, and let in the wild beasts; Concerning
the hedge of God about his Church we have spoken before: The wild Beasts are
one of Gods sore judgments often threatened: Those who will not be subject to
the blessed holy God, they shall be subject to the ravening and rage of Beasts:
And it is like the Seventy understood it, even literally of that judgment of
noisome beasts to be let in upon them; for I find that they add to these words
[ the beasts shall eat them] the fowls of the Heaven, and the creeping things
of the earth shall devour; (...).
but though I find that in the translation of the Seventy, yet I do not find it
in the Hebrew Text, and therefore we must let it pass, and only speak of what
we have here, of the beasts eating: Now therefore by that according to most
Interpreters, I incline to think, and am persuaded, that it is the intention of
the holy Ghost to express a judgment beyond the judgment of letting in of
noisome beasts, namely the Assyrians, the adversaries of Israel, who should
come upon them as ravening beasts to devour them; from whence the words being
so opened, you have these three notes of great use concerning us.

The first is, Obser.
sin makes men like Beasts, the beasts of the earth, he means the Assyrians,
great ones, and yet he calls them the beasts of the earth, to be like a beast,
is worse then to be a beast; for to be a beast is but to be as God made the
creature, it is no dishonor to it: but to be like a Beast, that is the
corruption of a creature, Sin makes men beasts yea worse then beasts.
and the deformity of it, the worst deformity that possibly can be: Chrysostom
shows it thus, Beasts (says he) have but some particular evil, take the worst
of all, as the Swine, sensuality, the Tiger, and the Bear, cruelty; the Fox
subtlety, etc. But wicked men have all evils that all beasts in the world have
in them. One wicked man has the sensuality of a Swine, and cruelty of a Tiger,
of a Bear, the subtilty of a Fox, and whatsoever is set out Emblematically by
any Beast, a wicked man has it all in his heart; yea and farther, wicked men
are worse then beasts in this, that they do corrupt themselves in those things
that they have common together with beasts, more then beasts do. As the
Drunkard corrupts himself in his drink, which a beast will not do, a glutton
corrupts himself in his mea^^ore then ordinarily a beast will do, and that I
think is the (...) (...) in (...) Jude, ver. (...) of that they know not, and
what they know naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt
themselves. As for their intellectual parts, they will be speaking evil of
what they know not, they will take upon them as if they knew much, but the
truth is, they understand little, and yet they will speak evil of that they
know not. It is a dreadful Text against such as will be crying out against men
and their ways, when as in truth they know not what they are; but further, in
that they know naturally as bruit beasts, in that they corrupt themselves, that
is, in things they do know merely by sense, as brute beasts do, they know by
tasting, and by smelling, as bruit beasts do, in those very things they corrupt
themselves more then bruit beasts, that is, by excess in meats and drinks.

Would not any account it to be one of the greatest judgments that could befall
him, Si nemo is it quin emari malit quam converti in aliquam figuram bestiae
quam, vis hominis sit mentem habiturus quanto est miserius in hominis figura
animo esse esserato, Lact. l. 5. c. 1.
if God should turn him into the fashion of a Beast while he lives here in
this world, though he should still retain the mind of a man in him? Suppose God
should inflict this judgment upon a Drunkard, he should still have his
intellectual parts as now he has, but yet his body should be turned into the
form of a Swine, or a rayler into the form of a dog, as they say Hecuba Priamus
his wife was for her railing; would not this be a fearful judgment? It is an
expression of a heathen, Lactantius has it from Cicero, (says he) If it would
be such a judgment as a man would be willing to endure any misery in the world,
rather then to have his body turned into the fashion of a Beast, is it not as
great a misery to keep the fashion of the body, and to have the mind to become
like a beast, to keep a humane shape with the soul of a beast? surely it is
worse then to have the shape of a beast with the soul of man.

Secondly, Obser. God looks upon wicked great men with a contemptible eye.
God looks upon wicked men who do great things in the world with a contemptible
eye: the Beasts shall devour, that is, the great King of Assyria, and all his
Courtiers about him, and Cavalliers with him, they shall come to devour them,
they are but the beasts, God speaks in a contemptible manner, as he does
against Senacherib that King of Assyria, in Isa. 37. 29. God threatens to put a
hook in his nostrils, and a bridle in his lips, because of his rage and of his
tumult, that is, he would use him as a beast, to hook his nose, and to put a
bridle into his jaws. Mark likewise how contemptible God speaks of the King of
Babylon, and his whole army, Joel 2. 20. His stink and his ill savor shall
come up, because he has done great things; and so in Psalm. 59. 7. They belsh
with their mouths (says David) and they go up and down the City grinning
like a dog: these are the expressions of David, and in that Psalm he means no
other but those his adversaries, that were about Saul in his Court: and Ezekiel.
38. 3, 4. To the chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal, I will put hooks in thy
jaws (says God) and in Dan. 7. the four great Monarchs, Babylonian, Persian,
Grecian, Roman, are set out by four beasts, and the fourth Monarchy which by
most Interpreters interpreted the Roman Empire, Dan. 7. 7. it is described to
be dreadful and (...) and strong exceedingly, and it had great iron teeth, it
devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it, and
it was diverse from all things that was before it; Now this beast raged first in
the heathen Empire, and after it gave its power to the beast Antichrist, as you
may read in Rev. 13. and that beast was like a leopard spotted, full of
uncleanness and filth, or as some translate it, a panther, who by the scent of
it draws other beasts to him, but devoures them, and his feet like a Bear,
and his head like a Lion. Thus you see how God describes the great ones of the
world, to be as beasts looking with a contemptible eye upon them.

Thirdly, Obser
It is a sore and a heavy judgment for a people to be delivered up to the rage
of cruel adversaries; the beasts shall devour them. I will give you up to
them who will bring you under, you will not be obedient to me, but to them you
shall, I will let out cruel wicked men upon you. Hence David prayed, Lord let
me not fall into the hands of men, when God would put him to his choice, to
choose what judgment he would have, he was quickly resolved what to refuse,
he would be sure he would not have that judgment, to be given up to the hands
of men, that he knew was dreadful; and Psalm. 55. 6. he prays, O that I had
the wings of a dove, that I might fly into the wilderness, and there abide.
Into the wilderness! Why he should be among the wild beasts in the
wilderness, and yet he cries, O that he had the wings of a dove, he would
abide in the wilderness! Why what is the matter here? it was because of the
cruelty of Saul, and his courtiers, David apprehended them so cruel, A
fearful judgment to fall into the hands of men.
that he had rather fall into the hands of Tigers, and wild beasts in the
wilderness, then into theirs. I could give you notable examples of people that
would rather endure any misery in the world, then be given up into the hands of
their enemies. That story is most famous of Numantia in Spain, when Scipio
came against it, and they were afraid it would be taken, all the young men
first took all the old men in the City and killed them with as fair a death as
they could; then they brought all the treasure and riches of the City to the
market place, and set all on fire, and after that they all took poison and
poisoned themselves, and thus in one day old and young, and all in the City,
were quite destroyed, rather then they would fall into the hands of their
enemies. Psa. 22. 20. Deliver my soul, says David, from the sword, my darling
from the power of the dog, the power of the dog, and the sword, is but one the
interpretation of the other; and that text is observable, 1 Cor. 15. 32. That I
have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men; some interpret this
literally, that he did indeed really fight with beasts, as being one way of
torment they put the Christians to, to fight with beasts; but it is rather
thought by most interpreters, that the meaning is with men that were beastly,
with cruel men, and Esthius thinks those men to be no other, but those that
are mentioned in Acts 19. 9. of whom the text says there, that diverse were
hardened, and spoke evil before the multitude, Paul then departed from them,
and (...) he disciples, Paul says that it was a most (...) to get the multitude
to be gathered together, and there to speak against him and his doctrine, and
against Christ, when all the multitude were got together, now their malice
thought that a fit opportunity to vent all their venom against Paul and his
doctrine, upon that the spirit of Paul was so provoked (says the text) that he
departed from them, and separated the disciples: he saw them desperately set
upon it with malice that they would take such an advantage, so to speak
against him and his doctrine before the multitude; it is thus with many, the
more sedition is raised, the better are their designs furthered. Christ tells
his Disciples, Mark 16. 18. that Serpents should do them no hurt, and drinking
poison shall not hurt them; yea, in the 19. of Luke the beginning, he tells
them they shall have power over devils; Serpents shall do them no hurt, poison
shall do them no hurt, they shall have power over Devils: but Matthew. 10. 17.
Beware of men; they might say, why blessed Master, what need we be afraid of
men? Serpents shall do us no hurt, we shall have power over Devils, and yet for
all this, Christ bids them take heed of men; as if there weere more danger of
hurt from wicked men, then from Devils, or from Serpents, and therefore S, Paul
in the 2. of the Thessalo. 3. 2. prays that they may be delivered from absurd
men; so the words are, that those that had lost the very principle of reason,
and were even as beasts. There are a generation risen up amongst us, who have
sucked up the poison of the old Serpent, and are sweld with it, who are set on
fire of hell, and the poison of Asps is under their lips, and in their hands,
and as it was said of Romulus and Romus, the founders of Rome, they were
suckled by woolves, so are these, who desire to build up Rome again; much like
the first founders of that Rome, they seem to be men suckled by wolves, or as
the Poets feign of Lycaon, turned into a wolf for his cruelty; or as it is
said of their S. Dominick, that was the Father of the Dominicans, that when his
Mother was with child of him, she dreamed that she brought forth a wolf, with
a firebrand in his mouth; according to that representation she had in her dream
of her child, she proved afterward; and if we look to the cruelty, and the
rage of these kind of men, we may even think, that their Mothers have brought
forth wolves with firebrands in their mouths; in these Satan rages, and we hope
therefore his time is but very short, because he rages so much; had they
prevailed, and brought all under their power, no Chronicle of any Nation under
Heaven would afford the like stories of horrid cruelties, as the Chronicles of
these times would have done; where they have prevailed, in Ireland, there have
been the beginnings of such barbarismes, as here would have risen to the
perfection of all rage and horrible cruelties; they may be fair a little
while, till they get more strength; but certainly had they their will, there
would never be parallel examples of that horrible rage and cruelty as you would
find among them, the Lord deliver us from being scourged with these Scorpions;
let us humble our souls before God, that God may not humble us before such
beasts, that we may not say that England shall be as a forest, and these
beasts shall devour them; in the mean time let us not be offended at their
prevailing in some places, for then we should be as beasts our selves, Psalm.
73. 22. So ignorant was I, I was as a beast before thee, (says David) Genesis
9. 5. God says, He will require of the beasts the blood of his people,
Certainly, God will require of these beasts, the blood that has been shed, it
is precious blood that they have drunk; had it been corrupt blood, God would
not so much have cared for it, but it has been the blood of his Saints; let
us believe that God will turn the rage of man, the rage of beasts, to his
praise, Psalm. 76. 10. Surely the Lord cannot possibly behold without
indignation such vile beasts to worrie his Lambs, who are so dear to him, even
such so precious in his eyes, to be torn and worried by such beasts as these
are, the eyes of the Lord are purer then to behold such iniquity as this is, we
may well cry out with the Prophet, Haback. 1. 2. 3. How long shall we cry out
of violence and wrong? spoilings and violence are before me, whe^efore look
thou upon them that deal treacherously and hold thy tongue, when the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous then himself? The higher the scum
arises, the nearer we know it is to the fire. I have read of Philo, when the
people of the Jews made use of him to apologize for them unto Cajus the
Emperor, Cajus used him very ruggedly, when he came out of his presence, the
Jews came round about him, well, (says he, to encourage them) Surely Cajus
will arm God against himself for us.

But it may be said by some, surely these men are not beasts, for they are
skillful warriers, they are not so brutish as you take them to be, but are
skillful enough in their ways; mark that text of Ezekiel 21. 31. I will
deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skillful to destroy; they are
skillful to destroy, and yet brutish men; we have a promise from God, and our
prayers should hasten the fulfilling of it, in Ezekiel. 34. 25. He will cause the
evil beasts to cease out of the land, and ver. 28. the beasts of that land
shall no more devour them; O that that time were come! O that the Lord would so
work for us as to cause our beasts to cease out of our land, that they might
no more devour! Isaiah 35. 9. No Lion shall be there, no ravenous beast shall
be found there, but the redeemed shall walk there; there is such a time
coming; let us be patient in the mean time, and comfort our selves in these
Scriptures, though our brethren endure hard things, by these cruel beasts, and
though God may perhaps bring some of us under the rage of them, yet there is an
estate of the Churches, that will be ere long that they shall be troubled no
more with such unclean, such outrageous beasts.

VERSE 13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt
incense to them, and she decked her self with her eare-rings and her jewels,
and she went after her lovers, and forgot me, (says the Lord.)

Here is the conclusion of the threatening part of the Chapter; Now God will
come upon them for all their sins together, if a generation shall succeed
(...) esse, God may justly come upon (...), for all the suns of the former
generations; all the blood from Abel to Zechariah shall be required of this
generation; I will visit all the days of Baalim, ever since they served Baal,
One new sin may bring upon us wrath for many formerly committed
let men take heed of continuing in the ways of sin, who can tell what sin may
put a period to the time of Gods bringing his judgment upon a Nation, a
family, or a particular person? though God has spared heretofore, upon the
next sin committed, there may be such a period put, as God now may come upon
the family, not only for that sin, but for all the sins of the family, that
ever have been committed since it was a family, and so upon a Nation, for all
the sins of a nation, since it was a nation, and all thy sins, ever since thou
wast a sinner. Men go on a while in the ways of sin prosperously, but when
God comes to visit, what will become of them? Isaiah 10. 3. What nill you do
in the day of your visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far,
to whom will ye flee for help? and where will you leave your glory? Now you are
merry, and laugh, now you fear nothing, but what will you do in the day of
visitation? what will become of you then? whether will you flee then? and where
will you leave your glory?

I will visit upon them the days of Baalim; in the plural number Baalim, by
which some think and that not improbably, that it is meant of their under Gods
that they had, which they called Baalims, for the Heathen had their chief
Gods, and their Dii minores, their lesser Gods, that were unto them, as
mediators to their chief Gods, and so our Papists have, they have their
Diiminores, Papists like Heathen.
lesser Gods, who are tutelar Gods, either over Nations, or over families, or
over particular diseases, etc. As they say, for England, S. George, for Erance,
S. Dennis, for Ireland, S. Patrick, for Wales, S. David, for Scotland, S.
Andrew, etc. These Saints they are in imitation of the Heathens, Baal, or in
the Caldee dialect Bell, was the King of Babylon after Nimrod, the first that
was deified, and reputed as a God after death, whence those men that were
deified after their death, and worshipped as Gods, as the Papists worship their
Saints, they called Baalims, as from Julius Caesar, the other that followed
after, were called Caesar's: This interpretation gives unto us much light to
understand that Scripture that you have in the first of the Corinthians, 8. 5.
6. Though there be that are called Lords whether in heaven or in earth, as
there be Gods many, and Lords many, but to us there is but one God the Father,
and one Lord Jesus Christ; If the Apostle had spoke in Hebrew, it would have
been thus, though there be many Baalims, there is to us but one God, and one
Baal; for in Hebrew, Baal is Lood, there are many Gods, (say they) there were
diverse greater Gods, and there were many Lords, many Baalims, that is, there
are many amongst the Heathens that are mediators to their other chief Gods;
But to us (says he) there is but one God, and but one Lord, but one Baal, we
have not Baalims, we have not many mediators, to mediate between us and God,
but as we have but one God, so we have but one Lord, but one Mediator, who
indeed in regard of his humane nature is inferior to the Father, but yet such
a Lord by whom are all things, and we by him, we acknowledge not greater Gods,
and less Gods: the Papists acknowledge but one God, but they have many Lords,
many Mediators, many that must be between God and them, but this is a
heathenish opinion.

Again, Baalim in the plural number. Another reason given by some, and not
improbably, is, that in regard of the several images they had of their Baal,
in several places, even in their private houses; for Idolaters would not
satisfy themselves in worshipping their Gods in public, but would worship
them in their private houses also.

Now though the Jews had only two Idols set up, one in Dan, another in
Bethel; yet they had some representations of those images in their private
houses, which may be grounded upon that text Hosea 10. 5. Because of the calves
of Bethaven, We must worship God in our private houses.
that is of Bethel, calves of Bethel. Why, how many calves were there? there
was but one calfe set up there, and yet here it is in the plural number: now
the reason of that is given, because though there was but one calfe set up for
the public worship, yet they had in their private families, the picture of
that calfe, and so would bring the worship of their Baal into their families. A
good lesson for Christians, not to satisfy themselves with public worship,
but to bring as much of the worship of God as they can into their families.
Wherein she burnt incense to them.

Incense was a typical signification of prayer, in two respects. First, in the
sweet savor of it. And secondly, in the ascending of it by fire, so all our
prayers should be as incense, sweet before the Lord, and ascend up with the
fervency of zeal, and Faith; it is properto God alone to have incense burnt
unto him in a religious way, the heathens burnt incense to their Idols,
imitating the worship of God. She decked her self with her eare-rings, and her
jewels: they worshipped their Idols in sumptuous manner, adorning themselves
with as costly apparel as they could, especially their foreparts: the word
that is translated jewels, signifies the nose jewel, the same word that you
have in Isay, 3, 21. nose jewels, they hanged upon their faces, jewels to make
themselves beautiful before their Idols: whores use to adorn themselves more
pompously then grave matrons, by this many simple people are drawn to the love
of Idolatry, (...)
which is spiritual whoredom; outward braveries draw the senses; they thought
God would accept of their service the rather, because of their costly jewels,
that hung about their ears and nostrills. From hence this note.

To think that God will accept our service the rather, We must not think that
God will accept of our service, because of any thing of our own (...)
because of any apparel, or any thing of our own devising, is to deal with God
as the heathens with their Idols; we must take heed of that: the Heathens
instituted garments, that so they might be accepted. There was a Council in the
333. year of Christ, that has this Canon in it, it anathematizes all those
that shall judge one vesture, one garment more holy then another, and make more
for piety then another does. We are to learn from Idolaters thus much, to (...)
adorn our souls, when we come into the (...) of God; did they deck their
bodies, and hang jewels about ears and noses when they came before their Idols
for acceptance? Cancilium gangrense anathematizat eos qui asiam vestem aliae
sanctiorem aut plus facere ad pietatem iudicant.
Let us beautify our souls every time we come before the living God; and would
you know what fine clothes you should have, when you come into Gods presence?
I will tell you, and especially women who delight so much in fine clothes, 1
Pet. 5. 5. Be ye clothed with humility; so the word is to dress with a
dress that Gentlewomen used to wear in those times, with ribband; about their
heads; well (says the Apostle) would you have a fine dress ye women? be ye
clothed with humility; the finest dress you can possibly have: and I will
tell you another dress too, in 1 Pet. 3. 4. Adorned with a quiet and meek
spirit, which is with God of great price; (...).
it is much set by of God, so translated in some of, your books. You love to be
fine, if you come into Gods presence with quiet and meek spirits, and clothed
with humility, you will be as fine as can be in the very eyes of God; but
withal remember, both men and women, the robes of Christ's righteousness,
except you come clothed and decked with that garment also, certainly you can
never find acceptance.

They followed after their Idols, but forgot me (says the Lord.) Their lovers
were remembered, but I was forgotten, says God; God speaks here in a lamenting
way, as a man bemoaning his sad condition: as if he should have said, how am I
flighted by my people? the Idols can be followed, they can be remembered, but I
am neglected, I am forgotten, they have activity for their Idols, none for me,
memory for them, but none for me.

God takes it very ill, Obser.
when men can find memory, strength, and activity enough for their sinful
ways, but none for him; many complain of strength, they are weak, but who was
ever so weak, but had strength enough to sin? though memories be weak, yet
sinful ways can be thought on.

Forgot me, that is, First, they have forgot what a God I am. Secondly, what I
have done for them, the great works I have done before them. Thirdly, all their
engagements to me; many follow wicked ways, yet so as sometimes they have
checks of conscience, they have somewhat of God yet sticking upon their hearts,
some remembrances of God, and so long there is hope; but when a sinner has so
far departed from God, and followed on his ungodly ways, as God is quite worn
out of his thoughts, then he is in a sad case indeed. I appeal to you, is it
not the case of some here? there was a time that you had mighty impressions of
God upon your spirits, and then you could never go up and down in your shops,
streets, fields, but the thoughts of God were in your mind, and when you
awaked in the night season, the thought of God was in your hearts; but there
was some haunt of wickedness that your hearts hankered after all that while,
temptation came, and you have given way to it, and now (friend) you can go up
and down, one day after another, and scarce think of God at all? what is the
matter that you have no thoughts of God now, as you were wont to have? yet
perhaps you are not gone so far, but that now and then there comes in some
darting thoughts of him, Lect. 12
but so as your conscience knows they are very terrible to you, you can never
now have a thought of God, but it is as a clagger at your heart, and indeed it
must needs be terrible to a guilty conscience that is departed from God. Well,
take heed what thou do O thou sinner, It is a dangerous condition when God
is gotten ont of a m^ns thoughts.
go not on so long in thy sinful ways, till thou wearest out all the
thoughts of God, for some have done so, though they had checks of conscience,
when they have been in wicked company, God has come into their thoughts, and
troubled them, but they have gone to wicked company again, and some thoughts
of God have yet followed them, but they have gone again and again, and now they
have forgot God, as if there were no God at all in heaven, as if God had
nothing to do with them, and they nothing to do with God, O this is a sad
condition indeed. If any of you be declining into such a condition as this is,
the Lord stop you, this day the Lord awaken your consciences. Ordinarily the
more prosperity men have, the more forgetful they are of the Lord; They forgot
me, as Genesis 48. 20. Jacob set Ephraim before Manasses, first Ephraim, then
Manasses; Ephraim signifies fruitfulness, and Mansses signifies
forgetfulness; thus it is with men, Ephraim comes first, f^uit fullness, God
is fruitful to you, and blesses you in your estates, and then comes Manasses,
forgetfulness; you are forgetful of his goodness to you:

My brethren, if always we had such impressions of God, as we have sometimes, O
how happy were it! It will terrify hereafter, when God shall again so present
himself to you, and cause you to remember what impressions of his divine
Majesty once you had; let us hold forth our continual remembrance of God, so
as all that behold our conversaions, may say, surely the thoughts of God are
mighty upon the spirits of these men; thus we should live before our brethren:
I will give you this one rule for your lives; Live such lives as by them you
may hold forth before your brethren such remembrances of God, as they may
conclude by that they see in your conversations, Certainly there are deep
thoughts of God upon the heart of this man, there was a time indeed he walked
lightly; vainly, foolishly, but now he is serious in his way, he is
considerate, he is heavenly, he walks with fear; Certainly there are great
impressions of the divine Majesty upon his heart; if it be so with us, how
joyful will it be to us hereafter, when God shall appear in his glory, then
to have our consciences tell us, the impressions of the Majesty of this God,
that now I see so high and great have been upon my soul, in the whole course
of my life, I now see the glory of the great God shining, and blessed be his
name, even this God that appears so gloriously, has appeared often to my soul
before, and I have kept the impressions of his glory upon my heart, and he was
continually in my thoughts. It is a wonder that God should ever think of us,
who are so forgetful of him as we are; Psalm 8. What is man that thou
remembrest him? (says the text) what is man? The word there that is translated
man, some would bring forth the Hebrew root which signifies forgetfulness;
(...)
I find Eusebius taking it thus, What is man O Lord, that thou should
remember him? that is, what is forgetful man, that thou should remember
him? yet I confess the Hebrew word that is there translated man, comes from
another root that signifies weakelinesse, sickliness; what is weak man, what
is sick-man; yet if this word come not from that root that signifies to
forget, yet I am sure there is a word that comes from that root that
signifies to forget, that is used for women, because of their forgetfulness;
we would be glad to have God remember us, in the day of our adversities, let us
remember God now; all you young ones, remember God, remember your Creator in
the days of your youth; you old people, whatsoever you forget, forget not the
Lord; let us all remember the Lord, who has remembered us all; who has
remembered England, in its low estate. for his mercies endure for ever.

We have done with the threatening part, now it follows, Therefore, behold I
will allure her, bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her;
[Therefore] Beloved, it is a strange therefore; what, they followed after their
Idols, they have said, that all their prosperity was a reward of their Idols,
they have forgot the Lord, they have decked themselves with their jewels, to
honor their Idols; (and mark) it comes presently, Therefore I will allure
her, and I will speak comfortably to her; one would rather have thought it
should have followed; Therefore I will yet plague her, therefore my judgments
shall pursue her, and cut her off; but mark it follows, Therefore I will
allure her, and speak comfort ably unto her; O the rich and free grace of God
to his people! But of that the next day.

The Twelfth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her: and I will give her her Vineyards
from thence,


HEre begins the second part of this Chapter; the former was in conviction,
threatening, pronouncing judgments: this from verse 14. unto the end, is the
opening of the free and rich grace of God to Israel. It may be said of this
Chapter, as Psalm 85. 10. Mercy and Peace are met together, Righteousness and
Truth kiss each other,

There is a blessed conjunction between threatening of judgment, and
proffering mercy; but where is the copula of this conjunction?

What is that knits these two together? Here is a conjunction, but it is very
wonderful, it is in the first word, therefore; that is the copula, [
therefore] I will allure her; Wherefore? This therefore has a very strange and
wonderful wherefore, if we consider of what went before; the words immediately
before were, She went after her lovers, and forgate me, says the Lord, [
therefore] behold, I will allure her; there needs an Ecce be put to this [
therefore] be hold; Behold, I will allure her. Lyra could not see how these
things could be joined together, therefore he thinks that this verse has not
reference to that that immediately went before, but to the words in the
beginning of the Chapter, Say to your brethren, Ammi, my people, and to your
sisters, Ruhamah, she that has obtained mercy, therefore: And Cornelius a
Lapide not understanding the cause of such a connection, he would refer the
beginning of this verse to the end of the seventh verse: She shall say, I will
go to my first husband, for then it was better with me then now, therefore
also I will allure her; these two, though learned men, yet are Papists, and
therefore understand but little of the free rich grace of God, and hence are
put to it, so much, to make a connection between that that went before, and
this therefore; but we need not go so far, the right knowledge of the
fullness, and the riches of the grace of the Covenant, will help us out of this
difficulty, and tell us how these two, the greatness of man's sin, and the
riches of Gods grace may have a connection one to another, and that by an
Illative therefore. (...)
I confess the Hebrew word is sometimes conjunctio ordinis, rather then
causalis, a conjunction that only sets out the order of a thing, one thing
following another, rather then any way implying any cause, but the reading here
by way of inference, I take to be according unto the scope of the Spirit of
God, and it gives us this excellent note.

Such is the grace of God unto those who are in Covenant with him, Obser.
as to take occasion from the greatness of their sins, to show the greatness
of his mercy, from the vileness of their sins, to declare the riches of his
grace. And the Scripture has diverse such kind of expressions as these, as Genesis
8. 21. The grace of the Covenant makes inferences from our sins to mercy.
The Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for
man's sake; Why? For the immagination of man's heart is evil from his youth: A
strange reasoning; I will not curse the ground for man's sake, for the
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. One would have thought it
should have been rather, I will therefore curse the ground for man's sake,
because the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; but the grace of
God knows how to make another manner of inference then we could have imagined:
So likewise, Isa. 57. 17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth
and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart; I have seen his ways (says God) Now one would have thought that
the next word should have been, I will therefore plague him, I will destroy him,
I will curse him; but mark the words that follow, I will heal him, I will
(...) him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners; I will
create the fruit of the lips, peace to him. This is a consequence at least, if
not an inference. David understood this reasoning to be indeed the true
reasoning of the Covenant of grace, and therefore he pleads thus with God,
Psalm. 25. 11. Pardon my iniquity, for it is great; Lord my iniquity is great,
therefore pardon it. Hearken you Saints, (hearken I say) this is the great
blessing of God unto you who are in Covenant with him, whereas otherwise your
sins should have made you objects of Gods hatred, your sins now render you
objects of his pity and compassion, this is the glorious fruit of the covenant
of grace.

I would only the Saints heard me in this thing, but why do I say so? I will
recall my word, let all sinners hear me, let the vilest, the worst sinners in
the world hear of the riches of the grace of God in this his Covenant, that if
they belong to Gods election, they may see the fullness, the glory of Gods
grace, to be inamoured with it, their hearts ravished with it, that they may
never be at rest till they get evidence to their souls, that God indeed has
actually received them into this his Covenant. If then God be pleased in the
riches of free grace to make such an inference, therefore let us take heed that
we make not a quite cross inference from the greatness of our sins, nor on
the other side, from Gods grace. As thus, You have followed your lovers, you
have forgot me, therefore will I allure you. An unbelieving heart would make
this inference: I have followed my lovers, I have followed after vanity and
folly, and therefore God has rejected me, therefore God will have no mercy
upon me, therefore I am undone, therefore the gates of mercy are shut against
me, unbelieving heart do not sin against the grace of God, he says, you have
forgotten me, therefore will I allure, and speak comfortably to you; do not
you say, I have forgot the Lord, and therefore the Lord will for ever reject
me; these discouraging, determining, despairing therefores are very grievous to
the Spirit of God. Tota scriptura hoc agit ne dubitemus, sed sperea mus, confic
damus, eredamus deum miscricordam esse benignum; patiente^^; Luther.
God would have us have all good thoughts of him. It is a maine thing that God
intends through the whole Scripture that his people should have good thoughts
of him, and that they should not think him a hard master. It is an excellent
expression of Luther, (says he) the whole Scripure does principally aim at
this thing that we should not doubt, but that we should hope, that we should
trust, that we should believe, that God is a merciful, a bountiful, a
gracious, and a patient God to his people. It is an excellent expression that I
have read of Master Bradford, in one of his Epistles, (says he, O Lord
sometimes me thinks I feel it so with me, as if there were no difference
between my heart and the wicked, a blind mind as they, a stout, stubborn,
rebellions spirit, a hard heart as they, and so he goes on; shall I therefore
conclude thou art my Father? nay, I will rather reason otherwise; says he,
because I do believe thou art my Father, I will come unto thee, that thou
might enlighten this blind mind of mine, that thou might soften this
hard heart of mine, that thou might sanctify this unclean spirit of mine; I
this is a good reasoning indeed, and is worthy of one that professes the gospel
of Jesus Christ.

Again, as the inference of this unbelieving heart is grievous to Gods spirit,
so the inference of a profane heart, an unbelieving heart makes his therefore
from the greatness of sin against Gods mercy, and the profane heart makes his
therefore from the greatness of Gods mercy, to the hardening of his heart in
his sins; what, shall God make his therefore from our sin to his mercy, and
shall we make our therefore from his mercy back again to our sins? where sin
abounds, grace abounds, but where grace abounds, sin must not abound, because
God is merciful to us who are very sinful; let not us be very sinful against
him who is so merciful. God takes occasion from the greatness of our sins, to
show the greatness of his mercy; let not us take occasion from the greatness
of his mercy, to be emboldened in greatness of our sins.

Therefore [behold.]

Behold. Here is a wonder to take up the thoughts of men and Angels, to all
eternity, even that that we have in this inference, behold, notwithstanding all
this, yet you men and Angels behold the fullness, the riches of Gods grace, I
will allure her; what will not God cast us away notwithstanding the greatness
of our sins? let not us reject Gods ways, notwithstanding the greatness of any
sufferings we meet with in them; there is a great deal of reason in this that
I speak; you may as well bear with sufferings in Gods ways, and yet embrace
them, as God does bear with sins in your hearts, and yet embrace you; (...)
but it follows, therefore I will allure; the Heb. word translated allure,
signifies to entice, and is used many times in the ill part, blandiendo
decipere, to deceive by subtle enticing: the Seventy in their translation,
thus, Therefore also I will deceive them, and the old Latin lactabo, and
others seducam, (...).
therefore also I will seduce them, so sometimes the word is: God makes use of
this word to express a very gracious affection to them, the sweet and
gracious ways that God intends to deal with them in.

What God means by alluring of his people, when once he is reconciled unto
them, may be expressed in these three things.



The mercy of God out bids all temptations.
and so did subtly draw their hearts from me, I will now deal with them in a
more powerful way then their lovers possibly could, and I will out-bid them
all. Did their lovers proffer to them comfort? I will bid more then they; did
their lovers proffer gain? I will bid more gain; did they proffer more honor
and respect? I will out-bid them in this too: I will bid more honor, and more
respect, so as I will persuade their hearts that they shall come to enjoy more
in me then possibly they could com^^ enjoy in whatsoever their lovers could do
for them. And indeed then has the Gospel the true, full, gracious work upon
the heart of a man or woman, when it yields to the profers of the Gospel, as
finding that all that the world can bid is now out-bidden; I have a better
bargain here in Christ then the world proffers to me. You know when one comes
to offer so much for a commodity, and another out-bids him, 2 Cor. 12. 16. The
s^cret waves of God drawing the heart to himself.
he carries it away: so when the world, and lust, and sin proffers to the soul
such and such contents, then comes God, and outbids all, and so the bargain is
made up, God carries away the heart.

Again, further, I will allure, that is, I will come upon them even unawares,
and as it were steal away their hearts, by a holy guile; as S. Paul tells us,
that he caught the Corinthians as it were by guile. I will secretly insinuate
my self unto them, and I will draw their hearts in such a sweet way, in such a
secret hidden way, that I will take them before they are aware.

So it is with many a soul; God takes it before it is aware, though it is
true, that afterward the soul comes to understand things more clearly about
Gods grace, but at the first, God has taken the heart even almost before it
thinks of him. Indeed the sinner sees himself, he is not where he was before,
surely there has been here something working upon my heart; I find it
otherwise with me now then it has been, but how this comes to pass, I scarce
understand for the present, but shall understand more; like that expression we
have in the 6. of Canticles, ver. 12. Ore ever I was aware, my soul made me as
the chariot of Aminadib: That is, the chariots of a willing people, so the word
Aminadib signifies. My heart was caught, and run amain to God, and this was
before ever I was aware, there came such ways of Gods grace into my heart more
then I thought of, and caught my soul, that my soul run mighty freely, swiftly
after the Lord, and this is a blessed deceit, when the heart is so deceived, so
allured, so enticed; As sometimes it is with an Adulterer, he does but give a
glance of his adulterous eye, and catches the Adulteress before she is aware;
it may be she never thought of any such thing; but there is a glance of an
unclean eye that catches the heart secretly. Thus with Christ, he sometimes
gives such a glance of his eye upon the heart of a sinner, as takes the sinner
before he is aware; the sinner is brought in love with the ways of God, and
with the truths of God, even before he thinks of it. We are to know that the
grace of God has a subtilty in it, as well as the Serpent; The Scripture, Pro.
1. 4. attributes a subtilty to Gods grace; It is a blessed thing to be thus
out-subtilled, (as I may so speak) for the grace of God to be too subtle for
our sins; As I remember Luther, when he was charged for Apostasy, he
acknowledged it, (says he) I confess I am an Apostate, but how? an Apostate
from the devil, falling off from the devil, and returning unto God, such an
Apostate I am; So many a man's heart may be deceived, but if he can say, Blessed
be God, I am deceived indeed, but so deceived that my sin is beguiled; I am
seduced, but it is out of the ways of sin, into the ways of God.

Many are easily allured by temptations, they are presently taken by the
devils allurements, but they are very subtle in objecting against all the
allurements of Gods grace, but he is subtle enough to put off the allurements
of sin and of the devil.

Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness.

Here is some difficulty in this; how comes this in? Therefore I will allure
her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her. How can
this, idem cum (...)
to bring into the wilderness, be between alluring, and speaking comfortably?
I told you, that this second part of the Chapter was altogether mercy: what can
be meant then by bringing into the wilderness? Some for the showing that yet it
is a way of grace that God intends in this phrase, I will bring them into the
wilderness, translate the words, After I have brought them into the
wilderness, Postquam per duxero eam, so T^emelius, he was a Jew, and therefore
could well understand the Hebrew tongue, he tells us that Vau, that is
translated and, is as much as postquam, after I have brought them into the
wilderness, and then the meaning is thus. After I have humbled them thoroughly,
as I did their forefathers in the wilderness, then will I speak comfortably
unto them: God humbled their forefathers in Egypt, yet that was not enough, he
humbled them afterward in the wilderness, and then he brought them into
Canaan; many times God brings one affliction after another upon his own people
to break their hearts, to humble them thoroughly, and at last he speaks
comfortably to them. It has been so with us, the Lord not many years since
brought us into bondage, it might have humbled us, and broke our hearts before
him; but when we began to be delivered a little out of our bondage, the Lord
brings us into the wilderness, and follows us with afflictions to this day,
that he might thoroughly break us, and yet we hope all this while, it is but
making way unto Canaan.

But in the second place, take it as you have it here, I will allure her and
bring her into the wilderness. Then we may take the scope of it to be not the
afflicting part of the wilderness, but only the manifesting this unto Israel,
that he would show unto them great and wonderful works of his power, and
wisdom, and goodness, as he did unto their forefathers in the wilderness.
What ever your conditions shall be into which you shall be brought, yet you
shall have me working in a glorious way for your good and comfort, as ever I
did for your forefathers when they were in the wilderness: and this exposition
is rather strengthened from that we have ex Thargum Ionathae, Operabor
miracula, and grandia, facinora, qualia edidi in deserto. Thargum Ionathae.
I will work miracles, and great wonderful, famous things for them, such as I
did work in the desert: has God wrought gloriously for his people hitherto in
the ways of his mercy? if reconciled to him, they may expect the fame
wonderful works of God for their good even to the end of the world We may read
the stories of Gods wonderful power in deliverances of his people in their
straits in the wilderness, and make them to be our own, and plead with God,
that he would show forth that old, that ancient power, and wisdom, and
goodness of his, as he did unto his people formerly, Gods former ways toward
his people, great helps to our Faith.
this is the ground of that excellent prayer, that we have Esaias 51. 9. 10.
Awake, awake, put on strength O arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient
days, in the generations of old; Art thou not it that have cut Rahab, and
wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it that has dried the sea, the waters of the
great sea? Awake, awake, thou art he who have done such great things formerly;
it is a great help to our Faith to consider what God has done for the Church
of old.

But further, Poreus says this expression is taken from the condition of a
poor man that is drawn aside out of his way by a thief, a thief comes and
entices him out of his way, and carries him into some desolate place, and when
he has carried him thither, then the manbegins to bethink himself, where he
is, and sees himself in a sad condition, and knows not what in the world to do,
and yet at that time there comes in supply, comfort, and help for him; so
(says God) I will bring you into the wilderness, that is, I will put you into
the same condition, that such a poor man is put into, I will allure you, as the
thief allures, I will make proffer to you of abundance of good, and by that I
will draw you into such and such ways, wherein you shall meet with very great
straits, for a while, and you shall be put into an amazed condition, as not
knowing what in the world to do, and when that is done, then I will come with
the fullness of my grace, and speak comfortably to your hearts.

Thus though God speaks of bringing into the wilderness, yet still it is with
an intention of showing mercy there; and is not this just to a very hair for
all the world our condition? have not the ways of God toward England for these
two or three years been alluring ways? God has made proffer unto us of a
great deal of mercy, and raised the hopes of his people, and the Ministers of
God have spoken encouraging words to his people, that surely the Lord intends
great goodness to us, and because Gods ways have been such toward us, as
they have been, we have endeavored (God knows) to follow him in those ways of
his, to do that, that for the present those present ways of his called for: and
yet we are even brought into the wilderness now, even into a kind of desolate
condition, When God brings into trouble: there is comfort in that trouble.
that for the present we even are at a stand, and we see afflictions to be
round about us, and the very beasts to be ready to come and tear us, and pull
us in pieces, and yet we can say to the comfort of our hearts, Lord, if we be
deceived, thou have deceived us, for (Lord) thou know that whatsoever we
have done, it was our duty to do, and although we be brought into great
straits, for the present, yet we repent not of what we have done, nor of what
we have said, for thou have allured us into this condition, thy gracious ways
of mercy toward us in the beginning of the Parliament, and so on has allured
us, and has brought us into what we have done. We will not therefore say,
what is now become of all our hopes? but we expect God even in this
wilderness, to speak comfortably unto us, let not men upbrayde us for what
we have done, we would do as we have done, if it were to do again, for God
has brought us into these ways, and if he has allured us into the
wilderness, the next words shall be made good unto us, he will speak
comfortably to us: if we be in no other then that wilderness he has allured
us into, then we may expect fully that he will speak comfortably to us.

Here is the difference between men bringing themselves into trouble; or being
brought by the Devils or worlds allurements, and by Gods. In the one we cannot
expect comfort, but in the other we may confidently.

Further, There is yet another interpretation that I think is most genuine, and
full; For the ground of that I shall say in this, we must know that from the
beginning of this part of the Chapter to the end, God is expressing himself
unto his people in a conjugall way; that is, whereas his people had gone a
whoring from him, yet he would receive them again into a conjugall affection,
and communion: all along God expresses himself thus, from the fourteenth verse
to the end. Now this being laid for a ground; In this expression of Gods
bringing into the wilderness, the Prophet alludes unto the custom of the
Jews, that they had in their marriages. Their custom that I read of, was,
that the Bridegroom used to take his Bride, and carry her out of the City,
into the fields, and there they had their nup tiall songs, and delighted
themselves in some place there, one with another, and afterward he brought her
back again, leaning upon him, into the City, to his Fathers house, and there
they rejoiced together, and solemnized the further nuptials: now these fields
are called the wilderness, either because they might be some champion dry
fields that were about the City; or otherwise, let them be what they will be,
yet because he would allude unto the mercy of God in bringing of his people out
of Egypt, into Canaan, and would put them in mind of that mercy of his,
therefore he gives these fields this title, calls them by this name, and this
custom of the Jews seems to have warrant from Scripture it self, Canticles 8.
5. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?
That was the way of marriage, they came out of the fields, leaning upon their
beloved, and so were brought unto the Bridgegroomes Fathers house: So Christ
brings his Spouse through this world, which is as the wilderness, and Christ
is here solemnizing his espousals, and has his nuptial songs in this world;
and the Church leanes upon Christ, all the while she is in the world, but
Christ is carring her to his Fathers house, and ere long we shall be with him
there, solemnizing the marriage of the Lamb in a more glorious way: This
expression goes on clearly thus, I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness; As the Bridegroom speaks sweet and comfortable words to his
Bride, and carries her abroad into the fields, and there solemnizes the
nuptials, and so comes back again, having his Spouse leaning upon him, and
bringing her to his Fathers house; so I will deal with you in the fullness of
my grace. I will perform all the nuptial rites with you. I will be married
again unto you, and look what the most solemnity in your City of Jerusalem,
or any of your Cities, there is in any nuptials, I will make as great a
solemnity in the nuptials between you and me: It is true, when a marriage is
such as people are loath to make it known, then there is no such solemnity, but
when it is a great marriage indeed, and such as marry together with their
friends would glory in it, then there is the more full solemnity; so says God,
I will not be ashamed to take you again, but I will take you openly; I will
have the solemnity of my marriage with you as publicly as may be, I will carry
you abroad into the fields; and look what rights soever there are in the most
solemn marriages amongst you, those rights I will perform unto you, that it
may be a most glorious marriage solemnity between you and me again: thus I will
bring into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto them.

And speak comfortably to her.

These words that are translated here, (...)
speak comfortably, in the Hebrew are, loquar super cor, or ad corejus, I will
speak to her heart, I will speak to her, either so as to prevail with her
heart, or speak to her so as to do her good at the very heart: Many Scriptures
may be brought to show, that speaking kindly, friendly, or comfortably, the
Hebrews express by speaking to the heart; I will give you two or three
instances, Genesis 34. 3. Shechem spoke kindly to the Damsel, the words are
in the Hebrew, Shechem spoke to the heart of the Damsel; So Ruth 2. 13. Thou
have comforted me, for that thou have spoken friendly to thy handmaid; thou
have spoken to the very heart of thy handmaid; there are two more remarkable
places for this, one is Esaias 40. 2. Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, the words
are, speak to the heart of Jerusalem; What should be spoke to the heart of
Jerusalem? Cry unto her, her warefare is accomplished, her iniquity is
pardoned; These are the comfortable words that God required should be spoke to
the heart of Jerusalem: O that God would speak thus to England! this would do
good at the very heart, if God would speak thus from heaven, Her iniquity is
pardoned, and her warefare is accomplished. But yet a place that is more
suitable unto this expression in the text, it is Judges 19. 3. There you have
the story of a Levite, whose wife having played the harlot, yet he was willing
to be reconciled to her, and the text says, that he went and spoke friendly to
her; Now the words are in the Hebrew, He went and spoke to her heart; And
indeed it is a word to the heart of an adulterous spouse, if her heart be
humbled, when she knows that her husband will be willing notwithstanding her
playing the harlot to be reconciled to her, this was the condition of Israel,
who had gone a whoring from God, yet when God promises a renewall of the
marriage rites he says he will speak to her heart; from whence we might
observe this note. Obser
That an Apostatizing people, or an Apostate soul, had need have words of
comfort spoke to their hearts, or else there can be little ease to their
terrified consciences. We read of Spira that famous Apostate, he had words of
comfort enough spoke to his ear, but they did him little good, God did not
come in and speak to his heart, therefore his conscience could not be quieted,
the throbs of it could not be eased: How many lie under the troubles of an
accusing conscience, Nothing can ease a troubled conscience but Gods speaking
to the heart.
and have the throbs and bitings of a guilty spirit, because they have been
back-sliders from the truth; and though they come to Sermons, one after
another, and hear the Covenant of grace opened to them in the fullness of it,
and the riches of Gods goodness set before them in the beauty of it, yet they
go away without comfort, why the words come to the ear, God all this time
speaks not to the heart; sometimes it pleases God to take but the hint of a
truth, and dart it upon the heart of a troubled sinner, that he feels it at
the heart, and says, Well, this day God has spoken to my heart, so he goes
away rejoicing, eased, comforted, pacified; when as perhaps such an one had
heard a hundred Sermons before, wherein there were blessed and glorious truths
presented to him, and it did no good until Gods time; and when the time of
Gods love is come, some little hint of a piece of a truth God darteth to the
hearts and that does the thing. God shows hereby that it is not in the word of
man to comfort an afflicted conscience.

Hence an expression Luther has in his Comment upon Genesis, Multo difficilius
est conscientiam afflictam censolari quam martuos excitare. Luther.
It is far harder to comfort an afflicted conscience, then to raise the dead;
you think it is nothing to Apostatize from the Lord, you think it is easy to
receive comfort, you will find it is not so easy, you will find it as easy to
raise the dead as to comfort your afflicted consciences. But you told us
before, how rich the grace of God was, that God took advantage from the
greatness of our sins, to show the riches and greatness of his mercy: grant
it, let the grace of God be never so rich, but till this grace be applied to
the heart, till God be pleased to speak himself to the heart of a sinner, it
will not do. I remember a story of one who had made profession of Religion, and
afterward Apostatised and made little of it, when his acquaintance told him
that those things he now did he would smart for one day, he thought because he
had some knowledge in the Gospel, that it was but to believe in Jesus Christ,
Jesus Christ came to pardon sinners, etc. when he came upon his sick bed, he
was in great torment of conscience, False applying comfort will not hold.
and grievous vexation, and cried out bitterly of his Apostasy, there came some
of his acquaintance to him, and spoke words of comfort, and tells him that
Christ came to save sinners, and he must trust in Gods mercy, etc. At length he
begins to close with this, and to apply this to himself, and to have a little
ease, upon which his companions began to be hardened in their ways, because they
saw after so ill a life it was so easy a matter to have comfort; but not long
before he dyed, he brake out roaring, in a most miserable anguish, O! (says
he) I have prepared a plaster, but it will not stick, it will not stick:
we shall find though the grace of God be rich, and the salve be a sovereign
unless God be pleased to make it stick by speaking to our hearts, nothing can
be done. From hence further, learn this note.

As when God speaks comfortably to his people, Obs.
he speaks to their hearts: so Gods Ministers, when they come to speak in Gods
name, should labor to speak so, as to do what they can to speak to hearts. It
is true indeed, it is impossible that any man of himself can speak to the
heart of another, but yet he may endeavor, and aim that way, there is a kind
of speaking that God does assist, so as to bring it to the heart of his people.

What speaking is that? you will say.

That that comes from the heart, will most likely go to the heart, though I
know God can take that which comes but from the lips, and carry it to the heart
when he pleases, yet ordinarily that that comes from the heart, goes to the
heart, therefore Ministers when they come to speak the great things of the
Gospel, they should not seek so much for brave words, and enticing ways of
man's wisdom, but let them get their own hearts warmed with that grace of the
Gospel, and then they are most like to speak to the hearts of their Auditors.
It is a good note that I have met with from Ribera, let Ministers remit (says
he) of their care of fine curious words, Remittant aliquid de cura nit^ris
culiusque verborum venustatis and numerofit atis sententiarum, and verae
humilitati and mortificationi, impendant ut charitatem habeant, sine qua si
linquis hominum loquantur, and angelorum, facti sunt sicut as sonans vel
symbalum tinniens. Ribera.
of brave neat phrases, and cadencies of their sentences, but let them bend
their studies to manifest humility, and mortification, and to show love to the
souls of people; otherwise, though they speak with the tongues of men and
Angels, they shall become but like the sounding brass, and the tinckling
cymball: this is an expression even of a Jesuit, it were then a great shame
that Gods Ministers should not labor to speak so, as that they may speak to
the hearts of people: you must be desirous of such kind of preaching as you
find speaks to your hearts, not that that comes merely to your ears: how many
men love to have the word jingle in their ears, and in the mean time their
hearts go away, and not one word spoke to them? but when you find a Ministry
speak to your hearts, close with it, bless God for it, and count it a sadd day
when you go from a Sermon, and there is not one word spoke to your hearts in
that Sermon.

From the connection of these two, I will bring them into the wilderness, and
speak unto their hearts: if we should take the wilderness for bringing into
affliction ( because there are so many interpreters that are very godly men,
and learned men, go that way) I dare not wholly reject it, but that there may be
some intention that way.

Hence the first note is,

Afflictions make way for Gods word to the hearts of sinners; Obser.
there are many obstructions at the hearts of men while they are in prosperity,
but when afflictions come, God by them opens those obstructions, and so gets
his word to their hearts; afflictions cannot convert the heart, but they can
take away some obstructions that did hinder the word from coming to the heart.
Many of you have heard thousands of Sermons, and scarce know of any one that
has come to your hearts, but when God casts you upon your sick beds, and you
apprehend death, then you feel the same truths, that you were not sensible of
before, they lie upon your hearts, the threatening word of God, that went but to
the ear before, now it is got to the heart, now it terrifies, now you cry out
of your sins, and relish the sweet promises of the Gospel that afflictions
make way for. I remember an expression that I have read of Bernard, he had once
to a brother of his, who was a Soldier, but riotous and profane, Bernard
gives him many good instructions, wholesome admonitions, and counsels, his
brother seemed to slight them, he made nothing of them, Bernard comes to him,
and puts his hand to his side; one day (says he) God will make way to this
heart of yours, by some spear, or lance, he meant God would wound him in the
Wars, and so he would open a way to his heart, and then his admonitions should
get to his heart, and as he said, so it fell out; for going into the Wars, he
was wounded, and then he remembers his brothers admonitions, they got to, and
lay upon his heart to purpose. It God should let the enemy in upon us, their
swords or bullets may make way to our hearts, that so Gods word may come to
have entrance there, the Lord rather pierce our hearts by his spirit, then that
way to our hearts should be made thus.

Secondly, Obser. Times of affliction Gods comforting times.
when we are brought to great affliction, that is the time for Gods mercies.
This should make us not to be so afraid of afflictions, how afraid are we? how
do we hang back when we see afflictions coming? why art thou so loath, O thou
Christian, to come to affliction! the time of affliction is the time for God to
speak to the heart of a sinner; many sinners may say that their condition has
been like Jacobs, he never had a more sweet vision of God, then when he lay
abroad in the fields, with no other pillow under his head then a stone, it may
be God will take away all your outward comforts, and when they are all gone,
then may be Gods time to speak comfortably to your heart.

Thirdly, the words of mercy, O how sweet are they, when they come to the heart
after an affliction! Obser.
Psam 141. 6. Thy Judges shall be overthrown in strong places, they shall he
are my words, for they are sweet.

If the words be taken, for bringing into the wilderness, that is, for Gods
wonderful workings for the good of his people, then the note is,

When God works great and wonderful things amongst a people, Obser.
then God speaks to the heart of that people: then surely God has spoken to
our hearts, for he has done great and wonderful things amongst us; he did not
more wonderful things amongst his people in the wilderness, then he has done
omongst us here in England. But from that meaning, of bringing into the
wilderness, as the custom of marriage, of solemnizing of nuptials, then the
note is this,

When God is reconciled once to a people, Obser.
they may expect full manifestations of his love unto them, one manifestation
after another, as alluring, and carrying abroad into fields, and nuptial
songs, all kind of manifestations of Gods love: A people, a soul that was
never (...) sinful before, and is new reconciled, may expect it.

Let all back-fliders then, whom God is about to draw again to himself, listen
and hear what God says unto their hearts; if they come in and repent let them
know that God is willing to manifest all expressions of love and goodness to
them.

Again, there is yet one note more from this expression of bringing into the
wilderness, and speaking to the heart; yet because it is the most improbable,
I will only but mention it to you, there may be yet some good use made of it,
and therefore I will set it before you; I find diverse going that way, it is
this (say they) by bringing into the wilderness, God means that he would take
them off from their engagements in their own Country, carrying them to a
strange place, and so take them off from their houses. lands, shops, estates,
friends, acquaintance, from the pomp, the glory, and all the clutter of the
world, that they enjoyed, and were snared by in their own Country, and so he
will carry them aside into desolate places, and there he will instruct them,
when he has got them as it were alone; That has been Gods way in making
himself known unto his people, whom he has had a love unto, to draw them
aside from the clutter of the world, from their engagements, and there to speak
to their hearts. We have a famous place for that, Mar. 8. 23. the poor blind
man, whose eyes Christ intended to open, the Text says, Christ took e him by
the hand, and carried him out of the City, and there fell a working upon him,
and opened his eyes; he carried him from the clutter of people, from his
friends and acquaintance, and there opens his eyes. While we are in the midst
of engagements here in our own land, while we have our estates, and all well
about us, we are scarce fit to hearken what God has to say to us: Many of
Gods people have found it by experience, that whereas there were many truths of
God, that they had some incklings (...) while they were here, and read books
about them, and heard much of them, yet they could not be convinced of them,
and their consciences tell them, while they were here they did not go against
the light of their consciences, but how ever it came to pass, convinced they
were not; but when God took them aside from their engagements, and from the
pomp and glory of their land, and carried them into the wilderness, or into
some remote places, where the glory of their own Country did not so glister
before their eyes, they then could see into truths, that they never saw before;
those things that could not get into their hearts before, now when God drew
them aside got in; and it is not now their conceit, but they know certainly,
(...)
that they do understand much of Gods mind, that they did not understand
before; when God has taken them aside, then God has opened their eyes.

Verse. 15. I will give her her vineyards from thence.

Vinatores, so some translate the word, her vine-dressers, and indeed the Heb.
word that is for vine-dressers, and vines, or vine yards, is the very same
letters, only the puncta are different, but we will read it as it is here,
from thence; illinc, ibi, either from that time that they are in the
wilderness, or from that condition of their affliction in the wilderness,
wherein I will speak comfortably to her, thence I will give her her vineyards;
God threatened to destroy her vineyards, now God says, he will give vineyards.

Observe, God can as easily restore, as he can destroy: It is an easly thing
for men to make havoc, to do mischief, but it is not so easy a thing for them
to restore all again; they can easily spoil a Country, but they cannot so
easily raise a Country again. Psalm. 52. 1. Why beastest thou thy self in
mischief, O mighty man? There is no reason that a man should boast that he can
do mischief; we have some who make their boasts in nothing but this, that they
can go up and down the Country, and plunder, spoil, and make havoc, Cuidam
philippum laudanti qued Olynthum subver^erat, Lacedaemonius respoudit, ^tal^m
civitatem non possit condere. Plut. l. de Trac. Obser.
but can they make all up again, that they undo? Plut arch tells us of one
commending the power and valor of Philip, for that he had utterly destroyed
Olynthus, a City of Tracia; a Lacedemonian standing by answered, but he cannot
build such a City. A fool may break a glass, and all the wise men in the
Country are not able to make it up again. Men may do a great deal of hurt
and mischief, but it is not their lives, nor the lives of a thousand such as
they are, can make up again what hurt is done by them: But it is Gods
property, he can destroy vineyards, and he can restore them again; I will give
them their vineyards again, when I am reconciled to them: Suppose there be the
greatest Pacification that can be, yet all this while, who shall make up the
hurt is done? if there be reconciliation with God, he will make up all our
hurts again.

Secondly, I will give her her vineyards. It is a note of Calvin, God says
not, I will give them their corn, that is for necessity, but I will give them
their vineyards, that is for delight: the note is,

When God is reconciled to a people, he will not only give them substance,
but abundance, even for delight, as well as for necessity.

Thirdly, When God is reconciled to a p^^ple, he comes with present real
evidences of his love, Obser.
he reserveth indeed abundance of mercy afterward, but he is never reconciled,
but he comes presently with some real evidences and demonstrations of love;
God says not only, I will speak comfortably to them, and there is an end,
and they shall expect mercy along time after; No, but I will speak comfortably
to her, and I will give her her vineyards again: I will give unto them real
manifestations of my love; so it should be with us, when we come in to God, to
be reconciled to him, we should come in with real expressions of our
repentance, of our respects unto God. Here is a deceit, (I beseech you confider
of it) many when they lie upon their sick beds, Together with ptomiks something
must be done presently.
will promise what they will do for God, if God restore them, but they do
nothing for the present, and so they are deceived. When you therefore find
your hearts wrought upon, broken, and melting, take heed of this deceit, do
not satisfy your selves in promising what you will do for God, if you be in
such a condition, and such a condition, but do something presently, set upon
the work presently, and so engage your hearts to God; if once you be engaged by
doing something, the work will go on: Lect. 13
It is a great matter when we can engage the heart of a man to God in any
business, suppose a man promise to do this or that, yet if all this while he
have done nothing, he looks not upon himself so really engaged, as when
something is done, he therefore sooner flies off again; but if together with
his promise he be brought to do, he will not so readily fly off; God does so
with you, he together with his promise, gives some real evidences of his love.

Again, Obser.
After God speaks to the heart, and then restores vineyards, then they are
blessings, then they are sweet indeed, for then God restores them as fruits of
reconciliation with him; Many a poor afflicted soul know what belongs to this
comfortable note: I thought my sinfulness forfeited all my comforts, all
mercies, and God indeed took away this, and the other comfort from me, but it
pleased God to come in graciously upon my heart, and to speak to my heart, and
in some measure to break it, and to humble it before him, so that I hope peace
is made up, and notwithstanding those great offenses of mine, he has now
restored mercies; he took away a child, but he has given another, a be^^e^;
he has took away one mercy, and he has given a better; and this I can (though
with holdness, yet with humility) say it is as a fruit of my reconciliation
with my God; O how sweetly may such a one enjoy that mercy from God! If after
the meltings of thy heart after God, Me ^cies are sweet when they come as
fruits of our peace with G^d.
he then comes in with mercies to thee, thou may take them, as tokens of
love to thee; now thy house is a comfortable blessing to thee, and thy
yoake-fellow, and thy children about thee; O how comfortable blessings are
they! yea, the meat on thy table, is sweet with a double sweetness, when thou
can look upon all, as the fruit of Gods reconciliation with thee; As the
Christians Acts 2. 46. 47. when they once believed in Christ, they did eat
their bread with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God. We may enjoy
all our common mercies in another manner then other men can they will be
blessings doubled, yea a hundred fold increased; I will speak to her heart,
and then, I will give her her vineyards.

Perhaps God has given thee an estate in the world, more then thy neighbors,
more then thy brother; But has God spoke to thy heart? Are Gods blessings upon
thee as a fruit of Gods speaking to thy heart, in away of reconciliation with
thee? otherwise it is but a flat dry comfort, to have an estate, and not to
feel God speaking to our hearts.

I will restore unto you your vineyards from thence: From whence? From the
wilderness. There the Note is,

God can bring vineyards out of wildernesses. Obser.
Let us not be afraid, only let us make up our peace with God, and then though
we be in a wilderness, God can from thence bring us vineyards. Our brethren
have found vineyards in the wilderness, and many of Gods people in the midst of
their straits have found abundance of mercy.

Further, Obser.
From the wilderness; they shall have more love, mercy working more strongly
for them now it seems, then they had before; They had vineyards before, Lect. 12
but they had none in the wilderness. Now God will dravv mercies out of those
things that were unlikely, he will bring forth good unto them, out of things
that seemed to go quite contrary to them: the Lord has done so for us, out of
those things that seemed to go quite contrary to us, God has brought much
good to us, as if he had made vineyards to spring out of a wilderness. But
the close of all is.

Those mercies that come to us out of great difficulties, Obser
and seem to be raised out of contraries, are the sweet mercies indeed, those
we are to rejoice in; and therefore it follows, and they shall sing. Deuteronomy. 32.
13. God made them to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty
rock; When did God do so? where did you ever read, that God did cause his
people to suck honey out of the rock, or oil out of the flinty rock; we read
indeed, that the rock was smote, Mercies coming out of great difficulties are
very sweet.
and the water did gusb out of it, but when did we read that ever oil or
honey came out of the rock? there was never any such thing that we read of;
but the meaning thereof is, because they being in necessity, God brought forth
water, yet being brought out of the rock by such a mighty hand of God, it was
oil, it was honey to them, it was as good as if God had given them oil and
honey; Why? because it came out of so much difficulty: So all the mercies that
God gives to his people, when he brings them out of difficulties and straits,
they are sweet and glorious mercies. Let us be patient a while, though we seem
to be in the wilderness, and we see nothing to fetch out water from, but only
rocks, stones, and difficulties, yet God at length will bring mercies out of
those difficulties, and they will be honey mercies to us, then we shall sing
and praise the name of our God with joyful hearts.

The Thirteenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 15. And the valley of Achor for a door of hope, etc.


THe words are an excellent expression of mercy to Israel; For the opening of
which these three things are to be enquired into.

1. What this valley of Achor was. 2. The reason of the name. 3. Why this is
said to be a door of hope.
For the first, Achor was a very pleasant, delightful, fruitful rich valley,
and lay near Jericho; The first place that Israel came into, in the entrance
upon, and taking possession of the land of Canaan, Esaias, 65. 10. And Sharon
shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie
down in, for my people that have sought me. First it is joined with Sharon,
Can. 2. 1. I am the rose of Sharon, that was a sweet pleasant place.

Secondly, It is said to be a place for the herds to lie down in; a fat
pasture that they shall even tumble in. And thirdly, It is promised as a
bles^^^ (...) the Lord.

The reason of the name Achor. Lect. 13
That hystory we have Josh. 7. shows Achan, who 1 Chronicles. 3. 7. is called
Achar, having taken the accursed thing, Why called the valley of Achro
God left the Camp, and Israel fell before the men of Ai, which was the first
battle that ever they fought for the possession of Canaan, upon that their
hearts were exceedingly troubled, as if the whole work had been at an end; so
frail is man's nature, so soon discouraged when it meets with opposition,
notwithstanding all the experiences of Gods mighty power going along with them,
so lately bringing them over Jordan so wonderfully, and given them Jericho so
miraculously, Lib. 5. c. 1.
yet now at the loss of 36. men, their hearts begin even to fail, Joshua
falls with his face upon the earth; and Josephus in his hystory of the Jewish
Antiquities, sets down Ioshuahs prayer at large, these are some expressions,
Beyond all expectation, having received an overthrow, being terrified by this
accident, and suspicious of thy promises to Moses, we both abstain from war,
and after so many enterprises, we cannot hope for any successful proceedings,
by thy mercy relieve our present sorrow, (...)
and take from us the thought of despair, wherein we are too far plunged.
Turbavit.


Now God comes to him and asks him, Why he lay upon his face, and bad him get
him up, for Israel had sinned in the accursed thing; upon search made, Achan
was found out, whereupon Joshua tells him, that he had troubled the Host of
Israel, and God would trouble him; upon which they stoned him, and from thence
it was called the valley of Achor, verse. 26. that is, Va^^is tribulation is,
the valley of trouble.

The third thing is the principal, why this valley is called a door of hope.
Herein two things, First, how it was a door of hope to Israel then, when they
first came into Canaan. Secondly, how it is promised to be a door of hope to
repenting Israel in aftertimes.

For the first, It was a door of hope to them in two respects.

First, Ho^^ the valley of Achor was a door of hope.
because it was the first place wherein they took the possession of Canaan,
when they began to have outward means of substance, to eat of the corn of the
land, all the while they were in the wilderness although God provided
wonderfully for them, by sending them Manna from Heaven, yet because they had
no way of substance by ordinary means, they always feared lest they should want
upon any strait they were brought into, their hearts began to sink. Now in
this valley God gives them outward means, and this raises hope in them, that
their danger was over, and that they should do well enough.

This is our nature when ordinary means fail, our hearts fail, yea though in
regard of Gods extraordinary workings, we have never so many gracious
encouragements, and when God grants means again, then we hope. Secondly, God
made their great trouble there a means of much good unto them, for by that they
were brought to purge their Camp, they learned to fear the Lord, and were
prepared more then before, for so great a mercy as the further possession of
that good land. The Septuagint instead of those words a door of hope, have
these, to open their understanding for there indeed they learned the
dreadfulnesse of God, (...).
who for one man's sin was so sorely displeased; there they understood to
purpose, that the God that was amongst them, was a holy God, and that he would
have them to be a holy people.

But how should this valley of Achor be a done of hope to Israel in after
times? Quest.


First, Answ. 1
the Jews think that Israel shall return into their own country again, yea and
the same way, they shall come again into Canaan by that valley which shall be a
door of hope to them.

Secondly, 2.
but rather by way of Analogy, as God turned this valley of trouble to much
good unto them, so he would turn all the sore afflictions of Israel in after
days to their great advantage, grievous afflictions should make way for
glorious mercies.

Thirdly, 3.
But especially thus, in this expression, God follows the Allegory of
marriage; now it was the custom of the Jews in their marriages, that the
Husband gave his Spouse according to his quality, as a dowry, some piece of
ground, rich as he was able, and this he gave as a pledge of his love to her,
to assure her that whatsoever was his, she should have the benefit of it; so
says the Lord, although you have gone a whoring from me, and may justly expect
that I should for ever reject you, yet I will marry you to my self, and I will
fully perform all marriage rights for the expression of my love toward you to
the uttermost, you shall know that you are married to a Husband who is rich, I
will give you a rich and plentiful dovvry, and this but as a token and pledge
of further love, mercy, riches, that you shall enjoy by me, it shall be that
valley of Achor, that rich, delightful, fruitful valley. By this he means he
would bestow some special choice mercy upon them, at his first taking them
into his favor again, and that should be a pledge of, and making way to much
more mercy, that he intended for them a door of hope to let in greater things,
as the first fruits of all those glorious things that he had treasured up for
them. Obser.


From this valley of Achor, Obser. 1.
as it concerned Israel before.

First, Sometimes when God gives men their hearts desires, when they think
themselves happy, as if all trouble were past, then he comes in upon them with
great and sore afflictions.

Secondly, Obser. 2.
although God has been humbling men's hearts with sore and long afflictions,
yet just before he bestows great mercies, he afflicts again, to humble and
break their hearts yet more.

Thirdly, Obser. 3.
sin will make the pleasantest place in the world, a place of trouble.

Fourthly, Obser. 4.
the afflictions of the Saints do not only go before mercies, but are doors of
hope to let in to mercies, means to further the way for mercies. God commands
light to shine not only after darkness, but out of darkness. Joseph's prison,
David's persecution, Daniels den, made way for glorious mercy God had in store
for them; that which once The mistocles said to his children and friends, the
Saints may much more say to theirs, I had been undone, Picrem nisi periissem.
if I had not been undone; had it not been for such a grieyous affliction, I
had never come to the enjoyment of such a mercy. Hence we must learn not only
to be patient in tribulation, but joyful.

But the especial thing intended in this expression is this: Obser.
When God is reconciled to his people, then present mercies are doors of hope
to let in future mercies; the Saints may look upon all mercies received as
in-lets to further mercies to be received. Every mercy a door to another mercy,
and all mercies here put together, are a door to eternal mercy. When Rachel
had a son she called his name Joseph, Genesis 30. 24. saying, The Lord shall add
to me another son. Every mercy the Saints have may well be called Joseph, it
brings assurance of mercy to be added, this is the high privilege of the
Saints: every mercy that a wicked man has, he may look upon as his utmost, as
his all, he may write a ne plus ultra upon it; one misery, one judgment upon a
wicked man makes way toanother, but not one mercy: howsoever God in his bounty
may lengthen out mercies to him, yet it is more then he can expect, he rather
has cause to wonder he has so much, then expect more, but God ever draws out
his loving kindness to his Saints. Psalm. 36. 10. Draw out thy loving kindness
unto them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
First, the good that others have from God is bounty, patience, but that which
the Saints have is loving kindness. Secondly, that which others have is no
ways tied to them by promise, but that which the Saints have they have by
promise. it is righteousness, Ps. 23. Thou make me lie down in green pasture,
thou anointest my head with fresh oil, my cup runs over. Here is a great
deal, but is here all? no, ver. 6. surely mercy and goodness shall follow me
all the days of my life. That we read of David, 2 Samuel 5. 12. is very
observable, from Gods prospering him in his present way, he draws an argment to
confirm him in the assurance for the future, that his Kingdom was established
to him, why? did not Saul prosper at the beginning of his reign as well as
David? and yet it was no evidence of his establishment; but David could see
Gods mercy coming to him after another manner then Saul could, all mercies the
Saints have come from the covenant in which there is a rich treasure of
mercies, a blessed connection of the mercies. The covenant between David and
Jonathan was, 1 Samuel 20. 15. That loving kindness must not be cut off from the
house of Jonathan. The covenant between God and the Saints is, that loving
kindness shall never be cut off from them, but the links of mercies shall be
fastened one to another, so as they shall reach eternity.

Mercies to the Saints come from love, and amor nescit nimium, love knows no
such thing as excess. The Saints understanding this mystery in the way of Gods
grace toward them hence they follow God in seeking his face then, especially
when he is most in the way of mercy; whereas the men of the world who know not
this, seldom seek after mercy, but in times of affliction, when God is in a
way of justice and wrath, this is their folly.

Infinite reason there is; O ye Saints of the Lord, that one duty should for
ever make way for another, seeing on mercy makes way for another: here lies a
great difference between doing duties from the strength of common grace, and
from sanctifying grace: in the one the spirit by doing some things is wearied
and thinks now it may rest, but in the other, the very doing still increases
strength, and puts the heart upon doing more.

But may not security promise continuance of mercy? Quest.


Yes, Ans.
but if so, then when affliction comes, the heart will sink for fears of
continuance in misery, as well as before it hoped for continuance of mercy.

When then may we assure our selves that our mercies are doors of hope to
further mercies. Quest.


First, Ans. 2,
When they are created mercies wrought by a more imediate hand of God,
generation may be imperfect, but creation never; omne creatum est perfectum,
Esaias, 26. 12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us, What is the argument? for
thou have wrought all our works in us.

Secondly, 2.
When they are spiritual mercies, Ezekiel. 39. 29. Neither will I hide my face
any more from them, What is the argument? For I have powered forth my spirit
upon the house of Israel; but is not this your private opinion that this
argument will hold? No, the words following are, Thus says the Lord God.

Thirdly, 3.
When mercies carry us to the God of mercy, and are turned duties, as if we can
turn our duties into mercies, that is, account every duty a mercy, that is a
good argument that we shall hold out in duty, when we can turn mercies into
duties, that is, make every mercy an engagement to duty, that is a good
argument that mercy will hold out.

But are there not interruptions many times in the ways of Gods mercy to his
own people? Object, Ans.
We sometimes think there is an interruption, when if we knew all we should
see a blessed concatenation, but it must be granted that there may sometimes be
some kind of enterruption in such a particular. After Isreal's return from
captivity and beginning to build the temple, there were such enterruptions as
it was seventy years before it was finished: but though there may be
enterruptions for a time, yet not a quite breaking off, there is yet a strength
in the grace of the covenant that carries the work on and perfects it at last;
by ceasing in one way of mercy, God prepares for another; the very ceasing in
such a way may be a mercy; we our selves at this day are a sad spectacle of the
interruption of the ways of Gods mercies toward a nation.

Mercy that ere while shined in her beauty upon us, has now seemed in a great
measure to have withdrawn the beams of her glory; our door of hope that we
thought to be so wide open, seems almost shut against us. I dare not say that
it is shut, lest I should wrong the present grace of God yet continuing to us.
But

First, Sin, yea our many and fearful sins, lies at this our door, Genesis 4. 7.

Secondly, And now a crowd of difficulties seem even to stop up the door, they
come thronging still to it, as if they would certainly stop it up against us. 3.


Thirdly, As the Prophet Ezekiel. 11. 1. 2. saw at the door of the gate five and
twenty men, amongst whom there were some chief ones, who devised mischief and
gave wicked council in the city, so may we at this day, see many even of the
chief ones, devising mischief, and giving wicked counsel, by which they
labor to shut, yea to lock, and bolt up this our door of hope.

Fourthly, 4.
We hoped that this our door of hope would have been like the doors that
entered into the oracle, of which we read 1 Kings 6. 31. made of the olive tree,
yea the side-posts and lintels were of olive tree, and carvings of palm trees
and cherubims, all overlaid with gold, but now our door seems to be of Iron,
the way to our help and mercy must be through the Iron gate, we must get to it
by suftering hard things.

5. 5.
Our door that was wide, whereat mercy began to come flowing in apace freely,
now it seems to be straitened, it is now the strait gate, we must be content
to strip our selves of a great part of our estates, of many of our outward
comforts, yea we must venture them all, and well if possibly at length we may
crowd in.

6. 6.
Yea, our door-posts are like the Israelites in Egypt, besprinkled with blood,
the keeping up of our means of mercy has cost much blood, and may cost more.

7. 7.
Now when we knock, when we would step in the dogs bark at us, and are ready to
fly upon us, yea it may be the servants, yea some of our brethren are
discontented at us, frown upon us, speak against us.

8. 8.
Alas we have rejected the right key that should have opened this our door,
Quest.
no marvel then though we stand blundring at it, and it opens not unto us.
Answ.
What is that right key that would have opened it before this time, had we
made use of it? That key of David that we read of, Apoc. 3. 7. That opens
and no man shuts. This key the Church of Philadelphia had, therefore it
follows, ver. 8. I have set before thee an open door, that no man can shut.
Quest. Answ.
But what is this key of David? It is the ruling power of Jesus Christ in his
Church; David in his government was a special type of Christ, the first godly
King over his people that ever was: Government is emblematically set forth by a
key, Esaias, 22. 22, God promised Eliakim to commit the government to him by that
expression, The key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, Esaias,
9. 6, 7. The government is said to be upon Christ's shoulder, and he sits upon
the throne of David; that is observable that to Eliakim there was promised, but
the key of the house of David; but to Christ the key of David himself; the one
was to govern but as a steward, the government of the other was to be
Princely. If we had been the Church of Philadelphia, united in brotherly love,
and had had this key of David amongst us, we might before this time had had a
door set open amongst us, that no man could have shut against us; but woe unto
us, how many amongst us say of Christ, We will not have this man to rule over
us? Mr. Brightman more then thirty years since paralelld this Church of
Philadelphia with the Church of Scotland, he made it in a typical way to set
forth the ways of God toward that Church in after times; and indeed they have
been very like one another diverse ways, and God ways toward the one has been
the same with his ways toward the other in many things.

1. They are both Philadelphians, united so in a brotherly covenant, as no
Churches in any kingdom more. 2. It was said of Philadelphia, it had but a
little strength, and yet it kept Gods word. What Churches in any Nation have
been more contemptible, then those in Scotland? They have been accounted a
poor beggarly people, despised of all, and yet God has enabled them to do
great things. 3. God has caused their enemies to come and bow before them, and
to know that he has loved them, even those who said they were lews and were
not, that they were the only Church, when indeed they were the Synagogue of
Satan; and they have rejected false government, and have received much of the
government of Christ, the key of David is more received among them then in any
kingdom in the world; no marvel then though their door be so opened that
none could shut it, through Gods mercy; our Houses of Parliament have cast away
the false key, (The Lord deliver them and us) for ever meddling with it any more
whatsoever come of us. They have further professed their desires to enquire
after the true key. This door of hope we hope will open to us in due time, so
as none shall shut it. 9. We have lost many opportunities for the opening this
door, never had a people fairer opportunities for mercy then we have had, we
cannot look back upon them without trembling hearts, we may see cause to
lament the loss of them with tears of blood, even this has cost much, and is
yet like to cost more blood.

10. Yea woe unto us, out father comes forth and seems to be angry with us,
and bids shut the door against us, yea he shuts us out himself; is not that
complaint of the Churches, Psalm. 80, 4. truly ours, O Lord of Hoasts how long
will thou be angry with the prayer of thy people? If God be angry with out
knocking, what shall we do?

11. And well may God bid shut the door against us, for we have shut it upon
our selves: This our door of hope has a spring lock, it is easily shut too,
but it cannot so easily be opened again: we have stood wrangling and struggling
one with another, and have clapped to the door upon our selves before we were
aware. That Scripture Hos. 7. 1, is as truly ours, as ever it was Isreal's, When
I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and
the wickedness of Samariah. When the Lord would have healed England, then the
iniquity thereof has been discovered more then ever. There is the vilest
spirit of malignity, against godliness, against the Saints, against the way of
Christ in his Ordinances, that ever was upon the face of the earth. Now men
care not though they ruin themselves, though they bring themselves and
posterity to be bondslaves, so they may but have their wills upon those that
are godly to suppress them. The controversy now is almost grown to that
height, that the kingdom divides it self into those who have some show of
Religion, and the haters of it. Those times complained of in Micah are even
ours, Chap. 7. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, put no confidence in a guide, keep
the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom; Yea, it is almost
come to that in the fourth verse, The best of them is a bryar, the most upright
is sharper then a thorny hedge. There is much frowardness, much perverseness
even in the best, many contentions and grievous breaches even amongst them;
they cannot endure you should be jealous of them, and they give cause of
jealousy daily. This generation for a great part of it, show themselves to
have such sullied, such puttid spirits, so defiled with superstitious vanities,
so imbittered with a spirit of malignity, that we may fear God has no
pleasure in the generality of it: yea Moses and Aaron have sinned, the best
have so sullied themselves with Antichristian pollutions, that just it were
with God that this whole generation should be first taken away, and that the
young generation that is coming on, who have not so defiled themselves, should
have this door that lets into Canaan opened to them, that they only should
go into, and possess that good land, but our carcasses should fall in the
wilderness.

You who are godly young ones, whose hearts began betimes to yerne after Jesus
Christ, know the heart of Jesus Christ yernes after you: and although some of
you may fall in fighting for your brethren, and so be received to heaven, yet
you are of that generation God will open this door of mercy unto, you shall go
in and possess Canaan, all this valley of Achor is but a door of hope to you;
continue you on in your sincerity, God will reveal himself more fully to you
then he has done to us, if we be cut off before those treasures of mercy that
God has ready for his people be opened, we must accept of the punishment of our
iniquity, and even bear this indignation of the Lord because we have sinned
against him. 12. Yea the Lord has struck us with blindness at the door, we
grope up and down and we cannot find it, as Gen, 19. 11. Never were a people
at a greater loss, in a greater confusion then now we are; every man runs his
own way, we know not what to do, nay the truth is, we know not what we do.

13. Yea many because they have found some difficulties at the right door, they
have gone away from it, and have sought back doors to help themselves by, even
base, false, shifting, treacherous ways, seeking to comply for their own
private ends, as if their skins must needs be saved, whatsoever becomes of the
public.

14. This is yet a further misery, that we are groping up and down at the
door, and night is come upon us, storms, tempests are rising, dangers are
approaching, and yet God opens not to us.

15. Above all our misery this is yet the greatest, that even our hearts are
shut up too, there lies a stone rolled at the door of our hearts, and such a
stone, as is beyond the power of an Angel to roll away, were it that after all
our hearts were but open, our condition yet had comfort in it.

Oh now what shall we do^*

1. Let us resolve to wait at this door, ^^aite upon God in those ways of
help that yet in mercy he affords unto us; Certainly we are at the right
door, let us say with Shecaniah, Ezra. 10. 2. We have sinned against the Lord,
yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.

Let us resolve whatsoever becomes of us not to go from our fathers door, if
we perish, we will perish at his gates.

2. Let us worship the Lord at this our door, though we be not entered in; yet
let our hearts bow before the Lord in the acknowledgement of his greatness,
power, dominion that he has over us; to do with us what he pleases: as Ezekiel.
46. 2. it is said, The Prince shall worship at the threshold of the gate, and
the people of the land shall wo^ship at the door,

3. Let us look in at the keyhole, or at any crevise that we can, to see
something of the riches of mercy that this door opens into. Within on the other
side o^ the door we may see what liberty of conscience, what enjoyment of
Ordinances, the blessing of Gods worship in his own way, we may see the ways
of God and his Saints would be made honorable in this kingdom, yea in a higher
degree then any where upon the face of the earth; yea we may see many sweet
outward liberties, the free enjoyment of our estates, peace, plenty, prosperity
in abundance, all these, and more then we can think of, if this door were but
once opened to us; howsoever it is good (...) look in, to quicken our hearts,
and set on our desires and endeavors the more strongly in the mean time. Oh
how happy were we if we had these mercies!

4. Let us yet knock louder, and cry louder at our Fathers door.

But did not you tell us our Father seemed to be angry at our knocking?

Mark what we have in that very Scripture, where the Church complains that God
is angry with her prayer, Psalm. 80. 4. How long will thou be angry against the
prayer of thy people? Yet ver. 7. Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and cause
thy face to shine* And ver. 14, Return we beseech thee, O God of H^sts, look
down from heaven, behold and visit this vine: ver. 19. Turn us again O Lord
God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

5. Let every one take away his sins that lie at this door, let every one
sweep his own door, Zech. 8. 15. 16. Again have I thought in these ^^^yes to
do well unto Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah, fear not. But yet mark
what follows, These are the things that ye shall do, Speak ye every man the
truth to his neighbor: execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.
Let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor. Both private
men, and men in public place must reform, How far are we from this? Never
more plottings, more heart-burnings one against another, and those in public
place neglect the execution of judgment; they would have their policies beyond
Gods wisdom. God puts these two together, and commends one as a means to the
other, the execution of judgment and peace; but they have a further reach they
will not exe cur^^^dgement for fear of a breach of peace. It is just with God
that we should never have peace, till we can trust God for it in his own way.

6. Let us seek to God again, and call to him for the right key. Lord reveal
the way of thy worship, and thy government to us, and we will yield our selves
unto it.

7. Stir we up our selves against all difficulties. Things are not yet so bad,
but we may help our selves, if we have hearts. Our Father hears us, he can
command many Angels to come to help to roll away the stone; yea he has opened
diverse doors to us already. We are indeed come to the ^ron gate, the Lord can
make that at length fly open of its own accord, as Acts 20. 10. The Church was
praying, and after the pr^^on doo^es were opened to Peter, and he had passed
the first and second gate, he came unto the iron gate that led into the City,
and there he found as easy passage as any where else. In the mount will the
Lord be scene.

8. Let us exercise Faith in the blood of Christ, let us as it were besprinkle
this our door with the blood of the Lamb; yea look we up to Christ as the
true door to let into all mercy; let Faith act as well as Prayer.

9. Let us now especially watch all opportunities of mercy, and take heed we
neglect no more as we have done many very foulely, lest hereafter we knock,
and cry, Lord open to us, and it proves too late.

10. Let us open to God who knocks at our doors; it we would have him open to
us, Psalm. 24. 6. 7.
God knocks at the door of every one of our hearts, open we to him fully, set
all wide open for him, Openye gates, stand open ye everlasting doors, let the
King of glory come in. These who do thus are the true generation of those that
seek the Lord; let England open, for God yet stands at the door and knockes,
and if we will yet open to him, he will yet come in and suppe withus, and we
shall suppe with him. It is true God rebukes and chastens severely, so he did
Laodicea at that time when he stood at her door and knocked, Apoc. 3. 19. 20.
if any Church be or ever was like to that of Laodicea, we have been; lukewarm
as that was; a mixture of Gods worship has been amongst us, more then in any
reformed Church; we have been a proud people, we have thought our selves rich,
and wanting nothing, whereas we knew not that we were indeed wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked: and those who would be Angels of this
Church, how has God spu^d them out of his mouth! they are cast out as filthy,
they have lain upon the stomach of God and his Saints a long time; they with
all that belonged to their Courts, have made themselves a most ^oathsome
generation of men; and now God is at our door and knocks, calls to us to let
him in, that he may come and rule us, that he may bring peace and salvation
unto us; But howsoever whether Christ be admitted by the State yea or no, yet
let the Saints who are willing that Christ should rule over them, hold on to
the end, the promise is even to those in Laodicea, to him that overcomes will
I grant to sit with me in my Throne even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his Throne.

11. ^et us encourage what we are able; all our faithful doore-keepers, those
who are the public instruments of God for our good, upon whom so much of the
great affairs of the kingdom, under God depends.

And for the quickening of our hearts that we may do all we can, that this our
door of hope be not shut against us, Consider further,

First, This door was opened to us when we began to think, yea almost to
conclude that all doors of hope had been shut against England, when we were
ready to give up all for lost.

Secondly, It was opened to us after much knocking by prayer. If ever there
were a Parliament of prayer since the world began, this was, and is, How
dreadful then would it be to have this door shut against us!

Thirdly, It was opened by a mighty hand of God. Josephus tells us of a door
of the Temple that used to have thirty men to open it, and yet as a
prognostication of some great thing to fallout, it opened of its own accord:
This our door was more hard to be opened, thousands of men could not have
opened this, it was the mighty work of God to do it.

Fourthly, It is a door that opens to the greatest mercies that ever England
had: how happy would England be in the happy success of this Parliament!

5. It is a door that our adversaries have labored all they can to shut by
policy, and by force, and through Gods mercy, yet they cannot.

6. How sweet have the manifestations of God been to us, in the beginnings of
his goodness, and our endeavors! Can^. 5 4. 5. My beloved put his hand at the
door, and my bowels were moved, my hands dropped myrrh, and my fingers sweet
smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock, the beginning of reformation:
but the hand upon the door is sweet, what would the work completed be?

7. If this door should be wholly shut against us, what a miserable people
should we be? if these men have their wills, then never expect Parliaments
more, or never good from Parliaments, They will be the most contemptible and
servile things that can be, if any, they will be doors to let in all misery,
to frame mischief by a law; then what are we and our posterity but slaves? the
Popish party must, yea will be gratified, their design will be effected; what
contempt of the Saints, of Religion? what hatred? what persecution will then
follow? what horrid blasphemies? how will they be hardened in all manner of
wickedness? our estates, our liberties, our Religion are then gone, yea it is
like our lives, and if not so, so miserable would our lives be, as we had
better have the grave open her mouth upon us, and we be shut in it, then to
live to see, hear and feel such things as we and our friends, are like to
hear, see, and feel.

It would be the most horrid judgment that ever was against a nation, it may be
told to all the nations of the world, God gave England a fair opportunity to
help it self, to be a most happy nation, but they had no hearts, they were
blinded, their hearts were taken from them, those worthies they chose, who
ventured themselves for them, they basely deserted, and betrayed, they have
also vilely betrayed themselves, their liberties, their Religion, their
posterity, and now are become the most miserable nation, the most fearful
spectacle of Gods wrath upon the face of the earth. Wherefore beloved in the
Lord, let us make sure of Christ, who is our hope, and who says of himself
that he is the door, as indeed he is to let in all mercies of God into us,
that whatever disappointment we have of our hopes here, yet we may not be
disappointed of our last hopes, though it should prove that here looking for
light, behold darkness, yet we looking for the light of Gods face eternally, we
may not be driven out to everlasting darkness. But shall I end thus? nay the
close of all shall rather be the close of the 31 Psalm. Be of good courage and he
shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord hope yet that God will
make the valley of Achor adoor of hope unto us. The next words in this
Scripture are words of joy, She shall sing as in the days of her youth. Was
there ever a time wherein she had cause to sing praise to God? there are times
coming that shall be as joyful as ever yet times have been, God has mercy for
his people, he has singing times for them.

The Foureteenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 15. -- And she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and as
in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.


YOu have heard formerly of the valley of Achor, that God gave to his people to
be a door of hope. This day you shall hear of Gods people standing singing at
this door of hope. Though it be but a door of hope, yet at that day they shall
there sing, as in the days of her youth, when they came up out of the land of
Egypt.

There are six things needful to be opened for the meaning of Gods mind here
in this their singing at the door of hope.

First, the reading of the words are to be cleared. 2. The scope is to be
showed. 3. What the days of youth that are here spoken of are, is to be
opened. 4. What was the song that they did then sing in the days of their
youth, is to be declared. 5. What cause they had to sing in this the day of
their youth, is to be enquired after.

Lastly, how this is applyable to repenting Israel, and what time this
prophecy a^meth at, likewise is to be manifested.

For the first, Lect. 14
the reading of the words, you have it in your books [ they shall sing as in
the days of their youth] There are only two words that have need of opening.

First, the word translated [ singing.]

Secondly, that which is translated coming up out of the land of Egypt.

For the word [ singing] the Septuagint have it thus, She shall be ^^mbled; A
strange translation you will say; (...)
how much different is it from this in our books, She shall sing! I find diverse
translate the word so [ she shall be humbled) Cyril, Theodoret, and he caryeth
it thus, that she shall be humbled by the Assyrians, as she was before humbled
by the Egyp^ians. But certainly the words cannot be carried so, for it is
spoken of ascending, of coming up out of the land of Egypt. (...) in (...),
humiliavit, in Nip^a^ humiliatus a^pitus (...)
But they might easily mistake in translating the words, because the Hebrew
word signifies both humiliavit, and it signifies likewise ce^init and
contavit, both to be humble, and to sing. The Hebrews diverse times by the same
word set forth contrary things; As (...) signifies both to bless and to
curse, many there might be named in the same kind.

This word likewise that is translated singing, signifies, (and so it is
translated by some) Respondebit, she shall answer, and I find a very excellent
note from it in Cyril, and some others: She shall answer as in the days of
her youth: What answer did she make? Thus, God in the days of her youth, when
she came out of Egypt, did bring her to his Covenant, and gave his land to her,
as Exodus 19. 5, 6. Now therefore (says God) if you (...) obey my voice indeed,
and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people; (A sweet promise to all in Covenant with God, that they shall be a
peculiar treasure unto him above all people.) Now verse. 8. All the people
answered to gether and said, all that the Lord has spoken we will do. Thus
they answered him in the days of their youth, so some would carry it, they
should answer as in the days of their youth, when they came up out of the land
of Egypt, as if the meaning should be thus; whereas God in the days of their
youth did tell them, that if they would keep his Covenant, they should be a
peculiar treasure unto him above all people of the earth, they all with one
consent answered, All that the Lord has spoken that will we do. So says God,
when I shall again convert them to my self, I will renew my Covenant with
them, and upon the declaration of my Covenant to them, they shall freely,
readily, and wil^ingly answer, Lord we accept of thy Covenant. Thus it is
carried by some, and the exposition is very sweet.

But we shall join both the significations of this word together, both ^^ing,
and to answer; And that I take indeed to be the meaning of the Spirit of God,
they shall sing by way of answering: Thus, they were wont to sing, ^lternis
choris, they were wont in their joyful songs to answer one another, his
praecinentibus aliis succinentibus, some singing before, and some answering. So
that it was not a bare singing, but a singing of a Canticum dramaticum, or such
a kind of song, as they did answer one another in their singing. And thus
(says God) shall be the melody of my people, when I am again reconciled to
them upon their repentance, there shall be mutual singing, one singing to
another, and the others answering in a joyful way.

The other word to be opened, is that which is translated, coming up out of the
land of Egypt. (...)
The word you have in your books [ came up] it is ascended, as in the day when
they ascended up out of the land of Egypt. And we are to take notice of the
manner of the expression, because it will afford to us a profitable note anon.
They ascended out of the land of Egypt, partly because Egypt was a Country
that lay very low, and in that respect they may be said to ascend. But that is
not the chief, they were in a low condition, they were in a state of bondage,
and in that regard they were said to ascend.

The second thing to be showed is the scope, what the Spirit of God aymeth at,
They shall sing as in the days of their youth, when they ascended out of the
land of Egypt. Read it so, and

It is a further expression of the nuptial solemnity that there should be
between God and his people, in the time of their reconciliation (for so I have
told you formerly, that God goes along in this second part of the Chapter, in
that continued Allegory, to show his bringing of his people to him in a way of
marriage, in a betrothing way, which afterward is expressed more fully; and all
the way God expresses it, is in the manner of Nuptial solemnities:) As if he
should say, Marriage is an ordinance I have appointed for mutual joy and
delight that the man and wife should have one in the other, so I will bring you
and marry you to my self, and there shall be a great deal of joy that I will
have in you, and you shall have in me; there shall be the singing of the
Epithilamium, the Nuptial long between us; there shall be a time of abundance
of rejoicing between us, when I shall take you again to my self. Do you think
with your selves, when was the greatest time of joy that ever you had in your
lives; Know I will bring you to as much joy as ever yet you had. Look what
mercy you had when you came out of the land of Egypt, and rejoiced in it, you
shall hereafter have mercies as great as that. Did I then appear in a
miraculous way to you? I will do so again. Had you mercies that were promised
long before, and rejoiced in them? you shall have the like again. Had you
mercies that you a long time prayed for before? you shall have the like again.
Did Moses and Miriam go before you in singing, and you followed after? there
shall be the like time again, when both Governors and people shall join
together in singing and praising the name of the Lord. This is the scope.

The third thing is, what is meant by the days of their youth? The days of
their youth is the same that after wards is expressed, and the day when they came
up out of the land of Egypt, that is, the time when they were delivered out of
bondage, after they had passed through the Red Sea, and had seen the great
works of God in their deliverance, then was the day of their youth. Jer. 2. 2.
I will remember the kindness of thy youth when thou followedst me in the
wilderness. The time that this people were delivered from Pharaoh, and saw the
great works of God in the wilderness, is the time of their youth, in the time
of their bondage; they did not outwardly appear to be the Lords; but when God
manifested himself so gloriously in their deliverance, then God did as it were
take them again to be his people, and they did seem as it were then to be born
again, and the time of their being in the wilderness was Gods training them
up as it were in their youth. For a people that are under bondage can scarce be
said to be born, they are but as the Enbryo at least in the womb in that
prison. They cannot be said to be a people when they are under bondage, at
least they are not a living people. Hence Chap. 13. of this Prophecy, when
they were in bondage under Jeroboams wicked commands, the Text says, verse. 1.
that they died. When Ephraim spoke, trembling, in Israel he exalted himself;
but when he offended in Baal, he dyed. A people under bondage are as a dead
people; before they have their liberty, they are to be accounted as not born;
and if they lose their liberty, they are to be esteemed as if they lost their
lives.

But here a question arises. How can God have reference to this time, and tell
them they shall sing as then, whereas in the beginning of the Chapter we find
that when God threatens them, he tells them he will set them as in the day
wherein they were born? so that to be brought to the same condition they were
in, is a threatening; How then is it here a promise?

The answer to that is, it is true, the time when they came up out of Egypt was
indeed a time of much mercy, but they were in great straits in regard of
external helps, as a succourlesse, helpless, and shiftlesse people, when
therefore God threatens to set them as in the day wherein they were born, he
only aymeth at that, that is, to bring them into a succourless, helpless, and
shiftlesse condition in regard of creature-helps as formerly they were. But
when God promises mercy, and tells them he will bring them into that
condition they were in their youth, he does not consider of their succourlesse
and shiftlesse condition, but rather looks at all the mercy they had in their
deliverance out of Egypt. As it is a great affliction for a people to be
brought into the same condition that once they were in, that is, to have all
the sour and bitter without any of the sweet, so it is a great privilege for a
people to be brought into a former condition, when they shall have all the
sweet without the sour, when God shall take away all the branne, and give them
only the flowr, strain out all that is evil, and give them all that is good,
that is a comfortable condition; but when God shall strain out what is good,
and give them what is evil, that is a sad condition, and that is the
threatening before, and this is the promise now.

The fourth thing for explication is, what the song was that they did then sing
in the days of their youth when they came up out of the land of Egypt. The^
excellency of Moses his song.


That song of theirs you shall find, Exodus 15. Then sang Moses and the children
of Israel this song unto the Lord, etc. And afterward you shall read that
Miriam and all the women sang likewise. In this song of theirs, there are these
five things Observable.

First, this song o Moses, Exodus 15. was the most ancyent, the first song that
ever was in the world that we know of. Orpheus, Musaeus and Linus, the most
ancyent of the Poets were 500, years after this time.

Secondly, It was a triumphing song; Then sang Moses and the children of
Israel, the Lord has triumphed gloriously, etc. When they saw Gods judgments
upon the adversaries, then they sang in a triumphing way. But you will say, how
could they sing thus when they saw such a dreadful spectacle before their
eyes? What, sing at such a lamentable object, when the Egyptians were so
miserably destroyed, when they were sprawling up and down in the water, and it
is like they heard their shriekings, their doleful cries, and saw their bodies
how they were cast upon the shore; And then shall Moses and the people of
Israel sing? O cruel hearted people that should sing at such a lamentable
object as this! What, to triumph over their adversaries thus fearfully
perishing? How may we rejoice at the destruction of the wicked


To that we answer. We must not be more pitiful then God is, Psa. 58. 10. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in
the blood of the wicked.

But you will say, this is austerity, they are cruel hearted people that shall
do so. Not so neither. Moses was the meekest man that ever lived upon the face
of the earth, the lovingst man except Christ that ever was; yet Moses sang thus
when he saw the Egyptians destroyed; so that to rejoice in Gods judgments
against the ungodly, may stand with meekness and quietness of spirit, with a
loving and sweet disposition as Moses had.

It is true, we ought not to insult over wicked men in way of revenge, in
respect of our selves, but when we consider the righteous judgments of God upon
his adversaries, we may be swallowed up in the consideration of Gods justice,
and rejoice in it; But so, as not altogether to be without some pity and
commiseration of the persons perishing: As Titus Vespation is said to weep,
when he saw the destruction of Jerusalem, though his enemies.

But there is a time coming when all the Saints shall be so swallowed up with
God, so as they shall rejoice in the destruction, yea in the eternal damnation
of the wicked, without the least pity and commiseration of them; they shall
wholly mind God and his glory without pitying of them, yea though they were the
fruit of their own bodies, and came out of their own loins. But for the
present, though we are to rejoice and triumph in the works of God and his
judgments upon the wicked, yet with some mixture of pity and compassion
toward their persons.

And mark by the way some difference between Gods affection toward his people,
and toward wicked men. It is very observable, that when Gods people come to be
in an afflicted condition, if there shall be any that dare to be so wicked as
to rejoice in that, God will avenge himself on them; yea if they do but look
upon his servants that are in affliction with any kind of contentment, the Lord
will be avenged on them for it. But when the wicked are destroyed, God does not
only give us leave to look at them, but to rejoice and sing praises to God for
their destruction.

I will give you a Text for this, Obad, verse 12. Thou should not have
looked on the day of thy brother, neither should thou haeve rejoiced over
the children of Judah in the day of their destruction. Mark, God has a quarrel
against them that did but look upon the day of their brothers distress, and
rejoice. But when destruction comes upon the enemies of God, then the people
of God may look, and rejoice, and triumph.

Thirdly, It is a song most excellent, in regard of the elegancy of the
expressions, and variety of the matter. For verse 1. He has triumphed
gloriously, or thus, He is become gloriously glorious, or, in magnifying
himself, he has magnified himself. What an elegant expression is here, He is
magnifyed above the magnificent, so some. All Gods works are glorious, but some
are gloriously glorious; and so is this work of God toward his people.

Rivet has a good note upon this: The greatest glory of God, wherein he is
most glorious, it is in doing good to his own people; so (says he) great men
should account it their glory not in spoising others, especially those that are
their own, but in doing good, that was the great glory of God wherein he was
gloriously glorious, in delivering of his people, not in spoiling them. In
Esaias, 14. 20. there is threatened a dishonorable burial to the King of
Babylon, upon this ground, says the Text, Thou have destroyed the land, and
slain thy people: Yea he threatens his seed, The seed of evil doers shall
never be renowned, because he had destroyed his land, and spoiled and slain
his people, his own people.

Again, the elegancy of this song is in those expressions that are in the
abstract; He is Fortitudo mea, and Laus mea, and Salus mea: He is my strength,
and my praise, and my salvation, all in the abstract.

So in that elegant Epiphonema, or patheticall eruption of spirit, which though
it should have been in the close as comprehending all the rest, yet he breaks
forth in the midst of the song, verse 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord?
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. In many other
particulars, we might show abundance of elegancy in this song.

Fourthly, it is not only narrative of what was, but prophetical of what is
to come. A Prophetical song, The Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, the mighty men
of Moab trembling, etc. ver. 15. Fifthly, it is typical, that is, a song that
does typifie out the rejoicing of Gods people in after time, when the Saints
shall overcome Antichrist, then the song of Moses shall be sung over again:
That is a very observable place, Rev. 15. 2. 3. of those that overcome the
beast, the Text says, They sung the song of Moses, that is, they sung that
song, which this of Moses was but a type of.

Sixthly, according to some, this song was a miraculous song, so Augustine has
it in his Tractate, De mirabilibus Scripturae, a miracle worthy of admiration
without measure.

Wherein did he think the Miracle of this song to be?

In this, Enormi admiratione dignum miraculum. August. Ans., 1.
that he imagined that both Moses and all the people, were at one instant
inspired by God to sing this song: this is that which has been thought by
some. But we are not able to make out that there was such a miracle at this
time, but rather God inspired Moses only, and the other people followed Moses
as he sung this song.

I note it the rather for this, because here by we may see that singing is an
Ordinance in the Church of God, not only in the time of the Law, but in the
time of the Gospel, for this place, She shall sing as in the days of her
youth, is spoken of the time of the Gospel, Therefore not only when one man
has an extraordinary gift, (as the Scripture speaks, if any one has a
Psalm, an extraordinary gift in the Congregation of making a Psalm) that he
should sing, but it is an Ordinance to join with others who have the gift of
making a Psalm; so were the people to do here.

The fifth thing to be enquired after is, the reason of their singing, what
cause they had thus to sing in the days of their youth. The reason was because
of their great deliverance they had from Egypt, and therein indeed are many
things considerable, that will afford unto us many excellent observations.
First, then they sang because of their freedom from outward bondage. Bondage
has three things in it.

1. When any one is under the power of another, under any Law without his
consent given, either explicit or implicit.

2. When he serves another without any respect to his own good; only aiming at
the satisfying of the will of him whom he does serve.

3. When he is forced to do what he does with rigor.

Here you may see the difference between a free subject, The differences
between a slave and a free subject.
and a slave; no

Indeed in our service to men, we are to aim at God, and in the condition God
has put us, to seek to glorify him, more then to provide for our selves; but
so far as our service has regard to man only, and looks no further then him,
we are not bound to serve him, further then with respect to our selves and the
good of others. Wherefore subjects may know that they are not made merely for
the will of those that are above them, they indeed serve them, but they serve
them for the good they expect from them.



Now the people of Israel were under bondage in all these three respects.
First, they were forced to serve without any consent at all. Secondly, they
that did govern them, did not at all aim at their good; It is no matter for
them, let them perish as dogs, we will have our work done, and well done too.
When men shall govern so as they care not what become of thousands of others,
so they have their wills satisfied, this is to make free subjects bondslaves.
And thirdly, all was done out of rigor, they forced from the people what they
did, as for their love they cared not for that. Wherefore when they were freed
from these three things, they sung, and they had cause so to do.







Dragon, for his cruelty, Ezekiel. 23. 3. I am against thee Pharaoh, King of
Egypt, the great Dragon.

Fourthly, They were in bondage to a King that was an unnatural King; Gen, 43.
32. The Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is abomination
to to the Egyptians.

Sixthly, They were in bondage under a wilful King, under one who was extremely
set upon his will; we scarce read of any one that ever was so set upon his will
as this King was, therefore they express this in their song which they sung
when they came out of Egypt. Exodus 15. 9. blessing God that they were delivered
from such a wilful Prince as he was. In the 9. ver. four times he says [I
will] I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, I will draw my
sword, and the 5. time, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, but of this
before, to be slaves to such a one, so wilful, was a very hard condition, the
like wilfulness has been already noted of the King of Babylon, and none the
like to these two; the Text speaks from their deliverance in part from under
the King of Babylon also, as if he should say, you did sing when you came up
out of Egypt merrily, and joyfully, because you were delivered from such a
cruel wilful King, you shall sing so again, for you shall be delivered again
from as cruel and wilful a King as he was; for though not all the ten Tribes
came back, yet it was in part fulfilled by many of them.

Lastly, They were in bondage under a suspicious and jealous King, lest they
should grow to a head, and so rise against him, one that thought he could not
confide in them. It is a sad thing when there are such suspicions between King
and people, or people and King, that they cannot tell how to confide and trust
one in another.

Well might they sing therefore in the days of their youth, when they came up
out of the land of Egypt.

Thirdly, They sang when they came up out of the land of Egypt, because Moses
told Pharaoh, that they must go three days journey in the wilderness to
sacrifice unto the Lord their God; they could not sacrifie in Egypt, therefore
when they got freedom to sacrifice to God, this being a great mercy they sang
praises. Fourthly, They sang, because their deliverance The Lord has triumphed
gloriously, has been gloriously glorious; so the words are. And ver. 6. and 7.
mark what the Text says, Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power.
The hand of God is God, strength, but the hand of God in power is a greater
expression. Thirdly, Gods right hand in power. Fourthly, the right hand of God
is glorious in power, this is a mighty expression, surely great was the work of
God in their deliverance. Yea and further, ver. 16. it is said, by the
greatness of his arm, not only Gods hand, but his arm, and the greatres of
his arm was in this work. And ver. 7. In the greatness of thine excellency,
Mulititudine celsitudinis excellentiae, superbiae elationis, in the greatness
of thine excellency, in the multitude of thy height, of thy elation of the
lifting up of thy self in a kind of pride, (for the word that is translated
excellency there signifies pride too.) Now God did this in the multitude of his
excellency, that is, he did such a work toward his people, as had a multitude
of glorious works in it, which if you could analyze, anatomize, you should find
a multitude of glorious excellencies in it. Well might they sing, when God did
manifest himself thus.

All these will afford us excellent and sweet observations by and by.

That at the end of 430. years, even the self same day, the hoasts of the Lord
went out of the land of Egypt; which has reference to a promise, and shows
us that God kept his word to a very day. Hence in verse. 2. of that 15. of Exodus
He is my God, I will prepare him an habitation, my fathers God, and I will
exalt him; As if he should have said, O Lord thou did make promises to our
forefathers, now thou have fulfilled those promises, thou art our God, and our
Fathers God. This made them sing so merrily.

Exo. 3. 7. it is said, they cried unto God by reason of their afflictions,
there were many cries sent up to God before their deliverance, and now being
delivered, this made them sing.



verse. Thou have guided thy people in thy strength to thy holy habitation, and
ver. 17. thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance. The holy Ghost speaks here as if the thing were done already, as
if he should say thus, O Lord thou have indeed granted unto us a great mercy in
delivering us out of Egypt, but herein we prize thy mercy that it is in order
to the bringing us to thy habitation, and it will bring us at length to the
mountain of thy holiness; it is not so much that were are delivered from
bondage, as that we expect to be brought to thy holy habitation.

Now says the Lord, you shall sing as you did then, look what causes you had
then to sing, you shall have the same causes to sing again, when I am
reconciled to you.

The last thing for the explication is, when this was fulfilled, or to what
time this is to be referred.

There are four times that this prophecy aims at, and refers unto.

Isa. 12. the whole chap. is a song blessing God for their return from the
captivity, Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation,
etc.

Romans 9. it is applied to the calling of Jew and Gentile together; when the
Gospel was first preached, Jews and Gentiles being called home, became the
spiritual Israel of God, then there was singing, Romans 15. 20. Again he says,
rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.

The third time that it refers unto, is the delivery of Gods people from under
the tyranny of Antichrist, typified by the tiranay of the Egyptians: for that,
the former place is very full, Rev. 15. 2. there you shall observe, Those that
had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark,
and over the number of his name, stood upon a sea of glass mingled with fire,
having the harps of God in their hands, and they sang the song of Moses, and
the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, etc. In this song,
which I make no question but this Scripture has reference unto, there are
diverse things observable. To take them up briefly by the way.

1. That they that sung were those that had gotten victory over the beast, over
his image, and over his mark; that is a full victory, not only abominating
Antichrist himself, but any image, any character of him, any thing whereby they
might seem to allow of him, to be owned by him.

2. They stood upon a sea of glass mingled with fire. The sea of glass, I K.
25. 13. The sea was of brass, which is far thicker and darker. But there was
fire mingled with this sea of glass, that is, though they had a clearer
doctrine then before, yet there were many contentions in the Church through
many different opinions, and much division there was even amongst the godly. It
was a sad condition indeed, yet it is ordinary, especially when Doctrines
come to be first cleared, to have great contentions grow in the Church among
godly men. It is no wonder though good men should be of different opinions, yea
and have some heat of spirit one against another, when the light first breaks
forth. When men are in the dark they sit together, and walk not at such a
distance; but when light comes, it cannot be expected but there will be
differences. But yet mark, the godly then, they did not reject the doctrine,
because there was fire mingled with it, because there was heat of contention,
but the Text says, they were there with their harps in their hands, they were
professing this doctrine and rejoicing that ever they lived to that time, to
have the Gospel so clearly revealed unto them.

And they sang the song of Moses, and not only of Moses, but the song of the
Lamb too. What was that? First, great and mavelous are thy works, in that we
see we are delivered from Antichristian bondage, as the people of Israel were
delivered from Egyptian bondage with a mighty hand of thine; Oh it is a
mavelous work of God that we are thus at liberty. Therefore know this, that
whenever the Church shall be delivered from Antichristian bondage, it shall
be a mavelous work of God, therefore we may not be discouraged, because we
meet with some difficulties by the way, for we shall never be delivered, but so
as it shall appear to be a wonder; if we should be delivered without
difficulties, we should not see the marvellousness of the work.

Further, Just and true are thy ways. God in that deliverance will show the
fulfilling of all his promises, and he will fully satisfy the hearts of his
people, who have been a long time seeking him, and suffering for him. Whereas
the adversaries, because God did forbear a while in his patience and let them
prosper, thought there was no God in heaven that looked upon them, they scorned
at the fastings, and prayers, and faith of the Saints; But though the hearts of
the Saints were ready to fail, yet at last they shall say, Just and true are
thy ways, Lord we now see all thy good word fulfilled, all thy promises made
good; now we see it is not in vain to seek thee, it is not in vain to wait
upon thee, for just and true are thy ways.

O thou King of Saints. God will appear then to be a King of Saints. He is
indeed the King of the world now, and the King of his Saints, but he does not
appear so clearly, the kingdom of Jesus Christ as King of Saints has been
much darkened in the world; We have some what indeed of the Priestly and
Prophetical office of Christ made known to us, but very little of his kingly
office; but when God shall fully deliver his people, then they shall magnify
Jesus Christ as the king of Saints in an especial manner.

Lastly, they shall say, Who will not fear thee thou King of Nations? As if
they should say, we see now it is good to fear God, we see now God has made
a difference between him that fears him, and him that fears him not. The
Angel that John saw, Apoc. 14. 6, 7. Flying in heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel to preach, cries with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him;
The fear of God will be mighty upon the hearts of the Saints in those times.
This shall be the song of Moses that this Scripture aymeth at, they shall thus
sing as they did in the days of their youth, when they came up out of the land
of Egypt, yea and the truth is, their song shall be much more glorious.

Isa. 51. 11.
is the great calling of the Jews, then the Scripture says, Everlasting joy
shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain gladness and joy, and all sorrow
and mourning shall flee away. They shall so sing, as never mourn more in this
world, in regard of any malice and rage of their adversaries. This was not
fulfilled at their return out of the Babylonish captivity, therefore there is
yet a time for the fulfilling of it, and the Scripture is clear about the
fulfilling it, even in this world; that place Rev. 21. 4. is a repetition of
that prophecy, he says there, God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more sorrow nor crying. When Jews and Gentiles shall
join together, then they shall siug indeed to purpose, as they did in the
days of their youth, when they came up out of the land of Egypt.

First, it is a great mercy for people to be delivered from outward bondage.
Obser.
It will be found a great mercy when the world shall be delivered from their
outward bondage, when men shall see they were born freemen, and not slaves,
though Subjects, yet not slaves, when men shall see that the world was not made
for twenty or thirty to do what they list, and they to account all the rest as
beasts, yea dogs; as if it were not so much for the lives of thousands of them
to go, as for their humors and lusts not to be satisfied; but when men shall
know, that they are men and not beasts, and so shall live like men, Obs.
and not like beasts, to be at the will of others, this will be a great mercy.
But to be delivered from Antichristian bondage, is a greater mercy, then it was
for the children of Israel to be delivered from their Egyptian bondage. For,

First, Antichristian bondage worse then Egyptian.
when they were in the Egyptian bondage, we read not that their Pharaoh did
not this, but Antichrist forced to Idolatry.

Secondly, Though Pharaoh laid heavy taskes and burdens upon them, yet he did
not kill them, indeed at length they killed their first borne, but the people
of Israel themselves might have their lives still, though with hardship.

Thirdly, It was the affliction of Gods people to be in bondage in Egypt,

4. Though they were under Egyptian bondage, yet they were delivered Come out
of her my people, lest you be partaker of her plagues. You must not think to
escape so as they escaped out of Egypt; if you stay in that bondage, you will
be involved in their plagues. With what an eye therefore should we look upon
those who would bring us into this bondage again, when God has begun to give
us a little reviving? Jer. 37. 20. O my Lord the King (says Jeremy) let my
supplication, I pray thee be accepted before thee, that thou cause me not to
return to the house of Jonathan the Scribe, lest I die there. So let us ery to
the King of heaven and earth, O Lord our King, let our supplication be accepted
before thee, since we are begun to be delivered from that bondage, do not
cause us to return to that house again. Obser.
The second is, A reconciled condition is a singing condition. When there is a
harmony between heaven and the soul, between God and a sinner, there is a sweet
melody indeed, there may well be singing, Esaias, 35. 10. The ra^somed of the
Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads. And Esaias 44. 23. Sing Oye heavens, for the Lord has d^ne it; s^out ye
lower parts of the earth, break forth into singing ye mountains, We being
justified by faith having peace with God, says the Apostle, we not only
rejoice in hope of glory, but we even rejoice and boast in tribulation: Having
peace with God, though war withal the world, we rejoice.

Thirdly, Obser.
It is a great mercy, when Magistrates and people shall generally join
together in praising God, when they shall sing as they did in the days of
their youth, (for that is the promise.) How is that? Moses begins, and
Miriam follows, the leaders of Israel, and then all the people join
together, and answer one another in their singing.

When that day shall come that God shall stir up the hearts of Magistrates and
great ones, that there shall be singing Hallelujahs to him that sits upon
the throne, and the Lamb for evermore; and when God shall generally move the
hearts of the people, that they shall answer one another in their singing, and
so join in a sweet melody; this will be a blessed time indeed. Now perhaps in
one place there is singing, and blessing God for what is done, in another place
there is cursing, and cursing those that do sing. Some men's hearts are
rejoicing in the great things God does, other men's hearts fret and rage when
they hear of the great works of the Lord, this makes no melody in heaven.
Perhaps now in the family the Husband sings, and the wife frets; perhaps the
wife sings, and the malignant husband is enraged; the servant rejoices, and
the master chafeth; the children sing, and the parents vex; this is harsh
music. This is our condition at this day; there are better times coming, when
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, and all the people shall join in singing praise to
our God.

4. Thankfulness to God, Obser.
for mercy cannot be without joyfulnesse. A grumbling, pensive, sad, dumpish
disposition, cannot be a true thankful heart as it ought. God will not accept
in this sense of the bread of mourners. It is grievous to the Spirit of God,
that we should be pensive and sad in the midst of abundance of mercies.

5. They shall sing there. There, where? at the door of hope in the valley of
Achor. You may remember in the opening of that valley of Achor, I gave you what
might be understood by it according to the most, that is, that God would make
the greatest trouble and affliction of his Church to be a door of hope, to
bring mercy to them: And if you take it in that sense, here rises an excellent
observation.

When God brings into straits, Obser.
yet if he shall sanctify our straits, making them means of good to us, we
have cause to rejoice. You have an excellent Text, Isa. 35. 6, 7. For in the
wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert, and the pa^ched
ground shall become a poole, and the thirsty land springs of water. Those
things that seem to go most contrary to you, I will work good unto you out of
them, says God. Well, what is the fruit of this? This is set as the reason of
the words immediately before, Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the
tongue of the dumb sing. Because the Lord shall make the parched ground become
a poole, and the thirsty land springs of water, this shall make the lame to
leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb to sing. Though our tongues be
dumb, yet it should make us sing when we see God working good out of
contraries, when we see things that of themselves tend to our ruin, and would
bring us to misery, that are as the valley of Achor, yet God working good out
of them; if we have the hearts of men in us, much more the hearts of
Christians, though we were dumb before, this should make us sing. Yea all this
is brought in as an argument to strengthen the weak hands, and the feeble
knees, and as a reason why those that have weak hearts should not fear,
because God works good out of that which seems the greatest evil; verse. 4.
Say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not, and then
follows this in the 6. verse.

Are we in the valley of Achor, The Saints should sing in the midst of their
straits^
a place of trouble and straits? we have cause to sing even in this valley of
Achor, for we have not yet been brought into any straits, but God has brought
good out of them; he has turned the parched ground into a pool, and the
thirsty land into springs of water. It is our great sin, that when God calls
us to singing, we are yet concluding of rejecting; we are ready to think if we
be brought into the valley of Achor, we are presently cast off: Oh no, God
calls you to singing, nothwithstanding you meet with difficulties. Isa. 49.
13. Sing O heavens (says the Text there) he joyful O earth, break forth into
singing O mountains, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy
upon his afflicted; But mark now the next words, But Zion said, the Lord has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me. At that very time, when the Lord
was calling for singing, even then they were concluding of rejecting. Take we
heed this be not our condition.

But take the words as then I told you as I conceived them to be the meaning of
the spirit of God, that this valley of Achor was some special mercy that God
gave at first as a door of hope to further mercies he would give afterward, and
there they shall sing.

Then the observation is,

When the Lord is beginning with his Saints in the ways of mercy, Obser.
though they have not all that they would have, yet it is a singing condition.
Though you be but yet brought into the valley of Achor, and be but at the door
of hope, and not entered into the door, though you have not yet got the
possession of all the mercy God intends for you, yet God expects you should
sing. You must not stand grumbling, We must rejoice at the beginnings of mercy
though we have not al we desire.
whining, complaining, and murmuring at the door, because you have not what you
would have; though God makes you wait at the door, you must stand singing
there. It may be said of Gods mercy as of his word in Psalm. 119. 130. The
entrance into thy word gives light, so the entrance of Gods works of mercy
gives light. Psalm. 138. 5. Yea they shall sing in the ways of the Lord, for
great is the glory of the Lord. In the ways of the Lord they shall sing, though
God be but in the ways of his mercy, and they have not what they would have,
yet they shall sing.

This is certainly one great reason why our door of hope is not yet opened to
us as we desire, or at least that we have not that entrance that we would have
at that door, because we stand murmuring; yea we stand quarrelling one with
another at the door, whereas God expects that we should stand singing and
praising his name there. Though we have not what we desire, yet let us bless
God that ever we lived to this day, to see so much of God as we have done,
though we should never see more, though the mercy we look for should be
reserved for the generation that shall follow, yet we have cause to bless God
while we live, that we have seen and do see so much of God as we have done and
daily do. Lect. 15
Let us stand at our Fathers door singing, and if we must sing at the foot of
Zion, what song shall we sing when we come to the height? Ier. 31. 12. They
shall come and sing in the height of Zion they shall flow to the bountifulness
of the Lord. If there be any one with whom God is dealing in a way of mercy,
though you can see but a little light thorough the keyhole, yet you should
sing there. There are many poor souls, with whom God is beginning in very
gracious ways, yet because they have not their minds enlightened, their hearts
humbled as they desire, power over corruptions, abilities to perform duties as
they expect, they are presently ready to conclude against themselves, surely
the Lord will not have mercy, we are rejected. They think they have nothing,
because they have not what they would. O unthankful heart! This is the very
thing that keeps thee under bondage, because when the Lord is setting open a
door of hope unto thee, thou will not take notice of it, but art presently
murmuring and repining, because thou have not all that thou would. Would
thou enter in at this door, and have God perfect the mercy he has begun? take
notice of the beginnings, and bless God for what thou have. This would be an
observation of marvey lous use to many a drooping soul, if they would learn by
this days coming hither, to sing hereafter at the door of hope.

Yet further, Obs.
They shall sing there as in the days of their youth. It is the condition of
Gods own people many times, when first they enjoy liberty, then to be in a
singing condition, Obser.
but afterward to lose their joy. At first indeed when Gods mercies were fresh
to them, in the days of their youth, O how their hearts were taken! how then
they sung merrily and cheerfully, Moses and all the people! Fresh mercies
affect much:
but in process of time it appears they had not kept up this singing, this
harmonious, this melodious heart of theirs, therefore God promises they should
sing as in the days of their youth.

We find it so in people, when they first come to enjoy liberty out of
bondage, Church liberties, Oh how they rejoice in them! how do they bless God
for them! O how sweet are these mercies at their very hearts! they rejoice that
ever they lived to this time; but within a while the flower of their youth is
gone, and they soon have the teats of their virginity bruised. At first
indeed, O the sweetness! but stay a while and you shall find contention or
scandoll arising amongst them, or deadness of heart befalling them. Oh the
blessed condition that God has brought us to, to have these liberties and
ordinances according to his own way! but within a while we may say as the
Apostle to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 15.
Where is the blessedness you spoke of? They would have pulled out their eyes
for Paul, What is become of all now? All their beauty and glory is quite
damped, let us take heed that when our hearts seem to be raised and mightily
affected with mercies, we do not soon loose our vigor and heat. It has been
so with England, when they have had fresh mercies at first, they rejoiced in
them exceedingly. I have read of the City of Berne, when they were first
delivered from Antichrist, they wrote the day of their deliverance upon pillars
with letters of gold. Was it not so with us here in England?

I will only instance in that deliverance upon the fifth of November, Lect. 14.
how mightily was both King and Parliament affected with it! their hearts were
exceedingly up, then there was blessing God, for their deliverance from
Papists, then there were prayers and thanksgivings set forth, and in them, this
expression against Popery, Whose faith is faction, whose Religion is rebellion,
whose practice is murdering of souls and bodies; When the mercy was fresh,
how did their spirits work? then they professed against all kind of Popery.
Read but the Proclamation about the solemnity of that time, and the
expressions of the prayers then set forth, and one would have thought verily
then that Popery should never have prevailed in England again; who would ever
have thought it possible that a Popish Army should ever have had any
countenance in England more? Certainly, if a Popish Army had been raised at
that time when men's hearts were so up, all the people of the land (if it had
been but with clubs) would have risen and beaten them to pieces.

It is so with many young people, when God first begins to work upon their
hearts, O how are they for God! then their spirts are mightily up for Christ,
Psalm, 90. 14. O satisfy us early with thy mercies, and then we shall be glad
and rejoice all the days of our lives; It is a sweet thing when the latter
part of that prayer follows, when God satisfies young people with his mercy,
and that satisfaction abides, so as they rejoice all the days of their lives
afterward. The Lord does many times satisfy young ones with his mercy, but
they quickly grow dead and cold, and their hearts are soon hardened and
polluted, Obser.
and they do not rejoice all the days of their lives. Another Observation,
that restored and recovered mercies, are very sweet and precious mercies. They
shall sing as in the days of their youth; They were once in a blessed sweet
singing condition, they had lost it, but now God promises to recover them. Job
29. 2. O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me,
when his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I warlked thorough
darkness; as I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon
my Tabernacle. Job desires this earnestly, that he might have restored,
recovered mercies; What a happy condition should I be in then, says he, if it
were now with me as in the days of my youth! May not many in this place say
so? God has been gracious to them in former days, he has given many sweet
manifestations of his love, many soule-ravishing communications of himself unto
them! but how have they lost them! They may well say, O that it were with us as
in the days of our youth! Oh that God would restore to us what mercy we once
had! what a blessed condition should we be in then! But God here gives a
gracious promise, that he will restore them, that he will give them that which
is the petition of David, Psa. 51. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation; Lord
I have lost it, O that I might have it again! How happy should I be! So Ps.
132. 1. By the Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept there when we
remembered Zion, we hanged our harps upon the willowes.

They were in this sad condition, but if one should have come to them and have
said, what will you say if you shall be restored again and go to Zion, to
Jerusalem again, and have songs there, as much and as delightful as before?
their hearts could not have held in them. This mercy would be like that wine
mentioned, Cant. 7. 9. that is so sweet, that it causes the lips of those that
are asleep to speak; If there be any life left, such a mercy will raise and
actuate it. Psalm. 126. 1. 2. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion,
our mouths were filled with laughter, and our tongues with singing, when God
granted them a recovered mercy. As a poor prodigal, that has left his fathers
house, and afterward is come to beggary and misery, and is under bondage, and
is almost starved; he sits down under a hedge, wringing his hands, falls a
lamenting the loss of his Fathers house, and considering what comfort he had
in his Fathers presence, cries out of his folly and madness; but if one
should come and say to him, what will you say if your Father should be
reconciled to you, and send for you home, and promise to put you in as
comfortable a condition as ever? O how would this cause singing in his heart!
Thus God promises to his people, that he would restore them to that singing
condition they had lost.

They shall sing as in the days of their youth.

That which made this mercy so sweet, was because it was a promised mercy.
Hence this Note.

Promised mercies are sweet mercies. Obser. Promised mercies are sweet.
Luke 16. 61. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, and has raised up a home of salvation to us, in the house
of his servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets. And ver.
77. To perform the mercy promised; there is the cause of singing, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, that has performed the mercy promised.

Giving out of a promise is sweet to a gracious heart, it can sing then; much
more sweet is the promise when it comes to be fulfilled. 2 Chronicles. 20. 17.
Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, there is the promise. Mark now
how Jehosaphat and the people were affected with the promise: And Jehosaphat
bowed his head with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem fell before the Lord, worshipped the Lord. And the Levites, and
the child en of the Koathites, and the children of the Korhites shall stand up
to praise the Lord God of Israel with a loud voice on high. And ver. 21. He
appointed singers unto the Lord that should praise the beauty of holiness, and
to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever. Jehos^phat had not
got the promise fulfilled, it was only made; they had not got the victory over
their enemies, but only a promise that God would be with them, and presently
Jehosaphat and all the people fell a singing.

A gracious heart sees cause enough to sing, if he have got but a promise, but
much more when he has got the performance.

If the promise of a mercy has such sweetness in it, what sweetness then
has the mercy of the promise?

But the promise was not only barely fulfilled, but fulfilled with a high hand,
and that made them sing. This may be another Observation:

When God appears remarkably, with a high hand in delivering his people, then
the mercy is to be accounted a precious mercy indeed, and all the people of the
Lord should sing and praise him. Esaias 43. 19. 20. mark there, when God had told
of an extraordinary hand of his in a way of mercy, says he, I will plant them
in the wilderness, and so goes on: Then (says he) shall this be, that they
may see, and know, and understand, and consider, that the hand of the Lord has
done this, and the Holy One of Israel has created it. When Gods imediate hand
does a thing, when it helps a people in an extraordinary way, he expects that
they should see, and know, and consider, and understand together: All these
expressions are heaped one upon another. And if any people be called to this,
we are at this day; God has appeared extraordinarily to us. Oh that we had
eyes to see! Oh that we had hearts to consider and understand, that we might
give God the glory that is due to him!

The Fifteenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 15. 16. -- And she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth,
and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.

And it shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou shall call me Ishi; and
shall call me no more Baali.


SOme few Observations are to be added to the 15. verse.

Mercies that have been much sought for, that have had many cries sent up to
God to obtain, when once they are granted, should cause singing forth the
praises of God. The people of Israel cried much, before God granted them
deliverance from Egypt, Exodus 3. 7. I have heard their cries, says God: And
God says here, They shall sing as they did when they came out of Egypt. Psalm.
22. 26. They shall praise the Lord that seek him. The more we seek God for any
mercy, the more we shall praise God when we have obtained that mercy. Psalm. 28.
6. 7. Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplication;
my heart trusted in him, and I am helped. Mercies got by prayers are sweet.
What follows? Therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song will I
praise him. Because God had heard the voice of his supplication, therefore with
his song he would praise him. Those mercies that we get by crying unto God,
those are singing mercies indeed. Such mercies as come to us only through a
general providence, without seeking to God, they are not such sweet mercies;
as Hannah said to Eli concerning her son whom she had got by prayer, (and
therefore named him [ Samuel,] Sought of God) As thy soul lives, this is the
son, this is the child that I was here praying for, and the Lord has given me
my petition which I asked of him.

This she spoke, Lect. 15
triumphing in Gods goodness. Mercies got by prayer may be triumphed in. When
you want a mercy, pray much for it; the more you pray for it, the more you will
sing when you have it, and the less prayer went before, the less singing will
follow after.

Further; Obser.
Mercies that make way for the enjoyment of Ordinances are very sweet mercies,
singing mercies, They shall sing as they did when they came up out of the land
of Egypt. Why did they sing when they came up out of the land of Egypt? Mercies
that make way for ordinances are sweet.
Because that mercy, that deliverance from Egypt made way to that rich mercy of
the enjoyment of Gods worship in his Ordinances. How does that appear? Thus,
Exodus 15. where they sung when they came out of Egypt, ver. 2. I will build him
an habitation says Moses, together with the people; they rejoiced in that,
that now they were going on in the way to build God an habitation; but more,
ver. 13. Thou have guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation: as if
Moses and the Israeli^es should say, this indeed is a great deliverance that we
are delivered out of bondage, but what is this but in order to a higher mercy
that we look at yet further, that is, guiding of thy people in thy strength to
thy habitation? we look upon this present mercy of our deliverance, for which
we do now sing and give thee praise, but in order to the guiding of thy people
to thy habitation, and that in thy strength: as if Moses should say, Lord there
will be a great many difficulties between this and our coming to enjoy thy
habitation, but thou will guide us in thy strength, thy strength shall carry
thy people along till it bring them to thy habitation; this was that which made
them sing so cheerfully as they did. And again, v. 17. Thou shall bring them
in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord,
which thou have made for thee to dwell in, in the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy
hands have established. This was that that made them so sing. So David, Psa.
27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after; that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple; That is a choice mercy,
therefore all mercies that make way for that mercy, are indeed sweet mercies.
So we should look upon all our deliverances, from outward troubles, and
whatsoever peace God gives us to enjoy, as sweet and comfortable, in order to
this mercy of enjoying Gods mountain, of living in God^ habitation, that we
may dwell there all the days of our life.

A third Observation is,

New mercies should renew the memory of old. They shall sing as in the day when
they came up out of the land of Egypt, that is, I will grant to them yet
further mercies, New mercies should renew the memory of old mercies.
and that mercy that I shall grant, shall renew the memory of all the former
mercies they have enjoyed from me. As new guilt renews the memory of former
guilt, so new mercies the memory of former. Has God delivered you from any
danger now? were you never delivered before? if but when you were a child,
those deliverances you now have should bring into your memory what then were.

So in a nation, does God grant to a nation any new mercy? this new mercy
should bring into the memory of that nation all the former mercies that ever
that nation has received. Psalm. 68. 26. Bless ye God in the congregatations,
even the Lord from the fountain of Israel. Not only you who are true
Israelites, but in your blessing God now, let present mercies be to you but as
streams to bring you to the fountain. Consider of all the mercies along till
you come to the fountain, even that Covenant that God has made with Israel.

A fourth is, Obser.
All former mercies to Gods people should help Faith in believing future
mercies. That is raised from hence. Why does the Prophet tell them or coming
out of the land of Egypt? He speaks of some mercy that was to come to Israel;
Former mercies must strengthen our faith in future.
now he names this coming out of the land of Egypt, that he might help and
strengthen their Faith in the believing of what mercy was to come: As if he
should say, That God that has wrought so wonderfully for you, in delivering
you out of the land of Egypt, is able, and willing to make good his word in
granting to you deliverance for time to come. We have excellent Scriptures for
this, as Psalm. 66. 6. He turned the sea into dry land, they went thorough the
flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him. Mark, they went thorough the
flood, and there did we rejoice in him: How did we rejoice in him? it was many
hundred years after that we came to rejoice: But upon the manifestation of
Gods great goodness to his people in former days, our faith comes to be
strengthened in Gods mercies for our times, and there did we rejoice in him, we
did rejoice in the work of God when they went thorough the Red Sea upon dry
land, for it is an argument of Gods mercy to us of the power, goodness, and
faithfulness of God to us. Another temarkable Text is, Hos. 12. 4. He had
power over the Angel, Obs.
he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us: Mark, he had power over
the Angel, he found him in Bethel; Who was that? It was Jacob, who many years
before, but there he spoke with us, he did not speak with Jacob only, but
there he spoke with us, that is, whatsoever goodness the Lord did show to
Jacob in Bethel, it concerned us for the strengthening of our faith, Mat. 22.
31. 32. Have ye not read that which was spoken unto you, saying, I am the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? This was spoken to
Moses many hundred years before; but that expression of Gods grace then, was a
strengthening the faith of the godly, when Christ spoke, and is the same to us
now. Obser.


A fifth is, where there is a proportion of mercies, there ought to be a
proportion of thankfulness. They shall sing as they did in the day when they
came out of Egypt. I will grant unto you as great mercies as they had, and I
expect as great thankfulness from you as I had from them; as they sung to my
praise, so must you sing too. God shows as much mercy to you now, as he has
done heretofore, I appeal now to you, nay God appeals to your consciences, Is
there a proportion of thankfulness as of mercies?

There has been a time when you have sung to the praise of God, when your
hearts have been enlarged to give God praise, why should it not be so now? A
sixth observation is, deliverance out of Egypt is an ascending condition, That
arises from the words as they are in the Original, They shall ascend out of
the land of Egypt, so I told you the words were in the Hebrew; as then God
would never rest till he brought them up to Mount Zion, so when God begins
to deliver his people from Antichristian bondage, they should never rest in
their spirits, until they be got to the height of Reformation, to the height
of their deliverance, that is, to come to enjoy Gods Ordinances in his own
ways, in the purity and the power of them. This is our misery and our
b^senesse, that upon some little deliverance we presently are ready to rest,
whereas we should rise yet higher and higher, and expect that God should go on
still with us, and raise us in the ways of mercy, until he has brought us
even to the top of Mount Zion.

Seventhly, From the connection of these words with what follows, They shall
sing as in the day when they came up out of the land of Egypt, and they shall
call me Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali, for I will take even the very
names of Baalim out of their mouths, and they shall remember them no more, that
is, there shall be a most glorious reformation, and they shall be delivered from
all the remainders of their Idolatrous worship, they shall not so much as
remember their very names, the Reformation shall be so perfect;

From thence the Observation is,

When God raises the spirits of people to rejoice in his mercy, then is the
time for them if ever, to set up a through Reformation; then when their hearts
are warmed, inflamed, and enlarged with the goodness of God unto them, then is
the time to cast out all the remainders of all superstition, of all kind of
false worship. I will give you two excellent Scriptures for this, the one is,
Esaias 30. 19. Thou shall weep no more (says he) he will be very gracious unto
thee at the voice of thy cry; The Lord promises abundance of mercy, he tells
them that they shall weep no more, he will be very gracious; now mark what
follows in the 22. verse, Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven Images
of silver, the ornaments of thy molten Images of gold, thou shall cast them
away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence; The other
Scripture is, 2 Chronicles. 30. 26. there you find that there was great joy in
Jerusalem, such joy as the text says, was not since the days of Solomon, it
was upon the celebration of their Passe-over, there had not been the like;
Mark then in the beginning of the next Chapter, says the text, when all this
was finished, that is, when they had celebrated a Passover so full, and had
such abundance of joy, such a joy as had not been in Jerusalem since the time
of Solomon; Now all Israel went out to the Cities of Judah, and brake the
Images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places, and
the Altars out of all Judah and Benjamin. Their hearts were inflamed with the
joy they had, and they went with resolution and brake down (...) ^^ages, etc.
And mark it, the Text says, it was (...) that did this; (...) went out into
the Cities of Judah, and brake the the Images in pieces, and threw down the
high places, and the Altars out of all Judah: What had Israel to do with
Judah? Judah and Israel were divided; But now their hearts were so inflamed for
God, that they were not able to abide any false worship amongst their brethren,
though it belonged to Judah, yet they would go help their brethren to cast
down all their Images, and to cut down their Groves and Altars, this was when
their hearts were warmed with joy in blessing the name of God. When God once
warmeth the hearts of people, it is much what they will do for God then: They
will not stand examining every nicety, but they will fall upon the work
directly; the joy of the Lord was the strength of their hearts at this time: as
it is with the lusts of wicked men, when they get into company, at feasts, in
Taverns, and there they are drinking, while their lusts are warmed, then what
desperate resolutions have they to do wickedness! So when Gods Saints are
exercised in Gods Ordinances, and are refreshed with the sweet love of God,
when that lies glowing at their hearts, what strong resolutions have they for
God! then they can do any thing for God.

Now the very name of Baalim must be taken away.

VERSE 16. And it shall be in that day, says the Lord, that thou call me Ishi,
and shall call me no more Baali.

17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall
be no more remembered by their name.

Here we have as full a Prophecy and promise of as thorough reformation of the
Church, as any I know we have in Scripture, God has a time to reform his
Church thoroughly, the very names of their Idols, the very remembrance of them
shall be taken away. This reformation is ^ods work, I will do it says God, I
will take away the names of Baalim

They shall call me Ishi, and no more Baali.]

Why? what great difference is there between these two names Ishi and Baali,
that God will have one but not the other?

The truth is, both of them signify even almost the same thing; Both of them
are names very fit for a wife to call her husband by, Ishi is my husband, and
Baali is my husband too. But the word Ishi comes from a word that signifies
strength, the woman being the weaker vessel, therefore she calls her husband
Ishi, my strength; for the husband should be strength to the wife, he should
live with her as a man of knowledge, he should be a protection to her, he
should help her in all her weaknesses, and afflictions. Baali signifies my
Lord, as well as my husband; it is a word that moteth rule and authority, Ishi
is a word that has more love and familiarity in it; Baali is a word that
notes the inferiority of the wife to the husband. Now God says he will be
called Ishi, but not Baali; why? there is no hurt in the word Baali it self;
the word Baali is a very good word, and has a good signification, and it is
proper to God, as any word that can be given to him by the Church (but that God
did forbid it here) for it is no more when the church calls God Baali, then if
the Church should say, O God that art my Lord, my husband, who art to rule and
govern me;

Yea and we find that God gives to himself this name, Isa. 54. 5. Thy Maker is
thy [ husband,] so it is in your books, but the word in the Hebrew is the same
that we have here, Thy Maker is thy [ Baali,] so that husband and Baal is the
very same. But now because they had abused this word Baal, and given into their
Idols, therefore God would have no more of it; though it was a good word, a
significant word, and as proper to God as any was. As the word Tyrannus was a
name once for a King, Kings were called Tyrants, without any such ill
signification as now it carries with it; but because they had gotten the sole
power into their hands, they did so oppress, abuse their power, therefore
oppressors were called Tyrants. So the Latin word fur, which is for a thief,
it was once the ordinary word for a servant, Fures, and Servi were wont to be
the same, and without any ill signification; but because afterward many
servants grew to be false, to steal from their Masters, therefore fures was
altogether taken in the worst part, only for thieves. So Sophista, a
Sophister, was one that studied wisdom, but because they did so much
degenerate, many under the color of the study of wisdom, deceived others,
therefore the name Sophister was used in the worst part. I might instance in
many other.

For further opening this. May not the name Baal be mentioned? God tells them
that he would take away the name of Baalim out of their mouths. Why may not we
use this word Baali in our mouths?

To this I answer, Yes, it is not unlawful for us to mention the word,
notwithstanding this, for the holy Ghost a long time after this mentions the
word in an historical way: Romans 11. 4. he speaks there of those that had not
bowed their knees to Baal, the word you see is mentioned and remembered by the
spirit of God, therefore it was not a sin; nay not only the word Baal, b^r it
is not unlawful to mention the names of any Idols of the heathen, for the holy
Ghost does so likewise, Acts 18. 11. speaking of the ship that they sailed in,
he says there, whose sign was Castor and Pollux, the names of two heathen
Idols. And you may observe that here in the text the remembering is as much
forbidden as the mentioning. Now if it were a finne merely to mention the names
of the heathen gods, it were a sin to remember them. Therefore God means the
mentioning of them Honoris gratia, any way for their honor, or without
detestation of them.

The words being thus opened, you have many excellent observations out of them
very useful and seasonable for our times.

First, Obser.
There is a great deal of danger in words and names. You shall call me Ishi, I
will not have you call me Baali, I will not have that word used; the Devil
has got much by words and names, heretofore by the word Puritan, though (...)
knew not what it meant; now by this new name that he has of late invented; The
danger of superstitious and Idolatrous names.
the devil has always some words, some names for distinction of men, in
which he sees advantage is to be had. The speaki^^ ^f the ways of (...) the
language of superstition does much hurt. (...) a notabl^ (...) ^etion from the
Papists themselves concerning that, it is in the Rhemists Testament in their
notes upon that place, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Keep that which is committed to thy trust,
avoiding profane, and vain bablings, so we translate it, they translate it,
profane novelties, this is their note upon it; Let us (say they) keep our
forefathers words, and we shall easily keep our old faith; you shall see that
we had not long since the very spirit of these men breathing in many amongst
us. The Heretics call repentance amendment, but let us say they keep the old
word Penance, they say the Lords Supper, but we will keep the old word Mass;
they say Communion Table, but let us keep the old word Altar; Was it not just
thus with us? the call Elders and Ministers, let us say Priests; they say
superintendents, but let us keep the word Bishop; (it is a Scripture word
indeed, but not in that sense they call it, for in the Scripture sense every
Presbyter is a Bishop) they say Sacrament, let us keep the word Sacrifice and
Host; they say Congregation, let us keep the word Church; they morning, evening
prayer, let us keep the words Mattens, even-song; and so Oblation and Lent, and
Palmsunday, and Christmas day, etc. This was the policy of Papists, and it has
been the policy of many of us to bring in popery by. Let us take heed of this,
for the Devil is subtle in this; for though these words have some kind of
good sense in the Original, yet there is danger in the use of them. Melior in
ore christianc ritus loquend^ Eeclesiasticus, Aug. in praef. enar. in Ps. 93.
ep. 200 non debemus consuetudinem serntonis humani in epta loquasitate
confundare.
Augustine in his preface to his narration upon the Psalms has this
expression. It is a better thing in the mouths of Christians to speak according
to the manner of the Church, so we may well say, it had been better that in the
mouths of Protestants, there had been the ordinary language of Protestants, not
the language of Papists. Certainly if God had not been very merciful unto us,
the very language of Papists that began to be amongst us would have done
abundance of mischief, take heed as long as you live of the language of
Papists, whatsoever pretense they may have for their words. In that place of
the Rhemists Testament quoted, they say, Let us take heed of the words of
heretics, they there confess that heretics (as they call us) use many words
that have no great hurt in them, but because they are the words of heretics,
let us not (say they) use them; They are wise enough, they will not use our
words, though they confess the words themselves have no harm in them, yet
because they are our proper language (as they make them) distinct from
themselves, therefore no Catholics should use them, why should not we be as
wise as they?

The second Observation, Idolatry is a most loathsome and abominable thing; Obs.
Why? Surely that is most loath some that we may not so much as mention, that
we may not so much as remember. We must seek to abolish the very name, the very
remembrance of Idolatry as much as possibly we can. First, one that we hate, we
do not love his presence, we do like his company.

Secondly, if we hate him very much, we do not love so much as to see him; The
loathsomeness of Idolatry.
and if perhaps we do see him afar off, out hearts rise, that is a second
degree. But thirdly, if our hatred be so great thee we cannot endur^^^ name
him, that is a greater degree of hatred. But fourthly, if we cannot endure to
remember him, that is more then to name him. Yet thus should it be in our
manifestation of our hatred to Idolatry: we should not admit it into our
company, much less then to join in the Ordinances of God. We should not admit,
no not the very sight of it, no not the name of it, no not the memory of it
without a great deal of indignation. Jer. 44. 4. Oh do not this abominable
thing, says the Lord there; The Lord cries out with a shriek as it were, Oh!
do not this abominable thing, as if any of you should see one ready to murder
your child, or to cut the throat of your father, you would shrick out, Oh! what
mean you to do? do not such a horrible villainy as this; so God cries out as it
were with a shriek, do not this abominable thing. It is observable in the
second commandment, that God says he will visit the sin upon the third
generation of them that hate him: none seem to love God more then
wil-worshippers; they will not only worship God as he has appointed, but will
devise ways of their own, and yet God charges the breakers of no commandment
with hatred of him but only these. As if God should say, you pretend love to
me, in that you will find out new ways to worship me by, you pretend decency
and reverence, but I account it hating me, you can provoke me in nothing more.
Tertullian in his book De Idololatria, Principale crimen generis, humani,
summusseculi reaatus tota causa judicii, Idolatria. Tertul. lib. de Idololat.
Little
has this expression; Idolatry is the principal hey nous crime of mankind, it
is the chief guilt of the world, and the only cause of judgment in the world.

It were good therefore, seeing God hates it, and loathes it so much, that we
should hate and loath it, and therefore even cast out the name and the memory
of it; it were a happy thing if this could be obtained, that now the names as
of Popish, so of heathenish Idols could be got out from the Church; But I know
not how it comes to pass that we Christians do still retain the use of their
names, the very days of the week am^^g us are called by the names of Planets,
or Heathen Gods: Not that I think it a sin, when it is the ordinary language of
the world, so to speak as may be understood; for the Apostle (as I said before)
mentions the name of Castor and Pollux: but if there could be an alteration
by a general consent, it were a thing desirable (as our brethren in
New England do) and it were very desirable likewise, that our children might
not be educated in the use of heathen Poems, where the names of heathen Idols
are kept up fresh amongst us; The Papists themselves acknowledge so much in
their notes upon the Rhemists Testament, Rev. 1. 10. where they say, the name
Sunday is Heathenish, as all other of the week days, some imposed after the
name of Planets by the Romans, some by the name of certain Idols that the
Saxons worshipped, to which they dedicated their days before they were
Christians; which names the Church used not, but has appointed to call the
first day Dominike, (the Lords) the other by the name of Feries, until the
last day of the week, which she calls by (...) name Sabbath, because that was
of God, and (...) imposition of (...) ^eathen. And in their Annotations upon
Luke, 24. 1. The first day of the Sabbath, that is, first after the Sabbath,
which is our Lords day. And the Apostle (1 Cor. 16. 2.) commanded a collection
to be made on the first of the Sabbath; whereby we learn (say they) both the
keeping that day, and the Churches count of days, 2, 3, 4. of the Sabbath: that
is, the second day, the third day of the week, and so on, to be Apostolical,
which S. Sylvister afterward named 2. 3. 4. Feriam. Thus you have the Papists
acknowledging the Lords day to be Apostolical, and the calling the days of the
week, the 2. the 3. the 4. etc. to be likewise Apostolical. The Heathenish
Roman names of the days were from the seven Planets, 1. Sol, from thence Dies
solis, Sunday, dedicated to the Sun. 2. Luna, Monday, dedicated to the Moon. 3.
Mars, Tuesday, dedicated to Mars. Our English Tuesday is a Saxon name, from
Tuisco, who they say was chief leader and ruler of the German Nation from the
Tower of Babel, who in honor of him called this day Tuisday, Tuisco his day.
4. Mercurius, to whom Wednesday is dedicated. Our English is from the Saxons,
Woden, who was a great Prince amongst them: after his death they adored his
Image. The 5. Jupiter, to whom Thursday is dedicated: Our English is from the
Saxon Thor, the name of an Idol which they anciently worshipped. The 6. Venus,
to whom Friday is dedicated: Our English is from Friga, an Idol of the Germans.
This Idol represented both sexes, as well man as woman, an Hermaphrodite. She
was reputed the giver of plenty, and the causer of amity, it is like it was the
same which the Romans called Venus. The 7. Saturnus, dedicated to Saturn, from
whence our Saturday has the name: or as others think, from Seater, an Idol of
the Germans. Exodus 23. 13. we have this charge, In all things that I have said
unto you, be circumspect, and make no mention of the names of other Gods,
neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. Psalm. 16. 4. David professes he will
not take the names of Idols into his lips. A third note is, that little things
in point of Gods worship, any way tending to Idolatry are to be taken heed of.
Obser.
The very word Baali, merely to mention it, one would think to be one of the
smallest things that could be, but yet we see God would have his people take
heed of that.

There is no Commandment wherein God speaks of himself as a jealous God, but
in the second: now jealousy you know does not only cause one to be offended
at some gross thing, but at any thing that does but tend that way, things in
matters of Religion must not be slighted.
as if a Husband be a jealous Husband, he is not only offended if he should
meet with his wife committing the very act of adultery with another man, but
the least glance of a wanton look will displease him, the least thing that is
any way tending that way will offend him. So says God in this commandment. I
am a jealous God, to note that though we should not agree to gross Idolatry,
to worship Images in a gross way, yet if we do any thing that does but tend
that way, that has but any likeness to superstition, the Lord is jealous of
that, even such a thing would displease him, in matters of Gods worship little
things are not to be contemned (if in any things in the world) we are to make
conscience of little things then in point of worship, when we come to deal with
God, we had need to look to the smalest things.

No question but the Pharisees when they washed their hands, and Christ would
not was his, would be ready to accuse him of too much preciseness, what is
there any hurt in the washing of a man's hands? yet Christ would not wash his
hands. Though this might seem to be but a little matter before others, yet
because it had some kind of tendency to show some respect to their
superstitious way, Christ would not agree to them therein.

There is a story in the Primitive times of that noble servant of God and
Minister of the Church Marcus Arethusius, who in the time of Constantine had
been the cause of overthrowing an Idol Temple, afterward when Julian came to
be Emperor, he would force the people of that place to build it up again, they
were ready to do it but he refused it, whereupon those that were his own
people, over whom he had been Bishop, took him and stripped him of all his
clothes, and abused his naked body, and gave it up the children to lance it
with their pen-knives, and then caused him to be put in a basket and anointed
his naked body with honey, and set him in the sun to be stung with waspes, and
all this cruelty they showed because he would not do any thing toward the
building up of this Idol Temple; Nay they came to this, that if he would do
but the least thing toward it, if he would give but a halfe-penny to it they
would save him; but he refused all, though the giving but of one halfe-penny
toward the re-edification of that Idol Temple might have saved his life, he
would not do it, for a little thing in that which concerns the worship of God
in Religion, is of more concernment then your or my life.

I have read in Theodoret of Valentinian, who was afterward Emperor, going
before Julian into the Temple of the goddess Fortune (which by the way,
because we are speaking of the names of Idols, take this note; The word
Fortune, as it is commonly used, such a man has a good forture, should be
forborne: The Heathen had a goddess that they called Fortune, and we should
not continue those names) when they went up into that Temple, the Priest there
had his holy water, (just as the Papists who imitate the Heathens) as he
sprinkled it upon Julian, by accident there came but one drop of water upon
Valentinian, he thereupon presently struck the Priest, and withal took his
garment and cut that part of it in pieces upon which the water was sprinkled.
Some would say, alas what was that? It was but a little water that dropped upon
him, and that by accident; yet in detestation of that Idolatry, he cut in
pieces that part of his garment. We cannot show our hatred against Idolatry
fully, except we show it in little things, as well as in things that are very
gross and vile.

Theodoret lib. 4. cap. 15. tells of the zeal of children of Samosaten, who
because a Tennis-ball with which they played, had but touched the foot of the
Ass whereon L^^ius their heretical Bishop rode, they cried out it was
defiled, and burnt it in the Marketplace presently; hatred is much shown in
little things.

Fourthly, It is the (...) of all Gods people, to keep themselves as free from
Idolatry and superstition as can be, from the very verges of it: Why? Here they
must not so much as mention the very names of their Idols, We must take heed of
coming too near Idolatry.
certainly therefore they must keep themselves at a great distance from it: We
must not think it enough to say, Can any man convince us that this is
Idolatry? Though it be not, yet if it but borders upon it, it is your duty to
keep your selves from it. Ps. 81. 9. You shall not have any strange God with
you, or by you. It is not only sorbidden that you shall not worship a false
God, but you shall not so much as have a false God by you; as Deuteronomy. 25. 13. when
God would forbid the sin of injustice, of selling wares by false weights,
mark what the expression is, Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights* a
great and a small one, it was sin to have a great and a small weight in a man's
bag; Why? if you should find a great and a small weight in ones bag, perhaps
you would say, but can you prove that ever I sold wares by the small weight, or
took wares in by this great weight? Yea, bnt says God, to the end you may be
far off from the sin of injustice, I require you that you shall not have
them in your bag; God would have us keep off from the very verge of that sin,
much more from Idolatry, which is the worst of all other sins; Esaias 65. 4. God
charge upon them, not only that gross sin of eating swines flesh, but the
having the broth of abominable things in their vessels; They might say, we will
not eat the flesh, but the broth; no you must not have the broth of abominable
things in your vessels, you must keep far off from that defilement; As the Lord
speaks concerning corporal whoredom, Prove. 5. 8. Remove thy way far from
her, come not ^igh the door of her house; If one should say, we will not
commit uncleanness, but says God, you must remove your way far from her,
and you must not come nigh her, no not nigh the door of her house. We must not
come nigh Popery, we must abstain from the appearance of that evil.

Certainly, it has been a great distemper in many of your hearts, that you
went so nigh to Popery as you did, especially at such a time when the Tide was
coming in upon you; for a man to stand just at the edge of the water when the
Sea is coming in, especially if you were in some places, as in the Washes in
Lincolneshire, is a dangerous thing, to stand at the edge when the tide is
going away, is not so dangerous: Many of you when the tide of Popery and
superstition was coming in, you stood upon the very edge of the water; Obser.
this is a sin you ought to repent off.

Fifthly, The Church of God must not worship God after the manner that
Idolaters do: They must not so much as make mention of the names that they
did, certainly then not worship God in the way they do, in those orders and
ceremonies they do.

Mark that place; Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared
by following them, and that thou enquire not after their Gods, saying, How did
these Nations serve their Gods? even so will I do likewise; thou shall not do
so unto the Lord thy God; then verse 32. What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto nor diminish from it.

Thou shall not so much as enquire how others serve their gods, what their
rites and ordinances, and manners of serving their gods are, thou shall not
worship me so; How then Lord? as if they should say, Whatsoever thing I command
you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, you
must keep to that, and not think to worship me, as others worship their Idols.
The Lord stands much upon this, though the thing in it self may be a
lawfulthing, yet because it is the way idolaters have taken up, therefore it
must be rejected, Ezekiel. 44. 20. there is a commandment to the Priests of the
Lord, that they shall not shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow
long, but they shall round their heads, so the words are rendered in the old
Translation, Tondendo aeque, aeque atondebunt.
and Arius Montarus translates them thus, They shall clip equally their hair
all of a length, that is the meaning of the words as they are in the Hebrew;
the old Translation, They shall round their heads, is according to the Hebrew;
the reason is this, because the idolatrous Priests, according to the several
ways of worshipping their Idols, some did shave their heads, others wore long
hair as women, some kind of Idols being worshipped one way, some another, all
in excessive ways: Now says God to his Priests, they shall do neither; so
that it is the injunction of God to his Ministers there to be Roundheads.
Certainly the Devil forgate that place of Scripture when he raised up such a
name to reproach men by, which we have the express word in Scripture for the
injoyning it: And on the other side, when the Scripture would describe the
enemies of God, it describes them by the contrary, the hairy scalpe. Ps. 68.
21.


I remember I have read of the Lacedaemonians, when they would reform excess in
apparel, which was much amongst them, at length their consultation came to
this result, that there should be a law made, that none but harlots should
wear pompous and rich clothes, and by this means they thought to get all
women that regarded their credites, or chastity, to go in mean or plain
clothing, by this they attained their end: If by the light of nature once a
thing come to be in fashion with harlots, grave and sober Matrons will never
meddle with it, then what Idolaters take up in worship, the Church should
abstain from; if there must not be a conformity between Matrons and harlots,
there must not be a conformity between the Church of God and Idolaters.

Arius Montanus in a Treatise he has De Templi fabrica, Tredecim mensas
lapidias in Airiis exterioribus fuisse, quibus adstantes homines orarent fuere
vero illae partem ad meridiem ad occasum, ad septem trionem sitae ad orientem
nulla. Montan. de fabrica Templi. l. 96.
says, that the Jews report of 13. tables of stone that were in the outward
court of the Temple, at which men were wont to pray, and all of them were made,
says he, so as some looked to the North, We must not imitate Idolaters in
worship
some to the South, and some to the West, but not one toward the East: And so
God built his Temple that the Holy of holiest was not to look toward the East,
but toward the West: Hence Ezekiel. 8. 16. it is said that ^^^se that worship
(...) the Sun, with their faces toward the East, they had their backs upon
the Temple, so that it appears plainly, that the Temple stood westward, and
upon this ground, because there were so many among whom the Jews lived, that
were worshippers of the Sun, and in their worship they would ever look
Eastward, and upon that very reason the Lord would not have the Holy of holiest
built Eastward; Now all your Chancels in England are built Eastward, and it was
wont to be the order and way of your superstitious worshippers evermore when
they came into such a place to look Eastward, and bow solemnly themselves, not
only to the Altar, but Eastward. I have seen my self a Bishop, who when the
Communion table was set down in another place, he neglected that, and goes to
the East end of the Chancell, and boweth himself, though his back was upon the
table. And you shall observe it in all your burials, the corpse are laid East
and West, for this end by some, that when Christ comes to Judgment, they may be
ready to look him in the face, it being a trodition that he shall come from the
east. You must not think, that those who do not follow the old customs of
superstition, do it out of crosness of disposition; it is the same way that God
brought his people up in, when they saw Idolaters worship one way, they should
worship another way; we must take heed of borrowing from the Egyptians, if you
borrow from them you may think it riches, but you may get their botches and
boils: we have enough in the word of God, we need no imitation of Idolaters and
Papists in the way of worship.

Yet further, Obser.
that which lies more fully in the Text is, such things that in themselves
considered have no hurt in them, yet when they come to be abused to Idolatry,
they must be cast away; I will take the name of Baali out of your mouths, the
name was good, but being abused, was to be taken away; yea not only such things
as are in the original of them from Idolaters, but even such things as in the
beginning were of Gods own institution, if they do not yet continue his
institutions, if God do not require the continuance of them still, they must
be taken away, not only corrected, but removed, and wholly rejected from Gods
worship. I will give you an instance for both these together, Exodus 34. 13. Ye
shall destroy their altars, break their images, cut down their groves. Many
will easily grant, those things that came from Idolaters at first, should be
rejected by us: but they say those ceremonies we have, Things abused to
Idolatry must be rejected.
we have them from the ancient Fathers in the primitive times before Popery
was. For a full answer to that which may for ever stopp the mouth of that
objection, you have an express command here, that those groves were to be cut
down whose original was not from Idolaters, for Genesis 21. 33. the text says
that Abraham built an Altar, and planted a grove, and called there on the name
of the Lord, the everlasting God; groves and altars had a good original from
Abraham, but afterward being abused by Idolaters, God requires of them now to
cut down the groves. And that example 2 K. 18. 4. of the Brazen Serpent, it had
a good beginning, and was an ordinance of God for a time, only it did not
continue as an ordinance afterward, but they might think and so plead that it
was kep^ as a religious monument:

But H^zekiah according to the command of God by Moses, beat down the Braz^n
Serpent, and called it Nehustan in a way of contempt, a piece of brass, though
it had been a notable instrument of good to the people of Israel in former
times, yet now it was but Nehustan, but a piece of brass.

And further, to the abolishing those things that have been abused to Idolatry
there is added a gracious promise, Esaias 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his si^ne, when he
makes all the stones of the Altar as chalke-stones that are beaten in sunder;
Then indeed has Jacobs correction the true fruit npon him to purge away his
sin, when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalkestones; And Josiah
is commended 2 King. 23. for destroying the high places, the groves and altars
and the charets for the sun, etc. And repenting Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 18. is
commended that he did take away the strange gods, and the Idols out of the
house of the Lord, and all the altars; and Daniel, chap. 1. would not eat of
the Kings meat, because it had been abused and consecrated to his Idols.

But for the opening of this there will be something required by way of answer
to an objection. Object,
You will say, are not those prohibitions there particular, concerning the Jews
and not so fully concerning us? they sometimes are forbidden to take of the gold
and silver of the Idols, do such prohibitious concern us in every thing that
has been abused to Idolatry?

For answer, Answ.
I confess I think we are not bound in every particular circumstance
according to those commandments that God required of them: neither do I
think that they had been bound if they had not had some express commandment
in some things that they did, if they had made use of the silver, or gold of an
image, for some civil use, before the express prohibition came to them, it had
been no sin unto them, those things being required of them by some positive
Law, and not required in the second Commandment further then there is a moral
equity in them.

Quest. Ans.
All those rules God gave to the Jews to destroy all things abused to Idolatry,
bind us in these three cases.

First, we must retain nothing whereby any false worship may retain any
honor. If Mordecai would not bow to a living monument of that nation, whose
name God had ordained to be blotted out from under heaven, much less should we
reverence dumb monuments of those Idols which God has devoted to destruction;
we must not show respect to any thing that Idolaters have abused, when our
reserving of them, or respect to them may any way keep up any honor of them.
Therefore certainly thi^ is a truth, that to take a ceremony from Papists, to
bring it into the most solemn Ordinances of CHRIST, yea so into them to that
end that it may add to the honor of that Ordinance, Rules to know how far
things abused to Idolatry are to be rejected.
can never be justified. There never was any ceremony more abominably abused
then that of the Cross; Now though it be not a sin to make a cross, yet to
bring it into one of the most (...) Ordinances of Christ in his Church, and to
make it there to conduce to the honor of such an Ordinance, it is impossible
but men must shut their eyes if they do not see it a great evil. So for
vestments, suppose there might be some use of them some other way, yet to bring
them to make the worship of God to be decent, to think that those vestments
that have been ^o notoriously abused, should add to the honor of divine
worship must needs be sinful, surely all those scriptures that required the
Jews to abolish those things that have been abused by Idolaters, if they have
any morality Rev. 2. 20. there the Church of ^hyatira is charged that they did
eat things sacrificed to Idols; Why? the meat sacrificed to Idols was good
meat, a good creature of God, and we have that rule, that every creature of God
is good, if it be sanctified by the word and prayer, yet they are charged for
it as a sinning against Christ in it; You will say what is that to them if it
were offered to Idols? they might eat it as Gods creature: But it was a sin
because the eating of that did argue communion with them, that is plain in that
1 Cor. 10. 18. 19. 20. where you have the argument of the Apostle against
eating things offered to Idols, thus he reasons, When you eat the same bread
in the Sacrament it is a note of your communion one with another, so when you
eat of the things sacrificed to idols, that is a note of your communion with
them: that is the argument of the Apostle in that place, and upon that ground
it is made a sin, You cannot (says he) partake of the Table of the Lord, and
the table of devils, if you eat of their meat, you communicate with them and so
it is sin to you.

Thirdly, Quid enim illae c^remonia aliud, fuerint quam totidem lenocinia quae
miseras animas ad malumperducerent.
To make use of any thing abused by Idolaters when it comes Cor. 10. 28.
eating meat offered to Idols, is forbidden in the former place upon a ground of
communicating, but in this 28. ver. it is forbidden upon the ground of
scandoll, that is enough: Calvin in his Epistle to the Lord Protector in King
Edwards days, has these words; What other things were those ceremonies
maintained by in England but so many pleasing allurements that ensnare poor
miserable souls, and bring them into evil? certainly these that we have
retained have brought abundance of evil this way, they have been the ensnaring
of many souls. In these three things the rules that concern the Jews have a
morality concerning us.

But yet these rules must be observed with some cautions, or else we may go
away and not understand the ruels aright.

They must be understood first in things that are not Ordinances continued by
God; for certainly if it be an Ordinance that God has appointed, though
Idolaters abuse it never so much, we must go on in it. It is true, the brazen
serpent was an Ordinance of God, but it was an Ordinance but for a time, it was
not a continued Ordinance, and therefore being abused to Idolatry it was to be
destroyed; but when a thing is an Ordinance appointed by God to be continued in
the Church, we must go on in the use of it, though it be abused.

As in Baptism, the ordinance is water, though they abuse water, we must
continue the use of it; in the ordinance in the Lords supper is the use of
bread and wine, though they abuse those elements, we must continue them, why?
because no abuse is an argument to refuse that which is a duty; the subject of
scandal is a thing indifferent, but if it be an ordinance, we must continue
our obedience, whether men be offended or not offended.



Let all things be done decently, but there is a mistake in that use that many
make of that Scripture, this rule is, that which the light of nature teaches,
though we had never found it in Scripture, it is not meant of such a decency as
the institution of man puts upon a thing, but such a decency as God in the
nature of the thing puts upon it, so that if it were wanting, the work would
be undecently performed: But if the things be merely man's inventions and
institutions, having their supposed decency, not from what is indeed in the
things themselves, but from that which man's institution puts upon them, then
they come not under that rule of the Apostle, but the abuse of them is argument
enough for their rejection.

But it may be objected, Object.
If we can instruct people what the abuse is, and what right use they may make
of such things, will not that serve for the retaining them?

No certainly, Answ.
it had not been enough for the Jews to use the name Baali, though their
Prophets had taught them what the abuse of it was.

This is as if a man should keep a company of rags, that have lien a great
while upon plague sores, and say it is enough, I will wash them clean, and lay
them out to air them; will any wise man keep such rags in his house upon this
precence? Those things that have had poison in them, none will be so unwise to
keep them by them, upon pretense of washing them clean; if they be broken
vessels of which there is no use, they are cast upon the dunghill with less
trouble and more safety.

All things that are of man's invention, yea those things that have been Gods
Ordinances, but now are out of date, and are not for the present Gods
Ordinances the Scripture calls them beggarly rudiments; you cannot compare men's
inventions to clothes, or any thing worth the ayring or keeping, but the truth
is, all such things that have been abused to Idolatry, are no other but as such
dirty rags, and plasters laid upon plague-sores.

But further you will say, Object.
If that use we receive them for be not the same use they were in, if we retain
them for another use that is good, why may we not do it?

The text answers that, Answ.
though the Jews should call God Baali in a right sense, it was not enough,
they must wholly reject the very mentioning of the name. But further, suppose a
harlot should be brought out of a most notorious stews in Rome or Paris, and
brought to Dover into an honest man's chamber, is she not a harlot still? and
is there not a provocation in her to uncleanness, though she become now to lie
not in the stews, but in the chamber of an honest man? So in all those things
that have been abused to Idolatry, though you should think you make use of them
in a better way, it is no other then to bring a harlot out of the stews, into a
place not so vile, and to company with the harlot there.

Besides, if a man's wife whom her husband had not without just cause suspected
for uncleanness with another man, should get something from that man, and keep
it in her bosom, or lay it next her heart, and should tell her husband, true,
she keeps such a thing, but she intends no hurt in it, it is a good thing,
only she had it from him, will this think you satisfy any jealous husband?
The Church is the wife of Christ, he is jealous, and he has cause to be
jealous, for he knows while we are in the flesh, we are prone to spiritual
filthiness; and if we take any ceremony from Popish Idolatry, and join with
his own Ordinances, and think to put off Christ thus, we intend to make no ill
use of it, this will not satisfy Christ.

If any say, Object. Answ.
why should we not retain our liberty if the things be good?

But why should not thou manifest thy hatred to all Idolatry? And why
should not thou tender thy brethren so, as to prevent all scandal that may
come by the use of such things?

But you will say, Object.
the idolatry of Papists, and the idolatry of Heathen is not the same, there is
a great deal of difference between the Heathens in worshipping their Idols,
and the Papists worshipping of God, though in a false way?

Indeed the difference seems to be much, Answ.
but yet the Idolatry is even the same in both; for you are mistaken, if you
think that many of the Heathens worshipped a false God, otherwise then the
Papists do; though they made stocks and stones their Idols, yet they worshipped
the God that was Primum Ens, Non lapidem colimus, sed virtutes Dei magni.
the first Being, in and through those Idols: Therefore Austin upon Ps. 96.
brings in one answering thus, We do not worship a stone, but the virtues, the
strength, and the powers of the great God we worship: And another, one Maximus
Madaurensis that Austin speaks of in his 43. Epistle, Who is so mad, or so
void of sense that will doubt whether there be more Gods then one? we invocate
the virtues of this one God under many names, diffused through the frame of the
whole world.

What more fair answer can Papists give for their Idolatry then they did?
Therefore the thing continues still clear, that (with those rules and
cautions that have been named) such things as have been abused to Idolatry,
must wholly be cast away; we must not retain them, and think to put off God
with such distinctions. To what end do we retain them? Is there not
sufficient in the worship of God it self to make it acceptable to him?

The Sixteenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 16. 17. 18. And it shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou
shall call me us more Baali.

For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall be no
more remembered by their name, etc.

And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field,
and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground: and
I will break the bow and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will
make them to lie down safely.


TO add a word or two more about that principal Observation in these words
opened the last day; god would not have his people to worship him in that way
that Idolaters worship him; It has always been the care of the Churches of
God, Tert. de coron. milit. Ignat. ep. 3. ad Philip.
to distinguish themselves in ways of worship from Idolaters. The Manichees
were wont to keep their fasts upon the Lords day, and upon that the Churches
did utterly prohibit the keeping of Fasts upon that day, because they would not
do as the Man^chees did. Tertullian says it is Nefas, a detestable
wickedness to fast on the Lords day. And Ignatius says; to fast on the Lords
day is to kill Christ. There is a notable and famous Tractate of Tertullians,
concerning a Christian soldier being in the Army of the Heathens, when they in
honor of their Idol gods did wear upon their heads a coronet of bays, he
took his coronet, and instead of waring it upon his head, he held it in his
hand, upon this there was a great mutiny in the Army, his fellows storming at
this, that one soldier should be in a different garb from all the rest,
surely this was some nice conscienced soldier, that (he forsooth) must not do
as others did, he must hold the coronet of bays in his hand, whereas others
wore it on their heads: The mutining of the soldiers came at length to the
Officers of the Army, and upon that this Christian soldier was called to
question, why he was in a different kind of way from his fellows; he gives
this answer, I am a Christian, and therefore it does not beseem me to do as
these do, that we are the bays upon their heads in honor of their Idol gods;
upon that they were all in a mighty rage, against this soldier, and not only
himself, but all the Christians that were near hand were in danger of a great
persecution; Lect. 16
Nay, there was a great mutining amongst other Christians, that this one man
for such a nicety should endanger not only himself but other Christians.
Sanctior caeteris sratribus qui duobus dominis servire se posse prasumun^.
Tertul de corone militis. O militem in Deo gloriosum. Vbi scriptum est ne
coronemur; at ubi scriptum est at coronemur; Tertul. ibid.
Tertullian therefore writes a whole Tractate to defend this Soldier for this
his practice, and he says of him, that he was holier then his holy brethren,
who thought and presumed they might serve two Lords, that they might comply
themselves for the avoiding of persecution with the Heathens in the observation
of their superstitious way of worship; and he cries out in an exclamation, in
commendation of this Soldier; Oh most glorious soldier, who would thus
venture himself, and not comply with Idolaters! and whereas some would plead
against him, even Christians, that would rather comply then endure the hazard,
and say, where is it written in all the word of God that we should not wear
bays upon our heads? Tertullian answers again, Where is it written that we
may do it? says he, we must look into the Scripture to see what we may do,
and not think it enough that the Scripture does not directly forbid this or
that very particular. By this we see that some to avoid trouble and
persecution, will as much as ever they can comply with the ways of Idolatry,
yet those that are of a true Christian heroic spirit indeed, will not comply
with them, but will rather hazard the sorest persecution.

Thus it should be with us, we must not retain any thing that has been abused
to Idolatry, so as to keep the honorable memorial of it; we must not comply
with Idolaters that way; and especially in regard of that great Idol of the
Cross (which we instanced in, the last day) not so far to retain it as to
bring it into the Ordinances of God, the very Sacrament, this puts a great
honor upon it; yea and too too great an honor is put upon it in reserving it
in the eminentest place of the City, and to think it is an ornament unto it,
whereas it is indeed a great disgrace and dishonor, and retains the memory of
your forefathers superstition, which is their and your shame. Augustine says,
it is better to dye with hunger then to eat that which is offered to Idols,
Melius mori fame quam I do lothytis v sci, August de bono conjug c. 18.
so far were these ancients from suiting themselves with Idolaters. Gabriel
Biel says the Church of Rome though meet to use leavened bread, lest in
unleavened they should seem to be like Ebion the Heretic: and Bellarmine
would not have Paul called Divus Paulus, but Beatus, because Divus and Diana
were the words of the heathen for their gods and goddesses. This promise to
take away the names of Baalim comes in upon Gods reconciliation to his people.
From whence the next note is, when God is reconciled to his people, there will
be a through Reformation both outward and inward. Idolatry is cast out not only
from the heart but from the mouth, the taking away the names from their mouths
is a synechdoche, and notheth the uttertaking away of all ways of Idolatry in
the outward practice as well as in the inward affection. The more
reconciliation there is with God, the more enmity against Idols and
superstitious worship. A fruitful sign then it is that we in England were
never thoroughly reconciled unto God, because we never yet have cast off our
Idols.

As some remaynders of superstition abiding amongst us, did not long since
break forth to most horrid and vile ways of false worship, so some remainders
of Gods wrath that has been amongst us, this day breaks forth into a most
dreadful flame. When the people of the Jews shall be called again, and God
shall be perfectly reconciled to his Churches, then Idolatry shall be perfectly
rejected, and there shall never be so much as mention of their Idols any more,
this Text aims at those times, and shall perfectly be fulfilled at that day,
that is the day when God will do it.

They shall call me no more Baali, but Ishi, my husband.

Thence the note is,

When a people is reconciled to God, Obser.
then they call God theirs, my husband, Isbi. Psalm. 16. 3, 4. David professes
that he would not so much as take up their names into his lips, of which
before. Now mark what follows presently upon that, ver. 5. The Lord (says
he) is my portion, when the Prophet is so taken off from Idols, as not to
mention the names of Idols, then The Lord is my portion; Sin makes us lose the
boldness of our claim in our interest in God.
So here now Ishi, the Lord is my husband, now can we claim a peculiar interest
in God indeed. This is the evil of sin, it hinders a nation, a soul from
clayming this interest in God. God is a blessed and glorious God, yea but what
is that to this people, to this apostatizing people? what is that to this
apostatizing soul? but when the soul comes into God, and comes off thoroughly
to the work of Reformation, then this God is my God, Ishi, my husband. Can any
comfort, any profit that you have in ways of sin countervaile this great
loss? you gain some contentment in the flesh, some profit in your estate, but
you lose the comforts of your interest in God, what is your gain now? think
of this when any temptation comes, I may be yielding to this temptation, get
this contentment to the flesh, but I shall lose this blessed privilege of
clayming an interest in my God, I shall not be able to say, Ishi, my husband.

Thirdly, Ishi, The word compared with the former Baali, is a word of more love
then the former. Baali is a word, though it signifies my husband too as well as
Ishi, but it is husband under the notion of dominion, under the notion of power
that causes fear; but Ishi is a husband under the notion of love and
protection. Hence the note is,

God delights to have his people look upon him with love and delight. Obser.
God delights to have his people look upon him with love.
It is Gods care, and it is his good pleasure that his people should not look
upon him so much as one that has dominion over them, but that they should look
upon him with joy and love, and call him Ishi. The more reconcyled we are unto
God, the more have we the use of the loving appellations of God. For a soul to
be always under the spirit of bondage, to look unto God only as the Lord of
all, this is not so pleasing to God; but when you come to have the spirit of
adoption, the spirit of grace, an Evangelicall spirit, that you can look upon
him with love, and say Ishi, my husband, that title of love and goodness, this
pleases God at the heart. It is reported of Augustus that he would not have the
title of Lord given to him, he refused it, and would rather have his people to
look upon him under the notion of love as a father, rather then to fear him.
It were happy that all Princes were of this mind, to desire that their people
should rather love them then fear them! It is a most villainous, wicked, and
cursed principle that is in some, who infuse into the spirit of Princes, let
your people fear you, no great matter whether they love you or no. Suetonius
relates this passage of Augustus, when a poor man came to present a petition
to him with his hands shaking and trembling out of fear, the Emperor was much
displeased, and said, It is not fit that any should come with a petition to a
King, as if a man were giving meat to an Elephant that is afraid to be
destroyed by him. God does not love the bread of mourners to be offered up in
sacrifice, he loves to have people come unto him with a holy boldness, with
a filial, not with a servile and slavish spirit. Christ laid down his life to
redeem us that we might serve the Lord without fear.

Fourthly, Obser.
They shall call me Ishi, that is, My strength. The Church should look upon
Christ as the strength of it; Thy maker is thy husband, and who is he? The Lord
of Hosts is his name, thy redeemer, the God of the whole earth shall he be
called. When the people of God can look upon Christ their husband as the Lord
of hosts, and their Redeemer as the God of the whole earth, then they find
quiet and satisfaction in their spirits, Psa. 89. 17. God is said to be the
glory of the strength of his people; Though we be weak in regard of our
outward helps, let us look up to Christ our strength, he has been our
strength, he is the glory of it.

Fifthly, Obser.
I will take the names of Baalim out of their mouth, and they shall be no more
remembered by their name. Repentance must be proportionable to men's sins. How
does that arise? before ver. 13. God charged them that they had forgotten him,
They went after their lovers and forgot me, says the Lord. Now says God, your
Idols shall be forgotten, your hearts were so far set upon your idols as you
forgot me, now in your repentance your hearts shall be so much upon me as you
shall forget your Idols. Those men who have been so wicked and ungodly
heretofore, that they have forgot God, God has not been in all their thoughts.
God expects now from them that their lusts should not be in all their thoughts.
It is not enough that you forbear the act, but you must not roll the sweet of
them in your thoughts you must not so much as remember them, except it be with
the detestation of them. If there be not a proportion between your repentance
and your former sins, Obs. Pompous superstition will vanish and come to nothing.
you may expect there will be a proportion between Gods wrath and your former
sins, Further, They shall not so much as be remembered by their name, they shall
not think of them. The note from hence is, all superstitious vanities though
they may seem for the present never so glorious, yet in time they will vanish
and come to nothing, God has a time to make them so to vanish, as they shall
not so much as be thought off. Col. 2. 22. it is said of the rudiments of the
world, that are according to the Doctrine of men, they perish in the use, in
the present use, that is, they effect nothing that they seem to be appointed
for, there is no good comes of them for the present, but in the very use they
come to nothing; but time shall be that God will cause them all to perish
utterly, and the very remembrance of them shall be taken away. It is true for
the present while men's hearts are set upon superstitious ways, O how glorious
are they in their eyes* but these glorious things will come to nothing, whereas
those Ordinances of God that seem to be but mean things, wherein the
simplicity of the Gospel appears, they shall appear full of beauty, though
for the present they seem to be darkened, they shall be glorious in the eyes
of the Saints to the end of the world.

Not long since what a stir was there about the more then decent, even
superstitious adorning of Temples, and building of Altars, and brave Canopies,
what sumptuous things and fine knacks had they, and all to set out a pompous
superstitious way of worship? this altogether prevailed; as for the purity and
simplicity of Gods ways and worship, how was it trampled under feet as an
unworthy contemptible thing? but these things that for a while seemed so
glorious, begin to vanish, and we hope ere long will come to nothing, the very
memory of them shall perish, the purity of Gods worship, and the simplicity of
the Gospel in Gods Ordinances shall recover their beauty and glory when those
braveries shall be no more.

7. Obser.
A true penitent cannot remember former sins without indignation, for so is
the meaning of the phrase, they shall not remember. Some of us may remember how
we have been entangled with ways of false worship, and how we have fullyed
and wrung our consciences that way, we said we would yield as far as we could,
but indeed we yielded further then we could, for id possumus qnod jure
possumus, we have cause to remember it with shame and confusion of face. Ye old
men may remember the sins of your youth, but how can you remember them and
speak of them with joy and meryment? that is an evil, yea almost a desperate
sign, do you so remember the sins of your youth as to tell tales of the
pranckes of your younger days with joy? you are in a high degree left of God,
and given up to hardness, you shall remember them with shame and indignation,
the sweet morsells of former sins coming up into remembrance should be bitter
and sower unto you.

The last note is, Obser.
the taking off men's hearts from Idolatrous ways, is a special work of God,
I will do it says God. I will take away the names of Baalim out of their
mouths. Certainly the people in these times hung much upon their false ways of
worship, they had many arguments for their way, no question but they had many
distinctions to uphold it: but there shall come a day says the Lord, Men's
hearts will cleave to superst^tious vanities till God takes them off.
when I will take away the names out of their mouths. I will stop your mouths,
I will take off your hearts from all those Objections and reasonings you have
had to maintain such ways as those were, I will silence all, and then you shall
see evidently and convincingly to your shame that you have been gulled by such
vain and false distinctions, I will take off all those engagements your hearts
were bound in, those being taken off I will soon take you off from all. What a
deal of stir has God (that we may speak with holy reverence) to take men's
hearts from ways of false worship? What a company of distinctions and
objections have men, their hearts clinging to them, being very unwilling to be
taken off, now and then their consciences are wrung, yet they hold fast, and
then conscience has another wring, and then they another objection, and
another distinction, and yet perhaps true grace lies at the bottom after all
this.

But God having a love unto them, by some way or other takes off their hearts,
if he does it not by settling truths upon the heart by his Spirit, he will do
it by some notable works o^ providence; we find it by experience, so long as
men's engagements hold, that they cannot enjoy their estates, liberties and
comforts, without yielding to such ways of superstition, they will not be
taken off from them; they please themselves in this (and perhaps they speak
what they think) that they do nothing against the light of their consciences;
for why? their engagements keep off the strength of truth, that it comes not
to a full conviction of conscience: But when God shall by any work of his
providence take off their hearts from engagements, and then come and set before
them the same truths that formerly he did, they come to see now a convincing
evidence in those truths, they stand admiring that they saw it not before,
wonder what the matter was, they read such books before that had the same
arguments against their ways, and for the truth, but they could not see the
strength of them before, now they see it apparently, and they are ashamed of
themselves every time they go into the presence of God, they are confounded in
their own thoughts to think, that though truths were so clear before, they
did not see them, now they see them with such cleareness, as they think they
could lay down their lives for them, whatsoever they suffer for time to come,
they can never yield to what they have yielded to heretofore: What is the
matter? God has come in with power, God has taken off their hearts. God
attributes this to himself, I will take the names of Baalim out of their
mouths; whatsoever they have to say for the keeping of such names and relics
of Idolatry, yet I will come with power upon their hearts and take them out of
their mouths.

Then indeed when God thus comes the thing will be done. And let us take heed
we do not stand out too long, lest God come to take off our hearts by some
dreadful way of judgment or other; It were better our mouths were stopped,
our objections silenced, and so all the relics and remainders of false
worship were taken from us thorough the word and Spirit of God: If that will
not do, God will come in some other way, and take the name of Baalim out of
our mouths; And if we will keep the memory of superstitious ways, God may
extirpate the memory of them by such ways as may prove fearful unto us, and
make our hearts to ache, and our ears to tingle. We have a notable passage
for this, Ezekiel 6. 6. In all your dwelling places says God, your Cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate, (mark) that your
Altars may be laid waste, and made desolate, and your Idols may be broken and
cease, and your Images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.
Observe the Text, In all your dwelling places your Cities shall be laid waste;
to what end? That your Altars may be laid waste; So that God will lay waste
their Cities for this very end, that he may lay waste their Altars; if they
will not lay waste their Altars, if they will not abolish their superstitions
that are amongst them, God will abolish their Cities, lay waste their Cities
that he may lay waste their Altars. God has begun to put it into the heart of
our governors, the Parliament, to abolish many superstitious pictures and
crosses in diverse places, there is yet one great one remaining, and we hope God
upon the same grounds may put into their hearts the abolishing of that. God
will destroy cities that he may destroy Altars
It would be a dreadful thing unto you, if God now calling upon us to cast out
the remainders of all Idolatry and superstition, to lay waste all Idolatrous
Pictures, Images and Crosses, if we should not come off, but that God should
lay waste your Cities, to lay waste your Altars, Crosses, and relics of
Idolatry: You see God threatens this here, as if God did not intend so much to
lay waste their Cities, he would preserve them, but because he could not (that
we may speak according to the manner of men) abolish their Altars, but by
laying waste their Cities, says God, rather then your Altars shall stand, your
Cities shall down. God has ways, and most terrible ways too to take away
the memory of superstitious vanities; Oh that we had hearts to join with God
before he comes in such a dreadful manner to abolish the memory of such
things! Were our Prelates in their power, such a speech as this could not be
borne, when Master Vdal a godly Preacher in Queen Elizabeth's days, was
charged with such an expression. If it come in, (that is, the true government
of Christ as he means,) by that means that will make all your hearts to ache,
blame your selves; for these words especially was he then condemned to be
hanged; such was the rage and potency of the Prelates in those days: What I
have said may be against the spirits of such as cleave to superstitious
vanities, we have no cause to fear the exasperating of these, for surely they
cannot be more exasperated then they are for the present, and it were a foolish
thing to exasperate and provoke God, for fear of further exasperation in those
who are for the present exasperated even to the utmost against us. And if they
were not, but the exasperation would arise new, what is the exasperation of
vile men, to the abiding of the wrath of God upon us?

VERSE, 18. And in that day I will make a Covenant for them with the beasts of
the field, and with the fowls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the batteli out of the
earth, and I will make them to lie down safely.

In this verse God promises peace and security; peace, in regard of their
deliverance from the beasts of the field, and fowls of the heaven, and
creeping things of the ground; Peace from the hostility of their adversaries,
he will break the bow and the sword, and the battle out of the earth; And
security, they shall lie down safely.

I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, etc.

Some allegorize upon these words, the beasts of the field, they say are meant
cruel wicked men; the fowls of the air, ambitious wicked men that are lofty
in their thoughts and counsels; the creeping things of the ground, subtle
adversaries, God here promises, they say, to deliver them from all these. But I
desire not to fall upon Allegories, but when there is a necessity, therefore
take the words literally, The beasts of the field, fowls of the air, and
creeping things of the earth. Object.
But how may God be said to make a covenant for his people, with the beasts of
the field, and the fowls of heaven, and the creeping things of the earth? For
to speak properly, no creature is capable of a Covenant with God, but only
the rational.

The meaning is, Ans.
there shall be such an establishment of Gods work upon the beasts and fowls,
and creeping things for the good of his Church, as if God had bound them to do
them good by way of Covenant; How a Covenant with beasts
that way of God is called making of a Covenant with them; I will show it you
in another Scripture, Ier. 33. 20. If you can break my covenant of the day, and
my covenant of the night, that there should not be day and night in their
season, etc. How does God make a Covenant with the day, and a Covenant with the
night? Thus, there is an establishment of Gods decree upon the day, and upon
the night, that it should be in such and such a way from the Creation unto the
end of the world, Ita ordinabo inviolabiter.
and that establishment is called Gods Covenant; so Oceolampadius upon my Text,
I will order inviolably and unalterably, there shall be an establishing decree
upon these creatures that they shall do you no hurt but good.

From hence the notes are these.

First, Obser.
Sin has caused enmity between man and the creatures; that is employed here, I
will, says God, make a Covenant (upon your reconciliation with me, and your
reformation) with the creatures, now they shall be at peace with you, I will
do it, noting that by our sin there is grown enmity between us and Gods
creatures. We have lost by sin a great part of our dominion that God gave us
over his creatures, that was the result from that Image of God that man was
created in. Therefore when you see any creature to rebel against you, be put
in mind your rebellion against God. It is true, God has kept a little of man's
dominion over the creature still, to the end that the world and humane society
may be preserved. Sometimes you may see a little child driving before him a
hundred Oxen or kine this way or that way as he pleases, it shows that God
has preserved somewhat of man's dominion over the creatures. But a great part
is lost by our sin. If we that are the servants of God rebel against him, it
is just with God that the creatures that were made to be our servants should
rebel against us. And you who are Superiors, when any of your inferiors are
stubborn against you, your servants, your children rebellious, raise your
hearts up to this meditation, My servant is rebellious against me, how have I
been rebellious against the Lord! my child is stout and stubborn against me,
how has my heart been stout and stubborn against the Lord my Father!

Again, peace with God brings peace with the creatures. I will make a covenant
with the beasts of the field, Obser.
with the fowls of the air, etc. Job 5. 23. you have a strange kind of
promise, Thou shall be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts
of the earth shall be at peace with thee. This goes somewhat deeper then that
which is here promised, there shall be a league, not only with the beasts, but
with the stones of the field. How in league with the stones of the field? It is
more easy to be understood, to be in league with the beasts of the field, for
they are many times hurtful unto us. But how with the stones of the field?
There are many interpretations given of that place. Only thus much for the
present. It was wont to be the way (and so it is still in many places) in
setting the bounds of their fields, The stones of the field at league.
they took stones which they set up for landmarks, and engraved upon their
stones, to note to whom this or the other parcel of ground belonged. Now this
is the promise, that the Lord would be so gracious to his people, that they
should enjoy the bounds of their own habitations securely, they should not be
wronged, their landmarks should not be taken away. The stones of the field
shall be in league with thee, that is, the stones of the field that stand for
your landmarks shall abide, and none shall take them away; I will preserve
your bounds, as if you were in league with the stones that are your landmarks,
as if they had agreed with you, and were in covenant that they would undertake
to stand, and to set out the bounds of your fields for ever: And the beasts of
the field also shall be useful to you, and do you no hurt.

But you will say, Object,
sometimes the beasts of the field do hurt the Saints, how does God make a
covenant with them?

Many things might be answered to that, Answ.
verse. 17. of that place of Job he speaks of a time when God corrects and men
despise not the chastning of the Almighty, now this in verse. 23. has reference
unto that time: that is, when any do make use of Gods correction, do not
despise it but in a reverent way submit unto Gods hand of correction, then God
will make this league with the stones of the field, and with the beasts of the
earth. If God has corrected you with any sickness, and you do not profit by
that sickness, it is just with God that a beast of the field, that some or
other creature should meet you, and be more terrible unto you then ever your
sickness was. And the promise here in Hosea is to those that are reconciled to
God, who have cast off their superstitious vanities: And because we are not
here perfectly reconciled, therefore this promise is not perfectly fulfilled;
But I make no question but the holy Ghost here aymeth at the t^me of the call
of the Jews, and then I believe that this promise shall be literally fulfilled,
and those other promises in Esaias and other places, where God says he will make
the Lion to eat straw with the Ox, and the like, and that no venomous
creature shall do them hurt; Time coming when the beasts do no hurt.
When the calling of the Jews shall be, the creatures shall be brought into
such a kind of excellency in a manner as they were in Adam in Paradise, they
shall come to the primitive institution, the Lion was not at the first creation
wont to live upon prey: the creatures were not made to prey one upon another,
therefore the promise is that the Lion shall live in that kind of quietness as
it was to do in Paradise, if man had not sinned; And at the calling of the
Jews it is very like there shall be such a restitution of all things (as it is
called Acts 3. 21.) the creatures shall be restored to such a knd of excellency
as it had at the first in the Creation: And though in part this may be
fulfilled to Gods people, so as the beasts of the field shall do them no hurt,
that is, if they prevail against them it shall be for some gracious ends that
God aymsat, yet for the literal fulfilling of it it is reserved for that day.
Thirdly, When God is reconciled to his people, Obser.
shall the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and the creeping
things of the earth be at peace with the Saints? what a wicked and ungodly
thing is it then in men, that the more any are reconciled unto God, the greater
enemies are they unto them? God promises when his people be reconciled to him,
the creature shall be reconciled unto them; yet thou a vile wretch when thou
see one grow up in the ways of reconciliation with God, A wicked thing, the
more God is reconciled to men the more to hate them.
thy enmity increases toward him; what a horrible wickedness is this? it is
more then brutish by far, it is desperate wickedness; as it was with those
Kings of Canaan, Josh. 10. 5. as soon as the Gibeonites had made peace with
Joshua, and were in coveuant, the five Kings conspired against them, they lived
quietly enough before with them, but when they heard that they had made a
covenant with Joshua, they presently conspired against them; Thus it is with
many at this day, when you had your companions who would drink, swear, and
break the Sabbath, and be unclean, and scorn with you, they were good fellows
then, how would you hug and embrace them, and delight in them? but so soon as
God has wrought upon their hearts, and they are brought from enemies to be
reconciled unto God, now your hearts are opposite to them, now you look upon
them as your enemies, now you hate them, now your spirits rise against them: O
horrible and desperate wickedness! the Lord rebuke you this day, the Lord
strike upon such a heart. Before Saul was converted hewas a man of repute, but
as soon as he turned Christian, he was a pestilent, a seditious fellow, Away
with such a man from the earth, he is not worthy to live, the next news we
hear, forty of them conspired together, and bound themselves with an oath,
that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed him.

Fourthly, I will make a Covenant, says God, you shall have this mercy, and
have it by covenant.

Mercy that comes by Covenant is excellent mercy indeed. Obser.
The same mercy that comes in by a work of general providence is nothing so
sweet, nothing so firm as that mercy that comes in by Covenant. When the
Saints enjoy a mercy, though it be outward, they are not so taken with the
mercy, for the outward part of it, because they have some comfort and
contentment to the outward man by it, but they are taken with it upon this
ground, they see even this outward mercy comes to them by virtue of Gods
Covenant with them, that sweetness and makes firm the mercy; when they go up
and down the field and the beasts come not upon them to destroy them, Mercy
that comes in by covenant is sweet.
they can look upon their present safety as enjoying it in the Covenant. You
will say, the wicked can walk up and down in the fields, and the beasts not
destroy them.

Though they do, yet a godly man has more sweetness in this then he, in that
he can see this his safety from the Covenant: when he rides a journey, his
beast is not made an instrument of Gods wrath to dash out his brains, perhaps
it is so with his wicked neighbor that rides with him, but that from whence
the preservation is, is different, it is a mercy to the godly man form the
Covenant that God has made with him, to preserve him in all his ways, it is
but general providence to the other; wicked men may have the same mercies for
the matter of them that the godly have, yet there is a kernel in the mercy
which only the Saints enjoy.

There are two things observable in a mercy coming by Covenant.

Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep
his covenant. This is a sweet promise, a soule-satisfying promise, more worth
then all the riches of your City, even that one promise; all the passages of
Gods ordinary providence are mercy and truth to those that keep his Covenant.
Mark, perhaps they are mercies to you, there is a general bounty you have in
your ordinary preservation, but they are not Mercy and truth to you, there is
the addition, they are Mercy and truth to the godly, that is, they are such
mercies as are bound to them by Covenant; Therein David rejoices, therefore
says he in the beginning of the Psalm, I will lift up my heart unto God, as
amongst other reasons so for this, that all the paths of God are not only
mercy, but mercy and truth: You have been preserved, and have had many mercies
from God, Well, they are Gods mercies unto you, but are they mercies and truth
to you? that is, Do they come to you in a way of promise? Look to that, there
is the sweetness of a mercy, and it is a good sign of a gracious heart to
look more to the Original whence mercy comes, then to the outward part of
the mercy.

Secondly, They are more firm, Esaias 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and
the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee: Why? For the
Covenant of my peace shall not be removed. That mercy that you have, I give it
in a way of Covenant, and the hills and mountains shall depart rather then
that kindness of mine shall depart.

5. Obser. Gods covenant with his people is the satisfaction of their hearts in
their deep^st sorrows
Is it such a blessed thing for God to make a Covenant with the beasts for us?
What a mercy is it then for God to make a Covenant with our souls? the
Covenant that God makes with his people is a Covenant in Christ, there is
mercy. It is a very observable place we have, Genesis 17. concerning Abraham, you
shall find there that in ten verses of that Chap. God repeateth his Covenant
which he made with Abraham, thirteen times, to note thus much, that that was
the mercy indeed that must satisfy Abraham in all his troubles, sorrows, and
afflictions: as if God should say, be satisfied with this Abraham, that I have
entered into Covenant with thee and thy seed, I am a God in Covenant with thee.
And 2 Samuel 23. 5. there is a notable Text, Although (says David) my house be
not so with God (as I desire, as I expect) yet the Lord has made me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Take this
Scripture Christians, take it I say and make use of it in these times of
trouble, though things do not go as you desire yet say as David did, yet the
Lord has made a Covenant with us ordered and sure in all things, ands all our
this isalvation and all our desire.

6. Obser.
Is this a mercy for God to make a Covenant with the beasts for his people?
what a mercy is it then for God to make a Covenant with his Son for his people?
It is that we are to bless god for, that he will make a Covenant with brute
beasts for our good, but that God will make a Covenant with his own son for
our good, for our eternal good. That God should bring the second person in
Trinity; to be the head of the Covenant for us, what a mercy is this? Tit. 2.
1. the Apostle speaks there of eternal life that was promised before the world
began, Why, what promise was there ever made before the world began? to whom
was this promise made? who was there before the world began for God to make any
promise unto? It was only the Son of God, the second person in Trinity, and
there was a most blessed transaction between God the Father, and God the Son,
for our everlasting good before the world began, and upon that depends all
our salvation and our hope. When we read the promises of the Gospel that the
Lord has given to us as branches of the Covenant of grace made with us, we are
ready to think, we are poor weak creatures, we cannot keep Covenant with
God, we cannot perform the conditions of the Covenant: But Christians know
this, thy peace, the salvation of thy soul does not depend so much upon a
Covenant God has made with thee as upon the Covenant he has made with his
Son, there is the firmness, the original, the foundation of all thy good and
thy salvation; and though thou art a poor weak creature that does not keep
Covenant with the Lord, yet the Son of God has kept Covenant with the Father,
and has perfectly performed all conditions the Father required of him, the
work has been perfected by the Son, and here is our comfort. Raise your
drooping hearts by this meditation.

The second part of this peace, and that is a promise of deliverance from
hoftility, from the enemy, I will break the bow, and the sword, and the
battle out of the earth.

First, Obser.
Peace is a great blessing, it is a great mercy to have the bow and the sword
broke. It is a part of the Covenant that God makes with his people, to take
away the instruments of hostility. Esaias 2. 4. God promises the breaking of
swords into plough-shares and spears in pruning hooks.

You find the contrary when God threatens judgment to a people, Joel. 3. 10.
he threatens thus, to beat their plongh-shares into swords, and their pruning
hooks into spears, then they are in a sad condition. It is a great deal better
that their swords should be beaten into plow-shares, The excellency of peace.
then that the plow-shares should be beaten into swords; that the spears
should be made pruning hooks, then that pruning books should be made spears.

This peace is a most amiable thing, and lovely in all our eyes, every man
desires it, and God promises it unto his people in many places as a most
special fruit of his love unto them. Esaias 33. 10. Jerusalem shall be a quiet
habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; And Number. 6. 25, 26. The
Lord make his face shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up
his countenance upon thee and give thee peace; the shining of Gods face
appears in giving of peace to a Nation: therefore Jer, 16. 5. where God
threatens the taking away of peace, mark the expression, I have taken away my
peace from this people says the the Lord, even loving kindness and mercies.
He does not say I have taken away peace, but I have taken away My peace, and
then, when My peace is taken away, I will even take away loving kindness and
mercies, how easy were it to let out ones self in large discourses in the
high commendations of peace? God teaches us in these days to set a high price
upon it. We have had a peace a long time and the Lord knows we have not priced
that mercy; now we know what a sad thing it is to have war in our Gates. The
evil of civil war.
And if this be a fruit of Gods Covenant to have peace, we have cause to
bewail the breach of our Covenant. Surely there is a great displeasure of God
out against us; this cup of blood that is prepared and powered forth and drunk
in a great measure is a most dreadful one, our brethren have drunk deep of
it, we have been afraid of it long since, we have heard of rumors of wars, and
when the Cup was abroad we prayed that if it were possible it might pass from
us, this Cup did pass and went to our brethren in Ireland, and now it is come
unto us, the sword has had its circuit, and now it is come amongst us, and
that which is come is exceeding dreadful, because our wars are not with
foreign enemies, but Civil wars the worst of all. I have read in the Roman
Chronicles, that in a battle between Sylla and Marius, there was a soldier by
accident killed one, not knowing who it was, but after he was slain he saw it
was his brother, presently in anguish of spirit he ran his sword into his own
bowels. This we find to be ordinary among us, even brother to be against
brother, yea son against father of each side at this time. Certainly therefore
it is time for us to fall upon our knees, and to be humbled before the Lord for
the breach of our peace.

Peace is a sweet mercy, therefore pity it is that it should not be improved,
pity is it that it should be abused. Oh how have we abused our former peace!
God gave us peace before, to what end? That we might be edifyed and so built up
in the fear of God and comfort of the holy Ghost, as Acts 9. 31. it is said,
the Churches had rest, and were edifyed, and did walk in the fear of God, and
the comforts of the holy Ghost.

We have not made this use of the rest God has been pleased to afford us, but
we have grown wanton with our peace, with this precious jewel, and just it is
with God to take it from us.

And now we do desire peace, but to what end? Still aiming at this especially
at this that we might have more freedom to satisfy our lusts, and to make
provision for the flesh, that is the very ground of most men's desire of peace:
whereas if we did understand the true worth of peace indeed, we would think it
a very low end to desire peace only to attain this. Peace rightly prized.
Ezekiel. 37. 26. Mark the promise that is there, I will make a Covenant of peace
with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them, and I will place them
and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for
evermore. Yea that is a comfortable peace, to be desired indeed, when God by
peace shall make way to set his sanctuary amongst us. If we did desire peace
upon these terms, we might have peace sooner then we are like to have it.

Again, Peace is sweet, therefore pity it is that it should be falsified. Ps.
28. 3. there are some that speak peace to their neighbors, but mischief is
in their hearts. It is pity that such a precious thing as peace should be
serviceable to men's lusts, that it should be pretended only to drive on a
mischievous design, Peace is too good to be serviceable to men's base ends.

Yet further, Peace is a great blessing, therefore pity it is that it should
not be endeavored for to the uttermost. War that brings peace is better then
peace that brings war.
Yea cursed be that war that has not peace for the end of it, it is that
which ought to be as the Emblem of every soldier, to have it written upon his
sword, Sic quaerimus Pacem, even thus do we seek peace. It is a great deal
better to have a war that aims at, and works peace, then to have a peace that
ayme^ at, and works war. It is true, war produces very dreadful effects, but
war that shall bring forth peace, is better then peace that produces war; and
the more we do commend peace, the more do we still commend that war that
tends to the bringing forth true peace, rather then to seek for a false peace
that will produce most dreadful war afterward.

Peace is a great blessing from God, but we must take heed we buy it not too
dear; we may say of this as we use to say of Gold, we may buy gold toodear.

You will say how is it possible to buy peace at too dear a rate?

Yes, if you give these three things for it, you have but a dear bargain of it.

First, Peace may be bought at too dear a rate.
if you sell truth for it, selling any truth for peace, you buy peace too
dear, for the least truth is better then all the kingdoms of the earth. It
first cost the blood of Christ, and since has been watered by the blood of
thousands of Martyrs.

Secondly, if you shall betray those that have been most active for the

Thirdly, if you for love of peace shall subject your selves to tyranny or went
before, that should buy peace for themselves so dear, as to bring not only
themselves but their posterity under the bondage of miserable tyranny and
woeful slavery. It is true, it is a great deal easier for a man that is
striving and fighting with his enemy, to lie down, then to spend his strength
with fighting and striving; he shall not spend so many of his spirits in the act
of lying down, why will he we ary himself? is it not better to lie down upon
the soft grass then to tire himself in combating? but if this man lie down,
he has his throat cut by his enemy; has this man think you done wisely for
himself? to prevent trouble, he has lost his life, If we should be so weary of
present troubles as to lie down to have our throats cut by our adversaries,
shall the generation to come commend either our wisdom or valor? It is true,
when a stream runs strong, you cannot expect to stopp that stream, but
there will be some trouble in doing it; And the truth is, that war that is now
o^ foot with us, though it has much trouble in it, and many of our brethren
suffer many hard things by it, yet let us know it is but to stop a stream of
misery that was coming upon us, and it is better to undergo some difficulties
in the stopping the stream, then to be quiet, and so let it overflow us, till
all be past recovery. Our adversaries cry out that we are enemies to peace, and
they all for peace, that is they would have us to be so quiet as to let them
do what they list, they would feign have us so to love peace as to give up our
strength to them, and to be irrecoverably under their power. Therefore let this
generation be wise, for great things depend upon these present affairs of the
kingdom, that concern not only their own outward comfort, but the glory of
God, and the good of their posterity to many generations after.

I will break the bow and the sword, etc.

It is God that brings peace as he pleases; Obser.
it is a great blessing, and it is Gods peculiar work to bring this blessing.
We may treat and treat about peace, but until God pleases to give a
commission for peace, it will not be. If God comes in with exceptions, our
treaties and our plots will never do the work. [ I] will break the bow, says
God, Jer. 47. 6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still. The sword
answers, How can I be quiet seeing the Lord has given me a charge against
Askelon, etc. Till God give a commission to the sword it cannot rest and be
still. Job. 34. 29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and
when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be against a
nation or a man only. If he cause trouble, who can make quietness? Oh no,
none can. It is God that is to be looked at in breaking of treaties, it is God
that hardneth the hearts of men that they shall not make peace until his time
come. Josh. 11. 19. 20. a most remarkable text. There was not (says the text)
a City that made peace with the children of Israel save the inhabitants of
Gibeon, for it was of the Lord to harden their hearts that they should come
against Israel in battle that they might utterly be destroyed. Of all the
Cities in Canaan that Gods people came against, though Gods hand was very
remarkable in going along with them, working many miracles for them, yet the
Text observes that there was none that would make peace with them only Gibeon,
God is the Prince of peace, he is the disposer of it as he pleases.
why? for was of the Lord to harden their hearts to come against Israel in bat
tell that they might utterly be destroyed. God intended to destroy them,
therefore God hardened them that they should not make peace with his people.
God is the Prince of peace, therefore he disposes of it as he will; Many
devices may be in the hearts of men, they have many plots and contrivances, but
the counsel of the Lord shall stand. Psalm, 29. 11. The Lord sits upon the
floods, yea the Lord sits King for ever. The Lord will give strength to his
people, the Lord will bless his people with peace. That is not the peace for
God to bless his people with, for which they must lay open their throats to be
cut, and betray his cause. God need give no strength for this, but Gods way is
to give strength to his people, and then to bless them with peace. We love
peace, but let us look to have our peace through the strength of God: put those
together, the Lord has promised it, and do you plead this promise; though we
seem weak, yet the Lord will give his people strength, and so he will bless
his people with peace. We must work our peace by improving Gods strength, not
think to get peace by a sluggish compliance, and a base unworthy yielding to
our adversaries, Jer. 14, 19. We looked for peace, it seems they were in some
treaties, and there is no good, for healing, and behold trouble, all their
treaties came to nothing: But mark what follows, ver. 20. We acknowledge, O
Lord, our wickedness and the iniquity of our fathers; O Lord we dwell amongst
people that are set on fire, we speak of peace, yea when they speak of peace
they have mischief in their hearts, O Lord our wickedness and the iniquity of
our fathers is great, O Lord pardon our iniquity. This is the way to have
peace, to make up our peace with God.

Thirdly, Obser.
Thorough Reformation is the way to bring peace, Mark how it rises, They shall
call me no more Baali, then will I break the bow; when they shall break of
thoroughly their Idolatry, then will I break the bow and the sword; so long as
they worship false gods, war shall be in their gates; but when they shall
thoroughly reform and set up my worship in that way that I will have, then will
I break the bow. That is the way if we could trust God for it. Thorough
Reformation brings peace.
Here is our baseness that we will not trust God in this way of peace, we are
ready think that reformation will bring disturbance, O no, reformation is the
way to a through peace. Let our wisdoms be pure, and then certainly it will be
peaceable. We have a most excellent Scripture for this, Isa 33. 20. Jerusalem
is there promised to be a quiet habitation, what follows? ver. 22. For the
Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the more we entertain him as
judge, and our lawgiver, the more peace we shall have, Isa. 9. 7. Of his
government and peace there shall be no end. When the government of Christ
comes, then comes peace. Zach. 6. 13. He shall rule upon his throne, and be a
Priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both,
that is, advance Christ in his Kingly Office as well as in his priestly Office,
and then there shall be a counsel of peace.

What is the reason that the counsel of peace has not prevayled to this day?
We have cause to fear they have not been set between both, between the
Kingly Office and Priestly Office of Christ to advance them both. Esaias 32. 17.
18. The works of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
quietness, and assurance for ever, and my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. See how the
Holy Ghost adds one word to another, to show that true peace is in the ways
of righteousness. When men's counsels for peace are crooked counsels, when
they seek to company for their own ends, when the honor of God is not their
chief aim, it is just with God to dash all their counsels. Esaias 59. 8. The
way of peace they know not, says God, there is no judgment in their goings,
they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know
peace. We know the going of the serpent is a crooked going, it windeth up and
down; so many of our Counselors of peace have gone like the serpent, winding
up and down in their carnal policies, they have not studied reformation, but
have gone in crooked paths, and therefore they have not brought forth the true
effects of peace. But one place more, Jer. 31, 22. 23, there the Lord speaks
concerning his people, when he was about to deliver them from captivity, How
long will thou go about? that is, you do not go on the right way, you
compass about, you have fetches because you meet with difficulties in your
way, you think by this and the other means to avoid troubles, but you shall
go on by a right line: what follows? The Lord bless thee O habitation of
justice and mountain of holiness; Apply your counsels that way to be the
habitation of justice and the mountain of holiness, and the work is done,
execute justice upon Delinquents that are in your power, and set up the
Ordinances of God in the right way of worship, this is the way of peace, but
all this while you have gone about, Oh that the Lord would deliver our great
Councillors from going about. They shall lie down safely.

Hence the note is, only Gods great peace brings safety, if we patch up a
false peace upon base and unworthy terms, we must not think to lie down
safely; but when God promises peace a fruit of the Covenant, then it follows,
they shall lie down safely, Only Gods peace brings safety.
And I suppose none of you would have any other peace but such a peace as you
may lie down safely, and how is it possible do you think to lie down safely,
except the Lord destroy the evil beasts out of the land? Levit. 16. 5. I will
give peace in your land, and you shall lie down, and none shall make you
afraid, and I will rid evil beasts out of the land. What is the end of our war
at present, but to rid the evil beasts out of the land, that so we may lie
down safely? Can you think to dwell safely so long as so many evil beasts are
in the land, and so exasperated in the highest of all their rage? Certainly, if
a false and a patched up peace should be made, we were in a mosticle and
hazardous condition, especially those who have appeared for the Cause of God;
those who have showed themselves most faithful, can they lie down safely in
the confidence of such a peace?

If you have the hearts of true Englishmen, you would never desire any other
peace, but such as that you and your brethren, your Ministers, and those
Worthies in Parliament, and all that have appeared for you, might lie down
safely, Acts 27. 13. 14. we read of a soft south wind, that did blow, but the
Text says, that not long after there arose a tempestuous wind called
Euroclydon. So if we have a false peace, Tranquillitas ista tempestas erit:
Hieron.
it may blow as that south wind did, softly and still, but certainly the
Euroclydon, the most terrible East Wind will follow after. 2 Chronicles. 20. 30.
Jehosaphat was quiet, for his God gave him rest, Suppose we should be quiet,
and our own base counsels and our own complyances should give us rest, our
quiet would never be security to us, there will follow dismal things
afterward; but then is a people quiet safely, when we have the peace of God,
together with the God of peace. Phil. 4. 7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, keep your hearts etc. Then presently, ver. 9. The God of peace
shall be with you. We would be loath to be without the God of peace, then let us
be loath to have any peace but the peace of God. You all desire Peace, and so
the adversary pretends; take heed you be not deluded with vain words; that
which is your end in your thoughts, is their means to drive on their designs;
and what good will such a peace do you? you will be no more secure then you
are, nay your danger will be far greater. Lastly, It is Gods own gift to his
people to lie down safely, Obser.
this is a further blessing then to have the sword and bow broken. We may be
delivered from our enemies, but the Lord may afrighten our consciences with
visions in the night, he may terrify us a thousand ways, and take away our
security, therefore he adds this, I will break the bow and the sword, and
then I will make thee lie down safely. This is a precious mercy, it is
recumbere faciam, in fiducia dormire faciam fiducialiter, I will make them lie
down in trust and confidence, that is, to go to bed without any fear of evil
to befall us before morning. We little think what a mercy this is, we have many
nights lain down safely, and slept quietly, and have risen up comfortably, you
have little thought of the giving God the glory of this mercy. Many of our
brethren in diverse Countries would prize such a mercy now, when they go to bed
they are afraid of every little noice, and can scarce have a nights sleep, but
are scared with Alarums.

What would some of our brethren give for one nights rest in safety, that when
they go to bed they might say, Well, I hope this night I shall have quiet
rest, I shall not be troubled in my sleep. In many places they are feign to
sleep in the day, and to watch in the night. It is true, here in the City you
can go to bed and sleep quietly, The blessing of a quiet spirit in troublesome
times
and rise quietly, Oh think of those that want this mercy, and give God the
glory of it while you have it. It is a mercy of God, a great privilege for the
Lord to quiet our spirits in these dangerous times, in these trembling days,
when every man's hands are upon his loins. Many who are free from their
adversaries, yet through the timerousness of their spirits they cannot have one
nights quiet, they turmoyle themselves without own thoughts, Oh what will
become of us hereafter?

It may be the enemies will come, and we shall lose our lives, and all will be
rent-from us, and this makes them that they cannot lie down safely, though
danger be not yet near them, but when God is pleased to quiet the heart in the
most troublesome times of all, that you can lie down securely, this is a choice
mercy, it is a fruit of the Covenant.

This mercy the Lord promises, Pro. 3. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way
safely, thy foot shall not stumble. Mark the 24 ver. When thou lie down thou
shall not be afraid, yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet, be
not afraid of sudden fear, for the Lord shall be thy confidence etc. This made
good to one in these days is a Text worth gold indeed. So Ps. 107. 3. So does
the Lord give his beloved rest; others they labor and toil, and they eat the
bread of carefulnes and are mightily perplexed, but so does the Lord give his
beloved rest, that is, the Lord takes away care and thought from his beloved,
and gives them rest, so that they can lie down quietly as it were in his
bosom.

There is a false ^est and security of the wicked when they make a covenant
with death and with hell, as Esaias 28. 16. Ye have said, we have made a covenant
with death and with hell, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood
have we hid our selves. This text is as proper a text to our adversaries as any
I know in the Scripture, they promise to themselves all security and safety
they make a Covenant with hell and death, but how? they make lies their refuge,
and under falsehood have they hid themselves. Here is a security, and it is by a
covenant, with hell and death; but this Text holds forth a lying down safely by
virtue of another Covenant, even the Covenant of God, therefore it follows,
ver. 16. Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone,
aprocious corner stone, a sure foundation, he that believes shall not make
haste. It is an Observable Text concerning our times, there is a security upon
that ground, the overflowing scourge will break down all, but says God, I lay
in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation, he that believes shall not make haste, you may be secure,
though your enemies do vaunt themselves and will boast in their own ways,
they have made a covenant with hell and death, yet for you I lay in Zion a
stone, a sure foundation, he that believes shall not make haste. Although God
does not come with his deliverance for the present, yet you who believe, quiet
your selves, and lie down safely, and do not make haste. A horse says the
Scripture, Psalm. 33. 17. is a vain thing for safety, they trust in the
creature, ver. 18. but behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
they have a greater safety then if they had Troops of horses lie about them to
defend them, and ver. 20. Our soul waits for the Lord, he is our help and
our shield, so Pro. 21. 31. The horse is prepared against the day of battle,
but safety is of the Lord. Let us the resore cry with the Psalmist, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, then will we lie down in peace
and sleep, for thou only make us dwell in safety.

Would you have quiet sleep in these troublesome times? make your peace with
God, if there be peace within, then you may lie down safely notwithstanding
all the rumors and tumults of war abroad, but if there be no peace in the
heart, though you should live to see outward peace, your sins would dog you,
they would pursue you, the terrors of the Almighty would be upon you, and you
should not have one nights rest.

But Lord what is all this except we may have communion with thy self, except
we may have communion with JESUS CHRIST? This is the voice of a gracious heart,
therefore follows that blessed promise as a further fruit of the Covenant that
God would make with his people, says the Lord, I will betroth thee unto my
self, I will be yours too, there shall be a most blessed union and conjugall
communion between you and me, you shall enjoy me in all the sweetness and love
that the wife enjoys the husband in, though you have most wretchedly departed
from me, yet behold, I will betroth you unto me in righteousness and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and iu mercies.

The Seventeenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 19. 20. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth
thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies.

I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.


BUt how betroth? (this phrase seems to be very strange) she had been the wife
of God before, and was gone a whoring from him; though God should be reconciled
to her, one would have thought it should rather have been, I will receive you
again, No, but I will betroth you. The reason of the phrase is, to note that
God would receive her with that love as if she had been a pure virgin, and he
would never upbraid her former departing from him: you have been an
adulteress, bear your shame, but for my own Names sake I will be content to
receive you again, No, but I will be^roth you unto me, you shall be as now
taken to me, and your sins shall be no more remembered, they shall be as if they
had never been committed. Obser.
When God pardons sin he will remember it no more, the Lord will never charge
upon sinners their former sins. And if God will not remember the sins of his
people, of his repenting people, to charge them upon them, we should not
remember them, to up brayd them for them; what ever they have been before, if
now converted, it is too much boldness in any of us to upbraid them for any of
their former sins. I remember Beza tells of himself, that the Papists
upbraided him much for the sins of his youth, for his lascivious Poems he
made before his conversion; but Beza answers them thus, Hi homines invident
mihi graciam divinam, these men envy me the grace of God.

I will betroth thee unto me, Lect. 17
yea I will betroth thee unto me, I will even betroth thee unto me.

The repenting Church might say, How is it possible that such an adulteress
who has been so vile, who has been so impudent in her ways of forsaking the
blessed God, her glorious husband, who has so long continued in filthy
whordoms, should yet expect to receive mercy? What, this mercy, to be betrothed
to God, to be taken as if she were a chaste Spouse before him? Yes says God, I
will do it, and therefore it is repeated three times for the assurance of the
humbled repenting Church that God will again betroth himself unto her, and
that with some Emphasis, I will betroth, yea I will betroth, even I will
betroth: there is betrething, and betrothing, and betrothing, and I, and I, and
I, showing how much the heart of God is in this thing. As if God should have
said, Though you think such a thing can never be, you see nothing but cause of
doubting and discouragement in your selves, but I will do it, yea I will do it,
and it is thus repeated to note also the excellency of the mercy that is in it.

It is an excellent mercy indeed that the Lord will take a people into so near
a communion with himself, from this mercy flows most glorious mercies, I
will do this says God, I need say no more, here is mercy enough to satisfy
any soul living, I will do it, I will do it, I will do it.

But will this mercy hold? will it hold? I have already apostatized from the
Lord, I have still an apostatizing heart, and am like to fall off from God
again, and so may condition is like to be worse then ever yet it was; no says
God, I will betroth you unto my self for ever, my heart shall be for ever
toward you, and your heart shall be for ever toward me, there shall never be
any breach of conjugal love and communion between you and I any more.

in righteousness, it shall be no dishonor at all to my righteousness, that I
take you again to my self. And I will put such a righteous frame into your
hearts, that it shall be no scandal unto me before the Nations that I have
betrothed such a one as you unto my self.



Well says GOD, though you know no reason why it should be done, yea indeed
though there be no reason at all in your selves, yet that which I will do, I
will do it in judgment too, I know a reason why I will do it, it is not a rash
thing that I shall do, I will do it in judgment, it is no other thing that now
I promise you, but that I have exercised my wisdom about from all eternity, it
is not only a work of my grace and mercy toward you, but it is a work of my
wisdom too, and there will one day appear a glorious shine of wisdom in this
my work of taking you unto my self again, I know what I do in it, yea and on
your part though hitherto you have seen no such excellency in my wayesto
cleave to them, but you have departed from them, and followed other lovers, yet
I shall when I come in ways of mercy to you, convince you so of the vanity of
all other things your hearts run after, and of that fullness of good there is
in me to satisfy your souls for ever, that you shall see infinite reason to
join your selves unto me in an everlasting covenant. You though there were
some more specious shows in ways of false worship, but when you shall be
reconciled, you shall see there is infinite reason in those ways of worship
your souls have heretofore rejected, you shall not only have your affections a
little stirred, and have some heat for the present, but that change that shall
be in you shall be out of judgment, I will betroth you unto me in judgment, in
judgment on my part. I will have reason for what I do, and in judgment on
your part, you shall see reason for what you do, you shall see so much reason
in coming in to me, that you shall admire at the former folly of your hearts,
when you departed from me, and sought your comforts elsewhere. The workings of
my heart shall be in judgment toward you, and the workings of your hearts shall
be in judgment toward me.

But take it at best that my heart does indeed come in to God, yet I shall I
will betroth you unto me in loving kindness. I will deal gently and favorably
with you, I will not take advantage of your failings and infirmities, I will
remember you are but flesh, I will have a tender respect to you.

But it may be there will not only be some ordinary infirmities which I will
betroth you unto me in mercy as well as in loving kindness, my bowels of mercy
shall yearn toward you, not only to pass over lesser infirmities, but to
swallow up greater iniquities. And accordingly I will work in you gracious
dispositions of loving kindness toward me, you shall have a most sweet and
ingenuous disposition of spirit, you shall do what you do for me out of
principles of love, out of abundance of sweetness in all your ways, that
perverse, surly, crooked, sour spirit of yours toward me shall be changed into
a sweet, gentle, gracious frame. And this sweetness and loving kindness
shall be in you toward one another, you shall have your hearts changed that
were so rugged, and so harsh, and peevish toward one another before, when I am
once reconciled unto you, you shall be reconciled one to another. And you shall
have bowels of mercy, as my bowels shall yerne toward you, so your bowels
shall yern toward me, as it shall pity my soul to see you in misery, so it
shall pity your soul to see me dishonored, and you shall have bowels likewise
one toward another, pitying one another, and helping, and relieving one another
in the greatest straits, I will betroth you unto me in loving kindness and in
mercy.

But there are many glorious promises that we find God made to his people, I
will betroth my self unto you in faithfulness, as well as in mercy; look
what ever I have said concerning my Church, that is yours to be made good to
the uttermost, and there is nothing that can be for your good, that concerns me
as a loving husband to do, but you shall be sure to have it: And as for you,
howsoever your hearts have been hitherto unfaithful toward me in departing
from me, yet now you shall have put into you a faithful spirit, there shall be
faithfulfulnesse on your part as well as on mine, so as my heart shall confide
in you, you shall not deal falsely with me as before; your hearts shall
confide in me, that I will deal faithfully with you, and my heart shall
confide in you, that you will deal faithfully with me, so that whatsoever
befalls you, yet you shall be faithful to me, and faithful one to another, so
as your hearts shall trust one in another. I will betroth you unto me in
faithfulness.

And whereas it is but little that yet you have known of me, and this indeed
you shall know the Lord; know him in another manner then ever yet you knew him;
I will show my glory to you, I will open my very heart to you, the secret of
the Lord shall be with you, you shall all know me, though your parts be but
weak and mean, yet you shall be taught of God; perhaps you may be ignorant of
other things, but you shall know the Lord.

And as for outward blessings, you shall have your fill of them too, all the
Let Iezreelory to the corn, the corn shall cry to the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn, the earth shall cry to the heavens, the heavens shall
hear the earth, and the heavens shall cry to me, and I will hear the heavens;
There shall be in them, 1 a readiness to help, 2 a greediness to relieve you;
yea 3 a concatenation of them all, 4 and I will join them for the good of
Iezreel.

I will sow her unto me in the earth; you were scattered, this is a judgment,
but now it is turned to a mercy, your scattering is as seed, you shall
fructify, and increase abundantly, and so be a blessing to the whole earth.

But we have lien underthe curse of God a great while, and have seemed to be
rejected; but says God, I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained

Lastly, we are a proverb uuto all the world (as you know the Jews are) I will
say to you which were not my people, you are my people; though you be a people
scorned and vilified in the world, yet I will own you, and it shall appear
so, your low and miserable condition shall not hinder me from saying, you are
my people: and as for you, whatsoever you shall meet withal in my ways,
whatsoever you suffer for my worship, though it be scorned and despised in the
world, yet you shall own it before the world, and you shall say, Thou art my God.

Thus you have a short paraphrase upon this gracious expression of God to his
reconciled people. You have here but a flash of this mercy of the Lord to his
Saints.

But when was all this fulfilled you will say? or is it to be fulfilled? to
what times does this prophecy refer? Quest.


There is in part the making good this prophecy, when ever a soul is brought
into the embracing the Gospel; but the height of this shall be at the calling
of the Jews, Answ.
then not only the spiritual estate of particular converted souls shall be
thus happy, but the Church state shall be thus, the visible Church shall be
betrothed unto the Lord for ever. We cannot say so of any visible Church here,
there is no visible Church but may fall off from the visibility of it, but when
God shall bring in the Jews, they shall never fall off from the visibility of
their Church Communion. Revel. 21. 2. seems to have reference to this
prophecy. And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband: And I heard a great voice out of
heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God. This has almost the same words that we have here in this
prophecy that is to be fulfilled in that glorious Church Estate, that shall be
when God calls home to himself his own people: Mark there, God himself shall
be with them; God is always with his people; but God himself, that is, a more
especial, and immediate, and full presence of God shall be with them. But the
words must have yet a more full search into them I will betroth thee.]

The Scripture makes much mention of Espousals and of marriage, to express the
great mystery of the grace of God to his people. The holy Ghost seems to
delight much in this Allegory: there is none more frequent in Scripture then
it, which is a very great honor to a married condition: And such ought to be
the lives of those that are in a married condition, as much as may be to
resemble the blessedness of the condition of a people reconciled unto God, for
in all similitudes there must be something in the thing to resemble that which
it is brought for. Married people should so live, as all that behold the
sweetness, the happiness of their lives, may be put in mind thereby of that
sweetness and happiness there is in the Churches comunion with Jesus Christ. I
appeal to you, are your lives thus? Now in a married condition there are these
four things most remarkable. First, There is the nearest unino that can be,
They two shall be made oneflesh; this is the power of God in an Ordinance,
consider it, two that not perhaps a month before were strangers one to another,
never saw the faces one of another, did not know that there were such in the
world, if they come under this ordinance, though it be but a civil ordinance,
The strong union in marriage.
these two shall now be nearer one to another then the child that came out of
the fathers loins, or out of the bowels of the mother, the fruit of the womb
shall not be so near now to thee, nor must it love thee so much as this party,
that not long since it was a mere stranger unto.

Whence comes this but merely from the power of an Ordinance? One would think
that the affection of a mother to the fruit of her own bowels should be more
then it were possible for her to have to a stranger she had never seen before
in her life; but it is not so, when a woman comes under this Ordinance, she
now comes to have (according to that which is her duty) more affection to one
that was ere while a stranger, then to the child that came forth of her own
bowels, so a man then to one that came out of his own loins. Here is the
power of Gods Ordinance, though but civil.

Now then if an Ordinance of God, though but civil, has such an efficacy in
it, what efficacy have divine Ordinances then? Certainly they have mighty
efficacy upon the soul when they are administered in the way of God. So it is
here, I will betroth thee; as if God should say, thou wast not long since as a
stranger unto me, one cast off, yea thou wast as an enemy unto me, but now all
the creatures in heaven and in earth, the very Angels themselves shall not be
more dear unto me, in a nearer communion then you. This is true of a wretched
sinful creature that has not only been as a stranger unto God, but an enemy
unto him, he comes now upon conversion and union with Christ, to be in a
nearer conjunction and further communion with God then the very Angels in
heaven are in some regard, for they are never said to be the Spouse of the Son
of God so as the Saints are.

This is the mighty power and love of God in uniting his Saints to his Son.

Secondly, Conjugall communion the full. lest
There is in nothing in the world that full communication of one

God has two ways of communication of himself, one is infinite, that is to
his Son in that inconceivable mystery of the generation of the Son; he has
other ways of communication of himself after a finite manner; but of all the
finite ways this is the greatest, his comunication of himself to his Saints in
Christ; God has no such comunication of himself to all the creatures, as he
has to his Saints in his Son. God in comparison communicates little or
nothing of himself to the frame of heaven and earth, so as he does to any one
of his Saints. So far as there wants communion in a married estate, so far
there wants the blessing of it, it should be full: The communion of God to his
Church is a full communion, his wisdom, power, riches are made over to the
Saints, the merits, the righteousness of Christ are made all over to them.

This is mutual, there is no such communication of any creature to another, as
there is of the hearts of the Saints to God; one converted to God, lets out his
heart into God in a fuller way then any creature can let out it self to
another creature. Suppose all the creatures in the world should have their
beauty and excellency put together in one, and present it self wholly unto thee
to be an object of thy delight, yet it were not possible that thou should
communicate thy self so fully to it, as thy soul will communicate it self to
God upon thy conversion. The soul gives up it self to God, as into an infinite
ocean of goodness, so as it would not retain any thing of its own, as a drop
of water into a tun of wine, it retains not its savor or color that it had
before, but it is as it were turned into wine. And hereby you may know whether
your conversion be right yea or no, As that which is Christ's comes to be
thine, so that which is thine comes again to be Christ's. My beloved is mine,
and I am his, says the Church. Hence it is that the honor that Christ the
Husband has, reflects upon the Saints; they shine with the brightness of his
beams. Esaias 43. 4. Since thou wast precious in my sight thou becamest
honorable. It was wont to be the custom among the Romans in their marriages,
when the wife was brought home, she had this speech, The Saints partake of
Christ's honor, and they are an honor unto Christ.
Where you are Ca^us, I am Caja. How mean soever the woman was before, yet
being married, she partakes of the honor of her husband. So the Saints,
whatsoever they were before, they are now looked upon as honorable in the eyes
of the Father, in the eyes of Christ, in the eyes of the holy Ghost, and in the
eyes of the Angels and the rest of the Saints, who are able to discern their
excellency. And so on the other side, (for still it is mutual) as the Church
has honor from the luster of the beams of Christ's glory, so even the Church
is a glory unto Christ. As the Scripture says, The wife is the glory of the
man. (which place heretofore you have had opened unto you) so the truth is, the
Church is the glory of Christ. How is that? you will say: It is true, Christ is
the glory of the Church, but that the Church who is a company of poor
creatures should be the glory of Christ, how can that be? yes, it is so, Christ
accounts himself glorified before the Father, that he has such a Spouse.

Mark that place, 2 Cor. 8. 23. Whether you inquire of Titus, he is my partner,
or of our brethren, the messengers of the Churches, the glory of Christ, Titus
and the brethren are there called the glory of Christ. And Ephesians. 1. 23. the
Church is said to be the fullness of him that fills all in all. Howsoever we
are to be low in our own eyes, yet this is certain, that it is the glory of
Christ before the Father and the blessed Angels, that he has such a Spouse as
he has. Hence Rev. 21. 9. Come, Behold the Bride, the Lambs wife: The very
Angels rejoice in this, O come, behold the Bride, the Lambs wife. Certainly had
it not been for the glory of Christ, the Angels would not in such a triumphing
way have called all to behold the Bride the Lambs wife. They call to behold the
glory of Christ in his Bride, Psalm, 45. the Church is described to be brought
in to the King all glorious and beautiful, with ara^ment of needle-worke, etc.
Christ rejoices, and his very heart even springs again to present his Church
unto his Father, Father here behold my Spouse that I have married unto my
self. It is true, a child may sometimes marry against his fathers consent,
such a one as he may be ashamed to think of bringing to his fathers house,
because she will be a disgrace to his father and his friends: But how mean and
sinful soever we are in our selves, when once we are betrothed unto Christ, he
will not think it any dishonor, no not before his Father, that he has such a
Spouse, but he will account it his glory before him and the blessed Angels,
that he has betrothed her unto himself. Afflictions are mutual between Christ
and his Church
And again, this communion makes the Afflictions of Christ the Churches
afflictions, and the afflictions of the Church the afflictions of Christ. There
is a communion in evil things as well as in good. The very sins of the Church
come to be charged upon Christ; as a woman that was in debt before marriage and
so subject to arrests, if she be once married she is no more troubled with the
Sergeants, none can arrest her, but all the debts are charged upon the man: so
though we be in debt, owing a debt of punishment because we have not paid the
debt of obedience, and while we are out of Christ, before this blessed
marriage, we may fear every moment to have some sergeant of the Lord upon us
to arrest us, to hale us to prison, there to lie until we have paid the
uttermost farthing; but when the soul is married unto Christ, all debts, all
sins are all transacted upon Christ, all charged upon him, if the law come
now and require satisfaction, if justice comes you may send them unto your
husband to answer all, and he will not take it ill. A husband perhaps may take
it ill, and think he has brought himself to misery, when arrests come upon
him for his wives debts, it may take off his heart from her, but Christ will
never love you the worse for all your debts when they are charged upon him, he
will willingly satisfy them, and he will rejoice in the satisfaction of them
before his Father. And if there be any affliction befall you, Christ is
afflicted with you. Esaias 63. 9. In all their afflictions be was afflicted. So
on the other side, all the afflictions of Christ are the afflictions of the
Church; does Christ suffer? you take it unto heart as if it were your own
suffering. Christ takes your sufferings unto heart, as if (...) his own; (...)

And you take the sufferings of Christ unto heart as if they were your own.

Thirdly, In a married condition there is a mutual entire love. That is,

First, Entire love in a married condition in three things.
loving the person more then what comes from him. True conjugall

Psalm. 36. 7. How excellent is thy loving kindness O God. Psalm. 91. 14.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deli^er him, I will set
him on high.

Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He found him in a desert land, and in the wast howling
wilderness, he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of
his eye. Mark, they were in the wilderness, in the wast howling wilderness,
yet even there they were dear unto Christ, they were kept as the apple of his
eye. The Church on the other side looks upon Christ in his afflictions as
lovely still as ever, Cant. 1. 12. A bundle of myrrh is my well beloved unto
me, he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. Myrrh is a bitter thing, yet the
Church professes that Christ though bitter in his afflictions, should lie as
lovely between her breasts as a bundle of myrrh. I remember Herodotus reports
of one Artemesia, Queen of Halicarnaffus (and Pliny speaks something of her
too) when her husband was dead, she took his ashes and drank it in wine out of
respect to him though dead. The Church loves a crucified Christ as well as a
glorified Christ. A most notable example of the love of a Spouse to her husband
we have in our English Chronicle, Elenor the wife of Edward the first, the
King having got a wound by a poisoned dagger, she to show the entire love she
bare to her husband, because she thought if the poison did stay a while in the
wound there would be no cure, therefore with her own mouth she sucked out the
poison that was in the wound, and so ventured the loss of her own life to
preserve her husbands. Here was love in a Spouse to her husband. There is the
like love of the Church unto Christ, if Christ be wounded with the poisonous
tongues of ungodly men in reproaches and blasphemies, Vtinam dominus avertat
adversarios ab ecclesia and in me omnia sua tela convertant, meo sanquine sitim
suam expleant. Ambr.
let him be never so persecuted in the world, they that are truly gracious are
willing to suck in that very poison to themselves, so they may take it from
him. Let the reproaches of Christ fall upon me, O let me suffer rather then
Christ. It was Ambrose his wish, Oh that God would turn all the adversaries of
the Church upon me, that they might turn all their weapons upon me, and
satisfy their thirst with my blood, this is the disposition of a true spouse
of Christ.

The fourth is unspeakable delight; communion has delight: the greatest
communion, the greatest delight: the greatest delight that God has is to
communicate himself, to his Son firstly, and next in letting out himself to
his Saints. If there be delight in God in letting out himself to the Saints, in
reason one would think there must needs be delight in the Saints, in letting
themselves out into God, in flowing into God. God takes such delight in letting
out his mercy to his Saints, as that he was well pleased with the death of his
own Son as a means conducing thereunto. One would think that the death of
Christ should be the most abhorring to the heart of God of any Mutual delight
between Christ and the Saints.
yet the Scripture says God was well pleased with it, Esaias, 53. 10. Why was
God pleased with it? Because the Lord saw this was the way for him to
communicate himself in the fullness of his grace unto his Church, and therefore
though it cost him so dear as the death of his own Son, yet he was well
pleased with it. And as for Christ, he takes delight in letting out himself to
his people, after he had suffered, the Text says, he was satisfied when he saw
of the travel of his soul. As if Christ had said, O let me have a Church to
communicate my self unto, though I see it has cost me my blood, it has cost
me all these fearful sufferings, yet I am satisfied, I think all is well
bestowed, so I may have a people to partake of my love and mercy for ever.
Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes. Then for the Saints, the delight they
have in communicating themselves unto Christ is unutterable. Stay me with
flaeggons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love, says the Church,
Cantic, 2. 5. Psalm. 63. 5. My soul shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness,
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my
bed, and meditate of thee in the night watches.

Take this note, the more fully you lay out your selves for Christ, the more
comfort you shall have in your lives. Here is the great difference between
hypocrites and others in the comfort of their lives. It is impossible that any
hypocrite can have that comfort in his life as a gracious heart can have, upon
this ground, because a hypocrite reserveth somewhat of himself for something
else, there is not a full comunication of himself unto Christ, he always
keeps somewhat back and thereby loses his comfort: But a gracious heart fully
letting out himself into Christ, from thence comes the comfort, and sweetness
that he has in the ways of Christ above all hypocrites in the world.

Perhaps you think that the only comfort you can have is by receiving some
benefit, some mercy from God, you are much mistaken, the comfort of letting
your hearts out to God, is a greater comfort then any comfort you have in
receiving any thing from God.

And now, Oh how happy are they unto whom Christ is thus espoused! How
comfortably may you live being made sure to Christ? and how comfortably may you
die? It is our work to seek to draw souls to Christ, to allure souls to be
in love with him. Genesis 24. 35. You may see what course Abraham's servant took in
drawing the love of Rebekah and her friends to his Masters son, he begins wi^h
telling them that he is the servant of Abraham, and that the Lord had blessed
his Master greatly, so that he was become great, and that the Lord had given
him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and that he had an only soon
that was to be heir of all this. This is the work of Ministers, to tell people
what riches of mercy there are in God, and that all the treasures of those
infinite riches of the infinite God are in JESUS CHRIST and to be let out in
him, this gains the heart. Yea it is not only the work of Ministers, but it
should be work of every gracious heart thus to seek to draw souls to Christ,
as Rev. 22. 17. not only the Angels there say Come, but the Bride says Come,
and let him that hea eth say Come, and let him that is a thirst come, and
whosoever will let him take the water of life freely.

Were I not in such a way of explication as I am, surely we could not get off
such a point as this; but that which I shall say for the present is only this.
Know that it is not want of any worth in you that can hinder communion with
Jesus Christ, do not reason in that manner. I am a poor wretched sinful
creature, will ever Christ be married unto me? It is not thy sinfulness, it is
not thy base condition that can hinder thee; Christ never joins himself to
any because they are worthy, but he joins himself to them that they may be
worthy, he makes them to be worthy in joining himself unto them. The woman is
not married unto the King, because she is a Queen, but the King maryeth her, to
make her a Queen. And further know, if your hearts be not taken with Christ to
join with him in his holy marriage, if he be not your husband to enjoy
conjugall communion with you, he will be your judge to condemn you. But besides
this betrothing between Christ and a soul, there is a betrothing between Christ
and a visible Church, especially the Church of the Jews when they shall be
called.

God shall appear in his glory when this marriage shall be between Christ and
the Jewish Church, the King will then be in his Robes, if a man of estate have
a son to marry, Christmar rying himself to the Church of the Jews.
and intends to solemnize the marriage according to his estate, if he have any
better clothes then other, he puts them on that day; so at the calling of the
Jews, the King of heaven will be in his robes; God will appear in a most
glorious manner to the world then ehe did since the creation. Yea and you know
the Bridegroom too will be very fine upon the marriage day; so Jesus Christ
will then appear, (whether personally or otherwise we say not) but certainly
he will gloriously appear at that day. Tit. 2. 15. We look for the glorious
appearance of the great God, and our Savior jes^s Christ. And 2 These. 1. 10.
Christ shall come so as to be admired in all them that believe; the Church
likewise shall then be arrayed in her fine clothes, she shall be then clothed
in white clean, and fine li^nen, as it is Rev. 19. 8. all in the righteousness
of Christ, the great doctrine of justification by Christ shall be made out full
and clear. Yea and the creatures, her servants, shall put on the best raiment,
as in a great marriage the servants in the house have new clothes, at that day
there will be a change in all the creatures, and another kind of face in the
world then now there is. Then will be the marriage supper, and happy shall
those be that shall then be found worthy to enter into the bedchamber; let us
now love Christ, let us now cleave to him, let us now suffer for him; we may
perhaps be some of those, who beside our eternal enjoyment of christ in heaven,
may enjoy him in this marriage upon the earth. But we must leave this argument,
we spoke something of it in the end of the first chapter.

And I will betroth thee unto me for ever.

[ For ever.] This adds to the mercy to make it glorious, this [ for ever]
makes a misery though never so little, an infinite misery, and a mercy, an
infinite mercy. This betrothing for ever, shall be fulfilled in a visible
church communion to the Jews, and in the spiritual communion of Christ with
the soul for the present. Of the visible form first.

Isa. 60. 15. I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
generations. I think this is not only meant concerning the spiritual happiness
of the Saints, but that God has a time to make his visible church to be an
eternal excellency, and a joy of many generations, an excellency that shall
never have an end. And this their perpetual condition, their enduring
happiness shall arise from three grounds.

First, from the precious foundation that shall be laid upon that Church The
grounds of the enduring happiness of the Church.
Isa. 54. 8. With everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord; but mark the ground, verse. 11. Behold I lay the foundation with Saphires;
all the rubbish shall be taken away, it shall not be raised upon a rubbish
foundation. God will lay the foundations of it with Saphires, and then with
everlasting mercy he will embrace that Church.

Secondly, that Church shall be in a peaceable condition, no rent, no division
Esaias 33. 20. A Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes
thereof shall ever be removed: Why? the very words before show the reason,
Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation.

Thirdly, this Church shall look wholly at Christ as their Judge, and their
Lawgiver, and their King. Isa. 33. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. Churches are ready to change, while they mix
other things with the worship of Christ, and the laws of men with his laws;
but when they can look to him, I mean in that which is spiritual, as their
Lawgiver, as their Judge, and as their King, then the happiness of it shall
be perpetual never to cease in this world, the Lord Christ will betroth this
Church unto him for ever.

Though I verily think the holy Ghost aymeth at this in great part, yet we are
to understand this betrothing for ever, further of the spiritual communion the
soul has with Christ. When Christ betroths himself unto a soul, it is for
ever; the conjugall love of Christ with a gracious soul shall never be broken:
At the first, man's condition was such, as man laid hold upon God, and let go
his hold; but now God lays hold upon man, and he will never let go his. The
bond of union in a believer runs through Jesus Christ, it is fastened upon God,
and the spirit of God holds the other end of it, and so it can never be broken;
This union is in the Father who has laid a sure foundation, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Romans
9. 11. In the Son who loves his to the end, John 13. 1. In the Spirit, who
abides in the elect for ever, John 14. 16, 17. Esaias 54. 10. The mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has
mercy on thee. My loving kindness shall be more stable with thee, and endure
longer then the mountains themselves. It is as sure as the ordinances of
heaven. Jer. 31. 35, 36. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light
by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the Stars for a light by night,
if those ordinances dopart from before me, then the seed of Israel shall
cease, etc. And Jer. 33. 20, 21. Thus says the Lord, if you can break my
covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, that there should not be day
and night in their season, then may also my covenant be broken with David my
servant. You have these three expressions of the abiding of Gods love to his
people.

1. The continuance of the mountains. 2. The continuance of the ordinances of
heaven and earth. 3. Gods covenant with night and day. Here is the bottom of
consolation to the Saints, They shall be kept by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
As if God should say, the special power that I mean to put forth in this
world, shall be to uphold the spirits of my Saints, to bring them to salvation,
certainly it is so. The special work that God has in this world to exercise
his power about, is to keep Christ and the Saints together.

Though it be through Gods power that the heavens and the earth be kept up, yet
if God must withdraw his power from one, he would rather withdraw it from
upholding heaven and earth, then from upholding one gracious soul that has
union with his Son.

The union that is between Christ and his people, it is too near an union ever
to be broken. Sicut impossible est fermentom mixum a pasta separari, quia
immutabit pastae naturam, it a impossible Christianus rapi aChristo, quia est
in eis Christus fermentum, it a incorporatus, ut unum sit corpus, una massa.
Luth.
I remember Luther has a notable expression about this: As it is impossible
for the leaven that is in the dough to be separated from the dough, after it is
once mixed, for it turns the nature of the dough into it self; so it is
impossible, says he, for the Saints ever to be separated from Christ:

For Christ is in the Saints as nearly as the leaven in the very dough, so
incorporated as that Christ and they are as it were one lump. Christ who came
to save that which was lost, will never lose that which he has saved. Heb. 7.
16. it is said that Christ was made a Priest not after the law of a carnal
commandment: That is, he was not made a Priest as the Priests in the law,
after a ceremonial way, but after the power of a indissoluble life: Coeli
virture, (...)
by a celestial virtue, so Calvin upon the place. The argument why Christ's
life is indissoluble, rather then the Priests in the law, is because they were
made by the power of a carnal commandment, not by a Celestial power. So
those who profess godliness according to a carnal commandment in a
ceremonial way, may fail, vanish, and come to nothing in their way of worship
as many have done; but such as are professors of Religion by the virtue of Gods
Spirit in them, they have the power of a life indissoluble. There are two
soul-staying and soul-satisfying grounds to assure of Christ's betrothing
himself for ever.

First, when any soul is taken in to Christ, it has not only all the sins
that it has committed heretofore pardoned, Two soulstaying and soul-satisfying
grounds for perseverance.
but there is a pardon laid in for all sin that is to come. There is
forgiveness with thee, Psalm. 130. 4. There lies pardon with God before hand
for all that is to come, as well as for that which is past. There is no
condemnation unto them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. That is, there is
no instant of time after they are once in Christ Jesus wherein it can be said
they are under the sentence of condemnation. Now were it not that there were a
pardon laid beforehand for all sin that is to come, there might upon
commission of a new sin be said at that time, that now they are under
condemnation; for if the least sin be not pardoned, there is condemnation: but
this cannot be. I do not say the sin is pardoned before it is committed, for
that is a harsh and improper speech: for when we speak of pardoning sin, we
speak of a work applied to the creature, not of that which is in God: a pardon
is laid up to be applied by God when ever the sin is committed, so that there
shall be no instant of time wherein the sinner is unpardoned, and so under
condemnation. Then surely he can never fall off from Christ; for what does
endanger the falling off from Christ, but commission of sin? Christ has as
well merited at the hand of God pardon for any sin that is to come, as he has
merited pardon for sin past; do not say this opens a gap to licentiousness,
then we need not care; No, the grace of Christ has no such malignity in it, in
saying thus thou speak against thy life. The second soul-staying argument
for perseverance is, that perseverance is a spiritual mercy purchased by Christ
as well as any grace, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ. Now you will say, Faith is a blessing, and
Humility is a blessing, and Joy is a blessing we have in Christ, why is not
Perseverance a blessing, a spiritual blessing too? Christ has as truly and
as really laid down his blood to purchase the perseverance, as to purchase thy
pardon, as to purchase any thing he has purchased for thee.

That which Christ has laid down his blood to purchase, surely must be had,
the purchase of Christ's blood shall not be frustrate. Is there any thing thou
have by virtue that purchase? Thou may be as sure of perseverance, for Chrst
has laid down his blood to purchase that also.

Christian then satisfy thy soul in this, God gives the comforts in this
world, but he gives them not for ever, but when he betrotheth thee unto his Son
he betrotheth thee for ever. Perhaps the Lord in mercy has made thy life here
in this thy pilgrimage very comfortable in giving thee a comfortable meet
yoke fellow, in this thy betrothing thou art happy, but this happiness is not
for ever, thou can look upon thy yoke fellow as a mercy of God unto thee,
that makes thy pilgrimage sweet, but there must be a dissolution between thee
and her; but thy union with thy Husband Christ is for ever, there shall never
be dissolution of that. Perhaps some of you have lost comfortable
yoke-fellowes, death has come and snapt asunder the union between you, and you
complain never woman lost such a husband, never man lost such a wife as I have,
if you be godly you have a husband that you shall never lose, it is he that
will fill up relations, he says, Thy maker is thy husband, Esaias, 54. 5.

And further, this is mutual, I will betroth thee unto me for ever, and I will
give thee a heart that thou shall cleave unto me for ever. This will afford
unto us another useful meditation, viz. When the Lord chooses any soul to
himself, as he sets his own heart for ever upon thar soul, so he gives unto
that soul a principle of grace to cleave unto him for ever too; to give up
himself unto him in an everlasting covenant, Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclyned
my heart to perform thy statutes always; Is not that enough? No, he must have
another word to express the thing, always, even to the end. David's heart was
much taken with the statutes of God, O Lord through thy mercy my heart is
inclined to keep thy sta^utes, yea and it is so always, yea and it shall be
unto the end. It is a kind of pleonasme, or rather the expression of the
fullness of his heart, in his resolutions never to depart from God.

But what are those riches Christ bestows upon his people whom he betrotheth
to himself? the bracelets, and ornaments he puts upon their necks and upon
their hands are these.

I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercies, I will ever betroth thee unto me in faithfulness,
and thou shall know the Lord.

There is much of the Gospel in this.

In righteousness.]

This according to some is understood, as opposed to dissimulation, Sine fuco,
without any dissembling, in this he assures his people that they shall find
his dealings with them altogether right and equal, and so I expect from you,
and will cause it in you, that in your dealings toward me, you be right and
equal, there shall be nothing feigned betwixt us, all shall be plain, right,
and just.

You know there is often a great deal of dissimulation in marriages, great
pr^ffers, and promises, and overtures of what one should enjoy in the other,
and when they meet not with what they expect, it causes great dissension
between them, and makes their lives exceeding uncomfortable; But now says God,
there shall be no dissimulation betwixt you and me, I will deal with you in
the plainness of my heart, and you shall deal with me in the plainness of
your hearts. So the word [ righteousnesse] is taken in Scripture, Isa. 48. 1.
They make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness,
one expounds the other, I will receive you again though you have departed from
me, in the very integrity of my soul, do not fear me, do not suspect me,
do not think though he make a show of love unto me, and of great favor, yet
he intends to cast me off at last: These are the jealous thoughts of many
troubled consciences. Indeed I hear of mercy, and God is working toward me as
if he intended mercy to me, but I am afraid he will cast me off in the
conclusion; No says God, do not fear, do not suspect me, this mercy I offer
is bona fide, it is in the very truth of my heart, therefore let there not be
such suspicious thoughts betwixt you and me, you may be sure that what is fit
and right for you to have from such a husband as I am, that does belong to such
a Spouse as I profess to take you to be, you shall certainly have it, you need
not be afraid, for you shall have plain and upright dealing with me. This I
take to be one part though not all of the meaning of the holy Ghost here, I
will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, that love I profess to you I do
not do it to mock you says God, but I do it in truth. From whence the notes
which are very useful may be,

First, Obser.
guilty hearts are full of suspicions of Gods real meaning in all his
expressions of love and mercy. They judge God by themselves. As they first
slight sin, because they judge of God by themselves, they see not such a
dreadful evil in sin, they think God sees it not: so after they have sinned,
they judge of Gods mercy by their own, they think thus; if any had offended us
so as we have offended God, though we might say we would be reconciled to him,
yet we could not bring our hearts fully to come off to it, something would
remain in our hearts, they therefore think so of God, they suspect God that he
does not mean really in his expressions of love and mercy to them. But take
heed of this, do not judge of God by your selves, though you have a base and
cruel heart, and cannot be reconciled to those that provoke you; it is not
therefore so with God. There are these two evils in sin, first in the nature of
it there is a departing from God; secondly, it causes jealousies and
suspicions of God, and so hinders the soul from coming unto God again.

Secondly, Obser.
God is very careful to prevent all these suspicions in the hearts of his
people. God desires that you should have good thoughts of him, and this is that
we plead with you for, and do often open the riches of Gods grace to this end
that you may have good thoughts of God, and to take off your jealousies and
suspicions of him, as if there were no real intention in all the proffers of
mercy he makes to you; do not think that all those riches of Gods grace are
mere words, they are certain intentions of Gods heart toward you. I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness.

And for your parts, I will give you a heart, you shall return to me bona
fide, you shall do it in the plainness of your hearts. There was a time indeed,
as Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36. God complained of his people that they sought him and
returned unto him, nevertheless they did flatter with their mouth, and lied
unto him with their tongues, there was no reality in their returning unto him,
they made great promises, that whatsoever God should say unto them they would
do it, but there was no reality in it, yea but says God, there shall come a
time that you shall have righteous hearts, and that which you promise to me you
shall promise really, there shall not be that falsenesse in your hearts, those
shows and overtures that were heretofore, but you shall return to me with all
your hearts in righteousness.

God has made ado at first with us to make us believe that he is in good
earnest with us in his proffers o^ mercy; Obser.
and much ado there is before our hearts can be gotten to work toward God in
good earnest.

Further note, this is one reason why God does betroth for ever, because he
does it in the plainness of his heart; and this is also a good reason why the
Saints continue for ever, because what they do to God is in the plainness of
their hearts. Those who return to God in an hypocritical way, will fall off,
but they that return in uprightenesse will hold constant with him, Prove. 8. 18.
it is said of Wisdom, that with her are durable riches and righteousness,
they are put together; where there is true righteousness in the heart, there
is durable riches.

But yet there is another thing in this betrothing in righteousness, and that
I think has more in it then the former. God will be so reconciled to his
Church, as yet he will manifest himself to be a righteous God. In the works of
the riches of his grace he will manifest the glory of his justice too; I will
do it in righteousness, though indeed the Lord intends to glorify rich
grace, yet so as he will declare his righteousness to men and Angels, that in
this very work of his he shall be acknowledged by them unto all eternity to be
a righteous God; GOD will make such a way for this his love and goodness as
that he will have satisfaction to his justice in it. That place, Romans 3. 25,
26. is remarkable for our purpose; Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood; How? To declare his righteousness for the remission
of sins. Mark it, it is not that he had set forth Christ to be a
propitiation, to declare his mercy in the forgiveness of sins; you will say,
What is there in the forgiveness of sins but only the mercy of God? Yes, there
is somewhat else, there is righteousness too, and the Lord does declare his
righteousness in the forgiveness of sins, and therefore it is that he has
set forth Christ to be a propitiation, that he might declare his
righteousness. If the Lord should have said but thus, Well, you are great and
grievous sinners, I will be content freely to forgive you all your sins, this
would have declared Gods mercy, but not his righteousness: but now when the
Lord has set forth Christ as a propitiation, and forgiveth sins through the
blood of his Son, in this God declares as much righteousness as grace. This
text Luther had a great deal of do to understand, and he prayed much before he
could get the right meaning of it; yea it is repeated again, To declare, I say,
his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus; not that he might be merciful in justifying him that
believes in Jesus, but that he might be just in justifying him that believes
in Jesus.

And this is the great mystery of the Gospel, this is that which the Angels pry
into, the Saints and Angels shall admire and bless God to all eternity, for the
reconciling riches of mercy, and infinite justice both in one. This was that
which set the infinite wisdom of God on work from all eternity, how to find a
way to save sinners, and to be infinitely righteous notwithstanding. If all the
Angels in heaven, and all the men in the world had been put to it, to find out
a way to answer this question, How shall sin be pardoned, the sinner reconciled
unto God, and God glorify his justice? they could never have done it, but God
in his infinite wisdom has found out a way to do it. This cost God dear, it
cost him the heart blood of his own Son, and that was a sign that Gods heart
was much in it, and indeed we are not Christians until in some measure we see,
and have our hearts taken with the glory of God in this mystery. We must look
at righteousness in our reconciliation, as well as to loving kindness and
mercy.

When God is reconciled unto a sinner, there is not only his mercy glorified,
but in that way that God has found out to save a sinner, he has the glory of
his justice as much, yea more then if the sinner were eternally damned in hell.

How is that you will say?

I make that good three ways.

Judge loves justice: but if the Judges own son be a delinquent, and it appears
before all the Country that the Judge will not spare him, but he must satisfy
the law to the uttermost, you will say the Judge does honor unto justice more
in this, then in condemning many other malefactors. So when the Lord shall cast
many thousands into hell, there to be tormented for ever, this shows that God
loves justice; but when his own Son shall take our sins upon him, but by
imputation, and God will not spare him (that is the very word of the Scripture,
He spared not his own Son, says the Text) this declares Gods love to
righteousness, more then if all the world had been damned.

Secondly, suppose the sinner that is reconciled had been damned, then the
justice of God had been but in satisfying, and never had fully been satisfied;

As for instance, suppose a man be a Creditor to one who owes him five thousand
pounds, this man is poor, and the utmost he can pay is but six pence, or
twelve pence a week; suppose the Creditor should lay him in the Jayle until
he had paid all, this man would be paying, but would never be paid so long as
the Debtor lives; but if another rich man should come and lay down five
thousand pound at once, the man is presently satisfied. Here is the difference
between Gods satisfying his justice upon sinners, and upon Jesus Christ; God
comes upon the sinner, he requires the debt of punishment, because he did not
pay the debt of obedience, God cast him into prison, the uttermost he can pay
is but twelve pence a week as it were, that is but a little, and thereforefore
he must be still paying and paying eternally, which is the very ground of their
eternal punishment in hell, because they cannot pay enough in any finite time:
Now comes Christ, and he fully pays the debt, so that justice says it has
enough, it is satisfied, this is the greater glory to the justice of God.

Thirdly, If the sinner had been sent down to hell, God had had the glory of
his justice passively upon him, he should be for ever under the power justice,
then if the sinner should have been eternally in hell to have satisfied.

And now Devils and all wicked men must needs have their mouths st^pped for
ever, they cannot cry out of God becanse he will marry himself to such
sinners, this is mercy, but where is his righteousness? where is the glory of
his justice? here is an answer to them all, though the Lord sets his love
upon vile sinners, yet so as he does it in righteousness. And this is a great
encouragement to come in and believe, as thus, if the sinner be terrified with
the apprehension of his sin, I see by them the wrath of God is incensed, and
infinite justice comes upon me, and I hear that crying for satisfaction; this
bids the sinner know likewise, that God has a way to satisfy infinite
justice, and yet to save thy soul, he will marry thee unto himself, and yet he
will do it in righteousness.

And this is a mighty help unto a sinner against all faylings afterward, a
mighty establishment against a thousand objections the sinner may make against
himself. Thus we must seek to God when we seek for reconciliation, to be
received again when we have departed from him, whatsoever GOD does for us,
he must do it in the way of righteousness as well as in the way of mercy.
Take this with you sinners, if ever you have a pardon sealed unto you, it must
be sealed in the Court of justice as well as in the Court of mercy; therefore
thou need not appeal from the Court of justice to the Mercy-seat, for in
that way of the mystery of godliness that there is in God reconciling himself
unto a sinner, there may be as much comfort in standing before the bar of
justice as at the Mercy-seat, that is, by standing there, in and through
Christ, for he has made justice propitious to us, and now it pleads to mercy
for us.

And indeed this is the very work of Faith, to go unto God this way, when by
Faith the sinner shall tender up unto God the Father the righteousness of JESUS
CHRIST for an atonement and satisfaction for sins; It brings the comfort of
justification this way. When you come to God in any other way but this, it is
but in a natural way, not in a true evangelicall way; A man by nature may know
thus much, that when he has sinned he must seek unto God for mercy, to pardon
his sin, or else he is miserable; but to seek unto God for pardon with a price
in our hand, to tender up the merits of Christ for a satisfaction to Divine
justice, here is the mystery of faith; faith is not only to rely upon Gods
mercy for pardon, but this, I see riches of grace in Christ, and Christ my
surety has made an atonement, has laid down a price, now by faith I tender up
this unto God the Father, and by this way I believe my soul shall be accepted
in him.

What a mighty engagement is this for us to be righteous with God? the Lord
betrotheth us unto himself in righteousness, and we should give up our selves
to him in righteousness too. O my brethren, take this away with you, what ever
you forget; If the Lord has thus engaged himself unto us in a way of
righteousness, and if it has cost him so dear to show himself righteous unto
us; what an infinite engagement is this unto us to be righteous before him,
^lasphemiam inge it religioni quam colit, qui quod confitetur no^ ante omnes
impleverit. Cyper. de sing. Cler.
to glorify Gods righteousness in our conversations: I will do it in
righteousness, and you shall have such a righteous heart, as you shall never
be a dishonor unto me before the people, neither devils nor wicked men shall
ever be able to upbraid me, that I set my love upon such creatures as you,
because whatsoever you were, you shall be now righteous. When ever we express
our selves to be the Spouse of Christ, and be unrighteous in our conversations,
we upbraid Jesus Christ, we are a dishonor unto him before Men and Angels;
what you the Spouse of Christ, where is this ornament, this bracelet of
righteousness then? whosoever Christ maryeth, he puts upon them this Jewel
of righteousness. He blasphems Religion which he seems to honor, says
Cyprian; who makes not good in his life what he professes.

The Eighteenth Lecture. Lect. 18

HOSEA 2. 19. -- And in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.


IN Judgement] Some Interpreters we find make this and righteousness to be
all one, according to that Psalm. 33. 6. He loves righteousness and judgment,
and so pass it over, but we must not do so, for we shall find much of Gods
mind in this.

Others take judgment, as diverse times it is taken in Scripture for
sanctification, so they would make this promise suitable to that of Christ, John
16. 10. 11. I will send the Comforter, and he shall convince the world of sin,
of righteousness, and of judgment; that righteousness there, is the same
with that here; judgment there by many Interpreters is understood of
sanctification; because the Prince of this world is judged, the power of Satan
is already broken, he is already cast out of your hearts.

And they think to strengthen that by that place in Mat. 12. 20. He will not
quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, till he send forth
judgment unto victory, that is, until he perfect the work of sanctification,
that it shall overcome corruption. This text in Matthew is quoted out of Esaias,
42. 3. but there we have the words somewhat different, there it is, He shall
bring forth judgment unto truth. Now if that should be the meaning, that by
judgment is meant sanctification, then we may learn an excellent note from
the comparing these two Texts together; that it is all one to bring judgment,
sanctification unto truth, and to bring it unto victory, when it is in truth it
will certainly be in victory. But we shall a little more examine this
interpretation of Judgment presently; for my part I do not think that it is
meant either in this Text, or in any of the Texts named.

Thirdly, I find others make this [ in judgement] to be Gods judgment against
the adversaries of the Church. I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness; I
will deal with you in a way of righteousness, and for your adversaries, I
will deal with them in a way of judgment, you shall have judgment against
them. Secunda gemma marital is annuli. Luther. Vt judicium excerceat in hosts
verbi jam multes annos hoe agit Satan ut per impi^s magistratus ecclesia
opprimatur and doctrina per prophanos doctores depravetur, sed videt Germania
Deum indicentem Luth. in loc.
So I find Luther carries it, and he says that judgment here is the second
pearl of the Husbands ring he gives to his Spouse, God promises to exercise
judgment and vengeance against the adversaries of the Church, and so he
applies it unto those times wherein he lived in Germany; says he, for these
many years wicked Magistrates have oppressed the Church, and profane Doctors
have corrupted the doctrine of it, but Germany has seen God judging his
adversaries.

And if we should understand it in this sense, we have a suitable place, Esaias
54. 5. where God tells his Church, that He that is her maker is her husband,
even the Lord of hosts, and her Redeemer the God of the whole earth; the word
there is Vindex, the avenger, he that will avenge thee of thine enemies, is the
God of the whole earth, he is thy husband. This might afford a sweet
meditation, that the Lord will defend his Church from the rage of adversaries,
as the husband will defend his Spouse being betrothed unto her; the Lord
certainly will take a valuable consideration at the hands of the adversaries
who wrong his Church. But this I think not to be the scope of the place,

Another is [ In Judgement] Though things be now out of order, all things seem
to be in confusion, yet the time is coming when all things shall be ordered in
the Church according to equity and right.

These two I think are meant in the former Texts, I will convince the world of
judgment, that is, the world shall be convinced that Christ has all judgment
committed unto him, and he shows it in this, that the Prince of this world is
judged; so that place before in Matthew, I will cause judgment to return unto
victory, that is, though the adversaries of the Church be many, yet he will
cause them all to be vanquished, judgment shall conquer over them all; though
there be much opposition and confusion in the Church, yet I will bring all
things in the Church to be ordered and composed in a right way according unto
equity.

That place likewise Esaias 4. 4. where the Lord says, he will purge his Church
by the spirit of judge^ent and by the spirit of burning. I know some carry it
as if it were meant of the spirit of sanctification, that is as fire to consume
lusts, but rather thus, whereas there were such as did oppress the Church by
false judgment, the Lord would cleanse the Church from wrong and oppression by
giving a spirit of judgment unto those that should be the Officers of it, and
consuming the adversaries.

But yet I think we have not the full scope of this place. I rather would
pitch upon this as that which is more principally intended, though the other
may be in some degree included, viz. I will betroth thee unto me in judgment,
that is, there shall be a good reason for what I do, that which I will now do
in betrothing thee unto my self shall not be out of rashness, it shall not be
done unadvisedly, but with understanding, with good deliberation, I know what I
do in it, and I know what glory I shall have by it, I will do it in judgment.

So I find the word judgment taken in scripture, Jer. 4. 2. Thou shall swear
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. In judgment, that is, when you
swear, know it is a worship of God, and you must do it in judgment, you must
not only swear in truth, that is; swear to that which is true, and in
righteousness, that is, not to the wrong or prejudice of your neighbor, for
you may sin in swearing though you swear in truth if you have an intent to
wrong any; but thirdly you must swear in judgment too, you must understand
what you do, that is, when you take an oath you must know that it is not as
the Ex Officio was, to swear to answer to every thing that shall be asked you,
but you must understand beforehand what you are to swear to, and so swear out
of judgment; So says God, I will betroth thee unto me in judgment, that is,
I have considered what I am to do in this thing, and I do it out of
judgment. And for your parts when you shall come and close with me, in this
blessed conjugall union and communion you shall do it out of jndgement too; I
will betroth you in judgment so as to make it appear before the world that I
had good reason so to do, and you shall likewise close with me as you shall be
able to justify it before men and Angels, that you had reason for what you
did, that it was out of judgment. There is nothing wherein there is more need
of judgment then in marriages and contracts; therefore the heathens were wont
to set Mercury, there god of wisdom, by Venus, their goddess of marriage, to
note that there was need of judgment there, yet there is nothing usually in
the world undertaken with less judgment, with more rashness and
inconsideratness then contracts and maryages, which is the reason of the
trouble of their lives ever after. The match between Christ and his Spouse is
in rash things, it is out of judgment.
But though there be many contracts between men and women that are not out of
judgment, yet says God I will betroth you out of judgment. Christ's match with
his Church is a match of judgment, Christ considers of our meanness before he
marryeth with us, he knows us fully what we are, he knows our sinfulness,
our wretchedness, he knows, we are in debt before he maryeth us, and whatsoever
else we can think might be any hinderance, he knows as perfectly as ever he
shall know it, and yet he goes on. Yea the match between Christ and his Church
is that which has been plotting in Heaven from all eternity, it is not a
sudden, rash match, it has been plotting between the Father and the Son from
everlasting. God the Father gives consent to this match, God the Holy Ghost is
sent to draw the hearts of his people to come in and consent to this match, it
is a match out of the deepest judgment that ever thing was done.

Though it be true that God can see no reason in us why we should be thus
united to his Son, yet he can see abundance of reason in himself; therefore
the conversion and salvation of a soul, is not only out of Gods mercy, but it
is from Gods wisdom too, Hence the Scripture attributes our pr^destination
and our calling, unto his wisdom as well as unto the freeness of his grace, as
Ephe. 1. 11. Being predestined according to the purpose of him who works
all things after the counsel of his own will. Mark, it is not only because God
will. I will have mercy because I will have mercy, I will choose such, and I
will refuse such, I will do it; no, but it is after the Counsel of his will.
We indeed are set upon our wills many times to do a thing and there is no
reason for it, there is no counsel of our will; but God even in this thing that
we can see no reason for at all, he works according to the counsel of his
will; and Ephe. 3. 10. the Apostle having said before, verse, 8. that he was to
preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, he says, he was to preach it to the
intent that now might be made known the manifold wisdom of God. In all things
in the Gospel there is a great deal of wisdom; Vocation is one of the
mysteries of the Gospel, and 1 Cor. 1. 24. the Gospel is said to be the power
of God and the wisdom of God; the Apostle there instances in one thing, which
one would think has as little reason in it as any thing in the Gospel, that
is, the leaving of the rich, wise and noble, the great ones of the world, and
calling the poor; but herein is not only the power, but the wisdom of God,
God does even this in judgment. And although we can now understand little or
nothing of any reason that there can be of Gods choosing us unto himself; yet
this will be made known at the great day of judgment. It will be a great part
of the glory of that day for the Lord to make known the counsel of his will;
we now know his will, but we shall then know the counsel of his will, and
praise him to all eternity for it; this shall be the glory of the Saints, that
they shall see into the counsel^ of Gods will in choosing and calling them, and
letting others go.

Gods betrothing himself thus to his people in judgment, is an especial
reason of the perpetuity of this betrothing. I will betroth thee unto me for
ever; Why? First, it is in righteousness, therefore it will hold. Secondly, it
is in judgment, therefore it will hold too. Things that are done rashly will
seldom hold, but though we are set upon them for the present, we quickly undo
them afterward, but that which is done in judgment holds; the calling of a
sinner, and uniting him unto Christ, is done in judgment, therefore it will
hold, that is the ground of the perseverance of a sinner; If a man before
marryage knows perfectly all the faults his wife has, or ever shall have,
and knows perfectly her estate and all the encumbrances he shall have with
her, The Saints choose Christ out of judgment.
yet loves her out of judgment, surely this love will hold: It is so between
Christ and his Church; Christ before he betrotheth his Church, perfectly knows
all the faults the Church has, or shall have, all the sins that ever she shall
commit, and all the encumbrances and dishonor she shall have, yet out of
judgment he betroths her to himself, therefore surely this will hold. Comfort
yourselves with this Christians, though there be many faylings after your
coming to Christ, Christ knew them all before you were united to him, yet out
of judgment he betrothed himself unto you.

There must also be judgment on our parts; I will put into you a judicious
heart, to choose me out of judgment. The Saints who choose Christ, know what
they do. They shall be all taught of God; every one therefore that has heard,
and learned of the Father, comes unto me; None comes unto me, Christas est
novitas semper renovanda.
but such as are taught of God, who hear and learn of the Father, they come
to me out of judgment; I know whom I have loved, says Paul, and so may every
Christian say. They do not come to embrace Christ and his ways out of
novelty, because they are new things, ^o not any truth of Christ, out of mere
novelty as many do, and so vanish to nothing; though it is true, there is
always some new excellency in Christ, I mean newly revealed; Christ has
always something that is further revealed more then we knew before, and
delightful I he is in that regard, if we love novelty: It is not a sufficient
plea against any truth, because it is now revealed, and was not known before; 2
Pet. 1. 12. Be established in the present truth: though truths be from the
beginning yet there are present truths in regard of manifestation: But the
Saints must not therefore receive them, merely because they are new to them,
neither must any reject them, because they are but now cleared, whereas before
they lay in the dark; but all out of judgment, we must examine them, when any
truth is presented, though it seems new, because you heard not of it before,
reject it not upon that, neither embrace it upon that, but try it, and when you
are convinced, then out of judgment embrace it. Neither must the Saints follow
God, or any way of truth, merely from the example of others, but out of their
own judgments. Perhaps you see such and such, of whom you have a reverent
esteem, and that justly do thus and thus; I confess, that is enough to put
you upon examining, to bethink your selves, surely there is something in it,
or else it is not like they would do it, but that must not be the only reason,
but if upon examination you find it to be good, then embrace it out of
judgment, never rest until you come to that that the men of Samaria said to
the woman, Now we believe that this is the Messiah, not because of thy sayings,
because you told us so, but we have heard him our selves, and we know that he
is indeed the Savior of the world. At the first they came to Christ upon her
relation, but they did not believe in Christ, but upon seeing and hearing
Christ themselves. You may come to examine the ways, the truths of God upon
the relation and example of others, but you must not engage your hearts in them
until you see the reality of them your selves.

Thirdly, you must embrace Christ and his ways out of judgment, not out of
sudden flashes of affection; suddeu flashes go out as soon as they come. You
have a notable example for this, Luke 14. 15. Happy are they that may eat
bread in the Kingdom of God: O this is blessed doctrine indeed. But by that
which follows we may find that they were such as presently went to their
Farms and to their Oxen, and prized them before Christ, and refused to come to
the supper. Sudden flashes there were in thsoe that cried Hosanna, Hosanna, but
presently they cried, Crucify him, crucify him. Josh. 24. 19. the people
seemed to be moved with sudden affections, they would serve the Lord, yea that
they would, but they considered not what they said, You cannot serve the Lord,
says Joshua to them. So Deuteronomy. Sudden flashes of affections soon vanish.
5. 27. All that the Lord our God has said unto us, that will we do, but
presently, says God, Oh that there were such a heart in this people to do it!
The truth is, they know not what they say, they have sudden affections, but
they will quickly vanish. We must choose Christ out of judgment.

Again, Not choose him out of mistakes, we must understand who he is. we must
sit down and cast with our selves aforehand what we are like to suffer in his
ways. Compare for this Cant. 5. 9. with the beginning of Chap. 6. What is
the^^ loved, say they, more then another beloved?

Let us know what thy beloved is: Then the Church falls a commending her
beloved, and in the beginning of Chap. 6. Whither is thy beloved gone? whither
is thy beloved turned a side? that we may seek him with thee, that he may be
our beloved too.

Nor out of by-ends, but out of a right knowledge of the excellencies of
Christ, having our judgments overcome that way. We must not choose any truth or
ways of God, because the times favor that way; we have now a company of
Parliament converts, who were formerly Prelaticall and ceremonial; they see
how the times sway, this is not out of judgment. Every Christian should be a
judicious Christian. Those adorn Religion, they are an honor to Christ. As the
more deliberation and judgment there is in sin, the worse it is; so the more
deliberation, the more judgment there is in godliness, the better it is. When
a soul chooses Christ and his ways upon this, Oh I see a beauty in the Lord
Jesus that I never see before, I see him to be the character, and the engraven
form of the image of the Father, in him dwells all treasures, the very Godhead
dwells in him bodily, he is the most precious among ten thousand, the ways of
God are holy and righteous.

Here is the rule of eternal life, here lies the happiness of the rational
creature, these are the ways that my soul closes with, and shall cleave to
for ever, whatsoever I suffer in them, for I see the excellency, the beauty,
the equity, the glory of them, the Lord is worthy of all honor from all his
creatures. This is a choice will hold. The world thinks the Saints are giddy
headed people, why? because they cannot see any reason for what they do; they
cannot see bottom enough in reason of such forwardness, and strictness, and
zeal as there is in them; they think they do in calescere in re frigida, that
they are very hot about a very poor, sorry, cold business, and therefore they
count their ways folly; that any man will do, when he sees another do a thing
that he understands not the reason of, he will either suspect his own
judgment, or otherwise think the man foolish; now wicked men are too proud to
suspect their own judgments, to think their own reason folly, therefore they
count the ways of God foolishness. They look upon Gods ways at a distance,
therefore they think there is no reason for them.

It is reported of that notable Convert Marcus Galeasius, that he was
converted by a sermon of Peter Martyrs, coming to hear him he expressed the
excellencies of Gods ways, and the mistakes of the world in this similitude,
the men of the world (says he) mistake Gods ways, as if a man see a company
of Musicians that were playing and dancing according to the most exactest rules
of art, if he see them at a distance, he sees them skippiug and leaping up and
down as a company of mad men, and wonders what they mean; but when he comes
nearer and hears the melodious sound, and observes how all their motions are
directed according to rules of art, then he begins to change his thoughts; so
the men of the world look upon the ways of God, and upon the Saints at a
distance, and (...) think the motions of Gods people and their ways are
madness, but when they come nearer, and observe the exactness of the rule they
walk by, and the wisdom of God that appears in them, they change their
judgments, and begin then to think, surely there is something in them more
then they thought. This similitude God blessed, so as it was the means to
convert that Noble man, and made him leave all his possessions in Italy, and
come to Geneva, where he became such a pattern of self-deny all, as scarce any
age ever had the like, God working by such a thing upon his heart. When you
come near Gods ways and see them indeed, you will see infinite reason in them,
and charge your selves o^ infinite folly that you should have such low thoughts
of them as you have had.

This is the reason why the Saints hold on in their ways. This judgment is as
the ballast of the ship; many hurry on in a kind of profession of Religion, and
the truth is, they know not what they do, nor what they profess, if there be
any new opinion, I mean not only in regard of new manifestation, but in regard
of the thing it self, presently they follow it that they may be counted some
body, and seem to go beyond other men, they are as a ship that moves a mighty
pace, all the sails are up, and winds blow fairly, but there is no ballast, so
the ship topples up and down, but never comes to the end of the voyage. Lu. 8.
6. when the seed was sown in the stony ground, it sprung up presently, but
because there wanted moisture at the root, it withered away. This judgment is
as moisture at the root, that is the reason that Mat. 13. 21. we read of the
stony ground, that notwithstanding it received the word with joy, yet when
persecution arose because of the word, by and by they were offended, they were
mightily taken with the ways of God, with the great things of the Gospel at
first, but not having judgment as soon as suffering came, by and by they were
offended. If times should change again, and the adversaries should prevail
(which God forbid) we shall soon have experience enough of abundance of
professors who have chosen the ways of God not out of judgment by and by they
will be offended.

Thirdly, I will betroth thee unto me in loving kindness. Though Christ takes
us to himself, and will not cast us off, yet he may see such failings and
frailties in us, as we may be grievous and burdensome unto his spirit, we
shall enjoy but little sweetness in our comunion together through the
wretchedness of our hearts. (...)
No says Christ, I will betroth you unto me in loving kindness, my heart and
ways toward you shall be full of gentleness and sweetness, and I will put
such a frame likewise into your hearts both toward me and toward one another,
you shall have hearts full of sweetness and gentleness. The Scripture speaks
much of the loving kindness of God to his people in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7. The
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. Tit.
3. 4. After the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. You
have these Epithets given unto Gods kindness; great kindeness. Neh. 9. 17.
Mavelous kindness. Psalm. 31. 21. Merciful kindness, (...) 19. 2. Everlasting
kindness, Isa. 54. 8. Excellent ^ving kindness, Ps. (...) Multitude of loving
kindness, Isa. 63. 7. Thus full is is the Scripture of the loving kindness of
God toward us in Christ.

To open it a little, The kindness of God unto us in Christ, consists.

First, In the freeness of Gods goodness: kindness in a friend is seen much
in this, Wherein Gods kindness to us in Christ appears.
when he does a thing merely out of his good nature freely, when he does a
kindness so as he does not burden it, he does not upbraid his friend with
what he has done; as he expects little before, he will not be mercenary, so
when he has done he does not upbraid him with it, he expects not such great
matters in lieu and recompense of what he has done, as shall make his kindness
worth nothing, but leaves it to his friend to answer him in a way of kindness
again as he thinks fit.

Thus it is in all Gods dealings with us, he looks not for much at our hands
before, but that he does is out of his free grace, he does not upbraid us, he
gives liberally and upbraideth no man, Iam. 1. 5
he does not burden his kindness toward us. But does not God burden his
kindness? he requires that we should give up our selves unto him, and serve
him, and suffer for him, for his kindness; I answer, there is nothing God
requires in lieu of all his kindness to us, but it is another kindness in God
to enable us to do it, and a further kindness in him to accept it at our hands
when we have done it, therefore his kindness is free. The Heathens were wont to
paint their Gratiae, their goddesses of kindness naked, upon this ground,
because all works of kindness should be free, not clogged, not burdened, The
blessing of the Lord makes rich, Pro. 10. 22.
and he adds no sorrow with it. The kindnesses of this world are ordinarily
clogged, scarce worth the having; the kindn^ss of God not so, it is free.

Again, kindness consists much in this, in our tenderness over those we show
kindness to. The kindness of God in Christ is much this way, in tendering our
weakness and dealing with us in all his ways accordingly, Esaias, 57. 16. I
will not contend for ever, why? lest the spirit which I have made should fail
before me. He considers our weakness. Psalm. 103. 13. The Lord knows our
frame, and heremembreth we are but dust, Isa. 40. 11. Christ gathers the Lambs
with his arm, and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that
are with young. Esaias, 63. 9. In his clememcie (so the word is) he redeemed
them, and he bare them, and carried them always, continually. Kindness makes
one long-suffering, he bare them always and continually. It is kindness for the
Man to consider all the weaknesses of the wife, and to deal with her in a
loving way accordingly, tendering her good; this is the kindness of Christ to
his Church,

Thirdly, kindness is passing by all infirmities, not taking advantages against
his people because of them. Christ takes notice of all the good that is in his
people though it be never so little, but that which is a weakness he will
pass it by; The Lord is not strict to mark what we do amiss, but the Lord
is strict to mark what we do well, if there be never so little good in an
action that has an hundred weaknesses in it, Christ will mark what good there
is in it, and pass by all the weaknesses. (...) commended by Pecer for calling
her husband Lord, in that speech of hers there was nothing but sin saving that
word, and the holy Ghost takes notice of that one word and lets go all the
other. If thou aymest at serving Christ, and can appeal to him that thy
heart istowards him, to honor him as he requires, I say though there be an
hundred weaknessesin an action, if there be but one thing good, all thy
weaknesses are past by, that one good thing is taken notice of.

Again, kindness is in a loving, sweet, amiable carriage toward one another
Canticles you shall find what sweet, amiable expressions there are between
Christ and his Church, (...)
what rebounding as it were there is of love and kindness one to another, Thy
love is better then wine, says the Church unto Christ; and, thy love is better
then wine, says Christ unto his Church, This ought to be between man and wife,
this is kindness, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Love is there said to be kind, there is no
morosity in love, but all a sweetness.

Fifthly, kindness is in easiness to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17. Peaceable, Thus
in Christ, he is easy to be entreated by his Church, and the Church should
easily be entreated, and indeed is: when the hearts of the Saints are right,
there is an ingenuity in them, they are soon moved to any service Christ
calls for.

Lastly, kindness is compassionate, sensible of all sufferings, so Christ

Now I put it to you who are in a married condition, is there this
lovingkindnes in you, as may hold forth the loving kindness that is between
Christ and his Spouse? so far as you want in your endeavors after this, so far
there is an evil; when you go home take this lesson with you, labor to walk
so in that way of loving kindness one to another, as that you may express how
the loving kindness of Christ is unto your souls. Kindness between man and
wife.
There are many frailties in the man, in the wife, but not so many frailties as
there are in you in reference to Christ, Christ bears with more frailties in
you then you can bear with in your wife; Christ is not morose to you, he is
not a bitter husband to you.

I have read of Monicha, Austins Mother, who lived near a Heathen, and she had
a very ill husband, of a very cross and perverse disposition; this Heathen
comes to her one time, and asked her, how comes it to pass that you and your
husband live so well together as you do?

We know your husband is of a very cross and perverse disposition, yet we see
nothing but there is a great deal of sweetness and love between you; it is not
so with us, we cannot do so for our lives: Monicha gives her this answer, It
may be, says she, when your husband is untoward and perverse, you are perverse
again, and you give cross answers; but Christian Religion teaches me
otherwise, when my husband comes home and is in passion, Christian Religion
teaches me to be as loving, and dutiful, and amiable to him as I can, and so
I have gained the heart of my husband. It were a happy thing if all women would
take this home with them, and learn this of Monicha Austins Mother, And so on
the other side, the man in reference to his wife, this loving kindness is
between Christ and his Spouse, let it appear between man and wise who profess
their interest in Christ.

And this loving kindness of Christ, Oh how should it draw our hearts unto him!
What more prevalent means to draw then loving kindness? Mark that Scripture
to show the power of loving kidndnes, 2 Chronicles. 10. 7. If thou be kind unto
this people, they will be thy servants for ever, say those ancient Counselors
of Rehoboam, who gave him wise counsel. If this be the way to draw the heart,
surely Christ must need have our hearts, he is not a bloody husband, but a kind
husband to us, let us then be his servants for ever. It were a good lesson for
all Governors to consider of, that it is kindness that draws the hearts of
people, they rule not over beasts, but men, therefore if they would rule over
them with comfort and safety to themselves, they should rule with kindness.
Hence Cant. 4. 10. it is said, that the Charet of Solomon was paved with love
for the daughters of Jerusalem, it is an expression of Solomon's gentleness
toward the people of Jerusalem. I have read of Alexander Severus, when his
Mother and his wife would put him upon harsh ways, and objected to him his
mildness and yeildablenesse to his subjects, saying, you have made your power
more contemptible by your kindness and yielding so much to your people; his
answer was, At securiorem, but more secure and lasting. Certainly, it would be
so if Magistrates had not the evil council of young Gallants; if they would
follow the counsel of the ancient Counselors, to be kind to the people, they
would be their servants for ever, their peace and safety would be more then now
it is. Christ expects loving kindness from you unto himself, and loloving
kindness likewise one unto another.

First. Christ expects you should be full of loving kindness unto him. O blessed
Redeemer, what is that we should do, that we should be kind to the! The very
phrase seems to be too low for Christ, that Christ should look for our
kindness. Yes, Christ looks for our kindness, and he prizeth it dearly,
nothing in the world is prized by Christ more then your kindness; as a kind
husband prizeth nothing in the world more in his wife then kindness. But how
kind to Christ?

Thus, kindness to (...)
you are kind to him first, when you cleave to him, when he stands in most
need of you, 2 Samuel 16. 17. says (...) Hoshi, is this thy kindness to thy
friend? that is, what is thy friend in danger, and has now need of thee, and
do thou now come from him? Is this thy kindness to thy friend? thou should
now be with thy friend in time of his danger and need, and that is kindness.
So I say, there are some times wherein Christ stands in more need of us then
at other, in suffering times, in times wherein his cause has many enemies, and
our help is called for, if we should now forsake him in times of suffering, may
not Christ, nay may not the holy Angels and Saints say, Is this your kindness
to your friend? To come to Christ when you have need of him is not so much
kindness, but to come to him when he has need of you, this is kindness.

Secondly, It is kindness when we serve Christ in the midst of difficulties.
Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the wilderness. To be willing to follow Christ
in the wilderness, that is kindness. Christ does not account it kindness for us
to serve him when we may prosper in his service, when serving of Christ may
stand with our own ends, when we may keep our shops, our lands and
possessions, when there is no difficulty at all in his service, what great
kindness is this? but when for love to the Ordinances, and the truths of Christ,
you are willing to follow Christ even in the wilderness, this is kindness and
Christ will account it so; however some men have thought that they have shown
great kindness unto Christ, in that they have staid and born the brunt; but how
have they born it? by yiedling to superstitious vanities, and being ceremonial
and Prelaticall; it will be found that those who have been willing to follow
Christ in the wilderness, our of love

Thirdly, For young people to give up their young years to Christ, that is
kindness, by way of allusion at least we may make use of that Scripture, I
remember the kindness of thy youth; when thy bones are full of marrow, and
when the world seeks to draw thy heart after the vanities of it, when thou
may have thy delights and pleasures in the flesh to the full; if then thou
be willing to deny all, and to give up thy self to Christ, this is loving
kindness; one that is old may possibly come to heaven upon repentance, but
what kindness is that for him, who has nigh worn out all his days and
strength in ways of sin, in the pleasures of the flesh, and now when he is
going out of the world, and can have no more pleasure in his sin, he comes to
Christ for mercy; what kindness is here? here is self-love indeed, but little
kindness.

Secondly, The loving kindness of the Saints one toward another.
loving kindness one to another, I will bet roth thee unto me in loving kindness;
I will put such a spirit into you of loving kindness unto your brethren, as I
have toward you; The word that is here used for loving kindness, you shall
find it often in Scripture used for Saints; those who are called godly, and
Saints in your books, in the Hebrew are called kind ones, it may be as well
translated kind ones; as thus, Psalm. 4. 3. Know ye that the Lord has set
apart him that is godly for himself: It is a most admirable text, as if he
should say, there are multitudes in the world, and all the world is mine, but I
look upon all the world, as refuse in comparison of some few, (...)
only here is a godly man, a godly woman, I set them, apart, they are for my
self; but the note I observe is, That that word which in your books is godly,
in the Hebrew is the kind one, the Lord has set apart those that are kind,
(...)
those that are of sweet, gentle, kind dispositions. And Psalm. 16, 10. Not
suffer thy holy one to see corruption, the Hebrew is, not suffer thy kind one
to see corruption, it comes from the same root with that that here is
translated loving kindness. So Psalm. 149. 1. Sing his praise in the
congregation of the Saints, (...)
of the kind ones; and the same word again is verse 5. Let the Saints be so
full in glory; the Saints, that is, the kind ones; noting what an ingredient
loving kindness is to Saint-ship, unto godliness; therefore it is not enough
for Christians to be godly, but they must be kind one unto another too. 2 Pet.
1. 3. And to godliness add brotherly kindeness: You think you are godly, but
you are of a rugged rough-hewen disposition, surly, cruel, rigid, severe,
froward, perverse, know here is the exhortation unto you this day from God, if
you will approve your selves to be godly, Add to your godliness brotherly
kindness, except you add that, you can have little comfort in your godliness.
It is impossible indeed for one that has the power of godliness, and has the
true comfort and sweetness of it, to be of a rugged and rigid disposition; the
reason is, because there is that infinite satisfaction as I may so say, that
such a heart has in God, that there is nothing that can come from without that
can make such a heart bitter, there is so much sweetness in that satisfaction
that it has in God, as the Scripture says, A good man is satisfied from
himself; that it is not all the bitterness from without that can sour such a
heart.

It is true indeed if you have a vessel of honey, a little gall will make all
that bitter, but if you have a vessel of gall, a little honey will not make
that sweet: But in grace it is thus, though there be a great deal of
bitterness in a man or woman's nature, though they be of rugged natures, yet a
drop of true saving grace will sweeten all that gall; and if they be once
gracious, a great deal of gall and bitterness that comes from without will not
imbitter that sweetness.

I beseech you take notice of this one note, when God has left men they grow
more passionate and froward then they were before; And I verily believe this is
one ground of the frowardness, and passionateness that is in professors, they
have made breaches between God and their souls, their peace between God and
them is broken, and nothing then can give them content. As usually it is when a
man has been abroad and others have angered him, when his inward comfort and
joy is gone, then every thing angreth him, he is pleased with nothing, his
countenance is lowering, and he is unto ward to every one, and why? because he
has lost the sweetness of his own spirit, and now nothing from without can
content him, all seems bitter unto him; but let this man go abroad and things
fall out well, it may be he gets a good bargain, hears of excellent good
news; that his goods are come home safely, he can now bear a hundred times
as much as before, and you can scarce anger him, why? because his heart is
filled with sweetness. So it is here, let a Christian walk close with God,
keep his peace with him, he will have so much sweetness in his heart that it is
not easy to put him into any passion of frowardnes, why? he has enough
within, perhaps his friend, his wife, his neighbor is cross, but his Christ
is loving; though there be little comfort in my marriage with one who is so
peevish and perverse, yet in my marryage with Christ there is satisfaction
enough. But when the heart has made breaches between Christ and it self, when
it has lost the sweetness in that marryage communion, no marvel if there be
no sweetness in the other marriage communion.

I will give you a notable example of this, a man who before his breach with
God was of a sweet disposition, was very mild and loving, but after he was of
a perverse, and cruel, and froward disposition. The example is Saul; When he
was first chosen King, how humble was he? he acknowledges himself to be of the
least of the tribes of Israel, and the least in his fathers house, and when
some raised npon him and said, shall this man reign over us? the text says, he
held his peace; and when others would have had them killed, no, by no means
they must not be slain, because God had shown him mercy in a late victory
given him. But after Saul had fallen from God, O the rugged, perverse, cruel
disposition of his spirit then, even to Jonathan his son, a gracious, loving,
sweet natured son, then Thou son of the perverse, rebellious woman, he cast a
jave lin at him to kill him, then the fourscore and five Priests in the City
of Nob must be all slain in his anger; What was the bottom of all this? It was
the breach between God and his own spirit. Oh take heed of breaches between
God and you, for they will put you into a perverse and froward disposition.
What does a man get by the want of this kindness and loving disposition. He
troubles himself, Pro. 11. 17. He that is cruel, of a sharsh disposition,
troubles his own flesh. I appeal to you, do you not lose much of the
sweetness of your lives, you that are in a married condition? What comfort have
you in your lives when there is nothing but snarling at, and crossing one
another? you trouble your own house, and your own flesh; whereas if there were
loving kindness betwixt you, it would sweeten all your comforts, yea all your
crosses. The loving kindness of a man or a woman is the beauty of a man or
woman. Pro 19. 2. The kindness of a man, is the desire of a man, says the text
there; And of a woman, Pro. 31. 29. among other high comendations of a virtuous
woman who had done excellently, this is one, The law of kindness is in her
tongue, kindness gives a law to her mouth, many women have no law given to
their mouths, their tongues are lawless when they are angered, but a woman
that is commended of God, the Text says, the law of kindness is in her tongue,
the kindness of her heart does give a law to her mouth, and that is the honor of
a woman. To be of a sweet, kind disposition is an exceeding beauty, it adds a
glorious luster to any man living. Isa. 40. 6. All flesh is grass, and all the
goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field, the word is in the original
(...) the same word that is here, that word which signifies kindness is
translated there goodlinesse, noting that kindness is the goodlinesse of the
spirit of a man or woman; what the beauty of a flower is to a flower, that is
kindness to a man or woman, it is goodlinesse. Just in Martyr in his Apology
for the Christians faith, that their adversaries did hate only the name of a
Christian, (...). Just. mar.
they had nothing against the Christians, and what is there says he in the
name? Nothing but that which is good and lovely enough, now says he, it is not
just to hate that which is profitable and gentle, for so the word signifies,
they are Christians, what if you call them Christiani, of (...) mild,
profitable? for to they are indeed, they are profitable, gentle, sweet natured
people, and why should you hate those people? 2 Cor. 6. 6. Being filled with
the holy Ghost, and kindness, are put together, there is much of the holy Ghost
where there is much kindness. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of kindness
and gentleness, and though you may think that your rigidness and roughness
may argue bravenesse of spirit in you (for it is ordinary for froward and
passionate people to think they have more brave spirits then others) but know
that your spirits are more base and vile then the spirits of others. I will
give you only one Text for that, Psalm. 45. 4. it is said of Christ, In thy
majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness; now the same word
that is here translated meekness, 2 Samuel 22. 26. is gentleness; thy
gentleness has made me great; Mark, gentleness, magnificence or majesty may
stand together, yea Christ is magnificent and full of majesty in the
gentleness, and quietness of his spirit, ride on in thy majesty prosperously
because of thy meekness, because of thy gentleness. Would you have a brave
spirit like unto the spirit of Christ in his glory? let your spirits be gentle,
sweet, and loving spirits.

I will betroth thee unto me in mercies.

Loving kindness and mercies may seem in the reading as if they were the same,
but there is a great deal of difference in them.

And in mercies.] Viscera, Non fructus tantum, sed radicem, non aquam sed
fontem.
so the word is, I will betroth thee unto my self in bowels. Not the fruit
only, but the root; not the water only, but the fountain; thou shall have the
fountain of all good, my very bowels, from whence flows all mercies. Wherefore
Christians you need not fear the want of the supply of mercies, why? because
you have the fountain of mercies from whence they spring. God may grant to
wicked men many fruits of his bounty and goodness; yea but they have not his
bowels, they have not the fountain, the root from whence all springs.

Here is the happiness of a Christian, not only to have much good from God,
The reason why the Saints can so easily give up any comfort they have.
but to have those very bowels from whence that good comes. Here lies the
dignity, the glory of a Christian, the vastness of his riches.

Christians, you shall not therefore need fear to give up any mercy God calls
for at your hands, for you have got the bowels of mercy to be yours, you have
got the springhead of all mercy to be yours, whence you may fetch all
seasonable, all suitable mercies when you will. Here is the reason why many who
are carnal, when they have got a mercy from God, they keep it so sure, they
are afraid to lose it, they are loath to part with it, though God calls for it
again. Why? because they are not acquainted with the true privilege of a
Christian, they do not know what it is to possess the bowels of God, they know
not where to go for more, therefore they are loath to part with what they have.
Now the Saints can part with any thing for God, let him take what he will have,
let him strip me as naked as he pleases, I have the bowels of God, I have the
springhead to go to for all mercies again. It is true, if there were want of
water, and you had only water in a cistern, if your neighbor came to borrow of
you, you would be loath to lend any; but if you have a wellspring, and a
fountain that never was dry, and never will be drawn dry, is it a great matter
for you to lend water then? So, it is true, the men of the world are needy
creatures, they have something indeed, but it is as water in a cistern, when
that is gone, they think that all is gone, therefore they will not lend it, no
not unto God himself when he calls for it. But the Saints have the bowels of
mercy, the springhead of all mercy, therefore whatsoever God calls for, they
presently say, Lord here take all, I know where to have it again, and much
more then that. This makes godly men so ingenuous for God, and so free hearted
to him and to his servants.

I will berroth thee unto me in mercies. The bowels of Gods mercies searched
into.


A little to search into these mercies: It is an argument that has much depth
in it.

First, they are a depth swallowing up the greatest evil of sin or affliction.
(...).
in which he betrotheth himself unto us, they are as nothing in comparison.
Therefore the Scripture has such strange expressions of the wonderfulness of
Gods mercies to his people in Christ.

The Scripture has three notable words to express the fullness of Gods
mercies in Christ. The first is Ephesians. 2. 7. the abundant riches of his grace,
the riches that are cast in, over and above. The second word is in Romans 5. 20.
The grace of God has been more then exceeding, there is a second (...).

And a third is, 1 Timothy 1. 14. The grace of God was exceeding abundant, it had
a pleonasme asore, yea but here is a super-pleonasme. Here are three (...) put
upon Gods mercy, to note the riches of the glory, and depth of the mercy of God
in Christ.

Secondly, consider these mercies in the effects. They set on work all for thy
good if thou be in Christ.

Yea further, know that it is such mercy as it is the great design, yea the
greatest design that ever God had from all eternity to honor this his mercy,
to set out the infinite glory and the riches of this his mercy in Christ.
Certainly God had great designs in doing such great things as he has done, but
above all the designs that ever God had in all his works, that is the chief, to
glorify the riches of his mercy in Christ. They are indeed bowels of mercy,
when they are such as in the glory of which God attaineth his great design in
making the world, he would never have made the world, had it not been for that.

he shall see his seed, and his soul shall be satisfied. I have enough for all
the blood I shed. Indeed I came from my Father, and was made a servant, a
curse, I suffered the wrath of my Father, my blood was shed, but if this be the
fruit of it, that such and such a soul shall have this mercy, I have enough
for all my blood, I am glad that ever I shed it.

Purcicum imperium quantum quantum est mica est quam pater families canibus
p^eciicit. Luther.
As for all the glory of the world God can give that unto men that he hates, to
reprobates, as Luther says of the whole Turkish Empire, it is but a crum of
bread that the Master of the house throws to his dogs; but when it comes to
his mercies in Christ, they are such as are worth the blood of his Son, that
must go to be the price for the purchasing of them.

6. They are such mercies as God bestows on purpose that he may declare to all
eternity before Angels and all his Saints, what God is able to do for a
creature, to what a height of excellency and glory these infinite mercies are
able to raise a poor creature unto. These must needs be great.

Yea they are such as must be the object for Angels and Saints to admire at, 7.
adore and magnify the name of God for, everlastingly.

What shall I say more in naming any fruits of these mercies? Such mercies as
whereas before sin made thee to be the object of Gods hatred, it makes thee now
to be an object of his pity, God takes the rise from thy sin to show his mercy.
Take heed of abusing it, it is childrens bread, that which I now speak, let us
not sin that grace may abound, God sorbid; seeing thy sin cannot overcome
Gods goodness, let Gods goodness overcome thy sin; Only let us learn to admire
at these riches of mercy in Christ, and let us exercise much faith about them.
Certainly we should thrive in godliness much more if we did exercise faith
in the bowels of God in Christ. Those kind of fruits, as your Apricocks and
your May-cherries, that grow up by a wall in the open sunshine, and have the
hot reflection of the sun, come to be sooner ripe and have more sweetness then
those that grow in shady places; your grass you know that is shaded by the
trees, in Orchards, is sour; So that fruit that Christians bring forth under
discouragements and dispairing thoughts, is very sour; some things they do
conscience hales them to duties, but alas it is sour fruit; though it be
better to do what conscience requires then not, for we must not go against
conscience, but to do it merely because conscience hales to it, it is but
sour grass. But when a Christian can by Faith set himself before the
Sunshine of these mercies of God in Christ, and continually live in the midst
of the luster of the grace of God in Christ, he grows ripe sooner, and his
fruit is sweeter. You may know whether it be the Sun of righteousness or no
that you are set in, Does your fruit grow ripe? and is it sweet fruit? Those
who talk of mercy and of Christ, who have the name of Christ in their mouths,
but is their fruit sour, does nothing come from them but crabbed fruit? these
men are not in the Sun, they are blind, they cannot see the Sun, they are but
in a light of their own fancy, and in a heat of their own making.

Ephesians. 3. 18. 19. The Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that they may be able
to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the
riches of God in Christ: Mark, the Philosophers tells us but of three
demensions, but here are four; but what is the fruit of this? And that you may
know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with
all the fullness of God; Here is the effect of it, when we come to know the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height of Gods love, and have that knowledge
by the Spirit of God that passes all natural knowledge, then we come to be
filled with all the fullness of God. Here now is a glorious Christian, a
Christian filled with all the fullness of God. Would you be so? Learn then to
exercise faith much about the infinite riches of the mercy of God in Christ,
this will fill you with all the fullness of God, you complain of barrennes and
emptines in your hearts and lives, it is because you exercise so little Faith
in these mercies of God in Christ.

God betrotheth his Church unto himself in mercies, in bowels. Let us learn
to plead these mercies before the Lord, to plead them when we are in any
strait, to plead with God for bowels, Esaias, 63. 15. Look down from heaven,
and behold from the habitation of thy holy esse and thy glory, where is thy
zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of the bowels, and of thy mercies toward
us? are they restrained? Lord, have thou not said that thou will betroth thy
Church unto thy self in bowels? Where is the sounding of thy bowels? Lord let
us have these bowels of thine in which thou have betrothed us through Christ.

Oh what confusion will there be one day unto those that shall miss of all
these mercies of God, in which the Lord has betrothed himself unto his
Church! What, will you content your selves now with crumbs that God casts to
dogs, with the fruits of Gods general bounty and patience, when you hear of
such glorious mercies as are in Jesus Christ? These things should so raise our
hearts, that we should protest as Luther did, I protest says he, God shall
not put me off with these things of the world, with my portion here. Valde
protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo. Luther.
Oh no, the Lord has showed me greater riches, though I be unworthy of any,
yet I know his mercy is free, why then should not I have my portion in these
glorious things?

Come in then* come in oh sinful soul, be in love with Jesus Christ, and the
ways of godliness, know that all these mercies are tendered unto thy soul this
day, to break thy heart, even that hard heart of thine, and they are as free
for thee as for any. There is nothing more pleasing unto God then for thee to
be taken with the glory of the riches of his mercy. Thou can perform no duty
so acceptable unto God as this, to have thy heart break upon the codsideration
of his bowels, to have thy bowels yern again, and to come in and close with
this infinite, rich, and glorious grace of his.

Which if thou do, know that the first moment thou art united to Christ, thou
do lanch into the infinite Ocean of mercy, now thou breathest in the element
of mercy, now thou live upon nothing but mercy.

Is it so? Then know God expects a merciful disposition from thee too. God
betrotheth thee in righteousness, and puts righteousness into thee; in
judgment, and gives thee judgment too; in loving kindness, and makes thee
loving and kind likewise; in mercies, and puts mercies into thee, bowels
into thee also.

First, Our bowels must yerne toward God.
toward himself. Why? can we be merciful unto God? what good can we do to
God? God expects you should have bowels toward him; How? Thus, Do thou see
the name of this blessed God thy husband to be dishonored in the world? Oh thy
bowels should yern, thou should have bowels working now. What, does God look
upon thee in thy blood, in thy misery, and does his bowels yern toward thee?
Can thou look upon God in his dishonor, and his cause trampled under foot,
and do not thy bowels yern toward him? It should pity thy soul to see this
blessed God to be so much dishonored in the world as he is, to see that there
are so few in the world that love and fear this God, who is thy God, and has
done thee so much good. What, is there any good cause up wherein the name of
God should be honored? Thy bowels should work presently toward it. Cant. 5. 4.
My beloved put his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for
him. When Christ did but begin to open a door, put but in his hand, when there
was any good but beginning to be done; Oh my bowels were moved, says the
Church, and I could never be at quiet until I had enquired after, yea and
found my beloved. Is there any beginning to let in Christ into the Kingdom in
his government amongst us? Dowe feel him putting in his hand at the door?
(certainly if we be skilled in the way of Christ, we may seele him putting his
hand in at the door) Oh that our bowels would yern, and cause our hearts to
flow to the bo^ntisulnesse of the Lord, and join with Christ in that blessed
work of his that he is about.

Our bowels must also be toward the Saints. It is extremely against the spirit
of Christ for a Christian to be hard-hearted toward his brethren, Christ
expects bowels; And as you would account it ^grievous misery to have your
bowels rotten, to have diseases in your bowels, know it is as great an evil to
have your hearts unmercifull, that is, to have a disease in your bowels, so the
Scripture phrase is, Amos 1. 11. He cast off all pity, and his anger did tear
perpetually, so it is in your books; but the words in the Original are, And
corrupted his bowels; their bowels were corrupted when they were not pitiful
toward their brethren in misery. It was a grievous condition that Iehoram was
in, 2 Chronicles. 21. 15. when his bowels came forth by reason of his disease. An
unmercifull heart is a worse disease then this.

What are we, and who are we that Gods mercies should be shown toward us?
why not our mercies toward our brethren then? The Scripture calls exceedingly
for mercy in the Saints toward one another. Col. 3. 17. Put on as the Elect of
God bowels of mercy and kindness. Would you have an argument unto your selves
that you are Gods Elect? put on bowels then. Never was there time since you
lived, or your forefathers lived, wherein God called for bowels more then now.
Do you hear of the miseries of your brethren, their goods spoiled, houses
burnt, wives, children ravished, themselves imprisoned, their bodies wounded,
and yet no bowels all this while; what, you hard-hearted in the mean time? Are
you the elect of God? why I pray you, what is your flesh more then the flesh of
others? what are your comforts more then the comforts of others? why should you
lie soft and safe more then others? Is there any such difference betwixt you
and your brethren, that they should be in misery, and you must be pampered, and
scarce feel the very wind to blow on you, and yet in the mean time your
hearts hardened toward them? It is true, God it is that has made the
difference you will say; and God may make a difference where he pleases. I
grant it, and it would not grieve God to make such a difference between you
and them, if he saw your bowels yern toward them. But if God lays such
afflictions upon your brethren who are better then you, and have done more for
him then ever you have done, and yet you are hard-hearted, this will grieve God
at the heart. 1 Ioh. 3. 17. He that sees his brother has need, and shuiteth
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? If
thou have bowels, and shuttest them up from thy brother, surely thou never
knew what the love of God meant.

Mark that place* 2 Cor. 9. 8. what encouraging expressions we have unto bounty
and liberality toward our brethren, for the opening our bowels toward them. God
is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. There is no such
text in all the book of God to encourage to the opening our bowels to the
administering to the necessities of the Saints, for that Scripture is brought to
that end, that part of the Chapter is spent about that argument, if you believe
any thing in the Scripture, if you have any experience of Gods bowels toward
you, read over this, and see if it will not open your bowels.

God is able to make all grace abound; Lect. 19.
Grace abound, that is something; all grace, that is more; but all kind of
grace, that is more then that, and that from Gods almighty power too; but that
is not enough, Mark, that you always having all sufficiency in all things. It
were enough one would think God should say, you shall have all things needful,
no you shall have all things, If he had said thus, you shall have sufficiency
in that you have, that is something, no but you shall have all things, and
sufficiency in all things, and all sufficiency in all things. Yea but I may
want before I dye? No, you shall have always all sufficiency in all thiugs.
Well, this may make us do something, you may think if I do this good work,
and another, and another, I hope I do my part, no but you must abound, you must
do every good work and abound in every good work. But I shall draw my self dry
if I be so abundant in every good work; No, God is able to make all grace in
you to abound toward you, that you always having all sufficiency in all
things may abound; You shall never be drawn dry, for you have the bowels of
Gods mercy. Alexander giving large gifts, some asked him, what will you keep
for your self? Spes, says he, I will keep Hope for my self, I will make
account that still there are greater things coming for me; what he had he gave
away, because he had a spirit that looked after and hoped for great things to
come; certainly Christians have that left, always they have hope, they may
expect great things, why? because they have the bowels of Gods mercies to be
theirs.

One thing more (to knit all together) all righteousness, all judgment, all
loving kindness, all mercies comes from God through our union with Christ.

Though God be an infinite ocean of goodness, yet we can expect nothing from
God but through our union with Christ, Man has forfeited the title he had to
all the goodness of God, and now the title upon which he is to hold all his
good, it is the union he has with this husband, with JESUS CHRIST by virtue of
this marryage. Whenever Faith goes to heaven for any good from God, it goes
to heaven by virtue of this right, and obtains all the good it gets from God
by virtue of that conjugall union the soul has with JESUS CHRIST.

How blessed then was the time when Christ was first revealed to the Church!
Cant. 3. 11. Behold King Solomon with the Crown where with his mother crowned
in the day of his espousals, in the day of the gladness of his heart, These
things opened in our espousals with Christ, must needs make that day the day
of the gladness of our hearts. O how dear should this Christ thy husband be
unto thee! how happy, when thou shall have full communion with him! when Jsaac
met Rebekka, he carried her into his mothers tent: when the Lord Christ shall
meet his spouse, he will carry her into his Fathers pillace. Behold the riches,
the glory of my Father whom I told you of, these are all yours in my right
eternally.

The Nineteenth Lecture.
HOSEA 2. 20. 21. 22. 23, I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness,
and thou shall know the Lord.

And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear says the Lord, I will
hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth.

And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Iezreel.

And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that
had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people, Thou
art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God.


I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness.

Here is a third betrothing, I will betroth, I will betroth, I will betroth,
Jerome has a note upon that and says, that it is thrice repeated to note
three several times of Gods betrothing himself unto his people. 1. When he
called Abraham. 2. After they went out of Egypt and were in the wilderness at
Mount Sinai. 3. In the time of the Gospel. And of this Exposition Calvin
says, Argutum sed srivolum.
it may be accounted witty, but it is frivolous. He gives a better reason
(which I think to be the mind of the holy Ghost) why it is thrice tepeated;
Because apostatizing Israel could hardly believe that ever God would do such a
thing as this, what after the Lord had cast Israel away? yea cast her to the
beasts (for so he threatens in the former part of the chapter) yet now betroth
her to himself, this was unlikely.

I will [ even] betroth thee, so you have it in your books; now the truth is,
the word in the Original is Vau, the same that is translated and before, but
because the third time it is said [ and] the Translators thought there was an
emphasis in the third And, and therefore to express that emphasis they put in
the word [ even.] Infaithfulnesse] In steadiness, so the word signifies, I
will betroth thee unto me in a steady way, Infide, in constantia, in
stabilitate.
my goodness toward thee shall be stable and sirme. So the word is often used
in Scripture, Exodus 17. 12.

His hands were steady, the same word that we have here for faithfulness, So
Deuteronomy. 28. 59. I will make thy plagues of long continuanoe, thy plagues stable
and constant, the same that is here for faithfulness. And 1 Samuel 2. 35. I will
raise me up a faithful Priest, and I will build him a sure house, there the
word is of the same root, a sure house, a firm, steady house. Faithfulness here
imports, Gods stability and steadines in his Covenant with his people. It notes
not so much the perpetuity, for that was before, I will betroth thee unto me
for ever: But firmeness and constancy, as opposite to ficklenes and
uncertainty. There is much unconstancy and fickleness in our love one to
another, but the love of God to his people is stable, settled, firm and constant
love.

That is the meaning in the first place, though not all. Esaias 62. 5. As the
Eridegroome rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice ^ver thee, that
is, the love of Christ after thousands of years is still but as the love of a
bridegroom upon the wedding day, then ordnarily love is hot and appears much;
not the love only of the husband, Christ's love is steady, and why. (...).
but as the Bridegroom.

There is no moment of time, but Christ rejoices not only as a husband, but
as a Bridegroom over every gracious soul.

Christ's love is steady, because it is pure, without mixture; it is a holy
love. Observe the comparing of two Texts, Esaias 55. 3. The sure mercies of David
are promised there. In Acts 13. 34. that Scripture is quoted, and there it is
The holy things of David; As noting, because the love of God is holy, therefore
it is sure and steadfast.

Christ's love unto his people is in righteousness, as before, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and mercies: It is from the sweetness of
his nature, and therefore it is steady and firm. With him there is no shadow of
change. It is grounded upon a sure covenant, therefore firm. Though indeed the
love of Christ may be to us as the shining of the Sun, not always in the
fruits of it, shining out so gloriously, but the Sun keeps his course in a
steady way, though sometimes it is clouded, and we have it not so gloriously as
at other times. The Saints should fasten upon the love of Christ in the
Covenant; and though other things be never so uncertain, yet they should quiet
their hearts in this, that their happiness in the Covenant of grace is
certain. Perhaps the love of our friend is uncertain, very fickle and
inconstant; those who will glavor upon you, and seem as if their hearts were
with you, but what sullen moods and fits will there be at times! and when you
have most need of them, you know not where to find them. But the love of
Christ is certain and stable, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Mark how David comforted himself
in the stablenesse of the love of God in the covenant. Though he does not cause
my house to grow, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things and sure, and this is all my desire and all my hope, that is, that
the Covenant is sure and steadfast.

And (as we have opened it in all the former) so here it must be mutual. The
Saints love to Christ steady.


I will betroth thee in faithfulness, and make thee faithful too; that is,
thou shall have a steady, firm, stable spirit in thy love to me, though not in
that degree that Christ's is, yet there is a stability in the hearts of the
Saints unto Christ, they are not carried up and down with every wind of
doctrine, with every puff of temptation as other men are. The righteous is an
everlasting foundation, Pro. 10. 25. The upright holds on his way, Job. 17. 9.

It must needs be so, because the affections of the Saints unto Christ are holy
affections too, though not perfect, they have indeed some mixture, therefore
some instability; but they have holiness, therefore stability.

And they choose Christ in righteousness and in judgment. And they have the
Divine Nature in them; and as that has no shadow of change, so they come to
have something like to the immutability of the Divine Nature, some shadow of
it. Esaias 26. 3. A godly man is described thus, Whose mind is staid upon God:
he has a stable spirit, not a wandering, fickle, roving spirit, he has fixed
himself upon God, he can say, My heart is fixed. The men of the world, because
they have not that which can satisfy, run up and down, first, after one
contentment, then after another, they have no where to fix: but the Saints
find all sufficiency in God, when they are there, their hearts are satisfied,
and there they fix. As a Be lighting upon a flower, The evil of a fickle
unconstant spirit.
finding but a little honey, gets away to another, and to another, and to
another; but when it comes to a flower, where it may suck honey enough it
fixes, it stays there. The hearts of the Saints find a fullness of good, in
God, and there they fix. A fickle, wavering, unstable spirit is exceeding
unbeseeming a Christian. As it is in the body, some who have flushings of heat,
have a very good color for a while, but when we know this good color is but a
flush, it is rather an argument of a disease, then of a good complexion. An end
of a candle that burns in the socket gives some flashes of light now and then,
but a candle that is set upon a table gives a steady and constant light. Mad
people you know have their Iudicia intervalla, some times wherein they do acts
of reason, but you may perceive they are not in their wits, because there is
not constancy, and evennesse in their actions.

This stablenes, this evenes in a Christian way is the beauty and glory of it.
Though you be never so forward sometimes in that which is good, yet if at other
times your hearts be off, there is no beauty in your conversation. But give me
a Christian whose ways are even, that you may find a constancy in him in all
his ways.

Those who have such fickle, uncertain, inconstant hearts, are never like to
excel; if they have any truth in them, yet they will never be eminent
Christians, Genesis 49. 4. it is said of Ruben, Ruben unstable as water, but he
shall not excel; so it may be said of a Christian unstable; here is one of
good affections, at sometimes very forward, but unstable as water, he shall not
excel. Constancy in love is exceeding comely and beautiful between man and
wife, from thence is the expression of the holy Ghost here; it adds much unto
the luster and comfort of their lives. For men to seem sometimes to be mighty
fond, and other times to be bitter and sour, like Nabals; or the wife to be
very fond sometimes, and to be grievous and irksome at other times, this takes
away the beauty, the comfort of their lives.

But there is more in this faithfulness then stability and firmeness, I will
betroth thee in faithfulness; I will certainly perform all the good you can
expect from me, which is befitting a husband, yea such a husband as I am, to
do to my Spouse; Providen tiam creaturis non negamus, curam sibi sponsa
vendicat. Bern.
you may confide in me, I will be faithful to you, not only my love, but my
faithfulness shall bind me to you: My loving kindness, my merciful disposition
is a great bond, but my faithfulness shall bind me also, I will be content to
engage my self to you, that you may certainly confide in me, so as you may not
only expect it from my love, but challenge it from my faithfulness. We deny not
Gods providence to other creatures, but the Spouse challenges Gods care, says
Bernard, which is beyond providence, such as is out of faithfulness, as well as
out of love. Christ here condescends to his Spouse, as a man is willing to give
satisfaction to his wife and her friends, though the truth is he would do any
thing in the world out of love to his wife, yet in regard of her weakness, and
to satisfy some friends he is content to enter into bond, to do any thing that
is fitting; it is good to make all things sure beforehand, say her friends, he
presently yields, for it is no other but what he is willing to do without
bonds, only to satisfy her and their minds. Thus it is between Christ and his
Spouse: The truth is, the love of Christ is enough to make a supply of any of
our wants, but we are weak, and would feign have things made sure, therefore
says Christ to help our weakeness, I will even enter into bond, and you may
be sure I will be faithful then, I will bind my faithfulness to you for all
the good you would have.

And this faithfulness of Christ is either in regard of the great
Marriage-Covenant, there he will be sure to be faithful to his Spouse; Or in
regard of all particular promises, that are under things as it were. There is
the great marriage-covenant, about reconciling God, and paying all debts that
are owing and satisfying Gods justice, and bringing to eternal life; but there
are many under-promises, and Christ will be faithful in them all. Ps. 25. 10.
you have a promise worth a kingdom, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth, not only mercy, but mercy and truth, mercy engaged.

Wicked men may have mercy from God, from the general bounty and goodness,
and merciful disposition of God, but what the Saints have is from truth, as
well as from mercy, it is bound to them.

God stands much upon this that the hearts of his Saints should confide in him.
Christ stands much upon this, that the hearts of his Saints should confide in
him.
He accounts not himself honored except we confide in him: therefore mark
how Christ suiteth himself unto our weakness, that we may confide in his
faithfulness. What is it (says he) that you poor creatures do one to another
when you would make things sure between you? We answer thus, Lord we engage
our selves by promise one to another. I will do so says Christ, you shall have
my promise, my faithful promise. Acts 2. 39. Peter invites to Baptism upon
this ground, because the promise is made to you and to your children, and to as
many as the Lord our God shall call: The first he speaks to the Jews, the other
to the Gentiles; As if he should say, Come in and receive Baptism, for to you
and to your children the promise is made, to you that are Jews and to your
children, and to the Gentiles, they have the promise that you have, they come
under the same Covenant for the maine, the promise is to them and to their
children too. And this promise that Christ hat^ing aged himself in, is no other
then a draught of that which was before the world began, from all eternity, and
therefore it is so much the more sure. Tit. 1. 2. the Gospel is called a
promise before the world began.

All promises in the Scripture are but a draught of that grand promise that God
the Father made to his Son before the world began; As if Christ should say,
Will you have engagement by promise? This is past long ago, my Father has
engaged himself to me from all eternity, and if you have any promise it is but
a draught of that first copy of that great promise my Father has made me from
all eternity.

What do you do more when you would make things sure one to another? We
answer, we do not only make a verbal promise, by word of mouth, but we write
it. God has therefore given us his Scripture, and the chief thing in
Scripture is the promise, God has set to his hand to his promise in Scripture.
Hence Luther has a notable expression, The whole Scripture does especially aim
at this, that we should not doubt, but believe, confide, hope that God is
merciful, kind, patient.

What do you more? Here you have my promise and my hand, is there any thing
else you use to do, to make things sure? We answer, Lord we take witnesses. I
will do so too, says God. When we would make things sure indeed, we take not
only two, but three, or four, but half a dozen witnesses sometimes. You shall
have witnesses; says God as many as you will, witnesses of all sorts,
witnesses in heaven, witnesses in earth; In heaven, I John 5. 7. The Father,
the Word, and the holy Ghost, witnesses authentical, of credit enough, the
three Persons in the Trinity, upon earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood.

What do you more to make a thing sure? Lord, we set to our seals too; you
shall have that too says God, you shall have seals of all sorts, you shall
have the broad seal of Heaven, the Sacraments, the seals of the Covenant; and
you shall have my privy seal, I will take my Ring off my finger, I will give
you even the seal of the spirit, and do but show this seal, it is
authentical enough.

Is there any thing more? Yes we answer, there is one thing more, we take an
oath, I will do that too, says God, that you may be sure, and confide in my
faithfulness. Heb. 6. 17. God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise the immutability of his council, consirmed it by his oath. As if he
should say, there is no such need of an oath, but I will be abundant to you,
because I would have you trust me, And mark this is for the sake of the heirs
of promise, God would never have done this for other men, it is for your sakes
only who are the heirs of promise, in regard of your weakness he conrfims all
with an oath. And if we would have things sure, we will not have the oath of
such as are of no great credit. Mark, therefore it is that God swears, and
that by the greatest oath, ver. 13. Because he could swear by no greater,
says the text, he swear by himself.

Is there any thing more says God that you use to do among your selves to make
things sure? Yes Lord, we use to take a pawn too. You shall have that too says
he, I will give you a pawn, and such a pawn as if you never had any thing more
you would be happy. what is that? 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has sealed us, and given
us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts. I will send my spirit to be an
earnest of all the good that I intend to do for you everlastingly. Is there any
thing else you would require of me that you may confide in me? Yes, if God
would do some great and notable work as a beginning and as an engagement of
that which is to come after, this is yet more then a pawn, when there is some
special thing done in way to that which we make account of, that we are not
only promised it, and have it under hand and seal, and have an oath and a
pawn, but it is in a great degree begun, and so begun as the difficulty is
over. Those who live under the Gospel see the greatest part of our salvation
already done for us. God made a promise of sending his Son into the world; Now
in Gods performing that promise that God-man should come into the world to be
made a curse for sin, this is the greatest work of all that is to be done to
all eternity, and if God would have failed in any thing it would have been in
that. It is not so much for God to deliver us in this world, it is not so much
for him to bring us to heaven, as it is to send his Son into the world to be
made a curse for us. Now when God has done so great a work and has been
faithful in that great promise, he has taught us for ever to trust in him, to
believe his faithfulness in making good other promises. If a man who owes five
thousand pound, and pays you four thousand nine hundred of it, you think
surely he will never break for one hundred, I may trust him for the rest,
seeing he has dealt so faithfully with me in the great sum. God has paid
the four thousand nine hundred and much more, in comparison of what God has
done for us, take all the glory of heaven, we have not one hundred of the five
thousand left behince, therefore we may well confide in him for the payment of
the rest. God a sure object for our faith.
But is God able? It is true, God is faithful: This is seldom an objection,
at least an explicit objection in the mouths of people, but surely an
implicit one it is in the hearts of many; that appears by those cautions, God
gives to take away that objection, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Commit the keeping of your
souls unto him as unto a faithful Creator, as if he had not said enough in
saying he is faithful, he adds faithful Creator, as if he should say, f there
be no means to help you I will create means, I will put forth my Almighty power
to create help for you, (...)
but you shall have help, Dan. 9. 27. The Lord will confirm the Covenant; the
word is used for a mighty man, a Giant in Scripture. Genesis 19. 8. He began to be
a mighty one in the land, as a Giant in the earth, the word here is of the same
root, God will come forth as a Giant, as a mighty man to make sure the Covenant
he has made with his people, if there be any thing in the world wherein God
will stir up his infinite power, the excellency of his power, the glory of
his right hand, it will be in confirming his Covenant to his Saints, Esaias 26.
4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength, Esaias. 54. 5. Thy Maker is thy husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name,
the God of the whole earth shall he be called.

Seeing God is so faithful, let not us be faithless. But things go very
cross, Our faith must raise us above difficulties.
and how shall we believe, our faith shakes? the true genuine love of the
Saints is such as will love God without gifts, for himself, so the genuine art
of faith, is to believe in God without experience, yea though things seem to
go contrary. That love is but a lame love that loves God only for that which
we receive from him for the present, and that is but a lame faith that
believes only in ^od for that which we see for the present.

Do things go cross? they are corrections, and those may come from
faithfulness as well as any thing the Church enjoyes, Psalm. 119. 75. I know O
Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted me; As God comes down to you and suits himself to you as his poor
creatures, so you should labor to raise your hearts to him, to believe in him
as a great God. ^od deals with you as having to deal with weak creatures, you
should deal with him as having to do with an infinite God. You must give God
leave to do his work his own way. The object of our confidence in God, it
is, the thing will be done, it is not how it will be done, or when it will be
done, but that God will carry his work thorough. Shall our weakness be so much
regarded, as that things must not work so as to show Gods power? Certainly it
is too too much for us to think our weakness must be so far condescended to.
One would think that it is enough, that God condescendeth so much as to
express himself so to you as you may believe; would you have God condescend to
express himself so to you, as he should not have the glory of his work, nor
you the glory of your faith? this is too low. Though we be bound to deny our
selves much, because of the weakness of our brethren; Must God deny his glory
because of our weakness? We burden God too much with our weakness. It is for
Gods glory that things go as they do; Lazarus was dead, and dead so long,
that the work of God might appear.

But I find not things go so as I expected, I think I have believed, at such
a time in prayer I thought my heart did close with the promises of God, but yet
things go not so as I expect. Though things be otherwise then thou expectest,
yet it may be God calls for new acts of thy believing, and it is because there
is no renewing of thy faith in his faithfulness. You must know, the continual
actings of Faith draw out the continual actings of the power of God. Renowned
acts of faith draws forth God power to work foe the Saints
I will give you for that one famous Text, perhaps you may read it often and
hear it, but not perceive the strength there is in it. Psalm. 31. 19. O how
great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! but mark
what follows, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee. Great is
the goodness thou have laid up. Gods goodness is great to admiration for them
that fear him, but how? It is laid up for them, but now mark, which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee.

All the goodness that is in God, is for them that fear him, but it is not
fearing God that will bring it to work, it is laid up in a treasury indeed; do
you fear God? God has laid up abundance of goodness in a treasury for you,
but you must not expect this will work for you, unless you trust in him; your
Faith must bring it forth into work, and that before the sonns of men; thou
shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of men.

Would you be hid in the secret of Gods presence from the pride of men? you
must not only fear God, but trust in his faithfulness. Mat. 13. 58. Christ
did no mighty works there because of their unbelief: And Ma^k. 6, 5. He could
not do no works because of their unbelief. One says he did not, and the other
says he could not, When we have a promise, let us put on to get the goodness
of God to work, which is by believing. For that I will give you as notable an
example as any I know you have in the book of God, of a believing heart,
catching hold upon a promise upon Gods faithfulness to work it out, 1 Chronicles.
17. 23. and so on. In the former part of the Chapter you shall find God had
promised David to establish his house, to build him a sure house; Well, as
soon as David had got the word, mark how he improves it, how he works upon
Gods word; As if he had said, Seeing I have got his word, I will hold to it, he
shall not go from it, says he, Therefore, O Lord, let the things thou have
spoken concerning thy servant and concerning his house, be established for
ever, and do as thou have said. Thou have spoken, do as thou have said. Ver.
24. Faith will hold God to his word.
Let it even be established, I expect it, seeing thou have been pleased in such
a gracious way to promise me thus, I will rely upon it, let it be even
established, that thy name may be magnifyed for ever. I will plead thy name in
it, if there be any thing to be pleaded more then other, I will plead it before
thee; but is not this enough? Verse. 25. Thou O Lord God have told thy servant
that thou will build him an house, therefore thy servant has found in his
heart to pray before thee. He had said before, that God had spoken it; here he
goes over it again, as making much of Gods word, thou have told me, and I pray
for nothing but what thou have told me. Nay yet still David encroacheth more
upon God, Ver. 26. Now O Lord thou art God, and thou have promised this
goodness unto thy servant. I have not to deal with a man that will be fickle
and inconstant, wavering and unfaithful, but thou art God, and I will trust in
thee as a God, thou art God, and thou have promised this goodness, it is thine
own goodness, now therefore do it. See how he follows God upon his promise.
And mark what admirable effects followed upon this, Chap. 18. ver. 1. After
this, says the Text, he prospered, when his enemies came against him, he took
a thousand charets, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen
from Hadarezer, and when the Syrians came to help that Hadarezer, he slew of
the Syrians two and twenty thousand men. After this, mark the connection of that
Chapter and this, after David had improved the promise, he might have what he
would; thus the loving kindness of God was laid up in a promise, but wrought
out by David's faith. This is our evil that we do not improve this
faithfulness of God, we lose abundance by it. It is an argument that we have
base spirits. It is a great evil between man and wife, when they cannot
confide one in another, but are jealous, how can such live comfortably
together? So we are jealous of God, we lose our comfort in him; Jealousy comes
oftentimes from much baseness of spirit, and selfe-guiltinesse, because we are
of such base hearts our selves, that is the reason we are so jealous of God.
Where there is much love between man and wife, there cannot be much jealousy,
and if there were entire love in the Spouse of Christ, there would not be
jealousy. You have an excellent passage for that, John 5. 40. You will not
come unto me that you might have life, you will not believe in me, that is the
meaning: then ver. 42. I know you have not the love of God in you. Is there any
thing in the world more tedious to a Husband, then that the Wife should be
jealous of him? Evidences that we do not trust in Gods faith fullness.
think of it, the same tediousness it is unto the Spirit of Jesus Christ, that
thou should be jealous of him, and not confide in his faithfulness.

Surely if we did trust in Gods faithfulness, we would not think to compound
with him so as we do, but we would improve his promise to the utter most. As
you that are Merchants, and have much owing you, all the while you confide in
your debtors, you will not compound with them for less then your debt; if you
should come to one that ows you money, and say, I pray Sir pay in my money, and
I shall be content to take ten, or fifteen in the hundred; the party would
think himself disg^aced; what, do you distrust me? Do you think I will break?
No, I will pay you every penny, he stands upon his credit. The truth is, we
poor wretches, because we have not Gods promises presently fulfilled, we would
compound with God, that is, if God would give us any little comfort for the
present, we would be satisfied rather then wait for that which is to come,
though it be infinitely more; this is a great dishonor to God, and an argument
of our unfaithfulness. It is an argument of little faith, if thou can be
satisued, should God give thee ten thousand worlds for the present, if God
should say, what will yon have? would you have your enemies destroyed? would
you have your peace and your trading in the world, your ease and quietness? Is
this all? This is to compound with God for twelve pence in the pound as it
were. No says a gracious heart, Lord thou have promised mercy, and I expect it
to the full, I will not abate the least farthing of it. God loves we should
stand with him for his promise unto the uttermost farthing. No, but I hope God
give me Heaven at last, yet I doubt he will leave me here in the world. This
is to compound with God another way; there are some who perhaps will pay
eighteen, or fifteen shillings in the pound, but it is a dishonor to God to
abate one shilling in the pound, therefore we must not only believe in God for
heaven, but for earth, and for safety and comfort, and that in times of
greatest trouble. God is well pleased with such kind of holy impudence, as we
may say, that is, to follow him for the uttermost, and to urge him upon his
word again and again, to pay what he is engaged for.

Again, had we faith in God we would set upon great things though we see but
little means. Many of you who have but little stocks, yet if you have rich
friends that have given you encouragement, and that you know will be faithful
to you, you will trade for great things with your little stock, because you
know you have those friends will stand by you. So though we have but little
strength, We must be faithful to god, so as God may confide in us.
if God call us, we should be willing to set upon great things, because God
has stock enough, and he has engaged himself to stand by us.

I will bearoth thee unto me in faithfulness. As I will be faithful to you,
and you shall conside in my faithfulness, so you shall be faithful to me,
that I may confide in your faithfulness, as I fulfill all my promises, and
covenant with you, so you shall be faithful to make good all the promises and
covenant with me. The Spouse of Christ is such a one as the Spirit of Christ
can confide in. It is said of the virtuous woman, Pro. 31. 11. Her husband
trusts in her. Let him be abroad or at home, in what company soever, yet his
heart trusts in her, he can leave all his business, his writing, or any
thing that concerns him with such a wife: Where there is want of this trusting
of the heart of the husband in the wife, there is want of comfort in their
lives; thus God says of his people, Esaias 63. 8. They are children that will
not lie; I can confide in them, I can turn them unto any business as I will,
for they are children who will not lie.

They are faithful to God first in the great Covenant, in the surrendering
themselves to God, as they do at their first closing with Christ. In the first
act of believing* every gracious soul enters into solemn covenant with God, and
it will be faithful in that covenant. And they will be faithful likewise in
all their under promises and vows that they make to God, in days of fasting,
and thansgiving, and at other times. As Gods promises are Gods gifts unto us,
so should our promises be as gifts unto God. 2 Timothy 1. 9. According to his
purpose and grace, which was given unto us in Christ Jesus before the world
began; not only promised, but given unto us in Christ Jesus. Gods eternal
purpose is called Gods gift, so our purposes and our promises ought to be as
sure as gifts unto God.

So in thy conversation thou must be faithful to Christ, not prostitute thy
self unto another, but keep thy self for Christ. Indeed the spouse of Christ
may be ravished by open violence, but she will not prostitute her self to any
other, she keeps her self only for Christ. Thus the Saints are described,
Ephe. 1. 1. faithful in Christ Jesus. There is a kind of natural faithfulness
as I may so speak, as in that place Esaias 8. 2. I took unto me faithful
witnesses, Calvin says it is meant of Vrijah, that base temporizing Vrijah,
who made the Altar according to the pattern that Ahaz sent from Damascus, he
is said to be faithful, that is, he was a fair, honest dealing man, his word
was as good as his bond; so many civil men will be faithful of their words;
But mark here in the Ephesians it is faithful in Christ Jesus, it is nnt only
faithfulness between man and man, for many Heathens were so, they would rather
dye then cozen and cheat one another, but this is a higher degree of
faithfulness; it is a faithfulness in Christ Jesus, so the Saints must be
faithful, faithful to Christ Jesus, and faithful in Christ Jesus. They who
are thus faithful, are fit for the service of Christ, Christ has a great
deal of work to do, they are only fit for it, Rev. 17. 14. The Lamb shall
overcome, why? for they that are with him, are chosen, and called, and
faithful, not called faithful, but called and faithful, and therefore the
Lamb shall overcome. It were happy that all that are in this public service
in the kingdom that are with the Lamb, with Christ in this cause, were called
and faithful, the work would soon be at an end; It is faithfulness we shall be
hereafter re^^rded for, Well done good and faithful servant; not well done
good and rich servant, or servant who had great employment in public works,
but well done good and faithful servant. Every one of us cannot be eminent,
every one cannot be employed in public services, but you may every one be
faithful; you that are poor servants you may be faithful as well as a
Magistrate, as well as a Minister; you that are poor laboring men, porters
and watermen the meanest, you may be faithful as well as the Nobles of a
kingdom; God regards faithfulness rather then service, he has no need of the
services of men, We must be faithful one toward another.
great or small, it is all one unto him, but he looks upon the faithfulness of
their hearts. And as you must be faithful unto God and his cause, so you must
be faithful one to another. You who are servants, if you be godly, be sure you
be faithful to your Masters, that there may be no occasion of any such
scandoll as often there is concerning those who are professors, such a servant
is forward, he must go to sermons, and he is set against ceremonies, etc. But
I never had any so unfaithful, if mine eye be but off him, he is from his
business presently. God forbid there should be such scandols given. So Wives
who profess godliness, be you sure you be faithful to your husbands and
tradesmen who profess more then ordinary strictness in Religion, be you
faithful in your dealings. Has Christ married himself unto thee in
faithfulness? he expects that his faithfulness to thee should have that
reflection upon thy heart as to make thee faithful to others. There is one note
that is to be taken from all together. As if God should say, O Israel, you have
dealt unrighteously with me, you have broken your covenant, you have gone a
whoring from me, but I will betroth you to me in righteousness. You have done
foolishly in departing from me, but I will betroth you unto me in judgment.
You have been unkind to me, but I will betroth you unto me in loving kindness.
It has not pitied your souls to see me dishonored, but I will betroth my
self in bowels of mercy to you.

You have been unfaithful to me, but I will even betroth you unto me in
faithfulness. The note from thence is this.

God deals not with those in Covenant with him as they deal with him. Obser.
It is a note of admirable use and comfort. Mark the difference between Gods
dealing with others and those that are in covenant with him. Let others deal
with God in a froward and perverse way, God will deal with them so too, Psalm.
18. 26. With the froward thou will show thy self froward. Will you be froward
with God? God will show himself froward with you. Will you be proud with God?
In the thing you are proud God will be above you. Will you be subtle and
contriving mischief against God and his truth? God will meet with the wicked,
and ensnare them in the work of their own hands. Are you resolute in
wickedness? God will be as resolute as you for your hearts, as Jer. 44, 25.
26. But when God comes to deal with his Saints in covenant, though they deal
frowardly with him, he will deal gently with them: though they deal proudly
with him, he deals in a way of condescension with them; though they be
unfaithful to him, yet he will be faithful to them. Oh my brethren this point
has abundance of sweetness in it, take heed of abusing it; Thy sins cannot
overcome Gods goodness, Quia ego dominus.
let Gods goodness overcome thy wickedness.

And they shall know the Lord, They shall know that I am the Lord, so the
Septuagint has it; so the old Latin, thou shall know because I am the Lord;
but we rather read it as it is in your books; They shall know the Lord.

But how comes this in, In faithfulness, and they shall know the Lord.

Thus, upon these two reasons.

First, because this shall be the means to keep the Church the Spouse of
Christ in faithfulness for ever, they shall know Christ to be the Lord. As if
Christ should say, The reason of all your vile departings from me all this
while, what is it? you do not know me, you do not see into the bounty and
glory, into the excellency of my worship, and what I am, that is the reason you
are gone from me and have been unfaithful to me, but when I betroth you my
self again, you shall know me, you shall see so much beauty and excellency in
me and mine Ordinances that you shall never depart from me.

Low thoughts of God are the cause of superstitious vanities. Had men high and
honorable thoughts of God they would never think to put him off with such
bauble-worship as they do. Acts 9. 7. it is said the God of glory appeared to
Abraham, Obser.
that is given as a ground why Abraham would forsake his Country his fathers
house and his kindred, if we once knew the Lord, and that the God of glory had
appeared to us, we would be ready to forsake all for him and give up our selves
unto him in an everlasting covenant.

Secondly, And they shall know me] This is as a fruit of my betrothing my self
unto them, The right knowing God is a fruit of the covenant.
as a fruit of the Covenant, Jer. 31. 34. They shall teach no more every man
his neighbor and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall
know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I
will forgive their iniquity, etc. It is a fruit of the conjugall union betwixt
Christ and the soul. As it is betwixt man and wife, when they are but only
suitors, well willers, they do not communicate their secrets one to another,
but when they once come to be married together, then they open all their
hearts, there is no secret but they will disclose one to another. So says God,
when I am once married to you, I will open my whole heart to you, the secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him.

Those that have but natural knowledge, understands something of the ways of
Religion, of the mind of Christ; As a man that is in the dark may know where
he is, by feeling he may know what length and thickness many things in the
house are of, but when the light of the day comes, then he knows what the
^^is in the room after another manner then he did in the dark: this is the
difference between knowledge of God in a natural man, and the knowledge of one
espoused to Christ, by his natural knowledge he may understand the hystory of
the Gospel, he may have some general notions of God and of Christ, but when
the Sun of righteousness arises, then be sees the excellency and glory of
God, then he sees God shining in all his attributes, he sees that in Christ
which draws his heart unto him in an everlasting Covenant. As we read Cant.
7. 5. Christ is held in the galleries, that is, Christ as soon as he is married
to the foul, takes it as it were by the hand, and walks into the Galleries,
and there opens his heart unto her. There is many a sweet turn that a
gracious heart has with Christ in his ordinances, wherein Christ opens even
his whole soul unto it, Joh. 15. 15. All things, says Christ, that I have
heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. An admirable Text, surely you
cannot but know the Lord then. Here is the fruit of our union with Christ. Oh
that our hearts were inflamed with desire after further conjugall communion
with him! according to the capacity of the soul, so Christ makes known to it
what he has heard of the Father. Certainly Christ has heard great things of
the Father; he is the wisdom of the Father, he has been with the Father from
all eternity, and the Father loves him, he will tell him all the glorious
things he has in his heart, and Christ will hide none of those things from his
Saints. This is the privilege of a Saint; (...)
who would not be godly, by which he shall come to know the mind of the
Father, according to what Christ knows of it?

Yea and Christ makes God known to the Saints in another way then others know
him. 2 Samuel 7. 27. Thou O Lord God of Hosts have revealed unto thy servant, so
you read it in your books, but it is in the Hebrew, Lord thou have revealed
this to the ear of thy servant. I wonder how that word to the ear comes to be
left out in your books, in which indeed the emphasis lie, I am sure it is so in
the Text. When God makes known himself to his people he reveals things to
their Ear, as we to a friend who is intimate with us, we speak a thing to his
ear. There is many a secret which JESUS CHRIST speaks in the eart of his
Saints, which others never come to be made acquainted with, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
It would ask time for the full opening the gradations of this Scripture, here
is knowledge, and the knowledge of the glory of God, and the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, and shining, and shining into our hearts, and
into our hearts in the face of Jesus Christ. Surely then they shall know the
Lord, and they shall know him in a very spiritual way. The light of the Saints
is a light three story high; First, The light of the Saints is three stories
high.
they have the light of nature, which other men have, the light of reason.
Secondly, they have the light of common gifts, which other men have too, and
that is a story higher then the other; Thirdly, they have the light of a
sanctifying spirit, that is a third loft, and they shall come to a fourth
story, and that is the light of glory. The light that other men have is but as
the light you have in a lower room, in warehouses, which in some you know is
so little that you are feign to use a candle at noone day, so some natural men
have only the light of reason, which indeed is rather like your cellars that
have but a little light coming in at a grate; others have somewhat more light,
they have common gifts, which is like the light in the next story, somewhat
more clear, but the light of the Saints is higher then all these, they know God
as their God, great is the excellency of his knowledge, the soul has blessed
satisfaction in it, let us see the Father and it suffices us, the fullness of
glory that is let out into the soul, the sanctification of the heart by the
presence of the beams of the glory of God, being transformed into the same
Image, it is the very beginning of eternal life. Take only this note about
our knowledge of God by Christ, what a different way have we to know God by,
from that which Heathens had. If you read the Hystories of the Romans, you
shall find the poor and mean ways of those wise men had to know God, as thus,
they would look into the intrails of beasts thereby to find out the mind of
their gods, they would observe how the beasts came to the slaughter, whether
willingly or not willingly, whether haled or not haled, they guessed somewhat
at the mind of their Gods by that, then they would look into the color of
the bowels of the beasts, then observe whether the entrals were sound or not,
then they would observe the fire of their sacrifices, whether the flame
ascended right or not, thus they came to know the mind of their Gods; What poor
ways are these? we have JESUS CHRIST God blessed for ever, the eternal Son of
the Father, who is come from the bosom of the Father, Ephesians. 4, 11.
to make all known to us, the mind of God, his and our Father: We know the
truth as it is in Jesus, not only as it is in the works of nature; some know
much of God in the works of creation and providence, we may know much of God
in those great things the Lord has of late done amongst us; but to know the
truth as it is in Jesus, to know God in Christ, this is another manner of
knowledge then to know God in the way of his works, here we see the truth
really indeed when we see it in CHRIST JESUS. Certainly then none united unto
Christ in a conjugall union can be an ignorant sot, for Christ ingageth
himself in his faithfulness, upon this marryage of a soul with himself, to
reveal himself and the Father unto it, Joh, 8. 54. Of whom ye say he is your
God, but mark the next words, yet ye have not known him. A likely matter that
he should be your God and you not know him, a likely matter that Christ should
be your Savior and you not know him, seeing he has engaged himself in his
faithfulness, that if you be married to him you shall know him and his Father.

Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear says the Lord,
I will hear the heavens, etc.

Now come in temporal promises, after the assurance of mercy in the Covenant,
then come promises for corn, and wine, and oil; God would teach us this lesson
by it, that all our outward things (at the least the sweetness and comfort of
them) depend upon the covenant in Christ.

I will hear, (...)
The word is Respondebo, I will answer, so it may be rendered as well, God will
so hear as that he will answer. Many times a poor man cries to the rich, and he
hears him but he will not answer, but says God, I will hear so as I will
answer. This is a most elegant expression, I will hear the heavens, and they
shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn and the wine and the
oil, and they shall hear Iezreel. Miraorationis sublimit as, a wonderful
sublimity of speech, says one Expositor of it; hyperbolica metaphora, a
hyperbolica metaphor, says another; pulcherrima prosopopoeia, a most
beautiful and delightful prosopopoeia, says another; these creatures being
put as it were in the person of a man as if they understood what they did. As
if the Lord should say thus. My people, you indeed through your sins have
been brought into great straits, you have wanted corn, and wine, and oil, you
have been scattered in your banishment, but when I shall betroth my self unto
you and enter into a covenant with you, then, when you shall cry, O that we
might have these outward comforts, presently the corn, and the wine, and the
oil, as if they heard your complaints, shall say, Oh Lord we would help,
Jezreel and satisfy these thy servants; the corn shall cry to the earth, O
earth let me come into your bowels, I will rot there that so I may bring forth
fruit for this people, the vines and the olive shall desire the earth to
receive them, to give juice and nourishment to them, that they may refresh
these reconciled ones to God; the earth shall say, O that I could entertain
the corn, and wine, and oil that I may be fruitful in my kind, but O
heavens I can do nothing except I have your influences and the shine of the
sun to warm me to make me fructify, therefore O heavens come in and assist
me that I may fructify for Jezreel; and the heavens they shall cry, Lord, we
would feign help the earth, that the earth may help the corn, and wine, and
oil, that they may supply Jezreel, but we can do nothing without thine hand,
therefore do thou hear us, do thou give us leave to rain upon the earth that
it may be fruitful. Obser.
Thus the creatures are brought in crying to help Jezreel.

Take these Observations.

First, See our condition in this world, though reconciled to God yet while we
are here we must be beholden to the corn, and wine, to the earth, and heavens,
Obser.
we know not how to do without them.

Secondly, When we are reconciled to God, then the creatures will be
serviceable to us, yea they will be greedy to do us good, they will cry for it.
Let us take heed of provoking God, the creatures then will be against us. I
have read of Cordius a martyr, giving this answer to those who would have had
him deny the truth, if deny it says he, the Sun, Moon, and stars will deny
me light. If we serve God, the creatures will account it their happiness to
serve us. Thirdly, God uses to work good for his people by second causes.

He does not send these things immediately from heaven, Obs.
but the heavens hear the earth, and the earth hears the corn and the wine.
We must look to second causes, but take heed of resting upon second causes. It
has been Gods work amongst us of late in finding out treacheries and giving
successes to manifest himself very strangly when the means have been very poor;
Nay indeed God has made as much use of men's weakness, as of their strength;
but let not us therefore be slack in the use of means, let us do the best we
can, though God sometimes work beyond means, and contrary to means, yet
ordinarily he makes use of second causes, not only to work, ad praesent iam, as
Biel the Schoolman and others say, that is, only together with the creature;
but there is say they no efficacy at all of them issuing into the effect; but
the truth is, God does make use of second causes otherwise, so that there is
some virtue and efficacy in them to work the thing that God intends.

Fourthly, Obser.
there is a concatenation of second causes, not only an use of them, but every
one in their order supplies the other, the heavens hear the earth, and the
earth hears the corn, one after another. If we could see the comely order of
the creatures, we should see them all hang together in a golden chain; as it
is in the joints of the body, one bone supplyeth another, one place is hollow
to take in another, so one cause in nature supplyeth, and comes in to the
other. As in our salvation there is a golden chain which we have Romans 8. So in
the creatures there is a golden chain of comely order and mutual supplyance.

Fifthly, Obser.
God is at the higher end of the chain, and nothing can be done by any link of
the chain of second causes, but by Gods being at the uppermost link. Jezreel
must cry to the corn, and wine, and oil, and they must cry to the earth, and
the earth must cry to the heavens, he must be the highest cause.

Sixthly, Obser.
It is most comely, and a great blessing, when the right order and chain of
second causes hold; As it is in Nature, so in any Society, in a Commonwealth,
in a City, when all keep their due subordination, as when the Tradesman works
in his way, the Magistrate in his way, the Minister in his way, and every
Officer in his place, every one keeping his order. But when it is otherwise,
when they are out of order, it is a great misery upon a City or Kingdom. As it
was once among the Athenians, Themistocles says of his son, a bol^ youth, This
boy can do more then any man in all Greece, Why? For says he, the Athenians
command the Grecians, and I command the Athenians, and my wife commands me, and
my son commands my wife; here was the concatenation of that government. God
deliver all societies from such a concatenation, that the beginning of any
public work, I mean the lower link of the chain should be perhaps in a
whoremaster, and he should command one, and that one another, and so one after
another. This is a fearful judgment where soever it is.

7. God is the giver of all plenty, Obser.
he accounts it his glory to give rain. Ier. 5. 24. God there wonders that
men will not fear him because of that, Neither (says he) do they say in
their hearts, Let us fear God that gives rain. As if he should say, It is a
strange impudence in men, what, will they not say in their hearts, Let us fear
God, seeing he gives us rain? Thus God gloryeth in this great work, when he
hears the heavens, and the heavens hear the earth, the heavens will be as
brass over us, and the earth as iron, unless GOD hear them, and send rain.
Therefore let God be acknowledged in that rain we have had of late; the
creatures wanted grass, and the grass cried to the heavens, and the heavens
cried unto God, and God has heard the heavens, and sent down rain, and so we
see the earth has been refreshed, abundance of good has come to us by those
showers. Give God the glory of this.

8. All plenty is given for the sake of the Saints. Obser.
How? God hears the heavens, and the heavens hear the earth, and the earth
hears the corn, and the wine and the oil, and they hear Jezreel. It is for
Jezreels sake that the earth hears the corn, and the heavens hear the earth,
and God hears the heavens. Were it not for the Saints, the earth wauld soon
come to a confusion. They are the blessing of the earth, Isa. 18. 24.

9. If the creatures work so graciously for us, how should we then work for
God, and one for another. What, shall the creatures cry one to another, and
hear one another for our good, and shall God cry to us, and we not hear God?
The senseless corn cries to the earth. O earth help me that I may help Iezreel,
and the earth cries to the heavens, O heavens send down your influences, and
the heavens say, We will hear, and the earth says, I will hear; Shall the
earth hear, and the heavens hear for our good, and shall not we hear when God
cries for help? God cries to you many times to help in his cause, and wilt not
thou hear to work for him? O vile creature, how unreasonable are thy ways
before the Lord!

Again, how should we hear the cries of the poor? When we are in want, the
corn cries to the earth, and the earth cries to the heavens, and the heavens
cry to God for us. When the poor, I mean Gods poor, whom Gods hand has made
poor, cry, will not you hear? Will you be more hardhearted then the earth
and the heavens are? seeing they hear you, do you hear the cry of your poor
brethren.

Further, if God will hear the creatures when they cry for us, how much more
will he hear Jesus Christ when he cries for us? It is our happiness in part,
that we have all the creatures cry to God for our good, but the top of our
happiness is this, that we have Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant, making intercession at the right hand of God continually for us.

Lastly, Gods mercies go through when they work for the Saints, the corn
begins to cry to the earth, that stays not here, but the earth goes on, and
cries to the heavens, the heavens go on and cry to God. Gods mercies to his
Saints never leave till the thing be done.

And I will sow her unto me in the earth.

What great mercy is this for God to grant plenty, if he destroy his people?
Our Country is plentiful, but if God should consume us out of the land what
good wou^d our plenty do us? Therefore says God, I will sow her unto me in the
earth. Indeed she is now a poor contemptible people, and there are but few of
them remaining upon the earth, but I will make them a seed, and a seed that
the Lord has blessed.

I will sow her. Here the Lord alludeth to the name Iezreel, which signifies
the seed of the Lord, the sown of the Lord. It was used in the first Chapter
in an opprobtious way, Lect. 19
and in the latter end of that Chapter in a way of mercy. I speak of it there,
therefore I shall not need say much now, only this, God makes use of the word
here, to put her in mind of what she deserved; as if he should say, though
thou be a Jezreel, and deservest to be scattered, yet I will be merciful to
thee out of free grace, I will sow thee, there shall come a blessing upon thee,
and though thou be scattered up and down in the earth, yet in all places
thou shall be as seed from whence my Church shall spring.

Hence the notes are: Obser,
First, that Gods people are the seed of the earth: But of that before in the
latter end of the first Chapter, only I will add a note of Ribera about it:
The seed, says he, lies under the clods, and at length fructifies; so should
the Saints be content to lie under the clods, and though they may seem in
regard of their afflicted condition to be dead, to be rotten, yet they shall be
glorious and fructify afterward. Before the time of the Churches glory, times
of great calamity and distress come, which this rotting of the seed before the
fructifying sets out unto us.

Secondly, Obser.
every godly man should so live, as either in life or death he should be as a
seed from whence many may spring; he should be a means that many should be
begotten to God. It is reported of Cicilia, in the history of the Church, a
poor Virgin, that by her gracious behavior in her mattyrdome, she was the
means of converting four hundred to Christ: As in the Indies, one corn brings
forth diverse hundreds, so we should labor to convert as many as we can, that
some that live after may continue to bear up the name of Christ, and the
profession of his truth. Especially be careful of your children, leave them as
seed to hold up the name of God in thy family when thou art dead and gone.

And further, Obser.
I will sow her to my self. The Saints are sown unto Christ they are seed for
Christ, therefore all their fruit must be given up unto Christ, Christ must
have all the fruit we bear: who should have the fruit but he that sows it?
Therefore Cant. 7. 13. All manner of pleasant fruits new and old which I have
laid up for thee O my beloved. Are we able to bear any fruit? Let us lay it up
all for Jesus Christ, for it is he that sows us unto himself, we must not
sow to our selves, not to the flesh, for then we shall reap corruption, but
all for Christ.

And I will show mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy.

Diverse things about Gods showing mercy after rejection were spoken of in the
first Chap. Only these notes for the present.

There are none so rejected, Obser.
as that they can conclude that they shall never have mercy (those that have
committed the sin against the holy Ghost excepted) though Israel had not
obtained mercy, though they were cast out, yea cast out to the beasts to be
devoured, yea says God, I will show mercy upon her.

2. Obser.
Children of wicked parents may at length obtain mercy from God. Though Israel
be cast off, yet her children shall have mercy. A comfort to us in regard of
the Idolatry of our fore fathers, yea a comfort in the regard of the children
that are to come. Our fore fathers have broken the Covenant, why may not we
obtain mercy? But suppose we should be the generation of Gods wrath, and not
obtain mercy, yet we may have hope that the posterity following shall have
mercy. Thirdly, Mercy after it is thought to be past; Obs.
if then it come, Oh it is sweet mercy indeed! when she seemed to be utterly
rejected, then to have mercy showed, this is sweet.

Fourthly, Obser.
Mercy is the cause of all the good the Saints have. One Scripture for it,
Psalm. 57. 3. Send from heaven says David. David was in the Cave, in a poor
condition, hunted for his life, persecuted by Saul; I see little hope from
earth, says he, therefore O Lord send from heaven; What, shall God send Angels
from heaven to deliver thee David? No, but mark what follows, God shall send
forth his mercy and his truth; as if he should say, Lord though I have no help
in earth, though I see no Angels from heaven to help me, yet let me have thy
mercy and truth, and that is enough. This satisfies a gracous heart, if he may
have Gods mercy and his truth, that is Gods mercy revealed in a promise. Obser.
Lastly, God has a special day of mercy for his people, for his Churches; I
will have mercy upon her that has not obtained mercy. Let us cry to God for
the hastening of this day, let us open the miseries of our own Kingdom, and of
Ireland; Oh when shall this day come that thou, wilt show mercy to thy own
people which thou have told us of! Oh that that day may hasten! Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. And I will say to them which were not my people.

This is that we had in the first Chapter only with some differences, there it
is, In the place where it was said ye are not my people. And I showed you when
I opened that place, both out of the Romans, and out of Peter, how the Apostle
makes use, both of that in the first Chapter, and this here in the second,
only take a hint of the truths in it. Obser. (...).
First, God has a special interest in his people; they are his people, they
are called his peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14. The word has this emphasis in it,
God looks upon all other things as accidents in comparison, and his substance
is his people, they are his very portion, as Deuteronomy. 33. 19. and Exodus 19. 5.
they are his peculiar treasure above all people in the world; and Esaias 19. 25.
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. I have made all
people, but Israel is mine inheritance, This is the happiness of the Saints,
therefore they are not as other people are. Number. 23. 9. This people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the Nations, this is a great ground of
prayer, Lord leave us not, we are thy people, called by thy name, we have an
interest in thee.

Again, Obser.
This is an argument to walk so as God may not be dishonored by us, for we are
his people. If those in a man's family walk disorderly, it is a dishonor to
the Master of the family; it is no dishonor to him for a stranger, or one who
has little reference to him, to walk disorderly; It is not so much dishonor
to God for the wicked to walk disorderly, as for the Saints, in regard of
their neerenesse to God: And besides, their light is (as I told you) three
story high, and if they sin, they sin against a greater light then others do,
their sin is greater then the sin of the wicked in that regard.

Further, Obser.
I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people, I will own
them before all the world.

It is a great mercy for God to make it known to the world, that his people
are his people. The world will not believe it, they think they are a poor
contemptible people, but there shall come a day that I will make it known they
are mine; And amongst other things by which God will make all the world to know
that his people are his, this is one, in s^tting up the beauty of his
Ordinances amongst them, Ezekiel. 37. 27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them,
yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people, and the Heathen shall
know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in the
midst of them. Thus they shall know, says God, that they are my people, and
that I am their God, when I have set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for
ever. Were it that the Ordinances of God might be set up in their purity
amongst us in England, were Reformation perfected, and the Saints walked humbly
and peaceably as they should, the whole world will be convinced, that these are
indeed the people of the Lord, and that God is amongst them.

And they shall say, thou art my God.

God must begin withus, Obser.
we cannot begin and say, Lord, thou art my God, but God must begin with us
first, and say, You are my people. There are a great many who say, God is their
God, but God never said, they are his people, (...)
Joh. 1. 12. it is said of those who believed in Christ, that God gave them [
power] to be the Sons of God, the word signifies authority, that they might
with authority acknowledge themselves to be the sons of God, and call God
Father, they had the broad Seal for it. Will you call* God Father? where is
your (...), your authority? if God call you children, if he say you are my
people, you may give the Ecchoto Gods mercy and say, thou art our God. Obser.
Secondly, When God speaks mercy to us, we must answer according to it. Does
God say, you are my people? we must answer, Lord, thou art our God. This is a
great fault amongst Christians, God manifests himself to many a gracious heart
in abundance of love and mercy, and they give an answer to God in a way of
dispaiting and discouragement. Gods ways toward thee speak thus, and say, thou
art one of my people, but thy heart works as if God were none of thy God, Has
not God done much for thee? thou think it is all in hypocrifie that thou
do, whereas the truth is, it is the fruit of his love and kindness to thee. He
speaks aloud in what he has done for thee, that thou art one of his people,
and yet thy heart thinks that he is thy enemy, that he ha^^s thee, and will
cast thee off at last. The ways of God are full of mercy to thee, and he has
set his stamp upon thee, and by his ways of love he tells thee, that thou
belongest unto him. O unbeleeving soul, answer Lord thou art my God! and lay
aside these discouraging and sinking thoughts of thine; O that thou would go
away with such an answer in thy mouth! Do not answer Gods loving kindness,
and his gracious dealings toward thee with discouragement and sinking of
heart, this is dishonorable to him, and tedious to his Spirit. Obser.
Thirdly, God works an answerable disposition in the hearts of his people unto
him. This is thy duty, but God will work it in time if thou belongest to him.
As thus, does God choose us to be his people? then the hearts of the Saints
choose him to be their God; Does God say, you are my people? the Saints say,
Lord thou art our God; Does God say, I will dwell with them? they answer Lord,
thou art our habitation. Does God say, I delight in them? they say, Lord our
delight is in thee. Does God say, I will rest in them for ever? the Church
says, O my soul return unto thy rest. Here is a sweet answer, a rebound of
all Gods loving kindness. Obser.
Lastly, the Saints must profess God to be theirs. It is not enough to believe
with the heart, but thou must confess with the mouth; profess it outwardly:
of this before.

Further, Obser.
This is the highest happiness of the Saints, that God is their God, when they
can say this, they have enough. If we could say, this house is mine, this
street, this Lordship, this City, this Kingdom, this World is mine; What is
all this? A Christian comes at length, and says, this God that made all is
mine. As it is reported of the French Ambassador, and the Spanish meeting
together, says the Spanish Ambassador, my Master is King of Spain; my Master
(replied the French) is King of France; my Master said the Spaniard again is
King of Naples: and my Master said the French is King of France; my Master is
King of Portugal, and my Master is King of France; still he answered with that
my Master is King of France, as being enough to answer all the several
Kingdoms of the Spaniard. So one says, I have this house, this land, this
stock, this estate, this trade, yea but says a Christian, I have God, God is
mine; Surely having him thou have enough. And if God be thy God, he will be a
God to thee. 1 Chronicles. 17. 24. The Lord of hosts is God of Israel, even a God to
Israel. So it must be with thee, if thou be a Saint of God, be a Saint to
God; Are we a people of God, then we must be a people to God. Blessed are the
people that are in such a case, yea happy are the people whose God is the Lord.
Thus we had opened the gracious manifestation of God to his Church, in part
fulfilled spiritually, to spiritual Israel here, but more sensibly to be made
good at the great day of Jezreel, Quae omnia Iudei post Antichristum in fine
mundi prestolantur. Hieronym. in locum.
that is, when the Jews shall be called, then the Spouse of Christ in a visible
way shall be thus married unto him, and the Lord will be their God. Jerome
says upon the Text, All these things that are here promised to the Church, the
Jews expect it at the end of the world, after the time of Antichrist. And I
make no question though in a spiritual sense this Scripture is made good for
the present unto the Saints, yet in a more visible and sensible way, all this
Scripture will be made good to the people of the Jews, and the Gentiles then
joining with them even literally, the glory of the Church shall be visible and
apparent. More whereof in the next Chapter.

HOSEA, CHAP. 3.
The First Lecture.
CHAP. 3. VER. 1. 2. 3. Then said the Lord unto me, go yet, love a woman
(beloved of her friend, yet an adulteress) according to the love of the Lord
toward the children of Israel, who look to other gods and love flaggons of
wine.

So I bought her ^o me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer of
barley, and an half homer of barley.

And I said unto her, thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not play
the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee.


THe close of the former Chapter had much mercy in it, and this Chapter
contains the expression of much love also to Israel, but yet withal, God
tells them of that mean and low estate they are like to be in before that time
comes, for the fulfilling of all that good that God intends to them.

God purposes great mercy for them, his heart is much set upon them, but they
must for a long time bear their iniquity, they must be brought into a vile and
desolate condition in their captivity, even until a second appearing of
Christ. But in all this time the heart of God would be toward them, his
intentions would be strong for good to that people above all the people upon
the face of the earth: though they might seem to be utterly rejected of the
Lord, and that for many years, yet he would look toward them as a people that
he intended yet to marry unto himself, and in time mercy should break forth
gloriously upon them, and his name should be magnified in their returning unto
him, so as their hearts should melt toward his goodness, they should not abuse
it any more as formerly they had done, but they should return and seek the
Lord their God and David their King, and fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter days. This is the scope of the Chapter. In which you have three
things.

1. Gods love continued unto an adulteress, Israel.

2. The low and mean condition of this adulteress for a long time.

3. The return of God in infinite mercy toward them at the latter day,
together with their return unto him.

And the Lord said unto me, go yet, love a woman (beloved of her friend, yet
an adulter esse.)

We have here a new injunction to the Prophet, and that somewhat harder then
his former. In the first Chapter God commanded him to go and take awife of
whoredoms, but here God commanded him to love an adulteress, which is
somewhat more then to take her unto himself,

What that was of taking a wife of whoredoms has been opened in the former
Chapter, Lect. 1.
and may spare some labor in this. It is here a vision as it was there; As if
God should say unto Hosea, Hosea it is just with me as it would be with thee,
if thou should go and have a wife an Adulteress, notwithstanding all the
love she has found, yet still an Adulteress, and thine heart should be upon
her, so as thou could not take thy heart from her, but thou must needs love
this Adulteress still. This people whom I have loved, for whom I have done so
much good, yet they have gone a whoring from me, they are an Adulteress, yet
for all that my heart cannot be taken off from them, but is still toward them,
yet I love them.

This is through the strength of the Covenant that Gods love is so permanent.
Others who are not in covenant with him, God casts out for lesser sins for any
sins; but as for his people who are in Covenant with him, no not their
adulteries, their idolatries takes not the heart of God wholly from them.
Surely then, if thou can appeal to God. O Lord, thou know all things,
know that there is nothing of thy mind revealed to me but my heart is ready
to do it, and if I fail in any thing thou know it is the greatest burden of
my soul; O that I knew more of thy mind! and that I had power to do more!
surely God will love thee, you hear he loves his people though an adulteress,
as before, so now take this lesson, thy sins cannot over come Gods goodness,
let Gods goodness overcome thy sinfulness.

An adulteress beloved of her friend.

This is (as some carry it, Calvin, Vatablus, and many others) beloved of her
husband, as if God should say, had they any such excuse for their departings
from me, that I have been a bitter husband to them, that I have used them
hardly, and rigidly, then indeed they might have some plea; but I have loved
them dearly, I have done much for them, they were beloved of me, and I have
carried my self to them in the most friendly way that possibly could be, yet
they are gone a whoring from me. The wife that follows other lovers, thinks if
she have but this to say, her husband is hard to her, he cares not for her, he
loves her not, it excuses in part her adulteries; and so the husband, a company
keeper, an adulterer, if he can say, what will you have me to do, I never come
home but my wife is always b^awling and she loves other men, he thinks this is
plea enough for him. But Israel could not have this excuse for her self, for
she was an Adulteress, yet beloved of the Lord.

If we take the words thus, the notes briefly would be these.

First, Obs.
The husband should be a friend to his wife. There should be nothing but
friendly carriage between man and wife; Yea the love of the husband to the
wife should far surmount the love of any friend in the world, but a friend at
least to comfort her, to cherrish her in time of sorrows, to bear the burden
of affliction with her, and so the wife toward the husband.

Secondly, Obser.
A base heart will be base against all bonds of love; beloved of her friend,
yet an adultoresse; if you should ask, who is he or where is he that is so
base? Lay thy hand upon thine own heart and consider what the love of God has
been toward thee all the days of thy life, and how thou have carried thy
self toward him, what love thou have had from God that might break the heart
of a devil, yet when any temptation comes to draw thee from God, Obser.
thy base heart listens to it. Thirdly, It is a great aggravation of sin to
sin against much love. We ought to do our duties to those that we stand in
relation unto, though they do not their duty to us; if a wife has a froward
husband, a bitter, churlish rugged, wicked, ungodly husband, yet she is bound
to do her duty to him, she is bound to love him, to obey him, to be observant
of him in what may give him all lawful content. So if servants have froward,
Love must not be abused.
churlish, cruel Masters or Mastresses, yet they are bound to be obedient to
them. 1 Pet. 2. 18. Be subject to your masters not only to those that rae good
and gentle, but to the froward. It is no sufficient excuse for the wife to say,
My husband is froward and unquiet, and therefore what shall I do? Nor for the
servant to say, My Master or Mistress are unreasonable, they are cruel, what
can I do? You must do your duty to them, though they do not theirs to you,
But if you have a loving husband, tender over you, then love is required much
more. Love above all things should draw the heart; the knowledge that it is
duty may force obedience, but it is love that draws the heart most kindly. So
if a servant have a godly Master and Mistress, who respects and tenders his
good, if he should sin against them, this aggravateth the sin exceedingly.
To wrong love is a very great sin, Delicata res est amor, love is a most
delicate thing, and it must not be wronged, it is tender, a precious thing. A
man who is of an ingenuous spirit, had rather a great deal be wronged in his
estate, then in his love; he cannot bear the injury that is done unto his
love; when his love is abused, that goes to his very heart. So it goes to the
heart of God for his people to sin against his love; therefore it is said of
the Saints when they sin, that they grieve the Spirit of God; he never says
so of wicked men; they anger God, but the Saints grieve him, because they sin
so much against Gods love.

Charge this aggravation of your sin upon your hearts, and be humbled;
collect together all the expressions of Gods love to you, and let them lie
glowing at your hearts, and melt them.

But in that God bids him take an Adulteress beloved of her friend, and calls
not this friend Husband, I think those who go another way express the mind
of the Holy Ghost in this more fully, thus: This friend is not meant of one who
is fully married, but rather one in a way of marriage. Amongst the Jews it was
usual for all women to be under the protection of some men or other. Esaias 4.
1. Seven women came and took hold of one man, and said, Let us be named by
your name, we will eat our own bread, and wear our own clothes, only let us
be named by your name, let us be under your protection. Even whores were wont,
though they had many lovers, yet to have some one special man, under whose
protection and care they would be, who was to see them not to have wrong, and
to make provision for them, and such a one they were wont to call their friend;
And many times these friends would so provide for them, that if they would be
reclaymed, forsaking all their other lovers, they would give them good hopes of
marrying with them at length. Arias Montanus refers us to one Propertius, in
his first Book and second Elegy, to read about the charge and care of such a
friend. The Grecians had that custom likewise: they called him under whose
protection they put themselves, (...), the whore was called from it, (...). It
is said of Plato that he had a whore, one Archenassa, who was called Plato's
(...). Here the Lord would have the Prophet take an Adulteress beloved of her
friend, that is, one that was a common Adulteress, and yet under the
protection of some special friend, so as if he might come in place of that
friend, and gain the love and affection of this Adulteress to himself, and in
time getting her to be reclaimed, he might marry her unto himself. This is
according to the love of God to his people, that is, as if God should say, This
people is a going a whoring, but I will be content to take them unto my self,
I will be as their friend, and so love them as a friend to protect them, to
have care over them, until such a time that there may be some experience of
their being reclaimed, and then I will marry this Adulteress fully unto my
self, for God is not now fully married unto the Jews, neither will that
marryage be until that glorious time of their calling comes; but yet God is as
a friend to them to this day, that is, God takes this people yet under his
protection, though they seem to be in a rejected condition, and so, as he
gives hope, yea makes many promises that upon their return unto him he will
marry them unto himself; yea there shall be a more glorious marriage between
the Jews and the Lord Christ, then ever yet there was between him and any
people upon the face of the earth. This I think to be the very scope and
meaning of the words, Beloved of her friend.

Somewhat suitable is that we have Deuteronomy. 21. 12. 13. when one of the Jews took a
captive woman, he might not marry her presently to himself, but if he had a
love to her, she was to continue a certain time, and to be so and so purified,
and then he was to take her. The Jews are for the present as that captive
woman, they are in bondage, yet God has a love to them unto this day; but so,
as they must abide a while until God be married to them; they are beloved of
God, but yet with the love of a friend. The Seventy read these words, (...)
Beloved of her friend, One that loves evil things, upon the mistake of the
Hebrew word, for indead a friend and evil are the same letters, only differing
in the points; so there might easily be a mistake.

Who look to other gods.

Their eyes are upon other gods. Where the heart is, there the eyes is. Timor
figit oculum, so Amor: Fear fastens the eyes, and so does Love. The workings
of the soul appears as much in the eye, as in any member; the workings of
love, of trust and confidence appear much in the eye. They look to other
gods, that is, they have confidence in other gods. Looking up to a thing in
Scripture phrase, is to have some confidence in it. Psalm. 121. 1. I lift up
mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help: That is, I look for help,
I have confidence and expect help. But how here to the hills then? What does
David's help come from the hills? Some think this to be the place where
afterward the Temple was built, and was then the place of the Sanctuary; but
for that it is said that usually in Scripture is but in the singular number,
the hill of God; not the hills; therefore I find Calvin, Mollerus, and others,
think that David here speaks of confidence in the creature, because he
presently retracts him self in the second verse, My help is in Jehovah. As if
he should say, I lift up mine eyes unto the creature for help, this is the
frailty of my nature, and of the nature of man, to look for auxiliary Forces
from Jerusalem, (which was a hilly place) I look for Forces to come from
Jerusalem, but they do not come, well, I will not rest any longer upon them,
(...).
Jehovah is my help, so they carry it. But now I would rather (if it may be)
free the Prophet from vain confidence in the creature, and so the words being
rightly understood, may free him if you read them thus, do I lift up mine
eyes unto the hills? do I expect help from the creature? God forbid I should
do it, for my help is in God.

Further, sometimes the Hebrew [(...)] is used for [(...)] and so it would be
translated above the hills, other men look to the hills, I look above the hills.
But rather thus, I lift up mine eyes to the hills, that is, I look to God, why?
because the place where the Temple was to be built, it was not only upon one
hill, but upon hills, and so this expression has reference to those two hills
it was built upon; the hill of Moriah and the hill of Zion (which were rather
but two ridges of the same) as 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. Solomon began to build the house
of the Lord upon mount Moriah; and Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Zion: I look says David unto God, my Faith has reference to that
place that God has chosen for himself; Ezekiel. 23. 27.
that this is the meaning will appear if we compare this with Psalm. 87. 1. His
foundation is in the holy hills, not hill, but hills. The respect Idolaters had
to their Idols, being manifested by lifting up their eyes to them, therefore
God commanded them, that they must not so much as lift up their eyes to their
idols; And indeed we had need take heed in what we do in this, so much as to
lift up our eyes to look upon the inticements of the flesh; many will not
commit their former sins, but they love to be looking that way. I have read of
a Lady, a loving wife, who being at the marriage of Cyrus, she was asked how she
liked the Bridgeroom? how, says she? I know not, I saw no body but my Husband.
Love and respect draws the eye either to God or to the creature. According as
our hearts are, so our eyes will be.

And love flaggons of wine. (...)
The word comes from a word that signifies fundavit. The old Latin turns it
vivacia uvarum, the leaves, skins, and stones of the grape that remains
after pressing, that sink down into the bottom of the vessel. Noting thereby
how saplesse, and savourlesse, and unworthy Idolatrous worship is in comparison
of the true worship of God.

True worship of God is sweet, and savoury, lovely, and excellent, but man's
institutions, how saplesse are they! The spirits of such men as plead for and
delight in superstitious vanities, the devises of men, how saplesse and
unsavory do they quickly grow! though heretofore they have had some quickness
and liveliness in their ways, yet if once they delight themselves in the
inventions of men, in Gods worship, their spirits grow very unsavory to those
with whom they converse.

But take the traslation as it is in your books, flaggons of wine, called by
this name in the Hebrew, because that vessel, the flaggon is broad in the
bottom: That is, (as some carry it) thus, They are as drunkards that call for
one flaggon after another. Superstitious and idolatrous people, when they have
one way of superstition, they call for another; and when they have got that,
they will have another, and are still greedy of more, they are never satisfied,
as drunkards are greedy of their flaggons.

Or rather, to note the sensuality of the ways of their Idolatrous worship,
their flaggons of wine are joined to their gods. The Seventy translate the word
(...), Bellaria, fine Cates and junkets, delicate things made with wine and
grapes together by all the art they can devise for the pleasing the appetite.
Obser.
From thence the note is clear.

Spiritual adultery and carnal sensuality go together. They used flaggons of
wine in their idolatrous solemnities, that made them love their Idols so much
the rather. In the true worship of God there is abundance of sweetness to
satisfy the hearts of the Saints, they need not have sensual pleasures to make
up their delight, but in superstitious worship there is no such sweetness to
satisfy the spirits, therefore they are saine to call for flaggons of wine,
and other sensual things to make up a full delight to themselves.

Superstitious and idolatrous Rites bring with them pleasure to the flesh,
hence how are they loved and followed by people? they can hardly ever be taken
off from them. Idolatry and sensuality go together.
In their Idolatrous solemnities they were wont to have Feasts to pamper the
flesh. Judge. 9. 27. They went out into the field, and gathered their vineyards,
and trod the grapes, and were merry, and went into the house of their God, and
did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech. So Amos. 2. 8. They drink the wine
of the condemned in the house of their God. What is that? By oppression and
violence they would rend the estates of men from them, and when they had gotten
them, then they made merry, yea they would come into the house of their gods,
and drink bowls of wine that they had gotten from the estates of such men
whom they had wrongfully condemned, Let Idolaters have their lusts satisfied,
and they care not what God they serve. 2 Cor. 8. 10. If any see them sit at
meat in the Idols temple; at meat, they had their flesh satisfied in the
Idols temple.

Thus God complains of his people here. As if he had said, Let all bemoane my
condition, for though I have loved Israel dearly, she has gone a whoring from
me, and she loves flaggons of wine, because she has more pleasure to the
flesh in serving Idols, she will serve them.

What an abominable thing it is to forsake the blessed God merely for the love
of wine? How many are there in the world who forsake all that good that is in
God, in Christ, in heaven, in eternity, merely for flaggons of wine?

Calvin has a note from the word that carries somewhat more with it, flaggons
of grapes, so the words are in the Hebrew, not flagons of wine, and of grapes
rather then wine says he, because there were artificial ways used by them to
make their superstitious ways to be more pleasant to them; As when drunkards
have drunk even ad nauseam, that they begin to loath what they delighted in,
then they will use some artificial way or other of mixture of grapes or some
other thing with the wine to make it have a new taste, that they may have still
delight in drinking; So (says he) because their old superstitions have nothing
in them to satisfy the heart, therefore they are fain to invent new kinds of
artificial ways to please themselves withal, although (says he) they brag
of their antiquity, yet the truth is, they are fain to invent new things every
day, to give a new luster and pomp to their worship, they are always devising
some new ceremony or other, or else it would grow loathsome to themselves. This
we have seen in our own experience, the wantonness of men's hearts in
superstitious ways is very great, they invent new ways to uphold their old
moth-eaten vanities.

So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver.

The Prophet obeys God in this other hard command. God many times sends his
Prophets upon very hard businesses, yet they must be willing to serve the Lord
in the hardest work; and bought her to himself for fifteen pieces of silver.

The word that is here translated bought, (...)
signifies to digg, it is taken (as some think) from the piercing or boring
into the servants ear, which was to be a slave until the year of Jubilee, to
note the slavish condition of this people they should be in for a long time.

But sometime the word signifies not only boring, but any kind of getting by
buying or bargaining, taken from the manner of the Jews, it seems to be a hard
expression, Cognatum cum (...) Pagn.
how distant do those two seem to be, to dig and to buy? it signifies also to
cut, says Pagnine, (excidit) he has cut a sunder, because in their
bargainings they were wont to cut a beast in sunder, and so to go between the
two pieces; Contrabentes dextras invicem datas ut rem ratam ess^ significarent
percutiendo discinderent, sicut and in faederibus bestiae disse cabantur. Pagn.
or because in their bargains they joined their right hands together, and then
another came and put his hand between theirs, as a spade is put into the earth,
and so did as it were cut them asunder, and from thence, though the word seem
harsh, yet those who understand the manner of their bargainings know the
meaning of it.

I bought her to my self. This buying was in order to marrying, that she might
be under his care for a while, and then come to be his wife. It was the custom
of men in those days to buy their wives. Jacob served twice seven years for
Rachel, and so bought her. David bought his wife for a hundred foreskins of the
Philistims; and Christ purchased his Church to himself at a dear rate, even by
his own blood: But I bought her (says he) for fifteen Pieces of silver.

There is a necessity for the opening these words, not only that you may see
the scope of the holy Ghost here, but likewise may the better understand some
other Scriptures.

Fifteen pieces of silver; How much is that? It is fifteen shekels, for that is
a rule among the Hebrews, when a piece of silver is named, and not the sum;
then a shekel is always understood, and when a shekel is set down, and the
metal not expressed, the silver is understood, not gold or any other metal.
Now the common shekell was according to the account of some of the weight of
160. grains of barley. Josephus says it was about four Drachmas (and so I
find most carry it) about 18. or 20. pence of our money; though a great deal
of difference there be among Interpreters about the sum of that shekell; Jerome
upon the fourth of Ezekiel, makes it half an ounce, but there is much
difference you know about ounces.

This was to signify the vile and base condition that Israel had brought her
self into, for thirty shekels of silver was to be given for the price of a
maidservant, Exodus 21. 32. If an ox have pushed a manservant, or a
womanservant, he shall give to his Master thirty shekels. Thirty shekels must be
given for recompense of loss of a servant who was but a slave; yet the Prophet
must buy this adulteress for half as much, fifteen shekels. Israel, all the
tenn Tribes, yea the whole people of the Jews are signified by this adulteress
beloved of her friend: So that now the people of Israel, who heretofore the
dear ly beloved of Gods soul, his only people upon the face of the earth, the
peculiar treasure of God, his portion, his inheritance, had now by their sin
brought themselves into a meaner condition then any poor bondwoman in Israel,
that they were worth but half as much now as a poor woman-slave. This thirty
pieces of silver was the goodly price Christ was valued at by the Jews, Zech.
11. 12. Mat. 27. 9. This showed how Christ was humbled, that he must be sold
for no more then was the price of a slave. But the price of Israel was but 15.
pieces, half as much. Israel was proud in the day of her prosperity, but now
she has brought her self by her sin into a meaner condition then a slave.

And for an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley. What that homer of
barley was, and what the scope of the holy Ghost is in mentioning of it must be
enquired. First, an homer contained ten Ephaes. But by that (you will say) we
know no more then we did. An Ephah then is near upon as much as our bushel, so
that this homer is near upon ten of our bushels. Ruth 2. 17. it is said of
Ruth that when shegleaned in the field after the Reapers, she beat out that she
had gleaned, and it was an Ephah of barley. And by that you may know the
meaning of that text, Esaias 5. 10. The seed of an homer shall yield an Ephah;
why a homer was ten bushels, how then should the seed of near tenn bushels
yield but one bushel? It was a threatening of a famine, that though they did
sow much, they should reap but little, they should sow a matter of ten
bushels, and reap but one.

Or thus, some interpret an homer to be about the burden that an Ass was able
to bear, for (...) in the Hebrew signifies an Ass, (...) so the burden of
that creature was called an homer; but Ezekiel, 45. 11. the Text tells us
plainly, that an Ephah is the tenth part of an homer.

There is a great deal of difficulty to understand this, if we compare it with
another Scripture, Exodus 16. 16, where the Text says they were to gather of
the Manna every man according to his eating, an homer for every man; and ver.
36. an homer is the tenth part of an Ephah. This seems quite contrary, here it
is that an ephah is the tenth part of an homer, and there it is that an homer
is the tenth part of an ephah. But for the salving of this, those who are
skillful in the Hebrew tongue know that these words are written with different
letters, though in our English the pronounciation is the same, for that in
Exodus is written with [(...)] and the other [(...)] one thus Gnomer, the other
Chomer, so it should be read. Now this homer of Manna that God gave for every
man for one day, was almost the tenth part of a bushel, it was four or five
times as much as the Romans were wont to allow their men, their Dimensum which
they called a Chaenix, which was their allowance for their servants, was but
the fourth part of this, and scarce that; noting thereby, tha^ God is exceeding
liberal unto his people.

But why an homer of barley; Because it was a mean food, and in those times
rather the food of beasts then of men; God promised to feed his people with the
finest flower of wheat. Therefore Revel. 6. 5. A measure of ^heate for a
penny, and three measures of barley for a penny. But what does this tend to,
that there must be a homer of barley and half a homer of barley given for this
Adulteress that the Prophet was to take unto himself? The scope of all is, to
signify the mean condition, that the ten Tribes, and afterward all the Jews
should be in, till Christ came to marry them to himself. First they should be
in a contemptible condition, they should be valued but at half the price of a
slave. Secondly, they should be fed but meanly and basely, even as slaves, or
rather as beasts, this homer and half of barley should be for their sustenance,
in which they should be used very hardly for along time. And that you may see
how this has been fulfilled, (for it did not only refer to the time of their
Captivity before Christ, but to all the Captivity they have been in ever since
Christ's time to this day, and shall be in until their calling) the mean
condition they were in before, in the time of their first Captivity, you may
see Lament. 4. 5. Those that were clothed in scarlet, embraced the dunghill;
they either lay in filthy places that had dung in them, like beasts, or else
they were employed in carrying dung up and down. And to this day, Histories
tell us, that generally the Jews have a most stinking savor, and we know that
they are the vilest people in the esteem of others that are upon the face of
the earth. An Historian tells us of an Emperor traveling into Egypt, there
meeting with some Jews, he was so annoyed with the stink of them, that he cries
out, O Marco-mani, O Quadi, etc.

At length, says he, I have met with worse, with viler men then such and such,
reckoning up diverse of the basest people that were upon the face of the earth.
O Mar^emani, O Quadi, O Sarmatae, tandem alios vobis deteriores inveni. Ammian.
lib. 2.
And to this day the Turks will admit of no Jew to turn to the Mahumetan
Religion, unless he first turn Christian; they have much more honorable
esteem of the Christians, they think that Jesus Christ though he was not God,
yet he was a great Prophet; but for the Jews, they have such vile thoughts of
them, that they think it a dishonor to the Turkish Religion that any of them
should turn Turk, unless be first turned Christian. And we read of the
Romans, that when they conquered other Nations, they would permit them to call
themselves Romans, after they had conquered them, but they would never permit
the Jews to call themselves Romans, though the Jews would comply never so much
with them and be their servants, ( Augustine has it upon Psalm 58.) lest
there should be some blot stick to the glory of the Romans by that odious
people. Alios Romanos appellari permitterent, non Iudaeos, ne quid labis ad
haertscenit nomini ab odioso ac sordido genere. August. in Psalm. 58. ad illud
ne occidas. Suetonius in Domitian^. c. 12. Obser.


Thus we see what shame has God cast upon that nation even unto this day, that
they are counted as the very offscouring of all nations. Suetonius tells us
that in the exactions that the Romans require of people, they put upon the
Jews more then upon all people. This that we read of in histories, and that
which we find by experience of the base condition these people are in, is the
fulfilling this Scripture, that I am now opening unto you, she shall be bought
for fifteen pieces of silver, and fed with barley, she shall be in a very low,
base and mean condition until Christ shall come and marry her to himself.

Notes from hence are.

First, A people who have been high in outward glory, when they depart from
God, make themselves vile and contemptible, God casts contempt upon wicked men,
especially upon wicked men who corrupt his worship. Do we not see it at this
day? Mal. 2. 9. It is threatened that the Priests who departed from the law, and
corrupted their ways should be base and contemptible before the people. Has
not the Lord done thus at this day? even those that not long since gave
themselves the title of the triumphant Clergy and the triumphant Church, and
went up and down jetting as if they would outface heaven it self; They feared
all men with the High Commission Court. But what shame has God cast upon this
generation? the people loath them, and we hope in time the Lord will sweep
away the proud and haughty of them, as the reffuse of the earth. Yea our whole
nation has been a proud nation; Sin puts into a vile condition.
what vaunting has there been of what a glorious Church we had? never such a
one upon the earth, we sat as a Queen amongst the nations; we have been a
haughty people, and God may justly cast contempt upon us. The Jews were so
(the Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord) but God has now made them the
vilest nation upon the earth. And the truth is, God has begun to cast much
shame upon this nation. The time was when the Kingdom of England was a terror
to other people, of late they have been the scorn and contempt of other
nations.

When Ephraius spoke there was trembling; he exalted himself in Israel, but
sinning it Baal he died, he became as a dead, poor, vile, contemptible people.
Hos. 13. 1. The Lord loves to name the pride of men. How many have you known
who have been proud and lofty, and the Lord has cast shame and contempt in
their saces? even before those whom they looked upon heretofore with contempt,
they have now been made objects of contempt.

Secondly, Obs.
Though a people be under contempt, yet Gods heart may be toward them to do
them good at the latter end. There is the love of Gods election still to this
people, God remembers them, and intends good unto them for all this. Who
knows what contempt God may cast upon us? Perhaps he may let our proud
adversaries trample us under their feet, but we hope he will not, because he
sees their hearts so proud as they are. But if he should, we should not
despair, we must not conclude God has quite cast off England, though he
should bring all his people under contempt, so as to betrampled under the foot
of pride. And if there be any of you whom God has so humbled as he has made
you contemptible; do you humble your selves before God, but do not despair,
the Lord may yet have a love to you, though you are now under shame and
contempt, who knows but that this was the only way that God had to humble your
hearts? God puts his own people under contempt, and yet it is all out of
love unto them, and vvithan intent to do them good at last.

Thirdly, (which is the most especial note hence) After many promises of Gods
mercy and of a glorious condition, Obser.
which he intends his people, he may yet hold a very hard hand over them a
great while, God having promised so much mercy in the former Chapter, Israel
might quickly grow vvanton, and say it is no great matter, though we be vile
and wicked, yet God will marry us to himself, and we shall be a glorious
people, and what need we take care? Nay says God stay here, though my heart be
toward you, Those to whom God intends great mercy, may for a long time be in a
sad condition.
yet this generation shall suffer, and the next generation, and the next
generation after that shall suffer hard things, you shall be brought into the
most vile condition that ever any people was brought into, yet my promise shall
be fulfilled at the last. Here we see what care God takes that people should
not grow wanton with his mercy, and think, Oh we are in covenant with God, and
God has pardoned our sins, what need we care? take heed of growing want on,
thou may suffer fearful things in this world. Though God may save your
souls, yet you may be brought into as woeful a condition in your own
apprehensions as ever any creature was upon the earth. And for England, though
it is true, we have as many arguments of the love of God to (...) as ever any
nation had, but yet who knows what this generation may suffer that has so
sullied it self with superstitious vanities? We may be brought into
vvefullslavery, and then God may raise up unto himself another generation, upon
whom he will be stow the mercy intended.

Fourthly, Obser.
Those who will take their fill of delight to the flesh in a sensual use of the
creature, it is just with God they should be cut short, and be made to live
meanly and basely, to be made to feed with course fare, with barley. The Jews
had their delicates before, they fared deliciously, now they must be sed worse
then their servants, and ear that which was meat for beasts. How many has
God thus dealt withal, who not long since had their tables furnished with the
choysest sare, with variety of dishes, and now perhaps are glad of a harley
loaf for themselves and their children?

Again, Obser.
If God will not utterly destroy a people as he might, but reserve mercy for
them at last, though they have never such a mean subsistence for the present,
yet they have cause to bless God. Though this here be a threatening, yet there
is a promise in it. The people of Israel (if they knew all) had no cause to
murmur at Gods dealing, but to admire at his mercy, though they had but a
little barley to sustain them. And suppose God should bring us in England into
a low condition, so as we may be glad of a barley loaf (we know famine
commonly follows war) (it was wont to be a phrase; brown bread and the
gospel is good fare) and God may bring that upon us in another way then ever
yet we or our forefathers were acquainted with, but yet if the Lord do not
cast us off utterly from being his people, though he feed us with brown bread,
though we have never so mean a subsistence for the present, we shall have cause
to bless his name.

Lastly, Obser.
It is the way of God to humble those he intends good unto, to prepare them
for mercy, by cutting them short of these outward comforts. If the Lord has
dealt so with any of you, you have lived full-handed, perhaps wives have
brought good portions to their husbands, and now they are broke, and all is
lost, perhaps you had good friends in the Country, and many of them are
plundered in their estates, and now you are feign to fare meanly, and if you
have bread for your children you think it well; but consider this, Is not God
now humbling me, and thereby preparing my heart for himself? Oh blessed be God
for this my condition, this bread is sweeter to me then all the dishes I have
had in my life. When you sit in your houses with your wives and children, and
have nothing but barley bread to feed upon, have these thoughts, I hope God
does this in love and mercy he is making this my condition the best condition I
was ever in, the greatest blessing to me

Verse 3. And I said unto her, thou halt abide for me many days, thou shall
not play the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be
for thee.

You shall not only be in such a low condition as a slave, and worse then a
maid servant, and be sed with barley, but you shall abide thus, and abide thus
many days. Thus they have abode these sixteen hundred years since Christ's
time, besides their former captivity. The Lord would have a full experience of
Israel that their hearts were throroughly humbled, before he would take them to
mercy again. There was never any people dealt more falsely with God in their
humiliations then they had done before. How often when they were in misery did
they come with their seeming humiliation and cried for mercy, and God ^^^wed
them mercy, and as soon as they were delivered, they fell off again and went
after their Idols, and then being in misery again, they cried to God and he
delivered them, and then presently to their Idols again; Well, says God, I
will not deal so with you hereafter, I will not trust you so as I have done,
you have been in misery, and I have delivered you when you cried to me, and
then you have fallen to your sins again, but now you shall be humbled to
purpose, you sh^l be ^ow many years in this low and mean condition, and then
your hearts ^^ll be th^rowly broken, so that when you shall return to me
again, you shall never fall from me. God has dealt so with many of you, you
have been in affliction, God has delivered you, you have gone to your sins
again, you have been in affliction again, and he has delivered you, and you
have fell to your sins again, and thus you have dallyed with the great God: God
may bring a fore and long affliction upon you, that you shall be so thoroughly
humbled, that you shall never go back again to your sins as you have done.
This is the meaning, abide many days, When we would scour and purge a filthy
garment thoroughly, we do not only wash it, but we lay it a soaking a great
while, and a frosting many nights; the Jews have line a soaking and frostning
many hundred years, this is the hardness of man's heart, afflictions will not
work presently; though many wedges be put into, and many blows struck upon
knotty wood, it stirs not: some metals are long in melting, yea though the fire
be very hot.

Again, Obs.
Here we see it is Gods ordinary way when he promises mercy, to seem to go
quite contrary to a people, to seem as if he would quite destory them. I will
marry my self unto them in loving kindness and in mercies, but yet I will let
this people be above sixteen hundred years in this forlorn condition. And so
it has been in all Gods administrations since the beginning of the world.

When God comes to humble sinners, they must be content to be humbled Gods own
time, they must not out of a sudden furious humor say, Lord how long? I have
been thus long in a sad condition, I have prayed thus long. Is your sadness and
affliction eternal? Oh no, a year or two perhaps, but you have deserved
eternity of misery.

Thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not play the harlot, and thou
shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. That is, in all this
time you must have a care of your self that you do not seek after other lovers,
let me have experience that you will now worship the only true God, and I will
promise you to stay for you as you do abide for me.

For the phrase, Thou shall not be for another man. The Hebrew phrase to be to
or for another man is to marry, thou shall not marry another, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I
entered into a covenant with thee and thou becamest mine, fuisti (...), thou
wort to me, that is, thou were married to me, Levit. 21. 3. A virgi^ which has
no has and, quae non suit viro, a virgin that w^^n to another (...). A useful
note may be had from ^^nce, That husbands must be to their wives, and wives
must be to their husbands, that is, live to them; whatsoever thou have, any
knowledge, any parts, any grace, it must be to thy wife, for the benefit of thy
wife, and what the wife has must be to the husband.

You shall abide for me many days, and take heed in all this time you do not
depart from me and worship another God: Hence we may observe.

In the time of the sorest affliction and trouble we must then take heed we
forsake not God. Obser.
Though I use you hardly for a long time, yet you may not think to go and
shift for your selves any other way. In time of affliction we must take heed of
using shifting ways, we must not seek to help our selves by false comforts,
though trouble continue long. We have an excellent place for that, Psalm. 44.
11. Thou have scattered us amongst the Heathens; and ver. 12, Thou sellest thy
people for nanght; and ver. 13. Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors,
and a derision to them that are round about us; and ver. 17. And all this is
come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in
thy Covenant; and ver. 19. Thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons,
and covered us with the shadow of death, if we have stretched out our hands to
a strange God; as if he should say, God forbid such a thing as this is, though
we be in the place of dragons, though we be under reproach, under great
affliction; (you may find in that Psalm the most woeful afflicted estate of
Gods people described, as in any part of the Book of God,) yet we have not
lifted up our hands to another God. We must not say as King Jehoram, 2 King 6.
30. Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? He seemed to be humbled, and
put on sackcloth, but he would not be contented to wait for the Lord any
longer, but shift for himself. It is that which is in the spirits of men under
affliction to think, why should I wait for God any longer? I will now seek
to help my self in my own way, to shift for my self, The Lord forbid that
such thoughts should be in any of our hearts. Sedebis mihi, thou shall be
quiet, though thou do abide in this sad condition a long while. Esaias, 30. 7.
their strength is to sit still, and ver. 17. In rest shall ye be saved, in
quietness and confidence shall be your strength. Alas, thou art now afflicted,
where will thou mend thy self poor soul? will thou go to false gods, to thy
former sinful lusts? that is not the way to help thee, thou must abide until
Gods time come that he will show mercy to thee, The heart of man is strongly set
upon good, and cannot be content to stay Gods time, but if God fubdue thy heart
so far as that it is content to abide though never, so long for God, and will
not go out to help it self in any unlawful way, this is a good sign that
there is much love in the bottom. It is a sign of a strong affection in a
woman, when there fall out things that hinder the match between her lover and
her self. Well says she, though there be this and that in the way, though you
object never so many things, yet I will have him, I will never marry as long as
I live except I have him: This argues heat and power of affection. So here, I
will marry you unto my self, says God, but I will have you stay for me my
time, many things are to be done before that day, and then after you have
stayed, I will come to you in a glorious manner. As God deals with the Jews,
so often it is in marrying himself to a particular people.

Thou shall do it.

God does not only command them to do it, but it is a promise and a prophecy
that they shall do it. But you will say, how have the people of the ^ews abode
for God? Thus, they have never to this day chosen any other God, though they
have not been convinced of the Messiah, yet ever since the captivity they have
hated Idolatry, and that was the thing GOD specially meant in this, thou shall
not have any more Idols, thou shall choose no other God, no other husband,
though thou have been very wicked and sinful this way heretofore (the Jews
formerly chose all manner of gods, the gods of the Amorites, and Moabites, and
of all the Heathens about them) yet now thou shall choose no other gods but me;
thus far this is fulfilled, to this day the Jews since the captivity have never
chose any other God, but have acknowledged the Jehovah to be the only true God,
they cannot abide Images. There is a notable history for this in Eusebius, in
the 18. Chapter of his Antiquities. Caius Caligula sent one Petronius to set up
an Image in the Temple of Jerusalem; diverse of the Jews came to Petronius to
plead with him, and said, Sir, what is it that you do? we beseech you do not do
it, dep^ive us of our lives first, for say they, it is impossible so long as
our souls are in our bodies to abide it, we will all dye first; But says
Petronius, it is the command of the Emperor, and there is no contradicting it,
it must be done. They answered, seeing you will not transgress Caesar's
command, neither will we violate the command of our God, nor are we so
fainthearted, or have we such a vain desire of the continuance of our lives,
as to enjoy them upon such terms to lose the reward of eternal life, that is
proposed for the keeping Gods commands. This was their spirit then, and to this
day they will not endure Idols; one main thing that hinders the conversion of
the Jews is, they being scattered here and there among Papists, and seeing so
much Idolatry among them, they are thereby stumbled at Christian Religion, and
if God would once pull down Popery, certainly the Jews would quickly come in,
God is now about that. Therefore all of us should assist in what we can to take
down all monuments of Idolatry, to make the worship of God more pure, this will
be a means to bring about their conversion, and in this regard they have abode
for God all this while; this I conceive to be the meaning of the Text.

And I also will abide for thee. What is the meaning of that? First, in their
captivity, says God, though you shall be long in captivity, and in a low
condition, be content, do not take any other god to be married unto as your
husband; I will be content, I will stay, I will have no other people upon the
earth but you all the while you are in captivi^y.

But how does God abide for Israel now? God has chosen the Gentiles how the^
does he stay for them?

Yes certainly, God stays for Israel to this day, thus. First, all the
Gentiles that are called, they come into God, as being joined to the people of
the Jews; God honored the Jews so far, as that all the Gentiles that do
come in, are to be made the Israel of God.

But rather further thus, God abides for the people of the Jews to this day, in
this sense, God never has taken, nor never will take to himself any Nation
upon the earth to be a national Church, as the Jews were, and as it is
probable the Jews shall be at their calling again, though God takes the
Gentiles that are converted, and several Congregations to be Churches, but to
marry himself to a whole Nation, in that way as the Jews were, that is, if a
man be born of that Nation, it shall be sufficient to make him a member of the
Church, this God did never do since the Jews rejection, and never will do it
till the Jews be called again; though God takes Kingdoms, and so in some
figurative sense a Nation perhaps may be called a Church, but to speak properly
and strictly, to be a Church so as the Jews were, there is no such national
Church, nor never will be till the calling in of the Jews again; then God will
be married to that Nation in a more glorious manner then ever, and God abides
to this day for that glory which he intends for Jesus Christ, until they
come in. And this I take to be a great reason why God for the present suffers
his Churches to be persecuted so much as they are, herein God suffers himself
as well as they; the Church ever since Christ's time has been in a low and
persecuted condition, the wicked have prevailed; What is the reason? God
abides for this people of the Jews, and he is pleased himself to undergo
many sufferings, in the mean time do you abide for me, I will be content to
suffer much dishonor my self, many shall come in to Christ, but yet they shall
be a poor contemptible people, the wicked of the world shall prevail against
them, shall scorn them, shall contemn them, so that I shall not appear to the
world to be their Husband, until you be called again, I shall be as it were
without a wife; but when the time shall come that you shall return to me, then
I wi^ manifest my self indeed, you shall be a most glorious Church, and then
there shall be such a full marriage between us, that all the world shall
acknowledge it, then they shall all come and say, Come, behold the Bride, the
Lambs wife, This is the scope of this Scripture; from whence these Observations.

First, Obser.
Husbands should not require of their wives any thing but what they will
answerably do for them. God does so here, Abide for me, says he, and I will
abide for you, there shall be parpari, like for like. Many husbands will
require hard things from their wives, but will do little themselves; and on
the other side wives expect great things from their husbands, but do little
themselves. There must be a proportion between what the wife expects from the
husband, and what she does to or for her husband, and so mutually.

2. In our sad condition God suffers as well as we. This may help us in
our sufferings we should think, though we suffer much, God suffers as much
as we, Lect. 1.
why then should we think much? the people of the Jews if they had hearts might
see it now, God stays for his honor till they come in. So in all the
persecutions of the Church, does not Christ suffer, in that the great work of
Reformation does not go on? It is true, we are grieved, (...) Spirit of God is
grieved as well as we, and suffers as much as we, God ^oth as it were abide
for us, and stays for his glory. We desire (it is true) that God would come in
and manifest himself, then we shall be happy and ^ejoyce; but so long as God
stays our happiness, he stays his own glory.

What abundance of glory does God lose in those praises he should have, if the
Reformation were presently perfected? but God has other ends, God is content
to stay for his praises, let us be content to stay for what we desire to have,
it concerns God to hasten the work as much, yea far more then it concerns us
to desire it, we suffer something for want of it, but God suffers more.

3. That people, Obser.
or that soul that endures hardship a long time for God, and resolves to
reserve it self for him, so as if it cannot have comfort in God it will have
none elsewhere, may assure it self that God reserveth himself for it.
Certainly nothing shall take off the heart of God, but there will be a blessed
marriage between that soul, that people, and him. Is there ever a poor
creature here is in a sad condition, and God seems to deal hardly with it,
yet he finds in himself this frame of spirit, well though God seem to leave
me, and I am thus desolate, yet if I can have no comfort here, I will have none
elsewhere; I will be content to stay and wait, no creature shall have my heart.
It is true, I am not able to guide my self, but I am resolved the Devil shall
never guide me; I am not able to do the will of God, but I will never do the
will of the Devil; and if God should leave me never so long, nay leave me
eternally, I will never have any other husband, I will rather dye a widow, I will
never let out my self to any; if he do not come in and marry himself to me, I
will be without comfort as long as I live. Is thy heart in this frame? Peace be
unto thee, certainly God intends thoughts of mercy to thy soul, there will
certainly be a marriage between God and thy soul. And this frame of heart
where it is, oh how will it help against temptation! when a poor soul is in
distress, and it may be God seems to go off further and further, I have
prayed long and long, and yet God seems not to hear, afflictions, they
prevail; why do you pray any more? why do you come and hear any more? you were
as good leave off at first, God will never come, you were as good take your
pleasure for a while, you can but perish at the last: This temptation many
times comes very sorely upon poor distressed souls; But now when the heart can
answer, it is true, the Lord indeed seems to be gone, and I have cause to
fear lest he should reject me, but become of me what will, yet I will never have
any other husband, never any other comfort but God comfort, no other peace but
the peace of God, and I am resolved that if I (...) I will perish crying for it;
if thou be in this frame waiting for GOD, GOD is waiting for thee in way^^
of his mercy, and at (...) bowels of GODS mercy will yerne toward that, as the
bowels of Joseph yerned toward his brethren so that he could hold no longer.
You know Joseph for a long time used his brethren hardly, but his brethren yet
behaved themseves humbly and submissively toward him, and at length he could
not refrain; so it may be God uses thee some what hardly for a while, yet do
thou keep in an humble and submissive frame of spirit unto him, do that which
beseems a creature to do, whatsoever God does to thee, it is fit God should
exercise his absolute power over me, and that I should do my duty to him, do
this and be sure thou art a soul that God will marry himself unto in the end.

Fourthly, Obser.
So far as we are willing to be for God, God is willing to be for us. God
requires that you should seek him with your whole heart, Jer. 29. 13. Mark how
God answers, I will rejoice over them to do them good, Ier. 31. 21.
yea I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my
whole soul; Will you seek God with your whole heart? I will do you good says
God with my whole heart. God is as willing to do for you as you are to do for
him, if all the faculties of your souls work toward God, We may know what is
done in heaven by by the beatings of our own hearts.
all the attributes in God shall work for your good. If thy estate be wholly
given up for God, Gods riches shall be wholly for thee. Would thou know how
Gods heart works toward thee? do but lay thine hand upon thy own heart,
according to the beatings of thine heart toward God, so are the workings of
the heart of God toward thee; thou may determine it thus; thou can not go
up to heaven to know it, but go into thine own heart and there thou may
know. As a man may know by the working of an engine within, how the workings
are abroad. That is the reason that the Saints, when they have had their hearts
enlarged in prayer, they have come to be resolved what God will do for them or
for his Church; as it is said of Luther, when he was in prayer one time more
then ordinarily earnest with God, he comes down to his frinds and says, well
it shall go well with Germany all my days, look ye to it afterward: he knew
what was done in heaven, by what was done in his own heart. We may know in a
great measure what God means to do with his Churches according to the inward
beatings of our own hearts. Obser.
Further, See here the happy advantage of the Saints, beyond the men of the
world thus: Be you for me says God, and I will be for you. The men of the
world can say, I am for the world, and the world is for me, I am for my honor,
and my honor is for me, I am for my whore, and my whore is for me, this is all
their happiness, but now a Saint can say, I am for God, and God is for me. Oh
the goodness of God toward us, that he is willing to be for us as we are for
him! for him, alas what can we be for him? we are poor worms, vile creatures in
our selves, what can we do? he has no need of us, we are bound to do all that
we do. It is all one as if a king should come to a poor beggar, and say thus,
poor man thou have but little, yet do what you can for me, I will do what I can
for you; this were a mighty disproportion: Alas what can the beggar do for the
King? If you will but use your staff or what you have for me, I will use my
riches, and glory, and all for your good; says the King to the beggar. So
says God to a poor creature, Be you for me, and I will be for you; stand for
me, and I will stand for you; use any thing you have form, and I will use what
I have for you. Oh the blessed condition of the Saints! who would not be for
God? Do not now say, alas! I am a poor vile and unworthy creature, so were the
Jews, do not say I am gone a whoring from God, and dealt falsely with him, the
Jews did so, yet says God, whenever you will be for me, I will be for you,
It is now the great question amongst us, who are you for? I will put the
question to you all, who are you for? Are your hearts wholly given up to God,
or are you for your lusts for the creature? certainly the creature will deceive
you ere long, you will have no good from the creature that now you are so much
for; if you be not for God now, he will send you to the creature in the time
of your distress. There is a time coming that every one of us shall see the
need we have that God be for us; let us be for God now, that God may be for us
then, when we come to cry to him, and say, Oh Lord, let thy mercy and goodness
be for us, he will say, who were you for? you were for your lusts, now go to
your lusts, you would have none of me before, I will have none of you now. Pro.
1. 26. 27. You would have none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your
calamity and mock when your fear comes.

Mark, They would have none of Gods reproof, he does not say, they would
have none of my mercy, they would have none of my grace, therefore I will laugh
at their destruction; but they would have none of my reproof; why? the
reproves of God are the bitterest, the harshest things of all, yet because
they would have none of Gods reproves, he laughes at their destruction. What
shall become of them then, who will have none of the riches of Gods grace
offered to them in Christ,

The Second Lecture.
HOSEA 3. 4. 5. For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a
King, and without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and
without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim.

Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God.


HEre is much privation, six withouts, 1. without a King, 2. without a Prince,
3. without a sacrifice, 4. without an image, 5. without an Ephod. 6. without a
Teraphim, but the last verse makes all up, They shall return and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King. These withouts show the woeful confused estate
that Israel was to be in for many days, many years, both in regard of their
Civil, and of their Church state.

The Civil State, without a King, without a Prince. Their Church, in the four
that follow after. Though once they were the happiest people upon the face of
the earth both in regard of their Civil and Church estate, yet now they shall
be most miserable. This they had brought upon themselves, they had set up their
Idols in Dan and Bethel, Dan is the place of judgment, Bethel the house of
God, so the words signify; there was abundance of corruption both in places of
judgment, and in the house of God, and now there comes upon them abundance of
confusion both in their Civil and in their Church state. They received their
order for both from God himself, from heaven, and their Laws as well for Cvill
as for Church Government, which no other people yet ever did in the state
manner; but they leave Gods instituions, and so they are brought into all
confusion.

They shall be without a King.

How without a King? When they were in captivity, yet they were under a King,
the King of Babylon and the Assyrian, and now they are scattered under the
Government of Kings and Princes still where ever they are.

They have Kings over them, Answ.
but they have none of their own Nation to be their King, and that is the
judgment; Neither are they governed by their own (or rather) by Gods Laws, and
for them to be in slavery under Kings, was to them as ill (yea worse) then to
have no King at all.

It is a sad condition for a people to be so without a King, to protect them,
without a King to maintain their Laws, their Privileges and Liberties.

When men reject God from ruling over them, it is just with God to put them
under the rule of Tyrants, of Oppressors, of public enemies unto their state,
of destroyers. The blessing of government is very great, if it be right, and
therefore the Persians were wont after their Governor dyed to let all the
people for five days be without any governor at all, that seeing the
inconvenience and mischief of being without it, they might the more willingly
yield themselves under Government, and be obedient to it when they came under
it. It is a question among Polititions, whether Tyranny or Anarchy be the
better, Tyrannical Government, or no Government at all. Though Tyranny
(except it come to a great extremity) may be better then Anarchie, yet
certainly it is not better then to bring power to be regulated, though it be
with some trouble, That power that at first raises power, that designs such
persons and families to have the power, that limiteth that power, surely cannot
want power to regulate that power that it should not be to its own destruction.

But here it is not only to be without a King, (...)
but without a Prince too. The word that is here translated Prince, signifies
a Ruler, Judge, or Governor, and so I find it often used in Scripture. 1 Chronicles. 27. 31. All these were rulers of the substance, Princes, the same word
that is here used; and Nehem. 3. 9. The ruler of the half part of Jerusalem,
the Prince. So that by Prince here is meant Judges or any kind of Rulers, they
shall be without Prince, without any Judges or Rulers.

Though they had no Kings, Lect. 2.
yet if the government had been in the hand of eminent men, of Judges over
them, their condition had not been so sad. Time was (not long before) that
their happiness did not consist in being under the government of Kings, they
were in a happy condition before ever these were over them, and the first time
that ever they came under their government, it was upon their own choice: and
so as God professes they had rejected him, and God sent them their first King
in his wrath. Therefore their misery certainly did not depend wholly upon being
without a King.

If God restrain not Kings, they often desire to encroach upon the Liberties
that the Laws of the Land, the light of Nature, and God himself gives
Subjects. Plutarch tells us a story of Pyrrhus, who coming to Athens, the
Athenians to show their respect, and to give honor to King Pyrrhus, let him
come into their Castle, to sacrifice there, to Minerva, which was a place they
were not wont to let strangers into. When he came out of the Castle, he told
them that he was much engaged to them for that great favor; in requital of
which, Plutarch in the life of Pyrrhus.
he told them he would give them this good counsel, Take heed, says he, that
you never let King come more into this place; Immitating how easily they may be
persuaded to internch upon the liberties of those who come under their power.

And this should abide for many days. It did abide for 700. years and upward
before Christ's time in regard of the ten Tribes, for from the sixth of Hezekiab
to Christ it was so long, the ten Tribes never came under any Governor of
their own in all that time: And since Christ's time neither Judah nor Israel
have had either King or Prince of their own. Oh what a blindness is there upon
this people! how dreadful is that darkness they are now in! That
notwithstanding the Prophecy was so clear, that the scepter should not depart
from Judah until Shiloh came; and yet now they have been without Prince these
1600. years, and yet they will not believe that Shiloh is come. Thus when God
gives over to blindness and hardness, things that are never so clear will
not be believed.

But their confusion in their Church state is more grievous then the other,
They shall be without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an Ephod,
and without a Teraphim. Two of these four, express their being deprived of
Gods own Ordinances, and the other two their being deprived of their false
worship. They made a mixture in worship, they would have their sacrifice and
their Ephod, but together with them their image and their Teraphim. Obser.
This is man's perverseness to make mixtures in Gods worship, they will keep
something of that which is Gods, but they will bring in something of their own
too, and that spoils all. I have read of an Emperor of Rome, that in one
Temple he would have Christ and Orpheus worshipped both together. And those who
were sent into Samaria by the King of Babylon, of whom we read, 2 Kings 17.
33. They feared the Lord, and served their own gods: but verse 34. it is said,
they feared not God, that is, though they would acknowledge the true God, yet
they would mix the worship of Idols with the true God, and so God rejected all,
they did not fear (...) God at all; It is no fear of God except we fear him
only; it is no worship of God that is accepted, unless we worship him only.
It is true, the Heathens are content with mixture in their worship; you may
worship one God, and have the worship of another God mixed with it, because
there is not any one of them who challenges to himself to be the universal
good, but God being the universal good, he must be worshipped alone without
mixture.

There are two things wherein we must take heed of mingling; 2. Things in which
we must take heed of mixture.
The one is in Divine worship, the other is in that great point of
Justification. It is as much as our lives are worth to mingle in either of
these, we must keep to the Rule very close and strict in these two, rather then
in any thing.

These people had both, and God threatens they should be without both; seeing
they would not keep themselves fully to his institutions, they should have none
at all, they should have neither Gods institutions nor their own.

We are this day much like to Israel. In regard of our Civil state, much
confusion there is in that, though not altogether so much as was in theirs. And
in our Church state we are very like them; we have neither the right way of
worship, nor the false, in regard of the Government of the Church; The false is
cast away and professed against, yet we have not the true; Only here is the
mercy of God that we are inquiring after the true, and seeking the Lord, and
David our King. The Lord give us hearts to inquire to purpose.

Those who understand the Septuagint, shall find that they translate these
four here, Some coples. (...).
Sacrifice, Image, Ephod, and Teraphim, by words that only signify the true
worship, and therefore for Image they put (...) an Altar, and for the Teraphim
(...) Priesthood, and for the Ephod, (...) manifestation; a word used for the
Vrim and Thummim. But the Hebrew is other ways, S^crafice, Image, Ephod, and
Teraphim, as in your books.

First then to enquire after that which was right, the true worship, Sacrifice
and Ephod, what that was, and then the other, Image and Teraphim.

Sacrifice. They should have no sacrifice at all, for since their Temple was
destroyed they could never have any. That is the reason that they pray with
that mighty fervency of spirit that God would build the Temple again, (as I
remember I formerly showed you out of Buxtorfius.) Aedifica, aedifica,
aedifica; cito, cito, cito, Lord build, build, build thy Temple, in our days,
etc. Because they knew they could have no sacrifice so long as their Temple was
down; And this was a sad condition they were in; this is their lamentable
estate to this day, they have not the legal sacrifices, nor that which was
typed out by them. There were these three things in their sacrifices.

1. Their tendering up of themselves to God, the showing their respect to him in
that way he required, that was in their Burnt-Offering.

2. Seeking the expiation of sin, that was in their Sinne-Offering.

3. Seeking for mercy and thanksgiving, that was in their Peace Offering.

Now to have no sacrifice in either of these three kinds, that is, to have
nothing to tender up to the high and blessed God to show our respect to him; to
have no means to expiate our sins when we have offended him; to have no way to
seek to God for mercy when we need, nor to return praise, this must needs be
a sad thing. This the Jews have not for the present, we have Christ who is to
us all these, the tendering up of him. to God, is the tendering the greatest
respect to God that possibly can be, the tendering of him is the expiation for
our sins, it is the seeking of whatsoever mercy we would have, and it is our
Eucharisticall sacrifice too for all our mercies. The evil condition of those
who are out of Christ.
But those who are without Christ, are to this day without sacrifice, they have
nothing to tender up to God. If thou will tender up thy estate, thy body, or
thy liberty, or thy name, this is no sacrifice acceptable unto God, except thou
have Christ to tender up to him, and can tender up all in him and through
him, then indeed God accepts of these. When thou have sinned what sacrifice
will thou offer to God to explate thy sin? all thy prayers, thy tears are
nothing, except they come with this sacrifice, Jesus Christ; in him indeed a
contrite heart is a sacrifice very acceptable to God. But so long as thou art
without Christ, the judgment of the Jews is upon thee, thou art without a
sacrifice.

And without an Ephod.]

By this he means, first, that they should be without the Priesthood. They
should not have any Church Officers, And secondly, they should have no means
to know the mind of God. That is the scope, which appears thus.

First, That by the Ephod is meant the Priests, is clear by that expression 1 Samuel 22. 18. where it is said that Doeg slew four-score and five persons that
did we are a limen Ephod, that is, four-score and five Priests.

Secondly, Without the means of knowing Gods mind, for the Vrim and the
Thummim, was upon the pectorall, upon the breast plate thas was fastened upon
the Ephod; So that when they were without the Ephod, they must needs be without
their breast plate, for the breast plate was annexed to the Ephod, and could
not be used for the knowing the mind of God but only by applying it to the
Ephod, 1 Samuel 30. 7. David said to the Priest, Bring me hither the Ephod, and
David inquired at the Lord, saying, shall I pursue after this troop? It was by
the presence of the Ephod, that he did enquire what the mind of God was what
he should do in this business that he was now about, whether he should follow
the troop, yea or no. And the Text is very observable in the sixth verse, you
may see at what time it was that David was so careful to make use of the
Ephod, to know the mind of God what he should do, he was in an exceeding
distressed condition, for Ziglag his own City that he had the charge of was
burnt, and the men of the City were all in a fretting mood, and talked of
stoning him, because the Amalekites had come in his absence and taken away
their goods, their wives and children, and burnt the Town.

This is the condition of men in public places, if any thing fall out
unsuccesfully, the people are ready in rage to fall upon them; this makes men
in public places to be in a hard condition, very dangerous and troublesome.
We had need pray much for them, we are ready to envy those that are above us,
and employed in public services; but considering what danger they are in, and
how every thing that falls out amiss, otherwise then we desire, the blame is
presently laid upon them, their condition is not so happy as we imagine. This
was David's condition, nay the Text says, that being in this condition, he and
the men that were with him wept, so as they had no more power to weep their
hearts were so broken, yet in this sad and grievous condition, he encourages
himself in the Lord his God, God is sought in straits.
and he calls for the Ephod to enquire, and know the mind of God what he
should do in it. You shall observe that this is the first time we read that
David in his Wars and Battles called for the Ephod, when he went to Achish,
then he did not enquire, when he invaded the Geshurites, and Amalekites before,
he did not enquire, but now when he was brought into straits, when his heart
was broken, when he was in a weeping condition, now he calls for the Ephod:
When God brings men into straits, and humbles them, then they will enquire of
God to purpose. We are now about to enquire of God, to know his mind but we
are not humbled enough, our straits have not broken our hearts, and perhaps we
shall not so readily know Gods mind, God may yet humble us more, and then when
we come to enquire Gods mind, it may be to further purpose.

But to open this garment a little. (...)
The word Ephod is that Hebrew word, which signifies to close in, and to
compass about, to gird about, because of the fitting garment to the Priests,
and the girding of it about them. There were diverse sorts of these Ephods, one
peculiar to the high Priest, that you have Exodus 28. 6. Others that the
ordinary Priests had, that you have in the former places I named about the
fourscore and five Priests slain by Doeg; What the Ephod was.
A third was common for the ordinary Levites, thus Samuel, 1 Samuel 2. 18.
ministered before the Lord girded with a linen Ephod. And there was a fourth
that other people did we are in their holy actions, especially before Kings,
David danced before the Lord, girded with a linen Ephod, 2 Samuel 6. 14. And to
this day the Jews have a kind of linen garment, but not of the fashion of our
Ephod, but some little kind of resemblance to it, they wear it upon their
heads, and so downward. When Alexander came to Jerusalem, I addus the high
Priest came with all his Priestly garments to meet him, which caused him to
fall down, prostrating himself before him, out of reverence to him; Josephus
tells us in that story, that the people came with white garments, garments that
had some kind of resemblance to this Ephod: Josephus says that this Ephod was
a garment but of a cubite long, only covering the shoulders and the breast,
open above and on either side, and girt about the breasts; others make it a
longrobe, reaching down to the very feet, But there was a robe beside the
Ephod, the Ephod was over another robe so Christ appeared unto John, Rev. 1.
13. Clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle, like the Priests, for so they were wont to be arrayed; And
Revel. 15. 6. the Ministers of the Churches called by the name of Angels, are
described, clothed in white linen, having their breasts girded with golden
girdles; not girt about their loins, but about their breasts, near their
hearts. That which makes Ministers of the Gospel ready prepared for the work,
is the girdle of truth, and this must be about their hearts; if their own
plottings and self ends shall gird them, that is, put them on to a readiness to
do what may serve for those ends; this girdle is not the golden girdle, but
like that rotten girdle of Jeremiahs, Chap. 31. 7. that was profitable for
nothing.

This garment of the Ephod was a holy garment then, and others must take heed
of meddling with such garments, or of seeking to imitate to make the like
garments. We read of Gideon, Judges 8. when God had given him a great victory
over the Midianites, he would imitate this Ephod, of the spoil he had gotten of
the Midianites, he made a rich and glorious Ephod, but the Text observes that
thing proved to be the destruction of Gideons house, for the people went a
whoring after it; he made it with a good intention to testify his
thankfulness to God for his victory, not thinking that ever it should be
worshipped. It is a dangerous thing for governors to imitate Gods ordinances
in garments or the like, and to preserve them amongst people, though it be with
never so good an intention, their good intention will not excuse them; Gideons
presumption in making an Ephod, in imitation of the Ephod appointed by God
proved to be the destruction of his house, yet this was Gideon who a little
before had destroyed the altar of Baal, though he was so much against Idolatry
before, yet now he does that which furthereth Idolatry: so many Governors, if
they take not heed, they may pull down one kind of false worship, and set up
another.

The Jews have many mysteries about this garment, it would weary you to hear
them. I shall only observe that which is most useful for you, we must not
read the books of the old Testament, as if they concerned us not. First, upon
the shoulders of the Ephod there were set ranks of precious stones, upon them
were in graven the names of the twelve Tribes according to their generations:
What to be observed from the precious stones upon the Ephod. Obser.
And in the middle of the Ephod upon the breast plate, which was to be
four-sq^are, there were four rows of precious stones, upon those likewise were
engraven all the names of the Tribes of Israel, and he bore them upon his
heart. There is much to be observed in this.

First, Let the Tribes be what they will be in themselves, though never so
mean, yet upon the Ephod they were precious stones. The Priest wearing the
Ephod was a type of Christ; let those who are godly, be never so mean in
themselves, yet in Christ God looks upon them as precious stones.

Secondly, Obser.
These precious stones that were upon the shoulders of the Ephod are called a
memorial, Exodus 28. 12. that was to signify Christ, bearing the names of all
the Saints before his Father for a memorial, those 12, tribes presenting all
the Churches that should be unto the end of the world. When God remembers his
Church, it is through Christ; God never remembers his Church, but it is by
Christ carrying it before him, that is the comfort of the Saints; therefore he
can never remember them to revenge himself upon them, for he never thinks of
them but only as Christ presents them unto him.

And further, A memorial (say the Jews) not only because the Priests were to
bear the names of the twelve Tribes engraven in those stones for a memorial
before the Lord, but to signify that the Priests themselves were to remember
to pray for the Tribes.

And thirdly, A memorial to signify that both the Priests and all the people
were to remember their godly Ancestors and Predecessors, and to follow their
virtues, and not to be any dishonor unto them.

But the first is the chief, these precious stones with the names of the
tribes were first upon the shoulder, and then upon the heart: upon the
shoulder, this notes that Christ carries his Church upon his shoulder, he
bears the burden of his Church, all their weight, all their afflictions upon
his shoulder, the shoulder of Christ stands under the Churcher, certainly
therefore they shall never sink.

But may they not be so burdensome to Christ as that he may shake off his
burden? No, therefore he has them upon his breast plate too as well as upon
his shoulder, there was upon the breast plate in the midst of the Ephod the
names of the twelve Tribes, Christ carries the memorial of his Churches at his
heart as well as upon his shoulders, and that makes Christ put his shoulders to
the good of the Churches because they are so near his heart. An infinite
comfort it is in the spiritual meaning of this Ephod that belongs to all the
godly, Christ night and day has thee upon his shoulder, and upon his heart as
a precious stone before God the Father. This one thing further is observable
about it, you shall find if you read that place in Exodus, that the names of
the twelve Tribes were to be engraven upon these stones in order according to
their birth, now in Revel. 21. the twelve Apostles who in regard of their
Doctrine are made the twelve precious stones of the foundation of the new
Jerusalem, you shall read that they are all the very same precious stones by
name excepting four, and those four I find that Interpreters think to be the
same that the other were, only with different names, for precious stones either
in regard of the places where they are found, or in regard of their quality or
color carry diverse names, so that it is very probable that those precious
stones in Rev. were the same with these in Exo. but there we do not find that
they are set according unto any dignity of one Apostle before another, as they
were in the setting of the names of the Tribes, for the first precious stone
that was to be set of the foundation of the new Jerusalem, of the glorious
Church that should be, it is the stone of Benjamin who was the youngest; And if
there might be any mystery in it, we may think it signifies thus much, at least
we may make use of it by way of allusion, that the Lord will use of the young
ones of this generation, who shall make way for the new Jerusalem before any of
the other tribes; God will cull out them to the first stone of the foundation
of that glorious Church. In that we find there was not such order set of the
Apostles as was of the Tribes, we are taught that Christ would not have us look
upon the Apostles as one above another; therefore you shall find the Apostles
are never named in one and the same order; in one Evangelist they are set down
in one order, and in another, in another, as Mat. 10. Mar. 3. Luc. 9. so Act.
1. In all these they are named in a different order, noting thereby that there
is no superiority nor inferiority in the Ministers of the Gospel.

Upon the Ephod there was likewise the Vrim and Thummim. It is very hard to
tell you what this Vrim and Thummim was, it costs a great deal of time to find
out what men think it was, and if I should tell you the variety of the guesses
of men about this, it would be tiresome unto you and me. Austin in his 117.
question upon Exodus In venire quid sint deficile, what this Vrim and Thummim
was, it is hard to find, and Cajetan says, none ever yet explained what it
was, and they tell us that even the Rabbis themselves say, the Jews were very
ignorant of this. Faetentur Rabbini sum mam esse apud Hebraeos harum rerum
ignorantiam.
But most probable one of these two, especially the latter. Some think that
they were some stones set in the breastplate, which by their brightness or
darkness did give an answer to what they demanded of God, that is thus; when
the high Priest went to demand of God what was to be done in any great and
public affairs, he presented this breast plate with these stones before the
Lord, and if God would give an affirmative answer, the stones gave a more then
ordinary brightness and luster; but if he would give a negative answer, then
the stones were darker then they were before; but we are not certain of this,
we may rather conclude upon the other, viz. that the Vrim and Thummim, (though
we know not what matter they were made of, no more then we know what Manna was
made of) it was somewhat that God gave Moses to put into the breast plate, which
by him was appointed as an ordinance which was to be presented before the Lord
by the Priest when they would know the mind of God, and when this was presented
before the Lord, God did then usually give an answer to the Priest, either by
an audible voice, or by secret inspiration, yet not always tying himself to
give it thus; for we find in Scripture, sometimes God did not give an answer
when he was sought by Vrim and Thummim, as when Saul enquired of God by Vrim
and Thumim there was no answer from God; and it is like Josiah would not have
sent only to Huldah the prophetess if he could have had answer by Vrim and
Thumim; but when God pleased he would give an answer this way.

The word Vrim and Thummim signifies light and perfection, some would make it
to signify the knowledge and integrity of life that is to be in Ministers, but
I rather think the meaning is, that they were bright precious stones which were
of a great perfection, and fit to do that which God did appoint them for. The
Septuagint calls this (...), the Oracle. Hence 1 Pet. 4. 11 Let (...) speak
(...), as the Oracles of God.

Now this must be upon the breast plate of the Priest, which the Priest making
use of, thereby the people came to know the mind of God. This was to signify
that we must look for the mind of God by Christ. we must know Gods mind by
Christ.
It is Christ who is come from the Father to reveal his counsels to us; if we
look to have the mind of God any other way but through him, we are mistaken.
And further, this Vrim and Thummim, this breast plate of judgment, was to be
upon the heart of the high Priest, and that when he went in before the Lord, as
Exodus 28, 30. There are two notable moral observations to be observed from
thence.

First, Obs.
The answer that any Minister of God in the name of Christ should give his
people, should be such an answer as should lie at his very heart, he must
speak nothing but his very heart unto them; when he would answer any case of
conscience, or make known any thing of the mind of God, his answer must lie at
his heart.

Secondly, Obser.
It must be as in the presence of the Lord, it must be as before God, he must
consider in whose place he stands to answer as from God, from the great
Prophet of the Church.

It is a great judgment threatened to be without Vrim and Thummim, seeing it was
of so great use to them. And this should be for many days. Josephus says,
that they were without this two hundred years before he wrote his Antiquities,
that was an hundred and five years before Christ; but it appears that they had
no Vrim and Thummim long before that time, for at their return from captivity,
Ezra 2. 63. the Tirshatha, that is, the Ruler, said unto them, that they should
not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a Priest with Vrim and
Thummim, therefore they had not then a Priest with Urim and Thummim, they
expected to have one, but whether ever they had one after it is not know. This
was the reason of that complaint of Asaph, Psa. 74. 9. We see not our signs,
there is no more any Prophet, neither is there any among us that knows how
long; that is a grievous complaint. Now it is like that Psalm was made about
the very time of their return from captivity; for Ezra 2. 41. Asaph is named
among those that came to Jerusalem from the captivity, The singers, the
children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight. But let it be then or after, by
this Psalm we may find that it was a very lamentable complaint to be without
Urim and Thummim.

The result of all is, Obser.
that it is a grievous thing to the Saints, that in the time of their strait
they dono^ know Gods mind. At any time when God brings his people into straits,
yet if they can know the mind of their God, they are refreshed and encouraged;
but when they shall seek to know Gods mind, and the Lord resuseth to discover
it to them, this is a sad condition indeed.

I find one note more of Jeroms about their being without an Ephod. We may
observe, says he, the hardness of the hearts of the Jews, that they should be
so many hundred years without sacrifice and without Ephod, without the true
worship of God among them, and ways to know Gods mind, and yet they are not
guilty of any greater sin then the sin of Idolatry, except it be of the killing
of JESUS CHRIST, that they should not reason thus, Quae sit causa tam grandis
offensa ut tanto tempore relicti sunt? maxim cum idolae non colant praeter
interfectionem salvatoris, aliam non valent invenire. Hieron. in loc.
what sin is it that thus provokes God against us more then ever he was
provoked? Surely there is some greater sin then ever yet we have committed;
but says he, they can never find any other offense, beside the killing of
Christ, to be a greater offense then Idolatry, and yet they have a greater
judgment upon them then ever they had, though they are not guilty of that
sin as they were formerly; surely were they not extremely hardened, they would
be convinced that all this is because of our rejecting and crucifying Christ
the Son of God.

As they had the Ordinances of God, so they had ways of false worship of their
own, Images and Teraphim. I must show you what those were, and then how it is
a threatening that they should be without those.

Image, What Teraphim was.
That seems to refer to the two calves they had set up in Dan and Bethel,
which they so much gloryed and rejoiced in, they should be taken away.

Teraephim, that likewise should be taken away. Now if you ask what this
Teraphim was? in the general, Taraph is a divining image; Quem admodum per
Ephod Deo consecratum quid agendum esset consule^ illbus significabatur, ita
per Teraphim Idolorum praedictiones declarabantur. Procop. in Sam. 15. 23.
as the Ephod was Gods Ordinance to know the mind of God by, so the Teraphim
was a way of the Devil, an idolatrous way to know things that were to come. It
was an Image made after this fashion, so I find those that write of it tell
us, The Teraphim was the image of the head of a man wrung off his body, salted
and bespiced with precious spices, Mactabant hominem, cujus caput terquendo
prescin debant, quod postea ^ale and aromatibus condiebant, scribebantque super
laminam auream nome^^ spirit^^ immundi, qua sopposita capiti ejus, ponchant
illud in parict^ intendentibus coram eo candelas, and adorantes coram eo,
supponebant nomen spiritus immundi sub lingua ipsius, and ille alloquebatur
eos, Sic. R. Eliez.
and then upon this head there was a plate of gold with the name of that spirit
they would divine by, (or, as some) the name of the unclean spirit was to be
put un der the tongue of this head, and this being set upon a wall, there were
burning candles and incense offered to it, and that under the constellation of
some star, and so enquiring to know something that was to come, by it the
devil was used to answer, and to tell them of such things as were to come; it
was an oracle of the devil that told them what success they should have in
this or the other business; sometimes it hit right. See the superstition of
the Jews; they desired much to know the mind of God, now because they were
afraid they should not know all by the Ephod, which was the ordinance of God,
they would join with the Ephod, the Teraphim. From hence there is this
profitable note. It is a very great and fearful evil for men in searching to
know any thing of Gods mind, not to keep themselves to Gods ways of knowledge,
to Gods own Ordinances.

It concerns us much now at this day. We are about enquiring the mind of God,
that we may know it about matters concerning the Commonwealth, but more
especially about Religion, I suppose there is none of us but will acknowledge
that way that God has appointed for the revealing of his will in the
Scripture; that we must look into the Scripture, and seek to know Gods mind
there; that is good, but let us not join Teraphim with it; then do we join
Teraphim, when we rest not upon Scripture alone, but search after rules of man's
devising, and what will stand with our own carnal ends. The Lord may justly
meet with us in wrath, if we presume to join our Teraphim with his Ephod. Pray
that at this day where there is so much searching after Gods mind, that those
who are employed in it, may keep themselves to the Ephod, to the Scriptures,
to that which is Gods Ordinance for the revealing his mind, that they may not
join the Teraphim, their own fancies and inventions of men with the
Scriptures; so long as we keep to that rule, we may hope to do well enough;
but if the Teraphim be joined with the Ephod, if any thing be joined with the
Scriptures, though it may seem to be never so rational, we have cause to
fear God will leave us.

We find this word Teraphim used sometime in Scripture for the image of any
man: as 1 Samuel 19. 13. when Michael took an image, and laid it in the bed
instead of David, the word in the Hebrew is Teraphim: so when Rachel stole away
her fathers images, the word is, she stole away her fathers Teraphim, and some
think they were her fathers Divining Images, and that she did rather steal
those then any others, because she would not have her father Divine which way
they were gone. Zachar. 10. 2. it is said the Idols have spoken vanity; the
word is the Teraphim. By which we may see they were wont to ask of their Idols
about their successes. And sometime we find in Scripture that Idolatry is
called by this name, as 1. Sam. 15. 23. stubbornness is as Idolatry, the word
is, is as Teraphim.

But here comes in the question, How the taking away the Image and the Teraphim
is a threatening.
God threatens to take away the Sacrifice and the Ephod, that plainly is a
threatening, but how is this a part of the threatening to take away the Image and
the Teraphim? You may understand it as a threatening by this similitude; It is
as if God would threaten to bring Israel into such a desolate condition as a
strumpet is brought into, not only when all her friends leave her which were
her kindred, her true friends, but when all her lovers leave her too, even
those who were filthy with her, those who pretended the most love to her, in
whom she took abundance of comfort, and from whom she expected protection; yet
now she is brought into such a condition, as she sits desolate, for lorne
and helpless: So shall ye be, says God, your Sacrifice and your Ephod, yea
and Teraphim shall leave you.

Or rather thus, Howsoever it is a mercy for God to take away false worship
from a people, Images and Teraphim, yet in this regard it comes in a way of
threatening, because it would cross and vex them to be deprived of these
Images and Teraphim, it would be a Judgment in their apprehension: As for
instance, what a deal of stir have we with people, when they conceive that any
false worship shall be taken away from them, they think they are undone in it;
when the inventions of men in Gods worship are but questioned, what a do is
there! men think their gods are taken away; as Judges 18. when the children of
Dan came to the house of Micah, and took away his Ephod and his Teraphim, he
cried out after them, Ye have taken away the gods that I have made, and what
have I more? what worse thing could you have done more? I had rather you should
have taken away all I had, and yet you say unto me, What aileth thee? Is it not
so at this day? What is it that now breeds such disturbance in England at
this time, but that people think their Teraphim shall be taken from them?
whereas they have heretofore worshipped God in a false way, after the
inventions of men, and now God is pleased to discover light, and thereis an
enquiring after the government of the Church in the right way, and the true
manner of worshipping God, they are even mad upon this, and would rather lose
their lives and their estates, then their Teraphim should be taken away; let
that be taken away, and how shall they be able to pray? what, will you take
away their Religion? How violently men's hearts are set upon superstitious ways.
This is the language of men in many ignorant places in this Kingdom, yea, the
very language of many even amongst us here, they are verily persuaded that the
Parliament are intended to take away all Religion in the Kingdom, and such
principles the adversaries go about to infuse into men, that the Parliament are
a company of Brownists, merely because they go about to enquire after the true
way of worshipping God, and would have the Land purged of all superstitious
vanities; Thus people cry out for their Teraphim, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. You may read the like in the history of the life of king Edward the
sixth, when he had but banished the Mass, there was an Army rose in
Devonshire, and they sent several Articles unto the King about their
grievances, as causes of their rising;

First, they said that their children were denied to be baptized, as now they
cry out that none but a company of Anabaptists do all this; the Popish Priests
did then infuse into the people that were in those remote Countries, that they
were to have no more children baptized, thinking this would exasperate the
people then against King and Parliament: And then they complained that their
Service was taken from them (meaning the Mass) King Edward was fain to write
to them, to tell them that they were exceedingly abused, that they should still
enjoy what was according to the word of God, that their children should be
baptized; and for the Mass, says he, the Common Prayer Book is that Mass the
same that it was before, only whereas it was in Latin before, now it is turned
into English, and so he quieted the people of that Country. Thus it comes to
be a threatening, that God will take away their Image and Teraphim, because the
hearts of people are so vexed when their superstitious ways are taken away. Now
upon this confusion, when they are without King, Prince, Sacrifice, Ephod,
Image and Teraphim, when all is come to this confusion, then comes the time
that they shall return and seek tho Lord their God, and David their King.

When Gods time is come to raise the most glorious Church that ever was in the
world, Obser.
a little before that there is like to be the greatest confusion that ever was
in the world: Lactantius (I have made use of before in speaking of the first
Chap. Great shall be the day of Jezreel) tells us, that just before the glorious
Church (he speaks of it at large, in lib. 7. c. 15. 24. and 28.) all right
shall be confounded, Laws shall perish, men shall possess all things by force,
good men shall be scorned and contemned: and though these times, says he,
wherein we live be naught, so that one would think that wickedness were grown
up to the height, yet in comparison of those evil days that shall be a little
before this glorious time, these days may be called the golden age. God will
bring all into a Chaos first, as he did in the first Creation, and then bring a
glorious building out of that Chaos. We know the raising of that glorious
Church that is so much prophesied of, is called a creation, a creating a new
heaven and a new earth; and it is probable enough, that as the heavens and the
earth were first made out of a Chaos, so those new heavens and new earth that
God is about to make, will be raised out of a Chaos, out of that which seems
to us to be but confusion. What do people cry out of at this day but of
confusion? all things they say are brought into confusion: It is true,
confusion is an evil thing, and we are to grieve for it, and to seek to
prevent it, yet let us not be too much troubled, for you see when the greatest
confusion comes upon the people of the Jews, then follows the greatest mercy,
then they shall return and seek the Lord their God, never return before that
time. Indeed till men be taken off from all, they will not return to God, if
they have any thing to go unto, they will never return to God. When Saul had
but a witch to go to, he would rather go to her, then seek the face of God in
way of repentance. Let not this be our way, because God seems to leave us for
the present, and lets us be in a confusion, and we know not what to do, let
not our hearts fiet and vex, let us not go to unlawful means; For mark, it was
just a little before Sanl was to be destroyed that he was grown to that height
of evil. There was a time that Saul did enquire after Gods mind, and God
refused to answer him, but yet he would not take such an unlawful course
then, but he searched to see whatsin was amongst the people that caused God to
refuse to give him an answer, so you have it in the case of Jonathan, 1 Samuel
14. 33. when he took the honey, he enquired of God, and God answered not, and
Saul said, draw near and see wherein this sin has been this day. But
afterward he grew to a greate^ height of evil, when he was in a strait, and
God answered him not, presently he goes to the witch, but it was when he was
near destruction.

The note from thence is, Obser.
Wicked men near destruction (as Saul was) finding things in a confusion, and
God not showing them what is to be done, presently are in a rage against God,
then they frer, and seek after unlawful means to help them. The Lord forbid
that this should b^ our condition. Let not us say, things are now in such a
confusion that we know not how to find out the mind of God, we consult with
Ministers and they know not what to say, they have cast out such a government,
and they know not what to bring in, and therefore it were better we were as
before. If this should be our teasoning, it is a sign we are like Saul nigh to
destruction. Let us be content to wait, they shall be many days without a
King, etc. and then they shall return; this shall be the fruit of being without
a King, and Prince* and Ephod, and Sacrifice, not vexing and raging, but
returning to God and repenting. It things be worse, and we be brought into
greater straits then ever we thought of, let us not murmur, but let us repent.
Every one is complaining, but who is repenting? If there were as much repenting
as there is murmuring, then we should soon know the mind of God.

Then they shall return.

Here is the use of sanctified affliction, it is to cause returning to God.
Jerome expresses the life of an impenitent sinner by a line stretched out,
Obser.
he goes says he from the center in a right line, and so goes in infinitum
from it, but a penitent sinner is like a line bent, and turning back to the
center, though by sin he goes from it, yet by repentance he turns to it again,
they are gone from me a great way says God, but I will give them a turn, they
shall bend back again and return to me. They shall return.

Repentance is set out by this word, Obser.
to note the folly of sin. In sin thou go out of the way, and the truth is
though you think you choose a good way for your self, yet you must either come
back again or perish. It is just like a man traveling in a rode, and he sees a
dirty lane before him, which he is told is the way, he must go there, but on
the other side of the hedge he sees a green and pleasant way, and he gets over
into that way, and so perhaps rides on a mile or two, at length he is compast
about with ditches and rivers so that he must either return back or else lie
there and starve, he returns back, with shame, and if any one that before told
him of the other way see him, he tells him now of his folly, I told you that
the other was the way, and that if you went over the hedge you must come back
again: So it is with sinners, there are ways of God that go directly to
heaven, but because those ways are rugged, and they meet with trouble and
persecution in them, and they see by-ways that lead to hell that are more
plain and smooth, they get over, they will transgress, (for that is the word
for sin) they are got over, now they are merry and sriske up and down for a
while in this fine way; but friend you must come back again, and if ever you
mean to be saved, you must go in the way that you have refused. Obser.
Further, they shall return and seek the Lord their God. Here is an
encouragement for old sinners. The Jews have been above 1600. years in this
woeful condition, for saking God, but in their latter days they shall return
and seek the Lord, and God shall be merciful to them. Have thou been forty,
fifty, sixty years going from God? there is hope for thy soul, Oh return,
return you old sinners,

But further, Obser.
(...) shall return to Jehovah, and seek him, Jer. 4. 1.

If thou will return O Israel, says the Lord, return unto me. They shall not
return from one false way of worship to another, but from the false way to the
true, they shall return to God. It is that we had now need look unto. We must
not think it enough to cast one false way of government out of the Church, and
turn to another, though not so ill yet not Gods, if out of any politic
pretense we reject the way of God it will prove a sore evil unto us, it is one
thing not to be able to bring in the way of Christ, and another to reject it,

They shall seek Jehovah, not their Idols, but God himself. The word signifies
conatu ac studio quaerere, to seek with endeavoring, with study rather then
merely to ask and enquire, they shall be studious in asking after God. They
shall seek the Lord, that is,

First, They shall seek his face and favor for the pardon of all their evil
ways, they shall come and acknowledge their false ways and their doings which
have not been good, and seek mercy for pardon.

Secondly, They shall seek the Lord, that is, they shall seek the true worship
of the Lord. Calvin in a Sermon upon that place Seek ye my face, interprets it
to be seeking the Ordinances of God, the true worship of God, so Psalm. 105. 4.
Seek the Lord and his strength, what is meant by the strength of God there? It
is the Arc, for that Psalm was made at the bringing in of the Arc into the
place that David had prepared, as you may see by comparing that Psalm with the
1 Chronicles, 16. the Ark of God is called the strength of God, Psalm. 78. 61. He
gave his strength into captivity. Surely if the true worship of God be the
strength of God, it is our strength too, a people are then strong when they
entertain the Ark of God, the true worship of God, and then indeed we seek
God aright when we seek to know the way of his worship.

Lastly, Obser.
They shall seek the Lord, that is, they shall seek to know his will in all
their ways, and to do it. It is not enough for them to be content to do just
that which shall be put upon them, but they shall seek to know what his mind
and his worship is. Some yield thus far to God, if any come to them and
convince them that this is to be done, then they will do it, they dare not then
but yield to it; but when the heart is in a true repenting frame, it is then in
a seeking frame, it is laborious and industrious to know the mind of God.
Whereas the heart of a sinner heretofore lay dead and dull, never stirred after
God, now it is in a stirting, in an inquiring, in a seeking way, this is a
sign of much good: though thou have not what thou seek for, yet be
comforted in this that thou art in a seeking way, Their hearts shall re^oyce
that seek the Lord. If thou be seeking God in his ways, though thou
complainest, I have been seeking a long time, but I know not the mind of God,
I cannot apprehend the love of God, the pardon of my sins, yea, but the hearts
of those shall rejoice that seek the Lord, if thou be in a seeking way thou
art in a saving way, there is cause thou should rejoice in this, that God
has brought thee into such a way.

They shall seek the Lord, and that not saintly but to purpose, auxiously,
Jer. 50. 4. 5. They (the children of Israel, and the children of Judah, when
they shall be both together) shall go weeping, and seek the Lord their God,
and they shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward. Many of you
come to ask questions, but your hearts are not right, your faces and the
strength of your spirits are not set to yield to the will of God when it is
revealed to you. And mark how it appears that their faces are thitherward,
Come (say they) let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten. This is to seek God, it is not merely to go to a
Minister and ask him a question, but it is to go with our faces, with the
strength of our spirits set to know the mind of God above any thing in the
world, and so to resolve to obey what shall be revealed to be Gods mind, as to
be willing to enter into a perpetual Covenant, to bind our selves to yield to
whatsoever God shall reveal. When you come to a Sermon, you must not come to
get a little notional knowledge, but come with your faces toward Christ and
his truth, before you come you should get alone (if you be a true seeker) and
enter into Covenant with God, that whatsoever God reveals to be his mind you
will yield to it and obey it, though you have heretofore gone against many
truths revealed to be the mind of God, but Lord no more now, here I am ready
and willing to enter into an everlasting covenant to be under the command of
every truth. Here is the right seeking of God. They shall seek the Lord their
God; [their God] this has two references, either to what is past, or to what
is to come. To what is past, their God, that is, the God who was once the God
of the Jews, the God of their forefathers, the God of Abraham. of Isaac, and of
Jacob. And secondly, their God, that is, that God that is yet ready and willing
to be reconciled to them, not withstanding all their sins. Thus they shall
seek the Lord their God. These two references afford two excellent Observations.

First, Obser.
This prevails much with the heart of an Apostate, when he can but think what
God was once unto him before he did Apostatize, and what he was unto his godly
parents and predecessors. There was a time that I enjoyed God sweetly, when I
went to prayer I had blessed communion with him, it is otherwise with me now, I
have apostatized. Let this consideration catch h^ld upon thy heart and turn it
this day; Oh turn, turn thou apostate soul. God who was once thy God in a
gracious manner is that God that thou have vilely forsaken, yea thy fathers God
also. Thou have a godly father, a godly grandfather, remember what a blessed
God he was unto them, and return.

Secondly, Obser.
Their God, that God that yet they may have hope to enjoy, notvvithstanding all
their departings from him. Hence the note is this, The apprehension o^ a
possibilty to obtain mercy from the Lord, is a strong means to draw the heart
to return to him; when they look upon God as a God in covenant with them yet,
and there is nothing to the contrary but he may be their God. Let this be an
argument to catch hold upon the spirits of all sinners who are departed from
God, thou have departed from God in a soul and vile manner, but Men and Angels
know nothing to the contrary but that he may be thy God for all this. Let me
speak to the vilest sinner that is in this place before the Lord this day,
thou have indeed most desperately and wickedly sinned against God, the Jews
have done so; Have thou crucified Christ? they have done so; have thou denied
the truth and followed false ways? they have done so; Notwithstanding all thy
wicked and evil ways, seeing thou art yet alive, I do this day yet once more
pronounce thee in the name of the great God, that there is nothing to the
contrary that either Angels or Men can possibly know, but that God may be thy
God, and that this day God may enter into covenant with thee, and thou with
him, this night he may come in and sup with thee, and thou with him, there may
be a blessed reconciliation between God and thee, return, return thou sinful
soul.

The Third Lecture.
HOSEA 3. 5. -- And David their King, I^daos in Christum nostrum credituros
celeberrimum est in sermonibus cordibusque fidelium. August. 1. Nihil ista
propheta manifestius quam David Regis nomine significatus intel^igitur
Christus. August. de civit. lib. 18. c. 28.
and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.


THat the Jews shall return and believe in Christ, is most ordinary and famous
both in the words and hearts of those that are faithful, says Augustine.

In this their return and seeking God, they shall seek David their King.

For the opening this, there are these five things to be inquired into.

1. Who this David was. 2. Why David is rather named then any other. 3. Why he
is mentioned in this place. 4. Why joined with seeking Jehovah, 5. Why this
Epithet is added to David here. David their King.
For the first, David clearly is meant JESUS CHRIST, Nothing is more manifest
then that Christ is meant by the name of David, says Augustine. The Scripture
is clear in this, it is usual in the Gospel to call Christ by the name of
David. Compare Esaias 55. 3. with Acts 13. 34. Esaias 55. I will give you the sure
mercies of David; what are those? Act. 13. that place in Isaiah is quoted, and
there the word is Sancta Davidis, the holy things of David; the holy Ghost
there going according to the Translation of the Septuagint, as it is usual in
the New Testament. And that Psalm 16. 9. 10. where David seems to speak in
his own person, Thou will not leave my soul in grave, Lect. 3.
nor suffer thy holy One to see corruption: this is interpreted of Christ, Act.
13. 36. 37. Act. 15. 16. In the Assembly the Church of Jerusalem, together with
messengers of the Church of Antioch, James makes a speech to the Assembly, and
tells them of a prophecy that God would raise the tabernacle of David, that is,
convert the Gentiles to the profession of Christ. But you will say how is this
quoted right, for that was James his intention in the Assembly (and it concerns
those who are of such a grave Assembly as that was, to speak what they speak
to purpose) But how does James here speak to the purpose? for the point he was
to speak to, was that the Gentiles were to be called, and he proves it by
that Scripture where it is said that God would raise the Tabernacle of David,
how does that prove that God would call the Gentiles? You may see if you look
into the prophecy whence this was quoted, that this text was right to the
purpose* The Prophecy is Amos 9. 11. 12. there it goes thus, after he had
said that he would raise the tabernacle of David, it follows, that they may
possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen which are called by my
Name: So that the Tabernacle of David indeed is the Tabernacle of Christ, and
it shall be raised to this end that he may possess the remnant of Edom, and
all the Gentiles that were to be called by the name of God. David is Christ
because he was his type, and Christ was the seed of David.

David rather named then any other, rather then Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob?
others were types of Christ as well as he and Christ was, their seed as well as
David's,

The reason is, because David typified Christ especially in his Kingly power
over his own people, Answ.
David was the first godly King that ever was over Gods own people;
Melchisedech was a King, King of Salem, but over the people of God David was
the first type of Christ.

seeking the Lord, that they shall seek David? Why was it not as full if the
holy Ghost had said, When Israel, these ten Tribes (for he speaks of them
especially) when they shall return they shall seek the Lord, and the Messiah,
but that they shall seek the Lord and David? The reason is, the expression is
brought to this end, to put these Tribes in mind of that great sin of
theirs, in their defection from the house of David, there was an intimation in
this expression of that defection they had from David, when they shall repent
this will lie near their hearts, they will mourn for this their sin, when
they choose Christ to be their King, they shall do it under the name of David;
As if they should say, we indeed have cast off the house of David sinfully, but
we now come and choose the Son of David to be our King. Thereby putting us in
mind of this note of instruction.

True penitents in mourning for their sin and returning to God, Obser.
will go to the root of their sin as much as they can, to their first
defection and mourn for that, and labor what lies in them to reform in that
very thing wherein the root and beginning of their sin lay.

The fourth is, why seeking the Messiah (under what name soever) is here joined
to seeking the Lord, the very marrow of all the Gospel is in these they shall
seek Jehovah, and David their King. It is added for this end, to show us, that
none can seek God rightly but through Christ, they must seek God in Christ;
This is eternal life to know thee and thy Son, to know God alone is not
eternal life, but to know God and his Son; so to seek God alone is not eternal
life, not will it ever bring to eternal life, except there be a seeking of God
in Christ, seeking Jehovah and David, putting them together. Grace from God the
Father, and from Jesus Christ, those must go together, no grace from God the
Father, but from him through Christ; Non solum periculosum, sed horrtbile est
de Deo extra Christum cogitare. Luther.
so no seeking of God the Father, Jehovah, but it must be with seeking of David
likewise: it is not only dangerous, but it is a horrible thing to think of God
without Christ; the very thought of God not through Christ is a most dreadful
thing to the heart of any who knows God. Indeed there are a company who have
bold presumptuous hearts, who will go into Gods presence though reeking in the
very guilt of their sin lately committed, and seek to God for mercy, and never
think of Christ the Mediator; they understand not the necessity of seeking God
in Christ, because indeed they know not with what a God it is they have to
deal; but that soul that knows what God is, Ego sape and lib^nter hoc inculco
ut extra Christum oculos and aures claudates, and dica^^ nullum vos scire Deum
nisi qui fuit in graemio Mariae and suxit ^bera ejus. Luther.
dares not think of God, much less come into his presence and seek him but
only through Christ. It was wont to be the way (as Plutarch in the life of
Themystocles reports) of some of the Heathens, the Molossians, when they would
seek the favor of the Prince, they took up the Kings Son in their arms, and
so went and kneeled before his Altar in his Chapel; so Themystocles did when
he sought the favor of King Admetus. It should be the way of Christians in
seeking the face of God the great King, to take up his Son in the arms of
Faith. A notable speech Luther has in Psalm. 130. Often and willingly, says
he, do I inculcate this, that you should shut your eyes and your ears, and
say you know no God out of Christ, none but he that was in the lap of Mary, and
sucked her breasts; he means none out of him. We must not, we should not dare
to look upon ^od but through Christ, and seek him together with David.

This is the Evangel^call way of seeking God; when we have sinned, if there be
any way of help, it must be by seeking this merciful God; thus far nature
goes, and most people go no further, yea most Christians, though they have the
name of Christ in their mouths, yet the work of their hearts is no further
then natural principles carry them on. But the seeking God in Christ, is the
true supernatural way, the Evangelicall way, that is the mystery of
godliness, to tender up a Mediator to God every time we come into his
presence. I fear that many of our prayers are lost for want of this. There is
much Fasting and Prayer thorough Gods mercy amongst us, and I would to God
there were no abating that way; but though we think, will God leave his
people when there is such a spirit of Prayer? If it be not a seeking of God in
his Son, know it is our own spirits rather then the Spirit of God. We may be
earnest in prayer, and cry mightily to God, yet if we take not up his Son in
the arms of faith, and tender him to the Father, thousands of prayers and
fasting days may be all lost for want of this. The truth is, we must not
depend so much upon our prayers, though we are to rejoice and to bless God
that there is so much prayer; but Gods ways toward us seem as if he would
take us off from means, and make us look up to free grace, not take us off from
the practice of any, but from relying upon any, only to rely upon free grace
in Christ. As this is the supernatural seeking God, so it is the most
powerful way of seeking him. It is not enough to seek God by virtue of a
promise, except we seek him by virtue of Christ, who is the foundation of all
the promises. We seek him because he is merciful, that is one way; yea we
seek him because he has promised mercy, this is a higher degree; but we must
go higher yet, we must look to his Son, in whom all the promises are Yea and
Amen; otherwise, though we seek him never so earnestly, though we challenge his
promises, and cry to him to remember his promises, yet if we do not act our
faith upon his Son, we may miss in all,

And herein we sanctify that great name of God in that which is the great work
of his, his masterpiece as we may say, or the great design he has to honor
himself in the world here, and everlastingly hereafter. Certainly, though God
has made the creature for his own glory, and expects we should honor him in
beholding him in the creature, yet the great design God has to honor himself
in and by, is in that glory of his that is manifested in his Son, to have the
children of men behold this his glory, and reflect it upon his own face; except
you give God his glory in this, he cares not much for what soever glory you can
give him otherwise.

You must not therefore expect when you seek God, that you must have good things
from him merely because he is merciful, you must not think that the mercy of
God serves to eike out our righteousness. Perhaps some will say, it is true,
we are poor sinful creatures, and what can we expect from God being fin full?
but we hope that God will pardon our sin, and so will accept of the poor
services that we perform; This is the way that most go, they do as it were
employ Gods mercy in such a work that God never intended it for, that is, they
would make the mercy of God to eike out their own righteousness, and so both
put together, they think they will serve to be a means of atonement: No, you
mistake Gods mercy; the work of Gods mercy is not this, but it is to show us
our unrighteousness, our misery, our unclearnesse, to show us Jesus Christ, to
draw our hearts to him, to empty us of our selves, that we may wholly rely
upon that righteousness that is by faith in him, and tender up that to the
Father for sanctification and atonement, that is the work of Gods mercy; when
it has this work, then it has the true genuine work indeed.

The fifth is, why here added King. True, we must seek the Lord and Christ,
but why Christ the King? The reason is, because Christ in the latter days
shall be fully honored in his Kingly power: they shall look upon him not only
as Prophet and Priest, but as King. Hitherto Christ has bin much honored in
his Prophetical and Priestly office, but not so much in his Kingly; but in the
latter days when God shall call home his people (the Jews) then Christ shall
be fully honored in his Kingly office. The Tabernacle of Christ was raised in
the Primitive times, according to that speech of St. James we had before, Acts
15. 16. God shall raise the tabernacle of David, he puts it as fulfilled then;
but there is a time when God shall not only raife the tabernacle of David, but
the throne of David; Christ the King shall appear in glory. Ezekiel. 37, 24, 25.
And David my servant shall be King over them. It was spoken upon the union that
there should be between Judah and Israel, then David my servant shall be King
over them. David was dead a great while before, there is a time that David must
again be King, that is, Christ, upon the union of all the Tribes together; And
again, David shall be Prince for ever, when they are brought again into their
own land, David shall be Prince over them for ever, says the Text: surely
this prophecy is yet to be fulfilled. And Luke 1. 32. The Lord shall give him
the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

I know we usually think that this is meant only of his spiritual reign, but
there is a mistake in it, certainly there is to be a fulfilling of this
prophecy in a reign that shall outwardly appear before the children of men,
which will appea more in comparing this with other Scriptures. Revel. 11. 15.
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ,
and so he shall reign for ever and ever. Why in a spiritual sense the
kingdoms of this world are always the kingdoms of the Lord and of Christ, but
there is spoken of some famous notable time when the kingdoms of this world
shall appear to be the Lord, and his Christ's, and then he shall reign for
ever and ever, after another manner then now he does. Revel. 3. 21. To him that
overcomes will I give to sit with me in my throne, as I also overcame, and am
set down with my Father in his throne. Mark this Text, as one of the most
notable of any we have.

That kingly rule that Christ has for the present is upon his Fathers throne;
he is not yet upon his own in comparison of what he shall be, the kingdom that
Christ has now is the joint reign of him with the Father, but there is a time
for Christ to have a Throne himself.

Now that Throne of Christ it may be you will think it is in heaven at the day
of judgment; but we find 1 Cor. 15. 24. that at that day he comes to refigne
the kingdom, the words do not seem to import as if he came to take it, but
that then he does give up the kingdom unto God the Father, therefore there is
a time for Christ himself to have a Throne, with whom the Saints shall reign.
Matthew. 21. 9. The children cried out Hosanna to the son of David, because
they looked upon the son of David as one who was to reign.

In these latter days CHRIST shall break the Kings of the earth who stand
against him, as indeed many, yea most of the Kings of the earth have ever stood
out to hinder this kingdom of his. There will be a mighty shaking of the
kingdoms of the earth when this shall be, Heb. 12. 26. Whose voice then shook
the earth, but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the
earth only but also the heaven; quoted out of Hag. 2. 6. 7. God in giving the
law shook the earth, but he will shake the earth and the heaven^, which some
Interpreters expounds thus, not only the meaner power of people, but the powers
of Kings and Emperors the highest powers in the world, whatsoever is lofty in
the world shall be shaken when Christ comes to take the kingdom to himself, the
Father will set him King upon his holy hill;

Though the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let us break their
bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us; he that sits in the
heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision, then shall he speak
to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, Yet have I set my
King upon my holy hill of Zion, yet have I done it, though the kings of the
earth and great ones of the world fret, vex, and rage, and gather power
together, though they blaspheme and say he shall not reign, the Lord sits
in heaven and laugheth at them, let them do what they can, and gather what
strength they can, and oppose to the uttermost they can, Yet will I set my King
upon my holy hill.

This is acceptable news, it is the joyful voice of the Gospel to tell you of
Christ's coming to reign in the world, Esaias, 52. 7. How beautiful upon the
mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings? What are those good
tidings? this tidings, that says unto Zion, Thy Godraigneth, This is the
triumph of the Church, Esaias 33. 22. The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our
lawgiver, the Lord is our King, for then shall the Churches be delivered from
the oppression of all Tyrants in the world. David and Christ paraleld in their
exercise of kingly power.
And this Kingdom of Christ's shall indeed be like David's kingdom, Christ shall
be David the King. I might show you the parallels in many things, but I will
only parallel the kingdom of Christ and of David in these two particulars.

First, David of all the Princes that ever were was one of the most gentle, he
was exceeding loving and sweet unto his subjects; that you shall find 1 Chronicles.
28. 2. Then David the King stood up upon his feet, and said, he are me my
brethren, and my people. Mark how a King speaks speaking to his people, he
stood upon his feet, and said, hear me my brethren, and my people. Thus the
kingdom of Christ is set out to us, Psalm. 45. 4. In thy Majesty ride
prosperously because of truth and meekness. Christ shall be a most meek King,
he shall not be a bloody King to his people, he shall not be a King ^^^ing in
violence and harshness, so as not to care for the love of his people, his
singer shall not be heavier then the loins of others, but he shall rule his
people with all gentleness. Therefore the government of Christ is set out (...)
a she^he (...) leading those that are with young; and (...) ^his, David David
and CHRIST are parallel, Psalm. 78. 70. 71. He chose David his servant, and
took him from the sheep-folds, from following the ewes great with young, he
brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. So the
Kingdom of Christ, Esaias 40. having spoken ver. 9. of the glad tidings of the
Kingdom, it follows, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young. When Christ shall reign he shall have great
respect to the good and comfort of his people over whom heraigneth, he shall
not reign over them without regard to their liberties, and what may be for the
comfort of their lives, the good of his people, and his own glory shall be put
both in one.

Secondly, David their King, in regard of faithfulness. David was exceeding
faithful to his people, and therefore the mercies of God in Christ are called
the sure mercies of David, because David was found faithful before the Lord.
Psalm. 45. 4. is the Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, the Text says, In thy
majesty ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness;
there shall be righteousness in the Kingdom of Christ.

This is a blessed thing when we may confide and fully venture our estates,
liberties and our lives upon the promises of those who are above us. We know
how many there are about great personages to take them off from those things
that they have promised, though never so seriously, and with never such solemn
protestations to perform them. I will give you a story or two remarkable for
this, to show what danger people have been in when they have confided upon the
promises of Princes, when there have been those about them that endeavored to
take of their hearts from performing what they had engaged themselves to.

You shall find in the life of Edward the sixth this story; The King sends his
Letters to London in the behalf of the Duke of Somerset the then Protector;
there were diverse of the Lords rose up against him, thinking he did oppress
the people, and they sent the same time their Letters to London for their aid
and assistance; hereupon there was a Common Counsel called in the City, and
amongst them there was one that the story says was a wise and an honest man,
one George Stadlowe, and he speaks thus to the Counsel, I remember, says he,
a story written in Fabians Chronicle, of the wars between Henry the third and
his Barons, at which time the Baronsdemanded aid of the City of London, as our
Lords do now, and that in a rightful cause, for the good of the Commonwealth,
for the execution of diverse good laws against the King, who would not suffer
those laws to be put in execution, and the City did aid them, and it came
unto an open bartell, and the Lords prevailed against the King and took the
King and his son prisoners, and upon certain conditions the Lords restored
the King and his son again to their liberties, amongst other conditions this
was one, that the King should not only grant his pardon to the Lords, but also
to the Citizens of London, which was granted, and the condition of their
accommodation of peace were ratif^ed by act of Parliament; but says the story,
what followed of it? was it forgotten? no surely, nor forgiven neither, during
the Kingslife, the libeties of the Cities were taken away, strangers were
appointed to be our head and governors, the Citizens, their bodies and goods
were given away, and so from one persecution to another they were most
miserably afflicted. Again, in the history of Queen Mary's time we find, that
Qeene Mary, because there was some dispute about her coming to the Crown, at
that time she went down into Suffolk, to the place where the Duke that then
rose up for another was most hated, and she being at Framingham Castle the
Suffolk men came to her, and promised their ^ide, upon condition that she
would not attemp the alteration of Religion, which her brother King Edward
before had established; she promised them there should be no innovation of
Religion, no God forbid, yea she so promised that the story says, no man would
or could misdoubt of the performance: But afterward when she came to get the
power in her hand, the Suffolk men came to make supplication to her, that she
would be pleased to perform the promise she made them, she answered them thus,
Forasmuch as you being but members desire to rule your head, you shall one day
well perceive that members must obey their head, and not look to bear rule
over the same; And not only so, but to cause the more terror, a Gentleman one
Master Dobs that lived about Windsor, who did but in an humble request
advertise her of her promise made to the Suffolk men, he was three times set
on the Pillory, and others for the same cause were sent to prison. We may see
what hold has been heretofore in the promises of those who had power to break
them, you know what temptations they have to withdraw their hearts from what
they have engaged themselves unto. But when this our Prince comes, David our
King we shall find the sure mercies of David, we shall find nothing but
faithfulness in all his dealings.

And they shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.

They shall fear the Lord. Obser.
The words are, they shall fear to the Lord, pavebunt ad dominum. The fear of
God is strong in a repenting (...).
The fear of God is much upon the heart of a sinner in his return to God.
Such a sinner has high and honorable thoughts of God, They shall return and
fear the Lord. The slightness, the vanity of his spirit, the boldness of his
heart, it is taken off, and the fear of God rules in it. The Majesty, the
power, the authority of the great God is strong upon him, when he comes to
worship him, the fear of God makes him to worship God as a God, and in all his
conversation he walks in the fear of God, even all the day long, you may see
written upon his life the fear of the great God, And this not a servile
slavish fear, but a holy, reverenticall, fil^^^ fear, Jsaac had such a fear
of God that God has his dominion from Isaac^ fear, He is called the fear of
Isaac. This is a most precious fear, others fear poverty, fear imprisonment,
fear disgrace, fear men, but says a true repenting heart, I fear the Lord;
this fear is the wellspring of life to him, it is the very treasure of his
soul, Esaias 33. 6.

I shall speak of the fear of God here only as it concerns this place, the
intent of bringing it in here, that is to show that in the time when this
glorious Church shall be, when God shall call home his own people the Jews,
and bring in the fullness of the Gentiles, then shall the fear of God mightily
prevayle upon the hearts of people more then ever, and the greater Gods
goodness shall be, the more shall the fear of God be upon their hearts, this
we shall find almost in all the Prophesies of the glorious condition of the
Church (which is very remarkable) there is ever speaking of the fear of God
that should be upon the hearts of people. One would rather think there should
be speaking of the joy that they should have, that there should be nothing but
mirth and triumph in those times; but the Scripture speaks exceeding much of
fear that shall be then, and more then, then at any other time. Thus Revel.
11. 18. a most famous Prophecy of Christ's coming, and taking the kingdoms of
the earth, The fear of God will be most strong when the Church shall be most
glorious.
and bringing his reward with him, he shall come and give a reward to those
that fear him. And Revel. 14. 7. I saw an Angel flee in the midst of heaven
having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth,
saying with a loud voyee, fear God and give glory to him. Mark, an Angel when
he comes to preach the verlasting Gospel, how does he preach it? what, now cast
away fear and rejoice in this everlasting Gospel? No, preaching this
everlasting Gospel, says with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him.
So Rev. 15. 3. 4. There is the song of the Saints when they are delivered from
the power of Antichrist, what is it, be jocund and joviall? No, Great and
marvailous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou
King of Saints, who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for
thou only art holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for
thy judgments are made manifest. And again Rev, 19. 5. And a voice came out of
the Throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his servants, and ye that fear him
both small and great.

But fear the Lord now in these times, Four grounds of the fear of God in
the times of he Churches deliveranc^
why so?

Upon these four grounds,

First, Fear the Lord now, because of the glory of Christ their King, they
shall behold their King in that glory that shall cause fear, Rev, 19. 12. Christ
is described with his eyes as flames of fire, and on his head many Crowns,
clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, at wo-edged sword out of his month, and
on his vesture and on his thigh written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Thus
they shall behold Christ, and therefore they shall fear.

Secondly, in those times the fear of God will much prevail in the hearts of
people, because of the great works of God that shall be then, the heavens shall
depart like a scrole, and the elements melt with fervent heat. This is meant
of the time when there shall be new heavens and a new earth, which refers to
the Prophecy of Esaias, and it is apparently) and so generally Interpreters
carry it) meant of the estate of the Church, then the heavens shall depart like
a scrole. Heb. 13. 26. quoted out of Hag. 2. 6. The Lord did shake the earth
once, but he has promised, saying, Yet once more, I sha^ not the earth only,
but also heaven. There shall be wonderful works of God in the earth when
those days come, therefore there shall be much of the fear of God.

Thirdly, Much of the fear of God then, because of the holiness of the worship
of God and of his Ordinances, the purity of them shall cause fear:

Did we see the Ordinances in the true and native purity and holiness of them,
it would strike much fear in us. Some have but seen the execution of that one
Ordinance of Excommunication in a solemn gracious way, and it has daunted
their hearts, it has struke fear in a most proud, profane, stubborn, wicked
heart, the beholding then of all the Ordinances, and all duties of worship in
their true native purity, holiness and glory, cannot but cause much fear,
Psalm. 68. 35. O God thou art terrible out of thy holy places; God will be
terrible out of his holy places and out of all his holy Ordinances.

Fourthly, Much fear there will be at that day, because of the holiness of the
Saints, there shall be so much holiness that shall appear bright in the very
faces and conversations of the Saints that shall strike great fear. Holy and
reverent is thy n^me; you know it is said of God, and so it shall be said of
the Saints in that day, their graces shall be much raised, they shall sparkle
with abundance of the graces of Gods Spirit in them; their wisdom and holiness
shall make their faces shine, holy and reverent shall be their names, Psalm. 89.
7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, those Saints of
his who walk close with him, have a daunting power in their appearance. I
appeal to guilty consciences, to apostates, to professors who have secret
haunts of wickedness, sometime when you come but into the presence of one who
is a truly gracious godly man or woman, whom your conscience tells you walks
close with God, does not even the very sight of such a one terrify you? the
very luster of that holiness you see in such a one strikes upon your
conscience, then you think such an one walks close with God indeed, but I
have basely forsaken the Lord, and have had such a haunt of wickedness, I have
brought dreadful guilt upon my soul since I saw him last. Ecclesiastical
stories tell us of Basil, when the officers came to apprehend him, he being
then exercised in holy duties, that there was such a majesty and luster came
from his countenance, that the officers fell down backward (as they did who
came to apprehend Christ) they were not able to lay hold of him. Surely when
the Saints shall be raised in their holiness, when every one of them shall have
their hearts filled with holiness, it will cause abundance of fear even in all
the hearts of those that converse with them.

But wicked ones shall fear too as well as the Saints. Luke 21. 26. Men's
hearts shall fail them for fear, it shall be true in these days as it was in
the destruction of Jerusalem.

The Saints shall fear the Lord and his goodness; (...)
the words in the original are they shall fear, ad Dominum to the Lord, and ad
bonum, to his good.

It is all one in effect, that good that God shall manifest shall cause this
fear to be in their hearts.

You will say, what goodness? what shall that goodness of God be that shall
move the hearts of this people with so much fear?

I will tell you briefly, I need not spend much time in it, for I have spent a
whole Sermon about it when I spoke of the last words of the first Chapter of
this Prophesi^, great shall be the day of Jezreel; I shall now add to what I
had then. This shall be the goodness of God in that day that they shall fear.

First, What is that goodness they shall fear.
The goodness of God that ever he should regard such a wretched David their
King, yet that blood they have shed is applied to them for the pardon of their
sin; Oh the goodness of God! they shall fear this goodness in being merciful
to such a hard-hearted, such a stubborn, such a stiff-necked people as they
have been, this goodness of God will break their hearts. Secondly, then God shall
make the difference between him that fears God, and him that fears him not.
Then shall God take away all the reproach of his Saints. What bitter reproach
has been upon the Saints since the beginning of the world, especially since
the times of the Gospel^ Reproach, first because they are mean people, of the
lower sort. 2. Reproach, God will take away the reproach of his Saints.
the adversaries say, where is your God? No marvel you pray and Fast, what is
become of all? Here will be the goodness of God at that day to wipe off all
this reproach. They shall have so much mercy, so much honor from God, that it
shall appear before all the world that it was good to wait upon him, so much
as shall countervaile abundantly all their sufferings, they shall bless God
that ever it was put into their hearts to suffer for him, to wait upon him.
And because God foreseeth this, what goodness he has laid up for his people,
that they shall enjoy ere long, (and we know a thousand years with him are as
one day) that is the reason why he suffers his people to be so under for the
present, he knows he has that goodness for them hereafter, yea in this world,
that all the world shall say that God has dealt well with them, that he was not
a hard Master to them to make them wait so long, and to let them suffer so
much as they do. I will give you for this one excellent Scripture, perhaps you
have not considered of the emphasis of the argument that is in it. It is Heb,
11. 16. They desired a better Country. that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is
not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City. The
poor persecuted Saints wandered up and down, they were content to leave their
own Country, their estates here, and sought another Country, an heavenly, but
they had it not, their enemies prevailed over them, as if God had forsaken
them; but God is not ashamed to be called their God, what is the argument?

For he has prepared for them a City; Mark the force of the argument, for he
has prepared for them (...) City: This City is this text I am now speaking of;
sometimes it is described as a Tabernacle, The Tabernacle of God shall come
down from Heaven; sometime a City, sometime a Country, sometime a Kingdom,
sometime an Inheritance. Here God has prepared for them a City: that is, there
is a glorious time for Gods people, when they shall have the new Jerusalem come
down from heaven unto them.

Now then, says God, though my people be in a suffering condition, I am not
ashamed to be called their God. I am not ashamed to own this people, for I have
glory enough for them, as if God should be ashamed that he should ever profess
such an interest in his people, and this people profess such an interest in
him, if there were nothing to come for them, if there were not a time to
recompense all their suffering. As if a Master should own a servant, or a
Prince a subject, if this servant or subject suffer extremely, and has no
help, but still when he expects help, there comes none, and when he thinks,
surely now it will come, still it fayls him; yet if you know that at such a day
you shall recompense all this, you shall advance him and bring him to such
honor that he will bless God that ever he was in your service; you will not
be ashamed to own this servant: But if this servant shall suffer in your
cause, and you have no time, nor no ability to recompense him, but he must
suffer and suffer for ever, it would be a shame to you to own him. So God is
pleased to speak here, because I have prepared for them such a City, though
they be in present persecution, I am not ashamed to own them for my people, and
I do not account it any dishonor to me, for there is a time coming that will
answer all objections whatsoever. This is the goodness of God.

They shall fear his goodness. Fear it, how?

In these several regards. How the goodness of God is to be feared.


First, They shall admire at his goodness, and in their admirations even stand
amazed at it, the fear of amazement. 2 These. 1. 10. When Christ shall come, he
shall come to be admired of his Saints; Luke 5. 26. The text says they were
all amazed, and glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have
seen strange things to day. When this goodness of God shall come, all the
Saints shall stand admiring it with amazement, and say one unto another, we did
heretofore hear of Prophesies and promises, and we thought when they were
opened to us, our hearts did burn within us, O they were blessed things! but
now here is goodness we never thought of, this is higher and more glorious then
ever we imagined. Thus they shall fear the Lord and his goodness. You have
such a place Jer. 23. 9. It shall be to me a name of joy, apraise, and an honor
before all the Nations of the earth, and When people shall hear of all the good
that I do unto them, they shall fear and

Secondly, Fear this goodness; they shall upon this fall down and worship this
God with fear: Oh how shall their hearts adore this God; because of this his
goodness! As we read of Moses, Exodus 34. 8. God had told him that he would
make all his goodness pass before him; now when God came and passed by before
him, and proclaimed his goodness, The Lord, the Lord God; merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin; The Text
says, When Moses heard this, he made haste, and bowed his head and worshipped
before the Lord. There is nothing will cause a gracious heart to make more
haste to worship God then the beholding the glory and luster of Gods grace and
goodness: then the heart will not stand dallying and triffling any longer, but
will make haste to worship before the Lord. Many times God shows his greatness
unto you, and that convinces your consciences a little, and you think you must
leave your sinful ways, then temptation prevails over you again; but when
God comes and makes known his goodness, then the heart stands out against the
Lord no more, but it gives up it self to the Lord in an everlasting covenant.
Thirdly, They shall fear his goodness, they shall fear to offend

Mark a note in this by the way: Whereas many will say, O the goodness of God
will break our hearts; if Ministers did preach only his goodnes^; but when
they preach the Law, when we hear of terror, that hardneth our hearts. Take
heed of this, there is more evil in this then you are aware. A heart that is
truly gracious will fall down before the Lord any way, and it is not a good
sign to be wrought upon only by the goodness of God, it may come through much
stubbornness of heart for one to be of such a disposition, to be only wrought
upon by kindness. Did you never know a stour servant or a stout child, that so
long as you are dispeased with him, he would stand out against you still, but
perhaps if you yield to him a little, he would yield to you? Is this a good
disposition? is not this stoutness and pride in a child, or in a servant, or in
a neighbor, that will never yield to you till you yield to him? This is just
for all the world the disposition of many people, so long as they hear of Gods
greatness, and terrors of the Law, and Gods justice, they are hardened; what is
that? that is, they stand it out stoutly against God, notwithstanding his wrath
is revealed from heaven: But say they, when Gods goodness is preached, then they
yield, that is as much as to say except God yield to them they will not yield
to God. But when I can yield hoth ways, fear his goodness and his justice, then
it is as a sign of a gracious disposion indeed. They shall fear his goodness,
so as they shall be no longer wanton upon the goodness of God, they shall not
slight Gods goodness, they shall not do evil because God is good, but they shall
fear his goodness. We have a generation of men who do extremely abuse the
goodness of God at this day, even Gods goodness in the Gospel, in those
blessed things revealed to us in JESUS CHRIST. As thus, We find this revealed
in the Gospel, Wantons who abuse Gods goodness.
that it is God that must work the will and the deed, the Covenant of grace is
such, as that God does not only require but work all for us; how is this
goodness mis-interpreted and abused! Therefore say they, what need we do any
thing? Why do Ministers urge people to duties? Your principle is good, the
truth is good, that it is God that works all in the Covenant of grace, but this
distinction is very absurd and vile, and an abuse of Gods goodness, and
therefore you must not work together with the Lord as rational creatures.

Again, The Gospel reveals to us the righteousness of God in Christ, that we
must not stand before God in our own righteousness, but it must be in the
righteousness of Christ; this principle is good; O but what abuse of this
goodness is there (...) false doctrines, and absurd consequences drawn from it;
therefore to make conscience of duties, what is it but legal? they are but
duty whore-mongers; such kind of bold and absurd expressions come from them.
Oh wanton, wanton spirits who do not fear God and his goodness, but abuse God
and his goodness! Agaiu, The Scripture tells us in the Gospel that all sins
unto believers are pardoned in Christ, all sins both great and small, there is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ, no not one moment of an hour after
they are once justified; this is Gods goodness, and thou should fear it,
here is the principle right, but the deductions and consequences are vile,
therefore to preach that we must be humbled for sin, this is legal preaching,
neither will these men ever confess their sins because of this goodness of
God. This is to be wanton, not to fear the goodness of God. The goodness of God
in the gospel tells us that the grace of God is strong, that the Saints
shall persevere, that those that are once in Christ shall never fall away;
therefore let us take liberty to our selves, what need we be careful of our
ways, seeing the grace of God will carry us through? Oh to abuse this goodness
of God thus is wicked, the heavens may blush to behold it, and the earth
tremble under it. But we have not so learned Christ, the more of the goodness of
God in Christ is made known to us, the more should we fear him. The goodness
of God in the Gospel is so rich that the truth is because the hearts of men are
so vile, and so ready to abuse it, we are almost afraid to preach it. Oh is
this the fruit of the preaching of the Gospel? Never was the Gospel so clear
as in England, and in no Age so as in this Age, and is this the fruit of all,
that men should draw such absurd consequences from this goodness of God, that
men should go away harder from that which is the softning word? When we come
to preach the Gospel, the goodness of it, we come I say with fear; with what
fear? trembling lest it should cost the damnation of some soul. The preaching
the goodness of God in the Gospel, does certainly cause, ex accidente, the
damnation of many a soul. Therefore in the mean time you who are Gods Saints,
know how dearly God tendereth you, God will have the goodness of the Gospel
preache^ to you though it cost the damnation of (...) a soul; you had need it
therefore, and make a good use of it. Let this meditation cause you to improve
to the uttermost what you hear of all the goodness of the Lord. That which I
hear is costly to some, it costs the perishing of many a soul that I may have
it, though God sees that many souls will be hardened by it, well, says God, let
them be hardened, these my servants shall not want it, though they perish for
ever. When a man has a thing in his house, and he hears that it cost dear,
even the lives of many men, he has other thoughts of it then before. David had
a reverent respect to the water of the well of Bethlem, because it cost the
hazard of the men's lives, learn then to fear God and his goodness.

4. Fearing God and his goodness is this, in all rejoicing in, and praising
God for his goodness, there shall be a mixture of fear. They shall be well
skilled in this mystery of godliness, when they enjoy so much of Gods
goodness, and are called upon to sing and rejoice, they shall sing with a
mixture of fear. Their hearts shall be very serious and spiritual in all
their joy. It is very hard for us to rejoice in Gods goodness, and not to have
our hearts grow slight and vain, it is a hard thing to keep a day of
thankesgiving with a serious spirit, joy commonly causes vanity in the hearts
of men. But now the goodness of God shall be so strong in their hearts, that
though they shall seek Gods goodness, and rejoice abundantly in it, yet with a
mixture of abundance of fear, their hearts shall be kept very serious, holy,
and spiritual in the service of God. I will give you a text or two for this.
Exodus 15. 11. when Moses was blessing God for that goodness in delivering his
people out of Egypt (which was a typical song as appears in the Revelation,
that bondage typifying Antichristian bondage) mark the expression, Who is like
unto thee O Lord among the gods, who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises? God is to be praised, but so praised as his name must be
fearful in praises. Consider this in all your joyful celebrating the
memorial of Gods goodness, you must so rejoice and bless God, as you must
hold forth this before all you converse with, that the name of God is fearful
in these praises you tender to him: this a slight heart cannot do. So Psalm.
52. 6. The righteous also shall see and fear, and shall langh at him. Mark
what a mixture here is, the righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh, he shall
rejoice, but with trembling, Psalm 2. 11.

God much delights to have the glory of his goodness thus. We have much
goodness of God at this day, and God calls us to fear him and his
goodness; if we give him not his glory in this, God may soon call us to fear
him and his greatness; to fear him and his justice, to fear him and his
wrath. This is the argument now, there is forgiveness with thee that thou
may be feared. But how soon may God justly turn this argument, there is wrath
with thee, vengeance with thee, there is sword, fire, blood, storm, an horrible
tempest with thee, therefore shall thou be feared? Our consciences are ready to
misgive us when we have any evil tidings, for we have much guilt upon our
spirits, we (...) had much goodness indeed from God, (who ever thought to have
lived to see that goodness you have seen) but because you have not feared God
and his goodness, Differen ces between legal fear and evangelicall.
here is the reason of those misgiving thoughts, when you hear of any ill
news, oh now God is coming against us with his wrath, that he may be feared.

Something might be said to open a little the difference between fearing God
and his goodness, and fearing God and his wrath and justice in a legal way.
Only thus in a word.

The fearing God and his goodness is such a fear as enlarges the heart. Isa.
60. ver. 5. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, and so he goes on describing Gods goodness, that refers to
these times that we are speaking of; then ( verse. 5.) Thou shall see and flow
together, and thy heart shall fear upon that, and be enlarged. When the heart
so fears, as it is enlarged unto God, this is the fearing God and his
goodness aright.

Again, It is such a fear as yet the heart clings to God for ever; It drives
not from God, but makes the heart cleave closer to him, that is the phrase in
the Text in the Hebrew, They shall fear to God and to his goodness, I will
put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. This keeps the
heart to God.

Further, This fearing God and his goodness works the heart to a high degree
of sanctification. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Seeing we have such precious promises, And Heb.
12. 28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverent and godly fear.

Lastly, It is a fear that is joined with love, whereas the other fear makes
the heart to have hard thoughts of God; take heed for ever of that fear of God
that makes you to have hard thoughts of him. In times of danger many begin to
fear, then presently they wish they had never engaged themselves so much in
these ways that have such ill success, they now cry out of others, you would
needs do thus, you see what is become of it. But fear of God and his goodness
is joined with blessing God, that ever you knew his wa^es, and were engaged in
them.

This shall be in the latter days.

God is content to stay for his glory until the latter days, that which is
indeed his chief glory; for though in these former days God has had glory,
yet he has had but very little. God is content to stay for that which is his
chief glory until the latter days. Let this be an argument for our patience,
though we have sufferings now, let us wait as God waits.

But the latter days, when are these? The times of the Gospel are generally
called the latter days; but this, though it refers indeed to the whole time
of the Gospel, yet especially unto the latter times of those latter days. If
you would know what these latter days are, though I will not take upon me to
give you the day, or (...) I will show you that it is like these latter days
are at hand.

For giving light unto this, that is a good help to us that we have in Daniel,
concerning the four Kingdoms, there we have a prophetical Chronology from the
Captivity of the Jews unto the time when the counsel of God shall be
fulfilled. You have a description there of four several Monarchies, the
Babylonian, Assyrian, Grecian, and Roman: Now in the last of these Daniel
says, Chap. 2. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never
be destroyed, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all the other
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. In this latter (namely the Roman) has
the Kingdom of Christ begun to appear already, but God tells Daniel, chap.
12. 13. Thou shall stand in thy lot at the end of the days. Now observe, the
chief Prophesies we have about the time of these latter days, when they
shall be set out in that expression of time, and times, and half a time, 1260.
days, or 42. months, all comes to the same three years and a half, reckoning
every day in those years for a year, compare these prophesies, Dan. 7. 25.
And they shall be given into his hand, until a time and times, and dividing of
time. Rev. 11. 2. The holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two
months. Verse. 3. The witnesses shall prophecy 1260. days; Now 1260. days are
the days of three years and a half, so the days of 42. months. Then the
woman in the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6. She shall be fed there 1260. days, still
the same number; the witnesses shall prophecy 1260. days; the holy City that
shall be trodden under foot 42. months; and the woman in the wilderness shall
be there 1260. days And again, Dan. 12. 11. From the time of the abomination
that making desolate, there shall be 1290. days, there are a few days more, not
many, but about this time you see the Scripture prophesies of some great
things to be done, at the end of this time are these latter days.

But all the difficulty is to know the beginning when the three years and a
half, or 42. months, or 1260. days begun, then we may know when these latter
days shall be. Brightman makes the beginning of the 1290. days from Julians
time, when he would have set up the abomination, that is, set up the Jewish
worship again, by re-edifying the Temple, that is, says he, the abomination of
desolation, reckoning 1290. days, for 1290. years, hi^ time by computation
will come out about the year 1650. The other we have in the Revelation (and
that in Daniel likewise refers to the same) notes the time that the Churches
shall be under the persecution of Antichrist, for a thousand two hundred and
sixty years, so long the Beast shall prevail, and the witnesses shall so long
prophecy in sackcloath, and the woman shall be in the wilderness for so long
a time.

But when did Antichrist begin to reign?

For that take this rule, It must be at that time when the Roman Emperor was
broken, and when the Dragon gives up his power to the Beast; when the power of
the Dragon that persecuted the Christians under the Roman Empire is given to
Antichrist, so that now they come to be persecuted under him; here is the
beginning of the 1260. days.

That the Roman Empire must be given up first, appears, 2 These. 2. 7 For the
mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who now lets, will let,
until he be taken out of the way; that is, as generally Expositors carry it,
the power of the Roman Empire, when that is taken out of the way, then shall
that wicked one be revealed; the^e were many Antichrists before, but then that
wicked one that shall exalt himself above all that is called God, shall have
power to persecure the Church. Hence it is observable, that the custom of the
Church was to pray for the continuing the Roman Empire upon this ground,
because they knew when that was broken Antichrist would come. Now the breaking
of the Roman Empire was at the raising up of those ten several sorts of
governmens called in the Revel. tenn Kings, and the raising up of those Kings
was 400. years and something more after Christ, as Chronologers tell us,
between the 400. and 500. years. It is hard to reckon to a year, there is so
much difference in Chronologers computations; after that time there must be
1260. days, that is 1260. years. Make this computation, and compare all these
Scriptures one with another, it cannot be long, but in this century that is now
current, these latter days are here meant, when the people of God and the Jews
shall return to Jehovah, and David^ heir King, and fear the Lord and his
goodness. The nearer the time comes, the more will these things be cleared.
Dan. 12. 9. Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the
time of the end, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand. Take but one note and we have done, why the Scripture sets ^^is out
rather by many days, then by so many years? The reason is, because God would
have his people think that time until his goodness should be revealed, but a
short time, if he had said they should be 1260. years under Antichrists
persecution, this founds harder; No, says he, it shall be but so many days,
(though flesh and blood may think this time long) yet look upon it as days, it
is but a short time to me, it will be but a short time to you, within 1260.
days you shall be delivered from his tyranny, and then you shall have this
voice from heaven, The kingdoms of the earth are become the kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever, and then shall ye
together with the Jews seek the Lord, and David your King, and fear the Lord
and his goodness.

Now through Gods goodness we have gone through these three Chapters.
Tertullian has this expression of the fullness of the Scriptures; Ador^ plenitu
d^nem Scripturarum, I adore the fullness of the Scriptures; By searching thus
into the Scriptures, we may come to see rich treasures in them, and so adore
the fullness of them; how do we read over texts, as if there were nothing in
them? but certainly God has revealed much more of his mind in Scripture then
we are aware of, let us all be in love with the study of the Scriptures.


