THE LEPER CLEANSED, OR THE REDVCTION Of an Erring CHRISTIAN.

Being a Narrative of Richard Ballamie of Tiverton his falling off to
Anabaptism and of his returning to the Truth, with the causes and occasions of
both.

Wherein he is not only cleared from the Anabaptists unjust Excomunicating of
him for leaving them, but their unchristian ways and wilds to deceive are
also laid open.

By him Published, to caution young ignorant Christians against the error of
that way.

Esaiah 29. 24. They also that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding;
and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at the Mary-gold in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

The Leaper Cleansed,
IT may seem strange to all that know me, to see me in print; and if any that
see me thus appear, judge that it is me main business to vindicate my self,
they are mistaken; I am partly driven to this by the irregular proceedings of
those who have judged me as an offender, and yet would not give me liberty to
speak for my self: So that I am enforced to speak this way, or to justify them
by my silence; but that which most of all prevails with me is,

1. A desire to give glory to God in acknowledging his mercy, who has opened
my eyes and showed me the error of my way.

2. I judge it my duty, to labor to undeceive all the simple and plain hearted.

3. I think it as necessary to discover the hypocrisy of some that lie in wait
to deceive, and by cunning insinuations and pretenses draw aside many souls to
their own loss, if not to their destruction.

It is notoriously known to all the inhabitants of Tiverton, that I was deeply
engaged in that way, which is commonly known by the name of Anabaptists; yea,
so far as that I though, I was bound to oppose all that dissented from that
way, as being antichristian; and so zealous was I to promote that interest,
that I forsook my relations, and left my Fathers house, not caring for any
society, but such as were for that way; refusing to join in prayer with such as
differed from me in that, though otherwise godly. Thus I continued for the
space of near two years, but at last God was pleased to cause me to reflect
upon my self and ways, and by some special providence (of which I shall by
and by give an account) he made me willing to stand upon the ways and see, and
enquire for the way of the Lord; for until this time I was so filled with
prejudice against the public ministry, that I refused all conferences and
debates with any (though offered with never so much mildness) concerning the
way in which I was: or if I did at any time admit of any, it was to defend and
not to examine it: but now God having put some check upon my spirit; I began to
lay things in the balance, and observing another people in this place, walking
under Ordinances, and joined with the public ministry; such thoughts as these
are would come in sometimes. We say, we are in the way of God, and they say
they are in the way of God: May not I all this while be mistaken? Though I
often opposed such thoughts as these, yet they returned upon me by my
observation; for I could not but take notice that those I walked withal, were
looser both in their principles and practizes, than those I dissented from; I
found them slight in their thoughts of the Sabbath, and that they observed
that day rather out of policy than out of conscience; not so much to sanctify
the name of God, as to keep their hearers from attending the public Ministry:
they speak slightly of those that walked strictly and closely with God in
duty; saying, that all the Religion of such lay in duties, but theirs was
spiritual. I further observed, that their families were without prayer
generally; their children without instruction; and surely their constant
neglect of duties in their families, made me grow very careless of mine in
private. The consideration of these things, made me begin to enquire whether
this were the truth which I professed. From henceforth I resolved to consider
what was objected against the way I was in, and to weigh the Arguments I had
slighted, because I saw many serious godly people did live in the profession
and practice of that which I opposed. And upon serious inquiring into the Word,
and earnest seeking of God, it pleased the Lord to satisfy me in the truth:
and in particular touching these two controverted truths:

1. That the Covenant of grace, stands now in force to the children of
believers under the Gospel.

2. That this is a sufficient ground by Gods appointment, why the children of
believers should be baptized: this is evident from many scriptures in the new
Testament, which the Anabaptists have endeavored often to obscure; I shall
only mention one, which was as full to me, Act. 2. 39. The Promise is to you,
and to your children; the Anabaptists have labored to darken this truth, by
persuading the world to believe that children have no right to the Promise,
till they are actually called, which they would infer from the last claim of
the forementioned Text. But by considering I saw their mistake in the Text, (
Call) has no relation to children but to them afar off.

1. Because the children are joined with their Parents in the promise which is
an entire proposition in the Text.

2. If children should be excluded from the promise, this could not have
comforted the Parents, but have sadned them, that their children should be the
same with heathens. Now here the scope of the Text is urged by the Apostle for
consolation.

3. If so; Then this could not encourage the Parents to submit to these under
this administration but would have hindered them that their children should be
excluded from the promise, who stood in it for 2000 years before, under the
other administration.

4. If so then, children would be superfluous in this Text, and so the spirit
of God would be charged with tautologies, which would be blasphemy to affirm.

5. The tense is changed, the promise is to you and your children, in the
present tense; but when he speaks of the call, he speaks in the future tense;
as many as God shall call which must needs be applied to them afar off, and not
to children.

6. If their interpretation hold good, there would be a very great charge in
the extent of the covenant, narrower under the Gospel then it was under the
law, and no notice in all the Book of God given of such a change.

7. If their interpretation be true, then the believing Jews should have loss
by their repentance, if their children should be excluded from the Promise, as
soon as the Parents had repented.

8. Then they could have no hope of their children, for hope without promise is
presumption.

9. If children should be excluded from the promise, let any man breathing show
me what privilege the children of repenting parents have above others? Now it
is clear the Apostle adds children in the Text, to show that they had some
special privilege above those that were yet uncalled.

10. Then how could the blessing of Abraham come to the Gentiles according to
Gal. 3. 14. which blessing of Abraham was, I will be a God unto thee, and thy
seed, Genesis 17. 7.

11. Then how can believers be heirs according to Gal. 3. 29. if their
children should be excluded from the promise, for the childrens right to the
promise is a part of the fathers Inheritance (For) the promise is to thee and
thy seed.

Lastly if children be excluded from the promise, it seems the Apostle went
about rather to deceive his hearers then to inform them; it is very unlikely
the Apostle would use the same dialect of the Covenant that was formerly used
to Abraham (I am thy God the God of thy seed, the promise is to you and your
children) if it had been his mind, that children should be excluded, I wish
that men would with unbyased hearts weigh those things, and you should see that
the children of believers as in the promise. Further I observe that the promise
is to be considered two ways.

1. As it is invisibly made, so it is alone to the Elect.

As it is visibly made, so it is with visible professors and their children;
whoever is in Covenant in the first sense, can never fall away. But many may be
in Covenant in the latter sense, who may afterward degenerate and fall away.

Here let the impartial Reader take notice that the Covenant, as it is visibly
exhibited, is the ground for Baptism; seeing the subjects of the Covenant
internally are known to God alone, this distinction of the Covenant is clear
from Romans 9. 4. where the Apostle says, the Covenant pertains to them, and yet
the Apostle was in great heaviness for them, verse. 2. Its clear from Acts 3.
25. where the Jews are called the Children of the Covenant, and yet but few of
them internally in the Covenant. Its clear from John 1. 11. where they are
called, Gods own, which could not be by creation, for so all are his own;
neither could it be by special grace, for says the Text, they rejected
Christ: Then it must needs follow, that there was a visible Church Covenant or
covenant of grace visibly exhibited, that gave them a claim to God.

In a word this must be acknowledged by the Anabaptists themselves, else how
can they call themselves a visible Church of Christ, if there be no visible
exhibition of the Covenant to give men such a visible relation; for there is no
claim to God but by Covenant.

In this sense we are to understand, the children of Believers, in the promise
according to the meaning of the Apostle in Act. 2. 39. Now this Covenant right,
is a ground which God himself lays down, why any should be baptized, Act. 2.
38. he requires baptism, verse. 39 shows the reason For the promise is to you.
Here I desire the reader to take notice, how the word of command depends upon
the word of promise, and with an inseparable union and Connextion there is
between the command and the promise, the same reason alleged by the Apostle,
why the parent should be Baptized is rendered by the same Apostle, as a reason
why the children should be Baptized, (for the promise is to you and your
Children) nay the very same command expressed to baptize the one is implied to
baptize the other, for if some or any to whom the promise is made, may not be
baptized there can be no force in the Apostles argument.

Thus the Lord satisfied me about Infantbaptisme.

Being thus far satisfied I went to hear the public Ministry, but this
coming to the ears of the Anabaptists, there came three of their society the
next day to me to have an account concerning this thing; I told them if they
please to come at a time appointed I would give them the reasons of my
withdrawing from them; and accordingly they came, the preachers and the
principalest among them, where I gave them an account of my withdrawing from
them, as many of my friends can bear witness, which was as follows,

1. Their denying the children of Believers a right to the Covenant.

2. Living in constant neglect of an Ordinance of Christ ( viz.) singing of
Psalms.

3. For neglecting of Family duty, maintaining it to be a man's liberty, not his
duty to pray in his Family.

4. For denying the power of the Magistrate for punishing of evil doers: (to
wit, Quakers.)

5. For sleighting the public Ministry.

I offered to give them a farther account of my withdrawing from the hypocrisy
and wickedness of one William Facye, who is their present Paitor, but they
refused to hear, and desired I would not cast dirt to their face; I desired
that they would please to give an account what they had against me; but I could
get nothing but this from them ( viz.) You are withdrawn from us, and have
neglected your place amongst us.

Then they solicited me again to return to them, but seeing they could not
prevail, they summoned me to appear before them such a day. I told them if I
might have the liberty to bring some friends of mine with me, I would meet with
them; this being granted and the day assigned, I desired Mr. Fortescue Lowman
Minister of the Word in Cadlie, with some other friends to be present, whom I
found very ready, and accordingly at the time appointed, came with me to their
meeting, where were present some of the ablest of that party in these parts,
Both from Plymouth, Dartmouth, Totnes, Bonytracy, Bompton and several other
parts, whom they had invited to assist them; and it is remarkable to behold the
just hand of the Lord, who will not bear with sin, nor suffer his truth to
fall to the ground; as soon as we came into their meetting, it pleased the Lord
to strike such a damp upon their spirits, and cast them into such an hurrey,
that not a man among them would engage to justify their proceeding, but one
Thomas Class (who was not of that society, but a Teacher of a company of them
at Bonytracy) in the name of the rest of the Anabaptists, desired that all such
as were not members of their society would withdraw. I told them if my friends
should not be present with me according to appointment, I would withdraw also
(knowing the inconveniency of being with them alone, when there was no one to
testify the plain truth of things) He told me if I would deny the authority of
Christ and his Church, I might. Unto whom I replied; That the authority of
Christ I did own, but your authority I did deny. William Facy not willing to
be laid open, joined with this motion, and desired my friends to withdraw: Then
Mr. Lowman told them he had something to propose to them before he did
withdraw, if they pleased, Thomas Glass replied, pray withdraw, for you have
nothing to do here. So we withdrew, and one of my friends said, Report no more
that we refuse to give you a meeting: which false report they have often spread
to deceive the simple, and to carry on their design by persuading the ignorant
into an opinion, that such as differ from them, have nothing to say from Gods
word to justify their practice.

The same night came Thomas Glass (it is worth inquiring, why they sent not
their own Pastor William Facy, if they were not ashamed of him or he to look
on me) and one of his brethren to my house with a message from the rest of the
Anabaptists, to declare that they had rejected me. Mr. Lowman being present,
desired to know by what Rule they walked to reject a man for withdravving upon
such just and reasonable grounds, as I had before urged: But Thom. Glass
refused to entertain any conference with him for his satisfaction, and told him
they had nothing to do with him; and being asked, why they denied my friends
liberty to be present in their meeting, accordicg to appointment, and refused
to give Mr. Lowman liberty to propose what he had to offer them. Thomas Glass
brake out in a pettish fit, saying, That we had attempted to disturb them in
the worship of God, and charged us with abusing the name of God, and his people
with inciviliry, dishonesty and want of knowledge; and withal affirmed, that
he was employed by the rest of his Brethren to tell us so: Unto which Mr.
Lowman replied, If you are employed by your Brethren to give us such language,
pray be pleased to return this message again, That I humbly conceive they have
done us the wrong, to appoint such a meeting with us, and when we came, to deny
us liberty to be present; and now to send such language after us. 1. We did not
disturb you in your worship of God, for we did neither see nor hear you about
any religious exercise when we came, neither did we speak a word till you bid
us depart, neither were uncivil with you, for we withdrew according to your
desire. Tho. Glass being desired to show some reason for giving such
slanderous words, replied, that he was not come to dispute, but to declare in
the name of their Church that they had rejected me, the particulars of my
charge, was as follows.

1. That I had withdrawn from their society; and neglected my place amongst
them.

2. That I had villified some of their Brethren, whom I had forgiven.

3. That I had villified some of their Brethren for denying Magistracy, neglect
of family duty, singing of Psalms.

4. That I had abused my father in law.

These things put together, Tho. Glass and one more of his Brethren did in the
name of the Church, declare me guilty of Blasphemy [You may judge this was a
learned assembly that brought this charge to such a conclusion] and they were
sent to tell me they had rejected me.

Now that you may see the irregular proceedings of such as pretend to religion
and under that pretense draw away many poor souls from those means, which God
has blessed for their conversion and edification, to the end such may be
warned to take heed, give me leave to answer to my charge and I shall speak
nothing but the plain truth, and let the moderate judge where the guilt lies.
for withdrawing from them.

I judge it a great blessing, that the Lord has so far opened my eyes as to
bring me out from among them, which will easily appear if you remember the
grounds I have alleged, and shall yet urge from their wickedness as well of
practice as principles that I found amongst them; insomuch that I wonder how
the sober amongst them could walk with them hitherto. But this I shall show you
in answer in the second branch of my charge; which is a villifying some members
which (say they) I have forgiven. The occasion of this charge they bring
against me is as follows.

William Facy, their present Pastor walked so disorderly, his wickedness was
so great, that they could do no less then suspend him: But so slightly did
they deal in the business that his suspension pretended repentance and
admition again, was all within one week; shortly after he fained himself mad,
and began to play prankes with his wife: called for a basin to let out his
blood, pretending that he would cut his throat, goes to cast his child in the
fire, which child shortly after sickned and died; so much of this I was both an
eye and ear witness unto: for his wife came crying to me, that she was afraid
to abide with him in house; gave me a relation of these things, desiring me to
come with her to her husband; when I came I found him on the bed: I asked him
how he did, but he gave me no answer, after some time I had been there, he
arose and goes from his house; this wickedness committed by him was deemed then
by the Anabaptists (as was by afterward himself acknowledged) to be out of a
design to get some money from his wife, having married a widow which kept
certain bills or bonds of debt in some friends hands, least he should consume
it* for which the Anabaptists suspended him again, and in a little time
received him again; wherein I was never satisfied to this day, and in testimony
of my dissatisfaction I refused to sit down with them at the Lords table ever
since. Now they charge me for villifying some of their members, when I speak
nothing but the plain truth in declaring against their sins and they say I have
forgiven him, when I were thus unsatisfied in his repentance, and now judge it
but fained; for he that could so artificially counterfeite madness, could
easily counterfeite sadness.

1. He cries down the public Ministry; for taking of tithes, when as shortly
after that his Brethren had admitted him to their Communion and fellowship, he
tells them, that unless they would engage to give him 80l. by the year he
would leave them.

2. He is a notorious liar that makes little conscience of his word, and has
reported many untruths, touching the public Ministers of Tiverton, nay
justify himself in lies when he is reproved. There was a young man who wrote
notes after Mr. Lowman, preaching upon the Doctrine of the Covenant in
Tiverton; which notes this young man delivered to one of the Anabaptist who
gave them to William Facy, within three or four days after, this young man
came to William Facy and demanded these notes which he plainly and peremtorily
denied saying, he had them not. But William Facy with drawing the room, the
young man espies those notes on the table, and takes them into his hand;
William Facy comes in, and perceiving the notes in his hand takes the notes by
force out of his hand, when the young man reported this to some of his friends,
William Facy comes to this young man, and calls him liar before his master (the
young man being then a servant;) but the young man produced another to testify
the truth of this matter, who was with him at William Facyes house, and heard
him deny the Sermon notes; afterward Mr. Lowman meeting with William Facy
reproved him for lying: William Facy to justify himself, tells Mr. Lowman that
the young man had cleared him in this matter before his master, which being
examined was found a lie. [So here were three lies, 1. He denies the Notes, 2.
He denies that he did deny them, 3. He affirms that the young man had cleared
him, which were all false.] Several untruths has William Facy reported, which
upon examination has plainly and clearly appeared so to be; yet they continue
him their pastor.

Yet they themselves have given it under their hands, that he is not fit to
manage a discourse to vindicate their practice and way in which they now walk.
For there was a dispute appointed between Mr. Lowman and William Facy, which
was occasioned by some opposition from the Anabaptists in Brampton, where
William Facy and his followers came and opposed Mr. Lowman in the Pulpit, who
entertained some discourse with him before the Congregation, and then referred
it to a day of public dispute. The question to be debated was (whither the
infants of believers were in Covenant.) But William Facy being desirous to new
state the Question, came to Mr. Lowmans house and in the presence of several,
Swore upon the faith of a Christian, that the Question to be discoursed was
not, whether Infants were in Covenant: But whether Infants were to be Baptized,
(where you may see, that such as make little Conscience what they say, will
make little Conscience what they swear,) Master Lowman reproving him for
swearing; told him that the question to be discoursed should be given under
each others hand; and if he desired to have the Question so stated, it should
be done: the time and place was appointed, the Question stated, given in
Writing. The Anabaptists willing to wave the business, employed a modest man
of their own party, one Mr. Nathaniel Strange with some others of their
Brethren, of which Thomas Glass was one, to come and treat with Mr. Lowman in
order to wave the dispute. Mr. Lowman desired to know the reason of their
retreat, they told him because William Facy was incapable to manage such an
undertaking. Mr. Lowman asked if they would give it under their hands, which
accordingly they did, and subscribed it in the name of the rest of their
Brethren; upon which the dispute was prevented: yet notwithstanding William
Facy is their pastor.

I wish that the plain hearted among them would but seriously consider, whether
they can possibly expect a blessing from heaven, under such a man's Ministry,
whose course I have a little hinted to you, and judge you whither I have not
cause to withdraw where such iniquity is indulged.

The third particular of my charge, is for charging some of the Anabaptists
with denying magistrates and the neglecting of family duties and singing of
Psalms.

Let me tell you, I do not charge you without a cause, for those things abound
in you at that rate* that seeing you and sin will not part, you and I must
part; and though some of you are dear to me (whom I trust the Lord will
convince in his due time) yet the Lord Jesus is nearer and dearer, whose
communion I must, and through grace do prize before yours, had you and I
continued it to be feared, the Lord and I should have parted: for while I sat
under your ministry, I could never find that blessing which I have found from
that ministry you despise. That tenderness which the Lord wrought upon my
Spirit by the public ministry before I came among you, did much decay while I
continued with you, and therefore it is no final mercy that the Lord has
brought me from you.

1. For denying the power of Magistrates it is notoriously known to many good
people of Tiverton how you have carped at the Magistracy there for executing
their power upon sabbath breakers and quakers, yea you confessed, and pleaded
it against me, as many of my friends can testify, when I charged you with it,
affirming that Magistrates had nothing to do with Quakers.

2. For neglect of family duties you cannot without blushing, say that I wrong
you in charging the neglect of it upon you: being conscious to your selves,
that many of your families call not upon God, which I can confidently affirm
upon my own personal knowledge, when I walked with you besides when I charged
you with it, you affirmed that it was a man's Liberty and not his duty, to pray
in his family, as my friends can testify who were then present.

3. For neglecting to sing Psalms an ordinance of Christ, you never performed
this duty in your assemblies, but when I charged you with this, you affirmed it
to be no better then ballads, as my friends can testify also. I come to the
fourth and last particular of my charge for abusing my father.

But whether by word or deed, or in what manner you gave me no account; But
sure I am, if I were guilty of such a thing, you never reproved me: I must
confess that when I walked with you through your instigation I took up many
hard thoughts, both of my father and mother, because they labored to convince
me of mine error: yea and I left my fathers house upon this very account, as I
have hinted before, but through mercy, the Lord has showed me my evil in so
doing, yet you were never the people that admonished me all the while I walked
with you. But now you act as if you would rejoice if you could take up any
thing to reproach me and set variance between the father and the son.

But had I been guilty of every syllable of which you charge me with, how can
you bring it to Blasphemy. The truth is Thomas Glass, made many sad shifts to
mince the matter, when he was desired to make forth wherein I had been guilty
of Blasphemy.

But let all modest sober Christians judge, whither that which lies in the
bottom be not my discovering their wickedness, and withdrawing from them,
though I could not in conscience continue longer with them, when God said, Come
out from among them; which makes them to forge something against me: and let
the reader judge where lies the guilt.

Thus I have given you a brief Narrative of the principalls and practices of
these Anabaptists, having walked with them and tried them; and likewise an
account of Gods gracious dealing in bringing me from them, to attend the
public ministry, and of their unjust proceedings against me in this matter.

If the good Lord make it useful for the good of any poor soul to undeceive
him, and bring him into the way of God, or to prevent any from departing out of
Gods way, I shall rejoice, so that God may not loose his glory, nor any of his
people loose their comfort: which if you tender, be sure to prize, those ways
in which you received the first conviction, least you one day lie down in
sorrow for going away from God, and from the striving of his Spirit. Let me ask
you that have withdrawn from that Ministry; to whom you can say, we are your
work of the Lord: have you the same tenderness, the same affections to God,
that you once had in former days: are not these much decayed? O return from
whence you are fallen and repent.

And now I shall conclude by giving the reader an account of the sad experience
that I have had in two years digression from the public ministry in
Tyverton, which God did at first bless to the awakening of my soul.

1. I do not remember that I have had one Conviction under all the sermons
which I heard whilst I walked with them; But that sense of my condition which I
had before did abate and by little and little, fall away; after I turned my
back upon the means which God made use of in working upon me. Therefore I beg
of all those upon whose hearts God is working to take heed of despising or
slighting those instruments with whom God is present.

2. I was drawn off by these men, when I was in the greatest probabillity of
receiving good from the ministry that ever I was: For I do remember still the
Impressions which were made upon my soul by those truths which I heard from Mr.
Chishull a little before I was thus drawn aside, which did work mightily to
conviction and to resolution in me, but the devil envying my prosperity, sent
me this Thorn in the flesh, and their Insinuations and temptations did so
prevail with me, that I left this ministry to attend on them; which was but a
diversion from the work of my soul and I find that whereas before I had
somthings of weigh: upon my spirit, these were soon laid aside, and I had
nothing to do but to dispute about baptism, and to rail against ministers;
so that my former awakenings were turned into drowsiness and doting about
questions.

3. As I found no profit my self by attending upon their teaching; so I
observed little to any other. Nay it has been not only mine but the
experience of others, who have constantly attended them as long as my self,
that there was nothing but deadness of Spirit, to be gained there, which has
at last caused them to desert them also.

4 They are very vigilant and watchful to find out any that are convinced and
awakened under the public ministry, and when they begin to see things a
little darkly and confusedly, they take the advantage of this twilight in which
their souls are to put off their commodities, where their souls have some
tenderness, and yet a great deal of ignorance, they are fit to be wrought upon
by them for by reason of the first, they dare not neglect a Command of God, and
by reason of the second, it appears to them that it is necessary to be dipped.

And they effect this especially by these means, First showing them very much
kindness, and pretending very great love and bowels of pity to their souls,
and they stand like Absalom in the gate by fair speeches to draw the hearts of
people from their Ministers.

2. By promising them very much peace in their way, and telling how much peace
they have found since they entered into this way; and this is a very great
notice to souls, who have some troubles accompanying their awakeings, and
indeed there are very few of their hearers or followers troubled in Spirit, for
they want a searching Ministry. I fear they get such a peace as I did by
loosing my conviction.

3. When they see that any do incline to them and their way in judgment, they
do press them to a speedy submission to Baptism, that they may not have time
to deliberate about it, or to go to the Minister, or any christian friends to
advise.

4. Let me therefore from my experience, warn all young Christians to watch in
this case; for know that if the devil cannot keep off the word from your
hearts, he will then draw you off, if it be possible, from that word and
Ministry which he sees does profit you. And doubtless he has gotten much by
this design; And many souls will at last lament what I now do ( viz.) that
they were so soon persuaded to leave the means in which God did vouchsafe to
struggle with their souls, and if any such Temptation do come in your way, I
beseech you to deliberate about it, and though it be backed with promises of
peace; yet enquire whither that which others call peace, may not be more fitly
called slumber.

5. I have seen how they labor to hold those by policy, whom they have gained
by craft; they hinder all that incline to them from hearing any that descent
from them as much as in them lies, though never so godly, Nay though they
acknowledge that they have been the Instruments of their Conversion. Nay they
do abstain from all society with Christians that are principalled and settled
in their judgments, and able to defend them; least any of their weak ones
should hear any thing that contradicts their principles: so that it is nothing
but ignorance, of what is to be said against their principles and practices,
that keeps the greatest part of their followers to them. Let me therefore beg
you, that would know the truth, to weigh what is brought against, as weld as
what is to be spoken for your opinion, for it is an argument of weakness and
guilt when we shun the trial: The papists are Conscious that their opinions
and practices would not stand if the Scriptures should be opened to the people,
and doubtless many of you do fear what would follow, if your hearers should
know what ministers do or can offer to the people against your way. But it is
easy to keep them to you, who must receive your interpretations of Scriptures
and no other.

6. They do press very vigorously obedience to all the commands of God, and in
Generals they will seem zealous of or God, and holiness: But when it comes to
particulars, all their zeal runs out into a submission to their way; as if
there were nothing of that weight that Dipping is on; But for the mortification
of sin, for the setting up of Religion in Families, for performing the
respective duties of their Relations; these are not minded, so that I must
profess though I have heard them est revile Ministers as Scribes and
Pharisees; yet I never saw any Generation of men, that did more resemble the
Scribes and Pharisees then they in this, in that they laid up their Religion
much in litttle things, in certain washings, and so did these: they have more
charity many of them for Quakers and Ranters, then for those that conform not
to the Baptism.

I speak not this of all, for as I have said; I believe there is a mixture of
godly amongst them, for whose sakes I write these things, that they may be
warned.

And now I bless the Lord, that he has brought me back again, and given me a
taste of the sweetness of the public Ministry in this place: And that I find
God meeting my soul, and stirring a fresh upon my spirit; and I cannot but pray
and mourn for those that yet remain under the temptations, with which I was
holden a long time: I trust yet, that the time is coming, that many more of
them will see the evil of their ways as I have done; and be humbled as I have
been; and desire yet to be more and more before the Lord.

FINIS.

