THE Straights Voyage, OR, St. Dadids Poem: BEING A DESCRIPTION OF The most
Remarkable Passages that happened in her first Expedition against the Turks of
Argeir, Sir John Harman Commander, Rere-Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet:
Beginning May 1669. Ending April 1671.

By John Baltharpe, belonging to the foresaid Ship.

With Alowance.

London, Printed by E. C. for T. Vere, at the Angel without Newgate. 1671.

(...) the Right Worshipful Captain Thomas Darcy Esquire; late Commander of his
Majesty's Frigot, The Dartmouth.
YOu Sir John Harmans second, Sir have been,
All this same Voyage, therefore you have seen,
The things here treated on, and more
Off these Transactions, part have bore
Too high a share for my poor Pen to write
I want expressions to set out the height
Of your brave Actions; pray excuse
The dullness of my Pen, and Muse.
I wish the Seafare you had mounted:
Then she a Frig at had been counted
Unto this hour, except pale Death,
Vnluckely had stopped your breath.
I Am sure good Fight* Sir, you would make
Both for your King and Countries sake:
The Turks could never then a vaunted,
An English Frigate to a daunted:
It Is not the Ship, nor yet the Guns,
Although she were a thousand Tuns;
But the brave Captain and his Seamen,
That fights like Englishmen, and Freemen
There is no Poetry exact
In these same Lines within, compact,
But such as it is, I pray receive,
No further favor I do crave;
Except it be to kiss your hand,
Who am your Servant to command.
John Balthrape.

A Catalogue of the chiefest Heads Treated on in this ensuing Journal.
THe beginning of the Voyage, and the subtilty of the Masters of Cellyers to
save their Men. Page 1, 2. The brave excuses of the Masters of the Merchantmen
to save their Men. p. 2, 3, 4,* Women Passengers notable shifts to save Seamen
from being Impressed. p. 4, 5. The reason of the Authors undertaking this
Voyage against the Turks, P. 6. The Clift Quarrel. p. 7, 8. The Townsmen of
Clifts Ambassie to Sir John about the Quarrel, and the effects of it. p. 9. The
Names of Sir John's Officers. p. 10. Our Arival in the Downs, and captain
Mintrens exploit, cutting off the Horses ear. p. 11 Fashion of Salutes. p. 12.
A trick put upon the Author, but took no ectect. 13 Our Arival and parting from
Plymouth, and the Authors solemn adieu to England. p. 13. Our Arrival in Spain,
and going to short Alowance, the English Seamens foolishness. p. 14. Our arival
at Tangeir its strength, and the Flagmens appointment to meet at Argeir. p. 15,
16 The manner of our entrance into Argeir, their excuse for Robbing the
East-Indies-man, and War begun, with the exploits with Boats. p. 17. Corn
Prizes taken, Captain Darcyes noble exploit in the Dartmouth against the Turks
Boats, Ships, and Castles, and the Cowardice of the Seafares Captain. p. 18,
19, 20. The poor Portugalls brave Resolution for his Li*berty. p. 20, 21. Sir
John, and Captain Darcyes departure from Argier, bout conveying Merchantmen,
and arrival ot Jversey. p. 22. The pride of the petty Governer of Jversey, o^^
departure from thence, and Arival at Alteere. p. 22 Our Arrival at Alicant, a
trick put upon a^ English Fiddler by the Author, the Bilbows disaster by the
strong effects of the Spanish Ox blood, and our Trumpeters Trumpets Levats to
the drowned Bilbows Prison. p. 23, 24. No Prodicke at Catergean: the loss of
the Pilcher Catch, and our Arrival at Malhago, the Order of Convoying our
Merchantmen forth the Straights, and loss of a poor man overboard. p. 24, 25.
Parting with the Fleet: Chase of Argeirers, 2784 yards of Canvis spread at one
time, and Arrival at Cales. p. 26, 27. The effects of the Spanish Jarr, and
Arrival at Malhago. p. 27, 28. Captain Darcy's Prize, and his commendable (...)
of (...) Sail of Frenchmen, thought to be Turks, and making a Fire-ship of
his Prize. p. 28, 29. Our Arrival at Alicant, the Spaniards eagerness to get
our Moneys: our parting from Alicant, and Christmas kept at Sea, and arrival at
Calery. p. 30, 31. Our departure from Calery, Cook-room discourse of Legorn
Ladies, our arrival at Legorn, and the eagerness of Italian Jack, to get our
Moneys, and Clothes. p. 32. Our entrance into Legorn Mould, shift to make Money
for the Boom-boats, the Doctors gains by the French Disease, their overlate
Repentance and Folly. p. 33, 35, 36. Our departure from Legorn, arrival at
Tunis, the meeting with the French* Fleet, their Pride, our brave Resolution.
p. 37, 38. The Tunaseens folly being taken by the French, Sir John's Releasing
of her, the English Lady and her Maids Releasment. p. 38, 39. Our arrival at
Messena, a Market aboard, the Cowardly loosing of the Seafare, sir John's
eagerness of persute after the Algereens, his hindrance, the Authors presage of
the Seafares Captain, and our Arrival at Legorn. p, 39, 40 Our departure from
Legorn, a small Miorkeens disafter, his after wise Resolution* a Disturbance in
the Fleet, arrival at Alicant, and Malhago, and Giblitore, a Cheating trick of
Spaniard, and arrival at Cales. p. 42, 43. The Birthday of the King observed;
The Merchants humble request to Sir John granted, to Convey the Merchantmen
home, our hindrance, and the heart-burning thereupon, p. 44. 45. Our Pursers
death, our going to Tangeir, manner of Lord Howards Treatment aboard, our Salle
Voyage, our Arrival again at Tangeir, and Cales: Our Return from Cales with
Merchantmen, and bad weather in the Straights-mouth, splitting of our Sails,
Anchored nigh Cape Sprat, brought to more new ones, and fixed again our Rigging.
p, 47, 48, 49, 50 51. Our Arival at Tangier Bay, sight of Sir Thomas Allen,
more Convoys, the Captains of the Advice and Garnsey killed. Our Arrival at
Malhago, and the effects of Malhago-Sack. Our Arrival at Almarea and Alicant:
our Return from thence to meet a Merchant-man: Our back Return to Alicant; The
manner and Order of Seamens excess in Drinking, with the effects: the reason of
Seamens excesse*in Drinking, and the Seamens Loyalty; and our departure from
Alicant. p. 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. Our Arrival at Porta Mahone, the manner of the
Place, the use of it, the Conditions between our King, and King of Spain, our
departure from thence, the loss of a Fly-Boat, by a grand mistak. My Ban Yean
Saturday, An inv^^^tive p. 56, 57, 58, 59* 60. Our Arival at Legorne, the fair
words of the Victulars, our waighting for the Mary and Lewis, our Sailing from
Legorne: Our puttings back: The death of our Coxon, Arrival at Naples, brave
Prodicke: Our Arrival at Messena; and Zant. p. 59, 60, 61, 62. Our return from
Zant, meeting a Tripolize. Arrival at Messena: the great Treat Aboard, Our
departure from thence, and Arrival at Legorne. p. 63, 64, 65. The finding of
the long looked for Mary and Lewis, The Arrival of the Kent and Swallow with
the New-found-land-men; The coming aboard of the three English Women, with an
Inspection into there behaviors and qualities. p. 65. 66. 67. The brave
exploit of putting Ashore the six Algereenes, The Turks strength lessened, and
Pride abated of their former insolency. p. 68, 69. Our departure from Legorne
with the Mary and Lewis: A great Storm in the Gulf, the losing company with
the Orange, Mary, and Lewis; The True-Consort Ship, Of the Dartmouth, her loss
of a man: Christmas at Sea. p. 71. 72. The feigned speech of Roger our Boar to
Sumpter Sir John's Steward. The search for the Mary, and Lewis, after our
Arrival at Alicant. p. 74. The Search goes on, our arrival at Alicant, the
finding the Mary and Lewis. p. 75, 76, 77. Orange given over for lost: Parted
from Alicant: the Pooke Pudding ^at in the fore top. p. 78, 79. A Storm, lost
Company with some Merchantmen, but found them again; great trouble with a
VVest-country Meazle. p. 79, 80. Arrived at Rocoeta; Fishing work. Cooks*Mates
Disaster: Late Kings Martyrdom* the Winds uncertainty: our Arrival at Malhago.
p. 81, 82, 83. Our Huxters to wise for us. Our departure from Malhago, and
arrival at Cales, Sir Edward Spragg at Cales. Sir William Jennings came in with
Merchantmen; our departure from Cales. p. 83, 84, 8^. The Authors Adieu to
Spain, and Spanish Lasses. Admonition and Comfort for English Lasses. Much joy
for a fair Wind beginning the First of March, being New Month, New Moon, and
new Wind, it is uncertainty. p. 85* The loss of the Mary's Main Topmast:
Parting from the Swallow. Sir John and Captain Darcyes care of the Mary. An
Invention ^ the Author (who Sailed home with Captain Hunt in the Mary) to get*
a Coat, and the effects. p. 88, 89. uncertainty of the Wind and Weather, much
Foggy Weather: Soundings, and sight of Land. p. 90, 91. Joy there upon. No
hardship thought on, The Authors Resolution. Sir John's trouble for loosing
company with the Mary, her Arrival in the Dovvns two days after him, and joy
thereupon. p. 92, 93, 94. The Authors unability to set forth Sir John's praise
and Captain Darcyes, for their great Care of Merchantmen, The Conclusion. p.
94. 95
ERATA.
PAge 3 line 8 read 'twas. l 10 r had. l 18 r save. p 5 l 18 r tardy. p 12 l 9
r it. p 15 l 6 r our. l 9 r short. p 28 l 28 r scorned. p 72 l 18 r bending. p
91 l 4 r showers.

THE Straights Uoyage OR, St. David's Poem.
Beginning May, 1669.
COncerning of the David Saint,
And her Straights Voyage I Will you acquaint,
From Chatham River we did sail,
And concequently through the Swail.
The first Place we did our Anchor lowre,
By Seamen called The Boy oth' Oar;
Where we that night did press some Men:
from Merchants Ships, Barbado's Men:
^or Manned we were from Chatham-River,
With such a Crew as you saw never,
There was Rope-makers and their Boys,
The Dockmen-Labourers made an noise;
We had a pretty handsome Host,
That of their Straights-Voyage could not boast
^or when we came to the Boy o'th Oar,
Our Longboat put them all a Shore;
And there she Grounded that same Tide,
Well moar'd in Sand she fast did Ride.
Into the Hope we got at last,
Where the St. David we Moar'd fast;
It was about the first of June,
When Sun declines in the Afternoon:
Two hundred Men, rather more then less,
That very Month we then did Press.
From the Black-Indies-men we gat,
Brave lusty Seamen, plump and fat,
Out of the Hold these Men we hurried,
For down in the Coals they deep were buried*
Says the Ship-master, on my word,
I Have naught but these same Boys a-board:
Some Cripples wouid appear in fight,
They knew that we such men did slight:
Some men with great beards would appear,
What would you firs, lo, I am here,
I hope that I me too old and weak,
To serve the King, you will not me take,
All my young days I Have spent in's Service,
It Is very true, my name is Jarvis.
Such a one, I Have great charge upon my life,
Of Children dear, and a sick Wife.
What should we say to such, we let them pass,
Though naught they said to us true was;
When we were gone, at us they would laugh,
And the other Bottle they would quaff,
Till we their Iug^ing tricks found out,
And then we put them to the rout.
When we such Old-men pressed again,
The self-same reasons they would fain.
But we gave small Credit to their word,
By reason that we had Aboard,
A Barber-Surgeon, which could Cure,
Three such Old-men, in half an Hour:
Though they had Beards great like a Brush,
There Is no excuse then worth a Rush.
For men of Thirty years of Age,
Great Beards had got like any Sage.
So much of these Black Indies men,
Next we will Treat of Merchantmen.
They brave Excuse would us present,
Drawn up in Language fine and quaint:
When we Aboard those Ships drew near,
The Master would straightway appear;
Make haste, there give the Boat a Rope
My men, I, all shall ^ave, I hope.
Master Coxon, welcome here Aboard,
I wish, I could you Men afford:
I very long from Port have been,
Stopped always with contrary Wind;
My Men are sick, weak, very Lean,
We at short Lowance, long have been:
Boy, bring a Bottle, this I got,
Since I within the Downs was shot.
In Dover Road, upon my word,
I could you not one drop afford.
A man might answer, nor now, neither,
It Is only for to make Fair weather.
Sometimes we take this same Excuse,
They us cannot, very well abuse;
For some of us unto the Seas,
Have served our Times, as well as they,
And unto Lying do I say,
Know what belongs as well as they.
When with a Straights-man we do meet,
To go on Board, we think it fit;
The Captain he looks very Bluff,
The Seamen clad all in stripped Stuff.
What come yea for? Friends I tell yea,
No men I have Aboard here for yea:
Cause he has got bove Forty men,
And we in the Boat, have only Ten;
He thinks with Number, us to Scare,
But he is mistaken quite, I Swear.
Our Frigot she does Ride so nigh,
That for her Shot, they cannot get by.
Sometimes they do so Rugged prove,
They into Anger turn our Love.
We cut his Haliards, and Shankpainter,
Lets fly his Stopper, brings her to an Anchor.
Lets our Commander know his Pride,
Then he under our Stern must Ride:
We in our Anger, takes his men,
But when it is Calm, gives them again.
Of small Craft, we Aboard also,
To seek Seamen oftimes do go.
Where many of the Female kind,
For Passengers, we often do find:
Seamen they will hide, they are so kind,
Even underneath their Coats behind.
No thoughts we had of finding Men,
When we played Under-board with them:
But some we found, even just and jump,
With Nose to thinking, close to Rump:
Which amongst our men, caused great laughter
And they were often told on it after.
Enough is said concerning Pressing,
We often are pretty Maids Confessing;
If underneath their Coats so wide,
They do not some stout Seamen hide*
If they have none, they will up be gone,
Shaking their Coats, no, I have none;
What think you that young men come there,
You very much mistaken are.
If guilty then, they blush amain,
To see how truly they are taken:
Down on their Mary*bones they will hover,
Be kind good Sir, he is my Brother;
But all this while he is her Lover.
Enough is said, I could say more,
For I have slept even at my Oar*
So weary have I been a Pressing,
Both night and day, even without seizing.
A thankless Office it is I swear
It, from hence forth I will forbear:
Except that there be great occasion,
By foreign Nations Invasion:
And then what men can stand, and see,
The ruin of his Country.
I am persuaded for my part,
A valiant heart must sufter smart:
To see his Country go to ruin,
And he that while is nothing doing;
Against these Pirates of Algeir,
Indeed I much concerned were;
Because, I by them Rogues was taken,
Though I had Friends, was not forsaken.
Against them I made a Vow that hour,
That I would plague them to my power.
A Year and half, they kept me there,
After that period Ransomed were:
By my*own Friends, for I compacted,
With a London Merchant, and contracted:
For every piece of Eight he paid,
Five shillings English down was laid;
But first of all we must to Court,
With Creatures strange of several sort,
For to present unto the King;
These things to White Hall we did bring,
Which forth the Straights in Zebulan,
Captain Hunt Commander did bring then;
There was Red-ey'd Pigeons, Turtle Doves,
And Antelops, which Kings they love:
The King most graciously, lent ear
To us, that Slaves were in Argeir,
And paid our Ransomes every penny,
Our Friends, from purses was not any.
I have served the King, and eke my Nation,
From that time after, in my Station;
My bouden Duty it was so,
A thankful Person less cannot do.
This by the by: But now let us pass,
To see Transactions what they was.
After the Pressing of our Men,
What Course Sterde we, I wonder then:
What thing of Note did us befall,
That I took notice next of all,
Was when we haled our Boat a shore.
Against there, where we our Ship did moar.
First, we her cleaned, all things complete,
She Tallowed was most fine and neat;
When we had done, her Blacking was not dry,
twould stick upon the cloths of them came nigh
Therefore we let her stand upon the stocks,
and to Clift town we went, never thought of knoks
But knocked we were, and that most soundly,
Though we stood too it pretty roundly;
For they were ten to one, I Am sure,
I should not lie if I said more:
This quarrel it did first begin,
As we sat merrily a drinking:
One simple Fellow of our Crew,
Told there a Towns-man he him knew
To be a Seaman; and that he
With him some time had been at Sea:
This foolish Fellow would him Press,
He told him he could do no no less.
At this the Fellow swears, and tears,
Sets all the Town about our ears;
Away they come with Crickets, Bats,
And knocked us down like unto Rats;
There came a Barber with his Pole,
And knocked me down upon my soul:
Nay, this of all did vex me worse,
The: women they did at us curse,
Crying out Presse-masters, ah ye Rogues,
Be gone from Town you arrant Dogs.
One quarter part of us knew not,
What all this time we Quarreled at:
That night they half of us Secured;
The other half they got A-board.
Betimes in the Morning, to our view,
There did appear a lusty Crew;
The Townsmen they began to tremble,
And fetched us beer, they did desemble:
Comes one poor Woman, truly I
Did* you no harm, I know not why
You were secured in this same Place,
'Twill last (I Am sure) but a little space.
A Prophetess she was, I think,
For before that we one Pot could drink,
Lieutenant Sounders, brought us word,
Sir John would speak with us aboard.
Then out of Wooden-Prison came we,
I was right glad, you could not blame me.
Now Sirs, I this to you will show,
When that the Townsmen they did know;
That we were Sir John Harmans men,
They could have wished us out again*
But seeing they had gone so far,
And against us had proclaimed War;
Ambassador they then did choose,
Their Minister who wont refuse
Unto Sir John, them to excuse.
And by his Arguments so sound,
He closed had, at last their Wound:
To his Parishoners he came,
And told them, he had lain the blame
On the Boats-Crew, and therefore,
He would us punish very sore.
He no true Prophet was in this,
Sir John was wiser, I do wis:
Then punish Ten, for one man's fault
Whose Name is called Master Maul^*
Some call him Sir John Barlycorn,
Choose which you will; he had out-worne
Our patience quite, at that same (...)
And mad us Act things out of Rea^^^
Captain Dangerfield, some do him (...)
When he gets Mastery oyer all:
The very Reason he Captives*
It Is never good when that he (...)
Our Friends he oftimes makes our Foes*
By him oftimes we do get Blows*
Therefore I pray, don't with him (...)
At last he makes a man a Beast.
Where are you running? Hold my M^^^
Let Us these things following now (...)
Sir John Harman, he Aboard us came,
That day that we did act the same.
Our Flag at Mizen-top-mast head,
To rights, a nimble young man spread:
The David Saint, sure now is proud,
Undaunted Sermen shout aloud;
And willingly they would to work,
To fight against the faithless Turk.
But that same Flag wan't all her pride,
She had a suit of Pendants tide,
At each Yard one, White, Red, Blew,
Methoughts they made a goodly show.
Our Officers, if I should name,
Methinks I were not much to blame:
Captain, Liuetenant, under Sir John,
Is by his Name, called Saunderson:
Liuetenant Stout, well known to Fame,
Our Master, Marshal is his Name.
Samuel Hatfield, is our Boatswain's Name,
He Is man enough, I Will say the same:
With Silver Call, on Deck he stands,
Winds it, make haste, aloft more Hands,
Come on my Lads, look to your Gear,
Be sure that we have all things clear*
Albian Howel, we our Gunner call,
The grandest charge he has of all:
He gives our Guns their Lowance in such sort,
That they do give a good Report.
Our Carpenter, is called Elias Waffe,
A tite Ship we done w^nt, that is praise enough.
Our one Eye'd Cook, is named George Drake,
No more of him I do mean to speak.
July the first, we Sailed from,
The Hope, where we had Rid so long:
Guns at that time were Fired some,
For joy that they had got our Room:
Away that Tide, with merry Gale,
We to the Boy-oth'-Oare, did Sail:
Next day we over the Flats stood,
But Anchor did in Margret-Road.
Into the Downs, upon my word,
We did Arrive July the third:
July the fourth, being Sabbath Day,
Our Streamers all we did display.
The Roe Buck Ambral, here did Ride,
With other men of War beside.
That very day we went a Shore,
To fetch our Parson and some more.
That left at Chatham were behind,
They unto us were very kind.
One Midship-man, named Captain Mintren,
That Rid in company with our Parson;
Cause that his Horse he would not Sail,
So well as the Parsons, but did fail:
Penknife pulls out, Curses, and Swears,
And Cuts off one oth' Horses Ears.
Saying, base Jade, What wont you Sail?
Next time you faulter, ware your Tale.
And he made but a merry Jest,
In thus abusing harmless Beast.
July the sixth from Downs we Sail,
But got we had Westerly Gale,
Which made us Anchor Tide, and Tide,
But so to Wind-ward we still plied,
That on the tenth of that same July,
We saw Sir Thomas Allen truly,
At the Spit-head where he did Ride,
With several Men of War beside:
That day some Powder it was burned,
And into nothing it was turned,
Upon Salluts as is the fashion,
Of our Seafaring English Nation;
If Guns Eleven we him give,
Two less be sure we shall receive:
Sir Thomas being Admiral,
We must salute him first of all;
Sir Edward Spragge we next salute,
Because Vice Admiral, has repute.
All other Captains, but them two,
Salute us first, as is our due.
About a Fortnight we did Ride,
In Portsmouth Road, called Spit-qead,
Where we did get what things we want,
Good Beer and Brande was not scant,
With them which Money had, for they would buy,
They which had none would pass away.
One thing of note I told yea not,
I had it almost quite forgot,
Our Fidlar did in Triumph fetch,
Mis Fiddle from Aboard a Ketch
Called the Portsmouth, and did play,
Often times to pass the time away;
Sometimes to pass sad Cares away,
On Fore-castle we dance the Hay;
Sometimes Dance nothing, only hop about,
It for good Dancing passes among the rout;
Yet on my word, I have seen Sailors,
More nimbler Dance, then any Tailors.
When we in Portsmouth Road did Ride,
I went a Shore on Gospar side;
For there Acquantance I had got,
With them I meant to crack a Pot;
An Hostess, she but of course fashion,
Yet honest woman by relation,
She needs would stop my cloths a shore,
For an old Reckning on the score;
But I was no such Fool I think,
To let my Clothes be stopped for Drink;
But off the Hedge I my self took them,
And aboard that night I bravely brought them.
The Wind being fair we did break ground,
And sailed next for Plymouth Sound,
July the two and twentieth day,
We Anchor dropped in the Bay:
That very night we waigh'd again,
Bound over for the Coast of Spain,
The Wind being fair, we Hoise a trip,
Our Topsails, and away we skip:
Adieu fair England, now adieu,
To War we go against Barborous Crew
Of Turkish Pirates; Grant Success
Thou God of Battle, and us bless,
That we those Pirates may confound,
And give Algeir a deadly wound.
On Deck I stood, and by Moonlight,
Of England that same night lost sight;
Farewell fair England, thrice farewell,
There all my Frinds, and Kinsfolks dwell,
Heaven knows when ever it will be,
That I their faces more shall see:
Gods-will be done, to Sea I Am bound,
Farewell sweet England, Plymouth Sound,
And all the Places on a Row,
That kindness unto me did show.
With fair Wind and a pleasant Gale,
We unto Bay of Bulls did Sail,
In Month of August the sixth day,
We Anchor droped in the Bay.
The Spaniards brought us Wine A-board,
Bread, Grapes, Fig-cheeses they aford*
Either for Money or Truckar;
For six Royals they I sell a Jarr,
They Will bargin make Wino per te;
Again reply Jarro per me:
They plied their business very close,
Most of our men they got a doss;
Next day before that it was night,
Some of our Men were drunk out right.
The first day of this Month, at Sea,
To short Allowance then went we;
What Meat before the King for four,
Allowed, now six men it devour;
A Dollar o each man is due,
Each twenty and eight days it is true:
When we can get it, we drink Wine,
Healths to their Friends then we combine.
A Seaman when he gets Ashore,
In one days time he spends more;
Then three months stort-allowance Money,
Perhaps he gets a Spanish Cony.
It may be not only in Wine,
He drinks till he is almost blind,
And then, The Spaniards picks his Pocket,
If naught be there, he takes his Jacket.
Some Spaniards they no Conscience makes,
To Rob an Englishman, he takes
What Guilt he has; another goes,
And strips him, takes away his Clothes.
This when he is Drunk, if he be Sober,
He need not fear a Spanish Rover.
I have seen one man with Boat-hook-staff,
Made Five to run, it made me Laugh:
Though they were Armed with Swords complete,
Amain they from him did Retreat:
Enough of these pilfering Culls,
When parted we from Bay a Bulls.
August the tenth, we Sailed away,
And Anchored at Tangier next day:
A place the English now possess,
On the Barbarian Shore it is.
It Is fortyfied very strong
Or else we should not keep it long:
There does also a Mold here stand,
Where: Ships may Ride within Command;
It Is Fortyfied two Miles long,
With Towers also Exceeding strong,
In each of which good Guns does stand,
To drive a^^y the Moors by land;
Of which sometimes there does appear,
More then one hnndred thousand in one year*
Enough of Tangeir, now lets turn our Tale
From thence that night we did set Sail,
Bound up the Streights, away we went,
To meet with* Algeir Turks was our intent.
We with our Squadron kept a Board,
The Christian Shore, upon my word.
Sir Thomas Allen steers along
Mid Channel, with his Squadron.
Sir Edward Spragg with Ships of War,
Did keep along the Barbary Shore.
These Flaggs-all three agreed were,
To meet together at Argeir;
Because those Rogues and we did jarr,
To make: with them perpetnal War;
We scorn with them to be Peace seekers,
Who are such Rougish peace breakers,
We sailed the Coast of Spain along,
With Ships of War well manned and strong;
At length Alteirs appeared in sight,
Sir Thomas Allen and the Fleet,
That then were with him, they got water,
We some did get presently after;
When we from Sea approached nigh,
A board with water they did hie,
That we might over with them steer.
Unto that Pirates Town Argeir.
We sailed away, and that same night,
Of Spanish Land we did loose sight.
The very first day of September,
We saw Argeir, I well remember:
We came to Algeir road with hammocks down,
Yeds slung, the Trumpets they did sound,
Into the Road we steered stedde,
All for a stout Encounter ready;
Of this same Town we took a view,
And thought upon the Roughish crew,
That do inhabit in that Cell,
The Number of them who can tell,
For as you do the Streets come nigh,
You scarce can for the Press get by;
They march so thick as Army were,
A going out to some great War.
The Turks they sooth us up with treaty,
They smooth us up most fine and neatly,
Till they have brought about their ends,
And then they care not to be friends;
Money which they did take away,
From the East Indies Man: They say
They cannot heple: for he that took
The same away: Has them forsook,
The Moneys shared amongst three hundred,
How they shonld get, i'ts to be wondered,
Out of the bellies of so many,
And therefore we an't like to have any:
To some Things they would condescend,
To other Things they would not bend;
So in conclusion we did Jarr,
And against them we proclaimed War.
On nights in Boats upon the Waves,
Near Shore we lie to take up Slaves:
Some Boats of Corn, laden for Argeir
We took, as they the Shore drew near:
One Boat I very well remember,
It was about the middle of September,
Dark in the Night, under the Shore,
As we lay sculking on our oar,
Near to the Shore (as he came creeping)
We Boarded him, a Woman weeping
With a young Child, sat after on*
The Turks and Moors over board run.
We went to fishing then for Moors,
And took them up with blades of Oars;
The flesh of some, with our Boat-hook,
We entered, and so up them took:
At last we took up quite so many,
That there did not escape us any.
One night as we lay waiting there,
Under the Shore at day appear,
A Fleet of Surkish Boats which come,
Thinking our our Boats to over run:
^or all they were bove four to one,
^et with our Muskets we went on,
and stood to it with Blunderbus,
Against them for all their Harquibus*
When the Turks saw us so Valliantly,
Come on with so much Gallantry,
They could not long endure our Force,
But straightway Turned their backs to us*
And then like Cowards run away,
Into the bottom of the Bay:
Then out unto their Aid did come
A Ericantine, well Manned and Gun'd;
Indeed of him we stood in fear,
Cause that he had got great Guns there,
Which far over our Boats would come,
But our small Shot would not reach home.
Captain Darcy now espying this,
In Dartmouth, which but fifth Rate is,
Let slip his Cable, and made have,
This Pirates Bricantine to bast;
His part he played that same day,
Most gallantly without delay;
His Guns did at the Turks Boats roar,
Which made them turn their Heads ashore*
No trust in Mahomet they had,
Their countenances were very sad.
For fear the Wind should faulter then,
The Dartmouth she stood off again:
When they Espied her about,
Down to their Boats in a great Rout
They did them high, thinking to gain
Argeir Town, fore that they were taken:
And so they did Rowing close by the Shore
As ever they could do for Oar;
Captain Darcy did let broad-sides fly,
Amongst their Boats perpetually,
He sent them to Mahomets Wherry,
No cause they had for to be merry,
For Charon to his Stygeon-Lake
Mahometans do always take.
The Ships, Forts, Castle, all did Fire
At him, being moved much to Ire.
But he at all was not dismayed,
In their own Coin he them repaid,
And gave them Shot for Shot therefore,
He naught would put upon the score:
Had Charles our King no Captains worse,
They would not have our Nations Curse;
As had that Sea-fares Captain, who
Ran's Ship A-shoar, he naught would do,
Neither for King, nor Countries sake,
But all to pieces Kings-ship brake;
Base Cowardice, unworthy Man,
More fit to ride in a Sedan,
Then for to Mount a brave Kings-Ship,
He rather does deserve a Whip.
Whilst we lay here, even at noon day,
A Portugal escapt away;
In Garden of his Pateroone
He was a working about noon;
^^ Boat he seeing near the Shore
^^ straightways did his work give over,
^^d was resolved for to dye,
^ gain desired Liberty.
^^rough press of Turks and Moors he then
^^d run with Pruning Knife in hand,
^^ost like a Valiant man and stout,
^^d every way did lay about.
^^ means whereof he free did make,
^ passage and we in him take;
^^me fifty years of Age was he,
^hen thus he gained his liberty.
^d was Eleven years a Slave,
unto a Tagareene base Knave;
^ow understand whilst we lay here,
before this Pirates Town Argeir,
^t Sea they Ships of War had then:
which harmed much poor Merchantmen.
^r John Harmon he well known to Fame:
^ppointed was to Guard the same
^is care it was exceeding much,
With them he always would keep touch:
^ake easy Sail on Nights therefore,
^n Nights he bore the Light before.
^is Chickens always who close clings
under the shelter of his wings.
^n days perhaps they will wander, yet keep sight.
Of their Rare Admiral if ought them fright,
As often it happens, does the Ravenou's Kite;
Under her wings they are at Night,
The Darmoth was St. David's second,
Though but a small Ship she is reckoned:
The Captain has a heart as great,
As if he were in a Third Rate:
A Pendent always she did bear,
At Mizen-top-mast-head most fair.
To show the World, she did belong,
Unto the Squadron of Sir John.
The fifth day of October we,
With Dartmouth in our company:
From Argeire Pirats-town set Sail,
With pretty fresh Southerly Gale.
And over for the Spanish Shore,
We bent our Course with speed therefore:
For Water at that time Aboard,
Was little left upon my word;
For Jversey we steer therefore,
Making account for to get more.
The eighth of October we,
Did Anchor dropped at Jversey:
But Prodick they wont us afford,
Cause that our Guns wont speak one word.
First in a fashion of Salute,
It Is true, our Iron-Dogs were mute.
I know no reason why that we,
Englands Rere-Admiral on the Sea;
A petty Governor should salute,
Of Islands, that is of no Repute.
From Jversey next day we steer,
And bend our Course next, toward Alteere.
Here stands a Castle at Alteere,
Upon a Hill, by the water nere,
Which has Three Gunns upon occasion,
If Turks should make on them Invasion:
As for Salutes, they do not care;
You need not fear of Prodick there.
From the Eastward, this same place does want
But Six Leagues, unto Alicant;
Good Water fresh there in a River*
Small neck of Land, from Salt does sever;
This place it is upon the Maine,
In Country of the King of Spain.
On Fourteenth of that same October
We came to Alicant moreover
Beveridge we got in steed of Beer
Good Red Wine that same was I swear
A Shore at this same Alicant
A Frolique rare I did not want
An English Fidlar I Will forget his Name,
Did leave his Fiddle saying take the same,
If I return not by and by:
I do not know the reason why;
But he returned not that same Night:
Before next Day appeared in sight,
Cause he that Night went to a W --
And to us he would come no more,
His Fiddle paid Six Rialls score.
At this he Frett, he Fomed, he Wept,
'Twas never the never to be perplexed;
Kings Ship this fellow leaves, poor Ass,
For Service of a Spanish Less,
Where he perhaps the Pox may get
He Will time then have to repent it.
Enough concerning this same bout,
Let Us other Matters now look out,
The Dartmouth's unto Dena gone,
To bring some Merchant Ships along;
When they came in we did not stay,
But straight ways did our Anchors weigh;
Our Prison called the Bilboes,
In this Road over Board they goes;
This Ox Blood had so warmed their Pates
That they did act things at strange Rates:
Likewise some of our Trumpeters crew
Their Trumpets over board they threw,
To sound a Levate as it was reason
Unto the drowned Bilboes Prison,
The Nineteenth of October we
From Alicant did put to Sea
With Dartmouth and our Convoyes go,
With all our speed for Mathago:
But with bad Wind being overtane,
We stopped one day at Catergeane;
But there we did get no Recrute,
Because we did not them Salute.
We did not then at all there stay*
But next day we did Sail away,
Where the next thing that fell of Note;
Was meeting with a Catches Boat,
By Bricantine then of the Moore*
This Catch that day was put a shore,
We that same day for Pilchards Fish,
In hold of this same little Ketch;
This little fish we roast and broyle,
In Cook Room, there was such a Coil,
As if a prize then we did take,
Our men did such a quarter make,
This same October Malhago we
The eight and twentieth day did see;
The twenty ninth day Malhago Sack
They which had Money, did not lack;
More Merchant Ships we here did take,
And Guarded them for the Southard Cape.
Upon the first day of November
We sailed away I well remember,
With Merchants Ships all in a row
The Dartmouth she a-Sterne did go,
Brought up the Rere, we went a head,
Brave Fleet of Merchant Ships we led,
Through the Straights mouth, upon the fourth
Of that November we came forth.
On the fifth day upon my word,
We lost a poor man over board;
He from our Anchor then did fall,
It was a strong Levant with all
Our yaul we got into the Sea
To save (if possibly could we)
Poor man, our boat-swaine also he
The yaul did steer in raging Sea
He took great care do all he can,
The Waves had swallowed up the man;
He other Sepulcure cannot have
The raging Sea it was his Grave.
For all we were in such a toss,
His Wife and Children find the loss,
In Greenwich Town, nere London City,
They poorly now must live, it is pity;
The life of Man is but a bubble
As is before the Plough the Stubble,
It over in the furrow turns,
Or else perhaps the same they burns;
Great Care and Cost there is bestown
In's bringing up, but he is gone
In less then one poor Minutes Space,
This same of Mortals is the case.
That same November the sixth day,
From Merchant ships we part away.
They good Wind had with merry Gale
Unto old England they did Sail.
But we to Cales our course did shape,
From Saint Vincents the Southward Cay.
Some of those Pirates of Argeir
Into our sights they did appear;
We straight ways after them did stand
But way for fear a pace they rnn;
Good 'twas for them that (whorsbirds) (...)
Could like to Lightning run away:
One after that a wholes days space
We followed, and did give him Chase;
At this same time more Sail we bore
Then ever since, or here to fore:
Top-Gallon, stay Sayls, out they went
All Sayls that we could now invent;
In Chase of these same Pirates we
No pains did spare that time at Sea:
Canvis we had out that same hour,
Two thousand yeards and eighty four,
And eke seven hundred yeards also,
But yet them Rogues from us did go.
But had not Night a been so nigh,
We one had got assuredly.
The seventeenth of that same November
In Cales Road we did drop our Anchor;
Next day the old trade it proceeded;
The Spaniards brought what things we needed
Except twere Money that they sold,
At dearer Rares then can be told:
We tasted of the Spanish Jarr,
Which in our brains did breed such war,
That we did talk of things that never.
In all our lives, concerned us ever.
Here we did water, nothing was scant,
What things we had we did not want.
Novembers twenty seventh day
We part then did from Cales away
With Merchants ships bound for the Straights;
Unto Legorne, and please the Fates,
The Dartmouth's gone fore to Tangeir,
To hear how Causes they stood there.
A Prize that Night under the Shore
From English taken was before,
She took a Pincke laden with carriage,
Of Reasons for to make Plum-Pottage.
But we did Sail her up the Straights,
And eat their Reasons for their sakes,
A Bakers dozen of those Moors
We took, which row with Gally Oars,
And we them sold at Legorne Port,
Because we had good Reason for it:
It was dark night, we see could not,
When Dartmouth this same Prize had got:
But through Straights mouth we sailed ne^^
The Garrison called Tangeir;
And on December the first day,
We gained Malhagoe I say.
Old trade proceeded as before,
Good Malhagoe we drunk therefore;
This Sack indeed our wits did puzzle.
Because too much ont, we did guzzle.
Within two days the Dartmouth brought
In Triumph, prize which she had caught;
A fire ship of her they made,
By reason now hereafter said:
Two days before they came us nigh
Four Sail of ships they did espy,
Which forth the Straights came stem, for stem
For Turks ships then, they did take them
But Captain Darcy second I say,
For Turks Ships for to run a way:
But prize to fire Ship did turn,
^esolving one of them to burn,
and fight the rest with Courage bold,
^rave English heart wont be controlled:
For faithless Turks to run a shore:
Though they were four to one and more*
But when he came them very nigh,
For Frenchmen he did them espy,
With Guns all out and all things clear,
He did approach these Frenchmen nere:
For he to Colors that does trust,
May lay his honor in the dust.
With Turks I sayld a year and more,
Their tricks I know full well therefore;
For they all sorts of Colors have,
By means whereof themselves they save
Oftimes, and also they do cheat,
Poor Merchantmen by that same Feate.
The French were four Ships stout and tall
The Dartmouth one which was but small
They wondered he would abide them sight,
And would not bear up and make flight.
They mainly did commend him for it,
That he was Captain of such Spirit;
And him Saluted in best fashion,
For honor of our English Nation.
Captain Darcy, they did Presents bring,
And Honor on him they did fling.
He part, did from them, then I say,
And came to Malagoe next day,
With Prize in Tow, most brave and boldly,
Even just as lately, I have told yea.
The Sixth day of the same December,
We Sailed from Malagoe, I remember:
Finding a strong Levant at Sea,
We put in next for Almare:
And there we did Careen our Ship,
The Saylors on the Yards did skip:
Each Commendations of the other,
A lost they gave, some this, some the other,
Pastimes with Girls, they then discover.
The Purser they cry up a high,
For honest Man; but answer Lie;
Of Stewards honesty, and his Mate,
They loudly on the Yards do Prate:
It was December the Tenth day,
When we did Anchor here I say:
Next day we Sailed toward Alicant,
But fair Wind that time we did want:
But yet we did without delay,
Gain Alicant the Thirteenth day:
Where we a storm of Wind did Ride,
About the Spaniards, Christmas-Tide.
Sheet Anchor we did let from Bow,
Because the Wind did fairly Blow.
The Spaniards they came off with Boats,
With Wine, Bread, Grapes, things of all sorts;
With Wine* Bread, Grape^, and their Fig-cheeses,
They Money forth our Pockets squeeses;
Old Trade proceeded as before,
We gave them Guilt in hand therefore.
^^me were quite Drunk, and some were Sober,
and some were also half Seas over.
upon December Twentieth day,
from hence then we did Sail away:
^n the same place we left it standing,
^Vhere we do find it at our Landing.
The Merchant Ships with us did Sail,
^ound toward Legorne, with merry Gale;
But four days after we did want,
No wind but fair, one which was scant.
And never unwelcome is to Seamen,
For by that means he is a Freeman:
From toylsom Labor, and sad Care,
Which winds cantrary bring for fare.
The Five and Twentieth as some say,
Of this Month called Christmas Day:
Our Fiddler then did Play, and Sing,
At Cabin door, made Steerage ring.
With cheerful Voice, bid them good morrow,
I think that he did Verses borrow:
From some famed Poet, for he would fing,
Brave merry Songs, made all to ring.
With VVeather stormy, winds contrary,
We bore up Helm, now for Calery,
Which on Sardina Island stands,
But where Ships rides there naught commands.
When Ships do near unto them come,
Into the Mountains they do run:
Till they are sure we are no Turks;
Then down they come and Trade with us.
It was December's Thirtieth day,
When we did Anchor here I say:
We for one Dollar, or four Shilling,
Might buy a Sheep, if but so willing:
Nothing else here was to be had,
The Wine was hard and very bad.
It was January, the Third, day,
When toward Legorn we Sailed away;
Great talk there is now of Legorn Ladies,
Some swore that they would get them Baby^*
But sted of Babies they did get,
What they have hardly clawed off yet.
Januarys Tenth day, on my word,
We got all into Legorne Road.
For Prodick we two days did Ride,
With many Merchants Ships beside.
When we had Prodick got, Italian Jack
Did furnish us with what we lack.
For they were quick to come Aboard,
And Wine, Bread, Sassages afford.
They nimble were, Wino, Wino,
And so about the Ship they go.
But when that they see Mone^y fail,
They presently will turn their tale:
Crying, Wino Pa Truckar --
Then we do find where that they are;
They Will run about old Coat, old Breech,
And this about the Ships their speech:
Till of our Money, and our Clothes,
They bravely now have wiped our Nose.
This Month the twentieth, we made bold,
To hale our Ship into the Mould,
Where that Month, and most part oth' next,
It was before we had her fixed:
For we were forced to watch, I ween,
For weather fair, for to Careen.
The End of the First Part:
The second Part.
The second Part of my Journal can,
Sir, do no less, than kiss your Hand;
I must begin from Legorne Mould,
The other part has so far told.
SAint David, and her Second's clean,
And ready to go out again;
But Wind, and Weather, wont present,
Which something hinders our intent.
Mean while we to the Boom-boats run,
Make all the haste that ere we can:
To set our Money flying we,
Did make such shifts as you never see.
Tobacco we Ashore did carry,
In wine Casks, we were very wary.
You might have seen oft-times our men,
Go into Boom-boats, Eight, Nine, Ten,
All on a row, with Coats on back,
When they came out, some they did lack.
Not only Coats, but also Wits,
It brought some of them to strange Fits,
Of Drunkenness, for you might see,
In some Boats Drunk, above thrice three:
That lost both Money had and wits,
In these outrageous Drunken fits.
I moared one time was ashore,
At new Venus three days and more:
Italian house it was, yet he,
Our Kings Arms keeps, as you may see:
With Sign, and Signpost, all complete,
All things in's House was very neat:
It was 'bout midst of February,
When we got out most fine and bravely.
The Dartmouth she got into the Road,
Some days before us on my word.
Some at Legorne they turned sick
Because clapped with french faggot stick,
Their greatest pain lay in their P --
About their legs perhaps youd see
A red rag placed most finely,
To blind the world yet I have seen:
Tho se juggling tricks what they have been
This all makes for the Doctors gains
He with these men will not take pains
Except a bill under their hand
He has some money to command,
In private to his Cabin door,
They come and curse that pocky whore,
And vow that they will do so no more:
They sower faces make and Cringe
As you may see through the door hinge.
Good Doctor oh I would not have,
You give me more of that green salve
It does me torment very sore
Therefore I pray give me no more
A heavy curse on that same whore:
The pleasure it few minutes lasts
But see the Body, how it wastes:
It makes them look both pale and wann
Like Death, Oh thou unhappy man!
That could not Anchor in clear ground
And company with them, are sound;
You need not then a feared this wound.
The first of March that very year
We from Legorne away did steer
With Dartmouth and the Tunnaseene
We sailed away being brave and clean
This Tunnaseene to Tunis we convoyed
Cause of the Argeir Turks she was afraid
Where we arrived the fifteenth day
And Anchor dropped in the Bay;
With hammocks down and all things clear
Being thirteen sail of Frenchmen there:
There was the French Vice Admiral,
With other ships being stout and tall
We past them by, being very mute,
We would not first the French salute
Though they were Vice, and we but Rere,
To first salute, we scorn I swear
By English men that were 'ith Fleet,
We heard the French did fret at it.
One mad braind French Commander he,
Swore he would come on board of we
Cause their Vice Admiral we wont honor,
Head strick he swore our English Banner
But they were very much mistaken
Before that we by them were taken
Or strike our gallant English Banner
We'd fight most bravely for our Honor
We would not flinch from them one jott
He that gets honor loses not
If that he loose his life what then
Eternal Fame gives the Anthem
Of everlasting brave renown.
When he is fallen into a sound.
But the poor little Tunnaseene
When she the Frenchmen, once had seen
She unto Porta fa re no
With all her speed away did go,
Where she by two Frenchmen was taken,
When she our company had forsaken,
But Sir John's presence in that place:
Did hinder them at that same space,
Of making of her then a Prize:
The French Vice Admiral was more wise
For we by the Frenchmens side would sink
Before that same should be I think*
The loss of this same Tunnaseene
The English Counsels would a been
Presents therefore he brought unto
Sir John, who kindness him did show.
In English Prize that sold was here
Was took by Pirates of Argeir.
One English Lady and her Maid
Who that same time were sore afraid
Least that bad usage they should have
Because that then they were their slave
But the English Consul did them buy
And took them from their Custody
With Honor then he did them treat
And let them want nothing was fit
This Lady was to Venice bound,
Before the Turks they had her found:
Her Uncle Consul of that place
Sent a great Ransom for his Niece;
And to Legorne we then convoyed
Both Lady ^ai^, and eke her Maid.
From Tunn is we did sail away
March the two and twentieth day
And toward Messena we did sail
With good wind and a fresh gale
Unto Messena we I say
Did come the five and twentieth day:
Some Merchants ships we then there found
Which down the Straights with us were bound*
Sir John he did appoint the Fleet
Him at Messena for to meet.
Three weeks we here at least did stay
A market was on board each day
Except on Sundays then Sir John
Would cause them all for to begone
All sort of trade they brought aboard
Silk Stockings Brande Wine they afford,
Some Cabidges, some Nuts, some Figgs;
Some Seracusa Wine, some Eggs,
When Moneys gone, they will truck for bread
No more needs now for to be said
Old a Drawers, old a Wascoate,
And so about the Ship they trot.
Nay some theyl truck even for old shoes
There Is naught so bad as theyl refuse
April the eight day we had news
How that the Seafare did refuse
To fight four Argeir men of War
Therefore they had her run a shore
When Sir John heard this news in have
We went to Sea thinking to bast
With only Dartmouth, them same four
We prayed to meet with them each hour
But who these bad things now can mend
The wind it would not stand our friend
But as we came then through the Vare,
Anchor and Cable we lost there:
By cross graind current for^st to Anchor
We cut our stopper and shank painter
Back to Messena we came then
And found store of the Seafares men
They lusty tall men were and stout*
Enough these four Sail for to rout;
But their Commanders had no hearts,
Like stout Men, for to act their parts:
Old man he was by course of nature,
His life it could not endure much longer:
It Was great Renown for to be slain,
Rather then such dishonor gain:
And yet by hand of justice he
Will loose his life assuredly,
If ever upon English ground
His foot he set, and to be found.
April the twelfth, we Sailed from,
Messena, where we staid so long;
With sixteen Sail of Merchantmen,
We toward Legorne sailed then.
That burning Island, Strambello,
We sailed by that Night also;
The blazing Flames, and sulpherous Fire,
We saw, which some did much admire.
The reason of it none can tell,
But God above who knows full well.
Upon our brave Saint Georges Day,
We gained Legorn Port, I say:
Much Powder that same day we Fire,
But all in Love, none out of Ire.
Two of our Squadron here we found,
The Jersev, and Centurion:
Who to Careene did make (...) ^old,
To hale their Ships into the Mo^^^:
The Orange Fire-ship, was there (...)
Who down the Straights did with us go:
Likewise 'bove thirty Merchantmen,
Who down the Straights saild with us then:
So that we had them in our Fleet,
'Bove fifty Sail, both small and great;
Like brood of Chickens, they close clings,
Under the shelter of our wings.
In our Main-top, we bore the Light,
The Darmouth in the Rear all night,
The Orange carried the Dark light.
With this brave Fleet, and gallant Gale,
The fourth of May, we did set Sail;
From Legoru Port, and left it standing,
Where we did find it at our Landing.
One Major Keen, aboard us came,
And to Sir John did say the same;
If that your Honor think it meet,
I Would gladly be one of your Fleet:
'Cause of those Pirates of Argeir,
Sir, I do stand in mighty fear.
Sir John him took for one of the Fleet,
Then he the Master straight did greet;
For Sailing-Orders, which I wrote,
In Spanish Tongue, though in mean sort.
Betwixt Legorne, and Alicant,
One Night fair Wind we did not want:
But this poor little Major Keen,
As Merchants Ships, he came between.
They for a Turk did him Epsy,
And there great Guns at him let Fly;
He straight then from them boar away,
Under our Starn, fore it was day
He was, and came Aboard Sir John,
For to acquaint him of his wrong:
Some of his Shrouds was shot, that's all,
The harm they did him was but small.
Poor man, be sure he ever after,
Would always keep under our Quarter:
Likewise* that night one Merchant-man,
Stemling aboard of another ran;
For help, he Fired then apace,
Our Topsail to the Mast we brace;
Got out our Boats, made all things clear,
Turks Men of War, we thought was there:
Like Lion robbed of his Prey,
Sir John did hunt about I say,
And every minute prayed for day.
To Alicant, in month of May,
We came upon the Fifteenth day;
With all our Merchants Ships beside,
Till next day only, there we Ride.
On Sixteenth day we way'd and go,
With all Sails full for Malthago:
All Turkish Pirates in Argeire,
With our brave Fleet we did not fear.
The One and Twentieth day of May,
We came to Malthago by day:
Malthago-Sack, for night we got,
For Prodick here, we stayed not:
Upon next day we loose our Sails*
And bend our course next toward Cales.
Toward the Straights mouth, then we did Sail
But then we found Westerly Gale:
The five and twentieth day therefore,
We forced were for Giblesore.
Into the Bay here with our Yeaul,
We went a Fishing with a Traule.
Some Gentlemen for to see Sport,
Ashore they did with us Resort:
One Spanish Don came bravely Mounted,
For man worth Thousands, I him counted;
He rode close to us within reach,
Asked us what Luck we had of Fish:
Plucks Hat from Head, of Captain Stout,
Puts Spurs to Horse, and wheels about:
Away he Rides, like valiant Knight,
That had Achieved some great Fight.
VVho'd think a Person of such Feature,
Should be of such base pilfering Nature.
When I do think of this Disaster,
I think upon Lazarelloes Master;
Who Clothes wore like some great D^^,
But Money never he had none.
May Twentieth, we loose our Sails,
Once more we bend our course toward Cales:
The VVind it proved a strong Levant,
Which was the VVind that we did want.
Next day we got to Cales therefore,
The thundering Canons they did Roar;
Birth day it was of Charles our King,
Whole Peals of Cancns we made Ring.
Each Merchants Ship; also did Fire,
What Guns they had, from small to greater:
For they had cause for to rejoice,
As well as we, with Heart and Voice.
Cause he does Seamen bravely Pay,
That Guards their Ships, both night and day.
Our David's Sister, whom we call
St Putrick, here Vice Admiral,
Of Fleet of Hollanders did Ride,
With several Men of War beside.
Here we three whole weeks here did lagg*
A waiting for Sir Edward Spragge;
These Merchant Ships from us to take,
And guard beyond the Southward Cape:
The Merchants cause he stayed so long,
Came to Sir John with Reasons strong.
And him persuaded to Convey
Them England too, without delay.
We watered then, made all things fit,
Unto Old England for to get:
Then Boot-hose-tops we gave Saint David,
And on the Yards did shout and brave it:
To think upon our English Girls,
We joyful was as any Earls.
But all our Joys were quite diminisht,
Before our work we had quite finished:
For we saw the Vice Admiral,
Come with his Squadron, great and small.
Our Mirth to Sorrow, all was turned,
Our hearts within our Bosoms burned:
To our acquaintance there Aboard,
We could not one good word afford.
For Enemies we did them take,
And to them one good word wont speak:
For they away our Fleet convay'd,
With sorrow left us ill apaid:
And likewise so was each Ships Master,
Most sorrowful at this disaster:
For they such love had for Sir John,
The like they never had for none.
This for the Second will suffice,
Perhaps you will think in it there is Lies;
But I Will assure you it is true,
To each man I Will give but his due.
The End of the second Part.
The third Part.
The third Part now so far reach,
As to Messena at one stretch;
And if your Patience ben't out-worn,
Perhaps will reach back to Legorn.
ABout this time, in this same Road,
We heaved our Purser overboard;
It seems his body was no stronger,
He died cause he could live no longer.
Enough of this, let us turn our Tale,
When from Cates Road then did we Sail;
Upon the sixteenth day of June,
We Sailed away before it was Noon;
Toward Tangeire, Orders to take,
To make the Moors of Salle quake,
Lord Howard there, as I do tell yea,
No peace would make with' Moors of Salle.
That very June the nineteenth day,
We Anchor did in Tangeire Bay.
Sir John was sick, and therefore,
Could not my Lord wait on ashore;
Therefore my Lord, he did afford,
To see Sir John, to come Aboard.
Upon our Main-topgallant-mast-head,
A young man did a Jack-Flag spread:
At each Yard Arm, our Pendants blow,
Methoughts they made a goodly show:
He Noble was to them oth' side.
And to the Centuries beside.
After his Treatment with Sir John,
We quickly guest the Conclusion.
Powder we took in thirty Barrels,
To vindicate Lord Howards Quarrels:
To fight a Castle hard by Salle Bar,
Cause we against them had got War.
The four and twentied day of June,
Our Anchors up we did get soon.
The Dartmouth, and Norfolk, with us Sail,
With pretty fresh Easterly Gale.
When we unto this Salle did draw nigh,
Two Sail of Hollanders, we did epsy:
With Salle men of War, which they had took,
Another put Ashore, which Moors forsook.
That day, the twenty eighth of June,
We saw that raging Bar in Afternoon;
Likewise the Fort, which to the Southward-stood,
It very near was unto the Bars foot.
Though Sir John's known of Courage bold,
and by no Enemi^^ will be controlled*
^f four Ships unto one appear,
He does not stand at all in fear;
But for to fight against this place,
Wherefor to ^ack, there is room scarce:
^n Ships so great of Charge as ours,
Twere in the Air, for to build Towers.
^or if a Ship should miss to stay,
^shoare she soon might be, I say:
Therefore we Cruset about the Bar,
^o meet with Salle men of War;
^nt meeting none, we Sailed away,
^o boot 'twas for us, there to stay:
and toward Tangeir, away we Sail,
^ith pretty handsome South-west Gale.
^uly the Fourth, we there Arived,
and found it standing where we left it:
^gain that very night we waighed,
^ut by my Lord, again was stayed;
because he did intend to go,
^o Cales with us, next day also.
^eparations therefore we did make,
^ip-board, my Lord, next day to take:
^e got up Flag-staff, all things meet,
^ith honor now, my Lord to Treat;
^ut minds of Great men, often do change,
^ thing it is, more true than strange:
(...) Lord he then, not being ready,
(...) Cales Road we steered steaddy.
At three a Clock, he sixth of July,
From Tangeir, we did Sail most duly:
And at Eleven that same day,
We gained Cales-Road, I do say.
Five Merchantmen there of good force,
We found, which stayed there for us:
For they up to the Straights were bound,
And did salute us, each one round.
We watered then, made all things fit,
What things we wanted, we did get:
And on July, the fifteenth day,
From Cales-Road we did part away:
But in the Bay of Bulls next day,
We dropped Anchor and did stay:
Because a Fleet of Merchantmen*
We did epsy, a coming then*
The Convoy of that Fleet was then,
The Jearsey, and Centurian;
Two of our Squadron, these Ships was,
The matter it was ordered thus.
As we go up, then they come down,
And so our Convoys, they go round:
No better way was ever taken,
Nor will be when the same's forsaken.
The sixteenth day, away we Sail,
With pretty fresh, and merry Gale:
With Fire-ship, we eight Sail are,
The Argereens, we do not fear:
But in Straights-mouth, good wind we want,
For we did find a strong Levant.
We tare our Rigging, split our Sails,
Levant strong blows, there is naught avails:
We Anchored then, and broke our Cable,
Under Cape Sprat, there nothing able,
To do good against this Wind, as yet,
Before its Venom it has spit.
The Twenty First, got Anchor hold,
Under the Cape, before is told.
New Sails brought too, and Rigging mended,
Before next day, it was half ended.
The Two and Twentieth, we did weigh,
And then got into Tangeir Bay,
Where we Sir Thomas Allen saw,
But Current will not, lets near him draw:
With several Frigots which did Ride,
In Tangeir Bay, with him beside.
We him saluted, though I Am sure,
We were a League from him, and more.
Two Pinks, one Ketch, he sent to us,
For to convoy them up the Straights:
The Ketch she had Commanders in,
For the Advice, and Garnsey, which were slain;
For they did die both in the Bed of Honor,
In the Defense of our brave Banner:
With seven Sail of best Ships of Argeir,
They bravely fought, and stood no whit in fear*
And did secure some Merchantmen,
In company were with them then.
July the Twenty Sixth, we stood,
That day unto Malhago Road:
By reason fair wind we had got,
At that same time we Anchored not;
But there our Boat she went ashore.
And Sack she brought Aboard good store:
That night there was some drunk, some sober,
And some were also half Seas over:
Some men would Prate beyond their skill,
When of this Sack, they would got their fill.
And when you tell them on it next day,
They do not know then what you say.
Nay, that same time, if but a Swabber,
He Will swear, he will Rig a Ship all over.
The fourth of Augustnext, I say,
We got to Almarea Bay:
Because we then fair wind did want,
But on the sixth, got Alieant:
Where we did get Wine special good,
Called by Englishmen, Ox-blood.
Like Blood it is, for it does cherish,
Both Heart and Body, and us nourish.
That very Night, we weighed again,
And sailed back toward Catergean;
To fetch one Merchant-man oth' Fleet,
Whom we had promised to meet.
There off the Cape, for we did fear,
Else she might meet Ships of Algeir;
And so she had, for we did see,
Under the Cape, there two to be:
When they saw us, straight Sail they make,
They had no mind with us to speak:
Could we but S^^^ as well as they,
We their Arears would quickly pay:
But when we chase those Whores-birds they*
Like Lightning from us run away:
They Are single Ships built all for Sailing,
Likewise they always are them cleaning.
Enough of them, we hoyse a taunt,
Our Sails, and steer for Alicant:
To take those Ships with as Aloft,
When they had livered Goods they brought*
On tenth of August, we did get,
To Alicant, but they as yet,
Are not quite fixed; therefore we stay,
Till that same August, the twelfth day.
Where we this blood of Bulls did drink,
Till some could hardly stand, I think.
It Is sweet, Delicious, very tempting,
The Bottle is not long a emptying:
When that is out, we will fill another,
When that is gone, we must have the other.
By this same time, then we are in,
To drink apace, we do begin;
Some Healths to this friend, some to that,
Some swears you drink't not off, there is a cha^
What with smoking, drinking, there is a pother
That by and by, we do not know each other:
Fight then and quarrel with our dearest friend,
For sober men to speak, is to no end:
For nothing then is heard but ribble rabble,
*Among drunken men, for there is such a babble
You scarce can hear your own self speak,
For Madmen then, you would them take.
If you the Reason now of this would know,
I straight unto you will it show:
To short Allowance, always goes poor men,
When they get drink that is good, it is great feast then;
Their Beef, and Pork, is very scant,
I Am sure of weight, one half it want:
A kind of Horse-beans, they do get for Pease,
No nourishment at all there is in these:
Instead of English Cheese, and Butter,
A little Oil we get, God wot, far worser.
A little Rice we get instead of Fish,
Which to you well is known, but a poor Dish:
Except good Spice to put in it, you had,
For with good Sauce, a Deal-board is not bad;
Our Drink, it is but Vinigar and water,
Four-shilling beer in England's ten times better
So that when Saylors gets good Wine,
They think themselves in Heaven for th'time:
It Hunger cold, all Maladies expels,
With cares oth'world, we trouble not our selves
I know the King far better does allow,
But how to compass it, we do not know:
For Mutaneers, we will be never,
If that we keep but Life and Soul together.
Commanders few there are, which thinks on this,
When they have daily each thing which they wi^
We seldom these same Festivals do use,
Which is the reason we do it abuse.
Our Dream by this time, now is out,
The Boatswain winds his Call, now look about,
Hark, hark, up Anchor, turn out before,
Get Bars in Capstan, let us our Ship unmoar:
The Gun is fired, Light in Topmast shrouds,
Aloft is mounted, though not near the Clouds.
The foresaid day, at ten a Clock at night,
A Storn we did leave Aticant then quite:
Porta Mahone, the plae we next intend,
Therefore for it, we strait our course do bend;
A place it is, where English Hulk do lie,
Which now our Ships of War, they careen by.
Good Harbor this same is upon Miork,
For Shiping very useful against the Turk:
The King of Spain, does to our King it lend,
As in the Line before, for that same end:
The entrance into this same place, is not wide,
Not 'bove a Pistol shot, from side to side:
Likewise a Castle of great force there stands,
Which Ships as they, go in and out commands.
The Spaniard they, are jealous of our Fleet,
No more than seven a time, he will admit:
For to come in, lest thas we should him wrong,
Of that same place, which he has had so long.
The Sixteenth of this August, we
Great storm of VVind had got at Sea;
Flashes of Lightning, claps of Thunder,
Which made our men most greatly wonder.
Our Mainsail, and our Mizen, it did split,
Our Foresail we did lower, and furl it:
Near to the Islands we were then,
Which made us play our parts like men*
It Is never the near to cry, God help,
And nothing do to save our self.
Mainsail and Mizen, we brought too,
Our Fore-yard we hoysed also:
In space of three quarters of an hour,
It Rained as fast as it could pou'r.
Porta Mahone, without delay,
We gained on Augusts eighteenth day;
Where we alone did enter in,
The rest oth' Fleet not suffered then,
Because that we seven Sail did make,
No more into their Hive they will take.
All sorts of Stores we here request,
We got yet something of the least:
We got one Anchor, and one Cable,
To ride our Ship were very able.
Bread, Wine, Hens, Eggs, all things were cheap,
One piece of Eight, would buy a Sheep.
A Hauser on each side ashore,
On that same fashion here you moar.
Good Harbor this same is, when in,
No wind can harm you there one pin.
The twentieth day we weighed again,
And sailed toward Legorn amain:
The Summer Island Merchant we,
Did take into our Company:
Also one Fly-boat twice Retaken,
By Us, and Turks, and was forsaken;
Unto Marcellus, her we would convey,
But she was lost Ashore, then by the way:
For ^tid of the Dartmouth's light, she steered by,
A light which on the Shore was nigh;
And thus this same poor Fly-boat, then they lost
Being before by much misfortune crossed:
She Pitched so well ashore, as God would have it
That every Man and Boy, in her was saved.
September the fourth day, at Sea,
Came out my Ban Yean Saturday:
Invective 'twas against Purser, and his Crew,
Because to Saylors, they will not give their due:
And now the same unto you I Will rehearse,
For thus I framed it to Sir John, in Verse.
It Is for no harm I fall a Rhiming,
My thinks the Bells are now a Chiming:
Purser, Steward, Mate, all three,
I wish them hanged upon a Tree:
Except that we have Scoff for Dinner,
It were no harm as I Am a sinner.
They say they give us what the King allows,
They think they speak to fools, that nothing knows:
But they are mistaken in the matter quite,
Were we their Judge, they would hang outright:
But seeing it is as it is, we cannot mend it,
That last it should 6 months more, God defend it
The Voyage too long already has been running
They Would have it last as long again, they are cuning
They have gilt to buy, what things they want,
One penny amongst the Foremast-men is scant
Though we belong unto the David, Saint,
For want of Victuals, we are nowgrown faint.
Our Beef, and Pork, is very scant,
I Am sure of weight, one half it want:
Our Bread is black, and Maggets in it crawl,
That Is all the fresh Meat, we are fed withal;
When we these things to Sir J. Harman say,
Our Purser mends the matter for a day:
Thinking to make us weary of complaining,
But he upon our Bellies still is gaining.
Old Tailor, he both Calls and Bawls,
Dispatch, make haste, Aloft hammawls.
He is in haste, as if the Spits were turning,
Nay, in such haste, as if the Meat were burning:
But when the work is done, as I Am a sinner,
Foremast-men havenaught but bread for diner
When we are sick, our Doctors Mate, poor soul*
Does ask us, when that we were last at stool;
If three or four days pass, that were defective,
He tells us that our Body's very costive.
And straight to us a Glisterpipe applys,
Put's Plug in Vent, and then away let flies;
Also some drams of Blood from us he will take,
The Purser this Phis^tian work does make:
Had men their victuals due, they would go to stool,
Without his rare contrived Glister Tool.
Six Months short lowance now is due, and more,
We houe Sir John will think upon the poor:
That we his health may pray for at Legorn,
The prayers of poor men, are not quite forlorn
For this we understand by Scripture Book,
God on the prayers of poor, as rich does look.
Now to conclude this simple Rhim,
Methings that it is quite high time.
Heavens bless Sir John, and all that is his*
I Am sure, I do not pray amiss.
As for the Purser, and his Crew,
For this time I Will bid them adue;
Assuring them if matters are not mended,
More they shall have before the Voyage be ended.
Written on Ban Yean Saturday,
being Kettle Holy Day.
We got upon September's seventh day,
Unto Legorn, and Anchored there, I say*
Where our good Victualer came Aboard,
And gave to us a parcel of fair words.
But stinking Beef, he sent to us to eat,
So that we count his fair words but a Cheat.
Some Bacon that was good he sent likewise,
But that was only for to blind our eyes:
For when we were from Legorn Road,
The Bacon was quite done, upon my word.
Upwards of Twenty days, we here did ride,
With men of war, and Merchants Ships beside:
A waiting for the Lewis, and the Mary;
But they came not, the wind did hang contrary
At that same place, Italian Shoes and Hose,
On board us came, which kept warm our toes:
A Cable New* here we did get,
Likewise some Hausers small and great:
We fore and main, and top-sail sheets got new,
With good maintacks, all fit for winters heu:
Our Sails we banded, and got new fore-topsail,
Likewise of Hollands Duck, we got a Mainsail.
The boom-boat men* had little trading now,
For money to procure, men knew not how.
But with some men, the old trade it proceeded,
For some would sell their clothes, though clothes they needed.
October then the seventh day,
We from Legorn, did part away;
But cause that one Ship came not out,
We Anchored there the other bout.
But on the Eighth, we weighed again,
And bent our course toward Naples then:
Bacon and Beveride Wine to get,
'Cause at Legorn we had not it.
The wind being bad, back then we stood,
And Anchored then in Legorn Road:
On the tenth day, we weighed again.
And toward Naples sail^^ amain,
^ut still the Wind it was cross grained.
For on the Eleventh, on my word,
We came once more for Legorn Road.
On thirteenth day, we weigh and go,
Betwixt the Main, and Isle Lilbow:
Our Co^on here overboard we,
Did heave, being stormy wind at Sea.
To Naples that same famous City,
We got the sixteenth day completely;
On seventeenth we Prodick get,
'Twas the best place we came to yet.
This place with plenty it is stored,
Boom-boats on board, when we were moared:
All things they brought, what you could name,
And very cheap they sold the same:
Here each man did a Dollar get,
But we did buy no Lands with it;
Old trade it did proceed a pace,
Some were half drunk for three days space:
The Wine was cheap, and very good,
It cheered our hearts, and warmed our blood:
A quarter of a Sheep a shilling,
You might buy for, if you are willing.
The same October, five and twentieth day,
From this place we did Sail away:
Toward Messena, then we Sail,
With pretty fresh Westerly Gale.
On twenty sixth, a Boom-boat came,
Six Leagues to Sea to us, George by name:
So eager they at this place, to get gains,
That they don't stick for to take pains,
On this Months one and thirtieth day,
Unto Messena we did get, I say:
But two days here, this time we stay,
But straight for Zant, we Sail away:
Three Merchant Ships with us did Sail,
And got we had westerly Gale.
The Dartmouth having sprung a Leak,
Here we did leave her, it to seek;
With Orange Fire-ship to Careen,
One by the other, and make clean:
And we did get to Zant, I say,
Upon November, the sixth day.
The third Part now, I quite have done,
For to the highest we are run:
For every day, we Homewards do,
Unto Old England bravely go;
And in our Prayers, fair Wind we crave,
That we may now short Passage have.
The End of the third Part.
The fourth Part.
WE stopped at Zant, but four days space,
Back to Messena we did Sail apace:
No Ship was with us, we alone did Sail,
Toward Messena, with brave Levant-Gale:
Which we in three days gain alone,
Being from Messena ten days gone.
The Dartmouth, and the Orange cannot,
Believe that we ^ave been at Zant;
In so short space indeed the Wind,
Going and coming, stood our Friend.
But stay, one thing I told ye not,
I had it almost quite forgot:
One night as we Sailed with fresh breeze,
Came up with us a T^i^oli^e:
Although that one Ship we don't fear,
Our upper Guns we did make clear;
Our Pinnace we hoist overboard*
Into the Sea, upon my word;
In morning soon as it was day,
Turks Flag at Topmast-head, I say:
We did epsy as he came near us,
Because we peace had with them, he don't fear us:
A little Tool she was, but full of men,
As whors-birds, one by other could stand then.
To windward they at least, two streaks did hele her
As they came sailing under our Quarter:
One English Runnegado came on board,
Likewise one Hollander, upon my word:
They told us they were twice aboard us coming,
As they under our Quarter, then were running:
They begged a Compass, told us Lies,
Enough of them, this will suffice.
November the twelfth day alone,
We tied Saint David to a Stone;
At Messena, one Fortnight there,
Because we wanted wind was fair,
No soul alive did ever see,
Such Traffic as on board had we,
All sorts* of things they put to Sale,
Except it were strong Beer and Ale:
Silk-stockings, Carpets, Brande-wine,
Silk Neckcloaths, also very fine:
Cabidges, Carrets, Turnips, Nuts,
The last a man may eat from Sluts:
Lemmons, Orenges, and good Figs,
Seracusa Wine also, and Eggs.
If you no Money had then they would Truckar,
For Brande-wine out of their Jar:
For Coats that is torn, and very old,
They Wine or Brande, then give would.
Strange 'twas to see such filthy Rags,
As they would put into their Baggs:
With Brande, Brande, Brande Wino,
About they march most brave and Fino:
On twenty seventh of November,
We forlorn left them, I remember,
With Dartmouth, and the Orange we,
That very day did put to Sea.
In one weeks time, though stormy weather,
We gained Legorn Port, together.
Upon December, the fourth day,
'Twas when we Anchored there, I say,
Where Frigots two, and Merchantmen,
We at an Anchor did find then:
The Jearsey, and the Garnsey, they,
Were the two Men of War, I say;
The Lewis, and the Mary too,
With other Ships, a lusty Crew:
Some were bound up for the Levant,
But a fair wind that time they want:
The Mary and the Lewis down,
Who very glad were we them found:
Thursday the eighth day, we did see,
A Fleet of Ships appear from Sea:
They Newfound-land men were then all,
The Swallow, she was Admiral:
The Kent, she was the other Convoy,
They brought their Fleet along most bravely:
They to Legorn, brought store of Fish,
Which amongst Italians is good Dish.
They Prodick did them straight afford,
By reason of their Fish aboard;
Of our Comrades we did get Fish,
Which we do look on as brave Dish:
For Breakfast Meat, with little Oil,
This same poor Jack we fry and broyl:
'Twas salt, and relisht well our Liquour,
I know no Breakfast meat more fitter.
The Goods here of my Lord Ambassador,
We now took in, cause of the War.
Likewise three Englishwomen hence we carry*
To England, cause no longer here they will tarry*
But I must needs confess to you,
The reason of their Travels, I don't know:
Perhaps 'twas to convert the Pope,
For of that Sex, the best I hope.
I forth the womb of woman came,
Therefore that Sex I will not blame:
The one is Motherly and staid,
The other saileth for a Maid;
But Mistress Sarah still shall be,
The handsomest of all the three;
And shall within my Journal stand,
A Beauty powerful to command.
Part of Sir John, his Cabin they,
Have to command on Board always:
For they unto the Vulgar sort,
At no time will make their resort:
But commonly do closly keep,
Within their Cabin, where they sleep.
Unless sometimes to take the Air,
They do resort in weather fair;
Upon the Quarter Deck, so high,
The wonders of the Seas to spy:
Also to Prayers, they seldom miss,
They are Religious sure by this.
Some men of Passion, more than wit,
Will blame these Gentle-women yet:
Gadders they will say they are abroad,
And will not them good word afford.
To this Objection now I say,
Times and Occasions, serve they may;
For women for to pass the Seas,
Their Minds and Fancies, for to please;
For they the same flesh are, and blood,
As men are made of, and as good:
And as good reason have they may,
To cross the Seas, as some of they;
I see naught by them, but what is civil,
Therefore by them I Will speak no evil.
This for the women's sake, was Penned,
Not them desertless to commend:
But 'cause the World shall see that I,
A woman's Friend will live, and die.
Not as some Vulgars, by conjectures,
Those in the least are not Protectors;
Of Ladies Chastities, for they,
More than is truth, oft-times will sa^;
Of me, I pray, those things do'nt ^n use;
But those foregoing Lines peruse.
I hope the words that I heard last,
On Quarrer-deck, some few days past:
Will also prove from them most true,
Whom I most kindly bid adue.
Enough now of these Female Creatures,
Of their Behaviors, and their Features.
Let Us now some other things peruse,
I Will straight ways tell you all the News:
The Jearsey told to us therefore,
That She and four good Frigots more,
Six Sail of Turks had put a shore:
Under Cape Sprat, as in their stations,
They watching lay, the Turks ships motions.
Some Hollanders from Sea them chase,
To the Straights mouth they high apace:
Whereas I told yea once before,
The Jearsey, and four Sail lay more:
There was two Ships there of our Squadron,
Called the Jearsey, and Centurian;
The Hampshire, and the Portmouth she,
Likewise the Foresight did them see:
All things then fitted and made clear,
When they did to their sight appear.
Per force they might to Leeward bear,
Because the Dutch to Windward were*
Where our brave Frigots took them up,
Being glad that night with them to Sup:
Our Iron Dogs did at them Roar,
Which made them stand in toward th'shoar.
But we did tear them whole Planks out,
Which put them Rogues all to the Rout.
Our Captains Five, all played their parts,
Like men of stout and valiant Hearts;
They Tore them, you never saw the like,
Being near the shore they will not strike:
At two a Clock fore day therefore,
Their Ships to Rights, they ran Ashore:
Where fourscore Slaves, Christians we take,
And Freemen of them we did make.
Two of those Pirat men of War,
Did force these Slaves to run ashore:
One Englishman got to Tangeir,
Which to Cape Sprat, is pretty near:
And out of seventeen Hundred men,
Said but seven Hundred, they did mas^er then:
We sent our Boats, and burnt them all,
As they ashore lay, both great and small.
The smallest had got Thirty Guns,
And was at least Two Hundred Tuns:
From Thirty unto Fifty they were Gun'd,
But thanks be unto God, now they are burnd.
And may those Pirates all come to such ends,
Then theywould gladly be with us good friends
They to Mahomet much did trust,
They cut a Sheep in middle just;
Hide, Head, Heart, Tail, and Horns, and all,
And on Mahomet, they did call.
With conjuring words, they on my word,
Did on both sides throw overboard.
In time of Fight, we them oppress,
They help besought in their distress.
But he asleep, I think was then,
For he wont hearken to these men;
Or else some business great, he had to do,
No ear he gave to his heathen Crew.
They which escaped with their Lives,
Taffeleta made as bad as Slaves;
Because Argeir took Guylands part,
He vowed for that, he would make them smart;
For he and Guyland, were great Foes,
And oft-times had exchanged blows.
It was August, the thirteenth day,
When we did act this same, I say:
Some few disasters like this same,
These roguish Pirates would soon tame.
These heathen Turks have been so bold,
That seize on Kings Ships, these Rogues would;
Witness the Speedwel, and the Faulcon,
As they conveyed New Foundland men:
Where Captain Hubbard life lost quite,
E^these Rogues, when he was in fight:
Some Merchants Ships from us they took,
When men their Ships had once forsook.
Also in Ship, called Mary Rose,
Brave Sir John Kempthorn they oppose,
Though they were seven, he but one,
With courage bold, yet he went on:
And fought them bravely, made them run,
Be ore that he with them had done.
fTwo Captains they killed in a trice,
In Ships called Garnsey, and Advice:
They fought most bravely with seven Sail,
To pay them off, they did not fail:
(...)ptains died in Bed of Honor,
In the defense of our brave Banner:
The Turks Vice Admiral did careen,
The Gernsey, and Advice between:
Cause of her Leaks, for they did hit her,
At that same time, twixt wind and water:
Had then the wind a little freshed,
We at that time had her so threshed;
That they at all need not to fear,
Her ever going to Argeir.
When they saw by them, they got naught,
But still received good as they brought;
They would no longer with them stay,
^ut hoyst their Sails, and went away:
(...) ^^ey to Sailing more do trust,
Than to their Fighting, and needs must;
Our great shot, they cannot long abide,
For they have Thin and Paper-side.
So much of these same Argereens,
Who next will treat of our own Friends;
Who ready were with us to Sail,
Before I told yea this last Tale.
It was the Mary, and the Lewis,
On Thursday fore that we eat Brewis;
For on the Italians Christmas Day,
We all from Legorn Sailed away:
Which fore our Christmas, is ten days,
Accounted by them just always*
We Sailed away with small Levant,
Which we did three days after want:
For then the Wind came to the West,
Which well is known no^^ of the best
On nineteenth in the morning then,
The VVind proved Levant again:
Against the Western Seas we thunder,
As if 'twould beat our Boughs asunder;
This blew not Home, for at the best.
The twentieth day it was Northwest.
The two and three and twentieth day,
Great storm of VVind we had at Sea:
Our Mainsail forth the Boltrops blew,
What I do tell you* is most true:
Such storm this Voyage we never had,
Indeed 'twas weather very sad.
Two men were Duckt at Main-yard Arm,
Being new Mainsail, yet no harm
They go; that time as God would have it,
But they got in again, and both were saved:
Drank each a pint of wine, kept inside warm,
By means whereof, the outside took no harm;
On four and twentieth day we had,
Brave weather, which made our hearts glad.
The Orange, Lewis, and the Mary,
Left us this time by Winds contrary:
But them we hope to meet again,
At Sea, or Alicant in Spain:
The Dartmouth she does still stick by us,
On our Lee-quarter she keeps nigh us.
All weather that from Sky does blow.
She far from us does never go:
Also upon that stormy day,
She had a man washed quite away:
The VVind so feircely it did blow,
That him to save, they could not go:
Boat overboard for to hoyse then,
Was way for them to loose more men.
Our Christmas we do keep at Sea,
Upon Decembers five and twentieth day,
But cause that it did happen on a Sunday,
Our Fiddler plays on Saturday and Monday.
Some give him Money, some good Wine,
The Rogue does tope his nose, till he is blind.
Instead of Rost-beef, and Plum-pies,
Good Houghs of Bacon, does us now suffice.
With Puddings mixed with Fruit and Oil,
^n surnace this same day we boil:
Our Gunners Pudding made so great,
That twenty men could scarce it eat:
With Swords and Pistols, forth the Cook-room
They it convoyed into the Gun-room:
Silk Flag, they also did display,
As they this Pudding fetched away:
Which amongst our men, caused great laughter
The Ensign will be told on it after:
As he does in his VVherry row,
There does this Pudden Ensign-bearer go:
Yet he the honor had to bear,
A Flag before a Pudden rare.
'Bout this time fell a sad mischance,
Roger our Boar fell in a Trance;
This Christmas-tide he died for hunger,
For want of Meat, could live no longer.
Methinks, could but this poor Boor speak,
To this effect, he would silence break.
Oh brother Sumpter, you live high,
You will not me poor Boar come nigh;
I Am in distress, and want good Meat,
You Delicates do daily eat:
Did you but feel the Hunger* I
Do daily feel, you soon would die.
My Children I leave Fatherless,
My Wife also in great Distress:
You also wrong your self, my Body great,
When I am dead you will not eat:
Good Brawn I am, if but well fed,
But good for naught if this time dead;
For I am Thin, and very Lean,
You always keep my Teeth so clean.
O Brother, unkind for ever unto you,
I do at this time, bid my last adue;
But yet I pray, been't so unkind,
To s^rve my Wife, I left behind.
One Hair which on my back does grow,
For Coblars Ends, I will not bestow;
To Brotherhood unkind like you,
And so once more, Adue, adue.
These were the last words, spoke poor Boar
When this was said, he straight gave ore:
And died; and then upon my word,
We straightway heaved him overboard.
Decembers thirtieth day, with small Levant,
We early Anchor dropped at Alicant:
Where we to our great griefs did hear,
The Orange, Mary, Lewis, came not there;
Which we in stormy Gulf of Lions lost,
For a new search, we backwards now are forced:
We that same very night did weigh again,
To find them off the Cape, but all in vain:
With pretty fresh Levant, we beat the Seas,
But yet could hear no news, our minds to please
But only by some Frigot we did hear,
How that Sir Edward Spagge, had took Argeir:
A Ship so called of that Town,
The Turks they had her run on ground;
But he did get her off again,
And bravely brought her into Spain.
The Christian Slaves seeing this disaster,
Fall on the Turks, what they could master;
They stopped from running then ashore,
And Slaves we made of them therefore:
So they from Slaves, was made men free,
And Turks from Freemen, Slaves to be:
This was the first Voyage she did make,
When that Sir Edward did her take:
And may they all come to such fortune,
'Twould better be for us, I Am certain.
So much concerning this same Turk,
Let Us now return to our old work;
Of looking out for our lost sheep,
The Cape, and Islands round, we sweep:
Miork, Minork, and Iversey,
We seach about our lost to see:
He that the Mary first can see,
Two Dollars in his way 'twill be.
We look out sharp, no news can hear,
Pray God they are not in Argeir:
But yet I think, they would make good fight,
It Is not three Turks, would them affright.
One six and thirty Guns does carry,
And she by name, is called the Mary:
For two Turks Ships, she does not care,
At Mizen Topmast Head most fair;
Saint George's Flag, she bears withal,
A three Decked ship she is and tall:
The Captain is of Courage bold,
For Turks he will not be contrould;
Captain Hunt he is called, good Ships he ever,
Did sail forth of brave Londons River,
The Lewis, she has twenty four,
A true Consort both day and hour,
She Would do what lay within her power.
In Orange Fire-ship, Captain Ball,
Would execution do withal.
So that they handsome Fight would make,
Before the Turks they should them take:
But that we fear now most of all,
The Orange Fire-ship, Captain Ball;
She was so Leaky and so old,
That we do fear she founder would,
But God who knows each thing above,
I hope that fear will soon remove.
January, the fourth day from Sea,
We did approach near Iversey:
We Anchored, sent our Boat to hear,
Whether or no they had been there;
No news being there, we went ^o work,
Heaved up our Anchor for Miork:
January the fifth day we got,
Unto Miork, but found them not:
The Dartmouth Pink, before called Ketch,
We found her in our morning watch;
One Merchant Ship there was beside,
Which at an Anchor here did Ride.
The Spaniards us no Prodick gave,
Because so many Guns we will have,
As we gave him; but he will have odds,
He Vowed, and Swore, by all his gods;
That Governor, presumtuous Elf,
May take a Knife and hang himself;
Before that we will him honor so,
Therefore a way strait-ways we go;
With Dartmouth in our company,
That fifth day we did put to Sea:
Unto the Eastward we did stretch,
Once more our lost to find, we search:
Three Sail of Ships, we then espied,
As they unto the Westward plied:
We strait-way thought, they were out lost,
But by misfortune we were crossed:
For they were Frigots Kent and Swallow,
The Lawson, Merchant-man, them follow;
Without Main-top-mast, cause that she,
Her Main-cap then, had spent at Sea:
With pensive hearts, we turn again,
And bend our Course, next for the Main:
And four days after we did steer,
Into the Bay called Alleer;
With Dartmouth in our company,
The Kent and Swallow, left at Sea:
Who that same (...) ^air wind did want,
To gain that Port^^^^'d Alicant:
Here we got Water store, and Wine,
The Spaniards they were very kind:
The ninth day we did get the Bay,
And stayed only till next day;
Then weighed again, though wind but scant,
On twelfth day we got Alicant.
The Mary and the Lewis, here we found,
Which made our joys at this time to abound*
No news of the poor Orange we,
Can here since we her lost at Sea:
We give her over quite for lost,
The men all to be drowned, that is worst.
'Bout twenty Sail of small Craft we,
Here found now bound with us to Sea:
But first we Liquour'd well our Brains,
Which made well for the Spaniards gains:
We drank store of this blood of Bulls,
And so we parted from these Culls.
Upon the fourteenth we did weigh,
With all our Fleet we put to Sea:
Where we a small Levant had got,
But long the same it lasted not;
On fifteenth day to the Southwest,
It came, which was none of the best.
Some of our men Pooke Pudding got,
And run with it in the Fore-top;
They eat it all, it is very true,
And gave the Bag unto the Sow:
With as good will, they could I swear,
Have eat him, had they had him there;
Or else they would a broke his Neck,
But he keeps on the Quarter Deck:
And if the Top were there, I say,
Perpaps he enter in it may.
No Luck did follow this same Jest,
The VVind blew hard at the Southwest:
On sixteenth day, it blew a storm,
But yet the small men took no harm;
Only a little separated,
Some Leagues asunder, being parted:
We bore up Helm, and looked them out,
Before two days were past about;
We did them bring once more together,
For all the late fierce stormy weather.
Only one Ship did go astray,
He was cross grained known, always.
Of the West Country him we found,
With Ki^^ick down, near Table Round:
Sir John his Pinnace sent Aboard,
But he would scarce give them good word:
Do what we can, proffer a Tow,
This cross-grained man will not with us go:
Perhaps his Ship he has secured,
And then her loss may be endured;
And by her loss, he will get gain,
Although his poor men suffer pain:
For they their Wages all are forcst,
To loose, if in this Nature crossed.
Now we have calm days, two or three,
For the late storm endured we:
But on the two and twentieth day,
The VVind came to Southwest, I say;
It only breathed a little while,
Poor simple Saylors to beguile:
God send it fair, for we would fain,
With joy Old England see again.
Now for Rocoeta we did steer,
Which is to Almarea near:
Here is a Castle does command,
Three or four Guns which in it stand.
The little Dartmouth, and the Kent,
Along the shore from us they went;
To look that same West Country Hick,
Which at our Kindness once did Kick:
Now they haveorders him perforce,
To take, which for him will be worse.
Himself he cannot well excuse,
Sir John his patience to abuse.
The three and twentieth day fore night,
Of this Rocoeta we got sight;
Until next day there we did Ride,
With all our Merchant Ships beside.
Likewise the three and twentieth day,
Of this same January we;
Our Ships sides scrapt, and also paid,
On upper Streaks, we Blackin laid:
On four and twentieth day, we then
Did hele our Ship, and make her clean:
And from Rocoeta we did weigh,
On that same four and twentieth day;
With small Levant, and easy Gale.
On Afternoon we did set Sail.
Good Wind there is at this same place,
But yet the same is something scarce:
Their Sheep and Poultry is not scant,
But yet the same cheap price they want.
The Kent and Dartmouth, when we weigh,
We saw in Almarea Bay;
With that some small West Countryman,
Which they in Tow, had got a Stern;
All this same night, with handsome Gale,
Along the Shore we bravely Sail;
But this same little Levant Wind,
Till next day only stands our Friend:
So calm it proved then withal,
It would not fill least Sail, though small.
And on the twenty seventh day,
It came to the Southwest, I say:
Once more we from Rocoeta steer,
And then we went a Fishing there;
Where we got store of Mullets Fish,
By Spaniards counted dainty Dish:
The thirtieth day we weigh again,
The Hills all full of Fogs, and Rain:
Which Spaniards count, sign of Levant,
Which the next day did not want.
A great disaster now befell,
To our Cooks Mate, which now I Will tell;
With bag of Rice, nigh hand a Peck,
He stood at Capstant bout his Neck;
Which he had pincht at times away,
His place he lost by it, I say:
I shall not name him, but a place,
He did not want, though they were scarce;
For they a Swabber of him made,
Though he liked best his former Trade;
Now he must Swab first here, then there,
They make him flourish every where:
The poor man lives a Life so bad,
Twould make some Hair-braind man go mad
But this himself he comforts by,
The Voyage does to an end draw nigh.
This was the Day, oth' Marryrdom,
Of Charles the First, King James's Son;
And our Kings Father, who did Die,
By (...) ^ands, sad, Tragedy.
Therefore each Ship his Colors bears,
But half mast up, in mournful ways;
And Sir John, he does first begin,
To Fire, as to a Burying:
Each Gun a Minutes space asunder,
And so the whole Fleet, they did thunder;
Which made the Spaniards greatly wonder.
There Is naught uncertain more than wind,
And Money called, a she Friend:
For on the one and thirtieth day,
It chopped about again, I say:
But on the first of February,
It came unto the Eastward bravely;
And blew a fresh Levant withal,
Which filled our Sails, both great and small;
So that upon the third day we,
The Town of Malhago did see:
And then it left us to our fortune,
The winds being various and uncertain.
This Malhago, we drunk good store,
And dear we paid for it therefore:
Though Spaniards sold it at cheap price,
Our Hucksters they were over wise:
For now three pounds a quarter Cask,
They sold it for what they would ask:
They had it now without dispute,
It would a bought a man a Suit:
It Is for Pay-day, that now they drink,
Which e're it comes, long time they think.
Therefore to drink away sad care,
For price these poor men will not spare:
Now each man his half quarter Cask,
So common was, as if a Flask.
A week in this same muddy sort,
We Rid, methoughts it was good sport;
To see them reel about with Casks,
As at Legorn they did with Flasks:
But I that week, was out the way,
Which I want sorry for it, I say.
Until the tenth day, here we Rid,
With all our Fleet also beside:
Now for next Tavern we are bound.
Therefore from hence we did break ground*
The Boatswain winds his cawl, get bars,
In Capstant, come let us to the Wars;
My Boys, to Cales we next are bound,
And then adue to Spanish Ground.
A fair wind now we did not want,
For we did get a strong Levant;
Which unto Cales did bring us bravely,
The thirteenth day of February*
Where we did than Sir Edward see,
With several Ships of Merchantree:
Likewise his Squadron there most bold,
Which for Turks ships, will not be contrould.
The Hampshire we did find, and Portsmouth,
The Victory Fire-ship, and the Nonsuch:
The Argeire Frigot likewise we,
There at an Anchor now did see.
All which belonged unto his Squadron,
Besides of Merchant Ships, a Chaldron:
For always when you come to Cales,
You find the Harbor full of Sails.
Sir William Jennings, he came in,
The sixteenth day with Merchantmen:
He then the Princess did command,
The Falcon did his second stand.
His men his Livery did wear,
Ashore at Cales, most brave and fair:
I mean his Boats-crew for his love,
From them no time he will remove;
For he great love has for his Crew,
The truth I Will speak, give him his due.
The twentieth day, with Falcon he,
And several Ships of Merchantre:
From Cales Road, then did Sail away,
Bound for the Straights they were, I say;
For they that time fair Wind had got,
Therefore they weighed, and lingered not.
February one and twentieth day,
We all from Cales did Sail away:
'Bove forty Sail, both great and small.
From Cales that day, we Sailed all.
Sir Edward Sprage, came out that day,
But yet he Sailed not away:
He for some* Victualers then did tarry,
Up in the Straights with him to carry.
The VVind being Notherly we Sale,
Unto the Westward, with brave Gale:
Adue to Spain and Spanish ground,
Now to Old England we are bound.
You English Giles, look in your Glasses,
For now we fancy English Lasses:
Your Spanish Girls no more we will fancy,
But Peg, and Mol, sweet Sue, and Nancy;
And we will bring home some Spanish Sherry,
On purpose for to make you Merry.
Long time 'twas since our last Adue,
Yet oft-times have we thought on you;
And many a cheerful Spanish Cup,
In your remembrance we have Supt:
Indeed the same did you no good,
But yet it cheered, and warmed our Blood:
We long to see you, may our Sails,
Be always full of Southwest Gales;
And then in short time we shall come,
Once more to our desired Home:
Upon the three and twentieth day,
We Cape Saint Marys saw, I say*
The Winds hang Notherly, therefore,
For better daily we Implore.
The seven and twentieth day than we,
Five Portugals did see at Sea;
An Admiral, and Vice Admiral,
With three Sail more, which were but small.
New Moon, New Month, New Wind,
The first of March, did stand our friend;
For now it came to the Southwest,
Which to you well is known the best.
And boldest for us may it stand,
Till we get sight of English Land:
Where we our old Friends then shall see,
I hope with Mirth and Jollity:
Then all the Hardship we endured,
This Voyage, in one month will be cured.
When we get with the Maids to play,
When they are making of the Hay;
The Milkmaids Pales, we seize on shall,
Drink up their Milk, and pay for it all.
Though they at first are something nice,
With them we will not stand for price:
Good Sack we send for Sullebubs,
We drink them in these Milkmaids Tubs;
And more than that, we an't such Clowns,
But we will give to them green Gowns:
If they so willing are as we,
It Is ten to one but that may be*
But hold my Muse, with sorrow mourn,
Because the VVind does forwards turn:
Our Sheets hald Aft, and Tacks Aboard,
On second day, upon my word.
But yet we hourly hope the best,
That it will come to the Southwest:
Our Prayers at this time God did hear,
For fore 'twas night the VVind came fair:
At the Southwest, with merry Gale,
Till two a Clock third day we Sail;
And then it chopped up to the West,
Which is not bad, nor yet the best:
But if it does not over blow,
Our Course we bravely still shall go.
On fifth day, then the VVind did come,
Unto the South, but blew not home:
And on the sixth to South-Southwest,
Which was as good as was the best:
The Mary her Main-top-mast lost,
This day by fortune being crossed:
We straight ways after her did bear,
And proffered help what we could spare.
They gave us thanks for our good will,
But they a Topmast had got still;
And Men and Seamen did not want,
With speed to get the same Alant:
Her Topmast, Mainsail, split that day,
Which they unbent without delay:
This same mischance was Afternoon,
But she her Geer did six full soon:
Eor fore that it was night than we,
Her Topmast through the Cape did see*
Next day full soon it was a Taunt,
And may it stand I pray God grant*
For Sir John Harman will not loose,
Her company for Friends nor Foes:
All other Ships he left to follow,
If they did please the Frigot Swallow;
He and the Dartmouth, by the Mary,
Let Winds blow fair, or contrary*
She carry does on Poop a Light,
And we keep near to her all Night.
I in the Mary now do Sail,
Toward Old England with brave Gale:
And about this time a Coat I wanted,
Which by some Verses soon was granted;
For cause the VVeather it was cold,
These Lines to rights, I strait-ways Scrould:
C ontrary Winds and VVeather bad,
A watch Coat's good, being thinly clad:
P ray be not angry, I Rehearse,
T o you my mind, Sir, now in Verse:
A watch Coat 'board of the Saint David,
I had the Boat-swains, and did wear it:
N ow I have none, though it be cold,
E nough is said, I Am something bold.
H Owever cold, yet in a storm,
U seful 'twould be to keep one warm:
N ow I suppose it is high time,
T o end at present this same Rhim.
This same I writ in windy Night,
When that the cold did me despite.
The wished effects these Verses had,
For I had Coat, me warmly clad:
Thanks I return unto the Giver,
I wish I may such Coat want never.
Of Northern Cape we had the length,
By virtue of this same Winds strength;
But now at eight a Clock at night,
The VVind came forwards, Oh despite!
But who can help this same misfortune,
This Marches weather's most uncertain.
The eighth and ninth, Winds Nor-Nor-west,
Did coldly blow, I do protest:
But yet we hope that better VVind,
Will in short time now stand our friend.
The tenth day in the morning early,
The VVind came to the VVestward bravely;
Then from the West to Sou-sou-west,
The VVind most bravely did increase:
And yet again in Afternoon,
Unto the West, but soon was done;
And to the Northward it did Veer,
Uncertain Winds this month there are;
With mizling Rains, and haizy weather,
The VVind is fickle all together.
At twelve a Clock at Night it came,
To the South-east, but almost calm;
From the South-east, to the South-west,
It came, and then we thought the best:
Because it round the Compass run,
At that same season with the Sun,
But yet the same had quickly done.
For we did find to our hard fortune.
The Winds once more to be uncertain.
For Northerly the VVind it came,
And very hard did blow the same;
For four days space fierce stormy weather,
With shores of Rain, and Gusts together*
But when the stormy Gusts were past*
Brave sereen weather came at last.
For on the sixteenth day we Sail,
Almost quite calm, with easy Gale:
And now we hope that change of VVind*
At this same time will stand our friend:
We are befriended with fair weather,
And little VVind four days together:
From us by English Ship we hear,
The Lizard does Northeast now bear;
From it 'bove fourscore Leagues we are,
I wish that we had VVind was fair;
In little time we should it Sail,
Had we but handsome Top-sail Gale.
The Mary on the eigteenth day,
New Topmast did get us, I say:
The former being old and cracked,
This last they set it nothing lackt;
They in Main-top-sail two ^*eefs had,
Low set to carry in weather bad:
Before perforce they hand it must,
For every sudden stormy Gust:
Or else a sprung a Mast for we,
This March bad weather find at Sea.
On nineteenth, and on twentieth day,
From North, to the Northeast, I say;
Once more into that hole it came,
Though we hoped better of the calm.
'Bout ten days space, we weather had,
Thick as Peace Pottage, very bad:
It is that time to make the Land,
For fear of some sunk Rock, shoal Sand:
Yet day by day, we soundings had,
Of fair England, which made us glad:
At length to our exceeding Joys,
We sight of Land did get, brave Boys.
The Hardship we before endured,
At this same time was all quite Cured;
Our Joys at this time did exceed,
On Deck we threw our Caps indeed:
Nay, some that time did on my word,
For Joy, their Caps threw Over-boatd.
Oh fair England! Thy lovely Banks,
I see once more, I give God thanks.
I always loved my Native Land,
England shall have my Heart, my Hand*
If War do chance, my dearest blood,
I will not spare to do Her good;
According to my poor endeavor,
My King and Country, I Will serve ever:
Though in Condition of mean sort,
I never will be sorry for it.
I still do hope before my end,
That my condition, it will mend:
The boldest Captain's but a Servant,
And we to them must be observant.
Yet can I not but pine to see,
A Coward raised to high degree:
But God be thankt, our Marshal Law,
Does such base Traitors, Hang and Draw.
By Dedford Town, Example there,
Was for such Blades, for to beware;
How they such Places take in trust,
Except that they were Stout and Just.
But hold my Muse: Where do thou run?
It Is time for thee, for to have done,
The Voyage does now draw to an end,
We for to the Downs, our Course do bend:
The VVind from West, to Sou-sou-west,
Did bravely blow, I do protest:
Which made our hearts and minds more merry,
Then when we drunk the Spanish Sherry.
It was the last of March that we,
Englands Lands end did bravely see:
And on April the second day,
Into the Downs we got, I say:
Not one days Victuals was on Board,
When we came in, upon my word.
Our Bread and Cheese, we had made even*
But we got more, thanks unto Heaven:
For here Provision we shall not want,
The same in England is not scant.
Pray God we may receive our Pay,
When we get up, without delay:
In misery they spend their Money,
That spend it fore that they get any.
And at Pay-day their Landlords come,
And take away the Total Sum:
Now to return a little back,
And speak of the great Mary's lack:
Her company in foundings we,
Did loose in that great Fogg at Sea:
Her absence did Sir John much trouble,
Because his care for her was double.
To seek her, time he cannot afford,
Provision was so scarce Aboard:
Into the Downs arrived we,
On Sunday: Tuesday in came she;
And did salute us with nine Guns,
We seven strait-ways her returns;
She three returns for thanks with speed,
Great Joy on both sides was indeed.
Reader, this Journal now is done,
Because of our safe home return:
If that Kings Ship no Voyage make worse,
The Nation needs not grudg their Purse:
The Prayers of Merchantmen we have,
For from the Turks their Ships we save:
With us no Ship did e're miscarry,
Sir John so wise was and so wary:
If ought they wanted in their need,
Unto Sir John they came with speed;
For to supply them in their want,
He unto them was never scant.
I many Instances could name,
But vyhat need I speak of the same.
Cause Sir John Harman's so well known,
To all the world, more than to one:
My simple muse cannot rehearse,
Half Sir John's Merits, in good Verse:
A Theme too high for me to Write,
Though I do throw in my poor Mite;
Let better Wits him Eternize,
I must confess my self unwise.
Captain Darcys Merits must have share,
In little Dartmouth, for his care:
^eing Sir John's Second, it was great,
Although he were in a Fifth Rate.
Sir John, he says, Pray Captain go,
And back a Stern, take such in Tow;
No sooner said, but forthwith done,
About the Fleet he will nimbly Run:
And heavy Saylors bring away,
Into the Fleet, without delay.
FINIS.

