ANOTHER BALLAD: Called the Libertines Lampoone: OR, The Curvets of Conscience.
To the Tune of, Thomas Venner, Or 60.
Written by the Author of the Geneva Ballad
AS I examined my Conscience,
All by my self;
My head was full of Nonsense:
After seven times turning,
Worse then a burning,
I found she was a Wayward Elf.
Ceremonious Oaths, and humane Laws offend her,
She Is constant as a Weathercock, and as a Millstone tender;
E'ne such another Protestant, as the old Witch of Ender.
Halloo my Conscience whither will thou go.
Treason she says is Religion,
Sacrilege Zeal;
A Crow she calls a Pidgeon:
She tells you surther,
Plundering and Murder,
Do Service to the Commonweal.
Justice she esteems to be a very slow thing,
Power Ecclesiastic, she reckons as a low thing,
And for an Act of Parliament she counts it next to nothing;
Halloo my Conscience, etc.
A Nonconformist to please her,
Lately declared:
She Is more a Prince then Caesar;
Say what she will say,
These fellows still say,
She must and ought to be heard.
Though Malice can corrupt her, and Avarice can taint her,
Pride can blow her up, and Hypocrisy can paint her,
And when Truth cries her down Sedition can Saint her.
Halloo my Conscience, etc.
Changes she can Ring a hundred
More then are good,
Else it might be wondered,
In the mutations,
Of these three Nations
How upon her Legs she has stood.
For under the old Rumpers she was enforced to truckle,
Cromwell and his Janisaries made her glad to buckle,
And when the King came in, she got the trick to s^^ckle.
Halloo my Conscience, etc.
When Smec and the Independent
Began to Clash:
She could foresee the end on it;
And as soon as the day
First brake at Breda,
She kept her self out of the lash.
Although of the Surplice she never had a Rag on,
Of all her nimble tricks, this she has cause to brag on,
She pitched upon her Feet when Bell fought with the Dragon
Halloo my, etc.
Quite from bending and bowing,
She is declined:
To Theeing, and to Thouing,
Sects and persuasions
All Modes and Fashions,
Of every sort and kind.
She was a Brownist lately, an Anabaptist newly,
And then she fell to plainly, Verily and Truly:
But errors have no end, and factions want a Thule.
Halloo my, etc.
Such is her intricate winding
No Man can trace,
She loathes to hear of binding:
She Is free and willing,
Although it be by killing
To run the Fanatic Race.
He that can restrain her, may fix the stars that wander,
Cure the fits of Jealousy, or gag the Mouth of Slander:
Sail without a Rudder, and rectify Meander.
Halloo my, etc.
Drunk with the Doctrine of Tub men
See how she reels,
From Men of Law to Club-men,
This way and that way,
No man knows what way,
Unsteadfast as Phaetons Wheels:
In Faith none more fervent, in Charity none colder,
As fiery as Bucephalus, and then blind Byard bolder:
She Is too untame for Earth, and none but Hell can hold her.
I, I, it is thither, thither, she may go.
LONDON, Printed for F. K. and Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1674.


