THE SOVEREIGNTY of the BRITISH SEAS.

Proved By Records, History, and the Municipall Laws of this KINGDOM.

Written in the year 1633.

By that Learned Knight, Sr JOHN BOROUGHS, Keeper of the Records in the Tower
of London.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

To the Reader.
BE not startled to see so great a subject handled in so small a Volume. When
you have read but a little of this little, you will think the Author was tender
of your trouble but not of his own. For (how cheap soever you come by this
Book) it cost the Author the perusal and search of the best, and most Records
of our Nation. And yet he was one that knew well enough how to value his time;
for none made better use of it; and (in these kinds of Scrutinies) you may
believe he went the best way, because he knew them all, and trod them every
day; it being his Office not to be ignorant of any Records that concerned the
Honor or Antiquity of this Island. It was written at the request of a great
Person, who desired to understand the true State of the Question, concerning
the Dominion of the British Seas, as well what Histories as our own Records
would afford. And here it is done in a little room; for the Author was able to
speak fully, and briefly both at once. Some others have written of the same
Subject; and if we thought any spoke more, or so much, in so short compass,
we should forbear the publication of this. We are borne in an Island, and
cannot go out of it without asking leave of the Sea and Wind; and not to know
what Right we have to that Water which divides us from all the World, is
something ill becoming such as can read, and may know for reading. The Title is
not too big for the Book, though one of the greatest Ships of the World was
called by the same name; and (if some knowing Persons be not deceived) our
Author was the first that hinted it, having written this Discourse three years
before that famous Vessel was built.

Farewell.
The Soveraigntie Of the Seas of ENGLAND.
THat Princes may have an exclusive property in the Soveraigntie of the
several parts of the Sea, and in the passage, ^ishing and shores thereof, ^s so
evidently true by way of fact, as no man that is not desperately ^^pudent can
deny it and for the point of right, though some of late have endeavored by way
of argument to prove the contrary, affirming them to be not only public but
common; yet the notorious practice of all Maritime Countries, the necessity of
Order in mutual commerce, and the safety of men's persons, goods, and lives had
taught even the most barbarous Nations to know by the light of humane reason,
that laws are as equally necessary for the government and preservation of
such as frequent quent the Seas, as of those that trade, and negotiate on the
firm land. And that to make laws, and to give them the life of execution must
of necessity require a supreme authority, for to leave every part of the Sea,
and shores to an arbitrary and promiscuous use, with-a correcting out
and securing power in case of wrong, or danger is to make men of the like
condition with the fishes that live therein, of which the greater do usually
devour, and swallow the less.

I conceive therefore that Princes do entertain these School Problems, and
Criticismes, no otherwise then with contempt and scorn, much disdaining to be
wrangled out of the ancient rights and regalities annexed to their crowns, by
the subtle Arguments of wit and Sophistry, specially considering that
amongst the Civil Lawyers themselves there is so great diversity of opinion,
whilst some peremptorily maintain, Groitus de Mari libero.
That Mare and littora maris jure Gentium sunt communia. Others as confidently
saying, Videmus de jure Gentium in mare esse distincta dominia sicut in terra.
Baldus ad L. dererum dominijs.
And further, mare ipsum ad centum usque milliaria pro territorio districtuque
illius Regionis, eviproxim. appropinquat assignatur: with many other like
alterations Barthol. in Tract. de Insulis.
diameter wife contradictorie the one to the other; And therefore the question
being not as yet resolved amongst themselves, it were strange to think that
Princes in the mean time will relinquish the possession of those Royalties
which they and their Ancestors have held beyond all memory, without a judgment
first agreed upon, and affirmed in the case. And for his sacred Majesty our
dread Sovereign Lord the King, such is his clear and indubitable right to the
Superiority of the Seas of England derived and confirmed upon him by
immemorable prescription, and continued in possession even until this very
year 1633. that the hearts and consciences of all just men must necessarily
subscribe to the evident truth thereof. But if contrariewise any shall presume
and go about actually to dispossess his Majesty of this his undoubted
birthright, or usurp upon his Soveraigntie in a case so highly concerning his
honor, and safety, as well of his own kingdoms and subjects, as of other
Nations that under the wing of his protection do pass those Seas, his
Majesty (no doubt) will never be unprovided of a good sword to vindicate that
right which all his royal progenitors have carefully maintained, the laws and
customs of this kingdom have ratified and confirmed, and foreign Nations
have freely acknowledged; as by the subsequent momuments of Record, History,
and the Common laws of the land will evidently appear.

When Julius Caesar first undertook the Invasion of this our Isle of Britain,
he found the neighboring Nation of the Gauls in a manner altogether ignorant
of the Island it self, the condition of the Inhabitants, their Towns, Havens,
and approaches, Quae omnia fere Gallis erant incognita, Co^ de bello Gallic. l.
4. fol. 72. m. 8.
neque enim temere praeter mercatores adit ad illos quisquam, neque eis ipsis
quidquam, praeter oram Maritimam, atque eas Regiones quae sunt contra Galliam,
notum est. So are the words of Caesar whereby it appears that the Britains
kept off all Strangers except Merchants from approaching their confines, and
that those Merchants in their access were restrained to the shore only, that
lay opposite to the Gauls, without being suffered to make further discoveries
of the more remote coasts. Insomuch that the same Caesar upon diligent
examination of those Merchants, Ibidem.
Neque quanta esset Insulae magnitudo, neque quae, and quantae Nationes
incolerent, neque quem usum belli haberent, aut quibus institutis uterentur,
neque qui essent ad majorum naviu^ multitudine^ idonei portus, reperire
poterat. which restaint of strangers they could not otherwise make good but by
the goodness and greatness of their Shipping, as may be gathered by the words of
the same Caesar afterward used. For though the Britains for ordinary
employment, and Rivers, and upon the Coasts near the maine, had Ships composed
of mean stuff, having their Keeles, and Ribs made of slight timber, and the
rest of the Hull rooven up with Osyers covered with leather. Carinae Primum ac
statumina ex levi materia fiebant, De bello Civil. lib. 1. p 233.
reliquum corpus navinm viminibus contectum coriis tegebatur: (From whence
Caesar took his pattern of those Ships which he was forced to frame on the
sudden for passing his Army over the River near Ilerda in Spain, without which
he had utterly lost both it, and himself) yet had they, and their
Confederates, other shipping of so great bulk and strength, and withal so
serviceable in fight at sea, that Caesar in their description prefers them
far before those of the Romans; for in the Navall preparations made by the
Gauls of Venice, near the mouth of the River Loyer (wherein he expressly
says, that they had ( Auxilia) supplies from the opposite part of Britain)
he sets forth their Ships in such manner as (considering the time) may
justly move admiration. De bello Gallico. lib. 3. pa. 55.
Ipsorum Naves (says he) ad hunc modum factae armataeque erant. Carinae
aliquanto planiores quam nostrarum Navium, quo facilius vada, ac decessum
aestus excipere possent, prorae admodum erectae, atque item puppes ad
magnitudinem fluctuum, tempestatumque accomodatae, Naves totae factae ex
robore, Ibidem.
etc. And again, Neque enim his nostrae rostro nocere poterant, tanta erat
firmitudo, neque propter altitudinem facile telum adjiceb atur. Et eadem de
causa minus commode scopulis continebantur. Accedeb ant ut cum saevire ventus
cae pisset and se vento dedissent, and tempestatem ferrent facilius and in
vadis considerent tutius, and ab aestu derelicta nihil saxa, and cantes
timerent. And presently after, circiter ccxx. Naves eorum paratissimae, atque
omni genere armorum ornatissimae e portu profectae nostris adversae
constiterunt. Neque satis Bruto qui classi praeerat, Neque Tribunis militum,
Centurionibusque quibus singulae naves erant attributae constabat, quid
agerent, aut quam ratione^ pugnae institerent, Rostra^ enim noceri non posse
cognoverant, (...)
turbibus artem excitatis, tamen has altitu do puppium ex barbaris navibus
super abat, ut neque ex inferiori loco satis commode tela adjici possent, and
missa a Gallis gravins acciderent. And that the Britains not only at this
time but in most of those Wars of the Gauls, did send them aids, and
supplies against the Romans, the words of Caesar evidently declare, who
intending to invade their country, pretended no other quarrel then, De bello
Gall. lib. 4.
Quod omnibus fere Gallicis hostibus nostris inde subministrata auxilia
intelligebat.

Yet these three confederates and neighbors the Gauls they permitted not
freely to pass the British seas, but kept them from knowing so much as their
opposite coasts, save only by way of Trade and Merchandise. And this to
certain appointed places near the sea-shoares where the known Marts and
Staples were appointed for commerce and traffic.

By all which it manifestly appears that before the Roman conquest the
British Nation had the supreme power and command of their own Seas without
the competition of any other Nation whatsoever.

So likewise when the Romans had made themselves possessorie Lords of the
Island, and the Soveraigntie of the Seas thereunto belonging was in them, and
accordingly continued and was maintained, without incroachment, or pretense of
title thereunto made by the other. But when the Civil wars and distraction
of the Roman Empire had by exhausting of the flower of the Britain youth, so
much infeebled the Nation, as enforced them to call in the Saxons to their aid
against the Picts their insolent neighbors, and for suppressing the national
factions grown up amongst themselves, and those Saxons (working upon the
weakness of the Britains) had expelled them from the better parts of the
Kingdom, though for a time they were diverted from settling their own affairs
by the powerful invasions of the Danes and their homebred quarrels, grown by
reason of the several petty Kingdoms of their Heptarchie, yet when they were
all reduced under one head, they forgot not to assume their right of
Sovereignty in the seas of England. As did the most noble Edgar, who in the
glorious title of his Charters, yet extant of those times, speaks as
follows.

Altitonantis Dei largiflua Ex. Charta fundatiouis Ecclesiae chathed Wigor.
clementia, qui est Rex Regum. Ego Edgarus Anglorum Basileus omnium-que rerum
Insularum Oceani quae Brittaniam circumjacent, cunctarumque Nationum, quae
infra eam includuntur Imperator and dominus etc.

And for maintenance of this his Soveraigntie he continually kept in readiness
a Navy of four hundred ships, which being divided into four several Fleets
of one hundred Ships a piece did every year after Easter take their course to
the four quarters of England where they remained to guarde, and scowre the Seas
until winter following. So says Ranulphus Cestrensis.
Ranulphus Cestrensis. Idem quoque Edgarus 400 Naves congregavit ex quibus omni
anno post festum Paschale, 100 Naves ad quamlibet Augliae partem statuit, sic
aestate Insulam circumnavigavit, hyeme vero iudicia in Provincia exercuit.

Etheldred after Edgar for defense of the Seas, and kingdoms caused of every
three hundred and ten hides of land a ship to be built, which meeting at
Sandwich, made the greatest Navy that ever this kingdom set forth to Sea.

And Canutus the Dane, coming not long after to be King, first of half the
Realm by by composition between him, and Edmund Ironside, and after the death
of Edmond of the whole Survivorshippe, did for his own time (as his Successors
of the Danish race after him) preserve the Seas of the Kingdom in their former
estate, without admitting any the neighbor Princes to have any dominion in any
part thereof.

And so they remained in the time of the Confessor until the conquest made by
William Duke of Normandy, in whose reign, and for many discents after him, the
Soveraigntie of the said Seas was so far from being evicted that it was never
so much as questioned by any Nation until the time of Edward the first, about
the year 1299. and the six and twentieth of his reign. At which time the King
of France being upon terms of hostility with those of Flanders, did by his
Commission constitute one Reyner Grimbald Admiral of his Navy which he then
sent forth against the Flemmings by virtue of which Commission, Grimbald in
passing to and again in the Seas of England, took upon him Sovereign
Jurisdiction, as Admiral unto the French King in those Seas, taking the
people, and Merchants of England, and other Nations, and carrying them into
France, where he caused them to abide his judgment, and a ward concerning
their goods and Merchandice; But shortly after the Kings of England and of
France appointed by agreement certain Commissioners (termeed Auditors in the
Record) to hear, and redress the wrongs interchangably done by their Subjects
contrary to the peace formerly made between them at Paris, before which the
Commissioners the Agents (or Procurators as the Record names them) for the
Maritime coasts of the greatest part of the Christian world, of Genoa, Spain,
Germany, Holland, Zealand, Freezland, Denmark, and Norway, made this
remarkable acknowledgment and declaration following, which out of the old
French of that time I have rendered into English, the title whereof is thus in
Latin.

De superioritate Maris Angliae and jure officii Admirallatus in codem. Record
in the Tower of London.

To our Lords Auditors deputed by the Kings of England and of France, to
redress the damages done to the people of their Kingdoms, and of other
Territories subject to their Dominions by sea, and by land, in time of peace
and truce.

The Procurators of the Prelates, Nobles, and Admiral of the sea of England,
and of the Comminalties of Cities and Towns, and of Merchants, Mariners,
Messengers, Pilgrims, and of all other of the said Kingdom of England, and the
Territories subject to the Dominions of the said King of England, and of other
places, as of the Seacoasts of Genoa, Cataloigna, Spain, Almaigne, Zealand,
Holland, Freezland, Denmark, and Norway, and of diverse other places of the
Empire, do show, That whereas the Kings of England, by reason of the said
Kingdom from time whereof there is no memory to the contrary, have been in
peaceable possession of the Dominion of the Sea of England, and of the Isles
being in the same, in making, and establishing Laws and Statutes, and
restraints of Arms, and of Ships, otherwise furnished then to ships of
merchandise appertains, and in taking surety; and affording, safeguard in
all cases where need shall be, arie
in ordering of all other things necessary for maintaining of Peace, Right, and
Equity, amongst all manner of people, as well of other Dominions as of their
own, passing through the said Seas, and the Sovereign guard thereof, and in
doing Justice, Right, and Law, according to the said Laws, Ordinances, and
Restraints, and in all other things which may appertain to the exercise of
sovereign dominion in the places aforsayd. And A. de B. Admiral of the Sea
deputed by the King of England, and all other Admiralls ordained by the said
King of England, had been in peaceable possession of the sovereign guard, with
the cognizance of Justice, and all other the appurtenances aforesaid, except in
case of Appeal, and of complaint made of them to their Sovereigns the Kings
of England in default of Justice, and for evil Judgment, and especially in
making Restraints, doing of Justice, and taking surety of the peace of all
manner of people using Arms in the said Sea, and carrying Ships otherwise
furnished, and set forth then to Merchants Ships appertains, and in all other
points where a man may have reasonable cause to suspect them of Robbery, or of
other misdemeanors. And whereas the Masters of the ships of the said Kingdom
of England in the absence of the said Admiral has been in peaceable
possession of taking Cognizance and judging all actions done in the said Sea,
between all manner of people according to the said laws, Statutes,
restraints, and customs. And whereas in the said first Article of
confederation lately made between the said Kings in the treaty upon the last
peace at Paris are comprised the words which follow in a Schedule annexed to
these presents First it is estreated, and accorded between us, and the
messengers and Procurators aforesaid in the names of the said Kings. That the
said Kings shall from this time forward be one to the other good, true, and
loyal friends, and ayding against all men (save the Church of Rome) in such
manner, as if any one, or more whatsoever they be, would disinherit, hinder or
molest the said Kings in the Franchises, liberties, privileges, rights,
duties, customs of them and of their Kingdoms they shall be good and loyal
friends, and ayding against all men that may live, and die, to defend, keep,
and maintain, the Franchises, liberties, privileges, rights, duties, and
customs abovesaid, except to the King of England Mounsieur John Duke of
Brabant in Brabant, and his heirs descended of him, and of the daughter of the
King of England, and except to our foresaid Lord the King of France the
excellent Prince Mounsieur Dubart King of Almaigne, and Mounsieur John Earl of
Anhault in Anhault, and that the one shall not be of Counsel, or ayding, where
the other may lose life, member, estate, or temporali honor; Mounsieur Reyner
Grimbald master of the said Navy of the said King of France, who names himself
Admiral of the said Sea deputed by his Lord aforesaid in his war against the
Flemmings, after the said confederation made, and established, and against the
form, and force of the said confederation, and the intention of them that made
it, wrongfully assumed the office of the admiraltie in the said Sea of England,
by the commission of the King of France, and used the same one year, and more,
taking the people and Merchants of the kingdom of England, and of other places
passing through the said Sea with their goods, and delivered the people, so
taken to the prison of the said Lord the King of France in the Ports of his
said kingdom, as to him forfeited, and accrewing. And the taking, and
detayning of the said people with their said goods, and Merchandise, as also
his said judgment, and award has justified before the Lords Auditors in
writing by virtue of the authority of his said commission of the Admiraltie
aforesaid by himself usurped, and during a restraint generally made by the
King of England by reason of his power, and according to the form of their
articles of the confederation aforesaid, which contains the words
underwritten, requiring that he might be acquitted, and absolved of the same,
to the great damage and prejudice of the King of England, the Prelates,
Nobles, and others above named.

Wherefore the said procurators in the names of their said Lords, do pray your
Lordships Auditors aforesaid that you cause due, and speedy deliverie of the
said people with their goods and Merchandise so taken and detained to be made
to the Admiral of the said King of England to whom the Cognizance of the same
of right appert aineth (as is before expressed) So that without the disturbance
of you, or any other, he may take Cognizance thereof, and to do that which
appertains to his office aforesaid. And the said Mounsieur Reyner Grimbald
be condemned, and constrained to make satisfaction to all the said parties
dampnifyed, so far forth as he shall be able, and in his default his said Lord
the King of France, by whom he was deputed in the said Office; And that after
due satisfaction made to the parties dampnified the said Mounsieur Reyner, be
so duly punished for the violation of the said confederation, that his
punishment may be an example to others in time to come.

In the Record these memorable points are to be observed.
First, That the Kings of England had then been in peaceable possession of the
said Dominion of the said Sea of England by immemorable prescription.

Secondly, that the Sovereignty belonged unto them, not because they were
Domini utriusque ripae, as when they had both England and Normandy, and so were
Lords of both shoares. For Edward the First at this time had not Normandy, but
that it is inseparably appendant and annexed unto the Kingdom of England, our
Kings being superior Lords of the said Sea, by reason (as the said Record
speaks) of the said Kingdoms.

Thirdly, only the Kings of England had power to make Laws, and exercise
supreme Jurisdiction over all persons, and in all causes within the said Sea,
and in their absence to the Masters of their said Ships only appertains.

Fourthly, That the, King of France could not make an Admiral in that Sea
without doing wrong to the King of England, but that it was an usurpation upon
his right.

Lastly, that all this was affirmed, and acknowledged by the Agents of most
part of Christendom, being strangers to the Crown of England.

Surely I believe no Prince in the world can produce clearer evidence for any
part of his estate then the King of England by this Record can do for his
Sovereignty, and exclusive Jurisdiction in the Sea of England. Yet for further
declaration hereof, I will add certain others of succeeding times in
affirmance of that above mentioned.

The first whereof is that of King Edward 3. being an Article amongst others,
upon which the Kings Justices were to be advised, with all the title of the
Record, being as follows.

Articuli super quibus Justiciarii Domini nostri Regis sunt consulendi.
Item ad finem quod resumatur, and continuetur ad subditorum prosecutionem
forma procedendi, quondam ordinata and inchoata per Avum Dominum nostruns
Regis, and ejus Concilium ad restituendum, and conservandum antiquam
superioritatem Maris Angliae, and jus officii Admirallatus in eodem, quod
corrigendum leges and statuta per ejus Antecessores Angliae Reges du dum
ordinata, ad conserv an dum pacem and justitiam inter omnes Gentes Nationis
cujuscunque per mare Angliae transeuntes, and ad cognoscendum super omnibus in
contrarium attemptatis in eodem, and ad puniendum delinquentes and damna parti
satisfaciendum. Quae quidem leges, and statuta per Dominum Richardum quondam
Regem Angliae in redditu suo a terra sancta correcta fuerunt, interpretata,
declarata and Insula de Olleron publicata and nominata in Gallica lingua. Lay
loy Olleron.

In this Record (as in the former) the ancient right of the King of Englands
superiority in the Seas of England, and the large extent thereof is clearly
specified, but especially in the conclusion we may observe to the great glory
of our English Nation, that the famous Laws of Olleron (which (after the
Rhodian Laws were antinquated and absolete) have now well near 500. years
been received by all the Christian world for regulating Sea affairs, and
deciding Maritime controversies, were first declared by King Richard the first
(a King of England) at his return from the Holy land, and by him caused to be
published in the Isle of Olleron (then belonging to the Duchy of Aquitane) and
thereupon, and from that Island took their name, which they yet retain; and
this is the more worthy of note, because until this Record (being lately
found) was produced, the most learned Lawyers, and Antiquaries of our times
were altogether ignorant by whom those Laws were ordained, and why they were
so called. To the same purpose and effect is this original in French, but
expressed here in English.

Item, Record Regis in Tower.
to the end that having seen and considered the forms of proceeding and
Letters, ordained by the Counsel of our said Lord (Grandfather to the King)
for them, and the said Nation of England, to recover, and retain the said
Subjects, Assistants and Allies, and to cause redress to be made unto them for
all damages done to them on Sea, and Land during the said Truce, Peace, and
Confederation, and against the form of the same by the said French their
Assistants and Allies, and to show the clamor of the people for the said
disinheritance, and the damages which by reason of such clamor might happen,
and especially to retain the Sovereignty, which his Ancestors the Kings of
England used to have in the said Sea of England, as touching the ancient
declaration, and interpretation of Laws by them made to govern all manner of
people passing through the said Sea. And first to his Admiral, and Masters,
and Mariners of the Ships of the Cinque Ports of England, and of all other
Lands annexed to the Crown of England, belonging to his Army in the said Sea,
the like forms of proceedings and letters be henceforth observed, with all
such amendment as may be ordained by the said Consells of our said Lord the
King to the profit, and honor of him.

And moreover the Record following, shows how much that great King Edward the
third held himself in honor bound not to suffer the dominion of the Sea to be
lost, or impaired in his time, but especially we are in it to observe that the
Kings of England were anciently as now Domini Anglicani circumquaque. Lords of
the Seas environing England, for so the words of the Record are.

Rex dilecto, and fideli suo Galfrido de Say, Admirallo flotae suae naevium ab
ore aquae Thamisiae, versus parts Occidentales, salutem. Cum nuper nos
animadvertentes quod Progenitores nostrum Reges Angliae, Domini Maris
Anglicatani circumquaque, and etiam defensores contra hostium invasiones ante
haec tempora extiterunt. Et plurimum nos taederet si honor noster regius in
defensione hujusmodi armis (quod absit) depereat temporibus nostris, aut in
aliquo minuatur etc. Mandamus vobis quod statim visis presentibus, et absque
ulteriori dilatione, naves portuum praedictorum and alias naves, quae jam
paratae existunt super mare tene atis.

And first to the practique proof of this Dominion, and Superiority in all
succeeding times, what can be more pertinent, and material then to show.

That the Kings of England successively have had the Sovereign guard of the
Seas.

That they have imposed taxes and tributes upon all Ships passign and fishing
therein.

That they have stoped, and opened the passage thereof, to strangers as they
saw cause.

That all wrecks and and Royal fishes therein found are originally due and do
belong unto them.

Every of which particulars the testimonies following will amply manifest.

As touching therefore the guard of the Seas. It is apparent by the Records of
Parliament, and by the printed books of Statutes, that Tomage and Poundage
were granted, as for other reasons, so especially, and all ways, for enabling
the King to guard the Seas. And accordingly diverse admiralls from time to time
were constituted by Commission for that purpose, of which there are multitudes
of presidents upon Records. It may suffice to insert this one instead of many.

Rex Charissimo consanguineo suo Henrico Duci Exoniae salutem. Sciatis cum nos
etc. retinuerimus vos sub certis modo and forma ad proficiendum in servitio
nostro supra Mare, super custodia ejusdem, etc. Ordin avimus and assignavimus
vos, and vobis tenore presentium plenam, et sufficientem committimus, et damus
potestatem, et authoritatem generalem et specialem ad proficiscendum supra mare
cum retinentia vestra, Piratasque et Spoliatores, Mercatorum, et Piscatorum tam
Anglorum, quam extraneorum cum eorum Navibus, et capiend. et arrestand. et eos
juxta casus et juris exigentiam similiter castigand. etc.

And to this purpose we find frequent protections granted to such of the
Subjects as were in service with their Admiralls, As to Thomas Warren of
Bristoll, qui in obsequium Regis in comitiva dilectiet fidelis consanguinei
Johannis Comitis Wigorum unius custodum Maris super salva custodia et
defensionem ejusdem Maris moratur.

So likewise unto John Ward, qui in obsequio Regis in comitiva dilecti, and
fidelis consanguinei nostri Richardi comitis Sarum unius custodum Maris super
salva custodia and defensione ejusdem profecturus est.

And the like to Richard Clarke, qui in Regis obsequio in comitiva dilecti and
fidelis consanguinei Regis Johannis comitis Oxoniae unius custodum maris super
salva custodia and defensione ejusdem moratur.

I shall not need to more of elder times for declaration of this point, since
our own memories can testify that diverse Ships have been sent forth by our
Sovereigns at sundry times upon the like employment, besides those that have
constantly kept the Narrow Seas, unto which all strangers even at this day
veil Bonnet in acknowlegement of this Superiority, according to this
Ordinance made by King John many hundred years past, worthy to be remembered,
and observed, which out of the old French I have here verbatim translated into
Enlish.

Item, Inter leges marinas sub fine
It was ordained at Hastings for a Law and Custom of the Sea in the second
year of the reign of King John, by the advice of the Lords Temporal, That if
a Lieutenant in any voyage being ordained by Common Council of the Kingdom
do encounter upon the Sea any Ships or vessels laden, or unladen, that will
not strike and veil their Bonnets at the commandment of the Lieutenant of
the King, or of the Admiral of the King, or his Lieutenant, but will fight
against them of the Fleet, that if they can be taken, they be reputed as
enemies, and their Ships, Vessels, and Goods taken, and forfeited as the Goods
of Enemies, although the Masters or Possessers of the same would come
afterward and allege, that they are the Ships, Vessels, and Goods of those
that are Friends to our Lord the King, and that the common people being in the
same be chastised by imprisonment of their bodies for their rebellion, by
discretion.

Concerning Taxes, and Tributes imposed upon Ships passing, and fishing upon
our Seas, and Coasts, it will be proper in the first place to set down the
Ordinance made in the second year of Richard the second by the assent of the
whole estate in the Parliament, which upon the Roll of that year is recorded
in these words.

Ordinance et grant per I advise des Merchants de Londres et des autres
Merchants verse le North per assent de touts les Commons de Parliament per
devant le Countes de Northumberland et le Mayor de Londres pourle guard de mere
et costs de Admiral des North aux deux niefs.

Primerment pur prender de chacune neif et Crayer de quelque passage que pass
per la mere le dit Admiral alant et retournant pur le voyage de de chacune
Tonne tight vj.d

Iten de prendre des autres neifs et vesseaux possioners et p^sson entour
autres poissonniers sur le me re deins le dit Admiralty de quelle portage quil
soit en troys Semanies de chacune Tonne tight: vj.d

Iten de toutes autres neifs Crayes and vessaux passantes per mere deins le dit
Admiralty charges ove biens de Merchants in Exprenx on en Northway on en Sion
Ga de chacune Tomne tight vj.d

In which Ordinance of Parliament we may plainly observe that these payments
were imposed upon all ships passengers as well as fishers within those Seas.
And to the like purpose is this of Edward the fourth.

Rex dilectis and fidelibus Iohanni Henningham militi Willo Hopton, Pat. 22. E.
4. part 1. in 2. de conductu sive gardia Waftorum piscatorum.
Edv. Ynce, and Johanni Wamfllet; salutem Sciatis, quod cum nos pro securitate
Subditorum nostrorum commitatum Northhampt. and Southhampt. quam Navium, and
Piscatorum aui super mare per Costenus eorundem Comitatum piscari voluerunt sub
conductu and salva gardua dilectorum and fidelium nostrorum Edw. Ynce, Johannis
Dabey, unius valectorum Coronae, et Will. Thederston, quos custodes,
conductores, et Waftores pro securitate dictorum Piscatorum versus inimicos
nostros, super mare existentes, ad presens ordinavimus, de fidelitate, et
provida circumspectione vestris before confidentes, assignavimus vos
conjunctim, et divisim, ac vobis plenam potestatem et authoritatem tenore
presentium damus et committimus, tam ad custodes, conductores, et Waftores
illos supervi vendum, quam ad communicandum cum quibusdam Pifatoribus
cujuscunque patriae fuerint, qui in partibus praedictis, sub securitate
dictorum, Edmundi Ynce, Iohannis Dabey, et Will. Federston piscari voluerint,
Quod ipsi piscatores et eorum quilibet ad omnia, et omnimoda costas onera et
expensas eisdem custodibus conductoribus et waftoribus persentium sint tempore
piscationu^ contributores, ad hujusmodi costas, onera, et expensas illa de
hujusmodi piscationibus, piscatorum praedictorum, ubicunque inueniri poterunt,
levandum et colligendum. Nec non ad omnes alios fore custodes, conductores,
sive waftores alios, quam prenominatos, presumentes, vel attemptantes,
arrestandi, et capiendi et prox. Goalae nostrae committendum ibidem salvo, et
secure, quousque eorundem deliberatione ordinavimus, custodiendum, similiter
authoritatem et potestatem damus et committimus. Et ideo vobis et cuilibet
vestrum mandamus quod circa praemissa diligenter intendatis, et ea faciatis et
exequamini in forma praedicta.

In this Record is manifestly expressed that the King appointed wafters to guard
the fishers, not only of his own realm but forrainers and strangers that fish
upon his coasts, and that the wafters took a rateable proportion of every Ship
toward their costs, and expenses, in securing their fishing. And lastly that
these wafters were to prohibit all other wafters whatsoever that presumed to
take that office upon them, and to commit them to prison there to attend the
Kings pleasure. Camdens Brit.


To this effect the venerable Camden in his description of the North riding of
Yorkshire says, that the Hollanders in their fishing for herring upon the
Northcoasts of England did first obtain license of Scarborough Castle for to
do.

But that which is most material to the Sovereign command, and propriety of
our King in this point of fishing, especially appears in that all Neighbor
Princes have by treaty obtained license for their Subjects to fish in our
seas. As in truce, and abstinence of war agreed between Henry the fourth, and
the French, to the intent the Fishermen might fish in all parts, the King sent
forth his Letters, as follows.

Le Roy au toutz nous Admiralls and a fin qu'en cest present herringinson les
poissonniers de l'un pertie, and de l'auter puissoint peshenre plus seurement
in le mere les Herrings, and touts autres poissons enter le haven de
Scarborough, and de fin de pays de Flanders verle East and dillonques sur le
coast de Angleterre insanes an haven de Southampton and sur le coast du Royanne
de Frence de le dit fin de tout le dit pays de Flanders nisques a riviere de
Sound, sc. voulomus and avomus ordonne and oustre ordonnomus ottryons per ses
presents; Que touts les poissonniers de la dite party de France poissoynt
pesher seurement les herrens and toutz autres pessons durant cest herringnison
and nisques an primer jour de Januarie prochainment a vener and denis and enter
les bounds dessus limits.

The like liberty was granted by treaty between Henry the sixth and the
Duchess of Burgundy to those of Brabant, and Flanders, witnessed by the
Record following.

Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. Inspeximus quasdam continuationem, prorogationem,
and elargationem nuper facta super facto intercur sus, and commutationis
Merchandiz and Piscariae maris and aliarum rerum necessarium ad utilitatem
communem nostrorum regni Angliae dominii and Hiberniae et villae Caliciae ex
una part, et Ducatus Comitatus patriae Brabantiae, Flandriae, et Dominii
villae Machlinae ex altera part. Amongst other Articles this is one.

Item et touts pecheurs tam de Angleterre Ireland, et Calais peaceablement
aller partont sur le mer pur pischer et gaigner leur venvre fans impeachment on
disturber de l'vne party on de l'auter.

So in a Truce to endure for thirty years between the King of England and his
heirs on the one party, and the Duke of Burgundy and his heirs on the other
part. One Article is.

Item et touts pecheurs tam D'angleter quam d'Ireland et de Calais sicome de
pais de Mon Sur le Duke quelqueles soyent purront peaceablement aller par tout
sur le mer pur pescher, et sans (...) lour so it be saigne sur ceo requirer ou
obtitiner asc license conge ou sau^ conduict, etc.

The like in a truce, Franc. 8. E. 4.
and abstinence of War, to endure the space of thirty years between Edward
the fourth and his heirs on the one part, and Francis Duke of Britain on the
other part, where one Article is.

Item et touts, pescheurs tam D'angleter' sicome du dit pais et Duche de
Britaigne quelqueles soyent purront peaceablement aller par tout sur mer pur
pescher, et gaigner lour unture, sans impeachment ou disturber delv'ne party
au de la'uter, et sans ceo lour soit besaigne sur ceo requirer sans conduct.

Moreover, Philip the second, King of Spain, in the first year of Queen Mary
obtained license for his subjects to fish upon the North coast of Ireland for
the term of one and twenty years, paying yearly for the same a thousand
pound, which was accordingly brought into the Exchequer of Ireland, and
received of Sir Henry Fitton, being then Treasurer there, as his son Sir
Edward Fitton has often testified.

To conclude this point; It is notorious, that at this day the King of France
(as others of his predecessors have done) by the special license of the King
of England, fisheth upon our Coasts near Rye, with a set, and limited number
of small boats, and that only for provision of his own household, being tied
to observe the Orders and Laws of his own Fishermen; for breach whereof
diverse of his Subjects of late years have been taken and imprisoned in Dover
Castle, and elsewhere.

Nor does the King of England in these particulars claim, or use any
exorbitant Jurisdictions, and differing from that of other States and Princes
in like case, who generally give Aliens laws to pass or fish in the seas
coasting upon their Territories. And also impose Taxes and Tributes for their
own profit and commodity.

The Emperor of Russia compels all Fishermen within the Seas, though it be
many Leagues from the Maine to pay him Tribute.

In Scotland and other Islands under the King of Swede they are enforced to pay
Taxes.

The King of Denmark at his Wardhouse in the Sound, has for a License a
Doller, and for the Seal or Rose, a Noble of every Ship, and for every last of
Herrings, being 12 barrels, a Doller.

The Duke of Medina Sidonia in Spain, has his greatest revenues out of the
Taxes laid upon Fishermen for their fishing in Tourney.

All Princes of Italy bordering upon the Seas receive a proportion of like
benefit.

And the Hollanders themselves impose taxes on the fishes taken by their own
Fishermen in our Seas.

Now for the King of Englands Sovereignty in opening and stopping the passage
of his Seas, the presidents of ancient times imbarging, and staying, not only
Pirates or Enemies, but friends also that were suspected to trade with Enemies,
or had done particular wrong to the English subjects, or upon some other urgent
occasion, or reason of State, are so frequent in Record of Story, that the
transcribing and reading of a thing so generally known, would certainly be
esteemed loss of time and labor.

I remember those of Hamborough, and other Easterlings (though in amity with
us) in the late reign of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, were
notwithstanding stayed from passing through our Seas toward Spain, and good
prize made of all other Nations that attempted to do the like without license
first had and obtained from hence.

I will therefore only note by the way to this purpose, that strangers being to
pass through our Seas either in coming to us, or going to any other place
without so much as touching upon any of the King of Englands Countries, have
used to take safe conducts, and licenses of our Kings to secure them, and
protect them in their passage, thereby acknowledging the right of their
superiotie in this behalf in the Seas. Of which sort amongst many, the
recital of these two shall suffice. France. 11. H. 4. de salvo conductu.


Rex per literas suas patentes per triennium duraturas suscepit in salvum, and
securum conductum suum, ac in protectionem, tuitionem and defensionem suas
speciales Edw. Sygal et Opicinum Lomeline de Jean Mercatores cum bonis, and
Merchandizis suis in quibusdam Bargis, Carakis, sive navibus in partibus Janus
carcatis, and alibi carcandis, ab iisdem partibus in Regnum, Dominum et
potestatem nostra veniendam, et exinde ad parts suas proprias tam per terram
quam per mare transeundo, et redeundo.

This was granted to certain Merchants coming with their Ships, and goods
out of Italy into England.

That which follows was to those which passed the Seas as well to other
places, ubicunque placuerit, as this kingdom. Rot. Fran. 38 H. 6. de salvo
conductu.


Rex per literas suas patentes de gratia sua speciali suscepit in salvum and
securum conductum suum, ac in protectionem, tuitionem, and defensionem suas
speciales Robertum Forrester, Rogerum de Clerk, Leonardum Blanch, and Johannem
de Conwillis, Mercatores de Normania, et eorum quemlibet, ac factores,
Attornatos, et servientes suos et quemlibet eorum in regnum Regis Angliae, ac
alia Dominia, Jurisdictiones et territoria Regis Angliae quaecunque vel alibi
ubicunque eis placuerit cum una nave vocatale grace de Dieu de Roven, portage
90. Doliorum, vel infra unde Johannes de Bognas, Nundinas de Basher, Martinus
Hunday, Johannes de Blanch, Johannes Massey, vel Wilielmus Emry, est Magister
Quibusdam bonis vel Merchandizis carcatae et cum 20. Marinariis, et uno pagetto
vel infra pro gubernatione ejusdem Navis, nec non pro rebus, herne siis et
aliis armaturis quibuscunque pro corporibus little; et pro defensione ejusdem
navis necessariis et defensibilibus, secum habendis, et ferendic.

It remains to show that by reason of this prerogative and soveraigntie all
manner of wrecks, and royal fishes taken in our seas, are due unto the King of
England only, or unto such unto whom by special charters they have granted the
same.

For manifestation hereof, although the known and continued practice might
suffice, we are to take notice, that by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
the King shall have wreack of the sea, all Whales and Sturgions taken therein
with Porpoyces, and other royal fishes: And for declaration of this Law, the
Statute made 17 Edw. 2. concerning the Kings prerogative, says.

Item Rex habebit wreccum maris per totum regnum Balenas, Stat. de Praerog. 17.
E. 2. cap. 11.
et Sturgiones captas in mare, vel alibi infra regnum, exceptis quibusdam
privilegiatis locis per Regem.

So likewise Porpoyces are adjudged to belong unto the King, unless any man
can claim the same by Charter, or Prescription, and accordingly in ancient
Charters granted by our Kings to particular places and persons, and among other
liberties, wreccum maris is usually passed by special words arguing the Kings
sovereign right, and power to dispose thereof at his pleasure, by virtue
whereof Wreck at this day is taken and enjoyed by many, as well Towns and
Corporations as private men.

But for clear proof of the right, and practice of this Sovereignty, the
Record following is very remarkable, and not to be omitted.

In a plea between Peter de St. Clear the Abbat of Cherbourgh. and Godfery de
Carteret Attorney for the Prior (the name of the Monastery is worn out of the
Record) concerning 2 Tuns of Wine found by certain Mariners in alto Mari, Rot.
de St. Clear, Johan. de Frosingfield and al. Justiciar inhabit: Insulis Gersey
and Gernsey, etc. anno 2 Ed. 3.
and by them brought to land through certain places, where the said parties
claimed to have liberty of wreck. After long debate, and full hearing of the
case recited at length in the Record, the conclusion and judgment is as
follows.

Et Willielmus de Marciis qui sequitur pro Domino Rege dicit quod nullus eorum
petere potest praedicta vina et wreccum, quia dicit quod ea tantummodo sunt
wreccum, quae fluctus Maris projiciunt ad terram, vel infra portum, vel tam
prope terrm quod astantihus in terra possint perpendi, et sic ducantur, vel
trahentur ad portum, et ea, quae reperta sunt in alto Mari unde wreccum non
existit, quod fluctus Maris ea vellent projicere, sed per laborem Marrinariorum
leventur a Mari, et ponantur in Navi, vel batello, et sic invasi ducantur ad
terram et non tangunt terram alicujus per trahimitronem nec alio quovismodo,
non possunt (...)
sed sunt tantummodo de adventuris maris, de quibus nullus potest aliquid
clamare nisi salvatores, (...)
et Dominus Rex concessit libertatem percipiendi hujusmodi adventuras. Et petit
judicium pro Domino Rege. Et praedictus Petrus, et alii non possunt hoc
dedicere. Et ideo consideratum est quod praedicta vina remaneant Domino Regi
(salva salvatoribus part sua) et Petrus, et alii in misericordia pro falso
clamore. Postea unum de praedictis doliis concessum fuit praedicto priori pro
LXs. de part sua et de XXs. residuis respondet Domino Regi.

Whence we are to observe, that all findings, or things floating in alto Mari,
and consequently the maine Sea, or Channel it self, belongs to the King, of
which those that find the same are to have two parts of three for their share,
in respect of their pains, and the other third part is due to the King.

For conclusion of that which has been showed already, I have thought fit to
add such presidents out of the municipall, and common Laws of the kingdom,
marshalled together in one body, or classis, as do affirm this, the King of
Englands Prerogative, and supreme Jurisdiction in, and over the Seas, which
being severally applied to such heads as are formerly set down will evidently
evict the truth thereof.

Bracton in his book de acquirendo rerum dominio says. Bracton de acquirendo
rerum do minio lib. 2. fo. 19.
Si autem insula in mari nata est (quod raro accidit) occupantis sit and per
consequens Regis propter suum privi legium.

The same Bracton affirms that one of the Articles to be enquired before the
Justices and Merchants was, de purpresturis factis super dominum Regem sive in
mari etc. 6 R. 2.


6. R. 2. upon an action of debt, the defendant sued forth a protection. At
which time Justice Belknapp took exception saying, the protection is, quia
profecturus est super mare with G. K. Ad mirall; and you never saw protection
allowed of, if the party did not go out of the legiance of the King of
England in the parts of Scotland, Gascoignie, or France. But the Sea is of the
legeance of the King of his Crown of England, wherefore it seems the
protection is allowable, not
and you never saw such a protection allowed before this day, But afterward an
express writ came out of the Chauncerie, commanding the protection to be
allowed.

A child borne upon the Kings Seas is not an Alien by the common law.

Tempore Edw. 1. a replevin was brought of a Ship taken upon the wast of
Scarborough on the sea, and from thence carried into the County of Norfolk,
to which Mutford took two exceptions, one because no certain Town, or place
was named from whence the visne should come; for the wast extends four
leagues. Secondly because of a thing done upon the Sea, this Court cannot have
cognizance. To which Justice Beresford said that the king will that peace be
kept as well upon the Sea, as upon the land; and we find that you are come in
upon due process, and so no cause but that you should make answer.

Doctor and Student says, that the king is Lord of the narrow Seas, as bound
to scowre the sea of Pirates, and petty Robbers, and therefore shall have wreck
of the sea.

By the common Law the King shall have Flostan, Jestan, and Ligan.

Flostan being such Goods as after shipwreck do floate upon the superficies of
the water.

Jestan are all manner of goods that the Mariners being in danger do cast out
of the ship perished.

By Ligan is understood all things that are ponderous, and in shipwreck do
sink to the ground and bottom of the sea.

By all which presidents it is manifest that by the common Law of the land the
king is proprietory Lord of our seas; that the seas of England are under the
legeance of the king, that the king is the sovereign conservator of the peace
as well upon the sea as land, That not only things floating on the superficies
of the water but such as lie upon the soil or ground thereof, belong properly
unto the king, whereupon I conclude, That Rex Maris imperio Dominio et fundo
possidet.

And that it may appear how great a King the King of England is by reason of
this his sovereignty and dominion, it will not be amiss to take a view of the
inestimable riches and commodities, which (besides ourselves) other nations our
neighbors do daily reap especially by fishing in our seas, insomuch that no
Christian Prince of the world is Lord of any Territory, that (considering all
circumstances) yields the like constant, and general benefit; for proof
whereof I will briefly set down such observations as others have heretofore
made, and we our selves find by daily experience to be true beyond all
exception.

The inestimable Riches and Commodities of the British Seas.
THE Coasts of Great Britain do yield such a continual Sea-harvest of
gain, and benefit to all those that with diligence do labor in the same,
that no time or season in the year passes in the year passes away without
some apparent means of profitable employment, especially to such as apply
themselves to fishing, which from the beginning of the year unto the latter
end, continues upon some part, or other upon our Coasts, and therein such
infinite shoales and multitudes of fishes are offered to the takers as may
justly move admiration, not only to strangers but to those that daily be
employed amongst them.

The Summer fishing for herring begineth about Midsommer and lasts some part
of August.

The winter fishing for herring lasts from September to the midst of
November, both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland to the Thames
mouth.

The fishing for Cod at Alamby Wirlington, and White haven near the coast of
Lancashire from Easter until Whitsontide

The fishing for Hake at Aberdeny, Abveswhich and other places between Wales,
and Ireland from Whitsontide to Saint James tide.

The fishing of Cod, and Ling about Padstow within the land, and of Severne
from Christmas to Midlent.

The fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland frequented by those of Biscay,
Galicia, and Portugal from the beginning of April until the end of June.

The fishing for Cod, and Linge on the North, and Northeast of Ireland, from
Christmas until Michealmas.

The fishing for Pilchers on the west coast of England from St. James tide
until Michaelmas.

The fishing for Cod, and Ling upon the Northeast of England from Easter until
Midsommer.

The fishing of great Staple Ling and many other sorts of fish lying about the
Islands of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the
year long.

In September, not many years since upon the Coast of Devonshire near
Minigall 500 Tonne of fish were taken in one day. And about the same time three
thousand pound worth of fish in one day were taken at St Ives in Cornew all by
small boats, and other poor provisions.

Our five-men-boats, and cobles adventuring in a calm to launch out amongst
the Holland Busses not far from Robin-hoods Bay returned to Whitby full fraught
with herrings, and reported that they saw some of those Busses take 10. 20. 24.
lasts at a draught of herrings and returned into their own Country with 40.
50. and 100. lasts of herrings in one Busse.

Our Fleet of colliers not many years since returning from Newcastle laden
with coals about the well, near Flanborough head, and Scarborough, met with
such multitudes of Cod, Ling, and herring, that one amongst the rest with
certain shiphookes, and other like Instruments drew up as much cod, and Ling
in a little space of time, as were sold well near for as much as her whole
lading of coal. And many hundred of ships might have bin there laden in two
days and two nights.

Out of which wonderful affluence, and abundance of fish swarming in our seas,
that we may the better pereceive the infinite gain which foreign Nations
make, I will especially insist upon the fishing of the Hollanders in our
Coasts, and thereby show how by this means principally they have increased.

1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade. 4. In Towns and Fortifications.
5. In Power externe or abroad. 6. In public Revenue. 7. In private wealth.
8. In all manner of Provisions, and store of things necessary.
1.
Increase of Shipping.
BEsides 700. Strand boats, 400. Evars, and 400. Sullits, Drivers and
Todboates, wherewith the Hollanders fish upon their own coasts, every one of
those employing another ship to fetch salt, and carry their fish into other
countries, being in all 3000. sail, maintaining and setting on work at least
4000. persons, Fishers, Tradesmen, Women, and Children. They have 100. Doyer
boats of 150. Tons a piece, or there abouts. 700. Pincks and Well-boats from
60. to 100. Tuns a piece, which altogether fish upon the coasts of England and
Scotland for Cod, and Ling only. And each of these employ another vessel for
providing of salt, and transporting of their Fish, making in all 1600. ships,
which maintain and employ persons of all sorts, 4000. at least.

For the Herring season they have 1600. Busses at the least, all of them
fishing only upon our coasts, from Boughonnesse in Scotland to the mouth of
Thames. And every one of these makes work for three other ships that attend
her; the one to bring in salt from foreign parts, another to carry the said
salt, and cask to the busses, and to bring back their herrings, and the third
to transport the said fish into foreign countries. So that the total number
of ships and busses plying the herring Fair is 6400. whereby every busse, one
with another, imployeth 40. men, Mariners and Fishers within her own hold, and
the rest ten men a piece, which amounts to 112000. Fishers and Mariners.
All which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, women and children
a land.

Moreover they have 400. other vessels at least, that take Herring at Yarmouth,
and there sell them for ready money: so that the Hollanders (besides 300. ships
before mentioned fishing upon their own shoares) have at least 4800. ships
only maintained by the seas of Great Britain, by which means principally,
Holland being not so big as one of our shires of England, containing not
above 28. miles in length, and three in breadth, have increased the number of
their shipping to at least 10000. sail, being more then are in England,
France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia. And to
this number they add every day; although their country it self affords them
neither materials, or victual, nor merchandise to be accounted of toward
their setting forth.

Besides these of Holland, Lubeck has 700. great ships, Hamborough 600. Embden
1400. whereunto add the ships of Bremer, Biscay, Portugal, Spain, and
France, which for the most part fish in our seas, and it will appear that
10000. sail of foreign vessels, and above are employed and maintained by
fishing upon our coasts. So that in Holland there are built 1000. sail at the
least, to supply shipwracks, and augment their store, which as the Prince, and
common Nursery, is the chiefest means only to increase their number.

2.
Increase of Ma rriners.
THE number of ships fishing on our coasts as being aforesaid, 8400. If we
allow but 20. persons to every ship one with another, the total of Mariners
and Fishers amounts to 168000. out of which number they daily furnish their
longer voyages to all parts of the world; for by this means they are not only
enabled to brook the seas, and to know the use of the tackles, and compass,
but are like wise instructed in the principles of Navigation, and Pylotage,
insomuch as from hence their greatest Navigators have had their education, and
breeding.

3.
Increase of Trade.
BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners they have extended their
trade to all parts of the world, exporting for the most part in all their
voyages our herring, and other fish for the maintenance of the same. In
exchange whereof they return the several commodities of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal for our herrings
they return Oils, Wines, Pruynes, Honey, Woolles etc. with store of coin in
Specie.

From the Straights, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silks, Allomes,
Currants, Oils, and all Grocerie ware, with much money.

From the East Countries for our herrings, and other French, and Italian
commodities before returned, they bring home corn, Wax, Flax, hemp, Pitch,
Tar, Sope-ashes, Iron, copper, Steel, clapboard, Wainscot, Timber, Deal
board, Dollers, and Hungary Gilders.

From Germany for herrings, and other salt fish, Iron, Steel, Glass,
Milstones, Rhenish wines, Button-plate for Armor, with other Munition, Silks,
Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such like Frank'ford commodities, with
store of Rix dollers.

From Brabant they return for the most part ready money with some Tapestries,
and Hullshop. Yea some of our herring are carried as far as Braseile.

And that which is more strange and greatly to our shame, they have four
hundred ships with fish, which our men of Yarmouth within ken almost of land,
do vent our herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pay for the fish
taken upon on our own coast ready money, wherewith they store their own
country.

4.
Increase of Towns and Fortes.
BY this their large extent of trade they are become as it were citizens of the
whole world, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them
within these four hundred years are full as great again as they were before;
Amsterdam, Leyden, and Midleburgh having bin lately twice enlarged, and their
streets, and buildings so fair, and orderly set forth that for beauty, and
strength they may compare with any other in the world, upon which they bestow
infinite sums of money, (all originally flowing from the bounty of the sea,
from whence by their labor and industry they derive the beginning of all that
wealth and greatness,) and particularly for the havens of the aforesaid
towns, whereof some of them cost 40. 50. or 100000 l. Their fortifications
also both for number, and strength, upon which they have bestowed infinite sums
of money, may compare with any other whatsoever.

5.
Increase of power abroad.
SUch being then the number of the ships, and Mariners, and so great their
trade, occasioned principally by their fishing; they have not only
strengthened, and fortified themselves at home to repel all foreign
Invasions, as lately in the war between them, and Spain, but have likewise
stretched their power into the East, and West Indies in many places whereof
they are Lords of the sea coasts, and have likewise fortified upon the maine,
where the Kings, and people are at their devotion. And more then this all
neighbor Princes in their differences by reason of this their power at Sea,
are glad to have them of their party. So that next to the English they are now
become the most redoubted Nation at Sea of any other whatsoever.

7.
Increase of public revenew.
MOreover how mighty the public revenew, and customs of that state are
increased by their fishing, may appear in that above thirty years since,
over and above the customs of other Merchandise, excises, Licenses, Waftage,
and Lastage, there was paid to the State for custom of herring and other salt
fish above 300000 pound in one year, besides the tenth fish, and Caske, paid
for waftage, which comes at the least to as much more among the Hollanders
only, whereunto the tenth of other Nations being added it amounts to a far
greater sum.

We are likewise to know that great part of their fish is sold in other
Countries for ready money for which they commonly export of the finest gold,
and silver, and coming home recoyne it of a baser allay under their own
stamp, which is not a small means to augment their public treasure.

7.
Increase of private wealth.
AS touching their private wealth if we consider the abundant store of
herrings, and other fish by them taken, and the usual prices that they are
sold for, as also the multitude of tradesmen and Artizans, that by reason of
this their fishing are daily set on work, we must needs conclude that the
gain thereof made by private men must of necessity be exceeding great, as by
observing the particulars following will plainly appear.

During the wars between the King of Spain, and the Hollanders before the
last truce, Dunkirke by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland,
and setting great ransom upon their fishermen, enforced them to compound for
great sums that they might fish quietly for one year, whereupon the next
year after the fishermen agreed amongst themselves to pay a dollar upon every
last of herrings, toward the maintenance of certain ships of war to waft
and secure them in their fishing, by reason whereof there was a record kept of
the several lasts of herrings taken that year, and it appeared thereby that
in one half year there were taken 30000 lasts of herrings which at twelve
pound per last amounts to 3600000. and at 16. 20. 30 pound the last they are
ordinarily sold; then transported into other Countries it comes at least to
5000000 l. Whereunto if we add the herrings taken by other Nations, together
with the codd, Ling, Hake and the fish taken by the Hollanders and other our
neighbors upon the British Coasts all the year long the total will evidently
arise to be above 10000000 l.

The great trade of fishing employing so many men, and Ships, at Sea must
likewise necessarily maintain as great a number of tradesmen, and Artizans on
land, as Spinners, and Hempwinders for cables, Cordage, Yarne-twine for netts,
and lines, Weavers to make sail clothes, cecive Packers, Tollers, Dressers,
and Cowchers to sort, and make the herring lawful merchandise, Tanners to
tanne their Sails, and netts, Coopers to make caske, Block, and Bowle-makers
for ships, keelemen, and Laborers for carrying, and removing their fish,
Sawyers for plankes, carpenters, Shipwrights, Smithes, car-men, Boatemen,
Brewers, bakers, and a number of others, whereof many are maimed persons and
unfit to be otherwise employed. besides the maintenance of all their several
wives, and children and families. And further every man and maidservant, or
Orphant having any poor stock, may venture the same in their fishing voyages
which affords them ordinarily great increase, and is duly paid according to
the proportion of their gain.

8.
Increase of provision.
ANd to conclude it is manifest that Holland only affording in it self some
few hops, Madders, butter and cheese, abounds notwithstanding (by reason of
this Art of fishing) in plentiful manner with all kind of provisions as well
for life, as in corn, Beef, Muttons, Hides, and Clothes, as for luxury, in
wines, silks, and spices, and for defense, as in pitch, tarr, Cordage, timber.
All which they have not only in competent proportion for their use, but are
likewise able from their several Magazines to supply their neighbor countries.

The premises considered, it makes much to the ignominy, and shame of our
English Nation, that God and Nature offering us so great a treasure even at our
own doors we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and, by paying
money to strangers for the fish of our own Seas, impoverish our selves to make
them rich. Insomuch that for want of industry, and care in this particular 225.
fisher towns are decayed and reduced to extreme poverty whereas on the
contrary by diligent endeavoring to make use of so great a blessing we might
in short time repair these decayed towns of the Kingdom, and add both
honor, strength, and riches to our King, and Country, which how easily it may
be done will appear by some few observations following.

By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength, and bigness,
there will be employment made for 1000 Ships, and for at least 10000 fisher
men, and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many tradesmen, and
laborers at land.

The herrings taken by the Busses will afford his Majesty 200000 l. yearly
custom outward, and for commodities returned inward 30000 l. and above.

We have timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates growing in our own
Kingdom for the building of Busses, every Shire affords hardy and able men
fit for such employment who now live poorly, and idle at home.

We have victuals in great plenty sold at easy rates without payment of
excises, or Impost.

Our shores, and harbors are near the places where the fish do haunt.

For drink, or nets, salting, and packing our fish, and for succor in stresse
of weather, we may bring our fish to land, salt and pack it, and from some
parts of his Majesty's Dominions be at our markets in France, Spain, or Italy
before the Hollanders can arrive in Holland.

We have means to transport our fish into some Northern Countries where the
Hollanders seldom or never come. And though we had as many Busses as the
Hollanders, yet is there vent for all, or more, for in the East and Northern
Countries, and in many other places, herrings are every days meat, winter and
summer as well to draw on drink, as to satisfy hunger, and in most places the
greatest part of the year they be scarce to be had, for presently after
Michaelmas the Sound and rivers are frozen up so as no herrings can be
transported into twenty several Kingdoms, and free States, until July which
is for thirty weeks space together, so that when Lent comes there are few to
be bought for money.

Lastly, since by care and industry we gained from the Flemmings, doubtless
so by the means we may as easily grow expert in the Art of Fishing, and in
time make it a staple commodity of our own.

But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider, and endeavor
to reform certain wants and abuses which hitherto have hindered us from
effecting that good, and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the
least.

1. General liberty of eating flesh contrary to old custom, and the Statute
Laws provided for observing Fish days, from whence our scarcity and dearth
of fish proceeds; for where flesh is ordinarily spent fish will not be
bought, and want of sale decays all trade, gain being the nurse of Industry.

2. Want of order and discretion in our fishing, every man being left to
himself, and permitted to fish as best likes him: whereas amongst the
Hollanders two of the best experienced Fishermen are appointed to guide the
rest of the fleet, all others being bound to follow them, and to cast their
lines according to their direction.

3. The Hollanders and other Nations set forth with their Busses in June to
find the shoale of fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till November,
whereas we stay till the Herring come home to our road steads, and sometimes
suffer them to pass by ere we look out, our Herring fishing containing only
seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty.

4. The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul
weather, whereas our Cobles, Crayers and Boats being small, and thin sided,
are easily swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair
weather by reason of their weakness for fear of storms.

5. The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are discharged of toding, but
presently put forth for more, and seek for Markets abroad as well as at home;
whereas our English after they had bin once at Sea, do commonly never return
again until all the money taken for their fish be spent, and they in debt,
seeking only to serve the next Market.

6. The Hollanders have certain Merchants who during the herring season do
only come to the places where the Busses arrive, and joining together in
several companies, do presently agree for the lading of 30. or 40. Busses at
once, and so being discharged they may speedily return to their former
shipping; whereas our fishermen are uncertain of their chapmen, and forced to
spend much time in putting off their fish by parcells.

These and other defects would carefully be taken into consideration, and
certain orders made to make our fishing prosperous, and and successful,
especially considering the careful mischiefs the neglect hereof has brought
to the King, and Kingdom in general, and to many good towns, and
Corporations in particular, as by authority even of Parliament it self in the
Statute of 33. Hen. the eight, is plainly testified, which I have summarily
here set down to avoid the prolixitie of the original.

Because the English fishermen dwelling on the Sea coasts did leave off their
trade of fishing in our Seas and went the half Seas over, and there upon the
Seas did buy fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders, by reason
whereof many incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. the decay of the wealth
and prosperity as well of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same, as of
other coast towns by the Sea side, which were builded, and inhabited by great
multitudes of people, by reason of using and exercising the craft and feate of
fishing. Secondly the decay of a great number of boats, and Ships. And thirdly
the decay of many good Mariners both able in body by their diligence, labor,
and continual exercise of fishing, and expert by reason thereof in the
knowledge of the Seacoasts, as well within this Realm as in other parts beyond
the Seas. It was therefore enacted that no manner of persons English, Denizens,
or strangers at that time, or any time after dwelling in England, should buy
any fish of any strangers in the said Ports of Flanders, Zeland, Picardy,
France, or upon the Sea between shore and shore etc.

This act by many continuances was continued from Parliament to Parliament
until the first of Queen Marie, 1. Mar. ca. 14.
and from thence to the end of the next Parliament and then expired.

For conclusion seeing by that which has formerly bin declared it evidently
appears that the Kings of England by immemorable prescription, continual
usage, and possession, the acknowledgment of all our neighbor States, and the
municipall laws of the Kingdom, have ever held the Sovereign Lordship of the
Seas of England, and that unto his Majesty, by reason of his Soveraigntie the
supreme command and Jurisdiction over the passage, and fishing in the same
rightfully appertains, considering also the natural site of those our Seas
that interpose themselves between the great Northern commerce of that of the
whole world, and that of the East, West, and Southern Clymates, and withal
the infinite commodities that by fishing in the same is daily made. It cannot
be doubted but his Majesty by means of his own excellent wisdom, and virtue,
and by the Industry of his faithful Subjects and people, may easily without
Injustice to any Prince or person whatsoever be made the greatest Monarch for
Command and Wealth, and his people the most opulent and flourishing Nation of
any other in the world. And this the rather, for that his Majesty is now
absolute Commander of the British Isle, and has also enlarged his Dominions
over a great part of the Western Indies; by means of which extent of Empire,
(crossing in a manner the whole Ocean) the trade, and persons of all Nations
(moving from one part of the World to the other) must of necessity, first, or
last, come within compass of his power, and jurisdiction.

And therefore the Sovereignty of our Seas being the most precious Jewel of
his Majesty's Crown, and (next under God) the principal means of our Wealth
and Safety, all true English hearts and hands are bound by all possible means
and diiligence to preserve and maintain the same, even with the uttermost
hazard of their lives, their goods, and fortunes.

FINIS.

