THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY, Discovered to work in the children of disobedience.
Whereby the pretended Godliness of Schismatics appears, to be the greatest
ungodliness. IN A Cathedral-lecture at St. Peter's in EXON. By ARTHUR BURY M. A
Some time fellow of EXON Coll. in OXON.

2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ.

And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light:

Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed, as the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works.

LONDON Printed for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

To the Right reverend Father in GOD JOHN Lord BISHOP OF EXON, All spiritual
and temporal happiness be multiplied.
Right reverend in Christ,
WHen the Lord turned away the captivity of our Kingdoms, then were we like men
that dreamed: The greatness of the felicity, the strangeness of the means, the
insensibleness of the manner made us distrust our very senses. When we saw the
Church immediately after her return from the wilderness, furnished with such
burning and shining lights, that it is not easily decided whether the
promotions or persons are most dignified: then were we like men astonished;
then did we admire the goodness of God, and the force of truth which spite of
so many years persecutions and tentations, preserved such multitudes undeluded,
and uncorrupted. When we heard that your Lordship was appointed to be the Angel
of our Western Church, then were we like men transported, then did we magnify
the Wisdom of his Majesty, in committing the government of so large a diocese
to a person in whom zeal and knowledge, learning and wisdom, courage and
moderation had mingled themselves into so happy a temper, as to render him one
of the most eminent Patrons of the Church in her afflictions, and worthy to be
numbered among her most eminent pastors in her prosperity.

But our wine was cooled with water when we heard that your Lordship took too
deep apprehensions of our divisions, which resentments will soon confess
themselves to have abused you, when you shall find the far greatest part of the
factious mewing their impudence with their hopes, and forsaking the withered
thistle for that tree which though it were cut down yet sprouteth again.

It is not indeed expectable, but in some greater Towns where the wealth, and
numbers of their disciples shall tempt them to expect more profit, and
reputation from their obstinacy, there will be found some venomous spirits who
will entertain his Majesty's gracious condescensions as they did his blessed
Fathers; that is, as fire does fuel, not to be satisfied, but emboldened; For
their observation is purblind, who perceive not that the Jesuit, and Puritan
agree (as in many other their worst practices so especially) in this, that
excluding all others besides their own party from any title to heaven, they
call a rigid inflexibleness, zeal, and Christian moderation, lukewarmnes.

But if reason do not abuse us we shall find, that when men's troubled humors
shall cease from fermentation, their understandings will become so much the
clearer for their past disturbances, and able to read those bloody characters
wherein the dismal effects of Schism, are largely written by lamentable
experience upon every family of this Nation; so that being thus doubly taught,
not only by S. James, but by woeful experience, they will not hereafter be so
apt to kindle, if the Incendiaries should again scatter their fiery darts from
those mischievous tongues, which set on fire the course of nature and are set
on fire of Hell.

Toward which consideration I offered some light in this Cathedral which for
some years suffered a Schism in her very fabric, by adivision in her body
and preachers, and a market in her cloystures.

It was not (sure) the worthiness but the necessity of the discourse, which
moved those hearers to press me to this publication, against whose importunity,
I could not harden my self without falling under that condemnation, which I
proved to belong to them that strive with their superiors.

And being come so far, I was easily encouraged to make another bold step, and
present it to your Lordship; that the first address which you received in
quality of our Bishop, might bring you an omen of good success in your charge,
an earnest of the far greater services which you may promise your self from
many others, equally unknown, but far more able, and an opportunity for an
early proof of your goodness by pardoning this boldness of

Your Lordships most humbled servant. A. B.

JAMES 3.15.16. This wisdom descends not (or, This is not the wisdom which
descends) from above, but is earthly, sensual, Divelish.

For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work (or
unsetledness and all mischief.)


THat the Mystery of Iniquity wrought in the Apostles days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
one of themselves complained: but what it was, is it self a Mystery. If we
consult their own Epistles (which, as they are the Oracles of God, so must
needs be the best interpreters of the inditers meaning) we shall find great
reason to conclude that it was the Heresy of the Gnostiks; those false
Apostles, deceitful workers that under pretense of extraordinary Wisdom,
emulated the Apostles, pestered the Church, and seduced many of the weaker sort
into faction.

Of those troublesome men every Epistle complains, and this chapter
especially sets forth both their Iniquity and it is Mystery.

First he endeavors to cool the ambition of their leaders, by showing that
the Office of a (...). v. 1.
Teacher which they so greedily sought, carried with it more danger then honor:
and every one had already enough to answer, for in many things we offend all,
so we need not inflame our (...). v. 2.
account. Which it will be extremely difficult to avoid when we are Teachers,
seeing it requires the greatest wisdom and care in the world to keep the
tongue in order.

You must not judge of the tongue by it is bigness; v. 3, 4, 5.
it is indeed little in bulk, but great in effects. The Bit is but small in
comparison of the Horse, and so is the Helm in comparison of the Ship, yet able
to turn those great bodies; so is the tongue among the members, and so are the
offenses and mischiefs which the tongue draws men into, least in appearance,
but greatest in consequence.

From how inconsiderable a spark is a whole city brought to ashes? v. 5, 6, 8.
How little a quantity of poison will infect a whole mess, and destroy a lusty
man? Such, so destructive is the Iniquity of the unruly tongue.

It is as unruly as pernicious, Man that (...).
tameth or at least mastereth all the several inhabitants of the air, earth,
and water; yet is not sufficient for this task; so we are doubly obliged to
beware how we adventure upon that employment where we shall be exposed to the
many temptations of falling into those sins of an extravagant tongue, whose
Iniquities are so exceedingly, both mischievous and insuperable.

This may perhaps seem a Mystery that there should be so vast a disproportion
between the bulk and effects of the tongue: But there is yet a greater Mystery
behind. Hitherto the fire or poison may vye with it: but there is another
mystery wherein the whole world cannot match it with a parallel, (...). v. 11,
etc.
It is a ridling mischief. What fountain is that which out of the same hole
casts forth salt water and fresh, sweet water and bitter? What root is that
which bears branches and leaves of one sort and fruit of another? What cause
is that which produces contrary effects? The Sun indeed hardens clay and
softeneth wax, but he does not beam out heat and cold; the difference is not in
his light, but in the objects which receive it.

But the tongue can at the same time bless God and curse man whom God made like
himself and to be loved for his sake. v. 9.
You cannot find in all the creation such another: the heart of man it self
which is comprehensive and deceitful above all things, yet is deceived if it
think it can do this. 1. John 4.20.
He that loves not his brother whom he has seen how can he love God whom he
has not seen? The tongue can really bless and curse: but the heart cannot
really, it may feignedly: the love of God if true, will expel the hatred of our
brother, if this dwell there, the other will not; however the stock and
branches and leaves speak a Fig, yet the fruit declares an Olive. Talk of
Wisdom and extraordinary gifts? and yet stir up Divisions in the Church?
Pretend the love of Christ? and yet live contrary to his Example and commands?
These things ought not so to be. If you will be Christians indeed, let it be
known by your Love, let your Wisdom appear by your meekness. For if you nourish
strife and envy, all your pretenses of religion are but specious lies and vain
brags. Love is of God, and malice of the Devil, Christ taught you to learn of
him to be lowly and meek and find rest, but faction destroys the peace and
happiness of mankind, and therefore, This is not the wisdom which comes from
above, etc.

Thus we see the greatest cheat in the world detected and arraigned. In the 15.
v. his disguise pulled off, by showing both that he is not what he pretends,
and is what he most professes to loathe. In the 16. verse. he is indicted as
the most pernicious malefactor in the world.

First His cheat discovered by showing his fountain.

1. Negatively, not from above. 2. Positively. It is earthly, etc.
2. His crime impleaded by discovering the sea of confusion and mischief which
he brings upon the world. And these are the two Offices of the 2. verses of
my Text. In prosecution whereof, what shall I do? shall I exercise the same
vehemence as my Apostle does? I must then exspect to be my self accused of
contentiousness even while I speak against it. Shall I then use gentleness? I
may more justly expect to be censured as an unfaithful Solicitor of the cause
of God and his Church. I will endeavor to offend on the better side: And if I
shall then be accused of bitterness, I will appeal to my Apostle who is far
more invective: If of coldness, I will appeal to him too; who has taught to
beware of strife: so I shall on the one side imitate his ardour, or on the
other practice his Doctrine.

First then for the discovery of the fountain, and that Negatively. It comes
not from above, cannot say to God as David did. Psalm 87.7. 1 John 1.5. Chap.
4.8, 16.
All my Springs are in thee. God is called in the Abstract Light and Love, He
is called Light with so much solemnity as will hardly be matched; and we are
told after great preparations, that this is the very sum of the Gospel. He is
called Love twice in one Chapter of the same Epistle. And they very well set
forth each other.

The proper Office of light and Love is to reconcile the greatest enemies,
multiplication and union. They are both the greatest multipliers and uniters.
The greatest multipliers, for it is the proper work of Light to Shine; that is,
to multiply, and furnish the world with it is self. The Sun is such a Fountain
as to stream out his light on every little atome of every side; and every beam
like the Fountain multiplieth into new beams: so that whether we believe the
Sun to be the Center of the world, it is admirable that he should extend
himself to every atome of so vast a Circle: or, if he be not the Center, it is
yet more wonderful, that his light should reach the most distant Star and from
thence return again to shine upon the earth: Light is the greatest, yea and the
only multiplier: every seed multiplieth by reason of a spark of astral fire
kindled in it, which if it might be husbanded would fill the whole world with
it is posterity: As Light, so Love too is ready to distribute, willing to
communicate.

Again, the beams of light do so scatter themselves abroad as to keep close
together; not the least piece of the air, where they do not embrace each other,
unless some gross body force a separation; and even then they use all possible
diligence to meet again. And this does Love too, If it be possible, as much as
in it lies, lives peaceably with all men. Thus light which Plato well honored
by calling it the shadow of God, sets forth the Divine Love in it is two
great effects, liberality and peaceableness. Which will more particularly
appear if we consider him manifested in each office of the three persons. As
creator, redeemer and sanctifier, we shall find that Love, not strife, comes
from above from the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

1. First, As Father and creator, God is light, and being so, multiplied
himself in begetting a world from himself. Love was the procatartik, Light the
instrumental cause of the creation. Which the Divine word describes to have
been performed after this manner. Genes. 1.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. The heaven as the
principle of light and heat, and life and beauty and love: The earth as the
principle of darkness and cold and death, and horror, and hatred: And thus it
was.

There was darkness over the face of the deep, vast Abyss: and the Spirit of
light moved upon the face of that liquid Chaos, and in a moment compassed it
round, and so distilled it that the purer parts drew toward the light, and the
grosser fled from it: The purer made that light inaccessible, which is the
throne of God the third heaven: and the evening and the morning, that exalted
light and that baffled darkness were the first day. Then the Spirit of light
did again distill the now darker residue of the Chaos: and refined its better
part into the ethereal heaven, the mansion of the Sun and Stars, but this
second days work is not expressed to have any blessing because the second
number breaks unity. The Spirit of Light the third time invaded the yet
darker deep and distilled the better part of it into air, the rest remaining a
thick water with a caput mortuum: so all the darkest and horridest parts of the
Chaos flying the Light were precipitated to the Center, and being not capable
or not worthy of a new distillation, the waters were so removed that some parts
of the earth might receive the Light and furnish bodies for such living souls
as the heavenly influences should kindle. Thus we see in the work of Creation
the best still kept highest, and all the darkness of the Abyss fled to the
Center.

And as the world was created; so is it still preserved by light and love,
which is the universal soul of the whole, knitting the higher parts with the
lower, and maintaining life here with the continual influences from above; and
again tying the lower with such a band of love, that all conspire the mutual
good. This I might largely prove, and confute the vulgar Philosophy which
dreameth of a continual war between the elements, and fancieth privation a
principle of generation. But I may fear to have already wearied some readers
with these abstruser considerations. I shall only remember this, which every
unlearned man may observe, That the very air and water have so much love as to
forget their own interest, when a neighbor stands in need of their help. That
will descend, and this will ascend to supply a vacuum; which is the
communicative part of love: and again, if the arrow or the ship make a violent
division they presently have to come together again, which is the unitive part
of love. Only the earth is void of both parts of charity, it will not
communicate, but sticks to it self, and as far as it can prevail freezeth the
water to the same selfishness: nor it loves not union, but unless it be glued
together with some moisture or hindered for want of place, it crumbleth to
pieces, and all the love it has even to it is own children is kindled in it by
the influences of heaven.

Thus from the work of creation (which shows that as any thing is higher so
it proportionably is filled with light and love,) I am. 1.17,
it appears that strife is none of those good and perfect gifts which are
from above and come down from the Father of Lights, but rises from the
uncharitable earth the seat of darkness; 1 John 2.9, 11. Heb. 1.3.
For he that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness.

2. The Son the Redeemer of the world is the brightness of his Fathers glory
the express image of his Person. Brightness is so expressly the image of Light,
that none but Philosophers know the one from the other, and they tell us that
brightness conveyeth light from it is fountain. Christ came from heaven to bring
heaven to us and us thither, and he brought love, as the means to reconcile God
to us, and us among our selves. The angels proclaimed his coming to be for this
end that there might be peace on earth, and good will both toward and among
men (the word (...) signifies both.) This great business he promoted in all
his Sermons and in all his actions, and all his passions; in his life, at his
death, and after his death. Taught to have a love so extensive as to reach our
greatest enemies, so intense as that which himself exemplifyed, even to die for
one another. This was his old and his new, his first and his last, his great
and his peculiar and his critical commandment. John 13.34, etc. and 15.12, etc.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples if you love one another.
Every disciple is known by the caracteristical precepts of his Master, the
disciples of Pythagoras by their silence, the disciples of Plato by their
sublime notions, of Zeno by their apathy, of Moses by their circumcision, of
the Sadducees by their denying the resurrection, of the Pharisees by their
broad phylacteries, and mine by their love: Their love, which shall be more
ardent and more large then any other in the world, and that in so eminent a
degree that all men, even of the weakest understandings shall see and admire
it. Men's goods are known by their marks, their Servants by their liveries,
soldiers by their arms, and my disciples by their love: And it shall be so
conspicuous that all men shall see it. All men know the Sun by his light, and
fire by it is heat, the Ethiopian by his blackness, and the Camel by his bunch,
and all men shall know my disciples by their love. Thus was love Christ's
commandment, his proper and peculiar commandment. It was his commandment, and
it was his legacy. He left a love-token to be remembered by, which was not only
a remembrance of his love to us, but an emblem of our mutual love among our
selfs. The bread which we break is the Body of Christ, and teaches us to
remember that we are one bread and one body. i Cor. 10.17.
The same bread teaches that he was broken for us, and that we must be knit
together among our selves. This is the wisdom which comes from above, brought
from heaven by our Savior, and by him recommended to us by all possible
endearments: Those practices which oppose this, cannot be the cognizance of
Christians, of Antichrist they may be.

3. When he left the world he took care to have this his dear commandment
promoted in his Church by the Holy Ghost, which the Apostle thus describes
Ephesians. 4, 8. When he ascended on high -- he gave gifts to men: Acts 2.
viz. the gift of the holy Spirit (whereby he installed Officers) coming
solemnly and visibly upon every of them in the likeness of flames of fire,
which resemble cloven tongues licking the air (the Holy Ghost is Light too) And
these Officers were thus installed, that they might kindle in the Church the
flames of Divine Love. That speaking the truth in love, etc. verse. 15.16. i.e.
That Love being the common soul of the whole Church, might knit every several
member with every other in one common affection, and so the whole body
Ecclesiastical grow up like a body natural, whereof every member shareth with
the rest as in one soul, so in one interest and one affection. To this office
they were principally installed and this work they principally advanced. No
duty so often, so ardently recommended as Love. If the graces be compared, the
greatest of them is charity, and above all we must have perfect charity. If
their titles be considered, Love is the royal law, the bond of perfection; If
virtues, it covers a multitude of sins, it fulfilleth the law, it is a sign
of our interest in God. No grace so frequently recommended, when there is
occasion, and when there is none: in season and out of season; If ^^^ies be
commended, that fails not to be in the number; if sin be condemned, strife is
one of the catalogue. If we consider the measure, it is set forth by the
highest comparisons, the love of brethren, and the love of members. Thus is it
done to the grace which God delights to honor. And if the advancement of
Mordecay be the fall of Haman; Envy and strife must needs be condemned, seeing,
the wisdom which is from above does thus appear to be as is described Verse.
17.18. First pure, then peaceable, etc. Where again you find love exalted; one
word for purity, but many for love, to dash the impostor quite out of
countenance and bafflle all his pretenses to a heavenly original. Which cheat
is further considered.

2. Positively from whence it does come, which is set down to be a threefold
fountain, It is Earthly. Sensual. Divelish.


Which that we may understand we are to consider that we have a threefold life.

First we live the life of vegetables: when we have only nourishment and growth
in our mothers wombs.

Then we live the life of animals, when we have sense and motion, and lastly
the life of man, when we come to the use of reason. Now the law of Nature
requires that every thing should act in the best manner it can. From our
threefold life therefore we are capable of 3. sorts of sin. 1. When we suffer
our rational part to be overborn by our vegetable and so degenerate from men to
trees. 2. When we suffer the animal faculty to prevail, and degrade us from
men to beasts. 3. When our rational faculty suffers a defacing of the image of
God, and we turn from partaking the Divine Nature to imitate the Devil. To one
or other of these, all sins are reducible; but factiousnes has this
singularity that it is guilty of all three; A transcendent sin, runs through
all predicaments.

1. It is earthly. Earthly mindedness properly taken, is that sin which turns
us to trees. Now a tree is a man reversed, has it is head in the earth, and
kicks with it is lower parts against heaven. For we are mistaken if (...) take
the boughs of a tree to grow upon it is head: that is the head by which it
feeds, those it is lower parts by which it generateth. This then is the life
of a tree: It thrusts the head as deep as it can into the earth, compasses as
much of it as it can with all the roots it can make: whereas man is erect, his
head lifted up to heaven and though the weight of his body keep him down to the
ground, yet he converseth with it only with his feet, he trampleth upon it, and
bears up from it, and always seeks to enjoy the light and influences of
heaven. His affections are set on things above, Col. 3.1.
his conversation is in heaven, and he is ashamed of that necessity which
makes him beholden to the earth for his maintenance, and uses the world as if
he used it not. So that the life of a godly differs from that of an earthly
man, just as a man does from a tree, and it is the sin of earthly-mindedness
that makes him thrust his affections into the things of this world.

Thus covetousness is called earthly-mindedness from the object of it is
affections: It may deserve that title upon another reason, because as it loves
the earth, so it imitateth it also. The heavenly bodies are communicative,
their motion is from the center to the circumference; the earth is attractive
from the circumference to the center, those send abroad their light and
influences, this draws home to it is self whatsoever comes within the Sphere
of it is activity. That which we call heaviness in massive bodies is not so
truly a quality inherent in them as a necessity imprinted upon them, they do
not seek the earth, but that great Magnet draws them, The same is the
difference between the heavenly and the earthly mind. That, is liberal; like
God and (his type) the Sun, which still beam abroad their bounty: This is
greedy, like the earth which still draws to it is self.

That factiousness is guilty of this sin, the Apostle does not only discover,
but earnestly beseeches to observe it. Romans 16.17. I beseech you brethren,
mark (as from a watchtower (...)) that you may be forewarned of those who
contrary to the doctrine which you have been taught bring in strife into the
Church in stead of the Royal Law of Love; and under color of zeal for Christ
advance their own wealth, Their fair words are but alluring baits to draw in
the simpler sort of people, who cannot see through their practices. And I
beseech you mark how this observation of the Apostle has been verified among
us. The eldest cannot remember when first faction set up it is trade, and the
youngest will not see it leave its trade; and they must be very simple that do
not observe what a gainful trade it has been and how greedily followed. And
who knows but God has suffered it to thrive so long that we might the more
plainly discover it, to love the House of God, as Ahab loved Naboths Vineyard?
for at last when opportunity smiled upon their attempts, they said, let us take
to our selves the houses of God in possession. And now we must be doubly simple
if we do not understand their true meaning when they say they make God their
portion.

2. It is called senfuall (...). animal, brutish. We know the beasts seek no
other happiness but to satisfy the appetites of the body: This then is the sin
of sensuality, when men who are called to spiritual joys in the feasts of a
good conscience and union with God, drown themselves in carnal delights,
gratify the flesh and neglect the spirit thus degenerating to beasts.

This is properly the sin of debauchery, thus the drunkard and the glutton, the
fornicator and the adulterer is by all sober men looked upon as a beast. But we
are further to consider that there is an irascible as well as a concupiscible
appetite, and all kind of passions dwell in the sensual faculty.

And though the grosser sins of the concupiscible appetite do in a manner
ingross all the hatred of the vulgar to whose thicker apprehensions they are
more suitable; yet that the issue of the irascible are brutish sins too, both
Scripture and reason do jointly testify.

The Apostles declare it not by way of discovery, or proof, but Enstasis,
pointing at it as a thing evident, but unregarded. St. James 4.1. Asks whence
come outward Wars but from the inward? men's lusts war in their members and then
draw the members of Christ to War among themselves too. And St Paul Gal. 5.19.
Reckons the quarrelsome sins among the manifest sins of the fiesh, as well as
the lascivious. And more plainly and enstatically 1 Cor. 3.1. The Greek
Philosophers would not admit young men to be fit hearers of their grave
Lectures, as being yet in the second region of life, the animal life, and unfit
to be fed with rational discourses until their judgments were better ripened,
and the scumme of their youthful lusts and passions boiled away: St Paul
treats the Corinthians according to their own principles, tells them they
are as incapable of the mysteries of Christianity as children of their
Philosophical discourses: for they were yet but sensual, their affections
childish and brutish, incapable of spiritual discourses. And I brethren (says
he) could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal even as unto
babes in Christ. I have sed you with milk and not with meat, for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal:
And this their carnality he proves by their factiousnesse, as by a most
undoubtable demonstration; While ye are some of one party, and some of another
are ye not carnal? Is it not most evident that factious men are carnal men? Do
not then please your selves in that humor as if it were an argument of I know
not what excellency, when it is a manifest evidence of your sensuality: As well
may a child pretend himself fit to command in an army, because he has gotten a
fine Hobbyhorse, or to be a privy counselor because he has a gilded Primer,
as you can pretend your selves to be good Christians because you separate into
parties. Those gathered Churches, and purer ordinances, that separation and
nonconformity and whatsoever other Phrases the Spirit of faction delights to
play withal, are but so many gaudes and the more you please your selves with
them the more childishness you betray. Until you lay aside these toys, and
betake your selves to the more substantial duties of Christianity, Love and a
sound mind; however you may pride your selves in a conceit of being higher
Scholars in Christ's School, yet know you are not yet perfect in the very first
and plainest lesson, very babes, not come so far forth as to be ABC darians,
mere animals ((...)) unable to understand the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.
that are spiritually discerned.

And the same Apostle 1 Corinthians 3.3. proves that their dividing themselves
into parties demonstrateth them to be carnal and walk as men (or as the
Syriack renders it to be bodily, and walk in the flesh) i. e. to be such, as
like beasts attend only their bodies and serve the flesh; men in shape, beasts
in conditions.

It is not only the nasty sow that trampleth pearls under feet which must be
reckoned for a beast; the quarrelsome dog that flies upon men and rends them,
Wolves and bears; foxes and lions are to be reckoned for beasts, and so are all
those that bite and devour; So the factious man is sensual as well as the
debauched.

The good old Jacob seeing his sons Coat torn, and bloody concluded it the work
of some wild Beast; he was not much mistaken, the cruel brethren were no
better. Nay they were much worse, They were Devils: For strife and envy is not
only sensual but

3. Divelish, and herein our Apostles brother St. John agrees with him 1 John
3.11. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Divil,
etc. Cain was of the wicked one and slew his brother v. 12. and whoever hates
his brother is a murderer, verse. 15. And St. Paul agrees with both, Ephesians.
4.26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath neither give place to the
Devil: let not your wrath stay with you till it fix into hatred, for hatred is
a Devil the word (...) signifies hatred.

And surely hatred is directly opposite to Love; Intemperance is only a
stranger to love, hatred an enemy. The Atheist is without God, the factious man
is an antitheist, an adversary to him. Debauchery is unchristian, hatred is
Antichristian, sensual sins are more palpable, but spiritual sins are more
odious: Those are crude and gross, these are distilled and Alcolisated, not so
massive but more mischievous. Is it not worse to be a Devil then a beast? Who
ever saw the Devil drunk? or when was he taken in adultery. His debaucheries
are of another region: he that has no flesh cannot be guilty (I mean formally
guilty) of the sins of the flesh: his are properly sins of the spirit: sins of
the body are but the body of sin, the sins of the spirit, are the spirit of
sin. And those that will describe the devil may as well be thought to describe
a schismatic.

The Devil having no body cannot be described by bodily deformityes, it is not
a black color or a cloven foot, a horned forehead, or an ugly visage, a long
tail or hideous claws that can paint out his deformityes which are of another
kind, but greater ugliness.

Pride, malice, slandering, censoriousness, envy, rebellion, etc. Thus
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, makes them of the Devils party in
opposition to God. The earthly and sensual are a kind of neuters in comparison
of malice, which carries men quite over to the opposite side: This contains
all the wickedness of the oother and adds greater of it is own. What one said
of ingratitude may better be said of contentiousnesse. Call me factious, you
call me all things, you call me thief, drunkard, whoremonger, nay you call me
Devil.

These are the works of the Devil which Christ came into the world to destroy.
The Devil is the great makebate, Christ the great peace maker. He would not
come into the world until there were a general peace over all its face, and as
soon as he came the Angels came from heaven to proclaim peace on earth. He came
and preached peace and that all evenues might be secured against strife, he
required us to love our very enemies. Love was his royal law, and we may say of
it as Samuel of King Saul, see ye him whom the Lord has chosen that there is
none like him among all the people. All the Officers of Christ are Ambassadors
of reconciliation, their work is to edify the body in love, what are they then
that preach contention but messengers of Satan to buffet us?

The Devil can transform himself into an Angel of Light. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
But when he goes to work division, how is it that we do not discover him by
his cloven foot? his instruments transform themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, they come in sheeps clothing, but when they fall to worrying us, how is
it that we do not discover them to be ravening Wolves? How has our Savior
condemned the Spirit of pride, and separation in the Pharisees! (the word
Pharisees signifies Separatists.) How have all the Apostles declamed against
it in their rivals! how have all the ages and regions of Christianity
complained of it in their Heretics, and especially how have our selves smarted
under it in the pretended godly party! How is it then that the most simple can
yet be deluded by it, after so many warnings and such frequent and woeful
experience? Other sins which are but sensual in their original, and not very
prejudicial in their consequences brand the guilty with indelible infamy. Yet
how impudently does this spiritual wickedness in high places, plead not only
for indemnity but veneration! All other things are profane, Churches and
Churchlands, and Church maintenance must resign all their Sacredness to these
men: And all other sins may, and must be punished; but faction and disobedience
must be privileged. To punish those is necessary justice, to question this is
cruel persecution. Thus the Pope sent a check to Rich. 1. for making a prisoner
of a Bishop though taken in Battle, and required him to send him his son; but
the King in stead of the person sent the armor, advising his holiness to see
whether this were his sons Coat. The Pope with shame returned answer that was
not the Coat of any son of his but of some child of Mars: Contentious and
Schismatical persons are not the children of the Prince of peace but the God of
War, and whoever would privilege them from punishment might learn shame from
the throne of impudence: What? must laws be to crimes, as of old they were
complained to be, to persons, like Cobwebs, which catch the smaller flies, and
let the greater break through? For shame let us hear no more of that complaint
that nonconformity, has been more severely punished sometimes then
drunkenness, as if a Devil were not worse then a beast. If we do not yet see
greater odiousness in this sin, I hope at next step we shall, when we consider
that as it is most base in it is Original, so it is most miscievous in its
Effects, and so most justly odious to God and punishable by man.

As our most gracious God in the work of creation, aimed not at any service the
world could do him (his infinite happiness, being incapable to receive any
addition from his creatures) but only desired to communicate himself and his
happiness: so in his government thereof, he provideth by his laws not for his
own but his creatures good. Hence was it that our Savior who came to bring us
present as well as future happiness, took such great care to endeare love unto
us, as being above all other graces, the greatest promoter of our felicity: and
hence is it that our Apostle the more to incense us against this sin, does not
only detect it for a cheater; but proceeds to indict it as a notable
malefactor against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the Prince of peace.

Thus we have seen this impostor doubly detected, by discovering the fountain
whence he does not, and whence he does come. In the next verse his indictment
is laid in, by showing the sea to which he tends, a sea of confusion and
mischief; he is charged to be a malefactor of the highest degree, a notorious
offender against the peace of our Sovereign Lord God, his Crown and Dignity.

Laws proportion punishments, not always to the hainousness, but ever to the
mischievousness of the crime. A mutinous word in an army is punished with
death, because it might draw on the ruin of the whole Army. What is mutiny in
an Army, is sedition in the State and faction in the Church: It is therefore
now to be condemned for the ugliness and perniciousnesse of it is issue, as well
as for the baseness of it is race. What sin shall we balance against this?
What other sin can be charged to bring confusion and all kind of mischief with
it? If we look to the root, every others sin is of some one region, this of
all: other sins hurt one or two this is an epidemical mischief: Of what other
sin can it be said, that it sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is
set on fire of hell? A single murder is guilty of death, this butchereth
multitudes in an hour, and makes a continual trade of it. The whoremonger
defiles (and does but defile) two or three bodies, and begets a life
unlawfully; This does not defile only, or beget, it destroys, and that by
heaps upon heaps. The drunkard wastes time and wine, and wit and turns
beast, this destroys lires, and turns Devil. The thief and (analogically)
every other sinner may answer a factious man as the Pirate did Alexander Magnus
I rob with one ship, thou with whole Fleets; I private merchants, thou whole
nations. A Schismatik cannot tell another of his mote, but he may be reproved
for his beam. Could all the sins in the world have brought such a sea of
mischief, as this has done upon us? How many thousand of families has it
ruined? How many millions of lives destroyed? what treasures of wealth wasted?
What confusion ((...)) what unsettledness in Church and State? And how much
more then all this had we suffered if God had not wonderfully said to it hither
are the proud waves come, but shall pass no further.

But there are degrees, there is a Prince of Devils: This sin though it be
always Divelish, yet sometimes it is so in a higher degree. To strive with an
equal or inferior, is wicked; but to strive with a superior, is much more so.
Hos. 4.4.
The Prophet makes it a symptom of a people desperately wicked, and past all
hope of reclaming when they strive with their Priests. It was the clamerous
fault of the Israelites that they quarrelled even with Moses and Aaron: in
whose persons God himself is concerned, for he that resists the power
resists the ordinance of God. The Corinthians are warned that they should not
murmur as the Israelites did lest they be destroyed like them. And these things
says he are written for our instruction. But we would not receive instruction.
We murmured (would we had done no more) and were destroyed of Serpents, The
Brewhouse and the bulk, etc.
things that crept among us out of obscure holes, things of whom we know not
the pedigree, nor should have heard the name but for their venom: By such
Serpents were many of us destroyed, and many of us stung, and had been worse if
God had not provided a remedy.

The sin has yet another aggravation. It is observed that they murmured at the
sea, even at the read sea, even within the prospect of so great a deliverance.
It is but newly that God has wrought such another deliverance for us: The read
sea of a bloody faction divided in to parties, and gave us between them a dry
and safe passage to our liberty: so that without one drop of blood we arrived
at that happiness, which in our boldest hopes we could not have expected
without a sea of blood and tears. And do we murmur at such a time as this? a
time which requires to be spent in praises to God and mutual congratulations?

When the Israelites were restored from captivity, Nehem. 8.10. commanded the
people to eat and drink, and send portions, do we quarrel and complain at such
a time? Jonah 4.9.
This is an aggravation of Ionahs peevishness. Do thou well to be angry? Thou
Jonah? Do thou well to be angry for thy goard? Have thou so quickly forgotten
the storm upon the sea, and the Whales belly under it. How few, days is it
since thou would have given one of thy eyes to behold the Sun with the
other; and art thou so quickly angry because it shines a little too hot upon
thee? Cha. 2 5.
How sadly did thou complain that thy head was wrapped about with weeds, and
art thou so quickly angry that a weed is withered over thy head: Angry so
quickly? and so much? and for a weed too? A poor weed, the issue of the night,
and the breakfast of a worm? so much anger for so slight a trifle, and so
little pity for so great a city?

You that are Ministers, and you that profess to love Ministers Do you do
well to be angry for your covenant? Have you already forgotten what fears
chilled your hearts but a few months since? What would you not then have given
to be assured of a King, and a Church upon any terms? When we groaned under the
yoke which our former factiousness had brought upon us, it was then the
expression of a chief of the Scottish Nobles, We see too late that we have
buried Monarchy and Episcopacy in one common grave; but we would dig away the
earth of that grave with our teeth to restore them. And do you gnash those
teeth for indignation that God has restored them? And all this aenger for your
covenant, a weed which sprung up but last night, a night of confusion and
rebellion? Is the Scottish thistle such a precious flower? Is it not a fretting
prickly weed? does it not fetch blood where ever it comes? No, No, it is not
the loss of that rigid, troublesome discipline that vexes you; It is your
reputation; You are afraid to be counted false Prophets, and to have made so
loud clamors for nothing; you doubt lest you should be thought either to be
timeservers now, or to have been seditious heretofore, if you now submit to
that government which you set the world one fire to destroy: But is your
reputation so considerable that the peace of the Church must be sacrificed to
it? Must so many thousand lives redeem you from such cheap fears? And do you
well in this too? Is that earthly sensual, devilish sin so inconsiderable in
your eyes? Nay must it be justified, as if it were no sin at all? Nay, must it
be honored, as if it were a piece of Godliness? Christ made it the cognizance
of his Disciples, if you love one another, and must it pass for a mark of good
Christians if they be quarrelsome? Is it not enough that so great a sin be
connived at? must it be sanctified too? Ambitious Devil! Is it not a favor to
be respited from the Deep, must thou be worshipped too? Worshipped by the Son of
God too? No less command serve for a sacrifice to the Devil, then the very
critical command of Christ? No less sin serve him, then the devilish sin of
Faction; Me thinks he might be contented to be served by the meaner sins, and
to be worshipped as the God of this World: as Mammon. or Venus, by the sins of
covetousness or intemperance. The Groves and the Marketplace might have
served, and must he needs set up his Altars in the Temple of God? and deceive
those that come thither to pay their devotions? make them believe that their
affections are enflamed with zeal from above, when they are set on fire of
hell? He may now be contented to part with those services of the inferior
sort, the debaucheries of the body, Drunkenness and Fornication. But stay,
must the Sword of Justice destroy none but poor and vulgar Amalekites? must the
King be spared? yea, and royally attended too? must the fat cattle be kept
alive, and that for sacrifice too? And must this be called obeying the
commandment of the Lord? Does God give every Magistrate as large a Commission
against sin, 1 Samuel 15.28.24.
as he did to Saul against Amalek, Go and utterly destroy the sinners? And
shall it be called justice to punish the vulgar, and persecution to punish the
King of sins? Is not this to sear the people, and obey their voice who judge by
outward appearance, and are easily persuaded to honor the Devil, when he
turns himself into an Angel of light.

This is indeed the root of sin and error; we judge like Children by the
outside, take all for Gold that glisters. This makes us prefer the visible
happiness of this World: This made St. Paul complain that the false Apostles
were preferred above himself, because the Corinthians judged by outward
appearance, and so did not judge righteous judgment. But our present error
exceeds all: Many esteem the future happiness of heaven beneath the present
enjoyments of the world, but no man condemns heaven as a place of misery:
whereas in the reverse we do not only reckon Faction to be a less sin then
the more visible sins of the flesh, Polano hist. council. Trid
but we magnify it as the very character of Godliness. Never was better
mystery found (says one) then to use Religion to make one insensible: But to
use the greatest of sins for a token of Godliness, this is the very mystery of
the mystery of iniquity.

Thus we see what great reason the Apostle had, so importunately to beseech the
Romans, that they would mark them which cause Division. I shall help you to
know them by those principles which they build upon, and wherewith they deceive
the hearts of the simple, and maintain division in the Church. I shall show the
Pillars upon which Faction is built, It will not need Samson's strength to pull
them down; if you do but mark them, you look them into nothing.

1. That we must keep as great a distance from the Papists as we can.
This carries malice in it is very countenance, needs no observer to help you
mark: and beside, the malice of it, is so certainly false, that it is
impossible to be true. For it self is most exactly Popish, and therefore it is
impossible to avoid Popery, unless we avoid this very position, which says we
must so avoid it. Popery never came to it is full growth, until the Conventicle
at Trent, nor was this principle ever authentically practiced until then:
There it was first authorized into a rule, that they must keep at the greatest
distance from Heretics. If we reform this position, as we have done the whole
Religion, we may have this truth out of it. We must avoid all those Doctrines
which are truly Popish and false; yet not because they are Popish, but because
they are false; and upon this account we must avoid these Doctrines: That we
must shun some Doctrines and Practices, merely upon this reason, because
maintained by Heretics: That the King has no power in Ecclesiastical
matters: That in some cases the Subjects, may lawfully resist the King: That
all men are damned who are not of our Party.

These and the like positions we must avoid: not so much because they are
Popish (though indeed they be so, and Jesuiticall too, the worst sort of
Popery) as because they are both false and factions. But if we lay it down
crudely, that we must neither do nor say as the Papists do, what shall become
of our Religion? Must we turn Turks, or Jews, or Heathens to avoid Popery? If
we should, yet must we retain some of their belief, unless we deny a God too;
Nay, if we drive home this principle, we must as the Apostle says, go out of
the world.

It is by some of the Popish Writers made a character of the English Nation,
that they think they are so much the nearer Heaven, as they are further from
Rome: They have too much color to speak it of some, but they betray too much
malice in applying it to all.

This is the great difference between the Fathers of our Church, and the
Children of disobedience: the one would have such a form of worship, as might
invite the soberer Papists to communicate with us; the other would have either
no form at all, or so slovenly an one, that the Papists may nauseate it; the
one would go as far as they may to meet the Papist, in hope that at least the
more moderate and uninteressed of them, would go some few steps to meet us; the
other will go as far from them as they can, that there never may be a meeting.
Now Ibeseech you mark, which of these two they are which cause division and
hinder union, and avoid them. Which of these best follows the Apostles
precept commanding us, If it be possible and as much as in us lies to live
peaceably with all men? Which best imitateth his example that became all things
to all men. He that to the Jews became as a Jew that he might gain the Jews,
would he not to the Papists become as a Papist, that he might gain the Papist?
It is no groundless conjecture of an observing judicious person, that if the
Ceremonies of the Church of England had been kept among the reformed in France,
all the French would long since have turned Protestants: Their own Cardinal it
seems is of the same mind, who suppressed the use of them, because the people
began to entertain more charitable thoughts of our religion, and he feared that
at next step they might prefer it before their own. It was wisely done; the
earthen pot ought to keep distance, but the brazen need not fear to come up
close to it: let them fear a meeting, who distrust their own strength, to keep
distance from the means of reconciliation is the figne either of an heretic,
or at least of a schismatic.

And by this I suppose it appears how we ought to value that objection which
is usually made against our form of Common Prayer, That it is taken out of the
Mass Book. If that be a sufficient accusation we must condemn our religion too.
When the Papists ask us, Where our Religion was before Luther? we have no
better answer then to say, It was in their own: we fet it thence as the
refiner: fetches metal out of the oar: We reformed from them by keeping the
silver and leaving the drovs; we reformed the old did not make a new. It is so
far from being a fault in our liturgy that it may be truly called Common, so
common that all Christians (Papists and all) may join with us; that I doubt not
to reck on it among it is excellencies, and I fear not to wish that the Popish
Missal were so reformed that it might be lawful for our Protestant Merchants
to communicate with them.

Obs. It may perhaps be thought sufficient for an answer to all this to say,
That while we use ceremonies to draw on the Papists, we thereby drive away our
own brethren; we cause strife at home, by endeavoring peace abroad, and so
this very position must be marked and avoided as a causer of division.

Ans. The Pharisees were angry with Christ for eating with Publicans, yet he
thought a soul well purchased with a Pharisees discontent. The whole have no
need of a physician; you think your selves such, and then there is no need of
complying with you.

And this is the present case: By complying with the Papists in some innocent
Ceremonies, we may have hope, and therefore it is charity to endeavor to
reduce them to the truth. You are angry and complain of Scandal. (By the way he
that has learned of the incomparable D. Hammond to understand what a Scandal
is, will see that it is a flat contradiction to complain that I am scandalized:
it is as if a man should say he cannot choose but stumble at that, which he
knows to lie in his way, that he cannot avoid being caught in such a trapp as
he knows to be tilled for him: whereas the very formality of a stumbling
block and a trapp do consist in not being known.) And require that we should be
really scandalous to the Papists by tempting them to hate to be reformed, that
you may not be angry with us for our desire to save them. You disobediently
quarrel at your superiors charity; and to this disobedience add a false
accusation as if they brought in that strife, which your selves have risen.

But can you thus father the division upon the Church? Judge by this case, Two
families are at difference; The master of one of them out of love to Christ
seeks reconciliation with the adversary, and uses means to procure it: some
of his children obey him and join with him in so good an enterprise: others,
that are more implacable, refuse and make a faction among the servants, and
then declare the good man to be a litigious person, and a raiser of strife
among those of his household. This is the true state of the quarrel, and I
beseech you mark them which are the true causes of the division and avoid them.

What puffing is there among some to blow up the old coals, and kindle our old
ridiculous but tragical fears and jealousies! What crying out that Popery,
Popery is coming in, Liturgy and Organs and Surplices, etc. Indeed Popery would
come in apace, if once we grant it to be as ancient as those things: We must no
longer call it an innovation nor deny it our veneration: how quickly would
Popery come in among us, if the schismatical party could do the Papists service
in that work, wherein their endeavors are plainly united, the destruction of
that government which all the Fathers of the Church but one venerate for
Apostolical, and that one in his greatest bitterness against it acknowledges
to have been instituted as a bulwark against heresies, and these men would
demolish as a piece of heresy that their new discipline might be advanced. How
aptly are these men said to stand in the Church like the ugly Anticks in
buildings: which with great show of bending and straining pretend to bear up
the weight of the whole fabric, but are not thanked by wise men for the
service they do, so much as laughed at for their false pretenses and real
deformityes. How much they have contributed to the supporting the Protestant
cause, witness the English Nunnery at Antwerp, witness the many sporades both
of Nobles and others that were tempted by our unsettlednesse to think better of
the bosom of the Church of Rome (though polluted) then of the wilderness
pestered with so many sorts of fiery serpents: But how much that Episcopal
party which they ridiculously call Popish have resisted the grows of Popery,
witness the invincible armies of Jewels, Andrews, Fields, Potters, Ferns,
Cosins, Bramhals, Hammonds, Tailors, etc. and especially Laud and Chillingworth
whom the schismatics have done the Pope so much service as to destroy, whereas
if they had any true affection to the Protestant cause, the best of them might
say to either of those Martyrs as the people to David, Thou art worth 10000 of
us.

Such Popery as these men and many others either wrote, or died, or both, in
defense of, such Popery as flourished in the first and purest ages of
Christianity, such Popery as by the blessing of God, we were reformed to in the
days of King Ed. 6. such Popery as many zealous persons defended with their
lives in the days of Q. Mary, that Popery for which Rome hates and fears
our Church more then any other of Christendom. That Popery which Mr. Calvin
would with all his heart have established in Geneva if the place had been
capable of it, that Popery which the most learned of the Outlandish Reformed do
strongly wish and faintly hope for; That Popery God be blessed is coming in
apace.

The fable of the Fox, that was caught in a Gin by the tail and forced to bite
it off and afterward persuaded the other Foxes to bite off their tails too
under pretense, that they were both burdensome and needless, is a perfect
resemblance of our controversy. But what if the Church of Geneva, were
necessitated to maime her self, and prevailed upon some other Churches to be
her apes, and glory with her in their naked buttoks; but the Church of England
would only wash, and cleanse and flea but not maime her self, reform her
errors and superstitions without losing that Government, which is so manifestly
ancient, does this deserve so much clamor? Is our Church Popish because it is
governed by Bishops? as well may the King be called a Fanatik because he
upholdeth virtue. But certainly whoever hates any thing because his enemy
uses it, betrayeth a malicious spirit, and such Doctrines deserve to be marked
for causing divisions among us.

2. That nothing may be brought into the worship of God, but what is warranted
by the word of God, and to do it, is Popery and superstition.
If they mean an Explicit and particular warrant, then this opinion pleads
to be rejected as Popish, and superstitious, for it has no such express
warrant in the word, as it requires. If they mean a general and implicit
warrant; The Church has such an one 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done
decently and in order. This had been superfluous if all particulars had been
expressly prescribed, and it had been too large if the Church were not a
competent judge of what is orderly and decent. Me thinks if not his reason, yet
at least the authority of so judicious a Father as Mr. Calvine should prevail
in this case, his words ad literam are these -- Quin etiam hinc colligere
promptum est, has posteriores (viz. pias Ecclesiae leges) non esse habendas pro
humanis traditionibus, quandoquidem fundatae sunt in hoc generali mandato. Et
liquidam approbationem, habent, quasi ex ore Christi ipsius.

But my present design calls upon me not to confute but mark the causers of
division; and yet indeed the very marking of any Doctrine for such is an
abundant confutation. Mark then whether this does not, and will not perpetually
quarrel with any kind of worship, that shall be enjoined. Let us e. g. suppose
it required that the two Sacraments should be celebrated after their own new
mode: That for Baptism a fine drilled frame should be set up by the Ministers
Desk, and a basin set in it, and that the Father should come, etc. May not
their own questions be in this case demanded: What warrant for this? did the
Apostles so? etc. Suppose again we should be required to sit at the Lords
Supper. Might it not again be demanded whether Christ did so? The more
unlearned may think he did. But it is manifest that they did not sit but lie
down to meat: and if we must celebrate that Supper after the same manner as
Christ did, We must get an upper Chamber (and that a guest Chamber too,) and we
must have beds set to lie upon round a table, and there we must eat a Lamb for
Supper, Nay, we must remember that it is particularly described by the Apostle
as a signal circumstance, that all this was done in the same night that Christ
was betrayed. Must then the Minister be betrayed and crucified that all may be
done after the Original form? where shall we stop? How shall we avoid division
if this Doctrine stand? Do we not perceive that upon this principle we still
crumble into further separation? Was it not upon this foundation that the
Quaker built his Fanatik Religion? The circumstances being not so publikly
known I shall here set them down, as I credibly received them from one that was
present, and if I be called to it, shall name the person time and place. A
company of Seekers being met, and ready to begin their prayers, One of them
thus spoke, Brethren what do we? We profess against forms, and we separate from
others because they use forms: And do we our selves use a form. How to avoid so
manifest an objection they knew not, and therefore concluded to wait upon God,
and expect how he would reveal his mind. They sat silent all of them almost
two hours, when suddenly a young women tumbled out of the window into the
middle of the room, no other sign of life appearing in her but this, a general
shaking of the whole body; yet so, that every joint had a particular motion,
and (so) impossible to be counterfeit. After much endeavor to recover her out
of her supposed swoon, at length of her own accord she rose up saying that God
had called her to speak to them at that time, and that he would in the same
manner continue to call those that should hereafter speak to them. Judge now
what kind of spirit this was, which for a while did thus abuse that frantic
sect and now leaves them when grown of age to stand upon their own feet. Do
you think it was the spirit of God which now breaks the promise that then he
made, and for a while performed? If it were not, how can you think fit to lay
that foundation which if prosecuted will bring you to quarrel with every form,
but what the Devil shall show?

3. To neglect our own duty and look after the duty of others.
Is that (...) which the Apostle ranketh with malefactors thieves and
murderers; 1 Pet. 4.15.
for this reason doubtless, because it wears a strong tincture of sedition,
but it is the usual practice of nonconformists: who disobey, not because they
may not obey but because (say they) the Magistrate may not impose a form of
worship. But what have thou to do to enquire after the Magistrates duty? let
every man look to his own work. If the Magistrate impose nothing that is
sinful, it is lawful and (if lawful) necessary for thee to obey. It is at
other times preached by the very same men that when any thing is required we
should ask this question, Is it lawful? will it stand with my interest in God?
But this is quite another question, then to ask has the Magistrate power to
enjoin this? might it not be better otherwise, etc. When I read of the Jews
wars with Antiochus, I read also of swines flesh and Idolatry: When of their
wars with the Romans, I read of Caligulae's statue set up in the Temple, When I
read of the burning of our English Martyrs, I find the worship of Images,
Saints, and bread required. When I now hear talk of persecution, of exhortation
to lose all and embrace the faggot rather then read the Common Prayer, I should
expect some great sinfulness in it, such tragical exclamations would make a
man expect news of a great image or a new religion set up.

But when the accusers stood up they brought no accusation of such things as I
supposed, Acts 25.18.
but had certain questions against it of their own superstition. (The word
superstition critically signifies a fear of what is good) The cross in Baptism
and ring in Marriage, some hymns ridiculous, prayers roped up like beads, etc.
and in general to impose a form is but commanding lusty men to use crutches.
These and the like are the great objections, against which I now bring no other
plea but this, they make nothing to the question: The question truly stated is
not, Whether it might be better otherwise? but whether it be sinful, as it is.
That excellent Martyr Ridly that professed he would rather preach in a fools
coat then not preach at all, though he died for the avoiding a sin would not
have made a schism for the avoiding a Surplice. But this question, Did the
Governor well in making such an order? as it carries a strong favor of
pride, so also a strong tendency to sedition. For if it be lawful to question
(not the lawfulness only, but the wisdom of the laws,) and to disobey them
whenever we shall be tempted to censure for the worse; we shall never be free
from sedition as long as any man is proud or factious. It belongs to a Dr.
(said Polano) to give a reason of his saying, A lawmaker if he do so, does
diminish his authority; because the subject does wrestle with reason alleged,
and when he thinks he has resolved it, he thinks also that he has taken
all virtue from the precept. And Seneca more short, Vt quis sapientior legibus
videatur, hoc ipsum est quod legibus prohibetur. Do thou think this no good
form? Why this form was enjoined for this very reason that it might not be in
thee to judge what form is best. Go and learn what that means I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, and thou shall find that God requires thee to prefer
obedience and love above those services which better please thy fancy. It was
Saul's error and his ruin that he did not what was commanded but what he
thought better. Supposing then thou could make a better form of worship, yet
can thou not find a better way of serving God then by obedient conformity to
the way of the Church. But granting more then usually is, or reasonably can be
objected; That there were some things in the Common prayer Book truly sinful:
Yet is it our duty to obey the Apostles precept: As much as in us lies to live
peaceably with all men. Let your peaceable mind, then appear by your conforming
as far as possibly you can: Perhaps the clemency of the Fathers of the Church
will induce them to wink at, if they cannot satisfy your Scrupulous conscience:
however, this you shall gain, that you shall not suffer as malefactors: whereas
if you willingly run upon faction, and trouble when you may without sin avoid
this, and cannot without sin (and the greatest of sins too) practice that. Talk
what you will of persecution, you are but the Devils confessors, and Martyrs.

4. That the Law of man does not bind the conscience.
That is, whenever a man's passions or interests shall tempt him, he may
rebel. But admit the law of man did not directly bind you, yet certainly it
does so by consequence, because there is no other way to obey the royal law of
Love. You know that Christ paid tribute, only that he might not give offense,
though while he did it he demonstrated that he was not bound to it. But say,
does not the law of man bind the conscience? Does not St. Paul tell us that he
that resists the powers resists the ordinance of God? and therefore we must
needs be subject, not only for wrath but also for conscience sake? And does not
St. Peter agree with him that we must submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake? If the Translatours had so pleased they might have rendered (...)
Humane invention, and then your own phrase had bound you to obey. But as if it
were a small matter to profess themselves not bound to obey, where the thing is
otherwise indifferent; the contentious spirit carries some of them further;
they profess that in such cases they are bound not to obey; what they may do
if they have liberty, they may not do if they be commanded. Is not this the
true spirit of contradiction? the thing is lawful in it is self, put but a
little obedience to it, and it becomes sinful. Thus rebellion is not only
quitted of the sin of witchcraft, devilishness; it is preferred and made the
righteousness of the Saints, To kneel at the Communion, or say the Lords
Prayer, etc. is confessed a thing indifferent if it were not required, but
being enjoined it becomes sinful. But as liars are often entrapped in their
own talk, so these men by over earnestly defending their liberty, reneage it.
Even thus they confess that humane laws bind the conscience, though to
disobedience. We must do what they forbid and forbear what they command. Had
they commanded us to fit at the Communion we must have kneeled, had they forbad
the use of the Lords Prayer, we must by no means have forborne it. I know a wise
and good man whose wife had this humor to appear unwilling of whatsoever he
desired; yet he found a way to have her comply with his mind by making show to
desire the contrary: must these men be thus managed? must the Law forbid what
it would have done, and command what it would have avoided? Would not a man
think that these men came from the Antipodes, whose both Religion and Policy
stands in such direct opposition to that of our hemisphere?

What God do they worship whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is Rebellion,
whose charity is murdering and ruining of Kingdoms? whose zeal is fury, whose
order is confusion, whose Christianity, is antichristian, whose Godliness is
Devilism? And what kind of Policy is that which armeth justice with a lath?
makes Magistrates without power to command, and laws without obligation to
obedience, which requires justice to punish the smallest sins, and reverence
the greatest, and teaches the subject to account the laws obligatory only to
disobedience: which bids every man do what is best in his own eyes, and
calls lawlesness liberty. Which makes it the duty of the subject not to
submit his wisdom to the law but to arraign the laws before his own fancy, and
think himself not only free from obedience to it, but bound to oppose it, if he
shall sentence it, less wise then himself?

Fanatik Schismatiks! There is this only to be pleaded for you, that your
principles are mad and therefore their wickedness is the more excusable. And
that God may therefore forgive you, because you know not what you do. But sure:
This is not the wisdom that comes from above. Whatever hope it may have of
Gods pardon it can have no title to our reverence. Let the Turks honor mad men
and fools, as supposing them inspired from above, but our Apostle preventeth
this conceit in us toward fanatics, for he concludes his chapter with a
character of heavenly wisdom quite opposite. The wisdom (says he) that is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits without wrangling, and without hypocrisy. Come now you
that pretend your selves the ingrossers of piety; that slight the phlegmatic
dullness of the conformist, that go up to the Temple with the supercilious
Pharisee, boasting that you are not as other men are: Job 12.2, 3.
No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you. But we have
understanding as well as you, we are not inferior to you: yea, who knows not
such things as these? Who sees not that this Apostle and all the rest agree
with their Master in teaching love to be the most Substantial piety? who sees
not that he multiplyeth the commendations of Peaceableness but passes over
Purity with one single expression? Who sees not that (however you boast your
selves not only the best Scholars, but the best Teachers in Christ's School,
yet) you stick in the first lesson, and have not yet learned to take out a
second? And who sees not that St. Paul challenges it as self evident that you
have not learned the first, until you be perfect in the second? Are you not
carnal whiles one says I am of Paul and another I am of Apollo? Is not your
very boasted Purity impure until you learn to be peaceable also? Alas! those
pollutions of the world through lust, are but the Devils forlorn which it is a
small victory to overcome, his main strength consists in his spiritual
wickednesses, wherewith he destroys multitudes of such as had escaped the
other: and many weak unwary Christians become a prey to him, as the
undisciplined Barbarians did of old to the Romans: when having routed the
Velites they broke their orders as to a pursuit and fell a cheap spoil to the
legionaries: fleshly lust compared with spiritual pride is but as Saul to
David: That has slain it is thousands, and this, it is 10000. Take heed of this
Parthian though you have put him to flight, Think not that you have already
attained, or were already perfect, as soon as you have learned to avoid the
grosser sins of bodily uncleanness: This is so far from making you perfect
Christians, that it does not make you perfect so much as in your first lesson;
the wisdom which is from above is first Pure, and it is purity cleanses from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit. On, on for shame then, to the next lesson
or the Publicans and harlots will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before you:
Their beastly sins are but gnats: your Devilish sins are Camels: you spy a more
in their eyes, and behold a beam is in your own.

Oh foolish seperatists who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth so manifestly set forth, by our Savior and his Apostles, and all ages of
the Church and your own dear experience? Is it the ostentous garb of a boasted
zeal? This only would I learn of you, Do you think our Saviors invectives died
with the Pharisees? or are they written for our sakes? Is that worthy of
reverence now, which was worthy of such vehement reprehension then? What did
our Savior inveigh against in them, which their successors do not glory in,
and you adore as in defiance to our Saviors Sermons? They boasted themselves
the only religious and thence concluded all men accursed but themselves and
their disciples; they wore exalted eylids and broad phylacteries and other
pomps of professed strictness, that they might extract reverence from the
deluded people: They made long prayers and large professions of zeal that they
might devour widows houses: and what more can you find in our modern
Pharisees, but this that they out-sin their predecessors? The Pharisees of old
devoured widows houses: these make fatherless and widows, and then devour
their houses: they reverenced Gods House that men might reverence them, these
deny all reverence to Gods House that they may ingrosse it to themselves and
take the houses of God into possession. And are not these the more ravenous
wolves under the same sheeps clothing? If we look to the Apostles, what did
they complain of in their rivals, which is not reverenced in ours? These as
well as those are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves
into the Apostles of Christ: these with fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple, and lead captive filly women: If we look to succeeding ages, was there
ever any heretic in Church or rebel in State, that did not profess for the
glory of God and the good of man? But if we look back to our own miseries,
whence came wars and fightings among us, and whither had they brought us? Did
they not come from a pretended zeal to reformation? and was it not a wonderful
providence that delivered us from total extirpation? And are we not bewitched
if we can relapse into the same follies again, when a burnt child, though but a
child, dreadeth fire, strange power of prejudice. Is it not enough that our
Savior warned us before hand by so many lively descriptions of our impostors?
that the Apostles, and all succeeding ages, and above all, our own has so
evidently and sadly suffered under their cheats? can we neither be forewarned
by cautions nor afterward instructed by such costly experience? Can neither the
leaves nor the very fruits tell us what they are? Do men gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles? can love come from scratching thorns, or joy from
prickling thistles? or could our Savior have prescribed a plainer or surer way
to know them then by their fruits?

Let us judge them then by their fruits: The fruit of the spirit is joy, love,
peace and long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, Gal. 5.22.
meekness: and what is that spirit which is so fruitful in malice, miseries,
and contentions, etc. Once more I beseech in the words of St. Paul, to mark
them which cause divisions among you and avoid them for they serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own interests and with fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple: And I conclude as my Apostle does this chapter, desiring you to mark
this too, that the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make
peace. That you may mark those who promote peace and union and may follow them
as wearing that mark, which our Savior owneth for his.

And the God of peace, and the peace of God which passes all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God and of one another,
etc. FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Author living at great distance from the Press; some errors, especially
in punctations, have escaped, the most considerable are these.

Page 13. l. 7. Read So evident does the Apostle account it. p. 14. l. 34. r.
avennes. p. 16. l. 30. for thus r. For as. and l. 32. r. So in the next. p. 17.
l. 10. r. other. and l. 33. for the r. thy. p. 18. l. 19. and 22. for read r.
red. p. 24. l. 1. r. Obj. and l. 30. for risen r. raised. p. 35. l. 18. r.
Strange power of prejudice!


