A SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE FEAR of DEATH: OR, A CORDIAL FOR A DYING
CHRISTIAN. BEING Ten Select MEDITATIONS, wherein a Christians Objections are
Answered, and his Doubts and Fears Removed, and many convincing Motives and
Arguments are laid down to persuade him to a willing Submission to Gods Will,
whether he be sent for by a Natural or a Violent Death. By EDWARD BVRY formerly
Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire.

For me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil. 1.21. I am willing not
only to be bound but to dye for Christ, Act. 21.13. For I am in a strait
between two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ which is better,
etc. Phil. 1.23. London, Printed by J. A. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible
and three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1681.

To the Worshipful PHILIP FOLEY of Prestwood, Esquire; One of the Members of
the present PARLIAMENT: AND TO THE Virtuous and truly Religious, The Lady
PENELOPE, Daughter to the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, his pious Consort:
E. B. wishes increase of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
Worshipful and Right Honorable,
I Have made bold here to present you with a Discourse of Death, or rather with
a Discourse with my self concerning Death. I am not ignorant that it is an
unpleasing Theme to declaim upon before many of the great ones of the times,
who fear Death more than Hell it self, as believing it to be a Reality; when
God and Devil, Heaven and Hell, they would believe are Fictions: The
apprehension of Death puts them into a cold sweat; it makes them tremble, not
much unlike to Belshazzars handwriting upon the wall; Dan. 5.5, 6. Mat. 8.29.
and whosoever minds them of it, does but torment them before the time; but
such as wink, and then conceit Death does not see them, will ere long find
their mistake. But had I imagined you had been of this Gang, I should not have
prefixed your Name to these Papers: They are intended for a Cordial against the
fear of Death, but such as those should be persuaded to fear it more. But the
Image of God, and those divine qualifications which accompany salvation,
appearing in you, I thought these Meditations, nay nor Death it self, would not
startle you. For let me tell you, without flattery, that there are some
qualifications in you that draw the eyes of the world after you, yea draw out
their affections to you; such as Justice, Temperance, Prudence, Charity, etc.
These, as they are rare in our times, in persons of your rank, so they are
lovely; but there are other qualifications, such as Piety and Holiness, the
Image of God, and the Graces of his Spirit, that make you lovely both to God
and good men; these the World take no notice of, at least love not in you; for
they ^^eem Grace and Holiness no better than ^^renzie or Madness: But the time
is coming, ^e greatest Gallants would be glad to be ^und in this Garb, which
now is grown so ^uch out of fashion; they are now, like Da^ocles, sporting
themselves amidst their ^inties, and priding themselves in their ^incely
Attendants, but forget the Sword ^^at hangs over their heads, ready every
mo^^nt to end their days together with their ^^ner. But though God has given
you ^^ndance of these outward things beyond any others, yet you take them not,
as they ^e, for your portion, but say of them as ^ther of the Cardinals Hat
when offered the Pope, God shall not put me off with ^h poor triffes; or as
Galeacius, that ^lian Marquess, when offered great riches forsake his Religion,
Let their Money ^ish with them, that hold all the Wealth ^he world worth one
days communion ^h Christ. You seek after better Riches; (...) as Solomon found
out by Experience, Eccles. 1.14.
at all was Vanity and Vexation of spi^^^ so you can write a Probatum est upon
(...) I know you lie under great Temptati^^, but I hope Gods grace to you (as
it was the Apostle) will be sufficient; 2 Cor. 12.9
and it is small measure of Grace will make you digest Prosperity without a
surfeit. I spea^ not these things to lay a stumbling block o^ pride before you;
I stand in my own apprehensions too near the brink of Eternity to b^ guilty of
this folly, and can say, it is your Humility that makes you lovely in my eyes:
(...) know the way to throw you down, is to lif^ you up; and whosoever brings
fuel to the fire, is your Enemy and not your Friend^ but seeing your works
praise you in the gates, Pro. 31.31.
as Solomon says of the good Hou^^ wife, why should not I and others praise
yo^ for them, as he does her; that God may (...) glorified, your hands
strengthened, and other encouraged by your Example to do the lik^ hoping you
will shine more and more unto t^^ perfect day, Pro. 4.18.
until you come to shine as t^^ Sun in the Kingdom of your Father? Mat. 13.4.


Now there are two or three things whi^^ you may desire to be satisfied in, in
order (...) this Dedication: As first, Why I write upon this Subject? And to
this I answer: That Discourse of this nature can never be out season; for as
soon as we are born, we a^^ subject to die: And as it is suitable for (...)
Times, so also for all Persons, none (...) exempted; and we have no greater
work do, than to prepare for Death: It Is g^ therefore for us, 1 Cor. 15.31.
with the Apostle, to d^ daily; that is, every day be expecting Dea^^ and
preparing for it. But more particularly, God was pleased to exercise me for a
long ^ime together with various distempers, insomuch that I despaired of life,
and received in my self the sentence of death, and was disabled for other
concerns; and although my distempers were not so violent as to ^hreaten a
sudden dissolution, yet being so complicated, and continuing so long without
check, notwithstanding all the means that were used, and I felt Nature so fast
decay, that I thought God had spoken by this Providence to me, as sometime to
Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.1.
Put thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live: And it being my
Clymasterical year, I thought it would prove fatal to me, as it had done to
many old persons; and these apprehensions were much heightened by the continued
rumors we then had, and still have, of Popish Plots, and ^ur intended Massacre,
and a little fastened also by Melancholy Conceits; so that between the one and
the other, I raised this Conclusion, My days were cut off, and my life drew
near to a period; but whether a natural disease, or a violent hand would do my
work, I was at a loss: Sometimes I concluded for the one, and sometime for the
other, according as my disease or our weekly News prevailed. However, this put
me on to have more serious thoughts of Death and Judgment than I usually have
had; and I thought it my Interest to make preparation for death, yea for the
worst of deaths; and therefore I did often ask my self this question, What if
Death should come? What if I should be brought to the Stake for Christ? what
comfort could I find? And considering my memory was treacherous, being much
disabled by my distemper, lying much in my head, I wrote down the Answer as my
mind dictated; and when God gave me any lucida intervalla, any breathing times,
I lost few of them, but can say with the Philosopher, Nulla dies sine linia, no
day passed but I did something; and thus in a little time the materials for
this Structure were gathered together; yet in a rude, confused and disorderly
Chaos, suitable to my distracted Thoughts and disturbed Fancy, suited also to
my end, to have recourse thereto in my necessity. But when through Gods
blessing upon my endeavor, those fogs were a little blown over, and my bodily
strength a little restored, I began to think that the fear of Death was not my
distemper alone, but an Epidemical disease; yea that some, and those not of the
worser sort, through the fear of death are all their lifetime subject to
bondage; Heb. 2.15.
and considering also the present at state of the Nation, which in the eyes
(...) prudent persons is not free from danger (...) Foreign Invasion, or
Domestic Insur^ction, I began to think an undertaking of ^is nature might not
be unsuitable, and to ^any not unwelcome; and hereupon I review^^ my scattered
Papers, set them in order, ^^d polished them, if not as I should, yet as ^
could, presuming a good Stomach (and for ^^ch I write) will digest wholesome
meat, ^^ough not modishly dressed: Those that are wil^^ng to live holily as well
as dye happily, to ^^ve to the Lord, and if called to it, to die ^^r the Lord,
yet are not without their ^ears and doubts, these be they that I would ^nimate;
but those that esteem the appearance of Virtue better than the Virtue it self,
I have here nothing to say to them, let them also think the appearance of
Happiness better than Happiness and Heaven it ^^lf. However, my end drawing
near, as I ^ay without the Spirit of Prophecy foresee, I was willing to leave
upon record what my present thoughts of death are, what I found benefit by,
when in mine own apprehension I lay upon my deathbed, and what I hope may
comfort others in the like condition. If it be objected, that many learned
Treatises ^are written by able Divines upon this Subject, it is granted; and yet
notwithstanding all those great Lamps, many are in the dark, and who knows but
my small Taper may be useful to light some one or other in some dark corner of
the house? the Lesson is not sufficiently taught, that is not sufficiently
learnt: Those that have no better, may make use of this; those that have, may
bestow this upon some one that wants it.

But you may demand, why I prefix your Name to these unpolisht lines? Truly,
those that know you and your worth, and know me and my Engagements to you, need
not wonder that I dedicate a Book to you, but rather that I did it no sooner.
That the present is so mean, the reason is, I had no better at hand, and I hope
you will accept the will for the deed, and herein imitate God himself, Exodus
35.5, 6.
who accepted of a little Goats hair, where there was neither Gold nor Silver
to be had (...) I was also encouraged hereunto by your ready and thankeful
acceptance of some former discourses from me; and therefore have imitated
herein that which is fabled of Pan the Rural God, who coming before Apollo to
show his Art, played upon his Oaten Reed, and being at first uncontrolled, he
took courage, and played louder and louder: so it fares with me, when one check
from you would have spoiled my Music. But that I present you with a Book of
this nature, my Answer is ready: Discourses of this nature are never ^ut of
season. Solomon tells us, Eccl. 7.2.
It Is better go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for
this is the end of all flesh, and the living will lay it to heart. It Is true,
you are in the flower of your age, and your bones are full of marrow, Job 21.24.
yet may you be cut off in your full strength; and Solomon advises such to
remember their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccles. 12.1. and 11.8.
before the evil days come, before the days of darkness come, for they are
many. My design in this Dedication is not that you should protect it; if it be
Truth God will protect it, if not, man cannot do it; let it therefore stand or
fall accordingly: neither desire I hereby to escape the just reproach due to me
for the ill handling hereof, yet would I desire that those that have death in
their eyes, as I had, and not those upon the Alebench, that put far from them
the evil day, may be my Judges. Neither is it because I think you have more
need of such a discourse than others have, that I send it to you: I know you
too well to have such a conceit; but it is to testify the great respect I have
for you, and hereby to acknowledge those debts that I cannot pay, when I am not
able to give you any thing worthy your self. I would willingly further you in
your great design, and put a weapon into your hand against you come to fight
against your last enemy, Death; and yet I send you this as a Tenant does a
present to his Landlord, not to relieve his wants, but to testify his
dependence, and as an earnest of his future service. I know you need not with
Philip King of Macedonia to have a Monitor to mind you of your Mortality: I
send it, as a bad Debtor when he cannot pay the Stock, he pays the Interest,
or at least acknowledges the debt, and begs a longer time of payment; so it is
with me. Fain would I avoid the title of Ungrateful, which sounded so harshly
in the ears of the Heathen, that they thought it to be the worst of sins;
Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. I look upon you to be well skilled in those
mortifying Meditations, and as deeply learned in self-resignation of your will
to Gods, as most are. The ground of my confidence is this; when God in a little
time had made you both Fatherless, (a loss which Thousands in England have
cause to bewail) and as if this cup had not been bitter enough, took away about
the same time your only Son, which might have been the staff of your age, the
stay of your Family, and the preserver of your Name; though you were deeply
sensible of this great breach God had made upon you, yet carried your selves
with so much moderation, Christian Fortitude, Discretion and Patience, without
the least murmuring, repining, or show of discontent, but with cheerful
submission to the ^ill of God, that I clearly saw death was ^o stranger to you,
and that you had learnt ^he Apostles lesson, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
Not to mourn as men without hope for those that sleep in the lord: you
imitated David, who when his ^^n was living, fasted and prayed, but ^hen dead,
2 Samuel 12.18.
held his tongue and said no^^ing, because God did it: Or said as ^^b, at the
death of all his children, Job 1.21.
^he Lord gave, and the Lord has ta^en away, Blessed be the Name of the lord.
To mourn for our Relations is doubt^ss our duty, to mourn immoderately (as
^achel) and will not be comforted, is doubtless;s a sin, and implies we think
God has ^onged us in taking away our Relations without our leave; or serves to
bespeak us (...) have more wisdom than God has, and (...) know better than he
when it is best for them to dye, and when their work is done. these
considerations made me think these Meditations would not startle you, nay your
own Death would not affright you; and yet considering that death is an enemy to
Nature, and that you were Flesh as well as Spirit, and though the Spirit were
willing yet the Flesh ^s weak, I thought it would not be unsuitable to put this
weapon into your hand, in this conflict between the Flesh and the Spirit; for
death sometimes comes with a grisly look, and terrible aspect: for, as a
Heathen says, of all Terribles Death is most terrible; and therefore the
Scripture calls him the King of terrors, Job 18.14
and experience shows that he is a terror to Kings: Psalm. 55.4.
David complains, the terrors of death compassed him about; and the
apprehensions of death struck a greater than David into an agony: Christianum
agere non est hominem exuere; when we become Christians, we cease not to be
men. Now though we cannot quite root out the fear of death, yet Christians may
and many do much abate it, yea and choose it rather than life upon any sinful
terms; those under great sufferings refused deliverance, Heb. 11.36
that is, upon any unlawful terms. The love of Christ in the Martyrs was hotter
than the fire they burnt in; yea this made Paul willing not only to be bound,
but to dye for Christ; yea desire to be dissolved and to be with him: so that
although I think you have not so much need of a work of this nature as many
have, yet I cannot think it is altogether useless; for you lie under greater
temptations than many others, and have stronger gusts of wind to grapple with
than low Shrubs; and happily Christ may cost you more than others, having more
to lose; and the world breaks many a match between Christ and the Soul: those
that are rich fall into temptation; 1 Timothy 6.9 Luke 18.23
remember the young man that parted with Christ upon this ground, and Demas
that chose the world before him. It Is easier to steer a small Vessel in a storm
than a great Ship, this may be thrust into any Creek or Harbor, where a tall
Ship cannot ride: Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator: Oh Death, Ecclus. 41.1.
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at ease in his
Possessions, and has prosperity in all things! We may say of you as the people
did of David, 2 Samuel 18.3.
If many of us fall, it signifies little; the Enemies great design lies against
such as you; those that fall high, their fall will be the greater, and a great
deal of Grace is necessary to support a great man: Till a man can see an
emptiness in the Creature, and a fullness in Christ, and enough in Heaven to,
make amends for all his losses upon Earth, he will not be brought to lose all
for Christ. It was no small measure of Grace that made Galeacius teave the
Marquesdom of Vico, and come to Geneva for the Gospel sake. I know we live in
such times as Salvian did, when Religion and Godliness are accounted a shame to
Gentility, and a blemish to Nobility; and those very Ingredients, let their
other qualifications be what they will, will render the worlds greatest
Favorites unlovely in their eyes. 1 Samuel 2.30.
But those that honor God, God will honor, and those that despise him shall
be lightly esteemed. St. Bernard tells Sophia, That it was a greater honor
that God made her one of a few, than that she descended from Noble Parents; the
one was Gods distinguishing Badge, the other a common favor. Solomon tells us,
A virtuous Woman, her^ price is above Rubies, and no doubt a virtuous Man is as
precious; but it is a good conjunction where Grace and Greatness meet, for
although a Diamond has the same virtue o^ the Dunghill as in a Gold Ring, or
the richest Cabinet, yet not so seemly: Grace loses not it Virtue in a Country
Clown, yet is it mo^splendid in a great man; and such a one thu^ qualified, is
capable of bringing more Glor^ to God, and doing more good in his Generation,
than a poor man can: Religion in great persons, as it is most Rare, so it is most
Conspicuous; it is like a Beacon upon an hill, eve^ eye is upon it; and the
Country imitates the Court: Qualis Rex, talis Grex. Greatne^ makes men capable
of doing God more work or the Devil more service: The great (...) need not be
ashamed of going in the Fashion, for Grace is the fairest Flower (...) their
Garland; for none wear those Jewel but the Spouse of Christ. It was more honor
to David to be Gods Servant than Isreal's King; it is more honor to be in
Covenant with God, than to have Royal blood run in our Veins; to be an Heir of
Heaven, than to be Heir to a Kingdom; to be the Children of God, than to be the
Children of Nobles: Isai 43.4.
since thou wast precious in my sight (says God) thou wast honorable: For
Nobility it self is mortal, and many Noble Houses and Families dye and come to
nothing, but Grace is longer lived: My desire is, that seeing God has written
Vanity upon the Creatures, that you may be able to read it, and so may hang
loose to the World; and so use it as not to abuse it. And seeing Death is
certain, and the time of Death uncertain, that you will learn to dye daily,
that when Death comes you may look upon it without Horror or Distraction: In
the mean time, Heb. 12.1, 2.
that you may run the Race that is set before you, yea, so run that you may
obtain; and with Christ endure the Cross and despise the Shame, 1 Cor. 9.24.
that you may sit down with him in his Kingdom of Glory; that you may keep your
Garments unspotted in the World, and have your Loins girded, your Lamps always
Burning, and you your selves in a Sentinel posture; that at what hour soever
your Lord and Master comes, you may be found Watching: my desire is, that while
you live you may shine as Stars of the first Magnitude in this our dark
Hemisphere, that your Lives may be exemplary, and your last Works better than
your first; and when you shall be gathered unto your Fathers, it may be in a
good Old Age, as a shock of Corn in its season; that while you live, you may
shine as the Sun in his strength, until you set in the Infinite Ocean of
endless Bliss, and lie for ever in the Bosom of your dear Redeemer, there to
receive a Reward for all your pains and labor of love; and that those tender
Plants which God has given you, may be watered with the dew of Heaven, and may
become Trees of righteousness, even Pillars in the House of God; and that in
your Family there may never want those that may own Christ in sincerity: And
that the remaining part of your time, Phil. 3.13, 14. 1 Timothy 6.12.
forgetting what is past, you may reach forth unto those things that are
before, pressing toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus; and fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold on eternal Life:
These are my Desires, and shall be my Prayers; and if these following
Meditations conduce any thing to the furtherance hereof, I have my desire; and
who knows but some poor drooping Soul may receive benefit by it? the Seed may
spring when the Seedsman is dead. And thus much in Answer to the Question, Why
I Dedicate it to you? If you demand, why I prefix both your Names? I will
answer with Jerome in the like case, Jungat Epistola quos junxit conjugium,
charta non dividat quos Christi nescit amor; God has made you not only one
Flesh, but also one Heart, and it is the concern of the one as well as of the
other: And thus having spoken to you jointly, give me leave to speak a few
words to you severally and apart.

Sir, I shall first Address my self to you, whom your Country has made choice
of to serve in Parliament, and have entrusted you with their Estates,
Liberties, Privileges, Lives and Religion; Oh! what an Engagement lies upon
you to be faithful in your Trust; and what a blurr have some in that relation
brought upon themselves of late days? that for private Interest have betrayed
their Trust: But Sir, those that know you, are free from these fears; you may
easily see what confidence they have in your Fathers Family, when all his three
Sons, besides Sons in Law, are chosen and Entrusted, as also other Relations,
not only in this, but in the last Parliament also: Go on Sir therefore
courageously, and the Lord will prosper you; seek to set a stop to the deluge
of Sin that is breaking in upon us, or otherwise God will pour out a deluge of
Judgments also; God will stand by those that stand for him, and though you may
lose something for him, you shall never lose by him: It Is your Duty to deny
your self, and private Interest, when it comes in competition with Gods Cause
and your Countries good: Put your shoulders to the work, and if England be not
reformed, you shall not lose your Reward; Who knows but God will honor you now
chosen with the Work, at least you shall be honored for the work? The time
was, Jerusalem had been spared had there been one man to stand in the gap to
execute Judgment and Justice in it: Jer. 5.1. etc.
There is now an opportunity put into your hand, a Talent to improve, and God
stands by to see how it is improved: Numb. 21.18.
It is left upon recor^ to the honor of the Rulers in Israel, that the Princes
dug the Well, and the Noble^ dug it with their staves: These stave are
imagined to be Ensigns of honor, which here they employed to a public good;
an^ it is a brand laid upon the Nobles of the Tekoits, Nehe. 3.5.
That they laid not their Neck^ to the work of the Lord; and I wish none of our
Nobles bear that reproach. My desire is, that you be not only blessed, but a
blessing in your Generation; and though your pains be great, and your cost not
small, yet remember whose the work is, and who will be your Play Master; one who
can make up all your losses, and whose is all that you expend in this service;
and imitate herein your dear Father, who was a public spirited man, and for
works of Piety and Charity, has left such an Example, that I despair ever to
see the like done by any one in those parts of England; he is now reciving his
reward, and I doubt not but he has left a Blessing behind upon his Posterity,
which his Children and Childrens Children shall inherit to many Generations.

And to you, Madam, one word more and I have done: Though you are a Branch of a
Noble Family, yet are you much more Ennobled by your second Birth, yea more
nobly Born than of Flesh and Blood; for God is your Father, Jerusalem which is
above your Mother, Christ your elder Brother, yea the Glorified Saints your
Brethren and Sisters: so that you are more happy in your New Birth than eminent
in the first; A virtuous woman ( says Solomon) her price is above Rubyes: The
Children of Princes and Nobles are the Foundation-stones whereupon Kingdoms are
founded, Pro. 31.31.
but had you not been polished by God himself, you had never been one of those
choice Stones that must beautify the New Jerusalem: My desire is, that God
will give you more Sons, for those two which you have so freely lent to the
Lord; at least give you a Name better than that of Sons and Daughters: When
Death comes, it must be Grace and not Titles of Honor that then will dignifie
you; and Humility and Self-denial, which many think now unbeseeming (...)
Gentleman, will be greater Ornaments that Jemms and Jewels, lofty Titles and
Coat^ of Arms; though these are not to be contemned, yet the other are to be
prefered Now if these poor Meditations conduce an^ thing to the increasing of
your Grace, the strengthening of your resolution to live in the Lord, and to the
Lord, and if he require it, (...) dye for the Lord, I shall think my pains we
bestowed, and my time well spent: And the it may be so, is the desire, and
shall be the Prayer of him who is, and resolves to be,

SIR, MADAM, Yours to his Power to serve you, Edward Bury
Eaton, October. 21. 1680.
To the READER.
Reader,
WHoever thou art, I here present thee with a bundle of my Thoughts, when I
apprehended my self standing upon the brink of Eternity: What entertainment
they will find with thee I know not, or what thy present thoughts of Death are
I cannot tell; but had thy Soul stood in my Souls stead, when I apprehended
Death at the door, if thy Eyes had been opened, and thy Conscience awakened,
happily thy thoughts might have been like mine; especially if thou believe there
is a God, a Devil, a Heaven, and a Hell, that the Soul is Immortal, and the
Scripture the Word of God, (pardon the supposition, for some deny the whole,
and most men live as if they did not believe it;) but whatever thy present
thoughts be, if thou art unregenerate, thy future thoughts will show thee thy
folly, and thou will have time enough to wish thou had neglected thy Ease,
Honor, Pleasure, Grandeur, yea, thy life it self, to have made thy peace with
thy God, and made preparation for Eternity; for this preparation would have
made thee dye never the sooner, nor the neglect of it have made thy life the
longer; whether thou art prepared or no, Death will make a very great change,
when Eternity is an addition to thy weal or woe: If prepared, Death cannot hurt
thee, for it has lost his sting; if not, it cannot benefit thee, for it
terminates thy happiness, and dates thy misery; the godly shall never have no
more Suffering, because they have no more sin; the wicked, as they are never
weary of sin, so God will never be weary of punishing: Happily thou may live in
great misery here, and think Death will set thee at liberty, but if thou art
in an unregenerate condition, it is but leaping out of the Drying Pan into the
fire, from Temporal Troubles to Eternal Torments, which are ten thousand times
worse; and is it not then time to be serious? and happily thou art young and
strong, and think thou may live many a fair day yet; but what assurance
have, when younger and stronger are gone before thee? Job 21.23, etc.
In Job's days such as thee have dyed, and so they do still; One dies (says
he) in his full strength, being wholly in peace and quietness, his Breasts are
full of Milk, and his bones are moistened with Marrow: And another dies in the
bitteeness of his Soul, and never eats with pleasure: Some dye in the Zenith
or height of their perfection, in the highest degree of worldly Prosperity,
having abundance of good blood and fresh spirits, even compassed in their Fat,
Psalm. 17.10
as the Psalmist has it; for a full Belly many times makes a foul heart, and
most weeds grow in the fattest soil; and experience teaches, that present
health and strength are no assurance of a long life; Amos 6.3.
think not because thou put far from thee the evil day in thy thoughts,
that therefore it is really at a great distance: It follows not that because
thou winkest and wilt not see Death, therefore Death is blind and cannot see
thee: No, No, he is stealing upon thee at unawares, tacito pede, with a swift
but silent foot, and if he arrest thee before thou have made thy peace with the
Creditor, Mat. 5.26
thou will be cast into Prison till thou have paid the utmost Farthing. Our
time-wasting Gallants that spend their time idly, or worse than in doing
nothing, will one day find the Bill of their accounts many fathoms longer than
they imagined; then they will set a greater estimate upon time than now they
do, and willingly would they redeem their lost hours (which now they know not
how to pass away) at a high rate, but it will not be; now they set Death at
defiance, and meet it half way, and hasten it by their Intemperance, Drinking,
Whoring, or shorten their lives in a Drunken Fray, or Whores Quarrel; but when
Death comes in good earnest, Dan. 5.5.
it will seem as terrible as Belshazzers handwriting upon the wall, make their
hearts to ache, and their joints to tremble; especially did they know the
consequences of Death, they would not be such prodigals of their lives, or did
they mind their work which they have to do, they would not be such Prodigals of
their time they should do it in, and would think it went away fast enough
without driving: Oh! how a little time will alter these men's Judgments then
their Feathers and Fancies will be laid aside, when they stand upon Christ's
left hand, and all their wealth will not purchase one drop of water to cool
their tongues: It Is not then a Baalams wish will serve turn, nor a Lord have
Mercy upon me, Mal. 7.22. and 25.11.
will do their work; Lord, Lord, open to us, will not prevail; those are not
like to receive the reward of the Righteous, that persecute them for
righteousness sake: Then they will befool themselves as fast as now they befool
others wiser than themselves: Then they shall change their minds, and sigh for
grief, and say, Wisd. 5.3. etc.
This is he that we sometimes had in derision, and in a Parable of Reproach; we
Fools thought his life Madness, and his End without honor; now he is reckoned
among the Children of God, and his Portion is among the Saints, etc. What has
Pride profited us? or what has Riches with our Vaunting brought us? all these
things are passed away like a Shadow, and as a Post that passes by, etc. Then
our proudest Gallants willingly would be found in the garb or Fashion now they
disdain and deride: Now they call those Fools that deny themselves, their Ease,
their Pleasure, or Carnal Interest for Conscience sake; but then they will
befool themselves for choosing Pebbles before Pearls, Earth before Heaven, and
the Creature before God; for these things will prove but a pitiful Portion when
there is most need. Now they think Heaven is held at a dear rate, and they will
not come up to the price; but then they will know that it was sold at a cheap
rate, when they parted with it for a lust, and that the World was bought too
dear when they gave the Soul for it: Mat. 16.26.
Now like Damocles they feast themselves without fear, and see not the Sword
that hangs over their heads, ready every moment to pierce into their Brains,
and end their lives with their dinner. Now they prize their honor more than
their honesty, and consider not, that if the foundation of honor be not laid
in Virtue, the building cannot stand; for those that lay the foundation in a
shadow, the building is but like a Castle built in the air, and will soon fall
about their Ears; but that honor is lasting where God is the top of the Kin,
and Religion lies at the bottom.

But to pass over this, I shall give you some account of my present
undertaking. Some there are that think Books of this nature are unseasonable,
especially to our youthful Gallants, because it spoils their Mirth, and they
have time enough to think of such things hereafter; and they cannot endure to
have their Enemy brought upon the Stage, for this spoils the Play: But to this
I answer, A young Sheep-skin is brought to the Market as soon as an old; and I
see not but the Gentry die as well as others; yea many by Intemperance hasten
their own death; and when the Disease is common, why should not the Remedy?
It Is like enough these will not have time to read this, from their necessary
Recreation; but this is no fault of mine, it is doubt they will want time for
other things also: but those that will not give themselves the trouble, it is
doubt will ere long meet with trouble of another nature. Others may think the
Book useless, because many have treated upon this Subject: To these I answer,
The more shame they are practiced no better. It was indeed Solons complaint,
That there were many good Laws made, but one was wanting to put all the rest in
execution: So many good Rules for Life and Death are published, but could a
Book be published to persuade men to live by these Rules, it would be a happy
work. I am not so vain or simple to think this may prove such a piece, yet I
know not what better Subject to treat of, that is more likely to prevail, than
a Treatise of Death, to persuade men to practice the Rules of Life: for those
that put far from them the evil day, are most like to neglect their daily Duty;
and what hitherto is written, seems too little to effect the work, and
therefore I have added my Testimony to the rest. I know it is easy for Momus to
quarrel and find fault with another man's Tale, when perhaps he may tell it
worse himself; it is easier to find fault with another, than to be free from
faults himself: Those that have done better, or will do better, I shall give
them their due respect; for others, I shall not value their censure; what I
have done has pleased my self, and the work was undertaken for my self, and I
hope I shall not displease any sober or discreet person; but for those that
God, his Word, his Works, or his Providence cannot please, I neither hope nor
desire to please: what I have done is intended for a Cordial for those that
have Death in their eyes, and the Fear of God in their hearts, and these
usually have better Stomachs than to nauseate their meat, because not modishly
dressed; those I mean that have Gods beautyspots, not the Worlds upon them; I
mean Grace in the heart, not Spots on the face, to adorn them and make them
lovely in the eyes of God and good men; it is these I speak to: As for those
that take the World for their Portion, and therefore are loath to leave it, I
shall not envy them, but pity them, their Portion is little worth; for
Nobleness of Blood, Greatness of Birth, Crowns and Kingdoms, shine not so
bright as the Image of God in poor Lazarus at the Gate, or Job upon the
Dunghill; for Grace is better than a thousand Escutcheons, for these are but
empty badges of Honor.

I have only two sorts of persons here to speak to: The first are poor
Desponding Christians, that though they have right to and Interest in Christ
and Glory, yet are under some black and direful apprehensions of Death; and
though they would willingly live to God, and if required dye for God, yet are
not out of fear of Death: To these I have spoke unto most in the Book, and and
therefore shall say little to them in the Epistle: The other sort are such,
that though they would dye the Death of the Righteous, and have the righteous
man's reward, yet are they loath to live their-lives; they would have the wages,
but none of the work; they would dye happily, but will not live holily; they
would land in Heaven, but they sail the contrary way; they will not go into the
Vineyard, and yet expect their penny at night: such as these happily are afraid
of Death, and well they may, for it will speak no good to them, but evil, as
Ahab said of Micaiah: Now I have said but a little to those in the Book, for it
was not my business, and therefore I shall speak the more to them in the
Epistle; not that I have any comfort for them in this Condition, but only this,
that there is a possibility to get out, and therefore would willingly lend them
my hand to help them ^ut; and therefore I shall reach out some Directions,
which if they take, they will ^e capable of the comfort the Book it self holds
forth, and the Directions are these that follow.

1. Direction. If you would look Death in the Face with comfort, get your
Corruptions mortified, and the power of sin abated, for til then Death will be
an Enemy: there is nothing that makes Death terrible, but unpardoned
unmortified sin; an honest man can look the Judge in the face without fear,
when the Malefactor trembles. Paul could triumphantly insult over it: 1 Cor.
15.54, 55, 56, 57.
Oh Death where is thy sting? Oh Grave where is thy Victory? the sting of Death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has given
us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: You see sin is the sting of
Death, and what hurt can the Serpent do that has no Sting? what a bold
challenge was this to Death? as if Paul had said, Death, do thy worst, I fear
thee not: In like manner Ambrose could say, I am not ashamed to live, nor
afraid to dye: and Ann Askew the Martyr, in her Confession, (...) neither wish
for Death, neither do I fear it. As Christ has not taken away sin it self but
the guilt of it, so has he not taken away Death it self the consequent of sin
but the sting of it, so that every godly man may say with the Martyr, Kill me
it may hurt me it cannot, the worst it can do, is b^^ to send me to my Fathers
house the sooner; but to others the Serpent is dangerous, and his sting deadly,
for if sin dye not the Soul cannot live: it is true, some there be that seem to
brave Death to his Face, but this shows an ignorant mind, and a seared
Conscience, and an hard heart; for it is impossible, if the Conscience be awake,
that a man should look into Hell, yea leap into it, without horror: Death to
such (if their eyes be open) will be terrible, yea of all Terribles the most
terrible, says a Heathen; yea the King of Terrors, says Bildad, Job 18.14.
yea, and as experience tells us, the Terror of Kings: Nothing can make Death
look terrible but unpardoned sin; till therefore this Pardon be obtained, your
condition is damnable, till you have assurance of it, it will be uncomfortable:
Now Faith and Repentance have the Promise of Pardon and Eternal Life, and the
want of this will make you liable to Eternal Death; Luke 16.16
He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be Damned. He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find Mercy:
Leave off therefore lusting after Riches, Honors and Pleasures, and spend your
time in minding your main Interest, fight against sin which is your greatest
Enemy; for if sin dye not before you, your Souls must dye: it is not enough to
quarrel s^^ but you must kill it; it is not enough to co^fess it, but you must
forsake it; it is (...) enough to rail against it, but you must ha^^ it with an
irreconcilable hatred, a^ shake hands with it, and give it a bill (...)
Divorce; and well you may, for it is y^^ implacable Enemy, and the cause of
(...) your misery, and will be the cause of yo^ Eternal Damnation if you repent
not of (...) This is it that arms Death against you, (...) when it is mortified
and subdued it will (...) pardoned, and when it is pardoned, De^ may buzze
about your ears like a D^^ Be but cannot sting you; by stinging Ch^^ he lost
his sting, that he cannot sting (...) of Christ's faithful people: Hence man^
the Martyrs went as cheerfully to dye a^ dine, and accounted their Dying-day
t^^ Wedding Day, as indeed it is to all Bel^ers; for in this life they are
betroathe^ Christ, and at their Death the Mar^^ will be consummate, and they
shall for^ enjoy their Beloved, and be Eter^ lodged in his Bosom: Oh the
madne^^ the men of the World, who lodge this pent sin in their Bosom, which
break^ match between Christ and the Soul.

2. Direct. There is another Enemy that must be overcome as well as sin, or
will not dye cheerfully and happily, and that is the World; for till it be
overcome and crucified, a man is not fit to dye, neither can he be willing to
dye; Gal. 6.14.
for who can willingly part with what he loves? By Christ (says the Apostle) I
am Crucified to the World, and the World to me; the world and he were at a
point, there was no love lost; the World mattered him not, and he mattered the
World as little; they were each to other as a dead Carcass, offensive and
unsavory; and though the World should lay many Temptations before him, it
would signify no more than if they were presented to a dead man; though she
draw forth her two breasts of Profit and Pleasure, he scorns to suck at such
botches, he looks upon it as a dead thing, and behaves himself as dead to it:
He had learned to want and to abound, and in every Estate to be content, and
therefore mattered not her Superfluities, and for Necessaries he knew he should
not want them: A prosperous Estate could not make him surfeit, nor a wanting
Estate repine; he was semper idem, always the same; as Job upon the Throne and
upon the Dunghill, he still keeps his Integrity, he wears the world about him
as a loose Garment, ready to cast off upon all occasions, and he is at a point
with all things under the Sun; if he may keep them with a good Conscience he is
content; if not, he is content also; and it behooves others that would look
Death in the face with comfort, to learn this lesson; for if the affections
close with the World, it is impossible Death should be either safe or
comfortable: safe it cannot be, for it makes a man break his peace with God;
for two such Masters as God and Mammon no man can serve; Mat. 6.24.
for if he love the one, he will despise the other: Jam. 4.4.
Know you not (says the Apostle) that the friendship of the World; is Enmity
to God? Whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, will be an Enemy to
God: 1 John 2.15.
And again, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World, if
any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him: Those that go a
Whoring from God to the Creature, and woe this vile Strumpet the World, are
very unfit to be received into the bosom of Christ; have it we may, use it we
must, as a Traveller does his Staff, so far as it is helpful, but love it we
must not, if we will not renounce the love of God; a man may allow his wife a
Servant to wait upon her, but not to lodge in her bosom: the love of the World
is Enmity with the Lord, Enmity both active and passive; it makes a man both to
hate God, and to be hated by God; he cannot be espoused to the World, but he
must be divorced from God; see this in Judas, in Demas, in Demetrius, in Ahab;
he will have Naboath's Vineyard, or he will have his blood, though he lose his
Soul for it; Col. 3.2.
wise therefore was the Apostles Counsel, to set our affections on things
above, and not on the Earth: Things on Earth are mutable and momentary, subject
to vanity or violence, when things above are as the days of Heaven and run
parllael with the Life of God, and line of Eternity; and as the love of the
World makes a man dye unsafely, putting him out of a capacity of eternal
happiness, so it makes him dye uncomfortably also: for who can willingly part
with a present good, for a future uncertainty; with a thing he loves, for he
knows not what? If the World seem a Pearl in his eye, he will not let it go if
he have no assurance of a better: Mat. 19.22
see this in the young man in the Gospel, that would not exchange Earth for
Heaven, nor the Creature for God, that parted with Christ whom he pretended to
love, rather than with his Estate which he did love: Oh World! how do thou
bewitch thy greatest admirers! how do thou deceive those that trust in thee!
But could we see the worth of Heaven, or had we but a Pisgah-sight of the
Heavenly Canaan, we should soon make Moses's choice: but the blind Moles of the
World think God holds it at too dear a rate, and if he will not abate he may
keep it to himself; some indeed while Religion is in credit will follow the
Cry, yet resolve they will, never lose by it; as the Young man before
mentioned, who came to Christ hastily but went away heavily: the world breaks
many a match between Christ and the Soul, by bidding more as they think than
God does; but it will fail in the payment: but he that forsakes not all for
Christ, cannot be his Disciple; the lesson I know is hard, but necessary, and
there is a great reason it should be so; when we look upon the World as our
chiefest Jewel, we are loath to throw it overboard; but when we see the Vanity,
Emptiness, yea Nothingness that is in it, and can have recourse to a better
Treasure, we shall not matter it; while we look upon it as our chiefest
Treasure, we shall be unwilling to part with it; but when by the eye of Faith
we can see better Treasure beyond Death, and observe how little good it can do
us at Death; or after, when we have most need, we shall not much value it: For
indeed it proves like a bush of Thorns, the harder we grasp it, the more deeply
it wounds; and when by Experience we find, that no Content, Satisfaction or
Happiness is to be had in the enjoyment, we shall not much trouble at the loss:
In a word, while the World is admired, Death is hated, but when Heaven is in
our eye, Death looks more lovely. If ever therefore you would dye Happily and
Comfortably, beware of letting out your affections upon the World, for you will
never be willing to leave what you love, nor to pay so dear for Christ and
Heaven till you affect them better.

3 Direct. If you would dye happily, then redeeem your Time carefully, make
preparation for a dying time, and take heed of losing time, and spending it in
vain; he that would win the Race, will set out with the first, and hold on to
the last, and take all the advantages that are offered in the way; he that has
much work to do, and that of great concern, must not lose the Morning, or if he
do, must ply it hard the rest of the day: You will find all your time that is
allotted you little enough for the work you have to do, and not an hour to
spare to spend in idleness; for delays and Idleness are the two Gulphs wherein
many Souls are drowned: Many when they are young, depending upon and trusting
to their Youth, their health and strength, send Repentance thirty years before,
and it is odds they never overtake it; many young men go to Hell that thought to
repent when they were old, and many old men that thought they might have lived
a little longer. Many are resolved to spend their youthful days in the Devils
service, and then stop Gods mouth with the Blind and the Lame, but he seldom
takes up with a deathbed Repentance from those that purposely put him off to
the last; he usually reckons with such mispenders of time for the Talents he
has lent them, and pays them off, not with a Penny but a Prison; for he
expects what he has given us to glorify him, should be that way improved;
upon this little inch of time Eternity does depend, our Everlasting well or ill
being, and therefore it is too precious to be spent in vanity and folly; and how
then dare you spend a day, an hour vainly in an Alehouse or other Vanity, and
not know whether you have another hour or day to live? I have read of a
Gentlewoman, that usually spent her time in Cards and Dice, and other
unnecessary Recreations; and coming from her Sport late in the night, found her
Maid reading, (for she was godly,) and casting her eye upon the Book, reproved
her thus: Thou poor melancholy Soul, what always reading, and spending thy
time thus; will thou take no comfort in thy life? And so passing into her
Chamber went to bed, but could not sleep, but sigh and groan; her Maid lying in
the room with her, demanded the reason of it, and whether she was well? Fox,
Time and the End of Time, p. 70.
She replied, She had read the word Eternity in her Book, which had so pierced
her heart, that she believed she should never sleep more till she had some
better assurance of her Eternal condition: And if this word Eternity were but
well considered, it might send our time-wasting Gallants trembling home from
their Sports; but God has hid these things from their eyes. There are more
than those guilty, though few more guilty; there is many a man that is a good
Husband for the World, and careless in nothing but in matters relating to his
Soul; he can observe Times and Seasons for Plowing and Manuring of his ground,
Seed-time and Harvest shall not be neglected, not the meanest Beast but shall
be heeded, his Garden, Orchard, etc. shall be fenced, pruned, manured, weeded
and preserved, his House well furnished, and Provision prepared, and yet his
Soul altogether neglected, and neither Food nor Raiment prepared for it: for
this life he is careful that neither he nor his Posterity shall want, and yet
has no care for the Life to come; he can go from Fair to Market to prepare for
the Body, and matters not the Harvest Season or Market Day for the Soul. The
Mariners that observe the Wind and Tide, yet neglect the sweet gales of the
Spirit of God, when they blow upon the Soul, and would waft them Heavenward,
and help them forward to their Journeys end, to the desired Port. The Devil by
his diligence condemns us, for where his work is, Latimer 1 Pet. 5.8.
there is he; he is no Non-resident, but always in his Diocese: He goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: And shall we not be as
vigilant to save our Souls, as he to destroy them? if he find us idle, he will
soon employ us. The heart of man is a Mill that will be always grinding, if
not Gods Wheat, then the Devils Tares: If the Devil spend all his time to
deceive us, we should spend all our time to prevent him: All the time we have
is little enough, and there is none to spare, and what is past is irrecoverably
gone, though we could give a world of Treasure for an inch of time: Now if you
would redeem time, beware of those great devourers of Time, which usually steal
away a great part, such as vain and idle Thoughts; how much of our time is this
way consumed! many an hour which might have been better spent, viz. in the
Contemplation of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of Glory, is spent in roving vain
imaginations, which bring no profit, do no good, and tend to no benefit. Yea,
worldly thoughts and cares take up also a great part of our time; it is true,
the World must have some of our thoughts and time, but most men make a bad
division between God and it, they let the World run away with his part as well
as their own; yea much of that Sacred time set a part for a better use; yea
many times amidst our Religious duties the heart is stole away by the World;
Idleness also consumes much, many enter not into the Vineyard till the eleventh
hour, and then mind not their work, but their Wages; vain and unprofitable
Discourse also is a Thief, and steals away much of our time, and many idle and
unnecessary Visits also; and when all this is deducted, it is no wonder there is
but little left for our grand business: to these may be added, immoderate lying
in Bed, vain and time spending Dressings and Attirings, the whole Mornings work
to our Female Gallants; immoderate and unnecessary Recreations, which some make
all the Calling they follow, Drinking, Tippling, and what not? but if these, in
this their idle expense of time, should ask themselves this question, Which of
the Eternities lie before them? and to which of them they are going? it might
spoil their sport; for when Death has struck his stroke, the Soul is in a
stated condition, which Eternity it self cannot alter; and seriously, it is one
of the saddest sights in the World, to a man apprehensive of the danger, to see
an unconverted man fetch his last breath, and lanching forth into an infinite
Ocean of boiling Lead and burning Brimstone; for the avoiding of that, take
time while time serves, and lose not that Prodigally that cannot be redeemed
with the whole World.

4 Direction. The next thing I would advise you to, which indeed is the chief
of all, is to get an Interest in Christ, that so you may have a title to Glory;
for till this be had, you cannot dye safely, and till it be cleared up, you
cannot dye comfortably; for who would leave a present Possession, that has no
assurance of a future? and when this is done, Death will not be terrible. But
what can bear up the Soul against the pangs of Death, if this be wanting? Now
the way to get an Interest in Christ, is to espouse the Soul to him; now there
is nothing but Ignorance can stave off our affections from him: ignotus nulla
cupido; The blind World can see no Excellency in him, no need of him, nor any
use of him, and therefore they have no love nor desire for him: but all that
know him, will love him; who prizeth a Physician that is not convinced of his
skill, and finds he has a real need of him? for who will take Physic before
he be sick? or minds a Plaster before he have a Sore? But when the poor soul
is convinced of her undone condition by Nature, and that there is nothing in
her, or that can be done by her, will serve turn for Salvation; yea, that help
is not to be had in any Creature, no not in the Angels themselves could she be
Espoused to them; for they cannot pay her debts, nor secure the Soul; in this
desparing condition, no wonder the Soul dreads death; but when it knows
withal, that though there be an Emptiness in the Creature, there is a Fullness
in Christ, and that he is fully able to make her eternally happy; and that
Christ does make love to her, and sends many Suitors in his behalf, to woe for
her affection, and that he is the only suitable object in the world for her
Affections, and that he can make her happy, when all the rest would leave her
miserable: I say under these convictions she begins to hearken to Christ's
proposals, when she sees he is more useful than any other, and will stand her
in more stead both in Prosperity and Adversity, in Health, Sickness, in Life
and at Death, when all other helps fail her: While the world is looked upon to
be the best match, Christ will not be valued, till the cheat be found out; for
who will forsake the better to choose the worse? but when they see Christ
really better than the world, they will then part with the world for him; for
who will stick at such a bargain, when a man considers that the world can do
him no good at Death or Judgment; But Godliness has the promise of this life,
1 Timothy 4.8.
and that to come; and that it is profitable to all things; Romans 8.32.
and that having Christ, all shall be ours; for if he spared not his own Son,
but freely delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give
us all things? When the match is made up between Christ and the Soul, all her
Debts are made over to her Husband, and he is touched also with the feeling of
her Infirmities, bears the heavier end of the Cross, and in all her
afflictions, he is afflicted; Isa. 63.9.
and he makes over all his riches to her, his Merits, his Righteousness, his
Spirit, his Graces, and his Glory; Plal. 34.10.
he has promised she shall want nothing that is good, and that he will never
leave her nor forsake her, Romans 8.28.
and that all things shall work together for her good: Now whatever he has
promised, he can make it good; for he is both Omnipotent, and Omniscient, and
he will make it good, for he is Faithful, and the Experience of five thousand
years prove it, in all which time no man could stand forth and say, This
Promise God has failed in; the world yields us some little comfort if God give
it a Commission; but Christ is all and in all; all the excellency that is in
the Creature, is but as a Vein to lead us to this Mine, as a drop of this
Ocean, and as a ray of this Sun; whatever our condition be, he can help us; if
the Soul be sick, he is her Physician, and all others are Physicians of no
value; if wounded, he has a Plaster of his own Blood to cure her; if she
hunger, here is food, the Bread of life, and the Water of life; his flesh is
meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; If she be Poor, and Blind, and
Miserable, and Naked, he can make supplies; here is a Treasure to enrich her, a
Pearl of great price, and spiritual Eye Salve to make her see; if she have
Enemies he is her Champion, that can overcome the Devil and all his
Instruments, and none can hurt her but through his sides: In a word, she can
want nothing when her Lord and Husband possesses all things; the Cattle of a
thousand hills are his, yea all the beasts of the Forest; with his own Robes
he arrayes her, and with the Jewels of his Grace he adorns her, with his Spirit
he directs her; and if heavy laden, bears her burden; if she be weary, he is
her resting place, and has promised never to leave her nor forsake her; Heb.
13.5.
and then no matter what others do: These promises the Soul may press home by
Prayer, as Jacob did in a great danger; Genesis 32.9.
Lord, thou said thou would do me good; and this was as good as present
pay, for God loves to be bound by his word, and to be sued upon his own bond:
Prayer is a putting the Promises in Suit; God can no more deny such Prayers,
than he can deny himself: what need the Soul to fear when Gods Word is out upon
it, That all things shall work together for her good? and if all things, then
Afflictions, nay Sin it self: Seneca.
Venenum aliquando pro remedio fuit, says a Heathen. It Is said, that to drink
of the Wine wherein a Viper has been drowned, cures the Leprosy, and the
Scorpion heals his own wound, the flesh of the Viper cures the biting of the
Viper; and so God sometimes cures us by the wound Sin gives us: we usually
say, The act increases the habit, but it is not so here; for the believer is
like a Sheep, that by his fall into the mire is warned to take better heed. Now
look over all the World, and see if you can find such a match for the Soul,
whether any Creature in Heaven or Earth has deserved thy Affections better
than he, or has done more, or will do more than Jesus Christ; that is a
greater Benefactor than he, and has bestowed better Gifts; whether any other
can pay thy Debts, or make preparation for the Eternal well-being of the Soul;
and if he prove the fittest Match, stand not upon Terms with him, think not to
alter his Conditions, or make him abate of his Price; he expects neither Money
nor Moneysworth; worth with thee as a Dowry, yet will he make thee the largest
Jointure; his Covenants will be, only to carry thy self to him as a loving and
obedient Wife ought to do to her Husband, to love him above all, to obey all
his Commands, and to submit thy self to his dispose; leave the Sin he forbids,
do the Duties he commands, and forsake all others for his sake; resolve thus to
do, give up thy self thus to him and thou need not fear death, for it cannot
hurt thee; for it is but his Pursivant he sends to fetch thee home to his
Fathers house, where all things are made ready for thy Marriage with the Lamb:
when thou can say, Cant. 6.3.
My beloved is mine, and I am his, thou art fit to Live and fit to Dye, and not
till then: such a man that has gotten a full gripe of Christ, is sure that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, Romans 8.38.
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height, nor Depth,
nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate him from the Love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: 1 Cor. 6.17.
for he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; As truly one as those
members are one Body, that are animated by the same Soul, or as Husband and
Wife are one flesh: All that I am and have, says the Soul, is his, and all he
has is mine; he that has this full assurance of Faith, looks death
undauntedly in the face, and goes gallantly to Heaven.

5 Direct. If you would Dye well, your way is to Live well, for a holy life
always ends in an happy death; Heb. 12.14
and a sinful life, if true repentance prevent not, always has a Tragical
end; for without holiness no man shall see God; and how can such a man think
then to come to Heaven, when the beatifical vision of God is Heaven it self?
but no unclean thing, Rev. 21.27 1 Cor. 6.10
no unrighteouss person shall ever enter there; no dirty Dog shall tread upon
that pavement: As the tree falls so it lies, Eccles. 11.3.
and as death leaves us, so Judgment shall find us: Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap; Gal. 6.7.
for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he
that sows to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting: He that
sails toward Hell, is not like to land in the Port of Heaven if he change not
his course; the way of Sin is the direct road to Hell, and those that follow
the broad Way, will ere long enter the wide Gate; but the way to Heaven is
narrow, and the gate strait; he that swims down the stream, is not like to find
the fountainhead; and he that goes down the hill, is not like to come to the
top; but most men, like dead Fish, swim down the stream, even into the dead Sea
of Eternal perdition: Exo. 23.2
Take heed therefore of following a multitude to do evil, for the way to Hell
is Broad and well trodden; beware of evil Company, lest thou learn to swear
with Joseph, to curse with Peter, but be courageous for Heaven, and valiant for
the Truth. It Is better go to Heaven alone, than to Hell with company; to be
with Noah in the Ark, than with all the World in the Flood: the way of Holiness
I know is not in fashion, but it is never the more to be shunned for the small
company that walks in it; nor is the way of wickedness the more eligible
because it is thronged: the way of Holiness happily may seem rugged and perplexed
by reason of the stumbling blocks laid in it, 1 Samuel 14.4 13.
like unto that of Jonathans and his Armor-bearers way, that had sharp rocks on
either side, that they were forced to go upon hands and feet, yet consider it
leads to Happiness; and who will not take pains for profit? Sic petitur Coelum
sed facilis descensus averni: Heaven is got by pains and patience, but a man
may wink and go to Hell: To come to Heaven, Opus est pulveris non pulvinaris,
(as one says:) those that trade in Righteousness and Holiness, are most likely
to treasure up Happiness; those that live uprightly to men, holily to God, and
walk, as Zachary says, Lu. 1.75.
in Righteousness and Holiness before him all the days of their lives, men may
befool them, but God will never condemn them; these men never need to fear
Death, or any Messenger God sends; Act. 23.1. and 24.16.
the that has made his peace with God, and with Paul keeps a Conscience void
of offense toward God and toward Men, though he may meet with troubles in his
life, he shall meet with Comfort at death; when those that think to dance with
the Devil all day and Sup with Christ at night, to do the Devils work and to
receive Gods wages, that will not enter into the Vineyard and yet expect the
penny, will find themselves under a great mistake: for his servants you are to
whom you obey, and from him you work for you may expect wages: you will find at
last, that a Lord have mercy upon you will not serve turn: Mat. 7.21, 22.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven: many will
say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in
thy name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful works, and then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. The like we see by the foolish Virgins, that cried, Lord, Lord, open
to us, but the door was shut against them and they kept out: such men's hope
will prove like the Spiders-web, or the giving up the Ghost, and but serve them
as Absaloms Mule did him, bring them to destruction and there leave them: yet
many verbal Professors we have, that if Heaven will be had for fair words will
have it, but this is their best bid; as Epictetus complained in his time, That
many would be Philosophers as far as a few good words would go, but no further;
but it be those, and those alone that make Christianity their daily trade, and
to please God their great design, that are worthy the name of Christians: when
the heart is upright God accepts the Sacrifice, as he did Abels; when the heart
is rotten he disowns it, as he did Cains: Those flyblown Sacrifices, such as
the Pharisees offered, will not down with God: But when the chief design is to
glorify God, Mat. 6.1. etc.
and that with a perfect heart, like Josiahs, with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased; such a man, though he may lose something for Christ, will never lose
any thing by Christ; death which sets a period to other men's happiness, will
set an end to his misery; those only that live a holy life, can rationally
expect a happy death.

6 Direct. If you would dye willingly and happily, learn with the Apostle to
dye daily; have death always in your eye, the strangeness of death makes it so
terrible. The Fox in the Fable that had never before seen a Lion, trembles at
the first sight, but after grew more bold: those that go first to Sea, are
usually more timorous in storms and tempests than the Ancient Mariners: sudden
danger more surprizeth, when expected trouble is better born. Death is stealing
upon us whether we mind it or no, and nothing more discovers our folly and
madness than to neglect our watch when we are besieged by our Enemy, and know
he intends to surprise us; to put far off the evil day when we know not but it
is ready to dawn. It Is a folly for a Tenant to forget his Rent day, and then
think his Landlord has forgotten it also; or for a Malefactor to forget the
day appointed for his Execution: it is a folly for a needy man to forget the
Market or Fair, where he should have supplied his wants, Death is no Jesting
matter, but a real thing, and will make a real change both to good and bad as
to the Body; for happily both may say the next day to corruption, Thou art my
father, and to the worm thou art my mother and my sister: then must they leave
behind all their earthly Glory, and worldly Pomp, their friends and Relations,
their pleasant Houses, yea Crowns and Kingdoms if they do enjoy them, and all
their earthly comforts they enjoyed, and must march down to the Chambers of
Death, and make their graves in the dust: but with the Soul is a greater
change, either they must go to everlasting Torments, or endless Joys; and
should not such a change be minded? did the greatest Prince upon earth, or our
time-wasting Gallants consider, it would spoil their sport; did a Malefactor
know that in a few days he should be dragged to Execution, would he take no
notice of it, but spend his time as idly as before? and shall we only be
unconcerned? they know in a few days, and they know not in how few, Eternity
will shut her mouth upon them, and then their souls will be in a stated case,
never to be changed. Oh what a prodigious Creature is a hard hearted Sinner!
and how senceless is many a profane wretch, that know not but the night
following their souls may be required of them, and yet regard it not; that feel
this house of clay mouldering about their ears, and provide for no other
Habitation; that sensibly feel Deaths approaches by the many darts he throws
at them, and yet need to be minded that they must dye: the wisest Virgins had
something to do against the Bridegroom came, though they had Oil in their
Vessels, yet their Lamps must be trimmed, but the Foollish wanted Oil to trim
them, and yet slept: the best of Saints should have their Loins girded, and be
in a Sentinel posture against the coming of their Lord and Master, and set
themselves in order for so great a change; were a mean woman to be married to
some mighty Prince, she would make some preparation against the Wedding Day;
but it is the worst of sinners that least think of death, though they have most
need, all the spectacles of mortality without, nor Monitors of mortality
within, cannot make them mind their latter end. Those should be like to
Jonathans Arrows to David, warn them of approaching danger; our Children that
rise up in our stead, and tread out our footsteps, tell us that we are
marching off the Stage, and they are coming in our room to act their parts. The
Sun never sets but it may mind us of our latter end, and that now one day more
is past of our determined number of days that we had to live: it is good
therefore to consider whether we are a days Journey nearer Heaven than we were
in the morning, or what work we have done in reference to Eternity; every Bell
that tolls may mind us of our Passing Bell; every time the Clock strikes, or
the Glass is run out, may mind us how our time hasts away, and our death
approaches; every breath we fetch, or every time our Pulse beats, may mind us
of death, for the number of them is determined as well as the number of our
months: Job. 14.5.
Did men certainly know they should dye within a month, what a change would
there be in the world? who then would mind earthly greatness or indulge his
lust, which yet those that are not sure of a day do eagerly pursue? If you
would dye happily, think on death to prepare for it; if comfortably, think on
it to be acquainted with it.

7 Direction. It is not enough merely to think of death, but you must also
prepare for it; for the former is necessary in order to the latter: this
preparation is your great Concern, the very business of your lives: God did not
send you into the world as Leviathan into the Seas, to play therein, neither
merely to cark and care, to moil and toil, and drudge for the world; you were
made for an higher end, and sent into the world upon another Errant, to make
provision for your immortal souls: some may think this work is difficult, and
so it is to flesh and blood, and cross to our carnal interest, but it is
necessary, and the neglect dangerous: were but your houses on fire, we need not
use many words to persuade you to quench them, though there were difficulty and
danger in the enterprise; or were your lives in danger, you would endure
hardship to save them; were you in danger of drowning, you would lay hold upon
every twig, and take any offered advantage to escape; were your Estates in
danger, you would spare no pains nor cost to clear it up; were but one of your
beasts, though but a Sheep or Swine, in danger, you would seek for help; and is
the immortal Soul only to be neglected? There are none but those that deny
there is a God, a Devil, a Heaven or a Hell, or that think the Soul is mortal
and shall dye with the body, and that the Scriptures are not Gods Word, but
must needs confess there is great danger in dying unprepared, or in an
unregenerate condition, and yet few live accordingly: but whatever men think,
Hell will prove a real misery, and Heaven a real Happiness, and our Atheist
will ere long be convinced of it to purpose: Luke 16.
God will be true, though every man be a liar. The rich Glutton found to his
full conviction, that Hell was no scarecrow, nor Gods Threats no Bugbear, but
real things; and we have many in our Age far worse then he is there described,
that yet have blind hopes it shall be well with them: and if these things be
real, should not we be serious about them? is not Heaven worth having, and Hell
worth the avoiding; and the soul worth saving? we are serious about the things
of the world, and much more should we be to save our lives, and are Salvation
and Damnation trifles not fit to be regarded? one year or month may make a
great alteration in our Families or Neighborhood, and many now living may then
be dead and landed in Eternity, that thought they might have lived longer:
sometimes death strikes the Child in the womb, when he spares him that stoopeth
through Age, and this may be your case for ought you know. This was Jerusalems
fault and ruin, She remembered not her latter end, Lam. 1.9.
therefore she came down wonderfully; and many I fear dye of her disease. Now
though our life is short, and time uncertain, yet our work is great, and of
great Concernment, and requires time to do it in; and those that consider it
well, know we have no time to spare, all is little enough for our work; and
those that have been Prodigals of their time, have found their mistake when it
has been too late. We are in a race, and run for our lives, and shall we not
set out with the first, and hold on to the last, and use our utmost diligence
in the way? if we turn aside, or turn back, or slack our pace, or sit down, we
are never like to win the prize; we stake our Souls to Heaven, and therefore
it is for no small wager; if we run well, heaven is ours; if not, the Soul our
chiefest Jewel is lost; we have a great deal of work to do, and Night draws on;
and the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, and when night comes no man
can work; and is it not time to be up and doing? most men are bewildred in the
dark, and lose themselves with their reward, and miss their way, or fall short
of their desired Journeys end, and this will be our case if we prevent it not;
for the way is difficult, and delays as well as mistakes are dangerous. Many
that have wit enough to get an Estate, yea to deceive and to circumvent their
Brethren, have yet been deceived themselves in this their great concern; yea
many that have made a great profession of Religion, and have directed others,
and have been their guides, for want of a guide have miscarried themselves, and
lost their way: those that have lived under the powerful means of Grace, and
performed many duties, and preached and prayed, and thought themselves wiser
than others, and cast their ground, and thought to go a nearer way to Heaven
than others, yet have been lost, and never came to the place they aimed at.
Those that have exhorted others to take heed, have lost themselves for want of
heed; and though they have been confident in the way, have yet missed of the
way; and is it time for us that never arrived to that height to sit still and
venture: there is but a little between us and death, and if death cut the thread
of our lives before our peace be made with God, we are past remedy; for if once
we fall into that gulf of Eternity, there is no getting out, we shall never
find bank nor bottom: As the tree falls so it lies, all the world cannot turn
it; and if the Soul miscarry, our case will be worse than the beast that
perishes; for as now men are never weary of sinning, then God will be never
weary of punishing, and all the racks, tortures and torments in the world will
not equalize the torments of a miscarrying Soul: but if we are prepared for
death, have made our peace with God, and evened our Accounts with him, have
espoused the Soul to Christ, and cleared up our Evidences for Heaven, it is not
the Devil, nor his Instruments, it is not death, nor him that has the power of
death, nay it is not Hell it self that can hinder a Believers happiness: for
Assurance of Gods love will bear up the heart above water, and keep it from
desponding or sinking even under the pangs of death. 2 Timothy 1.12
I know (says Paul) whom I have Believed, and I am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. And again, Romans
8.38 39.
I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

8 Direct. For Preparation, it is necessary to put your Hearts as well as your
Houses in order, nay it is much more necessary: if you would reform, begin at
the right end; if you reform the heart the rest will follow, but all other
reformation signifies little without it: the way to kill a Tree is not to lop
off here a Bough, and there a Branch, but to stub it up by the root; and to
destroy the tree of Sin, is not to be lopping off here one, and there another,
but root up the whole; which will be done if the heart be reformed: it is not
the Stream but the Fountain we must cleanse, if we will have clean water; the
other will prove but labor in vain. Prove. 4.23.
Keep the heart with all deligence (says Solomon,) for out of it are the
issues of life: Quod sanitas in corpore, id sanctitas in cord: if a Disease
strike to the heart it is dangerous, but if the heart be sound there is hopes;
if the Spring be clear the water will purge it self, Job 31.1.
if that be infected or polluted it is in vain to purge the Stream: Eccles. 5.1.
it is true, the Eye, the Foot, the Hand, must be heeded, but if the heart be
not first Regulated, these will not be kept in order; the Eye will be full of
Adultery, and the Hand swift to shed blood; for out of the heart proceed
murders, Mat. 18.8.
adulterycs, etc. Look to the heart, and the heart will look to the rest. The
heart of man is of so great a Concern, that it has many Suitors; the world
yields many of them; Riches, Honor, Pleasure, woe for the Affection, and
seldom but one of these prevail; Pro. 23.26.
and spiritual Powers make suit also; God says, My Son give me thy heart, and
happy are we if we give our consent: as the heart is defiled he will have none
of it, and till it be renewed he will own nothing that man does, nor any
Sacrifice he Offers; God sends many a Messenger to woe for it, and many a time
he striveth by his own Spirit to win it, and many a Love Token he sends to
oblige it, and many a promise he makes to win upon it: The Devil also contends
more for it than about the Body of Moses, for that is imagined to be but in
reference to it, he owns it as his by nature, and would fain keep the
possession, for while he keeps this fort all is safe; he can give the eyes,
ears, the tongue their liberty, if the heart be his he matters not, his
Prisoner is secure; and to keep possession of the heart a thousand snares are
laid in the way, and if any make an escape he sends out Hue and cry after them,
stirs up all his Instruments to bring them back again; sets some to reproach
them, some to persuade them, yea some to flatter, some to threaten, and some to
persecute: for he knows the heart is the Master-wheel that guides all the rest;
for a man is denominated good or bad according as his heart is either good or
bad; this is the Shop wherein good or bad wares are forged: Mat. 2.35.
it is fons boni vel pec^andi origo, the Fountain of good, or the Spring of
evil: if there be a principle of life there, the actions are pleasing to God;
if not, they are but dead works. A carnal heart is a Stews or Shambles, a
place whence unclean and cruel thoughts are produced, the forge where wicked
thoughts are framed, the Mint where they are coined, the very Anvil upon which
all Sin is forged, an Augean Stable for Filthiness: the heart is the Temple
wherein Gods Ark or the Devils Dagon are placed, Gal. 4.7.
and worshipped; it is the Palace wherein dwells, the Throne wherein sits
the King of Glory, or the Prince of darkness: Ephesians. 2.2^.
for the Devil works and acts in a wicked heart, as a Smith does in his Forge,
or an Artificer in his Shop, what he pleases, without control; these two
Princes cannot sit in the same Throne, or rule in the same heart; these two
Masters cannot be served by the same man, their commands are so different,
those that love the one will despise the other, and if one be obeyed the other
must be neglected; he that gets possession of the heart is our Master, for we
may know it by our obedience: If Christ rule there, the Devils kingdom must
down, and if the Devil rules, Christ will be gone: now his servants ye are to
whom ye obey; the heart is the fountain out of which all water flows, whether
sweet or bitter, Mat. 7.26.
and therefore it concerns us to see it be not defiled: It is a Tree, and we
may know whether it be good or no by the fruit; By the fruit (says Christ,) ye
shall know them: It Is a Treasury out of which good or evil things are brought;
it is the primum mobile, that sets all the rest in motion, and gives motion to
the inferior Orbs; the hand, the eye, the foot, the tongue, are all moved by
it, either in a direct or irregular motion: It Is the chief Monarch in the Isle
of man, that gives Laws and Commands to all the rest: It Is like the Treble in a
Viol, if this be in tune, the other are soon ordered; if out, the Music is
spoiled; it is the spring or Master-wheel of all the curious Clock-work of the
Soul, and sets all the rest in motion: This is it that denominates an action
good or bad, as it differenced between Cains sacrifice and Abels, and the
fastings, prayers, and alms of the Pharisees, and of the Apostles. The more of
the heart is in the sin, the greater is the aggravation, but the more of the
heart is in a duty, the better God accepts it. Where the heart goes not along
with the sin, God will pardon it, but if the heart go not along with the duty
he will not own it: weak performances are accepted where the heart is right,
glorious actions are abominable where the heart is rotten. Now the heart by
nature is polluted, and must be cleansed; it is deceitful, and if not looked to
will betray us; and when the heart is polluted the whole man is defiled, and
till this be cleansed a man is neither fit to live, nor fit to dye, nor after
death to come to Judgment. Get therefore the heart purified by Faith, or never
think to dye comfortably or happily.

9 Direction. As the Heart must be purged from sin, so it is necessary that it
be replenished with Grace, for without this you can neither dye a happy nor
comfortable death; for these are the Divine qualifications which God has made
necessary to salvation; this is the Oil which the wise Virgins had in their
Vessels, Mat. 25.4. etc.
their Hearts, which the foolish did want, and therefore were shut out of the
Bridechamber: This is the wedding garment, without which you will be bound hand
and foot, Mat. 22.1.
and cast into outer darkness; this is the Sheep-mark of Christ, those that
have it he will own, and place them at his right hand, when all other like
reprobate Goats shall be set on the left; This is the Ticket, whosoever has it
shall be admitted into Heaven, and whosoever has it not Heaven gates will be
shut against him; now how can that man be happy or comfortable in death, that
has not this Oil, this Wedding Garment, this Sheep-mark, nor this Ticket; that
has nothing to show for Heaven and happiness, or why he should not go to Hell
and misery? These Graces are the Jemmes and Jewels that adorn the Spouse of
Christ, and make her amiable in his eyes; this is the differencing badge
between the Children of God, and the men of the World, that shall have their
portion in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone: These, these are the
Evidences Believers have for Heaven, and by these it is they hold God to his
bargain; for he has told them, he that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be condemned: This is the witness of the Spirit, for it is
the Spirit that works those graces in the soul, and also enables the Soul to
read them thus written in the heart, by the Spirit; and so the Spirit
witnesses with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. Now can any man
willingly leave a present Inheritance, that has no assurance of any for the
future? Holiness is the Image of God, the Livery that all that go to Heaven are
clad with, and though now it be out of fashion, at death our greatest Gallants
would willingly be found in this Livery; yea Balaam himself would dye the death
of the righteous, though he liked not his life; other Jewels adorn the Body,
but this adorns the Soul, these have this excellent virtue, they make a man
live holily and die happily, none can miscarry that wear them; these make men
dye securely, but it is also requisite that they know they have them, for
sometimes Believers lose their comforts for want of clearing up their Evidences
for Heaven; it is necessary that a man have grace, and it is comfortable to know
he has it; to have it in the habit suffices not, if he act it not: he must
not only have faith, but he must live by faith, and by faith suck sweetness
from the promises: this will make a man look death in the face undauntedly;
this grace will assure a man that life and death will prove advantageous to
him, and that God and his departing soul are at peace, and that the Covenant
remains firm even in the Grave it self; this makes a man look even beyond death
it self, and see the Crown of glory, the recompense of reward before him, and
assures him death will do him more good than hurt, that it will set an end to
his misery, and beginning to his happiness, and that when death has struck the
stroke, the Angels will carry the Soul into Abraham's bosom, yea lodge it in the
Arms of their dear Redeemer. These apprehensions made Paul to desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, and the Martyrs to be so willing to dye, and
so cheerfully to go to the stake: Love to God also is another grace which much
sweetens the very thoughts of death; indeed this sweetens the sharpest passage
of Providence, when we think, this is my Fathers will, whom I love, and who
loves me, and knows best what is for my good; yea death it self shall be
welcome when it is a Messenger from him I love, to fetch me home to his bosom:
what will not a loving Wife suffer to enjoy her beloved Husband? love desires
the strictest union, and most intimate communion with the party beloved, but
this the Soul cannot obtain but by Death: O says the Soul, now I lie under the
hatches, troubled with a thousand infirmities, I can seldom have a glimpse of
Christ here; well, the time is at hand that I shall see him face to face, and
enjoy him in glory, where I shall serve him without distraction, and never be
troubled more with vain thoughts or roving imaginations, or any of Satan's
temptations: Oh when will this time be! The other graces of the Spirit are also
necessary to this end, to sweeten death, such as Knowledge, Repentance,
Obedience, Humility, Self-denial, Patience, Hope, etc. of which I shall not
speak particularly. Now the Promises are made to these graces not only of this
life but of that to come; among the rest of the good things promised, is Heaven
and Happiness, but what is a carnal man the better for these promises, that is
not qualified for them? but when by Faith we can see this Crown of glory, and
see our Names written upon it, and get a Pisgah-sight of this heavenly Canaan,
we shall willingly venture over this Jordan, and encounter all the Sons of Anak
we meet in our way, and not fear what Man, what Devils, what Death can do unto
us: get these Graces in exercise, and you need not fear Fire and Faggot.

10 Direction. That you may thus empty the heart of sin and wickedness, and
replenish it with Grace and godliness, that so you may be fit to live and fit
to dye, and fit to live with Christ-for ever, it is fit and necessary you take
Gods way; for it cannot be done by your own strength. Improve therefore all the
means which God has afforded you for this end; for those that refuse the means
seldom attain the end. Improve his Word and Ordinances; these are the appointed
means, however some scorn at them, and some think they are above them, but
those that go not this way seldom come to Heaven. In the Word are given Rules
how to live, and how to dye, and how to behave ourselves in all Conditions;
here is Oil to be had, and those that neglect will be to seek when the
Bridegroom comes. Those that now neglect the Wedding Garment, will want it when
they have occasion to use it, and so be thrust out of the Bride-chamber. This
Word of God should be our daily study, for here are directions both for life
and death, and none but those that are bad Husbands for the soul, will neglect
it: here are the precious Promises which are our Fathers Legacy, out of which
the Soul by Faith sucks sweetness, which are special Cordials against fainting
fits, which bear up the head above water, and the heart in all storms and
tempests: here is direction in Heavens way, yea way-marks set up that we should
not err nor wander; here you may find what qualifications God requires in his
servants, and what Evidences for Heaven are good and authentic, and what God
will own another day; and if by the help of the Spirit you can read them in
your own hearts, as in a counter pane, there is no better Evidence for Heaven,
no greater Cordial in the world to bear up the heart: here you may find
comforts and consolatious in all your conditions, and if you walk in this road
you will meet with much help and assistance, yea many companions in your
Journey: here you have the Spirit of God both to direct and comfort you, and
who can err that has such a guide, or droop that has such a comforter? here
you shall hear a voice behind you saying, this is the way walk in it, turn not
to the right hand or to the left: here you have the assistance of Gods
Ministers to direct you, but take heed of quenching the motions of his Spirit,
or abusing his Messengers, lest his Spirit leave striving with you, and God
take away his Messengers in his anger: here you may find many that have walked
the same way, met with the same troubles, suffered the same afflictions,
temptations, crosses and losses as you do, and yet have born it with patience,
and overcome it with constancy and comfort; here you may know the worst that
death can do to you is for your advantage, if you love God, for such death
cannot hurt; kill you it may, hurt you it cannot; the worst it can do is but to
send you to your Fathers house the sooner. Meditate therefore upon this Word of
God, and also upon the Attributes of God, and this must needs support you under
sufferings. Meditate also upon man's Mortality to quicken you in your pace, of
the Worlds vanity and emptiness to make you slight it, and the fullness of
Christ to make you to desire him. The Meditation of death will not make you dye
sooner, but safer, and the Promises will yield sweetness even in the pangs of
death; for death is to the godly but as a Pursivant to fetch them to Heaven,
and his wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth, are Cordials
also, and will help to keep the heart from fainting and desponding; and will
shield the Spirits against all crosses and afflictions they shall meet with:
and by Meditation in the Word, you may learn the happiness of the godly, and
the miseries of the wicked, and what will be the end of both; yea you may find
there what are the pains of Hell, and the Joys of Heaven, and these may be
used as motives to a holy life: Prayer also is an excellent duty to prepare for
death; by this God is engaged to help at a time of need: Christian Conference
also is another help, wherein one fire-stick helps to inkindle another, till
all come into a flame. Now those that are constant and faithful in these and
the rest of the Ordinances and means God has appointed to this end, are
likelyest to have the qualifications before mentioned, and those thus qualified
need not fear death; those that walk evenly with God in Prosperity, are most
like to hold out in Adversity, Heb. 2.14.
and need not fear death, nor him that has the power of death, the Devil. The
more faithful and constant any one is in the Trade of Godliness, the more
Assurance he may have of a happy death, and joyful Resurrection; and what
hinders then but a cheerful resigning our selves to death when God calls? a man
will not willingly resign up his old Lease till he have assurance of a better:
but who will not leave a Cottage for a Palace, or exchange an old Suit for a
new, Rags for Robes? when assurance of Heaven is got, no wonder if earth be
contemned; for who will not change a Temporal Life for Life Eternal?

And thus, (Courteous Reader) if thou art prepared, I have spoken to thee in
the Book, if not in the Epistle, wherein I have given thee some direction how
thou may be prepared, and how thou may come to be fit to live, and fit to
dye, and fit to lie in the Arms of Christ for ever: What effect the Book will
have upon the one, or the Directions on the other, I know not; but my desire
is, and my Prayer shall be, that it may be beneficial both to the one, and to
the other: This will be your own advantage, but the comfort of him who
subscribes himself.

Yours for your Souls good, Edward Bury.
Eaton, October. 23. 1680.
Books printed for and sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
at the lower end of Cheap Side near Mercers Chapel.
SErmons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Collossians by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation, on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermons to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking, by Tho. Tailor. D. D.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7. by
Anthony Bargess.

Christianographia, or a description of the multitudes and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world not subject to the Pope: by Ephesians. Pagit.

Dr. Donns 40 Sermons, being his 3 Volumes.

Forty six Sermons upon the whole Eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans, by Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of St. Hellens.

An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of 23 Chapters of Exodus, by George
Hughes, D. D.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful Observations
thereupon: by William Greenhill.

Gods holy Mind touching matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments:
Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer: by Edward Eston, B. D.

The Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the rise, increase,
doctrines, and deeds of the Jesuits.

Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method:
by Sylvanus Morgan.

A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.

Separation no Schism, in Answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor,
by, J. S.

An Exercitation on a question in Divinity, and Case of Conscience, viz.
Whether it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the opinion of his own
conscience, formed from arguments that to him appear very probable, though not
necessary or demonstrative.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good man's mercy
to the bruit-Creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges, B. D.

Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.

Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection.

A Sovereign Antidote AGAINST THE FEAR of DEATH: OR, A Cordial for a Dying
Christian, being Ten Meditations suited to that End.
MEDITAT. I. What Death is to a Believer and to an Unbeliever.
WHY art thou cast down, Psalm. 42.11.
O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, I shall
yet praise him who is the health of my countenance, and my God. What is it that
thus amazeth and terrifieth thee? Why art thou so distracted in thy duties, and
so full of anxious fears and doubts? is it the apprehension of death that so
disquiets thee? Why man, did thou never look Death in the face till now?
did never behold his grisly looks and grim face? yea, thou have many a time;
and art thou yet afraid? is this the fruit of all thy prayers, and thy
mortifying Meditations? have not thou instructed many, Job 13.4, etc.
and strengthened the weak hands? thy words have upholden him that was falling,
and thou have strengthened the feeble knees, but now it is come upon thee do
thou faint? and when it touches thee, art thou troubled? Is a disease now more
terrible than formerly? Or the apprehensions of death than in times past? or is
it bad News that terrifies thee, and makes thee afraid? Some Papist plotting to
take away thy life; Psalm. 112.7.
among others, the Psalmist tells thee, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings
whose heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Suppose they seek thy life, and
thirst after thy blood, have thou no hiding place, no City of refuge to fly to,
till the storm be over? Have thou no interest in God? no Friend in the Court to
make thy complaint to? Prove. 14.32.
No comfort in time of need? But dye thou must; well, yet the righteous has
hope in his death; and does thy hope and thy happiness then expire with thy
life? Come let us reason the case, and see if there be so much cause of
desponding as thou pretendest. Art thou from under the protecting hand of God?
Ps. 59.1.
Or is his hand shortened that he cannot save, Isa. 50.
or his ear heavy that he cannot hear? Where is the bill of divorce that he
has given thee? Or has the Lord put thy life into thine own hands, and do
thou think it will be wrested out by violence? Art thou thine own keeper, and
do mistrust thy strength? Or is thy life put into thy Enemies hand, and by
whom? Or can they take it away without a Commission? God usually keeps the
Keys of Life and Death at his own girdle. Or if thy Life be gone, is thy
Happiness at an end? if not, what need all this consternation? this is more
than thy Enemies can do without leave; and if they could, what a great matter
is it for a man, an Old man to dye! but it is him whom thou call thy Father,
Numb. 16.22.
that can kill and make alive, and brings to the gates of death, and back
again; it is he that is the God of the Spirits of all flesh; are not thy Enemies
also at his dispose? and their lives, are they not in his hands? Who was it
that turned the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, Exodus 14.28. Esth. 7.10.
and drowned Pharaoh and his Army in the Sea; and caused Haman to be hanged
upon the Gallows he had made for another; and can take his Enemies in their own
snares, and the crafty in their own devices? And is not this God in Heaven yet?
and does he not rule among the children of men, and dispose the Kingdoms of the
world to whom he pleases? and will thou fear man whose breath is in his
nostrils, and the son of man that is vanity? and cannot he deliver thee out of
their hands if he see it good, and will do, if he have more work for thee to
do? and if not, why should thou desire to live longer? and if they must be
the messengers which thy Father sends to fetch thee home, what hurt is in that?
what wrong is done thee? Heb. 9.27.
If thy trouble be that thou must dye, it may be as well that thou wast made a
man; for it is appointed unto man once to dye, and after death the Judgment:
And if thou would not have God to have the dispose of thy life, why do thou
not speak out, and renounce thy Christianity? Lu. 14.26.
Was it not one of the first Conditions Christ required of thee, when he first
admitted thee into his service; If any man (says he) come unto me, and hate
not his Father, and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters,
Mat. 16.25.
yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my disciple? And does he not plainly
tell thee, he that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will lose his
life for his sake, shall find it? Is not this the lowest degree of true grace,
and a necessary qualification, without which thou can not be his Disciple? he
told thee this at the beginning; he does not impose upon thee, and put new
Conditions into the Covenant, that were not agreed upon. Joh. 16.33.
Heaven was never offered upon lower terms, he always told thee that through
many tribulations thou must enter into it; and if the World hate thee, and the
seed of the Serpent persecute thee, it is no new thing, thou knew it before;
and if thou tookest up the profession of Religion, and not reckon the Charges,
it is not Gods fault, but thy folly: Christ never indented with thee to leave it
at thy dispose, when, and how thou should dye; if thou refuse to dye in the
Cause of God, if he require it, the Heathens will condemn thee, who would
venture their Lives for their Countries good, and many times upon lower
accounts, as to end their Miseries, to prevent a worse death, or to get
themselves a Name; and have not thou a better call than any of those, when
Christ and his Cause require it? Many of the Gallants of our time, that it is
feared are not very well provided for Death, yet will venture their Lives in a
drunken Fray, in a Whores quarrel, or to prevent the name of Coward; but if
they well understood the consequents of their death, they would be more
timorous; and will thou shrink back in the cause of Christ, when his Truth and
thy own Soul ly at the stake? when thou can not deny to dye, but thou must
deny Christ and his Truth, and hazard the Salvation of thy Soul? Dye thou must,
whether thou will or no, and there is no thanks to thee; Heb. 9.27.
there is a Decree passed in Heaven, which cannot be reversed, more firm than
the Laws of the Medes and Persians; and will thou lose thy God, thy Christ, thy
Soul, thy Heaven, and Happiness, and all to prolong thy life a little longer,
which yet thou know not whether thou can do it or not? If thou dye for
Christ, thou put off thy life at the greatest advantage imaginable; and if
thou refuse when he requires it, thou runnest thy self upon the most desperate
danger conceivable. Thou think perhaps the condition is hard, and so it is
if thou only consult Flesh and Blood, and the Sensitive faculty; but if thou
consult with Grace and rectified Reason, thou will find it much easier than at
first it seems: There is greater reason God should dispose of thy Life who gave
it thee, than that thou should dispose of the lives of Bruits that thou did
not, can not give them, and yet thou think thou do them no wrong; but
God has a better interest in thee, and a clearer title to thy life, than thou
have to them: Life indeed is a precious Jewel, and to be valued above all
earthly enjoyments, but Christ and the Soul are more precious than Life it
self; and when Life cannot be had, but Christ must be denied, and the Soul
lost, it is easy to determine what is to be preferred; for he that will
preserve his Life at these rates, makes a bad bargain. It Is thy duty it is true
to part with any earthly enjoyments for life's sake; Job 2.7.
Skin for skin and all that a man has will he give for his life; but Life and
all must go, to secure the Soul: Death it is true is an enemy to Nature, yet in
some cases it must be chosen, and we must deny our selves: Hunger and Thirst
are natural to us, and the Appetite requires Meat and Drink, and yet did we
know there was Poison put into our Cup or Dish, reason would restrain the
Appetite, and rather choose Hunger or Thirst than a worser evil. Physic is not
pleasing, neither to be chosen for its own sake; yet for healths sake we take
bitter Pills, and unsavory potions. Pain is not pleasant to the flesh, but an
enemy to Sense, yet Reason persuades us sometimes to open a Vein, to prevent
greater pain, and to cut off a Joint, a Member, a Limb, to prevent greater
mischief. Some discontented persons weary of a miserable life, not only wish
for death, but lay violent hands upon themselves, choosing Death as the lesser
evil; these leap out of the Drying Pan into the fire, and consider not what the
Event of such a death is; these have low ends, and drive on a bad bargain, and
seeking to avoid Scylla they fall into Charybdis; Job 3.21, 22.
these obey not Gods Call but the Devils Whistle. There are some that long for
death but it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasure; they
rejoice exceedingly and are glad when they can find the grave: This is
unnatural joy, for as it is our duty to yield up our breath when he that gave it
calls for it, so it is our duty to preserve our Lives, and our sin to hasten our
death before he requires it: We must not leave our station till our Captain
commands it; we must not leave the Vineyard when we would, but when our work is
done, and with our Master's leave: We must not with our own hands pluck down
these earthly Tabernacles, neither deny our consent when God will pluck them
down; we are Tenants at will, and must not think to have our Houses at our own
dispose, whether they shall down or not: we came not into the world but at his
appointment, and must not go out without his leave. I know, a Godly man though
he have some assurance of a better habitation, is not so reconciled to death as
to choose it for its own sake, for Deaths looks are not lovely, it being the
King of terrors, Job 18.19.
and the terror of Kings, and in it self formidable, and has daunted the
courage of the stoutest Soldiers, and triumphs over the most triumphant
Conqueror, and sometimes discomposeth the most composed Christian. And
therefore as on the one hand it should not be overmuch feared, so on the other
it should not be overmuch slighted. Christ himself had some fearful
apprehensions of it, and well he might, knowing what he had to suffer; the
Sting was then in, but by his death it was taken out in reference to Believers;
yet the Serpent is formidable, but not poysonful; it will strike still, though
it cannot sting: and as it is an Outlet to Life, so it is an Inlet to Eternity,
and who can enter into so vast a Gulf and so boundless an Ocean without
amazement, where he can find neither bank nor bottom? It Is impossible for men
to put off Humanity, neither does Christianity teach us to be Stoics, yet it
teaches us to bound and moderate our passions, and not overmuch to fear Death.
When we have a lawful call to it, and when it is our duty to dye; when God
sends, let who will be the Messenger, obey we must. Lu. 12.5.
Fear not them (says Christ) that can kill the body, and can do no more, but
fear him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell, yea I say unto you fear
him. All outward things must be undervalued for Life sake, but Life it self
must go for Gods sake: if thou sell thy life for any worldly advantage, thou will make a hard bargain. For what good will the world do thee when thou art
dead? Luke 12.20
Thou fool (says Christ) this night will thy soul be required of thee, and
then whose are these? Thou must part with any thing in the world to preserve
it, but if thou sell thy Soul to save thy life, or part with Christ upon that
account, thou will make a bad bargain; Mat. 16.26.
for what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul?
or what shall a man give in Exchange for his soul? This is not to prevent
death, but to Exchange one death for another, temporal death for eternal. It Is
not a choosing death thou art Pressed to, but a submission to the will of God
that is required at thy hands; and of two evils the least is to be chosen: if
thou must either choose death, or choose sin, death is the more eligible; for
sin will expose thee to the second death, and prove the everlasting separation
of soul and body from God, which is worse a thousand times than death. If thou
must lose thy life or thy soul, let life go; if thou must deny life, or deny
Christ, Christ is better than thy life, being the very life of thy soul; and he
that to avoid a little temporal pain, incurs eternal torments, makes a foolish
bargain. Now though there be no reason to love death, yet is there great reason
why thou should love God better than life; Psalm. 63.3.
whose loving kindness is better than life: though life be dear, yet Christ is
dearer. The Cup of death may be bitter, but Hell and Damnation, and the eternal
Wrath of God are much bitterer, which if thou forsake Christ thou must drink up
to the bottom, which Eternity will be little enough to do: God puts Sugar into
the former, none into the latter. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them: But those that miscarry
are sent away with a curse; Mat. 25.41
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc.
It Is true, after the Fall death was threatened as a Curse, and a Judgment for
sin, but by the death of Christ the nature of it is changed to Believers, Psalm.
116.15.
and the malignity of it abated. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of his Saints; the sting is taken out, and we may put the Serpent into our
bosom; it is now to the godly a Sleep: Our friend Lazarus sleeps; and so it is
said of Stephen, he fell a sleep; and the Grave is but Gods Cabinet to hide his
Jewels, where they are secured from the evil to come; Isa. 57.12. and 26.20.
it is but a Chamber to hide them in till the indignation be past: And though
Deaths chambers be dark, they are best to sleep in, where thou shall meet with
no disturbance, no noise without, or terror within: thou shall neither see,
nor hear, nor feel, nor fear evil: death is but a sturdy Porter to open the
door of thy Fathers house, the gates of Heaven to thee, to let thee in: And
though it may expose thee to some pain for the present, it is not much, and it is
but momentary, and not worthy the glory that shall be revealed, for endless Joy
presently succeeds it, and pain will soon be forgotten. If thou can but stoop
a little and crowd in at this strait gate, and narrow door, thou will enter
into that spacious City the New Jerusalem. If thou can not love death for its
own sake, yet entertain him for his Masters sake, for it is the Ambassador of
the great God, and for his Message sake, for he brings an Answer of peace. To
submit unto the will of God, and to be obedient unto the death, is not only thy
Duty, but thy Wisdom and Interest, and to say with Christ, Not my will but
thine be done; and with Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.10.
Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. If thou deny thy Life when God requires
it, Christ will deny thee entrance into those Heavenly Mansions; and it is a
thousand times better lose thy life, than lose his love: think not yet that
Heaven is had upon hard terms, thou may happily lose something for Christ, but
shall never lose by him; the way to save thy life, is to hide it with God in
Christ. The hardest terms that Christ propounds are but reasonable; it is thy
Interest to go to Heaven though it were even through the flames of Hell, much
more through the pangs of Death. Paul easily concludes, to dye for him was
gain, and to be with Christ was best of all; he dyed daily, and carried his
life in his hand, ready to offer it up when God required it; Acts 21.13.
and was willing not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ at Jerusalem: the
recompense of reward was in his eye, the Crown of glory was in his sight, which
Christ the righteous Judge should give him at the last day; Phil. 1.21.
and his desire was that Christ might be magnified by him both by his life and
by his death. Thou can contentedly endure pain for health, and will thou not
endure it for Christ and everlasting Happiness? Will thou not endure some few
gripes for glory? Thou had thy life given thee upon this condition, to part
with it when God requires it: thou art a Tenant at will, and so at another
dispose, and if thou will surrender, God will build thee up a more sumptuous
house; if thou will not, he will distrain upon thee, pluck down thy house
shortly, and cast thee into Prison: Life it self was given on no other terms,
but to be at Gods dispose, and think not that thou have wrong: Death is the
common road wherein all men walk; Kings and Emperors leave their Crowns and
Scepters at his gate; rich and poor, great and small, bond and free, crowd in
at this door, and travail this road; if thou willingly resign, thou may make
an advantage; if not, ere long thou will be constrained to do it upon harder
terms: and seeing a death thou must dye, what matter is it what Messenger it is
that Death sends to distrain for this Rent, whether an ordinary disease, or an
extraordinary Pursivant? whether thou dye in thy bed, or go to Heaven in a
fiery Chariot; and if so, the Crown of Martyrdom will be thy Reward. Death to
the wicked is but an entrance into Hell, the beginning of sorrows, yea of
eternal death; Rev. 20.6.
but those that have a part in the first resurrection, the second death of them
shall have no power. Oh my foul, why art thou afraid of death, seeing the sting
is taken out, and the nature of it changed? let us view it a little better, and
see what the godly have thought of it, and what the Scripture says of it.
Isaiah tells thee, Isa. 57.1, 2.
The righteous are taken away from the evil to come, to enter into peace, and
to rest in their beds: and is Rest so terrible to the weary man? Paul calls it,
a departing, Phi. 1.23.
and to be with Christ; and is this so dangerous, to lie in Christ's bosom in
eternal bliss? Job makes no more of it than the cutting down of a flower, Job
14.1, 2.
and is this a matter of such moment? Simeon calls it a departing in peace;
Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: Joshua calls it, The way of
all the earth; Joshua 32.14.
Behold (says he) I am this day going the way of all the earth: and will thou
be afraid of going in this beaten road? In Christ's account it is but a falling
asleep: Our friend Lazarus sleeps: the like was said of Stephen; And when he
had said this, Act. 7.60.
he fell asleep: and who is afraid of falling asleep? It Is called also a
finishing our course; 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have fought a good fight (says Paul) I have finished my course: And who
would be afraid of his journeys end? It Is called a going hence; O spare me,
Psalm. 39.13.
says David, that I may recover strength, before I go hence and be no more: a
going home; Man goes to his long home, Eccle. 12.5.
says Solomon: and what danger is in going home? it is but a resting from our
labor (says the Spirit): Rev. 14.13.
There the wicked (says Job) cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest,
Job 3.17.18.12.
there the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor,
the small and the great are there, and the Servant is free from his Master: And
how sweet is rest to a weary man! and doubtless death to the godly is the end
of all misery, and the beginning of Happiness. O my God, I am fully convinced,
and I see great reason why I should submit to thee, and lay down my life at thy
feet; and I resolve through thine assisting grace so to do, and to submit my
self to the stroke of death, when and how it shall please thee. Lord assist me
in these resolutions, lest my enemy surprise me, and my deceitful heart betray
me, and my frail flesh ensnare me, and make me dishonor my God, deny my
Redeemer, break my Peace with thee, wound my Conscience, and lose my soul, by
any sin^^l compliance, or denying my Life when thou cal'st for it.

MEDITAT. II. Death is common to Good and Bad.
O My Soul, why art thou yet afraid at the apprehension of death? why do thou
draw back? why do thou frame excuses? is death any strange or unwonted thing,
that thou have not seen nor heard of before? then there were some cause: but is
it not as common as it is for a man to be born? is it not the end of all flesh,
the way of all the world? Omnibus una manet nox et calcanda semel via lethi: is
it not the common road that all men tread, when they go out of the world? young
and old, great and small, rich and poor, good and bad, all throng in at this
Gate; and art thou loath to stoop so low? Death sometimes strikes the child in
the womb, and sometimes the man that stoops for Age, and art thou afraid of
that which unborn Babes, and crooked old age undergo? Heb. 9, 27.
and that which is as sure as the coat upon thy back? It is appointed unto all
men once to dye, and after Death the Judgment. All men dye once, and most men
twice, but the second Death is far more formidable: Job 14.1, 2, 5.
Man that is born of a woman, is of a few days, and full of trouble; He comes
up like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues
not: His days are determined, the number of his Months are with God; he has
appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass: Job 14.14. and 10.9.
It Is therefore thy Duty, all the days of thy appointed time to wait till thy
change come; for he has made thee as the Clay, and will bring thee to Dust
again: 1 Timothy 6.7. Wis. 7.16.
Thou broughtest nothing into the world, and it is certain thou shall carry
nothing out; all have one entrance into Life, and a like going out; Death makes
a very great change; so that wicked men have cause to fear it, the Godly to
desire it, and all to expect it: Life flies away suddenly and cannot be
retained, Death comes speedily and cannot be resisted; O death, Ecclus. 41.1.2.
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions! unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and has prosperity in
all things; yea unto him that is able to receive meat; Oh Death, how acceptable
is thy Judgment to the needy, and to him whose strength fails him, etc. The
best and holiest men have dyed; for Innocence it self is no Target against it;
otherwise Christ had not dyed, in whose mouth was found no guile: The stoutest
and strongest cannot resist death; Sampson himself must yield him the victory:
The wisest cannot preserve himself alive; Solomon himself, that had studied the
nature of all Vegetables, 1 King 4.33.
from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hyssop that grows upon the wall, yet found
out none that could cure the dint of Death: contra vim mortis non est medicamen
in hortis. The worst of men also are subjected to his power; those that would
sell their Souls to save their lives, cannot do it; there is no power can
resist it: at one time it prevailed against almost all the world, as in the
Flood; against populous Cities, as Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. against Potent
Princes and great Armies, as over Pharaoh and his Host; Senacherib's Army,
where an hundred fourscore and. five thousand were slain in one Night: thus
good and bad pass through the same Gate, but then their way soon turns, the
Godly to the right and the Wicked to the left hand; the one to Heaven, and the
other to Hell; for as death is an outlet to let us out of the World, so it is an
inlet to let us in to Eternity; to the Godly an inlet to Eternal Bliss, and to
the wicked into Eternal misery. Then will a difference be made between the Good
and the Bad, as wide as between Heaven and Hell. Death is a debt we owe to
nature, and pay it we must, and it is not much matter whether it be sooner or
later, or whether we dye a natural or violent Death; they both signify the
same thing; should thou turn every stone, and use all means direct or
indirect, thou can not long preserve thy life: possibly if thou deny payment
of this debt, when God requires it, thou may preserve it a little longer, and
but a little; for God will ere long distrain for the Debt, and then cast thee
into an Eternal Prison. Gods determinate counsel is upon thee, and he knows
eventually when thy death shall be: he has determined thy bounds that thou
can not pass; God commanded Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, and it was his Duty
so to do, and his sin if he refused, though God determined eventually it should
not be done, yet if he had refused it he had missed of the Blessing. Thy
appointed time is with God, but unknown to thee; it is his revealed will that is
thy duty, thou must look after, not eventually what shall come to pass; secret
things belong to God, Deu. 29.29.
but things revealed unto us: if God and his truth, his Gospel and his cause
call thee to lay down thy life, and seal thy doctrine with thy blood, thou must
carry thy life in thy hand, and lay it down at his feet: If God command thee to
lose thy life, it is thy duty to dye, and if by denying Christ life be
prolonged, it is a hard bargain, and it is no less thy sin though God eventually
determined thy life to be prolonged. There are many that hasten their death by
their intemperance, and sacrifice their lives to Bacchus and Venus, to
drunkenness and lust, and so become a Victim to the Devil himself; yet are not
Gods decrees altered; for though many hasten their death, or use unlawful means
to preserve their lives, and so both the one and the other become Guilty, yet
Gods decrees are not altered. If thou devote thy life to God, and fully
resolvest to lose it for his sake, if he require it, though he never call thee
forth to suffer, thou will not lose thy reward; and if thou resolvest thou will
part with Christ, and kick up thy profession rather than suffer for him, if he
never put thee upon the trial, God will take the will for the deed; whether
thou will or no, dye thou must, for death will not be bribed: Crowns and
Kingdoms will not prolong their owners lives; thou may say of death as Paul
of preaching, A necessity is laid upon me, will I, nill I, dye I must: if
willing, I have a reward; if against my will, I cannot help it; death will not
be corrupted with bribes, won with promises, nor terrified with threats. When
the time will be, it is not so much thy concern to know, as thy duty to prepare
for it: thou may lose thy self, but can not preserve thy life one day
beyond the appointed time: if thou deny God a temporal life, he will deny thee
eternal life. I have read of one in persecuting times, being called to suffer
for the truth he had professed, cries out, The fire is hot I cannot burn; but
within a short space he was burnt in his own house, and we have cause to fear
he finds the fire of Hell incomparably hotter than the flames he was burnt in,
which yet he could not evade. Death triumphs over all ranks and Estates of men,
from the King upon his Throne to his meanest Subject. Mors pauperum tabernas
regumque turres aequo pulsat pede. Death makes no difference; ere long the
grizly hand of Death will with a winding sheet cover those naked Breasts and
spotted Faces, which have been the Looking-glasses of lust; And worms will ere
long make their nest between those Breasts which are now exposed to sight. and
sale, and eat out those wanton windows of love, and messengers of lust; death
will then cool the courage of the stoutest hot-spur. Crowns and Scepters are
the spoils taken by this Conqueror as trophies of his victories: Job 14.7.
man that is born of a woman is of short life, and full of trouble. Inward
corruption disposes us to Death as well as open violence; thy body is an
earthen pitcher ready to break at every knock; this earthly tabernacle must be
repaired with food or Physic, or both daily, or it will soon fall about thy
ears: many are the harbingers of death, many are the sensible decays in
nature, which tell thee thy end is approaching; the weakness of thy sight, the
dullness of thy hearing, the rottenness of thy ^eeth, the wrinkles in thy face,
and thy gray hairs mind thee that this crazy Pitcher will not long come home
from the water unbroken. The contrary Elements whereof thy body is compounded,
the disagreeing qualities within thee of cold and heat, drought and moisture,
will at length quarrel for the upper hand, and work the destruction of the
compositum; were there no external cause of thy dissolution, these will effect
what thy greatest enemy can but do; though happily not so soon. The fruit when
it is once ripe, will fall if it be not gathered; the Rose will wither if not
plucked; the sturdiest Oak, or Elm, or Cedar will at length yield to time.
Methusalems glass will run out; and these houses of clay will at last tumble
down of themselves. Psalm. 89.48.
What man is he that lives and shall not see Death? shall he deliver his soul
from the hand of the grave: Mors omnibus communis est: It Is the common path all
the world walks in, some sooner, some later; some in Infancy, and some in
Youth, and in middle, and some in old age; And it is the best way for thee to
put thy life into his hands that gave it, and who only is able to preserve it;
and assure thy self he will dispose of it to thy advantage; and if he take it
from thee, will exchange it for life Eternal: for a Believer to dye is but as
the putting off an old suit of clothes, 1 Cor. 5.6.
and exchanging it for a new: and who will fear to put off his old nasty Rags
at night for rich Robes in the morning? It Is but to change a Cottage for a
Palace, Earth for Heaven, and the creatures for God; and who will not be
willing of such a bargain? yea of a Peasant to be made a Prince? Whatever thou
losest for Christ, thou shall lose nothing by him; for he will repay thee a
hundred fold: Mat. 19.29
This is the way to secure thy life, or to part with it at the best advantage,
when otherwise thou will lose thy life as the Pharisees did their duties, for
nothing; they prayed, they fasted, they gave alms, but by reflecting upon
themselves, and not looking at God in what they did, they lost their Reward. If
thou lose thy life and can not help it, what praiseworthy thing do thou?
Thousands of men, it may be imagined, that never intended a life for Christ,
have yet with others been bloodily Massacred upon a religious account, when
something else lay at the bottom; these have suffered Death without a reward,
and this may well be thy condition. It Is true thou should not run before thou
art sent, or expose thy life to danger without a call, so may thou be guilty
of thine own death, which is murder in the highest degree; this is the way to
shorten thy life, but to hasten thy misery: But to dye for Christ is gain, and
soul-advantage; and how can thou that pretendest to believe a Resurrection to
Eternal Life, and pretendest an interest in it, yet fear to dye, which is the
only way to enjoy it: we sow our seed willingly in hope of a plentiful crop, we
go to bed willingly in hope of rest and sleep, and shall we fear to repose our
body in the Grave in hope of a joyful Resurrection? O the Ignorance, the
Infidelity, the want of Love that appears in thee! for did thou really
believe what thou pretendest to believe, or had thou that love for Christ
which thou pretendest to have, thou would long for the time when thou
should enjoy this happiness, when thou should enjoy this God: Mat. 6.21.
love would make thee run through fire and water to come to him; Love makes
labor light, it makes a man slight all the difficulties that lie in the way:
Vbi amor ibi animus; and where the treasure is, there will the heart be also;
do thou believe that at death this mortal shall put on immortality, 1 Cor.
15.54.
and this corruptible shall put on incorruption, that death shall be swallowed
up of victory; and that in Heaven thou shall never hunger more, nor thirst
more, nor have need of any creature supplies, and never meet with more losses,
crosses or afflictions to molest thee, but shall be as the Angels of God, which
behold Gods face in glory? Dan. 12.3. Phil. 3.21.
do thou believe that thy glorified body shall shine as the Sun in the
firmament, and be fashioned like unto Christ's glorified body; and yet art
afraid to dye, and come to glory? how can these things be reconciled? The
question is not, Whether thou must dye or no, this is determined by an
irrevocable decree, but it is about the Time and the Manner of thy death: who
is fittest to dispose of it, thee or the great God that gave it? would thou
have it at thine own will? alas! thou can not preserve it a moment, and thou
can not preserve it from a violent death, and a languishing disease may happily
be more painful than the death thy enemy puts thee to: thou can not deny
Christ thy life without hazard of eternal death, and will thou not rather
suffer a few pangs than run this hazard, and be obnoxious to eternal torments?
Thou have a sickly weakly body, many distempers hang upon thee, from head to
foot, scarce a free part, and subject to more than yet thou feel, and there
is no other Physician can cure thee but Death; his stroke is the Catholicon,
the universal Medicine for all distempers; and do thou fear the potion which
so many of the Saints have taken and did well; nay never any that miscarried
under his hands: Christ by his death has destroyed him who has the power of
death, Heb. 2.14, 15.
even the Devil; to deliver them which through the fear of death were all their
life time subject to bondage: Now the only way to be delivered from this fear,
is to fall under this Stroke; for death frees us from this as well as from all
other miseries. If thou should yet deny thy life, and so think to save it,
thou art much mistaken, when God is thine enemy, and thine enemy then he will
be. Every creature will wait for a Commission to take away thy life: God can
hide Death in the smallest creature: With what contemptible things did he
torment Pharaoh and his people, which had they not been withdrawn upon Moses
supplication would have been their destruction, as Frogs, and Lice, and
Locusts, and Caterpillars, etc. Nay we may read of many that have lost their
lives by such as these: some have been devoured by Rats and Mice; others
destroyed by Leeches, some stung to death by Bees, Wasps and Hornets; some
choakt with Flies, with Figs, with Grapes, Ward on Mat. part 329.
with the kernel of Grapes, with Fish-bones, crumbs of bread, an hair in milk;
some have been eaten of lice, others of worms; some have dyed in smelling of a
flower, some with the prick of a pin, or thorn, and many other such like. God
needs not muster any great Army to destroy thee; the least of his creatures can
do it, if he give them a commission; and if thou deny thy life when he requires
it, well may thou fear this commission will be sealed; well may thou fear
the bread thou eatest will choke thee, the drink thou drinkest will be thy
bane; and what ever judgment thou ever read or heard'st of, that ever
befell. a graceless sinner, it may be thy portion; that the floods may drown
thee, as it did the old world, and Paraoh and his host; that the fire may burn
thee, as it did Sodom and Gomorrah; that the earth may open her mouth and
swallow thee up, as it did Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Or whatsoever other
judgments have befaln the Enemies of God, may be thy portion: for Apostasy is a
most dangerous sin, some creature or other may well distrain of thee in Gods
name, when thou denyest the debt. Had thou been the first that ever tasted of
death, as Abel was, thou might have been afraid; had never any before thee
entered into deaths darksome Cell, or gone through that dark and narrow entry,
it were something, but when ten thousand times ten thousand have gone before
thee, what need this fear? and seeing, will we, nill we, all of us must dance
after deaths pipe, why will thou not do it willingly? God loves a cheerful
giver, he loves a freewill Offering, and loves not grumbling Servants: millions
of the Saints are now in Heaven that have travailed this road, yet none of them
repent they came there too soon: Many of them have been taken out of the world
by the hand of violence, and now have the crown of Martyrdom upon their heads;
Rev. 12.11.
they loved not their lives to the death, and now have received a crown of
life; and if thou be faithful to the death, this will be thy reward when thou
come to thy Juorneys end, thou will be among the souls of just men made
perfect, singing Halelujahs to God for ever and for ever; then will thou bid
adieu to a vain, miserable cheating and deceitful world. But happily thou may
say, Here I am acquainted, but there I am a stranger, and what comfort can I
have in the removing? Art thou a stranger! the more shame for thee; other
Saints were strangers and pilgrims in this world, and made have home into their
own country: if thou had been well acquainted with the Word, thou would
have seen the vanity, and emptiness of all earthly felicity; and that there was
nothing in the world worth thy love; and had thou had thy conversation in
Heaven as thou have pretended, thou would not have been such a stranger
there, as thou seem to be: But stay, have thou not many friends and
relations there? is not almighty God there, whom thou call Father? and art
thou a stranger in thy Fathers house? have had no communion, no trading with
him in his Ordinances? what is then become of all thy prayers, and other
duties? are those all lost? it is true, thou never fawest his face, neither
can see it and live, but have not seen him in his Word, in his Ordinances, in
his promises, threatenings, providence, and Attributes? Blessed is he that has
not seen, Gal. 4.26.
and yet believes; and is not Jerusalem that is above the mother of as all?
and is not the Lord Jesus Christ him whom thou call thy Lord, and thy God,
and thy Husband, and thy elder Brother, yea thy Head? and is a loving wife a
stranger to her beloved husband? and is not the Holy Ghost there, from whom
thou have received such sweet consolations, in thy sinking fits? and are not
the holy Angels there, beholding thy Fathers face in glory, who are now thy
guardians that rejoiced at thy conversion, and will rejoice at thy Coronation:
It Is true thou see them not, thou know them not, they are invisible; but
they see and know thee, and then thou will be able to see and know them, for
they shall be thy constant companions, and thy fellow brethren. And are there
not millions of glorified Saints, which are thy Spiritual kindred, fellow
members of Christ's body, yea brethren in Christ? yea are there not some that
thou knew in the days of their flesh, whose company thou so much desiredst,
and whose death thou so much lamentedst? nay are there not some that were
related to thee in the flesh, gone before thee, of whom thou have comfortable
hopes that they are with the Lord; and will not their company be now as
comfortable as it was on earth? yea thou will know more there than ever thou
did here; for I question not but the Saints shall know each other: for, shall
we sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and not know
them? All the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, Martyrs and glorified
Saints are here, and is not thine Inheritance, thy Crown, thy Mansion House
here? and art thou yet a stranger? is not this thy country which thou
pretendest to be seeking, and all this while art thou a stranger to it? yea
do not live upon heavenly allowance, and have thy meat, and thy drink, and
thy clothes for thy soul from hence? Or is it death that thou art a stranger
to; why did thou not know that thou wast mortal? why then did not acquaint
thy self with death? thou knew all must dye, why did not consider of it,
and among the rest of thy own death? did not believe God when he said, Dust
thou art, and unto dust thou shall return? Heb. 9.27.
or when he says, It Is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after death the
judgment: and when he told thee, that all flesh is grass, and the flower
thereof as the flower of the field? But if thou had not believed God, could
not believe thy own eyes and ears? do not daily see younger and stronger than
thee go before thee? do not hear of many round about thee stricken by death?
many suddenly, many by a violent death, and many by diseases? Do not remember
a hundred thousand slain in London in one year? two or three hundred thousand
in Ireland in a few weeks bloodily Massacred? have thou not many Lectures of
mortality read to thee, many Monitors of mortality within thee? does not the
dimness of thy eyes mind thee, the very Spectacles thou look through tell
thee of the decays in Nature; and can expect greater warning? or have any
more considerable work to do than to provide for death? and is death yet a
stranger? have thou not visited many a sick bed, and been with many a departing
soul, and received their last breath into thy bosom, and yet have not
sufficient warning? God never engaged to give thee so much; thou art his listed
soldier, and have taken press-money, and thou art engaged to be in a continual
readiness; yet God has given thee many a particular warning to prepare for
death: thou have many a time looked death in the face, and God has often
plucked thee by the shoulders, and showed thee grim death before thee; and thou
have several times received the sentence of death within thee, and God has in
effect said to thee, Set thy house in order, for thou must dye; nay not only
so, but God has employed thee to warn others, yet he has forborne thee above
sixty years, and every year given thee many warnings, and what would thou
have more? and yet art unacquainted with thy main work? What if he had taken
thee hence thirty or forty years ago, as he did many that were companions with
thee in vanity, what had been thy condition, that yet pretendest thou art not
ready? and what hopes is there of thee, if God spare thee another year, that
thou will bring forth better fruit? is old age the best and fittest for
repentance, and preparation to dye? when thou will find enough to do to wrestle
with pains and bodily distempers? would a Captain take it for a sufficient
excuse, if a Soldier that is by engagement to be ready at an hours warning,
and should give him a week, a month, a years time to make ready, and at the end
of that time he should plead, his Arms are not fixed, nor other necessaries
provided; and if the Captain give him another year, and at the end thereof he
should plead the same excuse, would this be taken for a good excuse? yet this
excuse has been in thy mouth many years together, and it is doubt if God yet
lengthen thy days and give thee more years, it will be the same. Has not
death entered into thy habitation? has it not taken away thy parents, thy
loving wife, thy dear children, and other of thy near relations? and did not
yet lay it to heart? wast thou no wiser than fatted beasts, that are taken away
one after another to the Shambles, and those that remain are senseless of the
danger, neither consider their turn is coming? yea has not death thrown many a
dart at thee, and sometimes wounded thee in the head, sometimes in thy bowels,
and yet do not consider that he has a dart will reach thy heart? Yea
sometimes thou have thought thou have had thy deaths wound, and yet wilt take
no warning to get on thy Armor? does not the pains, the aches, the distempers
of thy body, under which thou daily groanest, bid thee prepare for thy
winding sheet? does not news ring daily in thy ear, this and that friend,
relation, or neighbor is dead, and ere long others will say of thee, he is
dead also? have thou not interred many a dead corpse, and preached may a Funeral
Sermon, and given many an exhortation to the living to prepare for death, and
comforted many that have lost their friends by death, and wast never yet
satisfied that thou wast mortal, and must dye also? did thou think thy self
only exempted from the common lot of all men; or that God would bring thee to
Heaven another way? or could thou wish thou were immortal and should live
on earth to Eternity? art thou willing to take the Earth for Heaven, and the
creature for God, and the happiness thou meetst with here for Heavens glory?
have enough to satisfy thee here below, and desire no more? if not, why
would not dye and come to happiness? if the earth be more desirable to thee
one year, why not twenty, and why not to eternity? if God should bid thee
choose thy time, and appoint it thy self, what time would thou require? happily
Methusalems days; well, but these would expire, and death at the end would be
as bitter as now it is. If death were the road to Hell as it is to the wicked,
thou might well startle at it: And I have wondered at those of them that have
been so prodigal of their lives, when Life is the only preservative out of
Hell. Or if thy case were that of the beasts, and thou were to be reduced unto
the horrid estate of nothing, death might make thee shrug, but when thou
believe that death to thee will be an entrance into glory, an outlet to
misery, and an inlet to happiness, and the same road that Christ and all the
glorified Saints have gone to Heaven in, how can this be reconciled with thy
fears? Have thou had so many discourses of death, and with death, and do
believe that the sting is taken out by Christ, and do yet run from this
Serpent, and take him for an enemy that is but thy Fathers Messenger, sent for
thy good? This must needs be thy sin, and thy folly, and does too evidently
bespeak thy Infidelity, or the weakness of thy Faith. Thou have comforted
others at the last gasp, and prayed with them; and for them, thou have
strengthened the weak hands, and feeble knees, and now do faint under the
same burden? But had thou had more mortifying Meditations of death, and with
the Apostle had learned to dye daily, death would not have been so terrible a
Bugbear to thee as now it seems: did thou once a day look him in the face, by
a serious meditation, and by a believing expectation, he would not look so grim
and terrible. Bears and Tigers are not so terrible to those that are their
keepers, and acquainted with them, as to others. The Lion in the Fable was at
first sight a terror to the Fox, but time much allayed his fear: the more thou
beholdest death, the less deformed, yea the more lovely he does appear: death
will be no excepter of persons; the rich and poor, high and low, whether they
will or no must dance in this Ring; when God commands, he must and will strike:
death is written upon thy cradle, and thou wast rockt upon the mouth of the
grave, and ever since no day has been sure to thee, but it might have been thy
dying day: it is not long since thou did bewail the death of thy Parents, and
it is not long before thy children will bewail thine; one generation comes and
another goes, and the latter treads out the steps of the former: we trod out
the steps of our predecessors, and our posterity will do as much for us. The
world is but a Tent to abide in for a time, an Inn to tarry in a night, a
Lodging place for a wayfaring man, a baiting-place in a Journey: Oh the folly
of most men, that take it for their Inheritance, and look for no more; but to
the Godly it is no continuing city, no abiding place, neither indeed worthy our
love. Were the world as the garden of Eden, full of delights and pleasures,
thou had something to say for it, and yet the worm of time would eat out the
very heart of it, the shortness of the continuance would spoil the sport. Many
dote on beauty, but none but the blind will fall in love with deformity it
self. The world is a Bochim, a place of Lamentation, and who falls in love with
sorrow? it is a Golgotha, a place of dead men's skuls, and who but mad men
converse among the Tombs? It Is a pesthouse, an infected, and an infecting
place, where most we converse with are infectious: it is a prison, a place of
hardship, where the soul has not liberty to act according to its nature: it is
a place of Egyptian bondage and slavery, where there is little but moiling,
toyling, working, caring, from morning till night, for a poor living, wherein
we are so chained to our Oars, that we have scarce time to eat our meat; and
what madness is it over eagerly to desire such a life, and to quarrel those
that ease us of our burden, and put an end to our labors? Here thou live
under continual pains, aches, griefs, and troubles, sorrows, dangers and
temptations, and what not; and is any poor prisoner lying in his fetters, or
Gally-slave chained to his oars, unwilling of his liberty? nay would they not
endure a little pain for their liberty? and is there but a little pain between
thee and eternal happiness, and do stick at that, when wicked men endure as
much in the road to Hell? do thou prize glory at so low a rate? will thou
suffer pains and labor, and cark and care for worldly vanities, and will thou
suffer nothing to enjoy bliss and happiness? the Physician cures thee not
without pain, thou take bitter pills and unsavory potions, when Sugared with
the hopes of Health; thou would suffer the Surgeon to dress thy sores though
he hurt thee, and if need require to cut, lance the flesh, yea to cut off a
limb or joint to save the rest; which is greater pain than many feel even in
the pangs of death, and yet thou must pay them for their pains, and shall only
the physician Death, which will cure thee of all thy pain and misery, be
disrespected, and abhorred, and looked upon as the worst of enemies, and all
because he puts thee to a little pain, which ends in eternal glory; when many
times the pains in dying is not so much as the raging pain of an aching tooth?
but imagine it to be the worst thou can, what proportion does it bear to the
succeeding joy? not so much as is between a Flea-biting and an earthly Crown,
and who would not endure much more for a Kingdom? what pain would thou endure
for an hour, to be freed from the Stone or Gout all thy life, if thou were
under the racking pain of it? or what pain would a poor man endure one day to
have a Knights or Lords estate at night? Oh death, if thy pangs be grievous,
they are but short, but what are the pains of Hell, which must be endured by
those that deny their Redeemer for Life's sake? If thy Supper be sharp, thy rest
will be sweet: this consideration made death it self welcome to the Martyrs; who
for the joy that was set before them, endured the cross and despised the shame,
and now are set down with Christ in his Kingdom of glory: Torments and tortures
to them were Jocularia, matters of sport: The soul that sees the Crown, heeds
not the weight of the Cross; and were there no other way to Heaven, but by the
gates, nay through the flames of Hell, the believing soul would through. Luther
would rather be with God in Hell, than without him in Heaven; but much more
would they go through the gates of death: what though the passage be dark, a
believer by the perspective of Faith can see light at the other end. A Soldier
that fights but for a temporary reward, yet with what violence does he press
through the thickest of his enemies, and carries his life in his hand, and all
for a thing of naught called Honor; and does not a crown of glory shine as
bright in thy eye, as popular applause does in his? do thou believe eternal
glory is offered to thee, and that thou may have it for the suffering a
little pain, and do thou stick at the price, and let God bestow his favors
where he pleases, thou will not have Heaven at so dear a rate? thou art well
worthy then to lose it. If these outward enjoyments will give thee content,
then the Atheist, the Epicure, the beastly belly-God, the Drunkard, the
Adulterer, has more pleasure than thee; the beast of the field, the fouls of
the air, the fish in the sea, that have neither carking care, nor fretting
fear, and many of them free from labors and pains, are in a happier condition
than poor Man is, if this be his all, and Believers then are of all men the
most miserable. If this be the sum of thy hopes, why do thou fast, and pray,
and deny thy self these carnal pleasures which others take? if their reward
will give thee content, why do not swear with the Swearer, and drink with the
Drunkard, and debauch thy self with the Adulterer? if thy portion and theirs be
alike, why do not run into the same excess of riot with them? Psalm. 58.11.
But there is a reward for the righteous, surely there is a God that judges
the earth; and art thou afraid to receive the righteous man's reward? will thou
after all thy profession content thy self with the Epicures portion, and lose
all the pains thou have taken in Heavens way? let them be loath to dye that are
loath to be with Christ, or loath to be happy. Is God willing to glorify thee,
and art not thou willing to be glorified? is he willing to bestow Heaven upon
thee, and art thou unwilling to take it, because it is up Hill? take heed lest
for murmuring at the terms, God swears thou shall never enter into his rest;
as he resolved those that made light of his Supper should never taste of it.
Mat. 22.8.
If thou make light of Christ and glory, so as to put them into the one end of
the Scales, and a little pain in the other, and make this weigh down all the
rest, Christ will make as light of thee, and resolve thou shall never have him:
if thou art unwilling to leave. Earth for Heaven, and the Creature for God, and
to enter the purchased Inheritance in the way he has appointed, God may justly
give thee thy. Portion elsewhere. It Is the Devils grand design to keep thee
from God, from Christ, from Glory, and art thou as willing as he to stay
thence? thou will do him the greatest courtesy, and thy self the greatest
mischief imaginable. O my Soul, look well about thee, Heaven and Hell are
before thee, if thou like not Heaven upon the offered terms, Hell is like to be
thy portion: those that murmured at the land of Canaan by reason of some
difficulty in the way, perished in the Wilderness. The way to Heaven and Hell,
is both by the Gates of Death; if thou give up thy life to Gods dispose, Heaven
will be thine; if not, Hell is thy reward. Oh my God, I believe, help my
unbelief; I know I must dye, I know it is my duty to dye for thee if thou
requirest; thou gave me my life, and have most reason to dispose of it; Lord
my Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak, I cannot stand by my own Strength,
Lord I can do all things through thee that strengthenest me; let my resolves be
for Heaven, which way soever thou command me to come to thee, though through
a Sea of Blood, or in a fiery Chariot; let me glorify thee by my Life and by
my Death, that I may be glorified by thee after my Death.

MEDITAT. III. God determines every ones Death, with the Time and Manner of it.
O My Soul, art thou afraid of a sudden Death? why no Death is sudden to a
prepared man: but it is a violent Death thou fear, to fall into the hands of
the cruel, into the hand of thy blood-thirsty Enemies: but consider, who it is
that appoints Death; is it not the great God that gives life? and is there any
but he that can take it away? can any act without him, when they cannot breathe
without him? is it not he that kills and makes alive, and brings to the Gates
of Death and back again? is it not he without whose Providence a Sparrow cannot
fall to the ground, by whom all the hairs of thy head are numbered? As thy life
is not put into thy own hands, to live while thou listest, and to dye when thou
please, no more is it into thy enemies hands, to take it away when their
pleasure is; but in the hand of thy merciful Father, who best knows when thy
work is done, and when thou art ripe for glory. It Is true, he uses
Instruments, sometimes one, and sometimes another, but these instruments cannot
go one link beyond their commission, and these are of his own chooseing;
sometimes inanimate creatures must do his Will, and prove his Executioners;
thus the waters must drown the old world thus the Red Sea must overwhelm proud
Pharaoh and his Host, thus the fire must burn up Sodom and Gomorrah and the
Cities adjacent; thus the Earth must swallow up Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and
their company; sometimes bruit Beasts, 2 King 2.24.
thus the two she-Bears that killed forty two Children that mocked the Prophet;
2 King 17.25, 26.
thus he destroyed those that feared him not with Lions; yea sometimes very
Insects are his Executioners; thus he plagued Pharaoh and his people, and many
others; Herod was devoured of Worms, and many of Lice: and the least of
creatures if animated by him can stop the breath of the proudest Tyrant; and
the strongest and most potent Prince without him can do nothing. The Devil
himself cannot touch one of Jobs Cattle without his leave; the fire cannot burn
the three children, nor the Lions devour Daniel, having no Commission from him:
A world of Arians could not destroy Athanasius, nor a world of Papists Luther
and Calvin. God, as he has appointed all men to dye, so he has determined by
what death, the time when, and the manner how, and the instruments by whom, and
every circumstance belonging to it. If he pleased he can make five of his
people put a hundred to flight, Lev. 26.8.
and a hundred chase ten thousand; Isa. 69.1.
his hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that he
cannot hear. I know in our Creation we were by our composition made subject to
death, but by his blessing, had we not sinned, we had not dyed; for sin brought
death into the world, but when the Fall came, man had not only an aptitude to a
dissolution, but an irrevocable decree past upon him, and dye he must; and ever
since nature of it self tends to ruin, and our bodies like an old house must
yield to time, and fall in pieces. God I know has power in his hand to
maintain life longer, or take it away sooner, and he acts accordingly; he
sets one a longer Lease than another, as he thinks fit: The Fathers of the
first ages lived long, some of them near to a thousand years; in our age few
reach a hundred, and there are but few that live so long as Nature might spin
out their lives, but either by some disease, some accident, some violence or
other offered to Nature, their lives are cut off. Man's body being compounded of
the four elements, and of contrary qualities, heat and cold, drought and
moisture, except God by his special blessing keep these in peace, they will
strive for the predominancy, and endanger the compositum. When sin entered into
the world, Romans 5.12.
death entered by sin, and so death passed over all, for as much as all have
sinned; and Christ in the work of Redemption has not freed us from the first,
but the second death; not from the stroke, but the sting of death: Christ died
not to deliver us from hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, sickness and
diseases, but so far forth as is for our good; and God himself, and not we our
selves, must be Judge in the case: Christ himself suffered these miseries, and
dyed by the hand of cruelty, and greater than the Master is the Servant cannot
be; and man is as liable to this as before Christ's suffering. Nature thou see
disposes thee to death, and God has determined the time when, for God is the
God of Nature; and disposes it as he sees good. Well may thou expect death
as the wages of sin, and every day does expose thee to some danger or other,
which may take away thy life. Death comes irresistible, like an armed man; thou
have no time certain, no time promised, no breath but what God puts into thee,
and therefore thou should daily expect death; let it come in what shape it
will, or let God send by what messenger he pleases, thou should bid him
welcome, thou should stoop willingly under the stroke, for it is but death
still, thou can not avoid it, therefore make a virtue of necessity. Seeing
thy Lamp must out, it is not much, whether it be put out, or burn out, whether
the tree rot down, or be cut down, whether the Rose wither, or be gathered; if
the later, it is like to be put into the bosom; all is but death, and a death
thou owe, and a death thou must pay; thy natural constitution adapts thee to
it, and God by his decree designs thee to it, and it is thy duty to submit, and
no reason to the contrary, for it is thy interest. The potion thou art to drink
is prescribed and mixed by the wise Physician; the Cup thou art to drink comes
out of thy Fathers hand, and no more, nay not so bitter as he gave his only
Son, and he drank up the very dregs of it for thy sake; yea, and there is Sugar
put into thine to sweeten it. All the circumstances of thy death are determined
by him, and none can add one dram to the potion he has mixed for thee, and yet
do thou grumble that it is too much, or too bitter? do thou think thy self
wise enough to alter Gods Eternal Decrees, who has determined thy days? the
number of thy months are with him, Job 14.5.
he has appointed thy bounds that thou can not pass. Or will thou quarrel
the messenger he sends, and like the foolish dog bite the stone, and let the
passenger that threw it go free? is there evil in the city, (...) 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it? without his leave a dog cannot move his tongue
against thee, nor an enemy his finger: whoever be the Instrument God is the
Author; Isa. 10.5.
if the King of Assyria be the rod, God is he that holds the rod, and when the
Child is reformed the rod will be burnt. David could see God even in Shimei's
cursing; 2 Samuel 16.10.
The Lord (says he) has bid him curse David. God can, yea he will if it be
good for thee, preserve thee from a violent death, and he will preserve thee
till the appointed time come; they cannot antedate his Decree; thou shall not
be cut down sooner, neither can thou stay longer than he has appointed: and
do call God thy God, and thy Father, and yet resist his will? do pray, Thy
will be done, and yet when he makes known his will do thou oppose it? but
happily thou may say, How shall I know it is his will, that I shall lay down my
life? why, when thou can not save it without denying Christ, or his Truth, or
committing sin; for he that commiteth sin, is of the Devil; and in such a case
think not to wrestle out of the hands of God; sin will find thee out, and never
any man set himself against God and prospered: There is no resisting of God,
when thou can not breathe without him; all diseases are his Executioners, and
wicked men can do no more; to the one or the other of them thou must submit,
and not much matter to which; to neither of them thou should submit willingly,
but to God in both: thou should seek all lawful means against the one and the
other, but nothing but what is lawful: when God denies help, go not to the
Devil for a medicine; to submit to death when thou can not help it is no
praiseworthy thing: when thou can save thy life by unlawful means, and wilt
not, this shall not be unrewarded, a Crown of glory will be given thee. He
deserves death that in time of danger deserteth his Captain, and falls off to
the enemy. Keep thy life thou can not without his leave, and if thou lay it
down for his sake, it is not the way to lose it but to save it, to hide it with
God in Christ; and does not Reason tell thee, he is fittest to dispose of thy
life that gave it? he is too righteous to do thee wrong, and too gracious to do
thee hurt; never was indulgent Father, or tenderhearted. Mother more careful
of their only Child, than God will be of thee; thou shall not lie longer in the
furnace than need is: he afflicts not willingly nor grieves the children of
men: thou art but like a sleepy child, that wrests, and wrings, and cries, and
will not be undrest; and thy Father must carry thee to bed against thy will;
and what harm has he done then? when thou awakest thou will thank him for it.
When Corn is ripe it should be cut, and who is fitter to know when it is ripe
than the great Husbandman? when thy work is done thou may go to thy rest, and
who better knows than the Lord of the Vineyard? if that he take thee off in the
midst of thy day, and give thee the wages for the whole day, what cause is
there of complaint? Nay, should he give thee the whole wages for one hours
work? if God call thee off, it is not to stop thy wages, or to blame thee for
working no longer. Thou must submit to the stroke of death, and do it
willingly, whether it be natural or violent; for consider, God has most right
to thy life, and is the fittest person to determine of the Manner of thy death:
He gives men Laws to live by, and yet many will take their own wills and ways,
to their own destruction; he gives men Laws to dye by, look that thou follow
not thy own will to perdition; thou art but a Tenant at will, if thou resign
not at thy Landlords will, it will be the worse for thee; he will never provide
a better house, but a Prison for thee; he is the fittest to determine when to
pull down these houses of clay, and who shall do it; and if thou willingly
submit, he will raise thee up a Spiritual building, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the Heavens. Is it not unreasonble for thee to think to
keep the keys of life and death at thy girdle? why should thou think to
dispose of thy death any more than of thy birth, or of thy latter end more than
thou did of thy beginning? it was through him that thou wast born, and at his
dispose shall be thy death: if thou would wring this key out of Gods hand,
into whose hands would thou commit it? is any in the world fitter for it,
than he is? nay, can any other in the world preserve thy life? thou art the
clay and he is the Potter, and whose is the Pot but the pot-makers? and who may
better dash it with his foot than he? may he not dispose of his own as he
pleases? he is best able to maintain life, and best able to take it away; for
if he tread upon thee, he leaves thee dead behind him: if he withold thy
breath, thou returnest to thy dust, and all thy thoughts perish. Does not he
rule in Heaven and in the Earth? does not he direct the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars in their courses? does not he cause Summer and Winter, Cold and Heat,
Seed-time and Harvest, Day and Night, and thou letst him alone with these? and
why? because thou can not take this work out of his hand: he makes the Grass
to grow for the Cattle, and Corn for the service of Man; he waters the earth
with his Clouds, and causes the Springs to run among the Hills; why do not
take these out of his hand? or must he rule all the rest, and only thee must be
excepted? has he more wisdom than thou have in all other things, only in the
disposing of thy life thou outwittest him? why, art thou not his creature as
well as others? and how came thou from under his dominion? does it beseem a
rational man, much less a gracious man, to argue at this rate, and except
himself from Gods dispose, and argue himself from under his tuition, and think
himself to be an independent creature, fit to stand upon his own legs? Does not
he know best when his work is done, and when his Roses are ripe, and when his
Children are fit for glory? or is any other fitter to determine these
controversies? or would thou dispose of thy own life? if so, would have all
men have the same privilege? then Heaven, especially Hell, would be long
empty; for what wicked man would leave the Earth to go thither? and God must be
beholding to his people to come to him: how should Judgment and Justice then be
executed? the sword of Justice would rust in the Scabbard; for what offender
would lay down his head upon the block willingly? How would the Earth then be
filled with violence, and all flagitious crimes? if thou would not have
others have the like privilege, then thou art partial; if thou would, thou
art foolish: but if it were at thy own dispose, how could maintain it? Thou
could neither provide thy self food, neither could thy life be preserved by
food without Gods blessing; neither could thou preserve it from the hands of
violence; and therefore it is best leave it in his hands where it is: or would
have God preserve thy life as long as thou please, and till thou think it is
fit to dye? why do think thou can put such a clause into the Covenant? or
do think it is fit it should be put in? would thou have God alter his
eternal decrees for thy sake? Oh the folly of such a conceit! the pride of such
a desire! thou think the life of the bruit beast should be at thy dispose,
to save or to destroy, as thou think fit, and yet thou think thou do
them no wrong if thou kill them; and why? because thou call them thy own:
but has not God a better right to thee than thou have to them? He gave thee
thy life, but thou gave them not the life thou take. But it is a violent
death thou fear, and would not fall into thine enemies hands; but if God
make them his Messengers, they are thy Friends, though unwillingly, and promote
thy glory; they cannot act without him, and therefore look not at the rod, but
at the hand that holds it. The King of Assyria was sent as a scourge by God to
do his work, Isa. 10.7.15.
to reform his people; Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think
so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few, etc.
Shall the Ax boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or shall the Saw
magnify it self against him that shakes it, etc? All are but instruments in
the hand of God, they do his will, and what he appoints; as Jehu cut off Ahabs
family at his command, yet God punished him for it, because he aimed not at Gods
glory in the work, but at his own greatness: wicked men can neither maintain
their own lives, when God calls for them, neither can they take away thine by
their own power; for they can have no power but what they have from above; and
if thou see Gods hand and seal to their Commission, murmur not at it, for it is
not want of love to thee that made God set them on work, nor any love to them
that made him employ them; but it was to fill up the measure of their sins,
that they may be ripe for Judgment, and to fill up the measure of thy
sufferings, that thou may be ripe for glory. The same love that sent Christ
into the world to dye for thee, is exercised in sending thee to dye for him; in
the one he prepared a King dom for thee, in the other he calls thee out of the
world to enjoy it. By Christ's death there is a possession purchased, and by thy
death thou art put into the possession of it; and what hurt is in all this?
there is thy life, yea Eternal Life, put into the lease of it. Never fear
miscarrying, i^ thou will be ruled by God: for if thou should, either it
will be want of power, want of wisdom, or want of love tha^ shall occasion it;
not want of power, for the Lord is El-shaddai, God alsufficient able to remove
all the rubs that lie in the way; thy enemies they cannot hurt thee without
him, for they cannot breathe without him, nor move a finger but by his
assistance: Neither can they out-wit him for he is Omniscient, the only wise
God, Isa. 9.6.
the everlasting counselor, the Prince of peace; who knows how to deliver his
people, and to reserve the wicked for the day of wrath: they cannot hide their
counsels from him, for he is every where present; if they dig down to Hell, he
is there also, and can countermine them; he has wrought wonderfully for the
preservation of his people; witness Noah, Daniel, the three children, Jonah,
Israel in Egypt, the Jews in Hamans time, Peter, Athanasius, Luther, Calvin,
England; and many others, which he has preserved against numerous enemies. And
for love never any has discovered more than Christ has done for his people,
and yet can not trust Him with the dispose of thy life, that lost his own for
the good of thy soul? Thou can trust thy life in a narrow Ship upon the
raging Sea, for gain, if thou think thou have a skilful careful Pilot, and
dare not sail in those narrow seas to the port of Rest, and Haven of
happiness, when God himself is thy Pilot, and steers thy Ship, when never any
miscarried in the voyage? Thou can trust a Lawyer with thy Estate, if thou
think him honest and able, and do mistrust the everlasting Counselor with
thy eternal Estate, who neither can deceive, or be deceived? Thou would trust
a skilful Physician with thy Body, and take bitter pills and unsavory potions
if he prescribe them, and dare thou not put thy life into the hands of the
Physician of Souls, in comparison of whom all others are Physicians of no
value, because he prescribes a little unpleasing Physic, though no bitterer
than needful? If thou mistrust him with thy life, either it is because thou
fear he will deceive thee, or may be deceived; but this intrenches upon his
wisdom or fidelity; it is better for a child be under his Fathers protection
than his own; much more for thee to be under Gods tuition, than at thy own
dispose: he never yet betrayed his trust, neither can any pluck thee out of
Gods hands; John 10.28. Romans 8.21.
he tells thee, all things shall work together for thy good, if thou love God,
and then why not death? why not a violent death? has he not told thee, Heb.
13.5. Mat. 16.18
he will never leave thee nor forsake thee; and that the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against thee? and dare not take his word? was he ever known to
falsify it? If life be good thou shall have it, if not, why wilt desire it? But
art afraid lest he should deal with thee when he takes thee hence, as the
Prophet did with the Syrians, lead thee to Samaria, when thou think thou art
going to Dothan; lest thou should go to Hell with hopes of Heaven in thy
mouth? Never fear, if thou carry thy Evidences for Heaven with thee, he will
never disinherit thee. Christ will not lose the purchase of his blood, and thou
shall not lose what he has purchased for thee. If it be good for thee to dye,
why would thou live? A child cannot choose so well for himself as his Father
can; and God knows better than thee what is belt: Many are loath to open a Vein,
and yet in some cases it is best; yea to cut off a Limb may be necessary, though
painful; the sensual faculty here must be ruled by the rational: that is not
always best that is most pleasing to the Appetite. If thou leave it to God
what death thou shall dye, he will make the best choice for thee, he will lay
no more upon thee than he gives thee strength to bear; and through Christ
assisting thee thou may do all things. Trust not in thy own strength, lest
with Pembleton thou failest in the performance. Mat. 9.17.
God will not put new wine into old bottles, nor the heaviest burden upon the
weakest Horse; the strongest if he leave them are weak, and the weakest in his
strength are strong: if thy heart be upright, God will either free thee from
thy suffering, or support thee under it; he will fit the back before he lay on
the burden: if thou dye by a violent death, so do those many thousands that are
slain with the Sword, and yet those that are slain by the sword are better than
they that dye of famine; Lam. 4.9.
many a wounded man that yet escapes with his life, suffers more pains of his
wounds than if he had been slain outright. If thou refuse a few pangs for
Heaven, thou art not worthy of it: yea a natural death may be as painful, many
times is more painful than a violent death; but the reward of the latter if it
be for God, may clearly turn the scales, and make it more eligible. Thy
enemies, as before was said, are not Masters of thy life, neither is it in
their power to take it away; for they have no power but what they receive from
Heaven: it is he that disposes of Angels and Men, of Crowns and Kingdoms, of
Heaven and Earth, that must dispose of thy life, and is not he the fittest for
the work? is there any in the world can do it better? is there any in the world
thou had rather trust with thy life? is not he the fittest to send for thee
out of the world, that sent Christ into the world for thy sake? and will thou
think thy life too dear for him, that thought not the pangs of death, nor the
pains of Hell too much to suffer for thee? has he suffered so much to purchase
glory, and will thou suffer nothing to enjoy it? his suffering was a thousand
times more for thee, than thine is like to be for him, or rather for thy self;
for thou had the benefit of his death, but he will have none by thine: has
he provided a Mansion, and wilt not leave thy Cottage to go to it? Death it is
true is surly and grim, but it is thy Fathers Messenger, and must do the message
he gives in charge; and it is an Ambassador from the great King, and Ambassadors
are entertained not for their own, but their Masters sake, and death may be
welcomed for the message sake he brings: He comes to tell thee, that thy work
is done, and thy wages is ready, thy Warfare is accomplished, the Field is won,
and the Crown is thine; Mat. 25.21.
that thou have been faithful over a little, and now must be Ruler over much,
and must enter into thy Masters joy: That the Bridegroom is come, and thou must
go in with him to the wedding; that thou have been faithful to the death, Rev.
2.10.
and now shall have a crown of life: And is not such a message welcome, and the
Messenger that brings it? will any wise man rather stay in Egypt, than go
through the red Sea at Gods command, or endure a few Wilderness troubles to
come to Canaan, yea through a sea of blood to a Haven of rest? If the way be
troublesome, the Journeys end is pleasant; if thou art stung with fiery
Serpents, there is a brazen Serpent to hea^ thee of thy wounds, and to draw ou^
the venom. If the sea be rough, the Pilo^ is skilful. If thy disease be
dangerous this Physician is skilful; if thy wounds be deep, this Surgeon will
cure thee, yea by Killing will cure thee of all distempers. Were Death a
pursevant from Hell, as to many he is, well might thou fear; but being sent
from Heaven, and coming in thy Fathers Livery, and his ugly Vizor taken off, he
is more amiable. If thou have part in the first resurrection, the second death
on thee shall have, no power. Death it is true, Rev. 20.6.
puts a cup of trembling into the hands of unrepentant sinners, even a cup of
the Lords indignation filled to the brim, which they must drink up to the very
dregs, and Eternity will be little enough to see the bottom; but what is this
to thee? thy part is sugered, and it is but one sup, swallowed in a few moments
of time; to them it proves the first and second death, to thee but a Sleep: Our
friend Lazarus sleeps. Those sparks which wicked men now on earth kindle by
their lusts, will there be blown up into an everlasting flame; Mar. 9.44.
the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out. That death that puffs out
the candle of the wicked, only snuffs the other that it may burn brighter. The
godly while they are in the world act a Comedy, which begins bad but ends well;
the wicked act a Tragedy, which always ends in blood and confusion; death sets
an end to both, to the godliess miseries, and the wickeds happiness. Rev. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord; even so says the Spirit, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them: And if this be the only
way to blessedness, why art thou afraid to walk in it? death will be the
Funeral of thy Vices, and the Resurrection of thy Graces: here Joseph's feet
shall no longer be hurt in the stocks, the iron shall no longer enter into his
soul; neither shall Jeremy lie here in the miry dungeon, nor Daniel in the den
of Lions, nor Jonah in the Whales belly: why will thou not be uncloathed, that
thou may be clothed upon, and surrender this house of clay that thou may
have a better? Thou art like an ill debtor, that bortowest with prayers,
keep with thanks, and partest with it with repining: Thy body is but lent
thee, yet art thou loath to restore what was borrowed. Well, dye thou must, and
whether it be fit that God or thee should determine of the Time and the Manner
of thy death, is the question in hand; and is this become a controversy? and
wilt dispute thy right? Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at thy folly: if thou will not yield him his due, he will ere long distrain for it, and try the Title
at Judgment, where thou art like to be cast, and thrown into Prison, till thou
have paid the utmost farthing: for if thou deny to glorify God by thy death,
he will glorify himself by thy destruction. Oh my God, I yield, I surrender, I
submit, I put my life into thy hands, send for me when and by whomsoever thou will; My spirit is willing though my flesh is weak: I dare not trust my own
deceitful heart, lest it betray me; but thee I dare trust, Lord strengthen my
Faith, confirm my Assurance, clear up my Evidences for Heaven, stand by me in
all my Sufferings, and lay no more upon me than thou give me strength to
bear; then call me and I will run after thee, though it be by the very Gates of
Hell; I can do all all things through Christ that strengthens me.

MEDITAT. IV. The Fear of Death is unsuitable to a Believer.
O My Soul, why art thou yet disquieted within me? why art thou cast down? why
do thou meditate terror; and all this when thou look Death in the face? Is
this amazement suitable for a Christian Soldier? is this the fruit of all thy
Preaching, Praying, Reading, Meditating, and thy other duties? is this the
result of all the pains thou have taken in Heavens way? Nay, has God set thee
to strengthen others against the fear of Death, to support the feeble hands,
and drooping hearts, and art thou thy self ready to faint under the burden? why
man rouse up thy self a little; did never see death before, that thou
tremblest at the apprehension? art thou fit to be a Captain of the Lords Host,
that art ready to fly at a shadow? If the Shepherd be terrified, well may the
Sheep be affrighted; if the apprehension of Death be so amazing, what will the
feeling of it be? well may thou say with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I
flee? Neh. 6.11.
Is not death bitter enough, but thou must make it bitterer? and do faint
before thou feel the burden? where is thy wonted courage? where are now thy
arguments where with thou wast wont to blunt the Dart of Death, and to uphold
sinking Souls under the stroke of Death? Death has been often in thy eye, in
thy thoughts, in thy Meditations, and then it was not so terrible, and now with
Agag thou thoughtest the bitterness of Death was past, and upon a new
Apprehension o^ it does it seem so formidable? Call to mind thy former
resolutions to suffer for Christ, yea thy Covenant engagement to him, wherein
thou devotedst thy sell and that thine was to him, and at his dispose and do
now repent of thy repentings: death is not so great an Enemy as tho^ supposest,
nor so terrible as he seems; pluc^ off his vizor and look him in the face and
he will appear both thy Friend and thy Physician, to cure thee of all thy
maladies: thou have not now a day free from sin and sorrow; for where the on^
is the other will be also, as the shadow will follow the substance, or rather
as the effect follows the cause; neither art thou like to have, till death sets
thee at liberty: thou art now a slave or servant, but the year of Jubilee is
coming, when thou will be free: Job 3.17, 18, 19.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest; there
the Prisoners rest together, and they hear not the voice of the Oppressor; the
small and the great are there, and the Servant is free from his Master: Death
is sent by God as Moses into Egypt, to bring thee out of Egyptian bondage to
the promised Land; and what if thy bondage like theirs be a little increased at
the present, will thou murmur like them, when thy deliverance is in sight?
though thou must through the red Sea, the way is safe if God go before thee;
and if the way be dark, he will be a Pillar of fire to give thee light; thou
need not fear losing thy way that have such a guide: Here thou can not
serve God but the Egyptians are ready to stone thee, but get but over this
bridge of Death, over this Jordan, and thou may serve him without distraction
or disturbance: here thou can hardly have a sight of God, but Death will
bring thee to speak with him face to face, to know him as he is, and to enjoy
him as thy own. In this Wilderness thou meetest with many troubles, many wants,
sometimes of meat, sometimes of drink, sometimes of clothes and other
necessaries, but in Heaven there is no want, no need of creature comforts; for
what need the Pipe when we are at the Fountainhead? here are many troubles,
many enemies, fiery Serpents, but when over this Jordan these troubles vanish,
all thy fears hushed, and thy self out of the reach of danger; the Devil nor his
instruments cannot pursue thee beyond Death; here is thy promised Land, thy
purchased Inheritance, thy Mansionhouse, and can Death that puts thee in
possession be looked upon as thy Enemy? The thoughts of Death are many times
worse than Death it self; as the Picture of the Lion seems fiercer than the
Lion himself; Heb. 2.15.
but Christ died to free those that through the fear of Death were all their
life time subject to bondage. Oh the precious hours that should be spent in
solacing thy self with the thoughts of God, and the forethoughts of Glory, and
taking a Pisgah sight of the Heavenly Canaan! which now are fruitlesly spent
between hopes and fears, of our Journey thither: not but that preparation
should be made, but no desponding fears should discompose thee for the Journey.
The thoughts of Eternal bliss and the weight of Glory that is before thee,
should divert thy mind from all the pains and sorrows thou meetest with in thy
journey thither; as the hopes of the prize makes him that runs the race
overlook the foulness or roughness of the way, and the hopes of a reward makes
the Soldier hew his way through the thickest of his enemies. That time which
now is spent in sorrowful thoughts how thou should part with the world and
endure the pangs of death, would be better spent in trimming up thy Lamp,
getting Oil in thy Vessel, and adorning thy self with thy Wedding garment, and
in praising God that thinks thee worthy to suffer for him, and in consideration
that after a little pain thou shall enter into thy masters Joy, where there
shall be no more pain; and that this light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for thee a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. 2
Cor. 4.17.
Is this thy living by faith that thou talkest of? What can a coveteous
worlding do more, that has his portion in this life, than fear the time that
he shall lose it? what can the voluptuous Epicure do more, that at death shall
see an end of all his pleasure? Is this thy living by Faith? is this the fruit
of thy hope, and the evidences of thy love to God, and the other graces of the
Spirit? Does vain glory steel the Spirit of our Hectors, that look death in the
face undauntedly, only in hopes of Honor, and a surviveing Name? do the
Mahometans venture their lives, upon conceit that those that dye in the wars
shall undoubtedly go to Heaven, and there for ever have their will with
beautiful women, and all other sensual delights; and will not the Enjoyment of
God in glory work thee to a willingness to suffer what he would have thee
suffer? Is this thy professed obedience, when thou startest at hard and
difficult duties, and only scummest off the fat and sweet of duty, and leavest
self-denying duties undone? what do thou in this more than an Hypocrite, or a
carnal man can do? The Pharisees could fast, Mat. 6.1, 2.
and pray, and give Alms, and what do thou more? The Apostle tells believers,
that to them it is given not only to believe on Christ, Phil. 1.29.
but to suffer for his sake; and how will thou prove thy self a Believer, if
thou refuse to suffer? Would thou receive a Soldiers wages, and not do his
work? will thou list thy self, and indent with thy Captain that thou will not
fight? are all thy graces counterfeit? if not, why are they not reduced into
act? will the Sword in the scabbard secure thee? why do not finish thy course
with joy, that a Crown of life may be laid up for thee? must God save thee
whether thou will or no, and pluck thee hence by violence to receive thy
Reward; or if he will not, he may keep Heaven to himself for thee? Does thy
faith and thy other graces now stand thee in no stead? have thou no Oil when
the Bridegroom comes? or if thou have, do thou refuse to enter? to what end
then serves thy Lamp? what mattereth it for a Wedding Garment, if when thou art
invited to the Feast thou refusest to come? Have thou no Armor on when thou
art called to fight, and thy enemy is in the field? or will thou cowardly turn
thy back and fly, or suffer thy self to be captivated and inslaved? have thou
no Armor to defend thy heart? is no Cordial to keep thee from fainting, to be
found in God? no promise in his Word, which may be a foundation of comfort?
what then is the difference between thee and the Epicure? nay, his condition is
much better, he has something that he calls Pleasure to solace himself with.
Are these anxious thoughts and fears suitable to a Christian, to a Minister, to
one that has made Forty years profession of Religion? have thou in all this
time made no increase of thy Grace, no improvement of thy Talent? have not yet
learnt self-denial, which is the first lesson in the School of Christ, and is
it not yet taken out? have not yet attained the lowest measure of true grace?
to hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, and thy own Life for him, without
which thou can not be his disciple? Is it suitable for a child of God to turn
his back upon his Father when he calls him, and like guilty Adam hide himself?
is it suitable for the Spouse of Christ to deny to come when her Husband sends
for her? Art thou yet unresolved whether Christ or Life be the sweeter, whether
Heaven or Earth be the better, or whether the Creature or the Creator be to be
chosen? If so, never call thy self a Christian more, never dishonor Christ
more by thy profession. Was ever Heir afraid of receiving his Inheritance? yet
this is thy condition; thou rather choosest a miserable life, attended with
ears and fears, with griefs and sorrows, rather than to dye and come to
Christ. Thou have devoted thy self to him as a Spouse to her husband, and have
formerly gloried in thy choice, and art now afraid of the time when the
marriage shall be consummate, and thou shall be lodged in his bosom? if so,
it is no wonder if he give thee a bill of Divorce, and put thee away, and what
Condition art thou then in? where will thou find such another Match? nay, there
is no other in Heaven or Earth that can boot thy needs, pay thy debts and save
thy soul; the Angels themselves cannot do it. Esth. 1.10, etc.
If Vasti the Queen were put away for refusing to come at her Husbands call,
much more do thou deserve a Divorce if thou refuse to come at Christ's call.
If thou go to him, thou leavest a vain, sinful, miserable and treacherous
world, which has laid many a snare in thy way, and more will do if thou live
in it longer, and do grieve at parting, and put it upon the debate whether it
be best to go or no? and art ready to pass sentence in the Negative? art afraid
of being put above all fear and dread? and wilt not go to Heaven because the
way is not strewed with roses, or because it is a little up the hill? thou have
but one style to thy Fathers house; if thy Breakfast be bad, thy Dinner will
make amends: Are the suares which the Devil, the world and the flesh have laid
for thee, so strong, and thy Faith so weak, that thou art now leaving God, and
choosing something else for thy portion; and that thou art detained in this
Harlots arms, when thine own husband calls thee? Art thou willing to lose all
the pains thou have taken in Heavens way, rather than go one step more? have
ascended all the steps of Jacobs ladder but one, till thy head be in Heaven,
and art now returning down again, because it is a little more difficult than the
rest? will thou now take up with these things for thy portion, and art busily
seeking after content in them, in which thou could never find satisfaction in
thy life? have exercised so much self-denial for Christ, have thou forsaken
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brothers and Sisters, yea thy Estate in
the world, and exposed thy self to want and penury, to labor and travel, to
scoffs and scorns, yea to persecutions and trials, and now wilt break with
Christ for a trifle, and lose the reward of what thou have done? will thou now
prefer thy life before him that is Life it self? have thou bid so much for
Christ, and now do stick at the price? if thou now forsake him, all is lost
that thou have paid. But what cause has God given to forsake him? has he ever
failed of his word? has he imposed upon thee, or foisted in any condition in
the Covenant that was not mutually agreed upon? if not, what makes thee boggle
at it? if Religion were not good, why did thou profess it? if it be, why do
leave it? if Heaven be not worth what thou must pay for it, why did not
consider of it before? and if it be, why do stick at the rates? or do thou
think that God will amend thy bargain, and let thee have it at Cheaper rates?
If these be thy thoughts, thou art much mistaken; Mat. 13.45.
if thou will have the Pearl, thou must sell all to purchase it; it is thy self
and all thou have that is the price he sets upon Christ, and Heaven, and Glory:
If thou think him not worth it, thou may let him alone, and no harm done; but
assure thy self, there is no indenting with Christ; This I will do, and that I
will not; this sin I will leave, but not that: thou must not, like Naaman the
Assyrian, expect a toleration in any sin, or in the neglect of any duty. Well,
whatever thy thoughts be, God will not abate one farthing; Gal. 6.7.8.
If thou sowest to the flesh, thou will of the flesh reap corruption; if thou
sowest to the Spirit, thou will of the Spirit reap life everlasting: why
haltest thou between two opinions? 1 King. 18.21.
if the Lord be God, follow him; and if Baal be God, follow him. If God be
better than the world, follow him fully; and if the world be best, then pursue
it with all thy might; but consider well what thou do, for this will be
bitterness in the latter end. Have thou so long labored, and prayed, and ran,
and wrestled, for a prize that now seems not worth having? do thou now come
within sight of Heaven, and does thy heart fail thee? Have thou put thy hand to
the plow; and now look back? did thou begin in the Spirit, and wilt now
end in the flesh? will thou be like wicked men and Seducers, that grow worse
and worse? Has the world bribed thee, or the Devil stopped thy mouth? Take heed
thou make not Judas's purchase, or Demas's choice. If thou change thy master,
consider what is his wages as well as what is his work, and if this please
thee, go on. Do thou want nothing here to make thee happy, that thou art so
loath to away? well, let me tell thee, if thou miss of Christ, thou will want
nothing to make thee everlastingly miserable; if the world be all thou
expectest, then it is no wonder thou art so loath to leave it; for who can
willingly part with his only Happiness, and be stripped of all his desired
enjoyments? and not only so, but enter into everlasting misery, for so they
will do that have their portion in this life, and those that make the world
their God, or love any thing, though it be life it self, above Christ: It Is no
wonder that these fear the Pursevant that fetches them to execution, and drags
them to Hell. He that has the world for his All, will be loath to lose all at
one cast; these may look upon death as one that comes to torment them before
the time; death to those is like as Belshazzars handwriting was to him, a
terror and amazment; and there is nothing that is in the world can speak peace
to such a soul, if his conscience be awake. It Is not Lucretius his Epicurean
Rules, nor Anacreons wanton Odes, can then lull it asleep, or cease the barking
of it, or shift off the terror of death. A wounded Spirit who can bear, but one
that believes that death is but a gathering to his Fathers, a sweet sleep, a
going to Christ, and being with him; and that the body though laid in the grave
shall not be lost, but raised up again at the last day, and made like unto the
glorified body of Christ? How unsuitable is it for such to be terrifyed with
the apprehensions of it! but the thoughts of the Immortality, and the
Incorruptibility, and the Spirituality and Glory of the body at the
Resurrection, should drown the noise, silence the doubts and fears of the
danger that lies in the way, and the pains and pangs of death it self. The
pains of death to these are worse than being dead; and this is but a
flea-biting to the joy that follows; but to the wicked the pain of dying is
nothing in comparison of the consequences of death, and the tormenting pains of
the second death: for were Hell no worse than the pangs which dying men suffer,
it were not so formidable. Rev. ^.6. and 6.16.
In misery, men shall seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to
dye, and death shall flee from them; then will they say to the rocks and
mountains, fall on us and cover us, etc. It Is wonder how wicked men can eat,
and drink, and sleep, and all this while know they are in debt and danger; yea,
that there is a Sergeant ready to arrest them whenever the Creditor will, and
to cast them into prison, out of which they are never like to get: sure some
judiciary hardness is fallen upon them, that they are sleeping thus on the top
of the Mast, and playing securely before the mouth of the Lion, or before the
Cannons mouth, and are more insensible than brute Beasts of their danger
approaching; yea they hasten their death and misery by the intemperance of
their lives, and sacrifice not only their health but life also to Lust and
Drunkenness, to luxury and excess, and will not suffer Nature to spin out the
thread of their lives to the utmost extent, but put a period to it themselves,
and cut off the thread of their lives with their own hands; these men run
headlong to Hell; and wilfully upon death, which they had cause most of all to
fear and avoid. The apprehension of approaching death is not the same to those
men and to others, that believe that death will end all their miseries, and
land them into everlasting happiness; the same Judge absolveth the innocent,
and condemns the guilty; and those men have not the same apprehensions of him,
the one longs for his coming, the other fears it. It Is rather a wonder, that
the Saints that have assurance of their future glory, do not long for the time
of their dissolution, and seek to hasten it by some illegal way, than use any
indirect means to live when they are called to dye: I know the former is
unlawful, for we must keep our station, while God appoints us; and so is the
latter, for we must come off the Sentinel when he calls us: but it is more
natural to desire happiness than misery, and to use indirect means to procure
the former than the latter. We read in the primitive times, when many
Christians were to suffer, of a Woman and her children that were hasting to the
place, and being met by one of the persecutors, who demanded whither she went,
and why she made so much haste, she answered. She was a Christian, and hearing
many Christians were that day to suffer, she hasted with her children to suffer
with them, and feared lest she should come too late. Ignatius was afraid lest
the Prayers of the Church should prevent him of suffering for Christ, and of
his Crown of Martyrdom: These had not such fearful apprehensions of death as
thou seem to have. Sure those that look for perfection by death, should not
be afraid of it; and if these tabernacles of our bodies must down, what matter
is it whether they are taken down, or burnt down, seeing the materials both
ways will be preserved; the one turns them to dust, the other to ashes; and in
a little time they will moulder of themselves into dust. Death to the godly is
but a parting of two intimate friends, the Soul and the Body, for a time; and
both the one and the other will be gainers by the separation; the Soul goes
immediately to Heaven, and the Body lies in the grave for a season, and shall
thence be raised in unspeakable glory, and God will build it up again an
habitation for the soul, at his own proper cost and charges: Death to them is
but a Jail-deliver, where the soul that has been long a prisoner shall be set
at liberty; it is but the bodies sleep, and the Souls awaking; the bodies death
and the Souls resurrection; wherein the Soul shall be freed from all those
clogs which now presses it down, that it cannot mount up into those heavenly
Regions, and it shall live with God blessed for ever to eternity; and is this a
thing to be feared? Have not already had a sufficent time in the world, that
yet thou desire more? a thousand thousand have not lived so long, and yet
none of those in Heaven complain their time was too short upon Earth, or that
they came thither too soon; and it would be hard to persuade them to return
with a promise of all the Excellencies that the world affords. This is the
godly man's Purgatory, and should he not rather pray to be delivered out than
continued in it? it is his Hell, all the Hells he is like to have, and shall he
take up his station here, among miseries, and troubles? had thou in thy
youthful days had liberty to appoint out thy own time, and bound the term of
thy life, happily thou might have thought the time thou have already lived had
been competent; and truly if there be much more behind, thou may well
foresee it will be burdensome to thy self, and troublesome to others, by
reason of thine infirmities. The world has not been so great a friend to thee,
as thus over eagerly to desire it; thy Lord and Master, and the most and best
of his Servants have not found it so kind; and thou have had thy share of
affliction even from thy youth up, upon the account of Christ, and his Gospel;
and must God put more gall and wormwood upon the breast to wean thee from the
world? will thou still linger, and draw back like Lot in Sodom? or like Israel
do quarrel at the promised Land, because there are some Anakims to be
subdued, some troubles in the way, and art ever and anon returning back into
Egypt, and longing after the Onions and Garlic and the Fleshpots thereof?
Thou have long since taken press-money, and art now running away from thy
Colors? thou have promised to be always in a readiness, and do thou now
frame excuses? and woudlst be at thy own dispose, and not at thy Captains? Thou
art in a journey, and do thou sit down at the style? and art glad when thou
meetest with some stop by the way to hinder thee? and is there nothing that
thou fear more than that thou should come to thy journeys end too soon?
but happily thy work is not done, and therefore thou dare not come into thy
Masters sight: but how do create thine own shame in so saying? had thou any
greater business to do, and of greater importance? have thou had time for every
thing else, and this not done? art thou in a race, and is a Crown of glory the
prize if thou win, and thy own Soul at the Stake if thou lose; and have been
hunting Butterflies as thou wentest, which when they are taken serve but to
soul the fingers? when thou did expect the Bridegroom, have thou Slept, and
neither trimmed thy Lamp, nor provided thy Oil? when thou wast bid to the
Wedding, have provided no wedding garment? Thou have been often minded of this
day, yea thou have often minded others also; thou have often had resolutions to
do it, how have these dyed, and come to nothing? many a time thou have renewed
thy Covenant with God, and ratified thy baptismal vows: In many a danger thou
have made large promises if he would deliver thee what thou would do, and
what a reformed man thou would be, that thou would double thy diligence,
and amend thy pace; and have these resolutions been stifled, and these promises
broken? Oh horrid Ingratitude! what would thou now desire of God, might
thou have thy wish? would thou desire to be immortal, and never dye? why this
is impossible; Gods decree is otherwise: it is contrary to Nature, for this
composition will work our destruction; and it is also inconstent with Grace:
then it might be thy trouble that thou wast made a man: Or would thou live to
old age? but how old? would thou desire to spin out thy life to an hundred?
alas! what a life of misery were thou like to lead! and when that time came,
happily thou would be as unwilling as now; and would not Thirty or Forty years
be as delightfully spent in Heaven, as upon the Earth? thou have far more cause
to complain of the wickedness, than the shortness of thy time. Many that have
had a shorter time, have done a great deal more work in it than thou have done.
If thou live long, thy corruptions will not dye for age; a hard winter will not
kill the weeds of sin, these may flourish when thy body decays, and old age is
not the fittest time for reformation, and for preparation: Old age is like an
old Tree, it will hardly bend, when a young tree is pliable: when thou come
to give an account of ill-spent time, thou will think the reckoning large
enough; if thy receivings are great, thy account will not be small. If thou
improve thy talents well, and God take them quickly out of thy hand, he will
never blame thee thou had them no longer, nor require an account of thee for
the time thou had them not: it is fit the Master not the Servants should
determine what talents each one should have, and how long; for it is fit he
dispose of his own goods as he pleases. The longer God makes the lease of thy
life, the greater fine or the more rent is to be paid; for God will not be a
loser by thee: well, if nothing else will serve, God may deal with thee as he
has dealt with others, whip thee home by some severer scourge than yet thou
have met with, and punish thee seven times more for this sin, and make thee
glad to return home as he did holy Job, whose afflictions were so great that he
chose strangling rather than life; he may lay thee under some raging pain, some
torturing disease, some tormenting distemper, and so make thee weary of thy
life; or he may make thee spend the rest of thy days in prison, and suffer
hardship there; or he may make thee to be a Turkish Gally-slave, as many are,
chained to thy Oars; or he may reduce thee to extreme wants and penury, to beg
thy bread from door to door; to endure much hardship, hunger and cold, as many
Protestants did in the Irish Massacre: and thus by putting more gall and
wormwood upon the worlds Nipple, he can wean thee from the immoderate love of
it, and the immoderate desire of life. Oh my soul, will thou force thy loving
Father to lay heavier strokes upon thee than ever he did? Oh how unsuitable is
this immoderate desire of life, and fear of death, and murmuring under a divine
dispensation of Providence, to a Christian, to an ancient Professor, to a
Minister! can any reason be given why God should not dispose of thee, as well
as he does of all the world? Shall the pot say to him that made it, Why have
thou made me thus? Art thou wiser than he, to know who is fit to be called forth
to suffer? and know thou better than he how to guide the affairs of the
world? But thou art afraid thou shall not hold out; but do thou stand by thy
own strength? and do not think that God has power enough to uphold thee, or
wisdom enough to know what thou can do? a wise Captain will not put a
fresh water Soldier upon the hardest assaults, put experienced Soldiers: God
will not put new Wine into old Bettles; if thy heart be rotten, no wonder if
thou miscarry; if it be right, God will not suffer thee to faint, having so
many cordials by him. In Queen Maryes days, we read of poor simple men and
women, that never had the Learning, the means, the time, the help that thou
have had, nor never made the profession that thou have made, yet were
wonderfully supported by God under all their sufferings, and became glorious
Martyrs; and cannot God uphold thee also? and why then should thou be so
desirous of life, and fearful of death, and rather live a miserable life than
dye a happy death? why would thou still live in Meseck, and in the tents of
Kedar, rather than in Gods own House, and in his presence, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore? why do
desire to be present in the Flesh, and absent from the Lord, and preferrest
misery before glory it self, and a vain empty nothing before eternal treasures?
sure something is amiss with thee, that with Adam thou hidest thy self from
God, and wilt not go when he calls thee: Heb. 10.22.
could thou draw near to him with a pure heart, in assurance of faith, with a
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and thy body washed with pure water,
thou may find more delight in his presence, than the world can yield; and in
sincerity will enable thee to delight in him, much more perfection; when all
imperfections will be done away, then thou will find with David, that it is
better be a doorkeeper in the house of God, than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness; that a day in his courts, much more in Heaven, is better than a
thousand elsewhere. But, Oh my soul, have not thou played the Truant, and now
dare not come into thy Masters sight? have thou not with the slothful servant
hid thy talent, or like the unjust Steward wasted thy masters goods, and now
fear what account thou shall give of thy Stewardship, or what answer thou
shall make about thy talent? Or have thou not played the Coward, and runst away
from thy Colors, or turned thy back upon the enemy, and now dare not look
thy Captain in the face? Paul when he had fought the fight, and kept the Faith,
and expected the crown, he desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; to
be absent from the body, and present with the Lord; well may thy Lord and
Savior entertain thee with a check, Why art thou fearful, Oh thou of little
faith? Art thou listed to fight against thy enemies, and now when the last
enemy is to be destroyed do thou turn thy back, throw down thy weapons, and
quit the field? does thy faith fail thee? and do thou question whether there
be a reward for the righteous, and a God that judges the earth; and whether
there be an eternal happiness to be had, or whither those that dye in the Lord
are blessed, and do rest from their labors? do now question whether death
does put an end to all the Saints miseries, and enter then into eternal joy if
so, why have thou preached, and owned, and pleaded for these things? yea why
have thou suffered so much in hope of a joyful resurrection? but if thou
believe there is a God, and that the Scripture is the Word of God, and that God
will do as he says, and will make good all his promises, and all his threats,
and that it shall go well with the righteous, and that he shall eat the fruit
of his labor; Isa. 3.10.
and that it shall go ill with the wicked, for the reward of his hands shall be
given him: If thou do believe death is to the godly the Outlet to misery, and
the Inlet to glory, and puts them into possession of all that is good, that it
will cure all diseases, and heal all maladies, how can this stand with thy fear
and dread? the very thoughts of eternal Joy draws up the heart to Heaven, and
makes thee wish and long for the time of thy dissolution, and much imbitters
all earthly enjoyments, and makes the soul impatient of delays, and to cry
out, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; when shall the time be that I shall Solace
my Soul in the enjoyment of my Husband? when shall I lie in his bosom? when
will my beloved send for me in his triumphant Chariot! O cursed sin, when shall
I be rid of thee? thou art the Makebate between my God and me, thou hidest his
face from me, thou spoilest all my duties, thou art the cause of all my misery,
when shall I be rid of thee? when shall I give thee a bill of divorce? when
shall it once be? Oh my soul, were but thy love as it should be to Christ,
these would be thy breathings and thy pantings after him; thou would be like
a lovesick woman, never well till thou were in the arms of thy beloved; thy
thoughts would be upon him; ubi amor ibi animus; where the treasure is, there
will the heart be also; where love is, the heart will be; and love makes labor
light; the wife that loves her husband, will rather venture his displeasure in
coming to him without his consent, than in staying from him when she is sent
for; and thy unwilllingness to dyeand come to Christ when he calls thee,
doubtless proceeds from want of love to him: let them fear death that have
Plague-sores running upon them, the marks and tokens of the second death; whose
passing out of the world is but the direct road to Hell, whose life time is all
the respite they have out of Hell, and the only breathing-time they are ever
like to have free from torments: but to the godly it is not so, but their only
Hell, and time of their misery. If a man were sore sick, and could certainly
know that after one night he should be perfectly well, and never be sick more;
or if a man in pinching penury and want, should know that after one Sleep he
should awake a Prince, and all his wants should be supplied; who would fear
that Night, or be afraid of that Sleep? but such a Night, such a Sleep death is
to the godly; it is but a sleep, and they shall wake in glory; It Is but to
wink, says the Martyr, and we shall be in Heaven presently; it is but the
weakness of thy faith and love, or thou would not desire to be absent from
Christ, upon such poor terms. Oh the hourly danger thou art in by reason of
enemies without, within, and round about thee! Oh the dangerous snares they lay
for thy feet! Oh the fears, the cares and manyfold troubles thou daily meetest
withal! enough to make thee weary of thy life, and with Job to wish for death!
and wilt not endure a little pain when it would set thee out of harms way, out
of the Devils reach, or man's malice. The love of Christ in the Martyrs was
hotter than the flames they burnt in; they could cry out, None but Christ, none
but Christ: true love desires union with the party beloved: and how can thou
say thou love Christ, when thy heart is not with him, when thou desire not
his company, or to enjoy him? thou pretendest love to him, and yet art
willingly, desirously absent from him, and wilt not come to him at his call,
but wilt rather deny him, and thy interest in him: thou cal'st him thy Husband,
and pretendest thou have devoted thy self wholly to him, and given up not only
thy Name but thy Heart to him, and promised to forsake all other for him, and
obey him whoever was disobeyed; yet when it comes to the trial, with Demas thou
choosest the world before him; thou will not obey him, neither forsake the
world for him, but love thy life above him: what hypocrisy, what
dissimulation is this, to pretend to follow him, and yet really run from him,
when he calls thee! well may he give thee a bill of divorce and put thee away,
who do thus wilfully desert him. Thou have preached for him, and spoke for
him, and suffered for him, but all this will not serve thy turn if thou love
any thing above him; thou must give up all, or thou can not have him; he will
admit of no Rival, he will have the prevailing degree of thy Love, or thou
shall have none of him: if thou prize thy life above him, he will prize himself
to be too good for thee; 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
for love is to him more acceptable than any Sacrifice; his love to thee made
him exchange Heaven for the Earth, and glory for misery, and will not thy love
to him make thee willing to exchange Earth for Heaven, and the Creature for
God? though a wife pretend love to her husband, yet if in her husbands absence
she desires not his return, and refuses to go to him, it is a sign her love is
cold, and she has something else she affects above him; that she has dealt
treacherously with him, and placed her affections elsewhere. Were thy love to
thy Lord and Husband but as strong as a covetous man's love is to his Riches, or
an ambitious man's to his Honor, or the unclean persons to his Lust, thou
would not think a little pains too much to enjoy him; for these run through
the pikes of danger, to obtain their end, and bring about their designs; and
though Damnation lie in the way, they will venture one, and march up into the
Cannons mouth, and expose themselves to the everlasting destruction of Body and
Soul, which is a thousand times worse than death it self, before they will fail
in their enterprise. Did but thy heart pant after God as David's did, Psalm.
42.1, 2.
thou would long for the time when thou should appear before God: had
thou but a believing sight of the Heavenly Canaan and its glory, thou would
then see the worlds emptiness, vanity, and misery, and be more senbsile of thy
wilderness troubles, and long to pass over this Jordan; thou would be more
willing to leave the one, and go to the other. But it may be it is not thy
dispute whether Heaven or Earth be the better choice, but thy own Interest that
thou questionest; some enjoyments thou have here, and loath thou art to leave
them till thou art sure of better: but has not this been thy objection many
years? and have not yet got over this style? why how have thou spent thy time?
what have thou been doing? what is the result of thirty or forty years trial of
the estate? had any greater work lay upon thy hand? did not God send thee
into the world upon this very business, and have thou spent thy time in hunting
Butter-flyes, or weaving the Spiders web to catch flies all this while? how
can eat, or drink, or sleep in quiet, without some comfortable assurance,
when thou know not but the next morning thou may awake with hell-flames
about thy ears? thou art sent to run a race, to fight a fight, to lay hold upon
Heaven by violence, and have all this while sat idle? Heaven and Earth may
stand amazed at thy folly. If God allow thee more time, what hopes is there
that thou will make more haste, or get clearer Evidence for Heaven? think not
that to deny Christ thy life, when he requires th^^ ^o lay it down for him, is
to gain time for better preparation; nay, it lays such a bar in thy way to
Heaven which it is much to be feared thou will never remove; the very thoughts
of using this unlawful means to save thy life, do evidence that grace is either
weak or wanting in thy soul. Time was thou did carry thy life in thy hand,
and hold forth the contempt of the world, and made a show that thou
matteredst the world no more than it did thee, and that thou did believe true
happiness was not to be had under the Sun, and is thy judgment now altered? and
in thy elder days, art thou grown more wise? and by diligent search have found
out thy mistake, and not only thine but the mistake of all the godly? and now
do begin to grasp after the world, and art loath to leave it? why do not
recant in public? why do not discover to the people thy former error, and
bid them look for their happiness here; Wisd. 2.^ 9.
and crown themselves with rose-buds before they wither; let us be partakers of
our wantonness, let us leave some tokens of our pleasure in every place, for
that is our portion, and this is our lot? Is this the doctrine thou would
have others believe, and the counsel thou would have them take? if not, why
do thou give them an Example to choose thy portion here, and let Christ which
was thy pretended portion go, and grasp after that little which the world calls
Portion, so greedily? and why art thou so loath to go where true Treasure is to
be had? why do choose to be tossed to and fro by the billows of this raging
Sea, and endure the tempest and storms of trouble, rather than come into a safe
Harbor, an Heaven of rest, because the mouth of it is straight, and the
entrance uneasy? Do thou put thy self into the case of the wicked, and do
expect their portion, that thou look upon death as thy enemy also? it is
true, it wounds thy body, but thy Soul is safe; but it destroys them both in
body and soul; and it brings more profit to the soul than damage to the body;
it is but as the prick of a pin to a dangerous Ulcer, which were it not pricked
would prove mortal; it will put an end to thy pains, and a beginning to thy
Joys; for when thy life expires, sin also dies; and sin and sorrow are
breathed out with thy life, and from this day thy Lease in Heaven bears date,
which shall never expire. Rouse up thy self, O my Soul, be not dejected, God
minds thee no hurt: Death will not, cannot hurt thee: Kill me they may, (says
the Martyr) hurt me they cannot; the worst they can do, is but to send me to my
Fathers house the sooner. Many a warning thou have had, many a Corpse thou have
interred, many a Funeral Sermon thou have Preached; for shame say not thou
had not sufficient warning: wast thou so mad as to think of going to Heaven
another way, or that thou wast immortal, when thou saw so many about thee
dye daily; or that thou should live to old age, when thou saw so many dye
young, and felt so many sensible Symptoms of thy approaching death? thou have,
as thou did suppose, some grounded hopes that thou had a part in the first
Resurrection, and that therefore the second death on thee had no power, and why
then is death so terrible? Many have more distempers in their Souls than in
their Bodies; it is true, this is thy case, yet thou have hoped thine are not
mortal, the malignity of the disease is over, when many others have
Plague-Sores running upon them; these may expect death, and have cause to fear
it; it will but heal thy distempers, but inrage theirs: thou have had many
meditations of death, and many discourses with death, and you did seem pretty
well agreed; thou have looked death in the face, and is he now become more
terrible, or art thou more timorous, that when he comes to thy Bedside, draws
thy Curtains, and shakes thee by the hand, thou tremblest? has Christ done
thee no good by his passion, by subduing Death, disarming him, pulling out the
sting, and trampling him under foot, yea laying him prostrate at thy feet? has
all the pains thou have taken in heavens way workt no more upon thee, set thee
up no higher? where now is thy promised obedience, and thy prayers, Thy will be
done, when thou art ready to resist Gods Will when it is manifested, and
preferrest thine own before it? why do call thy Father the only wise God,
when thou think thy own wit best, and that thou know best when it is best
for thee to dye, and wilt not submit to his will; and that if thou would
speak out, thy mind is to indent with Christ; this thou will do or Suffer, but
not that; this sin thou will leave, but that thou will not; thou would pick
and choose thy duties, and take the easiest part of it, and leave the
difficult, dangerous, and costly part undone, and wilt not have heaven at so
dear a rate. Thou pretendest a desire to be happy, and who does not? Balaam
desires the death of the righteous, and that his end may be like his; but they
will not live the righteous man's life, and thou art not willing to dye his
death, for he is conformable to the will of God, both in life and death, which
is that thou do dislike. O my Soul, some great thing is amiss with thee, thy
corruptions are as strong fetters to hold thee in the Devils Slavery: thy grace
is weak, and cannot procure thy freedom; the Devil is too cunning for thee, the
world subtle, and thy own heart deceitful, to betray thee into Satan's hands. Oh
my God, this is my condition, this is the estate of my Soul; here lies my
distemper, the world lies too close to my heart, and Christ lies at too great a
distance; my corrupt deceitful heart is ever and anon putting me on to choose
this for my happiness; a little Grace I see will not carry me through the
temptations that lie before me, but Lord speak the word and grace will
flourish, and corruption will dye: thou have said, and I believe it, that thou will not break the bruised reed, Mat. 12.20.
nor quench the smoking flax, till thou bring forth Judgment unto victory:
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief; and let not my little grace be lost in the
great heap of the rubbish of my corruptions: Lord, if thou open mine eyes to
see the emptiness of the creature, and the fullness of Christ, then shall I love
the one and despise the other; Psalm. 119.32.
and shall run the ways of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart; I
see no reason why I should be exempted from obeying thy Will, even to the
laying down of my life, and though flesh and blood will not yield willing
obedience to it, yet it is my resolution thus to do, Lord strengthen my
resolution: I know my fears are the result of my Infidelity; Lord strengthen my
faith, that I may overcome them; for by thy strength I shall stand, and without
thy assisting grace I shall Apostatize, and fall back: Leave me not to my self,
for then I shall undo my self, dishonor my God, scandalize Religion, bring a
reproach upon the Gospel, wound my Conscience, break my Peace with my God, and
undo my Soul. Luke 9.62.
Let me not, O Lord, now I have put my hand to the Plow look back again: Nor
when I have begun in the Spirit, Gal. 3.3.
end in the flesh. Rev. 2.10.
Lord make me faithful to the death, and then give me a Crown of Life.

MEDITAT. V. The World is not desirable to a Christian.
OH my Soul, why art thou desirous to stay in the World? and why so unwilling
to go to thy Father? The time was when thou wast otherwise minded; thou
lookedst upon it as Bochim, a place of tears, a Golgotha, an unlovely
habitation: thou wast not willing to dwell in Meseck, and in the tents of
Kedar; thy affections did like fire mount upward; and what Lodestone have now
to draw thee back? thou wast at a point with all things under the Sun, and
did wear the World about thee as a loose garment ready to cast off upon all
occasions, and do now spit upon thy hands and take better hold? do now set
up thy Staff, and with Peter say, it is good being here? Art now beginning to
build Tabernacles here, and slight that house not made with hands, but eternal
in the Heavens? thou did conclude with Solomon, Eccles. 1.14.
All is Vanity and vexation of spirit, and now at last have found some
solidity? 2 Pet. 2.22.
art thou now returnining with the dog to his Vomit, and the washed Sow to her
wallowing in the Mire? are the Scales of ignorance now fallen from thine eyes,
and do thou see some excellency in the worlds enjoyments, that before were
hid from thee? take heed lest thou see through the Devils Spectacles, for these
may deceive thee. Is the world now become a Pearl in thine eye, that thou
despisest that Pearl of great price? be not deceived, it will not prove a true
Diamond, but a Bristow Stone. Art thou now ready with Cardinal Burbon to say,
thou will not leave thy part in Paris for a part in Paradise? consider well
what thou do before thou strike up the bargain, and take the world for thy
portion; take a view of it again, and see it in its own dress, and not in the
Devils paint and colors, or in his Glass: had thou indeed rather be absent
from the Lord than from the World, and does it yield thee better delight and
satisfaction? Well, and will it do so at death also? where will thy portion be,
2 Pet. 3.10.
when the earth and all the works therein shall be burnt up? give not Christ a
bill of divorce till thou art sure of a better match: will the World content
thee here and hereafter? what provision can it make for thee for hereafter? if
this be all thou take for thy portion, then no wonder thou art loath to leave
it; for where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. Had thou a great
Estate in the World, there might be some temptation, but who will grieve to
leave an empty Cell? heretofore when thou had a greater Estate in the World,
thou wast crucified to the World and the World to thee, and now do fall in
love with Poverty and Want? thou did look upon it as upon a dead Carcass, and
now do perceive some life in it? But stay a while, and consider well what the
World has, and whether her portion can pay thy debts, and make provision for
thee to Eternity; thou can expect no more portion than it has; consider
whether it will serve thy turn: the Soul is an immortal piece, and must run
parallel with the longest line of Eternity, will the world do so also? if not,
what will the Soul do when the portion is spent? thou art in debt ten thousand
Talents, and can not pay one farthing, and it must be paid to the utmost
mite, or thou will be cast into a Furnace of fire for ever; can the World, if
thou espouse thy self to it, pay this debt? No, nor all the Angels in Heaven to
help it: and what a case will thou then be in to Eternity! It Is best for thee
to return to thy former Husband, for it is much better with thee then: Here is
enough in him to pay thy debts, and provide for the future. But is thy
forsaking Christ and choosing the World the result of all thy profession, and
the fruit of all thy Mortification, Repentance, Self-denial, Preaching,
Praying, Hearing, Reading, Meditating, and of all thy other duties? and is the
World a sufficient recompense for all the pains thou have taken in Gods
Service? and do expect no more at his hands? and art thou willing to let go
all thy right in the Promises, and all thy hopes of a future reward? and does
the World make thee amends for all thy losses and crosses thou have met with
upon Religious accounts? have thou reduced thy self to pinching wants, hard
labor, how foolishly then have thou behaved thy self! if the world be thy
portion how foolishly have thou denied thy self in thy portion! why have thou
not run down the current of the times as others have done, when it was the way
to preferment? why have thou swam against the stream? why did not take thy
pleasure as others did, in thy sins and sinful company? then might thou have
enjoyed the World as they do, for their Portion in Externals is better than
thine; they take their pleasures, they satisfy their lusts; and why do then
live a mortified life for the like portion? why did thou take upon thee the
profession of Religion, when thou knew it would run counter with the times?
why do not swear with the Swearer, drink with the Drunkard, and be as
debaucht as any other, if the reward be alike? but if thou look for another
reward, why art thou afraid of the time when thou art to receive it? if
Religion will not pay thee thy charges, why did profess it? if it will, why
do forsake it? haft thou had a hard Master of Christ? has he failed of his
Word, or broke his promise to thee? is his work or Wages worse than Covenant?
if not, why do leave thy Master? look about thee, within and without;
consider while thou art here what thy wants are, what thy miseries, and whether
the world is like to free thee from the one or the other; if it can, how
happens it in all this time it is not done? thou have spiritual wants, can the
World relieve those? thou have but a little knowledge of God, and do thou
desire no more? if thou do, in what School will thou learn it? death will bring
thee where all these clouds of ignorance shall be dispelled, and thy knowledge
shall be perfected: 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
Here thou know but in part, and understandest but in part: But when that
which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. Thou have
now but a little enjoyment of him, a few glimpses of him in a duty, and do
desire no more? what means then all thy Prayers and Duties tending this way?
but thou art never like to have much more till thou come to Heaven: doubtless,
if thou now take up with the World for thy portion, thou art of all men the
most foolish; why do thou run from it, when thou seek to enjoy it? and why
do forsake thy desired happiness? If the world will content thee, why do
seek after other things, and deny thy self that content the world offers thee?
Art thou as holy as thou desire to be, and as good as thou would be? and
have thou as much satisfaction as thou desire? what is the meaning then of
all thy Prayers, Studies, and other duties? why do bewail thy sins, and
implore Heaven for power against them? and if thou would be better, why do
fear Heaven, where thou will be holy as God is holy? if thou be as good as thou
desire to be, why do play the Hypocrite with God and man; and like a man in
a Boat, look one way and row another? would thou have no more power against
thy sins, why then do rail upon it and revile it, and profess that it is thy
greatest trouble? why do wrestle, and fight, and pray against it, and bring
under thy body? and if thou would have power, why do thou fear Death which
will free thee from this as well as other Enemies? art content to live in thy
Pride, and Passion, and Ignorance, and Hypocrisy? why do not then speak
plain? art thou like some Beggars, that have sores to show to move compassion,
but are not willing to have them cured lest it mar their Trade? have as much
Grace as thou desire; why then do pray for an increase, and usest means to
strengthen it? Why, Death will bring thee to perfection: can thou content thy
self with a low frame of Spirit, and a small measure of Grace? why do thou
the^ complain, that thou can not serve God with greater freedom, and that thy
duties are performed so deadly, dully and drowsily, and with so much
distraction? and yet art content with them as they are, and longest not for the
time when thou shall serve him without distraction, and never have wandering
thought more? thou complainest that thou feedest upon the husks of duty, and
find not God in the duty, and yet art willing to rest in this condition, and
longest not for the time when thou shall solace thy self in his love, serve him
according to his will, and enjoy him for ever? do thou do God as good service
as thou desire? and does he reward thee here according to thy content? art
thou fully satisfied, and do expect no more at his hands? art thou satisfied
for all thy duties, losses, crosses, and afflictions? if so, why have thou put
up so many vain petitions, wherein thou beggedst for greater matters? nay, what
matter had it been if thou had never put up any petition? for such a portion
is given to those that never care to Pray, Hear, Read, or do any Religious
Duty; but if thou expect a better reward, why then art thou afraid of death,
which puts thee into the possession of it? Why art thou afraid of having thy
prayers answered, and thy requests granted, and a reward given thee an hundred
fold? if thou pressest after perfection, why art thou afraid of it, when it
cannot be obtained on this side Death? would not have thy prayers granted?
death will conduct thee where it shall be done; but it is in vain to expect it
on this side Heaven: art thou afraid of being called out of the Vineyard to
receive thy wages? and wilt rather lose thy labor than go home for thy pay?
have so eagerly pursued after happiness, and when thou come within sight of
it, does thy heart fall thee? or would thou find happiness where no man ever
did? or do expect it to be sown in the furrows of thy field? art thou
searching for Honey in a Wasps nest? None of these things can be had in this
world, they are reserved for Heaven; sin will not dye till thou dyest, nor
leave thee till body and Soul are separated: serve God thou can not till thou
come to Heaven without distraction; thy graces will be imperfect, thy knowledge
weak, thy love cold, thy obedience imperfect, and all thy Graces maimed; and
thy corruptions will be strong, 1 Cor. 15.54. Lev. 14.44.
till this corruptible has put on incorruption, and thy mortal has put on
immortality, and these natural bodies become spiritual, and then deathshall be
swallowed up of Victory. Sin in thee here is like a Leprosy in the House, it
will not be cleansed till the house be pulled down; it is in thy very nature,
and sticks as close as the skin to thy flesh; yea as the flesh to thy bones,
and more close: these may be separated, but so cannot sin while we live, till
Death make the division; this polluteth the heart, which is the fountain; and
hence the streams are filthy; for like corruption it lies within, and will
break out in some botch or other; the very heart and conscience, the
affections, actions, life, and conversation are polluted, so that thou may
say with the Leapers, Unclean, Unclean; and thus it will be while thou art in
the world, and there is no other way to cleanse thee or make thee whole, but
passing under the stroke of Death, this lances the Ulcer, and heals the Sore;
and while sin goes before, misery follows; for this follows sin as the Shadow
the Substance, or the effect the cause; and the same hand that cures the one,
heals the other also: for in Heaven sin and sorrow shall be no more, yea sorrow
and sighing shall flee way, and there shall be no more pain; abut till we are
rid of sin we shall never be rid of sorrow, the natural effect of it: Nil valet
medicamentum dum ferrum in vulnere; thou may as well expect fire without
heat, or water without moisture, or a stone without weight, as sin without
sorrow; here thou may expect to lie under an afflicted condition while thou
live; and the holier thou art, the worse entertainment thou art like to meet
with in the world; it will love her own, but hate the godly, as it hated
Christ; it is a Stepmother to them, but an own mother to the wicked; these she
nourishes, but would starve the other, if the their Father did not look to
them. It is by reason of sin that our lives are so bitter, and we live inter
suspiria and lachrymas, between sighs and groans; here thou live always
under the hatches, 2 Cor. 12.7.
and always have some thorn in the flesh, some messenger of Satan sent to
buffet thee; and being amidst these storms and tempests driven from side to
side, and always in danger, can thou fear a safe harbor? when thou art
weary can thou be afraid of rest; or being hungry or thirsty art afraid of
meat and drink? all manner of miseries attend us here in this vale of tears,
and whatsoever outward misery a wicked man suffers, a child of God may suffer
the like; Eccle. 9.2.
all things fall alike to all, as to the good so to the bad: and is not that
Physician welcome that will free us from all these? we pay our Physician if he
heals us of one distemper, our Surgeon if he cure one wound, but death deserves
more that cures us of all that is called evil: here thou live in the midst of
thy enemies, they are both within and without; some seek thy estate, others thy
good name, some thy liberty, and some thy life, and others thy soul; and these
lay snares accordingly to take their prey, and do thou choose to live in such
a Neighborhood? thy very senses are the floodgates to let in sin, thou can
scarcely open thy eyes, or ears, or any other sense but some bewitching object
or other presents it self, and the Devil baits his hooks with it, to Angle for
thy soul; one vanity or other comes in at these windows, either to provoke
pride, or covetousness, or passion, or luxury, or some vice or other that
lodges in the heart; these are the five Cinque Ports, and here the Devil many
times sails in with the Tide; Jer. 17.9.
And thy heart is deceitful also and desperately wicked, and ready to betray
thee into thine enemies hands: thy very Relations many times prove a snare, and
either draw away thy affections inordinately to them, or incline thee more to
accept of life upon unlawful terms: This was Spira's ruin, thy Children and
Servants many times prove thy trouble, either beholding them under Sufferings,
or fearing their extravagant courses; thy Table also sometimes becomes a snare;
thy Meat and thy Drink, the Clothes thou wearest; the Neighbors among whom
thou live prove snares or troubles, sometimes vexing thee with their unjust
dealings, sometimes provoking thee by passionate words, and sometimes grieving
thee to see and hear their sinful words and actions; the most with whom thou
live have one plaguesore or other running upon them, giving and receiving
infection one from another; the very duties thou performest are full of snares,
the Devil does what he can to thrust in base ends and motives, or to divert the
heart in the performance, or he fly-blows them, and makes them stink in the
nostrils God: thy very Calling is full of temptations and snares, all the
Talents, Gifts or Endowments God has lent thee, the Devil will do what he can
to render them the fuel for Pride or some other lust; and how can desire to
live in such a world, among such snares, and such temptations? The world it
self is a very Golgotha, there are few men but what are spiritually dead; a
very Egypt for slavery, where there is little else but Moiling and Toiling,
Carking and Caring, and a thousand troubles and anxieties do here accompany the
Sons of men, and few men but be snares one to another, many pull-backs in
Heavens way, but very few helpers forward: every man almost is like a Turkey
Gally-Slave, chained to some oar or other, where he labors in the very fire,
Isa. 55.2.
and spends his money for that which is not bread, and his labor for that
which satisfies not; he moils and toils night and day, works hard, and fares
hard, and all this while thinks not of his latter end; and of any the Godly
meet with most wrongs, most injuries, and most hardship, and all little enough
to make them mind their Fathers house; yea Professors themselves many times
help to increase each others Burdens, by their contentions, animosities, and
reproach they fasten one upon anot^^r, if they differ from one another in
circumstances and modes of Worship; and can take delight in such a world, and
exchange it for Heaven? What can observe here but Pride and Covetousness, and
Tyranny, and Oppression, Envy and Malice, Debate and Strife, Hypocrisy and
dissimulation, and other works of the flesh; and little sincerity, and the
power of godliness to be seen? now are these the things that take with thy
affections? are these the fleshpots, the Garlic and the Onions that tempt
thee back into Egypt? look but within thee and without thee, and thou will see
enough to wean thee from the world; within thee are many bodily distempers,
Pains and Aches, Griefs and Infirmities, and apparent decays in nature,
languishing distempers, which hasten thy approaching death; decay of thy
senses, thy sight dim, and thy hearing dull, many a broken nights sleep, many a
waking hour, yet few free from pain, weakness, and trembling of Joints and
Limbs, and several distempers which are not like to be cured by any Physician
but Death; and look which way soever thou will without thee, and thou may see
some cloud or other pretending an approaching storm arising; some threatening
wants and penury, and thou find much ado to provide necessary Food and
Raiment for thy Family; here one is sick, another lame, another lying under
other Infirmity, and all causing thy grief and trouble. And if thou look
abroad, what pleasing object can thou fix thy eyes upon? what but
profaneness and debauchery does appear in sight, and little of the fear of God
is to be found? which way can thou turn thy Eyes, but thou will see
Profaneness, Sabbath-breaking, and debauchery acted? or thy Ears, but thou will hear Swearing, Lying, Filthy and Ribald speaking, mocking Taunts and
Reproaches against the power of godliness, Gods ordinances contemned, and his
Ministers abused? and is this thy pleasant sights, thy delightful Melody, the
Siren Songs that inchant thee, and draw thy affections to the world? here, if
thou delight in it, thou may hear the godly made the Drunkards Songs, and
with the Apostles, the Off-scowring of all things, a gazing-stock to Men and
Angels, and those that depart from evil make themselves a Prey: Here thou can
scarce pray in thy Family, or sing forth the Praises of God, or fast to the
humbling of thy Soul, but thou becomest a reproach and derision, and perhaps
the Butt of persecution. And if thou look abroad in the Nation, thou will find
it not much better, in some places much worse; if thou ascend the Courts of
Judicature, in some of them thou may find Judgment and Justice perverted,
Tyranny and Oppression countenanced by Magistrates, great men like great Fishes
eating up the rest, Covetousness and Extortion exercised, and the Righteous
Oppressed in Judgment, and Pillows sown under great men's Elbows by many
Ministers, and the Power of Godliness more than the Torrent of sin opposed and
restrained, and sin and wickedness winked at, and tolerated by both Magistrates
and Ministers, so that the Land is become a Sodom for Sin, and for Uncleaness,
and may, for ought we know, equalize it in Sufferings, and few Mourners will be
found in our Sion. If we look abroad, we have cause to fear a Foreign Invasion,
and at home Domestic Insurrections; even Vipers breed in our own Bosom; many
long to wash their hands in the blood of the Saints, yea in the best blood in
the Nation; and which increases our misery and danger, our Councels are
divided, and we know neither our Enemies nor the danger we are in; only this we
know, we are in the hands of God, and it is against him that we have sinned; and
will thou fall in love with deformity it self, and desire to live amongst
confusion? when God calls thee away from the evil to come, art thou loath to go?
Sin is the ugliest Hag that ever the World brought forth, and destruction is
her natural issue. The very best which the world can show thee, is nothing else
but the shadow of a Smoke, or the Dream of a Shadow; those that have most
trusted to it, have been most deceived; there is no trust to be put in mortal
man, nor confidence in Princes; there is nothing of solidity under the Sun, or
any thing whereof we can say, there is satisfaction in it. The Devil does what
he can to dress it up in his Paint and Varnish, and shows it to us in its glory
and splendour, but whosoever has the wearing of it will find it much worse than
here it is described; so that death cannot be worse to a Saint than life,
neither should it be less desired; and is this world now Christ's Rival? and is
the contention which will prove the better Match, or whether Heaven or Earth be
to be preferred, or whether God or the Devil be the better master, or give the
better Wages? and is God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Glory like to be cast
off, and the world like to run away with thy affections? is this like best to
maintain thee, and make thee most happy? Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at
thy folly: surely, if thou have met with no better usage than thy Neighbors,
yea than thy Lord and Master has done, the controversy would soon be at an
end, and the question soon decided: Christ tells thee in plain terms, if thou
belong to him the world cannot love thee, and I think thou have had experience
of it to thy cost; Joh. 15.18.
will thou now proclaim to the world thy Hypocrisy, and make them believe thy
Faith was but a fancy, and thy Love to God but a pretense? will thou now
strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he shall not depart from his
wickedness? have thou all this while used Religion but as a stalking-horse, to
take a prey? and what prey have thou taken? nothing but Losses, and Crosses,
Scoffs, and Scorns, and Persecution: sure thou have played a low game; thou have
been under fears and doubts about thy sincerity, and will thou now determine it
in the Negative? thou have complained of the absence of thy Beloved, and now by
thy willing desertion, will thou prove all was in Hypocrisy? thou have been
persecuted for Righteousness sake, and wilt now convince the world that it
wronged thee; and that thou wast not righteous, nor the man they took thee for?
if not, why art unwilling to go to Heaven, where thou shall never hear this
grinning language more? here thy eyes affect thy heart, when thou see the
Oppression that is done under the Sun, but there thou shall never more see
unpleasant sight; here thy ears affect thy heart, for thou can scarcely open
them, but some bad news or other reaches thy heart to afflict it. If thou look
upon the Churches of God in most Nations in the World, thou may find them
pickled in their tears, and wallowing in their blood, abroad and at home; thou
may see them under sufferings in many places, thou may find the Prisons
full of them, and many under tortures and torments, and bloodily butchered for
Religion sake; miserably slaughtered in France, Spain, Italy, Hungary,
Helvetia, Savoy, Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, New England, Ireland, and many
other places; yea, England and Scotland have not been freed; and at this day if
we look upon the face of the Protestant Churches throughout Europe, it is so
deplorable, that there is cause enough for grief; yea in some places there is
persecution even by those of the same Religion, only for some small differences
about Modes and Circumstances of Worship; they agree in all the Articles of
Faith, and yet writing as bitterly one against another, as if they were Jews
and Turks; and those that we may believe may agree together in the same Heaven,
cannot be of the same Church; yea the Church it self is a very Hospital, every
one has one Disease or other; one complains, and not without cause, of a hard
Heart, another of a Stubborn Will, and a third of a dark Understanding; one of
Pride, another of Passion, another of Worldliness, and another of Hypocrisy;
and yet, which is the mischief of it, there are many more distempers upon them
than they know of. Look into the best Congregations, and here some are sick of
a Lethargy, and sleep as they go about their work; others of a Consumption, and
instead of growing in Grace, decline, and lose their first love; some of the
Rickets, and these men's heads grow bigger than the rest, for they have some
brain knowledge, which by reason of some obstructions never sinks into the
Heart, or seasons the life; others have he Falling Sickness, some fall foully,
and others fall quite away, and come to nothing; some have a Burning Feavour,
and their fiery zeal sets the Church on a flame, and in some it heightens to a
Frenzy; these are always raving, and tearing in pieces all that come in their
way, or all that thwart their humor; these are never so confident as when in an
Error; as men at football they many times make such have they overrun the Ball,
so these men many times leave truth behind them, and outrun it. These men must
have Religion modeled in their own Brain, or it pleases them not; those that
go beyond them are too hot, and those that cannot reach them are too cold, or
in plain terms profane and irreligious; and their Heart like Jehu's must be
the Standard to try all others by; 2. King 10.15.
and all this while it is but their Distemper, and a fiery zeal like James and
John that would have all others consumed but their own party, and rather had
they rent the Church in pieces, than abate an Ace to dissenting Christians; and
these many times spend themselves and their zeal upon circumstances, when the
main substance is neglected, the very Vitals of Religion; yet these men think
they have found out the nearest way to Heaven, when alas they run but the
circle of Errors; for the Devil leads them circular, when they thought they had
ran straight forwards; and many of those that are in a little time above their
Teachers, are quickly above Ordinances, and run from one opinion to another,
till they end where they began, at Profaneness; they are led by the Devil
toward Hell, when they think they are in Heavens road, as the Syrians were to
Samaria by the Prophet, 2 King. 6.19, 20.
when they thought they had been going to Dothan; these men are like the
Lapwing, who cries most when farthest from her Nest; and so they are most
confident when they have left the truth behind: some fall from their first
love, others into errors, and some turn Apostates, yea persecute the truth they
once professed; and is this a delightful thing to thee? and may not see also
some of thy own Relations going toward Hell, with hopes of Heaven in their
mouth, and will take no warning, although they live in the committing of those
sins which God has plainly told us such as commit them shall never enter into
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
and yet they are as confident of Heaven as if they were there already; and
after all this, can thou delight to live in such a World, where thou can
meet with so little comfort from good or bad, but all thou conversest with help
to increase thy sorrow, one way or other, some willingly and some against their
wills? would thou live among those hard taskmasters, rather than go through
the red Sea to Canaan? nay, had rather endure thy Wilderness troubles than go
over this Jordan, and fight with this Anakim, Death, though thou have the Lord
for thy Protector? thou have longed to enjoy thy Inheritance, and many a Prayer
thou have put up to this purpose; thou have looked upon the flesh as a Screen
drawn between thy God and thee, and as a clog to the Soul, and breathed after
more liberty in Gods service, and now art unwilling that the Screen should be
removed, and thy liberty gained? was Daniel unwilling to come out of the Lions
den, or Jonah out of the Whales Belly, or Joseph, or Jeremy, or Paul, or Silas,
or Peter, to come out of Prison, when the time of deliverance came? was ever
fick man afraid of Health, or Lame man of being restored to his Limbs, or a
Blind man of being recovered to his sight? was ever Hungry man afraid of his
meat, or thirsty man unwilling to drink, or weary man unwilling to rest? or was
ever Turkish Slave unwilling to leave his Oars, or enjoy his freedom? yet have
none of these so much cause to rejoice in their freedom, as the poor Soul has
in the freedom purchased by Christ, and to be enjoyed at death. Does not the
Husbandman long for the Harvest, when he shall receive the fruits of the Field,
the reward of his labor? does not the Soldier long for the Victory, when he
shall receive the Crown? does not the Traveller desire his Journeys end, and
the Mariner his wished Port, and the Labourer for the Sunsetting, when his
work is done, and his wages is due? and will thou only be afraid of the time
when thy misery shall end, and thy Joys commence? and all because there is a
little dirty though not dangerous way to pass, though there be an eternal
reward for a temporal, yea momentany Pain, yea a thousand weight of pleasure
for an ounce of grief? Oh foolish Soul! have thou fought the fight, and won the
day, and is it but stooping down and take up the Crown, and wilt not be at so
much pains? Is there but one style more to thy Fathers house, and will thou sit
down here, and go no further? but one hour between thee and Glory, and have
thou spent so many years in reference to it, and now wilt not add that hour to
the rest? have thou almost run the race, and shall one Lake in the way make
thee to retire, when the end is in sight? have subdued all the Enemies but one,
and is he disarmed also, and lies prostrate at thy feet, and yet faintest, and
forsakest the Field? do thou fly from the Serpent when the sting is out? have
thou vanquished the Flesh, the World and the Devil, and yet fear Death which
is a reconciled Friend? have thou overcome him that has the power of Death,
and fear thou Death it self? Have thou overcome the substance, and do
quake at the shadow? many thousand lose their Lives upon lower ends, and
venture them for a lower reward than here is propounded; some for vain glory,
others for a corruptible Crown, and wilt not venture thy life for Eternal
glory, and to secure thy Soul? some venture Life and Soul and all in a Whores
Quarrel, or a Drunkards fray, and will thou not in the cause of God, and
vindication of the truth, and that when thy Captain stands by thee? are the
Gates of the Heavenly Jerusalem open, and wilt not enter? wilt lose all rather
than strike one stroke more? O my God, let not the Flesh, the World, nor the
Devil deceive me: let me not faint under the burden, nor ever turn my back upon
thee. Lord strengthen me, and I will suffer for thee.

MEDITAT. VI. What hurt can Death do a Believer?
OH my Soul, what makes thee yet draw back? are not all these foregoing
considerations enough to satisfy thee, but yet the thoughts of Death do appale
thee, and the thoughts of the Grave make thee to shiver? heretofore thou have
even courted Death, and solaced thy self with the Meditation of the Grave, and
the forethought of the time when Sin and Sorrow should be no more; and now do
quake at the apprehension of it, and art frighted at his grim countenance?
Consider a little, what he is, whence he comes, and what message he brings, and
then see if he be so formidable as he seems: he is but a Messenger, and comes
not upon his own errand, neither runs he before he be sent; he comes not from
an Enemy, but a friend, yea, from one that loves thee, yea from that friend
that sent Jesus Christ to dye for thee; and the same love is exercised in the
one as in the other; he sent first to purchase an Inheritance for thee, and now
sends to thee to receive it: He comes to tell thee, the Great King of Heaven
and Earth Greets thee, and invites thee to the Marriage Feast, to the Wedding
Supper, to drink Wine with Christ in his Fathers Court; he comes to tell thee,
thou have fought the good fight, thou have finished thy course, and from
henceforth is laid up for thee a Crown of righteousness, which Christ the
Righteous Judge shall give thee at the last day; that thou have been faithful
over a few things, and shall be Ruler over many things; and shall enter into
thy Masters Joy: He comes to tell thee thou art at Age, and must receive thine
Inheritance; that thou have been long enough tossed to and fro upon the Waves
of trouble, and now must enter into the desired Port; that thou have long
enough fed upon husks, and now must come to thy Fathers house, where there is
bread enough and to spare; he comes to tell thee, thy Warfare is accomplished,
the race is run, the prize is won, and from henceforth the Crown of Glory is
thine own; and what hurt is in all this? or why is such a Messenger to be
feared? he comes not, as happily thou may suppose, to break thy peace with thy
God; no, but to make an everlasting peace, which shall never be broken; to
assure thee, God and thy departing Soul are at peace, and all controversies are
ended, and that thou shall never more see one frown in the face of God, nor one
wrinkle in his forehead; he comes not for thy hurt, but thy good; not to hinder
thy promotion, but to promote it; not to destroy thy body, but only sow it in
the Earth, that it may spring forth a glorious body; that corruption may put on
incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.55.
and the mortal may put on immortality, that Death may be swallowed up of
Victory. He comes not to make thee miserable, Rev. 14.13.
but happy; Bl^ssed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the
Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. He comes
not to separate thee from God, this he cannot do; For neither Death, Romans
8.28.29.
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. No, Death
brings us into a nearer Union, and more close Communion. It Is not come to make
void the Covenant with God, but to make it good, for God has promised in the
Covenant to give Christ, and Heaven, and Glory to thee, and how can this be
made good till Death? and though the body lie for a season in the Grave, as
Israel did in Egypt, after Gods Covenant with Abraham, yet shortly Death, like
Moses, shall come and bring it into the Heavenly Canaan: and though Death in it
self be a Punishment, yea, a curse threatened upon the fall, and remains so
still to wicked men, to whom it is an inlet into eternal misery, yet to the
godly the curse is taken away by the death of Christ; who for us was made a
Curse, and dyed that cursed death upon the Cross, to take away the Malignity of
it; who by his death disarmed Death, and took away his weapons wherein he
trusted; yea took away his sting, that now thou may put the Serpent into thy
bosom; and now Death is so far from putting an end to Believers happiness, that
it puts an end to their sorrows, and is the very Gate to eternal Life; and at
the very stroke of Death, in that moment of time their Joys commence, and
their sorrows end; death to the Wicked is a Pursivant sent from Hell, to fetch
them thither; to the Godly, a Messenger sent from their Father to bring them
home: it is to the body but a quiet sleep, free from hurtful dreams or fearful
Visions. The Grave is but a Bed of Roses, perfumed by the Body of Christ, a
resting Chamber, a Repository where God lays up his Jewels, wherein thy dust
will be kept as in a Cabinet, and not one grain of it shall be lost, Rev. 20.13.
but the Earth, the Sea, the Grave and Hell shall then give up their dead; and
then both Body and Soul shall be received into the City of Pearl, where no
dirty Dog shall trample upon the Pavement; when that Death has done his
Office, the Angels shall do theirs, and carry the Soul into Abraham's bosom, and
lodge it for ever in the arms of Christ; and at the Resurrection when the Soul
and Body shall be reunited, they shall both be glorified for ever; and freed
from all mutation, and change, and all things else that may be called Evil:
when Death has broken the Cage, the Bird will be at liberty, and sing sweetly;
when the prison Walls are pulled down, the prisoner will be free; and is this
that which thou fear? how many thousand deaths would a miscarrying Soul
endure for Heaven at last? yea, if Eternity were spent in the continual feeling
the very pangs of Death, it would be much easier for a damned Soul if it felt
no more, than now it is; and art thou so nice that thou can not endure it for
one Hour, for one moment, upon the promise of Eternal life? Death brings in the
Harvest of thy hopes, the fruit of thy Prayers, the reward of thy pains, and of
all the losses and sufferings thou have had for Christ: God is now sending for
thee to make thee a King, and will thou now withdraw thy self like Saul, and
hide thy self as he did, when they sought him to make him King? here lies the
perfection and end of thy Faith, and of thy Hope, the Salvation of thy Soul;
for these Graces as well as others are imperfect here; here is the only place
where happiness is to be had, the only soil where hearts-ease grows, and yet
must God needs whip thee home, or thou will not matter it? well, if now thou
refuse to come at his call, when thou call'st he may give thee no answer, and
when thou knockest he may not open: but sure some root of bitterness lies at
the bottom, either thou do not believe there is such a happiness, or that it
is not thine, or have placed thine affections elsewhere, and can not remove
them, and made some other choice which thou will not leave. Did thou
steadfastly believe that there was a reward for the Righteous, and that thou art
one of those that shall receive it, how can this be reconciled with thy fears?
would any wise man take a great deal of pains for an Inheritance, and then lose
it all for want of taking possession? thou have in thy lifetime, it is very
like, suffered a hundred times as much pain as thou art like to do at thy
death, and shall this dismay thee more than all the rest? the day of Death is
not so gloomy as it is thought to be. Solomon when he was upon his Throne, in
the midst of his Jollity, commends his Cosfin; Better (says he) is the day of
Death than the day wherein a man is born. Eccles. 7.1.
Many of the wiser Heathens were of the same mind; they wept and mourned at the
birth of their Children, to consider the troubles they were like to meet with
in this troublesome World; when they feasted and rejoiced at the death of their
friends, because their troubles were over, and their rest was come; and surely
Believers have better ground of rejoicing than they had, a more sure foundation
for Faith and Hope to build upon. Oh Death, how pleasant is thy face, to those
acquainted with thee! thou art black, but comely to those that know thee; thou
art indeed attended with a little pain, but with endless bliss; the one makes
makes thee feared, the other beloved. Oh my Soul, let us draw a little nearer,
and take a more exact view of Death, and see what is the worst hurt he can do
us, the best good he will bring us; and compare the one with the other, and
compute the odds, and see whether we can make a savers bargain of it; and if
so, how little cause of fear we have. It may be thou think thou must part
with all thy carnal Joys and worldly delights, thy sensual pleasures, thy merry
Company, and bid farewell to all thy merry meetings, and pleasant Jokes; with
all thy Recreations, Pastimes, and pleasant Sports, and be Buried in silence,
and laid in the dust, and must bid thy pleasures adieu; and poor Soul is this
thy trouble, and the cause of thy fear? have thou not better in exchange for
them? are there not more, and more lasting Joys in the presence of God; Psalm.
16.11.
Rivers of pleasures, without bank or bottom, at the right hand of God for
evermore; unknown Pleasures, unseen Delights, which no eye has seen, nor ear
has heard of, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive of;
such as no stranger shall ever meddle with; Pro. 5.14.
and will not those make thee amends? Let the Epicures of the Age, that choose
pleasures for their portion, plead this argument; let the Drunkard howl when
the new Wine fails, Joel 1.5.
or when the Cup is snatched from his mouth: Alas, thou have met with little
Joys, and those mixed, and the greatest part Wormwood and Gall; a litttle
Honey and many Stings, a little bitter-sweet pleasure that ends in pain; yea
short and transitory, in the midst of laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the
end of that mirth is Heaviness; but what are those to the Joys unspeakable and
full of Glory, that is in Heaven: It Is true, there are some that are the Sons
and Daughters of pleasure, Psalm. 73.5.
That are not in trouble as other men, neither are plagued as other men. Amos
6.4, 5, 6.
They lie upon their Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches,
they eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the
Stall: They chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves
Instruments of Music like David: They drink Wine in Boles, and anoint
themselves with chief Ointment: But they are not grieved for the afflictions of
Joseph, etc. These may indeed fear a Change, and dread the time, when suddenly
they shall go down to Hell; but this is not thy condition; Psalm. 73.14.
for all the day long have thou been plagued, and chastened every Morning; and
thy drink has been mixed with thy Tears: The pleasures thou have had, have but
tickled the Senses, but reach not the Soul, and true content thou never
foundest in them: If thou look back to thy youthful delights and childish
vanities, as they are passed away, and have left nothing but a sting behind
them, so they should not be called to mind without sorrow and compunction of
Spirit; for many of them were the pleasures of sin, yea the pleasure in sin,
sinful pleasures, which have wasted thy precious time, and stole away thy
heart from God, and hindered thee from making useful employment of it, and from
more necessary business; but in Heaven thou shall have pleasure without
satiety; here thou art fain to use various pleasures to patch up a little of
that which thou call delight; the pleasure of any one, yea of the most
delightful Recreations soon passes away, and becomes nauseous, and leaves a
sting behind; but in Heaven thou will solace thy self with Eternal delight:
those pleasures which thou here call by that name, bear no more proportion
to Heavenly Joys, than fire upon the Wall to true fire; the former gives
neither light nor hear, though it have some dark resemblance of it. But happily
this may not be it that troubles thee; it is thy Estate which thou art to leave
behind, which sticks upon thy stomach, for when thou dyest thou must leave all
behind thee; a great All sure, and this also in exchange; when for a handful
of Muck, thou art like to have a handful of Angels, Heaven for Earth, and God
for the Creature, and do repine at the bargain? let those that have great
Estates plead this argument, not one that exchangeth Penury for Plenty, and a
Cottage for a Kingdom; but does not God seem to say to thee as sometime Pharaoh
to Jacob, Genesis 45.20.
As for your stuff regard it not, for the good of all the land of Egypt is
yours? Does it grieve thee to leave this house of clay, which will doubtless
ere long moulder and fall about thy ears, for a Mansion in Glory, a House made
without hands, whose builder and maker is God, Eternal in the Heavens, Pebbles
for Pearls, Earth for Heaven, and the Creature for God? and is this the wrong
Death has done thee? yea this is not all, Death will put thee in possession of
thy own: here thou have nothing thou can call thy own, but may say of it,
as the Prophet of his Axe, Alas Master, 2 King. 6.5.
for it was borrowed; here thou art a Tenant at will, not only at thy Fathers
will, but at another will also, and know not but thou may be dispossessed
before the years end; but that is thine Inheritance; here thou art a rack
Tenant, and have much ado to pay thy Rent, but there thou art a Freeholder,
and payest neither Rent nor Taxes: what here thou have is lent thee, and for
every Talent thou have thou must give an account; what there thou have is given
thee, and thou have ten thousand times as much under thy hands, yet an account
shall never be required: Besides, when thou art gone thou shall have no need of
the things here left behind, for thou go to a house ready furnished: what
need wooden Vessels, or earthen Utensils, when the Walls of the City and the
Streets thereof are of pure Gold? and as there is no need, so there is no use
of these earthly things: what good will food do when thou art not hungry? or
clothes when thou art not cold? there is the Tree of Life in the midst of the
Garden; there is the Fountain of Life to stench thy thirst; there is neither
use nor need of these things: thy Silver and thy Gold signify nothing here;
they trample upon better metal: thy coin will not pass in this Country; these
things should not be thy trouble to part with them, which have proved snares to
thee, both in the getting, and in the keeping; and like a bush of thorns, when
thou have graspt them too hard they have pricked thy fingers; yea, and pricked
and pierced many to the heart; they are not satisfactory, and if they were,
they are not durable, but like a bird upon the Wing, now in one man's Close, and
then in another, and no one can say, She is mine; and if thou dye not from
them, it is odds they will dye from thee, as the Example of two hundred thousand
in Ireland in our days may sadly witness; they are like unto Jonah's Gourd,
they spring up in one Night, and wither in another: I have read of a Heathen
Philosopher, when the City he lived in was taken, sacked and Burnt by the Enemy,
and his Wife and Children captivated, and all his earthly Substance gone, being
demanded by Demetrius, what he had lost, answered, Nothing, Omnia mea mecum
porto; I carry all along with me; his virtue, which could not be lost, was only
his own; and may thou not better say so, if thou be demanded, what thou
losest by Death? for if thou can carry thy Graces, which are thy Evidences
for Heaven, safe thither, this is thy All; for the rest was but lent thee for
thy Journey, as a bed in an Inn to a Traveller, which he must leave behind
him, and not carry it away in the morning; for if thy Evidences be safe, thine
Inheritance is sure; these outward things thou have as long as they will do
thee good, and when they will do thee none, why wilt desire them? and Death
will not deprive thee of any good thing; the lading is safe, though the Ship
sink; the Jewel is safe, though the Box be broken; though the Body dye, the
Soul will live; and thou may therefore say as Jacob, I have enough, Joseph my
son is yet alive, my Soul is yet safe; or as Mophibosheth, Seeing the King is
returned safe, let Zibah take all: Seeing mine Inheritance is secured, my
chiefest Jewel safe, let who will take the rest. But happily it may be thy
Relations that thou art so unwilling to leave, thy dear Wife, thy beloved
Children, those that depend upon thee for their livelihood; and other Relations
that thou have let out thy affection upon, and other intimate acquaintance and
Christian Friends, which have been all that little comfort thou have had in the
world; and now to leave these behind thee, and expose thy own to the wide
world, and know not what will become of them when thou art dead, this makes
thee loath to dye and leave them; this does make thee like unto the Servant that
loved his Wife and his Children, Exo. 21.6.
willing to have thy ears boared, and to be a Slave for ever: but consider a
little, is not this inordinate love, to love the Creature more than the
Creator, and rather obey man than God? when thou tookest upon thee the
profession of Religion, was it not upon those terms, Luke 14.26. etc.
to hate thy Father and Mother, thy Wife, thy Children, thy Brethren and
Sisters, and thy own life for his sake; that is, to leave any or all of these
if he required it; and now art breaking with Christ, and wilt rather deny him,
lose thy Soul, thy God, thy Heaven, thy Happiness, than leave thy Wife and
Children, and other Relations? Joh. 15.13.
Greater love than this has no man, than that a man lay down his life for his
friend: But is not this more, to lose his Soul, to part with his interest in
Heaven, and endure Hellish torments to Eternity for their sake, or for their
company? But they live upon thee, and if they were dead, thou know not how
they will be maintained: And do know how they will be maintained, if thou
live? do know how the World will be Governed, and all the Family in Heaven
and Earth maintained if thou were dead? do thou bear up the Pillars of it? or
do all things seek their meet at thy hand? is it Gods Providence or thine that
maintains thy Family? or at whose charge are they kept? it is true, thou art his
servant, to give them meat and drink in due Season, but thou have it out of his
Storehouse, and if thou were removed cannot he put another into the Office?
cannot he that feeds the Fowls, the young Ravens when they cry, yea the Lions
seek their meat at his hand, and he clothes the Lillies, and the Grass of the
field, and cannot he maintain thy Wife and Children if thou were dead? if the
Pipe be cut, is there no water in the Fountain? Psalm. 78.20.
this is thy unbelief; can God provide a Table in the Wilderness? Nay, but thou
do not question so much his Power, as his Will; why how do know he will
provide for them if thou do live? many a Wife and Children have suffered want
in the Husbands life time, and God may let thee live to be a burden and a grief
to them, an hinderance and not an help; Nay, has not God more engagements upon
him to provide for the Fatherless and Widows, the poor and the needy, than any
other, Psalm 68.5.
having made so many promises on that behalf? A Father of the Fatherless, and a
Judge of the Widow, is God in his holy Habitation; Hos. 14.3. Psalm. 146.9.
and it is in him that the Fatherless find Mercy; He preserves the Stranger,
he relieveth the Fatherless and the Widow: Jer. 49.11.
Leave thy Fatherless Children (says God) to me, and I will keep them alive,
and let thy Widows trust in me; and many a command has he given upon their
account, that they shall not be wronged; Nay, are they not in the same Relation
to God as thou art? are they not his Children also? and will he that feeds all
his Enemies, starve his Children? Nay, he feeds the Fowls of Heaven, Psalm.
34.9, 10.
and has not he promised that those that fear the Lord shall want nothing that
is good; Nay, if thou should lose thy life for his sake, thou would yet
more deeply engage him to look to thine in thy absence. But suppose thou
should for the sake of Christ lose thy Relations, or rather leave them
behind, what wrong is done thee? you came not into the World together, and it is
not like you will go together; but if thou go first, have no satisfaction for
this piece of self-denial? God is not wont to be behind hand with thee; shall
not thou enjoy more and better Relations in Heaven whither thou art going? Is
not the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ there, whom thou call thy
Father, and Christ which thou call thy Husband and thy head, and the Holy
Ghost which thou call thy Paracletus, thy comforter? and is not Jerusalem
which is above the Mother of us all? Gal. 4.26.
are not the Angels thy Guardians, and the departed Saints many of them thou
knew in the flesh, thy fellow-Brethren, and thy companions? and do not these
better deserve thy love than any in the world, being altogether lovely, and
without Spot or wrinkle, glorious in holiness? yea are not many of thy
Relations in the flesh gone before thee? Thy Father, Mother, Wife, and several
Children, those thou lovedst in the days of their flesh, those thou Lamentedst
at the time of their Death; and will not their Society rejoice thee in Heaven,
when they shall be made perfect in holiness? here is Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and all the Prophets; here are the Apostles, and the Noble Army of Martyrs, and
here are the Spirits of just men made perfect; and those faithful persons thou
have left behind thee, will shortly follow, and is there yet sufficient matter
of complaint? what if thou do become a stranger to what is done upon the
Earth; this is thy happiness: for if thou know no good, thou will know no evil;
and for an ounce of good there is a pound of evil done there; there is much
that may wring tears from the eyes, little that will remove sorrow from the
heart; much sin and debauchery, much Idolatry and superstition, much swearing
and cursing, much drinking and drabbing, and of all manner of wickedness, but
little holiness and true Godliness; this may bring tears from the eyes, and
sobs from the heart; but in Heaven thou shall never be troubled more with the
Unclean conversations of the wicked, for there will be nothing there to
discompose thee. And if thou shall in Heaven know the things done upon the
Earth, which is a secret which God has not revealed, doubtless it is not to
lessen thy comforts but increase them; for as sin, so sorrow shall never enter
there. Thou may happily think, that when death has passed upon thee, thy name
will be forgotten; and what then? if thy good deeds are not remembered, no more
will thy sin, and thy folly, and this far exceeds the other: but there may be a
resurrection of Names, as well as of Bodies; Pro. 12.7.
The memory of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot;
Psa. 112.6
the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. If honor be not
founded on grace, it is the emptiest of bubbles, which time will prick, and the
most lasting Marble cannot preserve: The Aspersions which are cast in the face
of the Righteous, time will wipe off, and the paint and luster bestowed upon
wicked men will off also: If thy Name be written in the Book of Life, it
matters not much if it be blotted out of the world; if God remember thee, it
matters not much though the world forget thee. What though the Habitation
wherein thou live know thee no more, if thou art acquainted in Heaven it
matters not much, though happily the place may be recorded for thy sake; Psalm.
87.4, 5, 6.
For of Zion it shall be said, this or that man was born in her, and the
Highest himself shall establish her; the Lord shall count when he writes up
his people that this man was born there. What matter is it to thee where thou
wast born, if now thou have a better habitation? thou have never had any
abiding place since thou wast born, but posted from one place to another by an
overruling Providence, and never in any long settled Habitation, having above
twenty times changed thy dwelling, many times against thy will, and most times
by an unexpected Providence: And sometimes when thou have pitched thy Tent, and
said, Surely I shall dye here, Numb. 10.12.
the Cloud has removed, and thou have been forced to march; some Providence or
other gave a check to thy conceits; and if thou live longer, thy future
condition is not like to be more settled: thou have been a wayfaring man all
thy days, even from the Morning of thy Life, and so thou art like to be till
thy Sun be set: And for some season thy own house would not own thee, thy own
doors were shut against thee, and thy nearest Relations durst not entertain
thee, though no flagitious crime was charged upon thee: Many a place that did
know thee, is now strange to thee, and thou art a stranger to it, and if this
become strange also, it is no great matter. If thou art of a Peasant made a
Prince, and from a Country Cottage brought into the possession of a Kingdom,
never complain what wrong death has done thee: Or is it thy work thou art so
unwilling to leave? or art thou ready to say, Alas! what will become of these
poor Sheep in the Wilderness? 1 Samuel 17.28.
if the Shepherd be smitten, they will be scattered; it is well if there be so
much care of them. Paul indeed having the care of all the Churches upon him,
was driven into a straight, whether to choose, Life or Death; yet to dye he
knew was best for him, but to live for them; but I fear there are few
like-minded, that naturally care for the Church: for all seek their own, not
one another welfare; but the argument may be retorted, If thou which have been
a Shepherd fly when thou see the Wolf coming, how shall the Sheep stand? if
thou turn thy back upon Christ, and rather deny him than suffer for him, what
woeful work will this make among the Sheep! if thou refuse to seal thy Doctrine
with thy blood, what encouragement shall they have to own their profession to
the Death? when the Captains run, what havoc will the enemy make among the
Soldiers? but what will thy Life add to any man's happiness, or thy Death
diminish from thy own? If the chief Husbandman take thee out of the Vineyard,
it is but to make room for other Laborers, for his work shall not stand; if he
stop thy mouth, he will open the mouths of others; his work shall be done
whether thou live or dye: Thou art almost laid aside as a broken Vessel, and if
he break thee quite, the matter is not much, there will be little loss: And if
thou live, thou art in a capacity of doing little good; but if thy Sun set at
Noon, God will not diminish thy wages; Luke 9.62.
if he take the Plough out of thy hand, he will not blame thee for looking
back; those that workt but one hour in the Vineyard had their penny; but thy
Sun is almost set, the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, Jer. 6.4.
and Nature it self will shortly end thy days, and cut off the thread of thy
life, if thou should spin it to the utmost extent, and yet art so loath to
have it broke off a little before the time? if thou have employed thy Talent
well, God will not chide thee that thou had it no longer; he does not require
so much use for the half-year as for the whole, nor so much work to be done in
the half as in the whole day, in the Vineyard. If he call thee hence, to serve
him elsewhere, he expects thou should obey; for thy praises in Heaven are as
pleasant to him as thy Preaching upon Earth; and for the Church of God take no
care, he that has made provision for it this five thousand years, he will not
leave it now, and can do his work without thee; and if God take away thy life,
he will take away thy work, and lay thy burden upon others shoulders: The same
stroke that lets out thy life, lets out thy sin; and sin being gone, the
consequents, fruits and effects of it cease also, which are labor and sorrow;
Job. 3.17, 18.
and in the grave the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at
rest. Death may be sweet to those to whom Life has been bitter, and though
death may destroy thy Body, yet shall it have no dominion over thy Soul;
Eccles. 12.7.
the Spirit returns to God that gave it: The body is but a crazie Pitcher, and
no wonder if it break, nay it is a wonder it has run through so many dangers
and is not yet broken; and when it is broken, it is but of the same Clay to make
a better by the same Potter: Thy life is precious indeed, and should not be
sold, but not so precious as to be bought at such a rate as the loss of the
Soul: What wise man will sell the Jewel to redeem the Box? Christ lost his life
for thy Souls redemption, and will thou not lose thine for its preservation?
Temporal death is the only inlet to Eternal Life; but to seek to save thy Life
when Christ and his Cause require it, is the ready way to eternal death; to
lose it in this case is to save it, and the way to get the greatest gain, and
to prevent the everlasting separation of soul and body from God, which is the
second Death: But Death of it self cannot separate from God, Romans 8.28, 29.
and however it may make the body loathsome in the eyes of men, and undesirable
to near Relations, yet it cannot make it unlovely in Gods eyes, or move him to
forsake it; and though it do fall into the earth and rot there, it is but as
seed sown into the ground to spring up with more advantage; it is a part of
Christ's Purchase, and shall not be lost; 1 Cor. 6.19.
it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and though it be ruined, it is but to be
rebuilt, and not one pin of it shall be wanting, for the Grave, the Sea, and
Hell must give up their dead; and though worms may feed upon thy body, yet thou
shall neither feel nor fear them; Psalm. 22.6.
and why should thou disdain thy fellow creatures, seeing man in Scripture
account is but a Worm? Job 25.6.
those cannot devour the body so as to hide it from God, neither can they make
it loathsome to God. When a house is pulled down, it seems a ruinous heap, but
many times it is in order to rebuilding, and then it is more glorious. But if it
be the pain of dying that does affright thee, (and I know not what else it can
be) consider, there is very little cause for it; for we may daily see that many
die and depart the world without any show of sensible pain, and depart in
peace, nay, as in a sleep, sometimes in a swoun, without motion or appearance
of pain; and art afraid of that which even sucking Children undergo, and which
all the world have or must endure? and were it painful, would thou grutch to
bear an hours pain for Eternal Glory, who usually suffer as much pain for a
meaner reward? If thy dinner be sharp, thy Supper will be sweet: Thou will take
pains for profit, and suffer much for ease. Oh my God, did my dear Redeemer
suffer such a shameful death for me, to make me happy, and shall I lose this
happiness, rather than go to enjoy it? God forbid. Lord, give me in requisite
qualifications, and then call for me when and how thou please; yet Lord let
me not dye unprepared, and lose both my Life and Soul together.

MEDITAT. VII. Martyrdom not hurtful to a Christian.
OH my Soul, what is it that thou do boggle at? Death thou hear can do
thee no hurt, why then do thou fear it? O! but it is a violent death thou
fear; were it but a natural death, thou could submit to it; but to fall
into the hands of the uncircumcised, into the hand of bloody and deceitful men,
whose loving kindness is cruelty; this thou can not willingly bear: all Death
offers violence to nature, and to be willing to dye by thy Enemies hand, thou
art not pressed to; use all unlawful means to escape, but no means but what is
lawful: thou must be willing to submit to God, and when he manifests this to be
his will, thou must cheerfully suffer it; but I fear this is but a Fig-leaf to
cover a little Faith: well, let us argue the case: To dye thou seem willing,
but thou must choose thy death, and God must have no hand in the business; thou
would go to him, but he must not send for thee, especially by such a
messenger thou likest not of: This is Childrens play, they would do any thing
but what they are bid do; go any whither but to School, learn in any Book but
their own. But do really think that thou art fitter to determine the
circumstances of thy Death than God? the time when, the place where, and the
manner how? or will God accept of thee for a Councellor in this case? and what
difference is there between the one and the other? one stops thy breath, and so
will the other; one sets an end to thy temporal being, and so does the other;
the consequences are the same, and the pains of the natural death may be as
great, or greater than the other; would thou choose some violent distemper,
some raging disease, some violent pain to end thy life? Nay, this thou likest
not neither; had thou the Stone, the Strangury, the Colic, the Gout, etc.
this might make thee live a dying life, and make thee weary of thy life, and
with Job choose strangling rather than life; and had rather endure this, than
a few minutes pain from the hands of man? I fear this excuse is but to prolong
thy time, but buy not time at so dear a rate: thou seem careful not to come
to Heaven too soon, nor honor God too much by thy Death, but take heed of
wringing thy life out of his hands; dye thou will, thou say, but it must be
when thou caust live no longer, and then no thanks to thee, patience perforce
is a Medicine for a mad Dog: does not Death, whether by a Disease, by the
Sword, or at the Stake, signify much the same thing as to the consequents of
Death? only the latter, if it be in the cause of Christ, speaks thee more a
Christian, and entitles thee to a Crown of Martyrdom, and will increase thy
happiness. Death, at which door soever it comes in, separates between the Body
and the Soul: but happily thou may live a little longer by refusing to dye
for Christ, but will not a years enjoyment of God in Glory, be as delightful to
thee as a year longer spent upon the Earth? and perhaps if the one be sooner
than the other, it may be with as little pain. But suppose God should give thee
thy choice, either to dye a natural Death the next year, or to dye by an
enemies hand seven year after, which would thou choose? I suppose thou
would seal to the longer Lease; If so, it is not a violent death thou fear,
so much as a short life: but if this be thy fear, to dye too soon, God may send
thee a languishing life, and make thee long for death, Job. 3.21, 22.
and dig for it as for Silver, and rejoice exceedingly when thou can find the
grave: But then it is no thanks to thee, to dye when thou can live no longer,
or only desire death to be rid of thy pain; and sometimes God punishes an
immoderate desire of life, by imbittering their life to them, and so makes them
say as Job, Troublesome nights are appointed to me: If thou will willingly
resign thy Life to God, and leave it to his dispose, thou will not make a
losers bargain: happily he may rescue it out of the Enemies hand; however, he
will not be long in thy debt, but for a temporal Life will give thee that which
is Eternal, which will be a thousand fold better. Ignatius knew it when he
said, Burning, hanging, tearing my flesh in pieces with wild horses, tantummodo
ut Jesum nanciscar, only let me enjoy Christ; and was afraid left his friends
should prevent his Martyrdom by their Prayers. Seeing thy body must be reduced
to dust, it is no matter whether it rot above ground, or in it; no matter
whether thou be burnt to ashes, or moulder to dust, God will not lose one grain
of thy dust: Kill me they may (says the Martyr) hurt me they cannot; the worst
they can do, is but to send me to my Fathers house the sooner. The love of
Christ in the Martyrs, was hotter than the Flames they burnt in, and much
allayed the heat of the Fire, that some of them felt little or no pain. O ye
Papists (says one) ye look for a miracle, behold a miracle, for in this fire I
feel no pain, it is to me as a bed of Roses. They went as readily to dye as to
dine, and accounted the day of their Death their Wedding day. Paul was ready
not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ. Many were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection; they had Trial of
cruel mocking, scourging, yea bonds and imprisonments; they were stoned, sawn
asunder, tempted, slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and
Goatskins, Heb. 11.36. etc.
being destitute, afflicted and tormented, of whom the World was not worthy;
they wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth,
etc. The more thou suffer for Christ, the more weighty will thy Crown of
Glory be; those that loved not their lives to the death, but were killed for
the Testimony of Jesus, are placed under the Altar; nay, follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and are clothed with long white Robes, and have Palms
in their hands: But if thou deny thy life to Christ, he will deny thee entrance
into this Heavenly Canaan; and thou shall not only lose thy reward, but thy
Soul also, and expose thy self to Death Eternal: If thou suffer with him, thou
shall reign with him; and if thou art ashamed of him, he will also be ashamed
of thee: Those that honor him he will honor; and those that despise him,
shall be lightly esteemed: If thou come to suffer for him, as many eyes will be
upon thee, so many Prayers will be put up for thee; and doubtless much comfort
will be dropped into thy Soul by the Spirit of God, who is the Comforter, sent by
God upon this business: and God will stand by thee in suffering times, and give
in Cordials to refresh thy heart. I have read of a Christian, that under his
Rack and Tortures, as he after told his friends, apprehended a young man with a
handkerchief wiping the sweat off his face, and comforting him. The holy Angels
will stand by thee, and God will not be at a distance from his suffering
Saints; and who then need fear to dye, that has learnt to live? if thou be
prepared, thou needst not fear what Messenger God sends for thee, nor at what
hour of the night thy master comes; for Death cannot be sudden to the prepared
Soul, that is always upon his watch; and thou needst not fear what thy
sufferings be, if thou can but say, Propter te, propter te Domine; It Is for
thee, and for thy sake we are killed all the day long, and accounted as Sheep
for the slaughter. The more thou suffer then, the more deeply thou engagest
God to thee, and he will pay thee an hundred fold; this is the best usury, and
the best way thou can dispose of thy life, for every year on Earth that thou
have lost, thou shall receive a thousand in Heaven; and for one friend thou
forsakest here, thou shall receive a thousand there; and for every thing thou
losest for his sake, thou shall be recompensed a thousand fold; and as thou
shall have no loss, so thy Enemies shall be no gainers by thy death; they heap
up coals of fire upon their own heads, and (without repentance prevent it)
augment their own damnation; for Christ will take it as done to himself; and
their torments are like to be as durable as thy Joys, which will be for ever
and ever. Consider not so much what thou suffer, as for what, and for whom:
if it be for the Truth, it will prevail; and if it be for Christ, thou shall
not lose by it: Truth is more precious than life it self, and fit to be sealed
with thy blood; thou must deny thy self, rather than deny thy God; for he that
gave thee thy life, is fittest to dispose of it, and whosoever parts with his
life upon this account makes a good bargain; he cannot buy this Gold too dear.
Many are the encouragements given in Scripture to persecuted Saints: Mat. 5.10,
11, 12.
Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven; blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you. And as great will be thy reward, so great also
are the company of thy fellow sufferers, even from righteous Abel to this day;
Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers Persecuted? Yea, Christ and his
Apostles followed after; for almost all of them dyed a violent death; and
greater than the Master is, the Servant cannot be; the world that hated Christ
will hate his Servants also, and persecute all that bear his Image: If they
hated him for righteousness sake, they will hate all that are righteous. Christ
suffered for thee the wrath of God, and wilt not thou suffer for him the wrath
of man? he was stung by Death, and do think it much to be stricken by it, now
the sting is out? he suffered for thee the pains of Hell, and think it too
much to suffer the pangs of death for him, when many times it is not so much as
some have endured from an aching tooth? and what is this to the recompense of
reward? he gave thee thy life, and can take it if he please, and yet desires
thy consent, and if thou refuse, he will distrain of thee for this debt: The
worst of Enemies can but stop thy breath, and the least of Creatures can do as
much, if animated by God: The least Fly, or Hair, or Crumb of Bread, will choke
thee if God give it a commission; and well may thou fear it, if thou have
denied God to lay down thy life for his sake; sickness or age will as surely
end thy life as thy Enemies can, though happily not so suddenly; thou have no
assurance of it a day to an end, neither can thou have, only put it into his
hand, and he will dispose of it for thy good: how can the seed spring up, if it
be not sown? or how can the body rise, if not fallen? if God suffer any to take
away thy life, it is not out of any love to them, or hatred to thee: he loves
his Child better than his Rod; though sometimes the rod may be set on high,
when the Child is turned out of door; yet when the child is reformed, the rod
shall be burnt; they cannot preserve their own lives, nor take away thine, it is
God does both; and ere long they must tread the same steps, and down to the
same pit, and travail the same road, and enter Deaths dark Vault as well as
others; only here is the difference, death which will bring thee as Joseph out
of Prison, will bring them in; and as it knocks off the bolts from thy heels,
he will fasten shackles and chains upon theirs, and shall bring them like Haman
from his glory to his execution; that death which will set an end to thy
misery, will terminate their felicity; it will bring thee to glory, but them to
shame and everlasting contempt: well may they fear Death, but thou have more
cause to desire it; Heaviness to thee may continue for a night, but joy comes
in the morning: and by the eye of faith thou may with Stephen see beyond
Death, even Heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, yea the
Tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, the Crown of glory,
the purchased Inheritance, the Prize for which thou did run, the Crown for
which thou did fight. If thou have a mark in thy forehead for a Mourner in
Sion, there thou shall have a Crown upon thy head, in token of Victory.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Thou art almost
come to the top of the hill, draw not back now, nor let thy heart go down; hold
out now Faith and Patience, your work will not be now long; hold fast what thou
have, let no man take thy crown; let no temptation draw thee away from Christ;
consider well the hand that holds it, and the design Satan drives on, to
captivate thy soul for ever. Thy life, as it is not in thy own hand, and should
not be at thy own dispose, so it is not in thine enemies hand, to take it away
at their pleasure; but as God makes wicked men his Skullions to scour off the
rust of his people, so also his Executioners to fulfill his Decrees: all is in
the hands of God; both the Time when, the Manner how, and the Instruments by
whom it shall be done; he knows best when his work is done, and when to gather
his Roses, and lodge them in his bosom; and the Devil and his instruments are
but his drudges, and when the measure of their sins are fulfilled, they shall
have their reward. The Devil himself was not able to kill one of Jobs Sheep,
nor to raise one boil upon his body, without Gods leave; Job 1.10.
for God had set a hedge about him, as he was fore't to confess. And God will
seal no commission to the damage of his people, for all things shall work
together for their good. Romans 8.28.
And why do fear man, whose breath is in his nostrils, or the son of man that
is vanity? if the fear of God be planted in the heart, the fear of men and
Devils will vanish; for God has them in a chain, and they cannot go a link
beyond it. Dan. 3.19. and 6.16.
Nebuchadnezzar had power to cast the three children into the fiery furnace,
but not to burn them. Darius had power to cast Daniel into the Lions den, yet
not to cause him to be devoured: the Sodomites compassed Lots house, but could
not enter; and Haman procured a decree to cut off all the Jews, but lived not
to effect it. Those that are faithful to the death, Rev. 2.10.
shall receive at God hands a Crown of life, and shall be made pillars in the
house of God, if they overcome. But if thou revolt and deny thy God, thou art
from under his protecting hand, and can not claim one promise of his
assistance; then thou stand upon thy own legs, and must shift for thy self,
and a miserable shift it will be. Do contend with him about thy life, that
has the keys of life and death at his girdle; he that gave thee thy life and
being, and thou have no breath but what he gives thee? See the grievous
judgments that God brings upon Apostates, which both the Scripture and Church
Histories will furnish thee with; the fallen Angels, Adam and Eve in paradise,
Judas, Achitophel, Ananias and Saphira, and many more, and in after ages not a
few; and what think to get by Apostasy, by denying thy God, or thy Religion?
perhaps thou think to save thy life a little longer: a miserable bargain,
and yet the Devil cannot assure thee of that. It is to be feared that many in
Ireland, in the late Rebellion, had they been brought to the trial, whether
they would have forsaken their Religion or their Lives, would not have chosen
Death, yet they suffered in the name of Protestants, when it is to be feared
they had little more than the Name, the question not being who were godly, and
who wicked, but who were Protestants and who Papists? and so it will be in
England, if ever a Massacre be there made by the Papists, which God forbid;
good and bad are there like to drink of the same cup: how much better then is
it to devote thy life to God, leave it at his dispose? if he save it, bless him
for it; if he take it away, let his will be done; if thou thus carry it in thy
hand, to lay down at his pleasure, if he require it not, thou shall not lose
thy reward, as Abraham did not though Isaac was not sacrificed. If thou
resolvedly deny it, though he require it not, thou shall not be innocent, as
Abraham, had he denied his son, though God eventually determined he should not
dye, yet had been a transgressour, and had missed of the blessing: yet it is not
required of thee by God to lay down thy head upon the block, but use all good
means for to save thy life; and as Christ bids his disciples, Mat. 10.23.
when they are persecuted in one city, to fly to another: for if thou suffer
without a call, thou losest thy reward, all lawful means for self-preservation
must be used, or we are guilty of our own blood, but when thou must sin or
suffer, dye or deny the truth, thou must not deny the truth for life's sake, nor
do evil that good may come of it, then trust God; if he will, he can preserve
thee; if not, his will be done; for then he sees it bes^ to take thee away from
the evil to come, of two evils the least is to be chosen, losing thy life is
not so bad as losing Gods love; Psalm. 63.3.
for his loving kindness is better than life: a violent death upon this account
has been the lot of many thousand Saints, that have deliberately made this
choice, whose souls are now attending upon the Lamb whithersoever he goes; from
the beginning of the world to this day, no age was free from innocent blood:
which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? the Apostles, the
primitive Fathers, and many thousand Christians were baptized with Christ's
baptism, and went to Heaven in a Sea of blood. The Jews made havoc of the
Church in the Primitive times, and when they were destroyed, and their power
taken from them, the Roman Emperors in the Ten bloody persecutions destroyed
hundreds of thousands of them; and after that succeeded the Arian persecution;
and when that was ended, and the Pope got his foot into the stirrup, and sat,
as he pretends, in the infallible Chair, he exceeded in cruelty the Heathens
themselves: witness the Spanish Inquisition, the bloody butchering of the
Waldenses, and Albigenses, the Massacres in Paris and other Cities of France,
in Hungary, Germany, Savoy, Piedmont, England, Scotland, and especially of
Ireland, where two or three hundred thousand have perished in a sew weeks: for
since the fiery Jesuits became an Order, having their Name rather from Judas
than Jefus, the Christian world has been in a flame; yea the poor Indians have
tasted of their cruelty; wherever they set their foot, like Saul, they make
havoc of the Church; and many hundred thousands have been cut off by their
bloody hands; and all along thou may trace the Church in blood and tears; and
do thou think much to be one of those that shall cry, Rev. 6.19.
How long Lord, holy and true, before thou avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth? Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.12.
as if some strange thing happened to thee; for this is no temptation but what
is common to man. When such great Commanders and old Soldiers lead thee the
way, thou need not be ashamed, or afraid to follow them: do think to
escape drowning in a common deluge? The Apostle was sure of nothing, but of
bonds and imprisonment, and was ready not only to be bound, but to dye for
Christ. If thou go to suffering, thou treadest not in an untrodden path, for
the Captain of thy salvation was made perfect by suffering: A few days, and
thou will be even with the greatest Kings and Emperors. Job 21.23.
For death is a perfect Leveller: and if dye thou must, as well as others,
dispute not the case with God what death it must be, or who is fittest to
determine it. In one of these late years death slew an hundred thousand in our
chief City, and two, or some say, three hundred thousand more by the hand of
cruelty in one Kingdom, in Ireland, and sometimes many thousands in one battle:
A death thou owe, and a death thou must pay, and whether in thy Bed, or on a
Tree, or at the Stake, if thy cause be good, it is not much matter; whether thy
life be ended by the course of nature, or by violent hands; whether thy lamp be
burnt out, or put out; whether the Rose be gathered or withered; if the latter,
even so Father, for so it seemed good to thee. Death is an enemy that cannot be
resisted, the only way to conquer it, is to fall under it; so Christ our chief
Captain did: we shall never conquer till we be overcome, and never be victors
till we are conquered, and then both death and the fear of death, and and he
that has the power of death, the Devil, shall be subdued; for when he has
separated the soul from the body, he has done his worst, and spit his venom,
and like a Ree that has lost his sting, can do no more mischief; and then thy
Conquest is fully obtained, and the last enemy is subdued; for then death and
bell shall be cast into the lake of fi^e; yea there shall be no more death,
thou shall then be for ever freed from the dread and danger of it: death pricks
that ulcer that would never be cured while thou live: when Corn is ripe and
cut, it is fit for use; the conquest of death is made easy by the death of
Christ, that now Believers may triumphantly sing, O death where is thy sting? 1
Cor. 15.55, 56.
O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has given us the victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. It cannot now sting thee, but strike thee, and the very
wound it gives is the way to heal thee, it seals up thy salvation to thee, and
makes it sure out of a possibility to lose; it seals up wicked men's damnation,
and puts them into an irrecoverable condition. Christ which was made a Curse
for us, has taken away the curse of death, and by hanging on a tree, which was
threatened as a curse, Gal. 3.13.
he has sanctified that death also to Believers who suffer for him, and for
the testimony of a good conscience; and their condition is also happy, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. All Saints dye, but all
are not Martyrs; all have crowns, but not all the crown of Martyrdom, but only
those that love not their lives to the death: all shall have white robes, Rev.
7.11. etc.
but these shall have long white robes, and palms in their hands, and shall
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. If thou can get the qualifications fit
for a dying man, thou need not fear death, nor the manner of it; to such,
deaths black Vizor is taken off, and there are few wrinkles seen in his
forehead: thy death is decreed, and the manner of it, and though thou know
not what eventually will happen, yet observe what is Gods will of command, and
so thou will know what is thy duty: secret things belong to God, but things
revealed to us; thou have no promise to be freed from the Prison, the Stake,
the Sword, or the Halter, and promise not thy self greater freedom than God
has promised; he has promised indeed all shall work together for thy good,
and this promise is sufficient: for why should thou desire freedom if it be
not good for thee? he has promised, that if thou art faithful to the death,
Rev. 2.10.
thou shall have a Crown of life; that he will never leave thee nor forsake
thee, and that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against thee. And these
promises he will assuredly keep, if thou break not with him. There is no death
which a malefactor may dye, but it may be a Believers lot, and then why not
thine? God has accounted thee worthy to preach the Gospel, and to dispense the
Mystery thereof, and if he account thee worthy also to suffer for him, and to
seal thy doctrine with thy blood, it is a double honor, yea such as the
Apostles gloried in; for to dye for the Truth, if called to it, is both a Duty
and a Dignity; if thou suffer with him, you will be glorified together: Pass on
therefore out of this Egypt, out of this house of bondage, courageously, though
through the red Sea, yea a sea of blood, to this heavenly Canaan; yea though
thy way lie through a wilderness of troubles; for thine Inheritance will make
thee amends; murmur not, for thou shall have no cause to repent: there is
enough in God to give thee content, and to pay thee for thy pains; if thou
think there is not, stir not a step further; if there be, never faint in the
way, never leave Heavens road for a piece of foul way, or for the Cross that
lies in it; go on toward Heaven, yea though thy way lie by the gates of Hell,
nay through the very flames of it; much more though it lie through the pangs of
death: happily thou may be burnt for an Heretic, this is no new thing;
hundreds of thousands of good Christians have suffered death under this
pretense: For a good work (said the Jews) we stone thee not; but for
blasphemy. This sect is every where spoken against: And after the way which men
call heresy (says the Apostle) so worship I the God of my Fathers. There Is
none that persecute the Saints as Saints, but as Offenders: no man will put an
innocent man to death under that notion, the Devil has taught them their
lesson better than so. Job is not punished as a righteous man, but a hypocrite,
that served God for gain; and if God restrained his wages, he would curse God
to his face. Daniel must be cast into the Lions den, and the three children
into the fiery furnace, for breaking the Kings Laws; and the Jews put all to
death in Hamans time, being against the Kings profit: He that would kill a dog,
says the proverb, must say he was mad. But these aspersions are not
inconsistent with eternal salvation. It Is true thou art a great offender
against God, and so deservest death, but thou art not like to suffer upon this
account; greater offenders escape safe, but thy fault is, that thou will not
betray the Truth; thou will not worship God according to men's Inventions; thou will not bow down to their Idols, who set up their Dagon by the Ark; these
things are most like to lay thee open to sufferings, rather than Atheism,
debauchery, or open profaneness. But if it be thus, thou art not the first
innocent person that has been oppressed in judgment, neither art thou like to
be the last: Eccle. 7.15.
it is no strange thing to see a righteous man perish in his righteousness; but
thy innocent blood, if shed, will, like the blood of Abel, cry from the earth
for revenge, and do them more hur^ thau the stroke of death can do to thee and
thy cause will be called over again, and tried at another Bar; and if
maintaining the Truth, and keeping a good conscience, and standing close to the
cause of Christ, be the cause of the sufferings, fear not, thou shall hereater
be acquitted, when thine enemies shall be condemned; and Heresy then will be
otherwise defined, than now they do. Oh my God, I see death cannot hurt me, my
enemies cannot hinder my happiness, if my own deceitful heart do not deceive
me: Lord leave me not to my self, for then I shall miscarry. Lord, through thy
strength I shall be strong; and if thou leave, I can do nothing. Lord qualify
me fit for suffering, and death, and then command what thou will.

MEDITAT. VIII. The Miseries Death frees us from.
OH my Soul, what say thou yet? will thou submit to God, even to the death,
and leave it to Gods dispose what death thou shall dye, whether a natural death
or a violent? thou see neither can hurt thee if thou be prepared, either will
undo thee if thou be not; and therefore thou needst not to fear it: nay it will
do thee much good, and therefore thou may desire it, with submission to thy
Makers will; thou may sing with Paul that Swan-like song, Cupio dissolvi, I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is best of all! There are
three things especially which make thy life uncomfortable to thee; and that is
Sin, Sorrow, and Temptations; and from those, or either of those, thou can
never be freed by any but death: sin is the cause of misery, and temptations
the cause of sin; while thou art in the world, thou art under the tyranny of
sin, and while sin lives, sorrow never dies; for afflictions follow sin, as the
shadow does the substance, or the effect the cause; and while there is a Devil
in hell, and thou be on earth, thou can never be free from his assaults. It Is
true, in the Creation the soul was made innocent, and the body spotless, but by
the Devils instigations Man lost his integrity, sinned against God, and so lost
his Image; and in the room of Original righteousness stamped upon his soul, he
has Original sin; so that thy whole man, soul and body, is polluted, and that
in all the powers and faculties of the soul, and the body is become the
instrument to act the s^^s the soul conceives: thou broughtest a poysonful
Nature with thee into the world, which thou can not be stripped of while thou
art in the world; yea before thou could sin, thou wast sinful; and before
thou could act reason thou wast guilty of Treason against thy God; thou
broughtest the spawn of all sin with thee, as a Wolf brings his wolvish nature
into the world, or a Toad or Serpent a noxious quality, though when young they
cannot reduce it into act. Corruption has naturally a seat in the soul; from
within come murders, adulteries, etc. It possesses the noblest powers and
faculties of it. Now a Swine in the Garden is not seemly, much less in the
Parlour, or the Bedchamber: it takes up its residence in the heart, which is
the room wherein Christ himself should lodge. This original corruption, with
which thou art tainted, is virtually every sin, for it is the Spawn of it:
there is no sin acted, but the seed of it lies here; and hence it is thou art
so disposed to evil, and so averse from good: there is no sin so bad, but thou
have an inclination to it, if this seed be watered with a temptation, if the
restraining or Sanctifying grace of God prevent not; and no duty so good, but
this sets thy heart against it: the very Praising of God, that Angelical duty,
is opposed by this original sin. This sin of Nature, this original corruption,
is universal, and that makes it much worse; universal in respect of Time, even
from the fall to the end of the world; no day free from this sin; some sin
reigns most in some Ages, this in every Age. Also in respect of Persons, no
mere man was ever free since the fall, no son of Adam or daughter of Eve: other
sins some persons may be, and are little infected with, but this all stand
infected with. And in respect of Parts, it is universal also; no power of the
soul, no member of the body free from it; and it is continual and perpetual,
without any Intermission; thou can not leave it behind in one duty. It Is
said, that some Serpents when they go to drink, lay by their poison, as also
when they go to generate: This I know not, but this I am sure of, thou can
not lay aside thy sinful nature; yea, when thou make thy Addresses to God
himself, thou may happily lay aside the acting of sin, but not being sinful;
for could thou leave thy sin behind thee, thou might have more sweet
communion with thy God in one Duty, than now thou can have in all thy duties;
for it is sin that stains all thy duties, and makes them signify little to
thee: and were thou not in Christ, God would hate them, and throw them back
into thy face with disdain: it is thy sin that makes thee take so much pains in
duty to keep thy heart to God, this hides his face from thee, that thou can
scarce have a glimpse of him in an Ordinance; this is the Root upon which all
other sins grow, the Spring that feeds all the streams of vice; and hence they
issue: and this is it upon which the Devil fastens all his temptations: the
want of this made the Devil successeless in his tempting of Christ; his fire
fell upon wet Tinder; and this is the misery of it, this sin never dies for
age, but the longer we live the stronger it grows: some sins are in a decaying
condition as to the Act, when age disables an Adulterer, and some others, but
this decays not: yea and we propagate it also to our Posterity, our children
receive it from us, and so it will be propagated from one generation to another
to the worlds end. Oh the horrid nature of this sin! it is the Image of Satan,
which he stamped upon us when the image of God was lost, and this cannot be
rased out, but by death: here thou art troubled with a hard heart, a stubborn
will, disordered affections, unruly passions, vain thoughts, idle imaginations,
which thou can not shake off more than thy very Nature: this makes thee so
unlike to God, so like to Satan whose Image thou bear, and whose work thou
do; this makes thy duties stink in the nostrils of God, and thy whole man,
Soul and Body out of order; this hinders thy communion with thy God, and makes
him a stranger to thee; it makes thee act as an enemy to him, and him to thee,
and thy iniquity hides his face from thee. These are the Anakims that terrify
thee, these are the sons of Zerviah that are too hard for thee, these are the
Caananites which are thorns in thine eyes and pricks in thy sides, these sins
of thine are the cause of all thy trouble; thou had never had aching head, or
aching heart, or loss, or cross, or any thing to trouble thee, had it not been
for sin, but from these thou can not be freed one moment: no Prayer, no Duty,
no Action, but savours of them; this thou art sensible of, this burden thou
groanest under, and lookst upon sin as thy greatest enemy; and well thou may,
for nothing could hurt thee but for this; this it is that makes the soul
vulnerable, which otherwise man nor Devil could not hurt; this thou have
preached against, spoke against, prayed against; thou have railed upon it, and
called it all that naught is; well now let us see whether thou wast in Earnest
or in Jest, whether all this was in sincerity, or hypocrisy; death comes now
to free thee from this bondage, ease thee of this burden, and brings a potion
to cure thee when all other Doctors have left thee, and can do no good: he will
bring thee where sin and sorrow shall be no more; for into heaven they shall
never enter: art thou willing of the separation, to give sin a bill of divorce,
and put it away? will thou shake hands with it, and bid it adieu for ever? this
potion will purge the soul from all the relics of this distemper, and cleanse
the heart which is the fountain of all thy actions, and make all the streams
thence proceeding run clear, and fetch away all those gross humors of sin,
that filthy lump that lies upon thy heart, and presses it down, and lies as a
clog upon it; it will cast out all those unclean Spirits, and cleanse those
Augean Stables from all pollution: this is the only Physician in the world that
can do it, and God the great Physician of Souls has approved of his Recipts,
and sent him to thee upon this errant, to heal thee of the wounds of sin, and
to restore thee to thy primitive purity, wherein thou wast created: what say
thou, will it give him entertainment or no? The Devil and the damned would take a
potion a thousand times bitterer upon the like condition: help thou can not
have, till thou art purged, nor to Heaven thou can not go, for no unclean
thing shall ever enter there; purged thou can not be without death; for then
Christ will wash thee clean with his own blood, and sprinkle thee with clean
water, and present thee to his Father without spot or wrinkle, or any such
defiling or deforming thing, and cure thee of all thy soul distempers and
bodily infirmities, which shall never more seize upon thee, he will say to sin
and sorrow as unto the unclean spirit, Go out of him, Mar. 9.25.
and enter no more into him. These sins be they that keep thee under the
hatches, that thou can not serve God without distractions, but death will
unpinion thy wings, and let thy soul at liberty, and then thou shall never be
troubled with vain thoughts or imaginations more, thou shall never speak vain
word more, or do any sinful action more: what would thou give for thy freedom
from sin for one month, or one year? and what now will thou give for a
perpetual freedom? what do thou yet hang back, and art not willing to suffer
one hours pain for it? is this thy Love to God, which thou have professed, that
when thou art put to thy choice, thou choosest sin before him? is this thy
hatred of sin, that now thou art loath to leave it when it comes to the trial?
is this the fruits of thy prayer, preaching and profession? Art thou now at a
stand, whether to deny thy God or thy Sin, and art inclined to choose sin
rather than God? and had rather be present with sin, and absent from God? and
had rather live in the suburbs of Hell, than dye and come to Heaven? and
had rather enjoy sin for ever, than God for ever? for till death has passed
over thee, thou can not be free from sin, neither can thou enjoy Happiness:
for Sin was born with thee, and will dye with thee; it has an indwelling in
the soul, Psalm. 51.5.
thou wast shapen in iniquity and conceived in sin. It Is as natural to thee as
to live, it is thy very nature, it is thy very self; thou may as well shake off
Nature, yea shake off self, as shake off sin; it sticks closer than the skin to
thy back, or the flesh to thy bones; these may be separated, but sin cannot
till the great separation between the body and soul, and then the same stroke
that lets out thy life, will let out thy sin, and all thy misery; which is the
consequents of sin: this has caused thee many a sigh and sob, and sorrowful
hour, and many a prayer, many an affliction, and many a lash of his rod, and
hindered thee many an hours Communion with thy God, it has spoiled thee many a
duty, and made thy life a very burden; it has broke thy peace many a time
with God, and wounded thy conscience, and made God hide his face from thee, and
many a time he has whipped thee home: and now art fallen in love with it, that
thou will not leave it, and rid of it thou can not be till death let out thy
life? it is only in the Grave thou will be at rest, and hid from sin, which then
cannot find thee, nor any miseries which now are the effects of sin nor from
the temptations which are the inducements to sin; and do thou yet tremble to
part with such an Enemy? thou have pretended Enmity to sin, and been at Daggers
drawing with it, and art now reconciled to it? it has been thy trouble to have
it, and is it now thy trouble to leave it? many a poisoned Arrow the Devil has
shot at thee, and would still be his Butt to receive his Arrows and venomous
Shafts? These Hell Hounds haunt thee, and will hunt thee till thou art in thy
Grave; there they will lose the scent and can follow thee no longer; here is
thy Borough, thy hiding place, where thou art shut in by God, and secure; Here
the weary are at rest, here the Prisoners are secure, and hear not the voice of
the Oppressor; here thou shall be freed from all that is called misery. Sin is
an imperious Tenant, or Inmate, it will not out till the house be pulled down;
yea, will turn the Landlord out of doors; Oh what hard hap had man to admit of
such a Guest! but this is thy comfort, sin is but a Tenant at will; not at thy
will, but the Will of God, who will shortly pull down the House, and set thee
at liberty; and Oh! thy madness, that though thou can no other way be rid of
it, yet art unwilling to dye, and be happy. In Heaven, Paul shall never cry
out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of Death?
Here the unclean conversations of the wicked, shall never vex the Soul of
righteous Lot: David here shall never water his Couch with his tears, nor
Jeremy wish his heart full of water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, to weep
day and night for the destruction of his people. There is nothing here that can
procure misery, for here sin shall be shut out, for no unclean thing shall ever
enter. But it is not sin only, but sorrow also as well as sin shall be done
away; for when the cause is removed the effect shall cease. It was sin that
brought Death into the World, and all the forerunners of it, yea all the
concomitants and consequents of it; here thou art troubled with a sickly body,
subject to many infirmities, many pains, aches, griefs and troubles; scarce a
waking hour free from pain, and from head to foot scarce a free part, but one
pain or other does molest it, some pain, ache or grief attends it; every sense
as it is an inlet to sin, so it is to pain and misery, to let in one trouble or
other into the Soul, and help to affect the heart with some fear, or care, or
grief, or trouble, and these consume it as the scorching Sun the tender
Flowers. Oh how tender a piece is this dust-heap thy Body! more brittle than
glass it self; a little cold or heat soon molests it: how many tender
Membranes, Sinews, Arteries, Veins, Muscles, etc. are therein contained, and
every one subject to obstructions, extentions, contractions, dislocations, etc.
and upon this distempers necessarily follow: well may thou say with Job; Job
3, 4.13, 14, 15.
I am made to possess months of vanity, and wearisom nights are appointed to
me: When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
full of tossing to and fro, unto the dawning of the day. When I say, my Bed
shall comfort me, and my Couch shall ease my complaint; then thou scarest me
with Dreams, and terrifiest me through Visions; So that my Soul chooses
strangling, and Death rather than Life. What bitter pills, what nauseous
potions do thou take when sugered with the hopes of health! what crying out,
Oh my Back! Oh my Head! Oh my Heart! Oh my Bones! Oh what would I give for a
little ease, a little rest, a little sleep, for a Stomach! my Stomach nauseates
my meat, when others want meat for their craving Appetite; and how hard a thing
is it to keep up this poor, old, decaying, ruinous Cottage in repair; one Wall
or other is continually ready to fall to ruin, and at which door Death will
enter is not yet known; and when it comes it will but destroy thy body, which
for the Materials of it are no better than the body of a Beast, which ere long
will fall, for Death is all this while undermining it, and the rational Soul
does only keep it from putrefaction, and Death is but a departing of the Soul
from it to Glory; and why should be troubled to have the Prison-walls pulled
down, and the Prisoner set at liberty? why art unwilling to lay aside this
flesh, which has taken part with Satan against thy God, and is at present a
temptation to thee, with Peter, to deny thy Master? why choosest thou to live
in a darksome nasty Prison, where thy Wings are pinioned, that thou can not
mount up to thy God, where thou had thy Original; this body is but a clog at
thy heels, and never was intended for thy dwelling place, but only as a Tent,
or Pavilion, an Inn or resting place for a night, where like a wayfaring man
thou may rest for a while and away; but here thou have no continuing City,
thou art passing on to another place, Phil. 3.21.
to a Mansion, a House not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens, which
Christ at his departing provided for thee, when this Tabernacle shall be built
into a Temple, for God shall change this thy Vile body, that it may be like
unto his Glorious body; and why then do content thy self in this dirty Cell,
when thou may have such a glorious habitation? does thy heart ache to think
that the time is coming it shall never ache more? or do thou weep to think all
tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and thou shall never weep more? or is it
a matter of grief, think, that thou shall never grieve more? and art
afflicted to think thy afflictions are at an end? what unnatural sorrow is
this! art thou sick to think that in Heaven thou shall never more know what
sickness means; or that thou shall never more have an aching Head, or an aching
Heart? here thou will be freed from whatsoever may be properly called Evil, and
shall want nothing that is really good. Here Christians themselves prove
stumbling-block's in each others way, which causes tears from the eyes and
sorrow from the heart, but there the fire of love will consume the thorns of
contention; here corruptions like thorns serve to keep the fire of contention
alive, and those flames are more like to burn up their graces than their dross;
for the divisions of Reuben there are great thoughts of heart, Judge. 5.15.
but here is no such thing; Ridley and Hooper here accord, Luther and Calvin
are made Friends; those Rivers of pleasure at Gods right hand quench all the
sparks of contention, pride and ignorance has kindled among the godly, and
there is no bone of contention thrown among them; there is nothing but sweet
peace, and concord, and what was weak is there made strong; and as no
contention, so no sorrow upon that account. Every son of the first Adam came
into the world crying, and every son of the second Adam while he is in the
world has cause to cry. God had one Son without sin, but none without sorrow:
Christ himself was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: God chasteneth
every son he receives, and scourges those he loves. Heb. 12.8.
If we be not chastized, we are bastards and not sons. But at death thy sorrow
shall cease, and thy joys commence; there shall be no more pain, no more
death, for sorrow and sighing shall fly away. But as thou shall have an
everlasting freedom from all hellish flames, which is the portion of the
wicked, and their cup, put into their hands by God; so shall thou have
everlasting freedom from all temporal sorrow, which is the godly man's cup and
lot while they are here, put into their hands by their loving Father: here thou
shall be freed from sin, the world and the Devil, thy mortal, thy sworn
enemies; thou shall never more have a pale face, a languishing body, trembling
joints, a dim sight, or any infirmity or deformity; there shall be none that
stoop for age, or any immature youth; but all perfect men and women in the
prime of their age, as it is conceived about the age and stature of Christ, as
Divines think the Apostle alludeth to that when he says, Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ: Unto such a stature that we should have been at had there been no
infirmity or defirmity had hindered; here we shall have no peccant humor, no
languishing disease, no carking care, no griping grief, no fretting fear, no
consuming evil; nay nothing that bears the name of evil; the Wormwood and the
Gall shall there cease for ever, and sickness and diseases shall be no more, no
predominancy of humors, no hurtful quality shall accompany our bodies when
they are glorified. Exodus 14.13.
When this corruption shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality, then may we say of sin and sorrow, as Moses of the Egyptians,
These your enemies which you see to day, ye shall see them no more for ever.
For as no unclean thing shall ever enter Heaven, nor shall any thing that
bespeaks sorrow or suffering; we shall deal by these when we ascend into
Heaven, as Abraham did by his Servants when he went to offer his Son Isaac in
Sacrifice, leave them at the foot of the hill: for if sin enter not, there is
no place for sorrow, but unspeakable glory, transcendent Joys, pleasure for
evermore; and though the glory there be inconceivable, yet the faculties of the
Soul shall be enlarged to receive it without offense; now we cannot behold the
Sun in its luster, but it is an offense to the eye, but then thou shall be
capacitated to behold a glory ten thousand times greater than the Sun, with
delight; and shall not this death which ends all our sorrows and miseries, and
ushers us into this glory, be welcome to us? Nay, but this is not all; thou
have not only a crazy tottering ruinous house to live in, but thou live among
bad Neighbors also, and there is little comfort in a bad Neighborhood: the
house where thou dwell is haunted with evil Spirits, and thou can have no
freedom day nor night; these continually trouble thee, day and night, and
infest thee even in thy holy duties; while sin, that is the Devils daughter,
and his darling, lives there, her Father will not be absent, and his presence
is uncomfortable to a godly man; he is thy sworn enemy, and thou can not be
rid of him; though thou give him never so many foils he will not desist,
neither can thou make any peace with him, but upon harder terms than the men
of Jabesh Gilead were offered by Nahash the Ammonite, to put out their right
eyes; but nothing but the everlasting damnation of body and soul will serve
him; many a blasphemous temptation, and many a poisoned arrow he darts into the
Soul; many a foul suggestion, and fain would he make a rape of her; he
frequently storms the chief Fort: Oh the hourly danger that thou art in by
reason of his temptations and thine own corruptions; for this is as Tinder to
the fire, ready to catch upon all occasions; and many a time he enters the
breach, and if he were not beat back again would destroy the Fort of the soul;
many a snare and gin he lays for thee, and baits his hooks according to thy
inclination, sometimes with one Bait, sometimes with another; like as a cunning
Angler does for Fish, or the Fowler for Birds; and what he finds most taking,
that he uses most; sometimes he moves thee to presume, if that prevail not, to
despair; sometimes to neglect Duties, if that serve not, to trust in them, or
be proud of them; sometimes to be proud of thy Enjoyments, at another time to
despond or murmur at thy wants or disappointments; sometimes he baits his hooks
with thy Relations, and either persuades thee to Idolize them, or moves them,
as he did Peter to tempt Christ, Master save thy self; and this proved Spira's
ruin, and I doubt not has ruined many in this age. He does what he can to
fly-blow all thy Duties, and render them odious to God, and takes advantage by
every action thou do, making thee to neglect it; or he foists in some by or
base ends of his own into it, or makes thee pride in it; if things succeed to
thy mind, he puffs thee up with pride; if thou meet with disappointments, he
makes thee repine, and makes thee believe the world is a bad play master, yea
God himself a hard Master, and that thou deservest better at his hand: and as
to thy calling, sometimes he persuades thee that thou take a great deal of
pains for little or no profit, and have no competent reward for thy labor, and
therefore it is better give it over, and live at ease; sometimes he persuades
thee thy calling is honorable, and would lift thee up above thy brethren; a
thousand are the shares which he lays in thy way to entrap thee, and although
thou should repel them, yet it is a great trouble to be thus continually
haunted by them, as it is for a Chaste woman to be always troubled with the
unclean motions of a filthy Adulterer: and as the Devil, so the world lays
traps for thee, sometimes in pleasures, sometimes in riches, sometimes in one
thing, sometimes in another, as may most suit with thy inclinations; sometimes
the world smiles upon thee, and so seeks to ensnare thee by her Siren song:
Sometimes she frowns upon thee, to make thee despond, and sometimes threatens
thee, to drive thee from thy duty; and thy own heart is the most treacherous
enemy, ready to open and to let them in. Now in this desperate danger who is it
can live delightfully? who is it can delight in such a Neighborhood, when the
most righteous is a thorn and the most upright is as a thorny hedge. Can any
wise man delight to live among such mortal enemies, whom nothing will satisfy
but the souls ruin? can contentedly suffer atheistical thoughts darted into
thy soul, concerning God, under-valuing thoughts of Christ, of Scripture, of
divine Providence, etc. If thou give them no entertainment, they must needs be
thy trouble; but the danger is, if the Devil find thee unarmed, and so thou
close with his temptations. Is it not much better for thee to be where the
Devil, the world, and the flesh cannot reach thee, and shall never more molest
thee? now this is in Heaven, for he is cast out thence, and his place is no
more found; thou may bid them defiance, for they cannot reach thee; now when
death comes, thy victory is won, the battle is over, and the Crown is thine,
and the enemy will quit the field. Now thy life is tormenting by reason of sin,
and the consequent of sin, and it is no small mercy to be delivered from the
danger, which while thou art on this side Heaven thou can not be; and then
there shall be no corruption within; and so no danger of temptation without,
the Devil himself as well as sin is there cast out, and his place is found no
more there; here he is always casting floods out of his mouth to drown the
woman, and though he cannot drown the Church, he may affright her; Christ that
Man-child was not free from his temptations, though he was well able to resist
them; but he lays many a stumbling block in thy way, and many times thou have
stumbled at them, and much ado thou have had to keep on in that path which is
called holy, that narrow path that leads unto life; many times thou treadest
beside it, sometimes on the right hand, and sometimes on the left, and it is
well if at last thou thread the narrow and strait gate, which thou art not like
to do if thou deny Christ to save thy life; thou can not open thy eyes, but
the Devil presents some object or other to divert thy mind, he fits his baits
according to men's dispositions; he baits his hooks to take the wanton with a
beautiful harlot; he has a Bathshebah for David, a wedge of Gold for Achan, a
Companion for the Drunkard; one vanity or other draws away the heart from God,
as the Indians are enticed with Feathers and Shells and other Gewgaws to part
with their more rich Merchandise. Job 31.1.
Well may Job make a covenant with his eyes not to look upon a maid, for by
looking many times comes lusting; and if thou open thy ears, thou let'st in
some sin or sorrow to the heart; for either thou will hear something that may
excite some lust or other, pride, passion, covetousness, uncleanness, etc. or
thou will hear swearing, ribald talking, lying, slandering, or such like, which
may provoke thee to indignation or sorrow; and thy other senses also are
Floodgates to let in sin or sorrow; yea it is much ado to use lawful things
lawfully; thy table, thy meat and thy drink, the clothes thou wearest, the
house thou live in, the means thou enjoyest, all become snares, and every
sense becomes a caterer for the flesh; latet anguis in herbas; danger lies in
all these, and poison is mixed with all our dainties; and had thou more, the
danger would be more, for the Devil will use his utmost endeavor to make it
all to be Fuel for pride, or lust, or some other filthy vice; he can bait his
hooks, and that to purpose, with any thing lawful or unlawful, licitis perimus
omnes; for if he can persuade us either to use unlawful things, or lawful
things in an unlawful way, he has his desire, and we are taken in his snares;
but when thou come to Heaven thou art freed from all these Temptations. Well
may he bark at thee, as a Dog barks at the Moon, but cannot reach thee, or pull
thee out of thy Orb; he may shake his Chain, but he can neither hurt thee, nor
fright thee. And thus thou see Death cannot hurt, but will much advantage
thee; it will free thee from thy sin, and from thy sorrow, and put thee out of
the reach of all thine Enemies; for neither the Devil nor his Instruments can
then do thee hurt: thou art set out of the reach of wicked men, as Lazarus was
out of the reach of Dives: What say thou? wilt yield to go when God calls
thee, and welcome the Messenger that is sent for thee? O my God, let me not
make a foolish choice, let me not undo my self; I am too apt to indulge the
Flesh, and too apt to venture the Soul upon the Pikes of danger; I am too apt
to live by Sense and not by Faith; my reason tells me I should go when thou
call, my Faith tells me I shall lose nothing by it: Lord, the Spirit is
willing, but the Flesh is weak; I live among many Enemies, and those persuade
me to favor my self, but I know those that are Friends to my sin, are Enemies
to my Soul; Lord I have devoted my life and all that mine is, and passed away
mine Interest in it for Christ; Lord, take what thine is, and dispose of me and
mine as thou see fit, only, Lord, give me in suitable Qualifications for what
I have to do or Suffer, and then command what thou will; prepare me for Heaven,
and then send for me when and by whom thou please.

MEDITAT. IX. Of Hell Torments the Reward of denying Christ.
OH my Soul, art thou yet at a stand, and know not yet whether it is best to
lose Christ, or to lose thy Life? to go to Heaven, or to stay upon the earth?
to forsake the Creator or the Creature? stand still a little, and let us better
consider it; whether is it better lose the Soul or the Body? the Jewel or the
Box? the Wine or the Cask? but lose the body thou will not, but only lay it to
sleep a little the sooner; but consider also what will be the reward of the
one, and of the other, of dying for Christ and of denying him, and as thou
likest thewages make choice of the work. If thou put thy hand to the Plow and
look back, assure thy self God will take no pleasure in thee; if thou beginnest
in the Spirit, and endest in the Flesh, of the Flesh thou will reap corruption,
but if thou sow to the Spirit, thou will of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting:
though thou have Preached the Word to others, thou thy self may be a
Castaway: Thou may be like to the Builders of Noah's Ark, and make a Ship to
save others, and thy self be in the Flood; or like unto the Sign at the
Alehouse door, that tells the Passenger where he may have shelter, and yet thy
self remain in the storm; if thou turn thy back upon Christ, notwithstanding
all the Profession thou have made, he will turn his back upon thee; If thou
deny him before men (and deny him thou do, if thou will not lose thy life
when his cause requires it) he will deny thee; if thou be ashamed of him, he
will be ashamed of thee; and he will never admit such to the Wedding; if thou
knock he will not open, but bid thee an eternal farewell, with a Verily I say
unto you, I know you not: View a little the place appointed for Backsliders,
and see how thou likest of it; Jude 6.
The Angels that kept not their first Station, but left their Habitation, are
reserved under blackness of darkness for ever; and do believe God will have
more Mercy upon thee than upon them, if thou commit the like sin; it is a folly
for those that remain all the day idle, and will not go into the Vineyard, and
yet expect wages at night; but it is egregious folly for thee, that have born
the burden and heat of the day, and when the shadows of the evening are
stretched out, and the Sun is almost set, to depart in a pet, and leave thy
Master, and lose thy wages. God has plainly told thee, Ezekiel. 33.12.
that if a Righteous man shall leave his Righteousness, and do that which is
evil, all his Righteousness shall not be remembered, in his sin he shall dye. If
now thou revolt, all thy pains for Heaven is lost, and will thou wilfully lose
forty years work and wages? he that runs a race, though he run never so well,
if he stop before he come to the end, or turn back, will lose the Race, as sure
as if he had never set out: he that acts his part never so well upon the Stage,
and fail in the last act, will miss of his applause: If thou deny Christ thy
life, thou will lose it, but if thou be willing to sacrifice thy life for his
sake, it may be he will never require it, yet shall not thou lose thy reward;
but if thou deny it, thou will lose it and thy self with it; if God be not
glorified by thee, he will be glorified upon thee in thy destruction; if thou
lose thy Soul to save thy life, thou make a bad bargain: The loss of a Joint
or Limb may happily bring tears from thy eyes, Mat. 16.2^.
but what is this to the Soul? and this will necessarily follow upon denying of
Christ. The essence and being of the Soul will not be lost, this will be thy
misery, it shall not be annihilated or come to nothing, this would be good news
to a wicked man, and the Atheist would willingly court himself into the belief,
that the Soul of man is breathed out as the Soul of a beast, but this will not
be; nay happy would it be for them if the Soul were divisible as the body, and
the infernal Spirits should rend it into a thousand pieces, till it were rent
to nothing; this then were the worst it could suffer, but there is a living
death and a dying life: if the Soul of man did expire with his breath as the
soul of a beast, and the whole compositum, the whole man were reduced into the
horrid estate of nothing, to feel neither weal nor woe, as the Atheist and
Epicure persuades himself, it were not so much; but it must run parallel with
the longest line of eternity, and shall neither dye nor sleep with the body;
for this Lamp of Gods own lighting, this fire of his kindling, will not out;
the matter of it cannot be consumed; hell fire will soon awaken those Atheists
and light them to see their own folly and mistake, yet the flame thereof cannot
consume the Soul, for it will prove fuel to feed those infernal and eternal
flames the fire whereof never goes out, neither will the powers and faculties
thereof be lost; the fire will not consume them, but they will be heightened and
made capable of these eternal miseries and hellish torments; the understanding,
which now is dark, and by them purposely blinded, shall then be enlightened,
they shall then better know the worth of the things they have slighted, the
vanity of the things they have chosen, the Happiness they have lost, and Misery
that they are like to suffer. The memory then will be enlarged, and tell them
of the means of Grace they have had, and slighted, the motions of the Spirit
they have rejected, the sins they have committed, the duties they have omitted,
the covenants they have made, the resolutions they have had of better
obedience; and by how weak temptations they have been overcome, the threatenings
they have had if they went on in a sinful way, all which are now made good on
them, their conscience then will fly in their face, and will not be quiet; then
will their evil deeds stare them in the face, and say we are thy works, and we
will follow thee; then they will call to mind at how low a rate Heaven and
happiness, God and glory were sold by them; then their sins will cry out, we
are thine, Jer. 17.1.
and they will be engraven upon the conscience with a pen of iron, and the
point of a diamond, which cannot be blotted out. Now thou can lull conscience
asleep, or check it that it may hold its peace; but then it will not be bribed,
but will be like a waking Lion, rending the very caul of the heart, and prove a
never dying worm, which shall feed upon thee for ever. All the faculties of thy
soul will then bear a part in this tragedy; these will then tell thee; thy God,
thy Savior, thy Redeemer, thy Heaven, thy happiness, thy All is gone,
everlastingly gone, past all hopes of recovery, and all thy hopes are dashed,
and nothing left but endless, easless, and remediless torments. This is the
news that will continually ring in thine ears. Oh what a sad, what a sorrowful
parting, will there then be, between the Soul and Body, expecting a sad
meeting! O cursed body, may the soul say, for thy sake and at thy request I
have denied my God, and now will he deny me: I was so indulgent to thee, I have
undone my self: to spare thee, I have wounded my self: to save thee a little
longer, I have procured eternal torments to us both: to save a temporal life,
we are like to dye eternally. Oh my soul! if by denying to dye for Christ, thy
natural life be prolonged, yet thy spiritual death will be hastened, and after a
few days this natural life, which now thou purchasest at so dear a rate, will
be required of thee, and God will send such a messenger that shall not be
resisted; Isa. 5.11.
and notwithstanding all thy shifts and evasions thou must obey, and
notwithstanding all the sparks of thine own kindling, thou must lie down in
sorrow. And whatsoever bait it was the Devil took thee with, and persuaded thee
by it to make such a foolish bargain, this will be gone also: if it were thy
Estate that thou wast loath to leave, leave it thou must: and if thy Relations
tempted thee to stay, stay thou can not with them when thy time is come, nor
stay them with thee when God commands them hence: Nay the world it self to thee
shall be no more: Nay the time is coming, the World and all the works therein
shall be burnt up. And where is thy happiness then? Thou must at death (and
that is not far off) bid an everlasting farewell to all earthly enjoyments,
never more to solace thy self in any earthly enjoyment: But were this the
worst, both the good and bad would fare alike; but here lies the difference,
the one parts with what he can well spare, the other with all his portion: the
wicked at death part with all that is really as well as imaginarily good, not
only temporals, but spirituals also. Thou must bid farewell to all the Holy
Angels and glorified Saints, never more to enjoy their society: They will be
ashamed of those that are ashamed of Christ, yea and rejoice in thy
destruction. Thou must then bid farewell to all thy carnal delights, to all thy
merry company, and Jovial companions, and to all the things thou tookest
delight in here below; yea to all the pleasures, delights and Joys, at the
right hand of God for evermore, those rivers of unmixed Joys and delights,
which eye has not seen, ear heard tell of, neither has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive of; to these thou must bid an eternal adieu, and in
the room of them thou must have eternal misery, woe and alas for evermore: And
instead of this blessed company and holy society, and these Celestial Joys, be
hurried with the Devil and the damned into the Lake of fire and brimstone, out
of which is no hope of redemption; and these shall be thy tormenting, and
tormented companions. The place whither thou art to go is not any lightsome
dwelling, but a dark dungeon, a dismal prison, the tongue of man cannot
describe it. Jovim.
It Is reported that Actiolinus a tyrant of Padua had a prison, wherein the
prisoners were laden with irons, starved with hunger, eaten with vermin, and
poisoned with stench, for the dead bodies lay rotting among the living. Here
death might come in without knocking, and those were most miserable that lived
longest, and those best that dyed first; but this was a Paradise compared to
hell: The others punishment was short, this to eternity; that reached only the
body, this the soul also; death quickly enters into the one, but cannot enter
into the other, for they shall be tormented for evermore; Oh gulf full of
horror and despair! Oh eternity of torments! the very thoughts thereof may make
the stoutest spirit quake and tremble. Here Dives lodges in flames of fire,
instead of his soft bed; he is scalded with thirst, and his sweet cups are
taken from him, and his food is new fire and brimstone; and for his insulting
joy, he has now gnashing of teeth. In hell there are no Holy Days, no
Festivals, no set times in which the fire shall cease burning. Here thou must
for ever swim naked to all eternity in this lake of fire and brimstone, where
thou can find neither bank nor bottom: here the wicked as tares, shall be
bundled together: Drunkards with Drunkards, Swearers with Swearers, and one
Apostate with another. But the greatest loss, which the damned have, yea the
very top of their misery, is the loss of God himself blessed for ever, in whose
favor there is light, and his loving kindness is better than life; if thou
miscarry, thou shall lose Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the beatifical vision
wherein consists a believers happiness: thou shall never see his face in glory,
but shall be everlastingly separated from him; thou shall never come into his
presence, never enter into his Courts, never tread upon that pavement where the
Angels and glorified Saints do inhabit: there is a vast gulf fixed between
you, Luke 16.26
that thou can not pass; thou will never enjoy one smile from the face of
God, or one kiss from the mouth of Christ, but must go from him with a curse,
and not a blessing: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41
together with the Devil and his Angels. Oh fearful sentence! a thousand
thousand rentings of the soul from the body is not so bad as one renting of the
soul from God, which is the life of it. The loss of God will prove the greatest
loss; the loss of life is but a flea-biting in camparison of it: for with him
the soul is lost also, yea the body which has put thee upon so many
temptations, and for whose sake thou denyest Christ, shall then be lost also;
and both soul and body to thy eternal horror shall be made capable of these
hellish and eternal torments. For there shall be pain of sense, as well as pain
of loss. It Is true, Divines do think the former is the worst, the loss of God,
and all that good is; this sets the worm of conscience a gnawing which will
never dye; but there is also fire which will never out: there is pain of sense,
as well as pain of loss: And this is another part of Hell, let me lead thee a
little by the hand, and let us take a view of this part also; let us look a
little beyond death, at the dangers that follow it, and consider when this
earthly habitation shall moulder into dust, where thy dwelling shall be for
ever. Let us take a view of Hell, which thou art to have into the bargain when
thou soldest thy soul to save thy life, and with Judas and Demas chosest the
world instead of Christ: let us view this region of the shadow of death, which
is thrown in to thy bargain. But had I the tongue of men and Angels, I were
never able to describe the misery of the damned in Hell, for no words in humane
language can set it forth; the Devil himself whose portion it is, and the
damned that feel it cannot do it, they cannot fully discover the worst of a
miscarrying souls condition. If I could describe eternity I might do something
to it, and yet I should be at a loss as to the torments themselves: yet perhaps
I may lead thee by the hand, and show thee enough to convince thee that thou
have made a foolish bargain, when thou denyedst Christ to save thy life, and
lost thy soul to gain a little longer time in the world; and that this time
thus gained was bought at a very great rate. The misery of a miscarrying soul
is such, that the consideration of it may send thee trembling to thy grave.
Here thou trucklest under a little pain, and groanest out thy complaints, Oh my
Head! Oh my Heart! Oh my Bones! Oh my Bowels! But all this while thou have some
part free, no distemper seizes universally upon all parts at once: or if it
did, it reaches only to the body; the soul which is the noblest part is free,
this is not touched: Those that kill the body can do no more, they cannot reach
the soul, but only as it sympathizes with the body; but in hell there is no
part free, either of Soul or Body, but all under hellish torments: Here if thy
back ache, thy head may be well, or if thy bones ache, the heart may not be
touched; but in hell all parts are affected, not a finger free; the rich Glutton
had not his tongue excepted, Luke 16.25
neither could he get one drop of water to cool it, but he was wholly tormented
in this flame. And not the body only, but the soul also must suffer torments,
and that in every part, power and faculty of it, no part of the soul or body
free; and these hellish pains are not only universal, but intolerable also, and
yet must be endured: for the mighty God will preserve the soul and body in
being, enable them to live under these hellish sufferings. Here the poor
creature falls under the infinite wrath of the Great God, which like a river of
brimstone kindles this flame, which shall never go out, Isa. 30.25.
which while God is God shall never cease; and this hellish fire seiseth upon
the soul and body as the fire does upon the lump of pitch or brimstone, which
being once kindled never shall expire. Now though some few sparks of this wrath
have fallen upon the world, yet the whole torrent of it is reserved for hell; but
we may judge of the Lion by his paw; one drop of this Ocean drowned the whole
world, except eight persons: and another drowned Pharaoh and his army in the
red Sea; one spark of it burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, a
little of it swallowed up Corah and his accomplices into the earth; slew twenty
four thousand Israelites at one time, and one hundred fourscore and five
thousand of Senacheribs Army in one night; and many times ruins Kingdoms,
depopulates Countries, and lays a fruitful land waste for the wickedness of
the inhabitants. Hundreds of examples may be given of this nature, but all this
is but a flea-biting to Hell torments, which damned souls must undergo: all
this reaches but the body, yet sometimes some flashes light upon the soul, as
fire into the the conscience, as upon Cain, Judas, Spira, Satomias a Louvain
Divine, which have made them weary of their lives; yea to choose strangling
rather than life, a wounded Spirit who can bear? But all this is short of the
torments of Hell, which make up a complete misery; but what they are, we are at
a loss to know, and because we cannot reach them, let us yet reach a little
toward them. Thou have heard of, and in some measure felt tormenting diseases,
such as the Stone, the Gout, the Strangury, the raging pain of aching teeth,
etc. these make men's lives uneasy, yea sometimes death desirable; those thus
tormented deserve pity, yea and are pitied by those that see them: but alas
this does but darkly shadow out these torments; but we have read of some that
have suffered greater than those, inflicted by men happily instigated by the
Devil; some have had their joints cracked upon the wheel, tortured upon the
rack; others fleyed alive, some have had their flesh pulled off their bones
with red hot pincers, some have been pulled in pieces with Wild Horses, or the
Arms of trees drawn together for that purpose, some have been burnt at the
stake, some boiled in lead, some roasted alive upon Gridirons, iron chairs, or
in frying pans, some hanged up by the hand till they were dead, some sawn
asunder, some famisnt, some starved to death, some put to one torture, some to
another, whatever the wit of man or the policy of hell prompted the persecutors
to, to make their lives miserable and their deaths painful; and this moved pity
in some of the spectators: but shall we choose out the most exquisite of all
those, and compare it with the torments of hell, alas it bears no proportion;
for though they were sharp, yet short. I have indeed read of some, by the great
Tyrant commanded to be fleyed alive, and that they might be sensible of death,
as he said, it was done by degrees, that they were fourteen days in dying:
this was savage cruelty, but as the pains were short of hell torments, for it
only reached the body, so fourteen days was far short of eternity: but if all
those forementioned pains and tortures had been inflicted upon one man, and all
the rest that ever poor wretch suffered, and if this man's life had been
preserved under these torments one whole year, what heart, if not made of
Adamant, but would lament him? most men would think him miserable; yet this
comes short of the case in hand. Those pains that reach the body only, and
touch not the soul, come short of hell torments that reach both body and soul;
and what is one year to eternity? these are invented by men, happily not without
the advice of the Devil, but hell torments are devised by God, as a sufficient
recompense for the breaking of his laws by men and Devils, where the soul, the
nobler part of man, as well as the body, shall be tormented, which neither man
nor Devil, but only God alone could do: the soul which should have done God the
greatest service, shall no doubt have the greatest punishment; because it
should have ruled the body, and yet did God the greatest dishonor, and the
Devil the most work. The never dying worm, like Titius's Vulture, will always
feed upon them, and yet they shall never be consumed. It cannot be a hard
bargain to part with a temporal life for an eternal. Nay it is not at thy
dispose, whether thou will dye or no; then it were not so much, though yet too
egregious folly, for dye thou must; but the business is, whether thou can
prolong thy life with the loss of thy soul, a little longer, and but a little?
In all other sufferings thou may have some respite, some ease, but in hell
there is none; now thou graplest with a disease, or at worst with a man, but in
this with the Almighty. Here thou have some friends to comfort thee, to pity
thee at least; but there is neither comfort nor pity. The Devil and his Angels
will rejoice in thy torments, for being tormented themselves, they have no
greater solace than in tormenting thee; here thou will be for ever helpless,
and comfortless, and shall not have so much as one drop of water to cool thy
tongue. Lu. 16.24
Oh the folly of men, thus to fear a temporal death, and not to matter death
eternal! to fear the wrath of man, and not the anger of Almighty God; to fear
the death of the Body, and despise the death of the Soul; to fear the creature
more than the Creator; that fears the rage of man, and not the wrath of
Almighty God. Gregory.
In hell there is death without death, and end without end, because death ever
lives, and the end ever begins, for death will never dye. Oh how sweet
would death be there accounted, if it would take away life, and not compel
those to live that would fain dye. Oh the stupidity of men, when a small loss
will wring tears from their eyes, and an infinite and irrecoverable loss is not
regarded, yea the speech of it they can digest with laughter. Many quake and
tremble to come before an earthly Judge, and when they are going before the
eternal Judge can sport themselves in the way; they fear to lanch forth into
the Sea, and not to lanch forth into this infinite Ocean of Eternity: for hell
torments are not only easeless, but endless and remediless. While there is life
there is hope, but where the breath is gone, the hope is past: while the door
is open there is entrance, but when it is once shut though thou knock it will
not be opened. When the soul is separated from the body of a wicked man, God
will be separated from the soul, and an uniting time will never come. Christ
stands now to receive repenting Sinners, but his Spirit will not always strive
with them, the door will be shut, and only those that are ready will go in to
the marriage. This is the time when the Father will receive a repenting
returning prodigal, but it will not last long, God will put an end to the day
of grace, the night comes when no man can work; the Sun will set that shall
never rise, and the day end that shall never dawn again, and then all hopes of
wicked men will be dashed; for as the tree falls, whether to the north or
south, east or west, there it shall lie. That tree that falls hellward, there
it will lie for ever. For after this life is no redemption for ever, let the
Pope say what he will to the contrary, their feigned Purgatory will prove a
delusion, the fire thereof was only kindled to make the Popes Kitchen warm: but
hell fire is of another nature, for all their Masses, Dirges, and Prayers,
cannot deliver one soul from thence: But if the sentence of condemnation be
once past, and damned souls delivered up to their tormentors, there is no help,
all conclude, this decree is irrevocable, and hell torments remediless: Here
the worm (says Christ) dies not, Mark 9.44.
and the fire never goes out; Mat. 25.41, 46. Rev. 20.10, 15.
and Christ calls hell torments, everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: yea he calls it everlasting punishment; the Devil that deceived the
world shall then be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast
and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and
ever, into which lake of fire, whosoever is not found written in the book of
life shall be cast: and many the like expressions we may find in Scripture,
which plainly tells us the perpetuity of hell torments; where it is called
Everlasting darkness, Jude 13. 2 These. 1.7.8.
eternal fire, everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. How little foundation is there then for Origens
opinion, that after a time the Devils and the damned should be refined by this
fire, and should be delivered? but what Scripture speaks thus? and if the
Scripture be silent, nay speak point blank contrary, where is the foundation of
this fancy? Micah 6.7.
it is not with thousand of rams, nor with ten thousand rivers of oil, that
they can be redeemed: the first born of their bodies will not be taken as
satisfaction for the sin of their souls; Mat. 16.26.
and what (says Christ) shall a man give in exchange for his soul? The rich
glutton with all his wealth, Luke 16.
with all his prayers and entreaties, could not purchase one dram of water to
cool his tongue; and this was far short of ransoming his soul. Prayers and
tears then will not serve turn, they are good preventing physic. Though (as
one says) we should wear our tongues to the stump, Shepard Sincere convert.
and weep more tears than there is water in the sea, it will do no good. It was
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, thou wast redeemed from thy
vain conversation received by tradition from thy Fathers, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot; but if we now
neglect this great Salvation, and despise the offers of mercy in the days of
our life, what remains for us but a fearful looking for of judgment? and if the
earth were turned into a globe of Gold, or an heap of Diamonds, and all offered
for the redemption of a lost soul, it would be rejected, for this is not the
blood of Christ; nay this blood it self though more precious than the world,
would not serve in this case neither, for it was never shed to this end, to
redeem souls out of hell, though it was shed to keep them from hell, and is of
infinite value to this end; nay if damned souls should obtain the prayers of
all the Saints, yea Angels in heaven, it would do them no good. Prayer here, if
pointed by faith, may pierce heaven, and prevail for a blessing: Jam. 5.15.
The Prayer of faith may save the sick, and if he have committed sins they may
be forgiven; but prayers for the damned are out of season; there is a time when
God will be found, and a time when he will not be found. When the door is once
shut, it is not knocking then will open it; yea the Angels and glorified Saints
will then rejoice in their damnation, that God is glorified by it; and those
Ministers that now weep over their people, and pity them, will then pity them
no more for ever; yea, to speak with reverence, God himself cannot then help
them: not that he wants power; for he could turn Heaven and Hell and all into
nothing; but he is infinite in justice and truth as well as power, and this
would entrench upon his Justice and Truth; his word is out to the contrary, and
he may as well deny himself as his word; yea he will be so far from an
inclination this way, Pro. 1.24.
that he will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes; in a
word, there is no ransom for a miserable soul; the blood of Christ was of
sufficient price to have saved the world, had it been applied for the end it
was shed for; but lost souls and damned Spirits have no interest in it, and
there is no redemption for such; the redemption of the soul is precious, Psalm.
49.8.
and it cease for ever; Luke 16.26. Mat. 16.26.
no one can get over that great gulf that lies between heaven and hell,
neither can any price be found out to redeem a lost soul: here is no Writ of
Error can be had, for the prisoner is laid in by an unerring Judge, that cannot
be deceived; there is no Appeal to be made to any other Court, for this i^ the
Supreme, where the Causes tried in all other Courts are called over again and
fully determined, and the Judge of all the earth will there do justice; here
can no force hinder the execution, and free thee out of prison, for thou have
an omnipotent God to grapple with; see now what a rock of ruin thou have run
thy self upon, what a remediless condition thou art plunged into: for if thou
deny the Lord that bought thee, thou will run upon swift destruction, and all
the friends thou have cannot help it. Well but though the pains be sharp, yet
if they be but short here is some comfort; there is some hope that an end will
come, though it be long first; but alas this comfort here is dashed. These
torments are eternal, as is already proved, and shall never end in the pangs of
death. It Is true there is hopes, for though they are sharp they are momentany;
yet some Tyrants have kept men many days in a dying life, or living death.
Tiberius Caesar being petitioned by one to hasten his punishment, and give him
a speedy dispatch, made him this answer; Nondum tecum in gratiam redii: Stay
Sir, you and I are not yet friends. Such an answer will God give to a damned
soul, if it desire God to put an end to his torments by death; those lingering
deaths either inflicted by God or man, though they seem long to sense, yet what
are they to eternity? the word for ever, will be a Hell in the midst of Hell;
for when the soul cries out in anguish and bitterness of spirit, How long Lord,
how long? the conscience answers again, Ever, ever: while God is God, and
Heaven is Heaven, and Hell is Hell, the miscarrying soul must remain fuel to
maintain this fire, that shall never go out. To this second death the first is
but a flea-biting; this is Mors sine morte, finis sine fine; this is that which
is called Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord; where the poor
soul must be tormented sine intervallo, without ease or end: for when the years
of a thousand Generations are whirled about, thy torments will be as fresh as
the first day thou wast cast into them, and not one farthing of the ten
thousand Talents paid off, nor one moment of eternity taken off. Oh Eternity,
eternity, how amazing art thou? how shall we conceive of thee? how shall we
cast thee up? Oh my soul, if thou substract from eternity an hundred thousand
millions of years, the remainder will not be the less, it is infinite still; for
two finites cannot make an infinite; for what is infinite is indivisible, it
cannot be made less; should a poor creature upon the rack under exquisite
tortures, have his life prolonged for twenty years together without any
intermission of pain, we might well account him the most miserable man alive,
and whose heart would not ache for him? but what is this to eternal torments,
and yet who pities them that are like to endure them? nay who pities himself
that lies under the danger? if a man under some raging pain, as of the Cholick,
Stone or Gout, lie upon a Featherbed for many years in tormenting pain, though
he have friends to visit him, meat and drink to support him, and what comfort
Nature or Art could help him to, yet we look upon him as a spectacle of misery,
and one that deserves pity; Job 9.14.
to him (says Job) that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friends:
But what is this to hell? or what is a few years to eternity? for in hell is no
comfort, no ease, no refreshment, neither any friend to pity; nay, if all the
torments that ever poor creatures endured upon earth, whether inflicted by God
himself, by man, or by the Devil, could all light upon one man, and should lie
under them for hunderds of years, yet would it fall short, for this would
neither reach the pain, nor reach the duration; for when the miscarrying soul
has lain in hell as many years as there are grass piles upon the earth, drops
of water in the Ocean, sands upon the sea shore, hairs on all the men's heads in
the world, and Stars in Heaven, yet the hundred thousandth part of Eternity is
not over: Oh eternity, how shall finite apprehensions conceive of thee? how
shall we number thee, or find out what thou art? we that live in time, and have
but a little time given us here, cannot conceive of thee but by a long space of
time, as we cannot of Infinity of Essence, but by a vast quantity; we know God
does not number Eternity as we do Time; one day is with him as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. For in eternity we need not trouble our
selves to count the fleeting hours, neither days nor years, for there is no
Sun, Moon or Stars to be set for times and seasons, or for days or for years;
but in hell is horrid darkness, blackness of darkness for ever. And whose heart
may not tremble at the apprehension of it? should all the Arithmeticians in the
world join heart and hand and head and all, to cast up the greatest sum
possible that each one severally could reach, and when this is done, should add
all these together into one sum, yet it would fall short; nay, should the
circumference of Heaven be written about with Arithmetical figures, from east
to west, from north to south, and all brought into one sum, it would yet fall
short; for what is infinite cannot be diminished or increased, such a sum
added to it would not increase it, such a sum subtracted from it would not
diminish it. Oh my soul, what think thou of it? will thou venture upon the
pikes of danger? will thou deny the Lord that bought thee, and the God that
made thee, to preserve a miserable life a little longer? Thou see thy wages,
and know thy reward; had rather choose everlasting damnation than a little
temporal pain? and rather thrust soul and body into eternal flames, and suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire, rather then the pangs of a temporal death? Oh
what madness has bewitched thee! what folly haunts thee? how does the Devil
and the world delude thee? Thou that would cut off a limb or joint to
preserve the body from greater torture, wilt not be willing to endure a little
to preserve both body and soul from eternal ruin? Heaven and Earth, and all
wise men may stand amazed at thy folly. If thou turn thy back upon Christ, he
will turn his back upon thee, and be ashamed of thee: If thou make light of his
Supper, thou shall not taste of his daintes. The question, thou see, is not
whether death be desirable or no, Nature it self answers the contrary; but
whether the first or second death be the greater evil; and so whether is to be
chosen, when both cannot be avoided? The question is not, whether pain be
eligible, but whether the pains of death or hell be the greater? Not whether
life be desirable, but whether life or Christ be the better? Whatever thy
senses may say, rectifyed Reason which should govern the sensitive faculties
will tell thee, the second death is far more formidable, and that it is better
to deny thy self than deny thy Redeemer. Oh my God, is this the reward of
Apostasy? is this the wages the Devil gives his best servants? Through thine
assisting grace I will be thine. Lord I resolve I will never forsake thee; Lord
do thou never leave me to my self, nor forsake me.

MEDITAT. X. Of Heavens Glory, the reward of dying for Christ.
OH my soul, thou have seen the danger of revolting, and denying Christ, thou
have had a view of hell, which is the reward of this sin, thou have looked into
it, and had a glimpse of it, though it was but a little representation; a true
map of it the Devil himself cannot make, nor give a full description; but here
is enough to stay thy stomach; how think of it? if thou trade for it, can
thou make a savers bargain, if thou lose thy soul to save thy life? For this is
the trade thou drivest, if thou deny Christ: here is the Devils offered wages,
it is true; he sugers this bitter pill with a promise of a longer miserable life
in a cheating world, but he cannot make good his bargain, though he will not be
behind hand with his wages; Mat. 25.41
if thou depart from Christ now, he will bid thee depart from him for ever;
what is thy resolution? Halt not between two opinions: if God be God serve him,
1 Kin. 18.27.
if Baal be God serve him: thou can not serve two masters, God and Mammon: If
thou pretend to both, thou art like to be cast off by both, by God and the
world; as many hypocrites are: the world hates them because they look like the
godly, and God hates them because they are really wicked; consider therefore
who is like to be the best master, and who will give the best wages; and if the
balances are yet equally poized, I shall put in one weight more, even an
eternal weight of glory into Gods end, which may happily turn the scales though
the whole world were in the other end; for if thou be faithful to the death,
thou shall receive a crown of life, and this crown will really overbalance
all that the Devil can put into the other end. Thou have seen there is but a
little in the world worth the losing, and a great deal in hell worth the
fearing, let us see if there be any thing in heaven worth the enjoying: in the
world is nothing but vanity, in hell nothing but misery, and in Heaven nothing
but felicity; now what wise man would lose this felicity, and endure this
misery, for a little while to enjoy this vanity? Thou have seen the Devils
wages, that is, the best of it, for the worst the Devil himself cannot make
thee understand, for it is inexpressible, and no word in humane language can
set it forth to the life, yet thou have had a taste of it, and a taste is better
than a whole draught: Now if thou would see what wages God will give thee,
thou must make a journey also into Heaven, and see if there be any thing that
may win upon thy affections; thou see already what the Devil and the world
have bidden thee, see also what wages God offers thee, and then choose as thou
see cause; see if there be any thing in Heaven to make up all thy losses,
crosses, sufferings and pains which thou must be at for Christ's sake, and if
there be not, take thy course and make another choice; view those celestial
habitations, those mansions of glory prepared for those that confess Christ
before men, and lose any thing for his sake: view this purchased Inheritance,
this Crown of glory and those eternal pleasures that are at Gods right hand,
and see if God do not outbid the Devil and the World, and so best deserves thy
affections; and consider whether this may not a little allay thy overmuch
desire of life, and fear of death, and make thee willing to be at thy Redeemers
will, and Makers pleasure: one view of this celestial Paradise may make thee
disrelish all temporal felicity. But how shall we sing the songs of Sion in a
strange land, or what conceptions can we have of these Heavenly Mansions, while
we abide in houses of clay? Water can ascend no higher than the Fountainhead,
and Nature cannot transcend Nature: what conceptions can a beast have of a
rational being? much lower must we have of a celestial being; for the
disproportion is greater: how can thou view those gloryes surpassing a
thousand Suns, when thou can not view one Sun when it shines in its splendor
but thy weak eyes are offended? how can utter those things which the Apostle
that saw them calls inutterable? how can discourse of the Father of Spirits,
and know so little of the nature of a Spirit, nay art so ignorant of thy own
soul; or tell what it is to enjoy God in; glory, when those little glimpses of
him here, are inexpressible? or how can thou discourse of that, which eye
never saw, ear never heard of, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive of, viz. What God is, and what he has prepared for those that love
him? for as those hellish flames which the wicked suffer, cannot be fully
described by those that endure them, no more can those celestial joys by those
that enjoy them; much less by a frail creature, that has had very little taste
of those honey-dews that fall upon the heirs of glory: In this wilderness of
troubles, we see few of those Canaans grapes and foretasts of Glory, the full
fruition no man living can discover. Yet let us get a Pisgah sight of Canaan, a
remote view of glory, and judge a little of the worth of the Jewel by the
richness of the Cabinet that holds it; and happily thou may by the report, as
the Queen of Sheba of Solomon's wisdom, get some conceptions of it, that may
make thee, like her, be willing to take the journey, though thou hear not
the one half of what there really is to be seen; and though thy conceptions
reach not the matter in hand, yet may they reach thy affections, and serve to
dazzle thine eyes, that all earthly glory shall seem little to it. To this
purpose let us view the bespangled Spheres, adorned with those beauty spots,
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, for it is by visible things we must reach after
those that are invisible; and see whether this beauty do not something thing
allure us; David upon consideration thereof was amazed, Psalm. 8.4.
and cries out, Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of
man that thou regardest him? When he beheld those vast bodies at such an
incredible distance, and all made for man's sake, and considering what a poor
worm man was, wondered that God should have any respect for him; and happily he
might raise his thoughts higher, which might increase his admiration. Now these
visible Orbs which are the Canopy over our heads, shall then be but the
Pavement under our feet; yea the pavement shall be doubtless much more
glorious; and if the porch be so glorious, what is the palace? what is the
throne? and what is the Presence Chamber? these visible things though gorious,
are made for the use of man while he is upon the earth, and when he is gone
hence for ought we know there will be no use of them: in heaven there needs no
Sun, the glory of the Lord is the light thereof; in Hell they shall not enjoy
it, which is a place of horrid darkness, even blackness of darkness for ever:
but concerning those celestial bodies which we see by day or by night, the
greatest wits in the world have been employed, yea puzzled in the search of the
mysteries in them contained; their matter, distance, magnitude, virtues and
influences; and those that cast the most rational conjecture concerning those
things, must needs say, if they will speak their consciences, much of it lies
in the dark; and those that have searched natures garden from end to end, must
say, many things are unsearchable and past finding out; and if we understand
not earthly things which we daily see, how shall we understand heavenly things
which we never saw? neither can we describe them if we did see them. If the
footmen have wearyed us, Jer. 12.5.
how shall we contend with horses? The Philosophers have found out many
heavens, and yet it is to be feared fall short of this we now discourse of; the
several Orbs in which the Planets move, they reckon as distinct heavens,
because they move in a different Sphere, some higher, some lower, the eighth
Sphere being the Orb of the fixed Stars, and above that they have their primum
mobile, or first mover. I shall not quarrel with their division, only being to
discourse of Divinity not Philosophy, which yet is useful in its place, I shall
take the Scripture distinction, and so we find mention made of three heavens;
the first is the Sphere below the Moon, the region of the air, here the fowls
of heaven fly; sometimes called the fowls of the air, and here the clouds of
heaven are scattered about by the winds; these are Gods Chambers out of which
he waters the earth; these are the bottles of heaven, when they are poured out
the earth is refreshed, and ^hen they are restrained it languisheth (...) are
Gods treasure houses, out of which ^^^ends plenty; and when he withholds his
^and, want and penury follow. The next above this is the Starry region, which
the Scripture calls the Firmament of the heaven; here the Stars keep their
courses according to divine appointment: below the fixed Stars are the several
Orbs of the Planets, which the Philosophers call so many Heavens; and above it,
is the primum mobile which sets the rest on work, unto whom God himself gives
the first push, and is the spring that makes all the wheels move: but above
this is the third heaven we are now describing; but there is no instrument made
or devised to be made, that can make any observation of it: all their
Perspectives, Tubes and Telescopes will not reach it; neither can we see it
with our bodily eyes, but by the eye of Faith, and by Scripture Light; this is
the place where the blessed Angels, and glorified Saints are blessed with Gods
immediate presence, and enjoy that beatifical vision, in the enjoyment whereof
true happiness does consist: not that God is included in Heaven; For the Heaven
of Heavens is not able to contain him: 1 King 8.17. 2 Chro. 2.6.
He is present in all places, but circumscribed in none: but as on Earth he was
specially present in the Temple, so is he much more in Heaven; here he most
eminently discovers himself to the best of his Creatures, Angels and Saints,
and manifests himself to be Love it self; for never frown was there seen in his
face, or wrinkle upon his brow; hither it was that Christ ascended after the
Resurrection, and here it is that he sits at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us; and from hence it is he will come to Judgment: It was from
hence that Lucifer that Sun of the morning fell, that the Devil and his Angels
were cast out, and their place was found no more there; hither it was that Paul
was carried, whether in the body or out of the body, 2 Cor. 12.2
he knew not, and heard unspeakable words, such as are not lawful or possible
to be uttered: This Heaven it was that Stephen saw opened, and Jesus standing
at the right hand of God; hither it was that Enoch and Elijah were translated;
and from hence it was that Moses and Elijah appeared, in the transfiguratiof
Christ; and hither it was that the Angels carried the Soul of Lazarus into
Ahrabams bosom; and here it was that the believing Thief was to be with Christ
that day in Paradise; and hither it is that the souls of believers pass when
death has separated them from their bodies. Now thou see there is such a
place; but it being out of the reach of sense, it cannot be seen but by faith,
and lies out of the Philosophers reach; the ablest of them cannot by any
instrument they can make, make any observation thereof; though they seem by
these helps even to command the Stars themselves, yet cannot reach this Heaven
of Heavens; no one can see it but by Scripture light, nor enter into or view
those Mansions of glory, but by a clue of thread thence borrowed. Now as those
things visible excel in glory, I mean those celestial bodies, all other
visible beautyes that ever God created; so the Scripture holds out, that the
Heaven of Heavens, or the third Heaven, excells these in beauty and splendour;
for it is both a vast and a beautiful place, far exceeding in both our
apprehensions: these outward things were made for man's sake while he was in:
house of clay, but those in Heaven were made for his sake when he shall be
refined from the dregs of corruption, and made (...) to enjoy them; and it is,
no doubt, repleat with all manner of felicity; where God himself vouchsafes to
communicate himself to Angels and men; here the body of Christ shines forth in
a most resplendent manner, here the holy Angels and glorified Saints enjoy
those Mansions of glory prepared for them from the foundation of the world; and
though we are not capable of understanding what Heavens glory is in reality,
yet we have a Pisgah sight, a glimpse of it in the Scripture; we find among
other places some description of it Revel. 21. yet must we not imagine it set
out to the full, for words cannot express it, neither can we apprehend it as it
is; we may rather speak what it is not, than what it is; as no humane language
can express what God is, no more can it what Heaven is, or what are the Joys
thereof; for how can a little Vessel comprehend all the water in the Ocean? but
by what falls under our senfes we must be lead to higher conceptions, and by
those things which we most highly prize we may consider of those that are
beyond our estimation. For as it is described, Rev. 21.15 etc.
it is most glorious, yet we must imagine it is far more glorious than it is
described, because our understanding cannot conceive of it as it is: we find
the Angel measuring this holy City, the New Jerusalem, and the length and
breadth and height thereof were equal, for each way it was twelve thousand
furlongs, which according to our measure is a thousand and five hundred miles;
the length, breadth and height equal; now if all the buildings in the world
were measured, I suppose they would not reach to this extent, nor amount unto
such a magnitude: But we must imagine that this is the exact measure of this
heavenly Jerusalem, this seat of the blessed; the Holy Ghost here gives us a
figurative description, as of the materials, so of the extent, and brings it in
here as a spacious, specious and glorious City, according to our capacity; for
our shallow capacities cannot reach what it really is; and most spacious it
must needs be, when so many miriads of inhabitants have their mansions prepared
for them: For thousand thousands minister to him, Dan. 7.10.
and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him: Yea all the Saints that
ever did live, do live, or shall live, shall there inhabit: or if we make
another guess how spacious this Heaven of Heavens may be, let us consider, this
terrestrial Globe is imagined to be above twenty two thousand miles in the
circumference, and from hence to the starry Region or Orb of the fixed Stars,
as our Astronomers and those that have taken most pains in those matters
imagine, there is above seventy four millions of miles, and the circumference
of that Orb must be above six times as much; and the Emperial Heaven includes
all the lower Orbs, as the Scales of an Onion, that outermost includes all the
rest; this is that spacious place where God manifests his glory to Angels and
men, where they trumpet out his praises: here Christ is, and where he is, his
servants shall be also; hither it is that he is ascended to his Father, Joh.
12.26. and 20.17. Lu. 23.43.
and our Father: and here the believing thief is with him in glory; methinks a
departing soul should rejoice to think, that within a few days or hours it
should be one of this heavenly quire with holy Angels and glorified Saints,
chaunting out the praises of the ever blessed God, viewing his face and
beholding his glory, and lying in the arms of Christ: Here is the desired port
which a believer bends all his sails to, and hither it is all winds blow him;
this is the point that his Needle touched with a divine Lodestone always
points to; this is the mark that always is in his eye, the white he always
aims at; this is his Journeyes end, which he travails hard to come to; here is
the prize he runs for, the Crown ^e fights for, and the Reward he hopes for;
here or no where his soul finds satisfaction; here is his purchased
Inheritance, here is the place where he is to receive his wages for his work,
the reward of all his sufferings for Christ; here is the end of all his labor,
and all his painful duties; there is no need now of any more Preaching,
Praying, Fasting, or humbling duties; there Humility and Self-denial will be no
difficult work: here will be a constant Feast, a perpetual Sabbath, a continual
Jubilee, where the holy Angels and glorified Saints shall for ever chaunt out
the Praises of the ever-living God, without weariness or Satiety: now is the
Harvest over, the Tares burnt, the Corn secured, the Laborers called home to
receive their Wages, and the godly put into the possession of their prepared
Mansions, which shall be as Glorious as Spacious; but when we come there, we
may say as the Queen of Sheba, of Solomon's Court and Wisdom, Much we have
heard, but the one half was not told us; yea a thousandth part of Heavens glory
is not revealed to us: How glorious does one Sun make the morning? but what
will ten thousand, yea thousand thousands of Saints and Angels, shining more
clear than the Sun, make that day, that shall never see night? It Is thought by
some, that were ^ll the Stars gathered and contracted into such Globes, and
set in the same Orb, they would make three hundred Suns; and should it be so,
yet would not the Glory of all these be like the splendour of Heaven. Some have
imagined, that these celestial bodies dart their light upward as well as
downward, and so serve to beautify heaven it self, as well as the earth; but
let us leave this as uncertain, or rather fabulous; for the Scripture tells us,
There is no need of the Sun there; for God himself is the light thereof: Heaven
will be glorious without them, for there is no use for them, nor need of them;
but we know not how better to conceive of Heavens glory, than by such visible
glory which falls under the senses: for this City Jerusalem which is taken up
into Heaven, is further described to be made of the most glorious things the
world affords, as of Gold, and Pearls, and precious Stones: not that it is
really made of such; no, this garbage of the Earth is too base materials for
this Spiritual building; but these things being most valued by man, shadow out
those glorious things which cannot be expressed, or otherwise conceived of by
man; therefore the walls are said to be of Jasper, and the City of pure Gold,
like unto Crystal; it had twelve Foundations, of twelve Precious Stones; the
Gates thereof being twelve, were twelve Pearls; the Streets thereof were pure
Gold, Rev. 21.18
like to transparent Glass; and there was no night there. Oh how beautiful, how
amiable must this City needs be, which yet as far transcends the description as
the City here described does our Country Villages, the Holy Ghost descending as
low as may be to our capacities, when no word in humane language can fully
express it; and if it could, no created understanding could reach it: but
seeing there is no earthly thing more glorious than those mentioned, we may
conclude the Glory here intended is very great; for as we know not how to speak
of God but by borrowed and improper words; attributing that to him which
properly belongs to man, or some other creatures, as understanding, will,
affection, passions; or more improperly, head, heart, arm, hand, face, finger,
and such like, when God has no such distinct faculties, parts or members, but
whatsoever is in God is God; so we may say of Heaven, there is no such thing
there as Gold and Pearl; but there is something more precious, which is darkly
resembled by these things; But if the external parts of the City, the walls,
the streets, the Foundations be so glorious, what are the inner Buildings, what
the Palace, the Throne, the Presence Chamber of the great King? the Kings of
the earth bring their glory to this, their Crowns, and Scepters, but what does
this add to its luster? but the glory of the place is much increased by the
inhabitants, which are the Holy Angels and glorified Saints; for these shine
every one as a distinct Sun, Dan. 12.3. Phil. 3.21.
when their bodies are made like unto the glorified body of Christ; which far
exceeds the native beauty of the place, nay in comparison of whom the Sun it
self is but a darksome spot: It Is true, the Saints and Angels shine with a
borrowed light, for the Sun of Righteousness shines upon them, but this Sun
shall never be Eclipsed, and no Cloud shall ever interpose, and the glory of
the Soul shall exceed the glory of the Body: Now if one Sun make the Morning so
glorious, what will those thousand thousands of glorified Saints, and ten
thousand times ten thousand Holy Angels, do, who shall shine as so many Suns?
Well may it be said, there shall be no night there; but if this be not enough,
God blessed for ever is more than all the light and glory of the place; so that
there needs no Sun, for all the rest borrow their light from him, and no Cloud
shall ever cover his face, no Earth interpose between him and his Saints, or
cause an Eclipse. It is not in heaven as it is in this starry vault, where there
is here one beauty spot, and there another, but the Sun shines from every
point, as if it were a thousand thousand Suns shining in their luster. Oh what
fools are we, that deliberately choose to live in these darksome cells, those
houses of clay, when such an habitation is offered to us! We have seen some
famous Fabrics, some well contrived Houses, with pleasant Walks and curious
Gardens, and these we are taken with, and willingly would spend ou^ time here,
and shall the Heaven of Heavens be less desired? It Is true, we must be willing
to live here while God will have us, and to this end we must keep up these ear
thly tabernacles in repair if we can, we must not remove our station without
our Captains consent; yet should we willingly submit to him when he calls us
off our service, and not despise those heavenly Mansions and this Crown of
glory when offered. Crowns and Kingdoms are held to be the top of humane
felicity, and the greatest ambition is but to enjoy them: Rule and Sovereignty
is held man's chiefest good, and many times this is dear bought, with the loss
of many thousand lives; yea of tentimes those that ascend these steps of
honor, break their necks in the fall, e're ever they come to the top of the
Ladder; or if they do ascend the throne, dye before they are well warmed in
their Seats, or are thrust out by some rival; and yet these men value not
Heaven, where there is none of those fears or dangers: they are like Aesops
Cock, prefer a grain of Barley before a precious Jewel, the worlds glory before
Heavens happiness, which yet as far exceeds it as the brightest morning Sun a
Gloworm, or a piece of shining wood; for all the worlds happiness bears no more
proportion to true felicity, than painted fire upon a wall, that has neither
light nor heat, to true fire; or a King upon a Stage to a King upon his Throne,
or a liveless Image to a living man, or a Crown of thorns to the Kings Crown;
yet many prefer a corruptible Crown, which many times proves a Crown of thorns,
before that which is incorruptible and fades not away; this is that Crown of
righteousness under which no injustice is lodged, when pride and tyranny and
oppression are often engraven upon earthly Crowns; this is a Crown of life,
when others have a deaths head pourtrayed on them, and sometimes prove as
mortal as the owner, yea dye before them; they cannot at the best preserve
life, and many times hasten their owners death. Oh how giorious things are
spoken of thee, O City of God, where no dirty Dog shall tread upon the
Pavement, where no unclean thing shall ever enter! Rivers of pleasures are
there at the right hand of God, and in his presence is joy for evermore; Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, such as eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive of. In the midst of
this Paradise of God is the Tree of Life, which bears twelve manners of
Fruit, and brings forth her fruit every month, whose leaves were always
green and fragrant, and served for the healing of the Nations: Rev. 12.12
here also is the pure River of the water of life, clear as Crystal, Chapter 3.4.
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb; and here it is there
shall be no more curse: Here it is his Servants shall serve him, and they shall
see his face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads; here is that spiritual
Manna, Angels food, for they shall feed upon God himself; here is that eternal
Inheritance that never shall decay; here their joys never fade, their
pleasures shall be always fresh and fragrant, and the Spring shall never end,
no Winter blast shall ever nip them, no Summer Sun shall make them wither: But
how shall this their joy be expressed by one that never saw it, never heard it,
nor never did nor was able to conceive of it? or how can that be uttered which
the Apostle says is unutterable? the most precious things of the world cannot
express it, but darkly shadow it out, and we cannot reach beyond them; for
there be neither Gold nor Silver, precious Jemmes nor Jewels in this building,
the materials thereof are more precious, but what they are we know not: By
these the soul may attain some higher conceptions, but know not how to express
them; water can ascend no higher than the Fountainhead; we know not what God
is, or what a Spirit is, or what the Soul is, and how shall we know what Heaven
is? we may better know what these are not, than what they are, by substracting
from them what implies Imperfection; but a corporeal Creature cannot reach what
is above its reach: What conceptions can a brute beast have of a Rational
being? no better can we have of celestial things, which are so far out of the
reach of sense. Kings are the highest degree of honor and dignity among men,
and therefore all the Saints are said to be Kings; Kings wear Crowns, and so do
they, but these Crowns are not made of gold but of Glory; but what that glory
is we yet know not. God is the Sun of righteousness that casts abroad his
beams, and the Angels and glorified Saints are as the Moon, that are enlightened
with his rays, and by reflection become light and shine as the Stars in the
Firmament by their borrowed light; and how many millions of Suns then will
appear at once in this Horizon which shall never set again? Oh the wonderful
love and mercy of God! that this body of clay shall then shine as the Sun, and
be made like unto the glorified body of the Lord Christ: this is the place
where sin and sorrow shall be no more, they shall never enter these gates, or
ever reach the heart of any Believer; no painful pang, no hard labor, no
sickness, no sorrow, nothing that bespeaks evil shall ever enter, but
everlaststing Joy and endless triumph; those that believe this, and believe
that they have a have a part in this, they may well say with Paul, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ. If Cleombeotus hearing Plato's discourse of
the Immortality of the soul, hastened his own death that he might have the
pleasure of another world, well may a Christian, though not lay violent hands
upon himself, yet wait every day when his appointed time come, and cry out,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Thus thou see the place is glorious, and the
company delightful, and adding more luster to the place, and more happiness to
one another. Here upon earth, as thou art among sorrows and troubles, so in a
bad Neighborhood, even among men spiritually dead; most thou conversest with
are so, and who but mad men would live among the tombs? every family have
some, most families have all thus dead in trespasses and sins; nay, not only
dead but infectious also: every one has some plague sore or other running upon
him, and thou art apt to take the infection; nay, many are infected to the
danger of the life of the soul, and who would live in such an infected air, in
such a pesthouse? thou live also amongst enemies, some open, some secret,
the latter many times worst of all; some seek thy Estate by unjust dealing,
some would rob thee of thy good Name by detraction and reproaches, by lies and
slanders; others of thy liberty, by persecution, and some of thy life; but the
greatest enemies seek the destruction of both body and soul, and all these lay
snares in thy way to entrap thee; many wait for thy halting, and for an
occasion to do thee a mischief; but in heaven here is a good neighborhood,
good society, the inhabitants there are free from guile, free from corruption,
self seeking, every one loving another as himself, and God better than all;
here both the Saints and Angels are perfect in Holiness, without spot or stain,
without sin or sinful inclination: here thou shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the Kingdom of thy Father, and have no worse company than the
Spirits of just men made perfect. It was Socrates (the wisest of the
Philosophers) comfort when he was to dye, that he should after death converse
with Homer, Hesiod and other excellent men in another world: It was Cato's
comfort against the pains of death, that now he was to leave the Colluvies, as
he calls them, that filthy, sordid, base, unworthy company with which he was
forced to converse, those beastly belly-gods, and that he should converse with
the Souls of wise men departed: But of all men in the world believers may
comfort themselves, that they shall in Heaven enjoy the company of Saints and
Angels, yea with God himself, and come to the City of the great King, Heb. 12.23
the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly and Church of the first born which are written in Heaven: for if the
Society of the Saints were so delightful here, when yet they had their Sins and
Imperfections, what will they be there, when they shall be there, when they
shall be healed of all their corruptions? if here they were Comely though
black, what will they be when they are without Spot or wrinkle? here on Earth
they are like fire-sticks, setting one another on a flame of love; provoking
each other to love and to good works, building each other up in their most holy
faith, exciting each others zeal for Gods glory, and the common good, watching
over each other, sympathizing each with other, and helping to bear each others
aflictions; but oh how sweet then will their Society be, when all imperfections
shall be done away, and they shall be perfect in holiness, when nothing will
appear but perfect Love, Unity and Amity one with another; when all shall be of
one mind, and every one shall speak the same thing, and there shall be nothing
to interrupt their joy, or break their peace, or frustrate their hopes, or
cross their wills? Oh blessed Society, between whom is no strife, no
contention, no difference in judgment, no discontent can arise; where there is
no hypocrite, dissembler, or hollow-hearted person among them; but all mind,
all pursue the same thing, the praise of their dear Redeemer; when there is no
Error in Judgment, no disorder in the affections, no disobedience in their
wills, no trouble in the conscience, no defect in the memory. Oh happy day,
when will it come, when I shall enjoy those miriads of Angels and glorified
Saints in glory! here the Saints are tossed to and fro in the world, as if they
were not fit to live in it, but there they come to their resting place: this is
their center, where they are as firm as mount Sion, and shall not be moved;
here is their work, but there is their wages, here is their suffering, there is
their Reward: here is their pilgrimage, there is their Country: here they are
subject to infirmities, there they are made perfect in holiness: here are those
nimble Posts of Heaven, Genesis 28.12.
which Jacob saw ascending and descending upon the Ladder in his Vision; these
are Gods Army, these are Believers Guardians, and in Heaven they shall be their
fellow Brethren: here are the Noble Army of Martyrs, that loved not their lives
to the death, whose garments were dyed red with their own blood, Rev. 14.
and now are made white in the blood of the Lamb: here are the hundred forty
four thousand John saw, with harps in their hands, which follow the Lamb which
way soever he goes, singing Halelujahs, Salvation, honor, power and glory be
unto our God: here are the innumerable company which he saw out of all Nations
and Countries and Languages, which no man could number: here are the Prophets
and Apostles, Martyrs and Professors, who together with the Holy Angels the
heavenly host make up that Heavenly Quire, that day and night chaunt out the
praises of God. Rev. 5.11.
Oh blessed God, that such an earthly Tabernacle, such a house of clay as my
body is, should dwell for ever among those incorporeal Spirits, those blessed
Angels! even so Lord, for so it seems good to thy godly wisdom: Christ himself
in his humane Nature is there, and where he is his Servants shall be also. If
the Eastern wise men rejoiced so much to see him in the Manger, in that low
degree of his humiliation, oh how glorious a sight will it be to see him on his
Throne, on the right hand of God, the highest degree of his Exaltation, when
all his enemies shall lie prostrate at his feet! and shall such a poor worm as
I sear a little trouble, a little pain, a few wrinkles in the face of death, to
see such a sight, yea to enjoy it for ever? God forbid: ^uch a sight seen by
the eye of Faith, will make a Believer breathe out longing desires, Psalm. 42.
When shall I come and appear before God! when will that happy day be! come
Lord Jesus, come quickly; when will thou send for me in thy triumphant Chariot,
and fetch me into thy bosom, and land me safe at the port of rest, and put me
out of the reach of all these storms and tempests which now I suffer! Psalm.
42.12.
If David's heart so panted after the presence of God in his Ordinances, how
will a believing soul thirst after the enjoyment of him in Heaven, where he
shall see him face to face, the beholding of whom ravisheth the Angels
themselves? who then can long to dwell in Meshech, Psalm. 87.3.
or to sojourn in the tents of Kedar? Glorious things are spoken of thee, O
City of God; in thee is no fear, in thee is no sorrow, Psalm. 38.8.9.
whatsoever a man can wish for is there present: God will abundantly satisfy
them with the fatness of his house, and make them drink the Rivers of his
pleasures; for in him is the Fountain of light, and in his light they shall see
light. Oh my Soul, here thou shall receive great things for small, and eternal
things for temporal: God himself is he that fills the empty soul, the sight and
enjoyment of all the rest, how glorious soever, would not satisfy it, but
Union and Communion with God will do it; this is the adequate object of our
happiness, all other glory which heaven affords falls short of this; like the
Moon they all shine by a borrowed light, when the Sun of Righteousness shines
upon them they are glorious, if not, they suffer an Eclipse; Job 25.5.
behold to the Moon and it shines not, and the Stars are not clean in his
sight; ten thousand Suns will vanish at his presence, as the lesser Stars
withdraw at the Suns approach: some few glimpses of him we have here, which
yield some refreshing, but then we shall not only with Moses see his backparts,
but his face, and enjoy him for ever, and be filled and satisfied with his
glory. It Is true, we cannot comprehend him, for can an infinite God be
comprehended by a finite Creature? and we shall be no other, we shall be like
Vessels cast into the Sea, every one shall be full, yet the Sea is not emptied;
we shall have enough to satisfy and give us content; we shall then see him,
but it must be by his own light, as we see the Sun by the light of the Sun: we
see something of him by Scripture light, but then we shall have a clearer
vision; we see him now as in a glass, then face (...) face: every power and
faculty shall be filled with him, and know no want, nor desire more; for a
desire of more implies want and imperfection: but in him are all variety of
delights, in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasure for
evermore. Hence Luther says, he had rather be in Hell with God, than in Heaven
without him: for his presence is the Heaven of Heavens, and were God specially
present in Hell, it would be no Hell; and Heaven would not be Heaven if he were
absent. If thou go not with us (says Moses) carry us not hence: Exodus 33.15. 1 John 3.2.
here it is that Moses may behold Gods face and live, and see his glory: here
we shall fully understand those deep mysteries that now we only can admire, and
see reason for them; as that of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, the
Decrees of Election and Reprobation, the whole design and work of the
Redemption, and why the Angels that fell were not redeemed as well as man, and
all those dark and mysterious Prophesies and Providence we now understand not,
and how all these work together for Gods glory, and his Churches good: all
scales of ignorance will then fail from our eyes, and truth and error will then
be known, which now so puzzles Gods people, and so rents and tears the Church
in pieces: here the soul, as it enjoyes God, whom to know is life eternal, so
it shall burn in love to God, and nothing can withdraw its affection; for
nothing but ignorance can stave off our affections from him now, but there
ignorance cannot enter: and God will love his image in us, and no vicious
quality will be left in us to alienate him from us, and this love of God is
enough, if there were no more, for his loving kindness is better than life. Oh
what wise man is there, but would be contented to be rent out of the Arms of a
beloved Wife, and be separated from Father and Mother, Wife and Children,
Brethren and Sisters, and nearest Relations, and dearest Friends, to come to
Christ, when he calls, and forsake all other lovers to lie in Christ's bosom,
and be made partaker of this endless bliss, this celestial glory? If the
foretastes of it be so sweet, that made Galeacius the Italian Marquess to say,
Let their money perish with them, that hold all the wealth in the world worth
one days communion with Christ; Oh what is the full enjoyment of him? if the
shadow be so delightful, what is the substance, when we shall be capacitated to
know him and enjoy him, without intermission, without fear or interruption? Oh
my Soul, thou feast the company is not less glorious than the place, nay much
more glorious; for God himself is the glory of the place: here thou shall have
no guilt upon thy spirit, thou shall not need with Adam and Eve to hide thy
self when God calls thee: if thou part with thy friends here, thou shall
receive them again with advantage, when their natures are changed, and their
corruptions done away; here the Angels which now cannot be beheld by poor
mortals, shall be our fellow Citizens, Rev. 22.9. Lu. 15.10.
our fellow brethren: they that delighted in our conversion, will then rejoice
at our coronation; and should God send for thee, Oh my soul, in a fiery
Chariot, would refuse to go? what if thou art taken away by a violent hand,
what hurt is in it? the greatest wound is to themselves, for thou will be among
those Souls under the Altar, among those that are slain for the testimony of
Jesus, and shall receive a Crown of Martyrdom. Oh happy will thou be if thou
can be of this blessed society in Heaven, and make up this heavenly Consort
in chaunting out the praises of the ever living God: what think thou of it?
is it worth having? is it worth desiring? is it worth laboring or suffering
for? sure there is a prize put into thy hands, if there be but a heart in thee
to seek it: thou see it is a glorious place, but the one half of the glory
thereof is not told thee, cannot be told thee; the Subject of Happiness here
will be both Soul and Body: these worldly pleasures can but tickle the senses,
they reach not the soul, but in Heaven both are concerned, but the Soul
especially; both had a share in the work, and both must share in the reward;
both must fight and get the victory, and both must have a share in the Crown;
the body without the soul is incapable of those heavenly Joys, and the Soul
without the Body is incomplete; it must be the whole man, soul and body, that
must be glorified: for our vile bodies must be fashioned like unto his glorious
body: both run the race, and both must receive the prize; both are purchased by
Christ, and he will not lose any thing that he has purchased: the body as well
as the soul are members of Christ: 1 Cor. 6.15
and Christ's body shall not be imperfect, or any member lost, but shall all be
raised up at the last day; the soul being the more excellent part of man, and
more capable of serving God than the body, it shall doubtless be the more
glorious, yet the body shall not want its glory: the soul shall be freed from
corruption, and the body from imperfection; this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality; then, and not till
death, shall all the diseases and distempers be removed, and perfectly cured,
all infirmities and deformities be taken away, and both body and soul be made
beautiful and comely, yea Vessels of glory: whatsoever implies any
imperfection, shall be done away; there shall be no immature Youth, or stooping
crooked wrinkled Old Age, but as Divines conceive, all perfect men and women,
in their perfect age and strength, in beauty and comeliness, as if no infirmity
or deformity had hindered: Jacob shall not be halt, nor Mephthosheth lame, nor
Leah blear-eyed; and though the body be sown a natural body, 1 Cor. 15.44.
it shall arise a spiritual body; not a real spirit, but shall retain the
properties of a true body, but spiritualized, and it shall much resemble a
spirit in activity, ability, nimbleness and power. Christ had a real body after
his Resurrection, which a Spirit has not: yet shall they be freed from the
clog and burden of flesh which now they bear, and no more be an hinderance to
the soul; they shall also be freed from all need of food or physic, clothes
and such like, which now are necessary for the preservation of life; from the
need of all creature comforts, from all that any ways imply infirmity or
misery, inward or outward: thou shall never have aching head, or heart, or back,
or bone; for there shall be no more pain, but perfect health and strength, and
immortality, and set out of the reach of death; for death it self shall be cast
into the lake of fire, and shall be swallowed up of victory: no noxious humor
or vicious quality shall ever trouble it more, no decay of nature, Deu. 34.7.
shall then appear, but like Moses in the Wilderness, though he lived to old
age, to an hundred and twenty years of Age, yet was not his eye dim, nor his
natural force abated: There no distemper within, nor casualty without can work
a decay, the flesh shall be no more a burden to the body, nor a clog to the
soul, but man shall be like unto the Angels, who neither eat nor drink, neither
marry nor are given in marriage; neither need they any creaturehelps, or
comforts, for God is their life, and he upholds their beings; where that body
that now is a clod of walking breathing clay, shall then be like the body of
Christ, more amiable than the celestial Orbs and glittering Stars: by death it
is sown a natural body, but shall spring up a spiritual body; it is sown in
dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 45.
but raised in honor; it is sown in weakness, but raised in power; for when
death has struck the fatal stroke, God will send his Angels to carry the soul
to Heaven, and gather our dust and put it in this Vrn, into his Cabinet, not
one grain of it shall be lost, which he will keep as precious Jewels, when many
glittering Stones shall be cast by into shame and contempt; Dan. 12.2.
many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt: Those that honor God he will
honor, and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed; and at the
resnrrection of the just, these houses of clay shall be formed into the
similitude of a Palace, at Gods own cost and charges: Oh who would not have his
Cottage pulled down upon such an account? But if the body be so glorious, not
admitting the least infirmity or deformity, how transcendently glorious will
the soul be? this Jewel will not be lost in the rubbish of death; nay, nay,
death cannot touch it, but only break down the prison walls, and set it free:
the body, it is true, by dying is made immortal, death shall have no more power
of it; but the soul is immortal be Creation, and Gods Institution, it must run
parallel with the longest line of eternity; death has no power over it; fear
not those (says Christ) that can kill the body, and can do more, but fear him
that can cast both soul and body into Hell. Many would persuade themselves, and
it is their interest so to do, if they could make it out, that the soul shall
dye with the body, and that at death men breathe out their souls with their
last breath, as a beast does; and well were it for them if it were so, for then
they might follow their pleasure, and drive on their designs more vigorously,
and then they might brutifie themselves more than they do, which needs not;
but these men rather would than do believe their own doctrine, the conscience
in the mean time giving them many bitter thrutches: No, no, this Lamp of Gods
own lighting will never out; they must shine in Heaven, Mat. 25.46
or burn in Hell; everlasting Joy, or endless Torments must be their portion:
They are capable of communion with God, and if they miss of this, are capable
of endless torments; neither are the faculties of the soul destroyed by death,
the understanding, will, affections, memory, conscience shall remain in Heaven
or Hell; otherwise it were bad news to the godly, but good to the wicked; these
are enlarged to the wicked, to make them more capable of torment; to the godly
to make them more capable of Heavenly delights, and more fit for their
enjoyments, and employments and their company: It signifies little if a small
Vesse^ be cast into the Ocean, it is quickly full, when every little pit of
water may do as much: the understanding of a wicked man shall be enlarged to
know the worth of the things he has lost, and the vanity of those he did
prefer: the other shall have their understandings enlarged to know the worth of
things he enjoyes, to know God, and see him as he is. The sight of God and
Christ begun here on earth in the godly by the eye of faith, 1 John 3.2.
shall there be perfected and completed; this shall be perfected when their
holiness is perfected and not before; for there can be no union or communion
where there is no conformity: can two walk together except they are agreed?
what fellowship has light with darkness, or Christ with Belial? There can be
no satisfying apprehensions of the Object, where there is no suitable Organ and
fit medium: those that would see God who is Holiness it self, must be holy
also: Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8.
for they shall see God: no unholy person can ever please him, or enjoy him.
The Image of God stamped upon, man in the first Creation, did capacitate him to
hold commuion and correspondency with God, and when this Image was defaced,
this Privilege was lost, and Adam stood at a distance, and was afraid to come
to God, but remained at a distance, in a state of enmity, till Christ made up
the breach, and by Grace renewed this Image in the Elect, and accordingly God
communicated himself again to them; but the Image of God was renewed but in
part, no more is our communion: for as our obedience was full of interruption,
so is our communion; and as there is but a little of this Image of God seen
upon us, so there is little communion with God to be perceived; and where
holiness is most to be found, this also is to be found: a little glimmering
light of him we have, and but a little, like as when the day begins to break,
but in Heaven, when the Sun of righteousness does arise, the shadows fly away;
no cloud there can interpose, no earth cause an Eclipse: our communion with God
shall be without interruption, it shall always be a serene sky, a clear air;
no sin then shall hide his face from us, or make him bend his brows: here one
cloud or other always interrupts, one sin or other always breaks our peace,
and spoils our Joy, and our communion, and hides Gods face, and proves like a
skreen drawn between God and the soul; but this in Heaven shall be removed, and
the soul shall see nothing but smiles in the face of her beloved, and meet with
nothing but embraces from him. There shall then be a perfect conformity of our
wills to Gods will, and they shall be as it were melted into his, as two bells
melted together make one, and the soul shall receive the utmost degree of
perfection that a finite creature is capable of: then shall he perfectly know
God, whom to know is life eternal, and his will, Joh. 17.5.
and shall be out of all capacity of erring, and shall know all necessary
Truths that tend to his happiness: The meanest Saint shall exceed the knowledge
of all the Learned ^abbies in the world now, and all those abstruse points in
Divinity that now puzzle this Learned Age, those that now call rather for Faith
to believe, than Reason to apprehend; those we now take upon Gods Word, and an
ipse dixit must suffice us, we shall then know reason for it; for all the
skales of ignorance shall then fall from our eyes, and all the mists of
darkness and clouds of error, shall be blown over, and a clear discovery made
of all our mistakes, and a resolution given to all our doubts: here we know but
in part, we understand but in part, but then what is weak shall be done away,
and the truth shall appear; we shall never then have a discontented thought
arise in the heart, occasioned by any dispensation of Providence, as here
sometimes we have, when they lie hid from our understanding; Psalm. 37. etc.
as David also had his mistakes about the prosperity of wicked men; for here we
shall understand the reason and ground of all: and our affections also shall be
perfectly set upon right Objects, and our love, desire and delight shall never
be set upon any forbidden object. In a word, all the powers and faculties of
the Soul, and members of the Body, shall be in perfect conformity to God,
without the least deviation, even more perfect than in the first Creation, and
this to eternity; for the worm of time shall never eat out the heart of our
heavenly Joys, neither shall there be any satiety and desire of change, as it
is in this world in the best Joys we can meet with; and shall we yet be afraid
of entering into this condition, and be put above all fears of an alteration,
but for ever enjoy that God that is the souls rest, and the Saints ^appiness?
Knowledge is a delightful thing ^o a wise man; If the face of humane Learning
(says Aeneas Silvius) were but seen, it is more beautiful than the Evening or
the morning Star. It Is a delightful thing to know the natures, the properties,
the ends and uses of natural things; it is a study well beseeming Solomon
himself, who spent much time this way; and many abstruse points in Philosophy
there are which the greatest wits are at a loss about, and which they would
give much to understand; and Divinity it self is not without its mysteries, and
such Arcana as will never be known while we are here: Alas, how little do we
know about God, or the nature and properties, offices and dignities of the
Angels? nay, how little of our own Souls, about the Decrees, work of
Redemption, Free will, and many more? but there nothing shall be hid; and no
doubt there we shall have the knowledge one of another: for shall we sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and not know them? or
did Dives know Abraham, and Lazarus in his bosom, and shall not the Saints in
heaven know them? do they know one another in this world after a little time of
converse, and when our knowledge is perfected will not eternity bring us to
acquaintance? and doubtless the enjoyment of the Saints in glory will be part
of the souls happiness. Now all earthly delights to these heavenly Joys are
but a shadow, a very dream, the very dream of a shadow, to what is there
enjoyed; where the glorified Souls shall be Kings and Priests for ever, of the
most high God; they wear Crowns upon their heads, and palms in their hands,
which they cast down at the feet of him that lives for ever. These little
flashes of spiritual Joy, (and indeed it is no more) will be blown up into a
flame: here no fumes of Melancholy shall disturb the Fancy, or interrupt the
Joy. Malignant Saturn cannot send any influence into these superior Orbs; but
here is that far more and eternal weight of Glory to be enjoyed. O my soul,
had thou had but such a glimpse of Glory as Stephen had, thou would not
have feared to have fallen asleep with him. Now thou art in the body, and absent
from God, but when death has closed thine eyes, and covered thy face with a
winding sheet, thou shall not only see God, but be present with him, and behold
his glory. Now thy glimpses of him are like a flash of lightning, soon gone;
much like a man that gazeth at a Star through an Optick-glass held with a palsy
hand; now and then thou catchest a sight, but quickly losest it again; but
there he will always be before thine eyes, thou shall behold his face there,
and not his back parts only; whether with bodily eyes or otherwise, is not well
known, nor much material; it is probable it may, and the eye capacitated to
behold the Object, though here it is dazzled with a weaker glory: we find Job
seems to be of that mind: Job 19.52. etc.
I know, says he, that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold him, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. When
this mortal has put on immortality, and this body which is sown a natural body
become spiritual, we know not but these Organs of our eyes may be capacitated
to behold spiritual objects, as well as our understandings be enabled to know
him as he is. 1 John 3.2.
This we know, God will make himself known, and that is sufficient to us;
whether the one way, or the other, let us not anxiously trouble our selves
about the manner of it: this know, if God do not enlarge and capacitate our
powers and faculties of the soul, we can neither know him, see him, nor enjoy
him as he is, which he has promifed we shall do; and he that believes in him
and has not yet seen him, shall see him on whom he has believed: it is Christ's
prayer, John 17.24.
that those that are given to him, may be where he is, to behold his glory; and
if those eyes were blessed, that saw him in his misery, how much more those
that behold him in glory? if the dawning of the day be so glorious, how much
more glorious will it be when the Sun shines in his full strength, and all the
shadows are fled away? If those that bear his Image here (and they are more
excellent than their neighbors) be so lovely, what will they be when this
Image of God is perfectly restored, and they freed from all corruption? here
they have sung forth his praises, then shall sing continual Halelujahs for
ever: how will they run the ways of Gods commandments, when all the clogs of
corruption are taken off, and their feet are enlarged? Now their labor shall
be turned into leisure to praise him, when they have nothing else to do, yea
nothing which they delight more to do, than that. Now it is death, and death
alone that can put us into the possession of this glory, where we shall have
fullness of Joy and Glory, and be Heirs, yea Coheirs with Christ; and would any
wise man deny to take possession? Oh my soul, will thou yet hang back, and
plead Nonage? art thou afraid of Eternity, when Joy and Happiness is added to
it? could thou wish the worm of time were at the root, to make it wither? art
thou come to the door, and thou make a halt at the threshold? and art willing
another should take thy Crown, and would thou surrender thy interest? when
Paul looks through the Perspective glass of Faith, and sees happiness at the
end, he was willing to dye and be with Christ; thou know whom thou have
believed, and dare not trust thy Redeemer with thy life, that lost his own
for thy sake? whatever thou losest, whatever thou suffer for him, it will
never repent thee when thou art in Heaven; it will reward thee for all thy cost
and charges, Christ tells thee, an hundred fold, and I may well say a thousand;
one day in Gods Courts here on earth was better to David than a thousand
elsewhere, and one day in Heaven is much better than that; yea, but if thy life
be cut off for his sake, for one day thou loosest upon earth, thou shall have a
thousand in Heaven for it, he will make thee Eagle-eyed, that thou shall behold
the Sun of righteousness in his splendor, and the Organ not offended. If Paul
and Silas could sing in the Prison, what will they do when they come into this
heavenly Quire? Isa. 15.5.
Here the eyes of the blind shall be opened, the ears of the deaf unstopped,
the lame man shall leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing: this
is the marriage of the Lamb, and his wife has made her self ready; and who
will not rejoice upon the Wedding Day, when the Bridegrooms voice is heard? Now
the marriage shall be solemnized, that was so long ago contracted between
Christ and the Soul; this is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice
and be glad in it: this is thy pay-day, when thou art to receive thy wages, the
harvest of thy hopes; when thou shall receive a plentiful crop of glory; that
which was sown in tears, shall now be reaped with joy: now thy desires, thy
longings and thy pantings shall be satisfied; now is the time when the Crown of
Martyrdom shall be put upon the head of the Martyr, and a Crown of
Righteousness upon the Just man's head: now is the time that Sincerity will be
discerned from Hypocrisy, let it be spun with never so fine a thread, and true
Gold from counterfeit: now is the time that those that have Oil in their
Vessels, as well as Lamps in their hands, shall go in with the Bridegroom to
the Marriage, and those that have not shall be shut out; now he that has a
wedding garment shall be a welcome Guest, Mat. 22.12
and he that has none shall be cast into utter darkness: now is the time that
those that have forsaken any thing for Christ, shall receive an hundred fold,
and those that have lost their lives for him shall receive the greatest share,
though those that have the least measure shall have Joy unspeakable and full of
glory, yea as much as they can hold; and who but a mad man notwithstanding
this, will look upon Religion as a Frenzy, and the professors thereof little
better than frantic, because they run themselves upon the pikes of danger, and
expose themselves to losses and crosses, to troubles and trials, yea to death
it self, and that for conscience sake? but did these men see the prize they run
for, the Crown they fight for, they would run the same race, and fight the same
fight; if any of them were but offered an handful of Gold for a handful of
Silver, they would not refuse it, much less if they might have an handful of
Angels for a handful of Muck; but believers make a better exchange, for they
receive Heaven for the Earth, and God for the Creatures, yea eternal Life for
that which is temporal: did others know the reward, they would do the work; did
they see the joy that is set before them, they would endure the cross and
despise the shame as well as they; but how can those see that are spiritually
blind, or know whose foolish hearts are darkened; they are at least sand blind,
and cannot see at a distance, nor discern what it is that stands beyond death,
and seeing no other pleasure but what only reaches the senses, take up with
that, and think there is no better: did they see better, they would desire
better; those that know no better than Hell, never look after Heaven: were they
nearer to God that Spiritual Loadstone, they would be drawn to him, they would
then contemn these fading delights, and lay hold upon everlasting happiness;
they would contemn this unrighteous Mammon, and seek after True Treasure: they
see indeed both ways, but cannot see to the end; the one they see broad and
easy, green and pleasant, but they see not the dangerous Precipice it leads
to, and the fiery Gulf it ends in; they see the other also, which is rough and
craggy, steep and hilly, which few men walk in, but they see not the Pleasures
it ends in, and therefore they choose the other, and think they do wisely, and
think they are Fools that do otherwise; but had they the Saints spectacles,
they would change their minds: but this their way is their folly, and nothing
but ignorance can make them walk in it; the time will come they would change
their course but cannot, as the foolish Virgins would have had Oil when it was
too late; corrupted Reason being enchanted by sense proves a Caterer for the
flesh, but were it rectifyed by faith, it would look for happiness elsewhere.
There are too many like a Cardinal I have read of, that usually said, I will
not leave my part in Paris for a part in Paradise: they are wedded to the
world, and are loath to be divorced. It Is true, believers know little of the
nature of Heavens joys, these know nothing of it; the former have some
glimpses of the glory, some foretastes of the sweetness of Canaans fruits, this
sets them a longing; the other are strangers to it; ignotus nulla cupido: The
godly know not the quantity of it, for how can that be discovered that is
unspeakable, or conceived of, that is inconceivable? or how can that be
measured that is infinite? this we may build upon, it is our masters Joy, and
therefore great; it cannot enter into us, but we must enter into it: methinks
when we speak or hear of Joy unspeakable, of Light inaccessible, and of Glory
immortal, our hearts may burn within us, like the Disciples which were going to
Emaus, when Christ spoke to them; it should make us cast a despising eye upon
all the worlds glory, and make us think no pains too much, nor cost too dear,
to come to the enjoyment of it; it might make us run that we may obtain, fight
that we might conquer, and travel hard to come to our journeys end; for then
all our work will be done, all our pains over, and we shall have nothing to do
but to praise the Lord, which will be our wages as well as our work: for when
we are spiritualized, and the dross of corruption left behind, it will be as
natural to us as to live, and as now it is to breathe; for there is nothing but
our corruption now, that makes this Angelical duty troublesome. And is there
enough in Heaven to make amends for all our losses and crosses upon earth? let
us then never stick at the price, for whatsoever we expend for Christ, or
Heaven, it shall be paid back with advantage. If Solomon's Servants were so
happy in seeing his glory, and hearing his wisdom, Oh what a happiness will it
be to see his glory in Heaven when it will be increased, and hear his wisdom
when it is perfected! nay in enjoying Solomon's God, and partaking both of his
glory and wisdom! and Oh the Honor that believers will have in such a
Relation, where they will have God for their Father, Christ for their Husband,
the Angels and Saints for their Brethren and companions, and not only seed upon
Angels food, but be set upon an Angelical Employment, and have the Angel
reward! And if this be not enough to satisfy for all the pains, troubles,
losses, and crosses, thou sustain upon this account, never take upon thee the
profession of Religion: but I am sure there is punishment enough in hell for
all those that make light of Christ, and slight the offers of the Gospel. Oh
the purblind world, that can see nothing but what is under their feet! had they
but such a sight of God and Glory as some others have had, they would desire
with Paul to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. Rev. 22.20
and with the Church, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Here thou complainest of
vain thoughts, and roving imaginations, and well thou may, but thou will
never be cured of them but by death, and after death thou shall never be
troubled with them more, but shall serve God without distraction. In the world
thou could never meet with content, in Heaven thou shall never meet with
discontent; and art thou yet content to be in the world? here thou meetest with
no satisfaction, and art thou satisfied without satisfaction? well, whatever
thoughts thou have of Christ now, the time is coming thou will have use of him,
and need of him; for at death one glimpse of his favor, one smile of his
countenance, will do thee more good than all the Cordials thy Doctors can give
thee. Moses saw but his back-parts, and his face did shine, how does he shine
now in beholding his glory! the fruition of God in glory is the souls
happiness, and happy are they that do enjoy him; but what this fruition is, we
neither know, nor can know in this world; no word in humane language can
express it; for how can a Cockle-shell comprehend all the water in the Ocean?
we can have no right conceptions what God is, or what it is to enjoy him; and
if we should form the highest conceptions imaginable, it would fall far short:
for how can a finite creature conceive of what is infinite; or a bruit beast of
a rational Soul? Mahomet proves himself a fool, in fancying to himself and his
followers a sensual happiness in Heaven, as the enjoyment of beautiful women,
and other sensual delights; and though Believers far outgo him, yet still shoot
short when they aim at the description of Heavens Glory; and no wonder, we that
know so little of Spirits, of their nature and properties, must needs be in the
dark when we discourse of God, the Father of Spirits, and the Creator of
Angels: while we are in the flesh we know little of the nature and Original of
our own souls, how then can we speak of those glorious spirits, or know what
their enjoyments in Heaven are? if we consult with things below, and search
Natures Garden from end to end, we may find work enough to do; nay the least of
creatures has something in it to puzzle Natures best Secretaries: the Gnat,
the Be, those poor Insects are not without their wonders; and what then if we
consider Gods greatest works, the Sun, Moon and Stars, and all the host of
Heaven; and if we understand not earthly things, about which we are daily
conversant, how shall we understand heavenly things so far above our reach? if
we understand not things visible, and those subjected to our senses, what shall
we say of invisibles, so remote from us? If the footmen have wearied us, how
shall we contend with horses? If we cannot wade a small Rivulet, what shall we
do with the Ocean? what conceptions can a poor worm have of an Angel, or a
rational soul? and proportionably must we have of the great God: what
conceptions can a man born blind have of Colors, or of the Sun it self? or
what conceptions can a man born deaf have of sounds, or of Music? such like
imperfect conceptions can we have of God, of Heaven, or heavenly Joys: the
proportion is greater between God and the best of men, than between that man
and the meanest Worm that crawls under his feet, nay between a worm and an
Angel; these are Fellow Creatures, made by the same hand, but what proportion
between the Pot and the Pot-maker? all light is in this Sun, all the water of
consolation is in this Sea, and all the lines of goodness here concenter; his
power, his wisdom, his goodness, are infinite, but what Infinite is, we cannot
tell: we shall enjoy all happiness in him, and with him, but what this
Happiness is, we know not: That which eye has not seen, ear has not heard of,
neither has it entered into man's heart to conceive of: What can we say of it?
the eye of man has seen much, the ear has heard of more, but the heart of man
may conceive more than this, but all this falls yet short; for this joy is
unconceivable, and if we could reach a conception, we cannot frame an
expression: the Apostle saw things unutterable, no word in humane Language can
express the language of this Country; the Scripture holds out: to us, that
there is a relative Union between Christ and the believing soul, which is
sometimes set forth by the union between the Head and the Members, the Vine and
the branches, the Husband and the Wife, etc. but wherein this union does
consist, is not easy to demonstrate; yet it may suffice us that there is such
a Union; and shall we not be willing to come to him when he calls us to make us
happy, unless we fully know what the Joys of Heaven are, and the utmost extent
of it, when yet we know it is beyond our desert? shall a Beggar refuse an Alms,
if he must not know before how much it will be: Oh my Soul, thou speak
hardly of the world, as if thou had wrong done thee, and do think God
wrongs thee also if he call thee hence? thou railest upon sin, and yet art loath
to leave it; thou complainest of thy suffering, and yet do fear nothing more
than deliverance: Oh what dissembling is this with God and Man! thou spendest
many hours in preaching, praying, hearing, reading, studying, meditating, etc.
and all to learn a way thou art not willing to walk in, and travellest in a
road thou art not willing to find thy journeys end: will thou run a race, and
wilt not lay hold on the prize, and fight a Battle and not be glad of the
Victory? what hypocrisy is this, to lie upon thy knees hour after hour, to
pray to be rid of that thou art not willing to leave; to get a plaster for a
sore thou art not willing to have healed? thou pretendest thou believe
everlasting Happiness to be the reward of faithful Obedience, thou professest
hope that thou have a share in it, and dare not trust God with the conduct of
thy soul to this happiness, who only knows the way? Well, I have but one thing
more to offer thee, and that is this: That as the Place is magnificent and
stately, the Company glorious and Royal, the enjoyments excellent and
unspeakable, so is the Happiness eternal, and shall never know end or
diminution so long as there is a Heaven, which will be while there is a God:
Thy Joys shall never end, but run parallel with the longest line of Eternity,
when that Vanity is writ upon all earthly enjoyments; and this one Epithet
spoils all the sport, and marres the splendor of all sublunary things, and
disgraces all the worlds pomp and glory, that it is mortal, fading, transitory,
and endures not: were it not for the Eternity of them Heavens Glory were not
so desirable, nor Hells Torments so dreadful: for if after a hundred thousand
millions of years the glorified Saints should leave their Habitation, and the
damned Spirits their Prison, this would be a Corrosive to the one, and a
Comfort to the other, that after a long tract of time an end would come: Nay,
if after the Revolution of this long time they should exchange places, those in
Heaven would have infinitely the worser bargain; but this will not be so,
otherwise the Reversion of Heaven would be better than the present possession,
and the Reversion of Hell worse. The Sun of the wicked man's comforts sets at
Noon, but in Heaven the godly man's comforts shall never set, Isa. 60.20.
nor go behind a Cloud: For there shall be no night; Thy Sun shall no more go
down, (says God) neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self: for the Lord shall
be thine everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy
people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever. Well
may I say, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee: he has delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling. Oh Eternity, how amazing, how confounding art thou to the
workers of Iniquity! but how amiable and delightful are the thoughts of thee to
the godly! for they have Eternity added to their Happiness, the other to their
Misery: Oh what a long Lease will this be of Heavens glory, that shall never
expire! the want of duration makes the worlds glory of little worth; but
Eternity makes Hells torments so Tormenting, and Heavens Joy so desirable:
these shall never wax old, nor know end. Here thou ^eedest not weary thy self
in Counting he fleeting hours, or the return of weeks, or months, or years;
here is neither Clock nor Watch, nor Dial to observe Time by, nor Sun, nor
Moon, nor Stars, to distinguish Day from Night, or Summer from Winter; for Time
shall be no more, it will be swallowed up of Eternity: one day with the Lord is
as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day: God reckons not time as
we do; their Sun shall know no Eclipse, nor their Moon no Change. When death
opens the door for the soul to enter into Eternity, it shall not float there,
but be immediately posted into glory; the Spirit shall return to God that gave
it, where it shall enjoy for ever those good things which it has labored for
and thirsted after, and reap the fruit of all the pains it has taken for
Heaven. Oh my soul, Eternity will be the very Crown of thy Crown, and the Crown
of Heaven it self; for if thou did certainly know thy Joys would expire,
Heaven would be filled with sad thoughts, and sour sauce to thy sweet meat,
and spoil all thy mirth. Oh my soul, thou have no^ a price put into thy hands,
the Lord give thee a heart to get wisdom: let not the thoughts of a short
trouble, or a little pain make thee love the race, and mis the prize; but
rather suffer any temporal pain, than eternal; and suffer any loss, rather than
the loss of thy soul, the loss of thy God, thy Heaven, and thy happiness. Thou
have seen what death is both to the godly and wicked; that it is common to
both, but no enemy to a Believer; that there is nothing in the world of equal
value with celestial Treasures; that Death can do thee no hurt, but much good,
in freeing thee from evil and putting thee into the possession of all that is
really good: thou have seen the reward of Obedience, and the punishment of
denying Christ; what is thy resolution? Will thou be faithful to the death?
then here is offered a Crown of life: Rev. 2.10.
If thou will prove an Apostate, thou must have thy portion with Judas, and go
down to thy place. Heaven and Hell, Life and Death are set before thee, choose
which thou will. Oh my God, I see reason sufficient, why I should give up my
Life to thy dispose; I am convinced that it is my Duty and my Interest. Lord
suffer not this treacherous heart to deceive me, let me consult with Faith and
not with Sense; let me never trust in my own strength, neither distrust thine:
Lord, through thy strength I can do all things, but without thee I can do
nothing. Lord, I believe, help my unbelief; let me honor thee both by my life,
and by my death: if thou will thou can let this Cup pass from me, yet not my
will but thine be done. Lord, fit the back before thou lay on the burden,
enable me to obey, and then command what thou will: if it be thy will I shall
be sacrificed, Lord accept of the Sacrifice, and thy will be done: let thy
strength be seen in my weakness, and Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 24. line 25. add some, P. 36. l. 24. for may r. many, P. 79. l. 6 blot
out to, P. 114. l. 30. blot out the, p. 117. l. 9. add or, p. 145. l. 22. for
they were r. thou were, p. 147. l. 24. add out, p. 188. l. 28. blot out from,
p. 195. l. 22. for defirmity r. deformity, p. 212. l. 27. for stench r. stink,
p. 214. l. 22. for him r. it, p. 229. l. 29. add he, p. 236. l. 23. no comma
after in, p. 241. for transfigurati r. transfiguration, p. 254. l. 20. blot out
have a, p. 267. l. 10. for it r. thee, p. 268. l. 23. blot out nay, l. 27. for
be r. by, p. 282. l. 19. for ignotus r. ignotis.

EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
Page 3. line 18. for triffs r. trifles, p. 10. l. 16. add si, p. 17. l. 10.
for nescit r. scivit.

TO THE READER.
Page 15. line 12. for parllael r. parallel, p. 23. l. 10. for iguotus r.
ignotis.

Books Sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end
of Cheap Side, near Mercers Chapel.
DAille on the Colossians. Tailor on Christ's Temptations. Burgess on the Third
Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Pareus on the Revelations. One
hundred select Sermons: By Dr. Horton.
Quarto.
Scandret against Quakerism. Bulkly on the Covenant. Elton on the
Commandments. The Fiery Jesuit. Morgan of Dialling. Separation no Schism. Dr.
Collings upon an Opining Conscience. Hodges's Creatures Goodness.
Considerations for Peace: By the same Author. Mr. Janeways Funeral Sermon. The
Morning Exercise against Popery. Four useful Discourses: By Mr. Buroughs. Dr.
Wilds Letter of Thanks. Brightman on the Revelations.
Large Octavo.
Heywoods Sure Mercies of David. Cobbet on Prayer. Polwheils Quenching of the
Spirit. Sober Singularity. Heaven taken by Storm. Lye's Spelling Book. Aesops.
Fables. Doolitels Catechize. Whitakers 18 Sermons. Dr. Stauntons Life. Venning
of Sin. Normans Cases of Conscience. Swinnock on the Attributes. Hurst of
Grace. Calamy's Art of Meditation. Shepperdice Spiritualized. Wadsworths
Remains. Lewis's Grammar.
A POEM, wherein is set forth the Vanity, Frailty and Brevity of Man's Life; as
also the Certainty of Death, with the Benefit of it to Believers.
THE Life we live resembles much a Play,
Where each man acts his part, and so away:
The best act Comedies which Joyfully end,
Most Tragedies, which to confusion tend:
Men are the Actors, and the World's the Stage,
Whereon appears persons of every age,
The good, the bad, the noble and the base,
Both Males and Females, even all Adams race.
None are exempt, each have some part to play,
Yet some have lesser, some have more to say.
Some Childrens parts do play, they cry and then
March off, when others act the parts of Men.
Some on the Stage do fetch a turn or two,
Some look about them, and no more ado:
Some act their own, and some another part;
In a disguise they are honest, Knaves in heart.
The worst in Royal Robes sometimes do dress them,
Those that their inside view have cause to bless them;
In their disguise like painted Tombs they shine,
They Are fair without, but foul enough within.
In Silks and Sattins many men are clad,
When Dunghill-rakers are not half so bad;
But when Death comes, in their own shape we find them,
Their borrowed Robes they then must leave behind them.
Some act in threadbare Coats, yet you may find
Under that sordid Vest a gallant Mind:
Though these are scorned by our Gallants gay,
Yet these do act their parts as well as they.
Some act Religious parts, but most profane;
The Hypocrite, he is for either Game;
For he has Vizards, if he please, enough
To make him seem profane and holy too:
For he can one way look, and row another,
In a disguise he will cozen his own Brother;
Where Interest or the Devil drives he will go,
And shifts his Sails still as the wind does blow:
He Will act you any part, Noble or Base,
With his Apparel he can change his Face;
Each day like to the Moon, his Face is new,
With the Chameleon he can change his hue,
Ape-like he will imitate whatever he see;
Proteus never had more shapes than he:
Like Mercury with Good he will seem the best;
If found with Bad, he will exceed the rest:
Religion is his stalking-horse, and he
Does only use it for to take his prey;
So long as he can get by it he will use it,
But if he lose by it, he will soon refuse it;
Him of his borrowed Robes Death will divest,
He Will dye in Earnest, though he lived in Jest.
Some more ingeniously show what they are,
Rotten they are at heart, and so appear:
Taverns they haunt, their Names not States to raise,
And those in Hell do go for roaring Boys.
In Venus Courts some live, but most of these
Come lamely off, or die of her disease:
Some few stay Natures time, most run before,
Bacchus or Venus opens them the door.
Some cheat, some steal, some lie, some swear and curse,
And most, though bad enough, grow worse and worse:
But when their part is acted Death will come,
And clear the Stage, and then the Play is done.
Most are hissed off the Stage, few get applause,
For few of acting well observe the Laws:
Some few to Wisdoms Rules their hearts apply,
And these know how to live, and how to dye.
Some mind their business, most time idly spend;
Some love their way, but few their Journeys end.
For Riches, Honors, Pleasures most men strive,
But to get wisdom is the way to thrive.
Some court fair Ladies, whose bewitching Spells
Ruins the State, and sinks the Souls to Hell.
Some few improve their time while God does lend it,
When others study vainly how to spend it:
How for to live most men their thoughts apply,
But wise is he that studies how to dye.
The heavenly Loadstone Grace having touched the Soul,
Makes her unsettled till she finds the Pole.
This World will not suffice for her abode;
She Is restless here, her Polar Star is God.
This Heaven-born Eagle mounts and soars too high,
To feed on Carrion that in Ditches lie;
This World she has conquered, and with Philips Son,
She Would weep if there were not more worlds than one.
This Pilgrim cares not where she lays her head,
She sleeps securely, if God make her bed.
In a cold Prison she can lie and ease her,
With Jacobs Visions Jacobs Stone will please her.
Most men it is true, complain of grief and trouble,
But few of sin, which makes their sorrows double:
Troubles arise from sin, the World and Devil,
God makes our days so few, we make them evil.
The world much like an Inn serves for a day,
Some only break their fast, and so away:
Some dine, some sup, and some are richly treated,
But those that eat most Meals are most indebted.
If any suffer hardship, it is the best:
The worse the man, the better is the Guest:
Some feast, some drink, some game, some drab and whore,
But when they come to pay, their reck'ning's more.
The World's to bad men as the Earth to weeds,
She Will cherish those, but choke the better seeds;
And Stepdame-like, she will Gods children serve,
She Will feed her own, but suffer them to sterve,
For entertainment she is much like to Jael,
She offers Milk, when she intends the Nail;
Who trusts to her smiles, does quite mistake her,
The wisest men they be that quite forsake her.
Well, though the way be rough, let us mend our pace.
Our Journey's short, and then we shall have ease.
Life's but a shadow which is always flying,
For from the Cradle we are always dying;
It Is but an Hourglass, and the sands are sins,
Brimm'd up by Nature, turned when Life begins.
Which still is running, as each day does come,
And when the last fins dropped, our life is done.
Our labor's near an end, our death is hasting,
And good or bad rewards are everlasting.
We reach not Nestors days with our short span,
Nor number years with old Methusalem.
Men lived then five hundred years or more,
Not one of twenty now can reach Threescore:
No, no, our Measure's cut, it well appears,
Our Fathers Months were longer than our Years.
The Heart, the Stagg, the Raven, the Eagle free,
May boast they are long-lived, so cannot we.
The withering Grass, a Shadow, Emblems be
That fitly sets forth our Mortality;
A Rose, a Blossom, or a Flower in May,
Or Jonah's Gourd, that lasted but a day;
A Dream, a Shadow, if you will a Span,
Is long enough to mete the Life of Man:
For like a Pear, or Plumb, when ripe we fall
Into our Mothers lap, for so do all:
Man's Life is of a thought much like the Dream,
A Weavers Shuttle, or the gliding Stream;
Or like a hasty Post that swiftly flies,
For man that is born to day, to morrow dies:
Life's like a Bubble that is soon pricked by Death,
For Man is but a Bladder filled with Breath.
Life hastes like a Ship that is under Sails,
Death comes like the Tide that never fails.
Our Time like Lightning full quick does go;
Death hastneth like an Arrow from a Bow:
Such is the Life of Man, for in a day
Man springs and withers, like a Flower in May;
The Sun never runs his race in this our age
But sees ten thousand marching off the Stage:
The Life we live is but an inch of time;
Last day my Fathers was, and this day mine:
The next belongs to the succeeding age;
Thus one does thrust another off the Stage.
My Predecessors they are dead and rotten,
And I in little time shall be forgotten.
Great Caesar's Bones Death did to Ashes turn,
And Alexander's bounded in his Urn.
The fair, the foul, the Holy, the Profane,
The Rich, the Poor, are worsted at Death's Game.
To Mighty Sampson Death did give a Fall,
Wise Solomon did dye, and so must all.
Though in thy hand all Peru's Gold thou have,
Death will thee make a Tenant to the Grave:
Death makes no difference between Poor and Rich,
The Worm feeds sweetly on no matter which;
The Fairest Lady, and the foulest Slave
Death can both wed and bed in the same Grave.
To God a thousand years is but a day,
Our life's then but an Hour that fleets away.
And of this Hour so many sharers be,
O Lord how small a part belongs to thee?
Though life seems long because it is full of trouble,
Yet many wish their days were three times double.
The Captive Slaves that in the Galleys lie,
To end their Bondage, yet are loath to dye;
They flee from death although he be their friend,
For when he stops their Breath their Sorrows end.
Life is a warfare, Death does stint the strife;
We leave not fighting till we leave our life.
We fight against our sins, the world and Devils,
At death we fully Vanquish all those evils.
To heavenly Joys Death opens us the door,
Where sin and sorrow they shall be no more:
There Is no Corruption shall molest us there,
There Is no Temptation that we need to fear.
Why fear we Death then, he this Boon will give,
Our Enemies shall dye, but we shall live?
Life is the day wherein we labor hard,
Death is the night, and then comes our reward.
Now we with Tempests on the Seas are driven,
Death is the Wind that blows us to our Haven.
Is he less happy that a brisker Gale
Drives to the Shore, or he that is under Sail?
Whom fierce tempestuous winds as yet are driving,
Who with a thousand dangers yet are striving?
In life we in the raging Surges be,
Death comes and lands us in Eternity.
In life the Saints are Heirs but under age,
When death comes they receive their Heritage:
Heaven is our Kingdom, but to come thereat,
There is no other way but through this Gate.
Life is our Journey, Death our Journeys end,
Life is our Enemy and Death our Friend.
Death like a Pilot guides us to the Shore,
He is the Porter that must ope' the door.
We cannot serve our God or Christ enjoy,
Without distraction till our dying day.
Death's but a quiet sleep when wearied,
It Is but put off our Clothes, and go to bed.
Death is Gods pursivant and will compel
Gods Friends to go to Heaven, his Foes to Hell.
He is his Messenger none can prevent him,
None can resist him, or the Lord that sent him.
Both Prince and Peasant drink of the same cup,
When he invites them home with him to Sup.
All men must pledge the health Abel began,
There Is none exempt, the Master nor the man.
The greatest Potentate cannot escape,
The way to Heaven and Hell lie through this Gate:
The high, the low, the rich, and eke the poor,
When he does knock must open him the door;
Nor fear nor favor makes him turn aside,
He will not be perverted with a Bribe.
What though some have their lives drawn out at length,
And we cut down by Death in our full strength?
What Hurt to us if we receive our pay
For one Hours work, as much as for a day?
What damage to us if Commandment come,
When others work till night, to leave at Noon?
The weary labourer pants and longs for rest,
And when he is in his bed he thinks he is best;
The Bed of Death to the weary will give ease,
Our sleep's not broken there by worms nor fleas:
No fearful Dreams, nor Visions of the night
Disturb our Fancies there, or minds affright.
Within Death's Sheets the Grave we rest secure,
Free from oppression, and tyrannick Power;
Our Souls like Captive Birds in Cages sing,
Death breaks the Cage, and then the Birds take wing.
The world's a Pesthouse, sin does us infect,
Death's our Physician, shall we him reject?
The Soul's infected with sins foul disease,
And naught but Death can give us our release.
The world's a Prison and we Captives be,
And only Death our Champion sets us free.
We mortal are when Death of life bereaves us.
We dye no more, Death does immortal leave us.
A thousand Maladies do each day attend us,
We Are sick to Death and none but Death can mend us.
In life we languish, Death can make us well,
He Is like Achilles Spear, can wound and heal.
Poor and in want we up and down do wander,
Death makes us all as rich as Alexander.
Death levels all, both rich and poor do stand
On equal ground, none serve nor none command.
When Death has done his work, there is no man can
Discern between the Master and the man.
The Princes Skull no more than other men
Bears the impression of a Diadem.
It Is true of terrors Death is called the King,
And well he may while he retains his Sting;
But to Believers he no hurt can do,
For he has lost his Sting and Poison too.
In Stinging Christ this Serpent lost his Sting,
He that brought terror then does comfort bring:
Christ conquered him, and shall we fear to meet
A Vanquished Foe, lying prostrate at our Feet?
For since that he was overcome and foiled,
He is no Enemy, but reconciled.
To good and bad he shows not the same face,
He Is Foe to Nature; but a Friend to Grace.
We are poor mortals, life is our disease,
Death our Physician that can give us ease.
We groan for pain, yet would not be set free,
We love our Bondage, hate our Liberty.
Rather than over Jordans streams we will venture,
We Will dye in the Wilderness, or Egypt enter:
This Son of Anak Death more terror brings
Than all the fiery Serpents with their Stings.
And though Egyptian Bondage does torment us,
Flesh Pots, and Leeks, and Onions here content us
At Death it is true, we must to Ashes turn,
But God will keep those Ashes in his Urn.
And when the all-awakening trump shall sound,
The smallest Atoms of it shall be found;
And then by virtue of a new Indenture,
The Soul into her new-built house shall enter:
God shall with robes of honor then invest her,
And sin and sorrow shall no more molest her.
She shall by Christ her Judge be then acquitted,
And all her sins and trespasses remitted.
She shall in glory Halelujah's sing,
Unto the mighty God the worlds great King;
And wedded be to Christ in endless Joy,
And in her Husbands Bosom lie for aye:
Sorrow and Sighing then shall fly away;
And Tears shall swallowed be in endless Joy.
Then set thy House in order, for thou must
Within a little time return to Dust.
Lord make me then to know my later end,
How long the number of my days extend;
That I may know how frail I am, before
I go from hence, and shall be seen no more:
When will this Joyful Marriage be? oh when!
Oh come Lord Jesus, quickly come. Amen.
Edward Bury.

FINIS.
The Author has in the Press a. Book on the Subject these Poems are of.
Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of
Cheapside.


