COLONEL JOSEPH BAMFEILD'S APOLOGY, Written by himself and printed at his
desire.

Facit indignatio versus. ANNO 1685.

PREFACE.
ALbeit the unbounded liberty of the press, may sufficiently warrant my
necessary undertaking; and that a modest, and needful Apology, free from all
passion, or unlawful Aims, may he, by an ordinary charity excused; if not
fully justified; yet I had not run the hazard of the public sensure being
conscious of my own incapacity, had I not been in need thereunto by some
reasonable pressages, that the end of my misfortunes (which can find no other
period) and that of my life, nearly approches.

1. Neither had this alone prevailed with me; unless constrained thereunto by
the injust and (to any ingenious nature) most insupportable injuries, and
Calomnies, of some, who are totally ignorant of the truth of my affairs; nor
have ever had the least provocation, on my part, to couver the cruelty of their
secret practices, and obscure proceedings against me, to the endangering of my
life, even since I came in this Province of Freesland; which (next the
protection of God) I, think has been chiefly preserved by my neglecting it: I
not being ignorant of my danger, nor of the causes thereof, which I saw no
certain means of preventing, but by flight, disguise, and concealment; which
I have ever through the whole course of my great troubles, been resolved
against; choosing rather to dye once, if I could not fairly defend my self;
then live in fear of dying always: Especially having a long time, considered
death (if not in a dishonorable way) as the only end of my calamities, which I
could reasonably hope for, and my most sure azile.

2. No less have their sinister and malicious practices, contributed to the
traversing of my fortune, which (I am persuaded) had not otherwise, been thus
long desolate and obscure: by increasing the jalousies, and indignation of
some; who I have never willingly offended; nor otherwise, then through the
insupportable necessity of my affairs heretofore; and the indispensable
compulsions of honor; which would not permit me to do what I might) and most
others would) have done: nor to have left undone, what in policy, and the
general practice of mankind, I ought to have avoided, as essentially needful to
my interests, and to the raising me, out of this sepulcher, wherein I have for
some years lain buried alive; which peradventure I should not have come short
of, had I not been secretly calomniated, and circumvented, by underground,
darck, and unavow'd (or rather never to be avowed) mines, and trains, which
in some kind, have not a little contributed, to the rendering my wounds
incureable, as well in England as elsewhere.

3. This being really my case, is also the sole cause, why I am enforced to
expose my discreation to the capritious sensure of critiques, rather then to
abandone my honor, by a womanish modesty, timiditie and silence: leaving these
persons triumphant in their victory, which they have atchived by indirect, and
most unjust means, I am not ignorant, what wrongs have been done me, by whom,
and how; but know I shall never be openly accused, and by consequence, not have
any occasion of vindicating my self, but by this means, to which only I can
have recourse, and although, I am far from all hope of recovering what I have
lost; yet I shall endeavor to let some see demonstratively, how far their
credulity has been abused, and my innocence wronged; which I can no otherwise
perform, then by declaring truly, and sincerely, what I have done, or not
done; leaving it to the judgment, and sentence, of all unprejudiced, and
unpassionate persons, to what degree I have been either unfortunate, or
criminel.

4. What my transactions have been in some great conjonctures, I shall be as
sincere and candid in; as if my eternal happiness, or misery, depended on the
truth, or falsehood, of what I here expose, to the common view: which I only
make public for the vindication of my honor, though I clearly foresee, my
interest may suffer by it; which weighs so little with me, that if this
adventure meets but with a charitable reception from good men, and
unpreoccupied; I believe (as far as I know my self) I shall not be much
troubled, if my death should prove immediately after the Epilogue, to this
tragedy.

JOS. BAMFIELD.

AT 17. years of age, I began to serve the late King of happy memory, Charles
the-First, being ancient under my Lord Ashley, General Major of the Army, in
the first expedition against the Scots; an Accord was made as other agreements
in those times, of very short continuance; for the spring following, the war
was the second time declared in that expedition, I was first Leutenant in the
Regiment of Colonel Henry Wentworth, brother to the Earl of Cleveland; shortly
after, a Compagnie falling vacant in the same Regiment, by the favor of the
King I obtained it. In the space of a year the peace was again made, and the
Armies disbanded. The war betwixt the King and the Parliament followed shortly
after; I continued in his Majesty's interest and service; I commanded the
Regiment of the late Duke of Somersent, at that time Marquess of Hartford.
General for the King in the Western Provinces.

2. In the first encounter, which Arrived betwixt his Majesty's and the
Parlaments forces; I was hurt and taken Prisoner; brought so to London, by the
late Lord Hollis, at that time Colonel under the Parliament. Not long after,
being at liberty; the King honnoured me with a Commission, for a Regiment; not
being at that time, full twenty years old: having levied it, I returned to
Oxford, where his Majesty held his court. Few days after, his Hyghness Prince
Robbert, gave me a Commission, which he had procured of the King; to be
Governor of Malmesbury; whereof I knew not any thing, before he was pleased to
deliver it me. About the month of April following; his Majesty sent me order
(being pressed for troops) to march with three Regiments of foot, and as many
Compagnies of horse, to Join his Army; for the relief of Reading; besieged by
the Earl of Essex; and was rendered by Colonel Fielding, at the same time the
King arrived there; which might greatly have endangered his Army; had the Enemy
seen, and made use of their advantage.

3. In the month of June following, his Majesty sent Prince Maurits, and the
Duke of Somerset with an Army into the west, whereof my Regiment was part; to
Join with My Lord Hopton, and Lord Berkeley; who had beaten the Parlements
forces, Commanded by the Earl of Stamford, not long before, in the Province of
Cornwell, the Conjunction was made; the towns of Weymouth (whereof the late
Earl of Shaffsbury was left Gouvernour) Taunton, and Bridwater being taken, and
garrisons placed in them; the body of the Army Marched, toward General
Waller, having first despatched my Lord Berkelay, with four Regiments of
foot, and some few troops of horse, to blocque up Exeter, to prevent the Earl
of Stamfords raising of forces in Devonshire. Who was General in the West for
the Parliament; but after the Battle of Stratton reduced to the Gouvernment of
that City.

4. The first day, we came before it; the Enemy despising our small Number;
sillied out, with a very considerable party; but was vigorously repulsed,
beaten, and some of their out worcks, and the south subburbs possessed; which
by reason of our want of Ammunition; and our few forces we quitted of our own
accord, very many of their men where killed, and taken prisoners. The siege
continued about twoe months: the Parliament endeavored twice to succor it,
once by land, from plymouth, and Dartmouth; which where surprised in their
march, beaten and totally Dissipated.

Secondly by sea, with the Parlaments fleet, commanded by the Earl of Warwich,
having two thousand soldiers aboarde, which he designed to land at Apsom,
under the favor of his Cannon; but was prevented by our sinking (the night
before) diverse vessels with stones in the Channel. He endeavored to land at
other places on the strand, in his long Botes; but was always repulsed with
loss, one of his ships was fired by us; another so raked through, by our
Cannon; that they were Constrained to fire it themselves, not able to bring it
of.

5. About this time Bristol was taken by the Kings forces. Prince Maurits
arrived before Exeter, with about 3000 Cornish foot, and some horse; having
viewed all the quarters, and Approches; resolved on an Attaque; by the south
gate; which was Committed to Colonel Chudly, and me; with 2000 men, the manner
left to our selves, at the place where we intended to fall on; the enemy had
twoe out guards, advanced from the southgate, the distance of musket shot, of
about 3 or 400 men; with a line of communication from the port, to the out
works, which, we could perceive was but slightly mand; we resolved with fire
locks, and Pikemen, with pistols by their sides; that light matches should not
discover our design; to march silently an hour before break of day, to
assault the line jointly, by way of surprise: he on the left hand neat the
outguarde, I on the right, near the port; hopeing thereby (if success full) to
cut of the retreat of the Enemy, which we did; by this means all in the out
work, were either killed, or taken. Whereupon we Lodged our selves under the
wall, reasnably well couvered; so near the port that they durst not attempt a
sally: in this condition and consternation; they beat a parley, desired a
treaty, sent out hostages; Sir Richard Cave and I, were employed to treat, and
had the place rendered even on our own terms.

6. Having refreshed the Army, twelve or fourteen days, the Prince marched to
Dartmouth, though late in the year, to begin a siege; before the several
Quarters were fully fixed, his Highness; the Earl of Marborow, General of the
Artillery, etc. and Major General Basset, fell all three at one time
dangerously sick, which caused disorder and delay; the greatest part of the
Officers were inclined to raise the siege, and retire the Army into
Winter Quarters: Sir Richard Cave, Colonel Chudley, and my self opposed it,
and wrote to My Lord Berkeley, (who was Gouvernour as well or the Province, as
of Exeter) to come to the Army; at whose arrival resolution was taken to
attacque the Town in two places: Colonel Chudley, and my self were ordered (as
at exeter) to assault one post, in diverse places, he entered the first, beat
the Enemy out of some Works, but being unfortunately killed, his Troops were
repulsed; those I commanded entered likewise, drove them from all their
outworks, which was their chief strenght in that quarter; and commanded the
Town, which immediately treated, and rendered: whereof Colonel Seymour was
made Gouvernour.

7. Toward the end of October, the King sent order to my Lord Berckely, to
dispatch me with my own Regiment, and what other troops he could spare, with
all expedition, to join with my Lord Hoptons Army, for the relief of Basing,
then besieged by Sir William Waller. I was immediately sent away with a Brigade
of Foot, consisting of his Lordships Sir William Courtenays (not he of
Devonshire, but another of the same name) Sir John Acklands, Colonel
Strangeways, and my own Regiment: with three troops of Horse: I joined my Lord
Hoptons Army; Basing was relieved, Waller retired, encamped advantagiously
under Farnham Castle; General Hopton followed him; presented him Battle; the
one would not dislodge, nor the other attacque him as he lay; the day
following, a Council of war was held, about the beginning of December, where it
was resolved, that the Amy should separate into four Brigades, and retire to
Winter Quarters, one with my Lord Hopten to Winchester, another under Sir
Charles Vavasour to Alsford, a third commanded by Colonel Boles to Alton, the
fourth with me to Petersfield, the Horse were divided accordingly, a party
with every Brigade of Foot, whereof I had with me Sir Edward Stowels Regiment
of Cavallery, Sir Edward Fords, Sir Edward Bishops, four Troops of my Lord
Bellasis his Regiment, commanded by his Major Bovel, with the three Troops
which came with me out of Devonshire. One present at the Council, declared his
opinion, that it was dangerous to divide the Army into so many open quarters,
whilst Sir William Wallers remained in one entire Body, since he could in one
night (as his custom was to march) force any of the nearest to him, before the
others could be advertised, join, and succor the quarter aetacqued; this
coming from a verry youngman was neglected as of no moment, though the
consequence, ten days after, made it appear, as one of Cassandra's
predictions, which though always true, were never believed, till accomplished,
or pastremedy.

8. Four of five days after, my Lord Berkeley arrived at my quarter, from
Oxford, bringing with him Sir William Butler his Regiment of Horse, with the
Kings commands, to march incontinently toward Arundel, to take it if possible.
I marched all tuesday with the Horse, and as many Musketeers as I could mount,
being favored by a great mist, without any discovery, about four of the clock,
wednesday morning, we surprised, and forced the Town; the greatest part of
the Enemy retired into the Castle, which was rendered the Saturday following
(when my foot came up) that the Soldiers should go whither they would,
leaving all Arms, and Ammunition, both of war, and mouth having in three or
four days, given the necessary orders, touching the defense of the Town and
Castle; I left Sir Edward Ford there, with 400. Foot, marching all night with
the rest (at the instances of Sir William Butler, whom his Majesty had made
Sherif of Kent) hoping to have taken Bramber Castle, but were prevented by
Colonel Morley, and Sir Michael Livesie, who had possessed themselves of the
place and passage over the River, with about 2000. Men, out of Kent, whilst I
was seeking another forde, where I might pass the River with more conveniencie
then in the face of the Enemy; my Lord Hopton by an Express, sent me
advertisement, that the General Waller (as was foreseen, and foretold) marching
all the night from Farnham, to Alton, had forced that quarter, about break of
day, killed Colonel Boles who commanded the Brigade, and all the soldjers
either out of, or taken prisonners, and totaly dissipated the Earl of Crawfords
Brigade of horse, which misfortune had so weakened his Army, that he could not
hinder the enemies progress, which he was persuaded would be for the recovery
of Arundel, before it could be provided of all things, necessary for its
defense; which he recommended to me with great earnestness, desiring me to
keep what forces I thought needful for the place, and to send back Sir William
Butler, with the rest, to join his Army; assuring me, that if I were besieged,
he would relieve me in eight days; exspecting suddenly forces from Oxford.

9. I retained near 800 Foot, with the four Companies of my Lord Bellasis
Regiment of Horse, and my own Troop; sending back all I could, under the
Command of Sir William Butler; in less then four and twenty hours after,
General Wallers Army appeared before the Town, which I resolved to defend, as
long as I could; and in case of necessity to retire to the Castle, it was
assaulted in three places, and no fortifications, but the ruins of an old wall,
and without it (at some distance) a more ancient Line, and Ditch; but without
Flanque; where I judged they might be most useful, I placed Major Bovel with
his horse; and perceiving not far from me, that a considerable body of the
enemies Foot had passed the Line, with eight or ten blew Colors, which were
of Sir Arthur Haselrigs Regiment, commanded by Colonel Birch (who I think still
lives) and began to range themselves in order; I desired Major Bovel to charge
them with me, for if we brake them not, the Castle might be lost as well as the
town; we charged, routed, and drove them back over the Line: Colonel Birch was
(as I remember) wounded in the belly, and one Captain Bedel casting himself
amongst the dead bodies (as if killed) was discovered, and taken prisoner: my
horse was shot with a musket-bullet in the hip, and fell with me; I had
(aparently) been killed, unless rescued by some Officers of my Lord Bellasis
Regiment. Another post where Major Fletcher commanded, was forced; he
dangerously wounded, and taken prisoner; with great difficulty we retired into
the Castle, where the Enemy thought to have entered with us, but was repulsed.

10. In these conflicts many were killed on both sides. I found means to
advertise the King of the state of the place, both as to its strenght
Ammunition, and Victual; of the twoe last we were very ill provided, by reason
of the suddainess of the siege, as soon it was taken. I received assurance from
his Majesty, that within ten, or twelve days, I should be succored; if I
could defend it so long, which was (in some manner) endeavored, but succeeded
not. I held it out five and twenty days, to great extremity, it was rendered
by the Council of War, upon quarter for life: I never signed the Capitulation,
and might have been denied the benefit of the Articles, and quarter, had
General Waller been cruel. Of above 900 Officers, and Soldiers, Horse and
Foot, which I retained before the siege; few more then 200 marehed out, the
rest either killed, or dead of the bloody flux, and spotted feavour; with the
first whereof I was my self attacqued, as soon as recovered; I was sent
prisoner upon my parolle to London, without guards, were rendering my self; I
was committed to the Tower; remaining there about six months, until I had
liberty from the Earl of Essex, to procure the freedom of Sir Ellis Layton (at
that time Colonel of horse under the Parliament) and of one White, Capitain in
the same Regiment, in Exchange, or to return again to the Tower within eight
and twenty days.

11. The King granted their liberty, as soon as I arrived at Oxford, where I
stayed but two days, and went post to Exeter by his Majesty's commands, having
dispatched my affairs, for which I was sent, I returned toward Oxford; on the
way I understood, that the Earl of Essex, and General Waller, were before it,
the King brake through them, with what forces he had and retired to Worchester;
Waller followed him: Essex halted some time at Burford, near which, in my way;
I fell into a small party of straggling Souldjers, without any Officer; I told
them I had the Earl of Essex his pass for 28. days; that not more then half
the time was expired, and was therefore free; that satisfied them not; I was
unwilling to be taken having papers of importance, and cyfers in my cloths, and
sadle; I was wounded in my left eye, and in danger to have lost it by the blow
of a pistol, which had been fyred in vain; I was made prisonner, brought to
Essex, who caused me to be dressed by his Surgeon for 2 or 3 days, and set
me at liberty, according to my pass: I went to Oxford, where I remained till
cured, and then returned to Exeter.

12. Prince Maurits, who had allways honored me with his favor, in whose
service I had not been unlucky, employed me in his Army; the Earl of Essex
marched Westward, whereof his Highness being advertised, rose from before
Plymouth, and strengthened with 2000 Cornish men, resolved to march to Exester,
and there encampe, under the shelter of the Town, and River, to keep himself
from the necessity of a Battle, being very inferior in number to the Enemy;
the same day the Prince marched from Okhampton, the Earl in the evening arrived
at Tiverton, we at Kirton; some Quarter Masters of both Armies encountered, to
make quarters in the same places; which was the first advertissement we had,
where he was; and I believe he knew as little of us: upon the alarm the
Prince dispatched me with a thousand Foot, and some Horse, in the night to
possess Exbridg, least the enemy should have been before hand; I did it, and
cast up a breast work. His Highness followed with the Army; the Earl persued
his march to Pliemouth, and thence into Cornwel; leaving the Prince, which
seemed strange to most. I conjectured at his reason, and found shortly after,
that I had not divined amiss, but the recite is long, and here needless.

13. The very same day, his Highness received an Express from the King in
Cipher, whereby he was advertised, that his Majesty had beaten Wallers Army,
at Croplie Bridge, and was on his march to join both Armies in the West, if
possible: His Majesty not knowing certainly, whither our Army was come
Eastward of Essex or not, thus unknown to either, things where in as good a
posture, as if concerted; the Prince sent me immediately to the King, with an
account of all.

14. I met his Majesty in march toward chard, being joined, his Majesty
followed Essex; we would have come to a bataille, he not; we encamped near
together; we had daily scermishes; our design was to streigthen them for
victuals; at the end of about 14. days, his horse broke through Eastward, under
Lieutenant General Balfourd, the Foot disputed their post a while, and then
capitulated, to leave their Arms, Colors, Artillery, Ammunition, and Bagage,
and to march away with cudgels only. Essex embarked himself at Foy, this
blemished his reputation, and shortly after lost him the Generalat.

15. The King marched toward Oxford, in his way thither was forced to the
second battle of Newbury, were his Army was something unfortunate, and had
been more so, if the jealousies (or rather the Diametrally opposite
principles, and aims) of the Chiefs of the Enemy, had not at that time (in
some kind) favored his Majesty.

16. The Winter following, the whole model of the Parliaments Militie was
changed, the Earls of Manchester, Essex, and General Waller put out: Fairfax
made General, Cromwell Leutenant General, and the officers and soldiers
composing the Niew Army; for the most part (if not all) at Cromwels devotion,
almost all confiderable persons of the Presbiterean party put out. The King
had for the following somer assembled, rather a good then a great Army,
betwixt which (despising the new model) and that of the Parliament, was fought
that fatal battle of Naesby, where his Majesty lost his Army, and as the
unfortunate consequence thereof, not long after, his Crown and Life.

17. The King being returned to Oxford the Winter following, employed me to
London (Sir John Bamfield having procured me a pass to return thither) to
penetrate as far as was possible, into the designs of the two parties in the
Parliament, in relation to his Majesty's Person and Authority. I wanted
neither means, nor assiduitie, to perform what I was commanded. I found the
one very severe in their principles, as well to the Civil, as Ecclesiastical
Gouvernment: the other which was influenced entirely by Cromwell, resolved (and
laboring) to change and destroy both; I clearly saw, by Joining, with the
first, the root of monarchy, was to be preserved, and did believe, the
branches would again grow out: to trust the latter, I saw no reasnable
ground; what ever the specious pretenses of some amongst them were; in their
secret Correspondency with persons, of great quality, and no less credit about
the King.

18. The Bulk of the party, and the leading men (as I knew, always said; and
writ both to the King himself, and diverse others of the greatest quality; some
whereof yet live) were resolved upon an entire subversion of monarchy, and the
Establishment of a new Government.

19. Having (as I thought) light sufficient, to make these twoe points, as
Clear, as by a Mathematical demonstration; I desguised my self, in my Grooms
Clothes; and went with the Tame Carrier to that Town; and thence on foot to
Oxford; where I Entered in the Evening, without being known to any; only the
Captain of the guard caused me to be brought to Sir Thomas Glemham, who was
then Gouvernour; but I was so disguised that he knew me not; I told him in
private that I came from London about some affairs which Concerned his
Majesty; desiring him to appoint me to some convenient place; where I might be
private; and that he would send one of his servants to Mr. Oudart (who at that
time was Under-Secretary to Sir Edward Nicolas principale Secretary of State)
to come to me; which he Immediately did, and returned forthwith, to acquaint
the King with my arival, who sent him back, with his commands to put the heads
of what I had to say to him in writing, that he might have time to consider of
it, and would speak with me (at large) the night following; in the day, it
being almost impossible, without discovery.

20. Accordingly, about eight of the clock, the next evening, I was brought
where his Majesty was; none being present but Mr. Secretary Nicolas; the Duke
of York; came in for a moment to receive his fathers Benediction, before his
going to his rest. The King debated at large Every point, and circumstance,
contained in my memorial; being at that time fully convinced that he could not
exspect any thing, but ruin from the Army, and there adherents in the
Parliament; giving me new instructions, concerning diverse eminent persons, of
the Presbiterean party, with letters to two of the Chief; and to a great and a
wise Lady, who was in extraordinary credit, and had much influence upon the
transactions of those times. His Majesty commanded me to acquaint the Queen,
from time to time, with all that passed betwixt him, and me, and of all my
transactions concerning his service; which I could better do from London, then
he from Oxford, which I did perform, by a constant Correspondence, with the
Earl of St. Albans, during the space of about three Years, until I was
commanded out of England for other services.

21. The King having charged me, with new Instructions, letters, and all things
expedient for his service, dispatched me again to London: when Imediately upon
my arrival I spoke with those, to whom his Majesty had written; two whereof
where unwilling to receive their letters; but contented to hear them read; and
after to see the hand, and signature; which they knew to have been all his own.

22. By these means, some where gained by public, others by their own
particular Interests: a few, who had been his Majesty's menial servants, and in
his favor; I think repented really what they had done; and resolved to
efface. What had passed, by their future fidelity

23. But much the greatest part where brought about, through the apprehension,
that the power of the Army, which daily increased, would overgrow the
authorithy of Parliament; treading under foot all laws, and constitutions
changing the Gouverment, and Gouvernours; as frequently as the Pretorian
Chohorts, did that of Rome, whereby the public miseries, of the preceding
civil war, might prove but the prologue to the following tragedy; Anarchy,
usurpation, and tyranny; which begun, was nourished, and ended in blood: as the
whole world, has been witness of.

24. Not long after, I had left the King at Oxford; the Army having reduced,
all the rest of the Nation (some few places excepted) marched toward that
City, to besiege both his Majesty and it; who being resolved not to fall into
their hands, as long as he could avoyde it, was constrained to save himself
disguised in an Ecclesiastical habit: which was the most proper he could
assume who not long after, sacrificed his life, for the maintaining of that
profession; which he was fully convinced, was of Apostolical Institution; and
had sworn at his Coronation to upholde; as it had been established by law, at
the first solid reformation under the Reign of Queen Elisabeth, who though a
most Zealous Protestant; and the greatest pillar of the reformed Religion,
throuwghout all Christendom; could never be induced upon any consideration, to
the taking away of the Episcopal function.

25. The King having for that time, thus Escaped; threw himself upon the
Scottish Army, which then besieged Newarke; and upon the rendering of the Place,
was conducted to New Castle: Whither (Imediately at his arrival) he sent me
his commands to Come with all diligence: having obeyed, his Majesty was
Pleased to Acquaint me, with the State of his affairs, with the Scots; Whose
conduct toward him, had not Given him the Satisfaction, which he reasnably
hoped for when he had volontarily, betaken him self to them, for Refuge in his
distress: having heard all I had to represent, concerning the affairs at
London, which could any ways relate to his person, or Intrest; since his Escape
from Oxford: he commanded me, to make a short deduction of all, in writing to
leave with him, for the refreshment of his Memory.

26. Having remained there a few days: his Majestye was pleased to trust me
with new Instructions, according to the change, and Exigence of his affairs;
and to dispatch me back to London.

27. Not long after I received a Letter from him by an express whom he
eminently trusted, to whose Information, he referd me chiefly in the following
terms.

The Several ends I have in this despatch, I have fully communicated to the
Bearer; resulting from what you left with me, when you where Here; and from
what you, and others have written to me since; the Particulars are to long, and
troublesome, to be put in chypher, and to important to be hazarded out of it:
Wherefore I must refer you to him for answer, to your two last, and for
direction in your conduct, touching what you have propownded.

Your assured friend CHARLES R.


28. Part of this Business needs not to be mentioned Here, being in some
Kind particular; relating to what degree two or three persons, might, or might
not be trusted, and in what Matters: but the principal thereof was, to Engage
the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Holland, Mylord Willoby of Parham, with several
others of both houses; so to contrive the Business; by their own, and friends
credit: that the propositions of the Parliament, which were resolved, should be
drawn up (upon his Maj. message a little before, pressing earnestly a treaty)
migt be as moderate, as possible Could be Procured; and that such commissioners
(by the influence of these persons, might be chosen to compile them, as near
the model, which his Matie. had given in writing, to the person all ready
mentioned, as Could be effected.

29. The business was communicared, where it was most convenient: but the
sudaine death of the Earl of Essex, throwgh an appoplexy, rendered the
propositions more harsh, and difficult; then peradventure they would have been,
had he lived; who was animated; resolute; would hazard more then all the
others; had credit; and was every moment incited, by the influence, and
persuations of his sister, the late Duchess of Somerset.

30. However, Cromwell, the army, and their adherents in Parliament, fearing
the very possibility of the Kings assent; in that extremity of his affairs:
and by consequence, the frustration of their designs, leading to the
destruction of his person, and the subversion of Monarchy; Employed all the
artifices Imaginable, to have the King desposed to reject entirely, the
propositions, Without so much as demanding any treaty, or Explication: which
they concluded, would disgust (to that height) both the Scotch, and severer of
the English Presbitereans (as indeed it did) that they should the easilier
arrive at their great design, in the overthrowe of all; as it after fell out,
and chiefly throwgh that maxim, which he all a long persued, of keeping the
King, and Presbiterans from agreeing; whereof the success, was even at that
time clearly probable.

31. To this end, they connived at the escape of a person out of the tower,
there Prisoner; and in reasnable credit, with the King: being moreover, a
clergy Man; animated in the highest degree, against the Scotch, and
Presbitereans; was a very proper instrument for their design; thowgh I shall
do him that right, as to declaer my persuation; that he suspected not the
deceit wherein he was flattered, employed, and deceaved; as many others were,
unblemishedly faithful to the King, but to credulous. This man (as I have
said) escaped; made his speedy repair to Niew Castle; being fortified with
powerful recommendations, from twoe, or three, great, and worthy persons.

32. The same day that he parted from London, one who was at that time, very
intimately my friend, and in the secret; gave me a visit; telling me, (with
joye even in his eyes) that he came to tell me the best news, that ever I had
heard; being a particular recite, of the Escape of the fore Mentioned person;
with his Message, instructions; and the ouverteurs he was charged with, to his
Maj. from some of the army; and principal persons, of their adherents; who as
he said were absolutely resolved to restore the King; upon his utterly
rejecting the Parliaments Propositions; and granting them a full liberty of
conscience; and such a power in the Militia, as might secure all to them, which
his Maj. (as affairs stood) should find himself necessitated to accord them.

Sect. 33. He added (as already in triumph) that the business was as good as
done; and that in less then three months, we should see the King on his throne;
and in the full Execution of his Regal authority having heard him, with great
attention (for his discource was weighty, thowgh his judgment deluded) without
one word of interuption; I answered him at lenght, that I was sorry, I could
not rejoice with him, at his triumphant niewes; which I should undoubtedly do,
as much as any Man alive; if I believed the success would prove, what he and
those engaged in that design, figured to them selves; for he had told me who
they were; three or four of the greatest, and one of the wisest men that served
the King, on whose prudence, and integrite his Maj. relied, as much as any
man's. I added, I believe (or rather I know) this to be a manifest cheat;
concerted betwixt Cromwell, Ireton, and some chief persons of their adherents
in the twoe houses; whose real, and hidden end is (what specious pretenses
soever they make to abuse the credulity of you, and others) to render this
treaty ineffectuall, which has been browght about, with great difficulty and,
against strong opposition, even of those persons, who make these ouvertures
now; hoping hereby to frustrate by adress, what they Could not hinder, by their
debates; in the twoe houses and by Making it break of abruptly; by his Maj.
Rejecting all the propositions in General; cast the odium upon him; and render
the breach irreconcilable betwixt him, and the Presbitereans; whereby (as I had
much reason to fear) the most zealous, the most violent, and the least
reasnable (which are allways the greatest number) would entirely abandon the
wisest, and most moderate; uniting them selves to the armies party in both
houses; whereby, the authority of Parliament, being joined to the power of the
army; both the Kings person, and Monarchy would be desperately exposed.

Sect. 34. I aleaged further, that I knew his Maj. would never consent to the
propositions as they lay; nor was it councellable he Should: only that he would
demand a treaty, and debate, by a power given to the commissioners to explain
and discuss, Every artickle apart, and in particular; which was the likeliest
means to produce a good Effect: and that by such an answer, and demand, those
persons who had (as then) the most credit, and chief direction, would
endeavor to despose the Parliament to consent by which means, and throwgh
reasnable expedients, which might be fownd out; the severest things might have
been moderated; and great difficulties remouved. To which end I told him, I had
already written to the King; who seemed to be very well satisfied therewith;
and disposed to give such an answer.

35. He replied, that he was (upon good grounds) assured, when his Maj. had
hear^d, what this messenger forementioned, had to propownd; be would not
demand any treaty; and that the army would set him on his throne and make him
a great King: I besowght Allmighty God, that it might prove so; but that I
feared, thy would at last take away his life, and crown together, putting him
in a capacity of possessing another in Heaven, more durable.

Sect. 36. The next day, I went to wait on the Marquis of Hartford, since Duke
of Somerset; who the forenamed Gentilman had told me, was acquainted with all
this transaction; and concurred in it: which I fownd true; and that he was
persuaded the army would restore his Maj. sudainly: perceaving me obstinate, in
the contrary opinion; he said these words to me: Colonel Bamfield, I have
allways wished you well, and do so Still; and therefore would advise you, not
to oppose your self further, to obstruct this cource toward the Kings
recouvery; for some of the clergy begin to suspect, that you have particular
interests, in your transactions with the Presbitereans; which weigh more then
that of his Maj. I made answer, that I had no other worldly interest, but what
was involved in, and subordinate to, the Kings: that I never expected any
advantage neither from the one, or from the other party; but that I was so
fully convinced, of the desperate designs, secret practices; and principles of
the army, and their adherents (where of I did not want light) that the
groundless jalousie, of some men, nor their deluding hopes, should never make
me prostitute my reason, nor act against it; or have any thing to do with
those, whose end, and underground workings were for the destruction of the
Kings person, and Monarchy.

Sect. 37. A few days after this his Maj. answer came, but not altogether
such, as these his friends, who, I have mentioned, desired; but unhappy
enough for him, to do the armies business at that time, for the most Zealous
part of the Presbitereans left, the wisest; and most moderate (who endeavored
to have made the Kings answer the fowndation of a treaty) and being likewise
irritated, by the Schotish Ministers, Gyllaspy, and others; joined with the
armies adherents in Parliament; to demand of the Scots, the delivery of his
Maj. person, to commissioners, who were sent to receive him; and guardes
commanded by Colonel Graves. This was clearly foreseen, by the late Duke of
Lauderdalle (then one of the Commissioners for Scotland) the Earl of Holland,
my Lord Willowby of Parham; my Lord Hollis, Sr. Phillip Stapleton, and very
many others in both houses; who were ar that time entirely for the Kings
restoration, upon as moderate terms, as their conduct, and credit in
Parliament, Could possibly work out: and as the only expedient, to remove
difficulties, wished, and endeavored to bring the business to a personal
treaty: by which means, they hoped to abate the severity of some demands, which
all reasnable, and truly conscientions men amongst them, knew his Maj. Could
not grant, without violence to his conscience, in the breach of his oath; and
divesting himself of all power, to maintain ye laws, protect his subjects;
or to preserve himself; and his posterity, from being deprived, of that less
then half his regal, and just authority; which his assenting to those
propositions (in the terms they were drawn up) would have left him: the
remaining part of his power being but precario; and at the arbitrament of every
succeeding Parliament.

Sect. 38. The wisest amongst them, Considered, and acknowldged these truths;
and seeing a part of the Nation desposed with the army, and their adherents,
toward a popular Gouverment; would willingly have had more power in the King;
then when they began the war, they desired, or designed.

Sect. 39. On the contrary; the adverse party, was absolutely against a
treaty, which they feared might lead to moderation on both sides; and produce an
accord; destructive to those great projects, the cheifs of them, had figured to
themselves, for a long time; and resolved upon, after the niew modeling of the
army: to prevent an agreement; they must hinder a treaty; to which end, that
party, in both houses having at first, vigorously opposed, sending of any
propositions to the King; but that being carried against them, in the
affirmative: by great adress, and infusing jalousies concerning Religeon, into
the greatest number of the Presbitereans; (few of them being States men, by
experience, and peradventure, not all by reason) they easily drew them to a
vote, that his Maj. Should be obliged to sign the propositions in the terms,
as they were sent him by both houses, alowing no latitude, to the Commissioners
by whom they were sent; to treat or debate one syllable: knowing very well,
that the King; neither would; nor indeed Could; consent to them as they were;
neither with Conscience, honor, or safety: however, least the extreme danger
whereunto he lay exposed; might have prevayled with him to consent; they made
use of the stratagem, I have already mentioned, of infusing into the belief of
many of the most considerable of the Kings friends, that the army would restore
him, upon certain conditions specified; who led his Maj. himself to some
hopes of it.

Sect. 40. By these means the King was by the Scots delivered to the
commissioners, sent by the Parliament to receive him; by them browght to
Holmby, one of his own houses: where he was rigorously guarded, and very
hardly used, in all considerations; not permitted to Speak with any man, but in
presence of some of the Commissioners; not one of his domestique servants
suffered about him, nor the liberty to write, or receive a lettre, from the
Queen, any of his Childeren, or friends: knowing nothing what his enemies did;
or what he was to do himself. In this deplorable condition, one nepar (whom
the Parliament had placed about him, as his barber) being gained; whose
employment every morning, and evening near his person, gave him the opportunity
of conveying letters, unpercevably into his hands; how strictly soever he was
watched: by this convenience, having written to him at large, concerning many
things; and especialy, of the desorders, begun betwixt the Parliament, and the
army; and of all else which I judged necessary for his Knowledge, in that estat
he was; he did me the honor, to write to me an answer, in the following terms.

Holmby the 15. April.
Sect. 41. I have received your cipher, and your twoe letters both without
date; desirnig you to mend that omission here after. And now to come to the
business without further preambles; you must know that I am guarded, with such
extreme severity, that I can neither write, nor receive any letter, nor speak
with any of my friends (to let pass all other rigours) which are such, as I
cannot but often times, profess publicly, that I can neither with honor, nor
prudence, answer to any proposition, which either has been; or can be made me,
whilst I am in this condition; for what ever I can now offer, or consent to;
will rather be interpreted to proceed from fear, or at best, to mend my
condition, then from any motif of public good: for I am as a blinded man;
without the least light, of what I am to expect, from my enemies; or hope for
from my friends: saveing what Gods Providence affords me; by the industry, and
hazard of those, who are most faithful to me: inso much, that I cannot change
my resolution; unless upon the certainty of gaining some advantage for the
public, which may counterballance, the passing by this real point of honor:
for I cannot admit of your distinction; of promising things now, to be ratified
when I am at liberty. But when you can give me such an assurance, as may
reasnably be depended upon, that the answer, which I am able to make to the
propositions, will produce the effect of bringing me with honor to London; I
shall not delay to give it; even before the twoe houses demand it of me.

And least your not knowing of my mind, might hinder you, from answering me
fully, and particulardy, I have thowght good to give you under my hand, what
the satisfaction is, which I can give; to the four chief propositions.

First for Religeon, I shall consent to confirm the Presbiterian Gouverment,
and the directory for three years (being the time as yet limited by the houses)
provided I and my household, have the liberty, of serving God as formerly: and
that allsoe, a consultation, and free debate, be agreed to, with the assembly
of divines at Westminster (only twenty of my nomination being added to them)
where by, I, and the twoe houses may agree, how the, church shall be Gouverned
upon the expiration of the said term of three years. Secondly, I will consent,
that the Militia, by act of Parliament; as well by sea, as by land, shall be in
the twoe houses for ten years: and at the expiration of that term, to return
to the Crown, as in the times of Queen Elizabeth, and of my father, of happy
Memory.

Thirdly for their great seal, I will confirm it, and all acts passed under
it: Provided that I be not pressed to disanull those passed under my own; and
that the Gouverment there of, for the time to come, be in me; according to due
cource of Law.

Fourthly for the business of Ireland, these other things being agreed, I
shall give satisfaction therein.

I am content to lay aside, much of my own proper right, for the public
tranquillity. And to agree to all, tending really, to the conservation, and
better reformation of the Protestante Religeon, as far as I may without
wownding of my conscience, by the breach of my oath. And assure all those, with
whom you treat, about these Matters; that no humane consideration, shall bring
me further, as to these four propositions; tell 128., that without
encouragement from him and from you, I shall not go thus far.

Be careful, that the twoe enclosed letters, be sudainly, and safely
delivered; the one to my wife, the other to the French Ambassador Adieu.

Your assured friend CHARLES R.


Sect. 42. Having showed this letter to some of the chiefs of both houses,
who I had gained into the Kings interest: and that they had consulted, such of
their friends, as they could trust, concerning his Maties. resolution touching
these four principal propositions; and done all in the business, which was
necessary, and (for me) possible; I gave his Matie. an account there of: with
all that I had learnt, and observed, touching the twoe parties; as well, as my
humble opinions; there upon grounded; in answer whereunto; I received shortly
after this following letter.

Holmby April ye 27.
SEct. 43. I have received yours of the 24. present on thursday; to which in
short my answer is; that no apprehention, nor yet certitude, of any evils,
which can befall me; shall make me leave, out those twoe clauses, you mention;
which are not circomstantiel, but most essential: and in such things, to rely
to much on their good nature; or to belive, that they care not to conserve,
what they desire with so much ernestness; or like children shall be soon
weary of it, seems to me a most inexcusable folly. Wherefor, I command you, to
assure all, with whom you treat, or think further fit to speak with about my
affairs; that I shall adhere firmly, without addition, or substraction, to
what I wrote to you in my last; only adding their expedient, which you sent me,
concerning the Covenant; as to the substance, but not in the same terms, which
they have drawn up; which I hope will give satisfaction to all reasnable men.
Let no man see, the note in cipher, but do all you can possible in what it
contains. The greatest of the enclosed, is for my wife; the other for the
Ambassador Bellievre, to whom I have written, to acquaint you with what he
has done; or hopes to do with those of the Scotch commissioners, which he
belives he has influence upon; to the end you may write it to me in cipher. Let
me know by your next, who gave you the note in French, which I fownd in your
last: allthowgh I belive it a cheat; yet I have made no great scrupule, to
answer it; which you are to deliver, as soon as you can: and here after do
not engage your self to secrecy, in such adresses; for I will not receive any
thing from those who Conceal their names; inconveniences may befall me by it.
If they think fit to trust you; they May me.

I am your friend CHARLES R.


Sect. 44. Shortly after, upon the advertisements, which I had given his Matie.
touching the Parliaments resolution to disband the army; which effected (some
pretended to me, that they Could treat with the King, in greater liberty and
securety.) But suspecting, that he would not meet with such reasnable
Conditions, after, as before, the armies Cassation: I gave him the
advertisement, with my humble opinions there upon, beseeching him to send his
offers whilst things were in the condition, they then Stood. He was pleased to
answer me as follows.

Holmby May the 8.
SEct. 45. Your advertisement, of the Parliaments resolution to disband the
army; and of its discontentement, lets me, see the cause, of their delaying to
send me the propositions: Were I assured that they would deal syncerely, and
moderately with me afterward; I should witsh te armies casheering; but the
very ill usage, I receive as yet, from them, makes me suspect all things: that
I can hardly resolve, what is best for me to do, in such an unhappy
conjoncture; and shall deliberate a little longer: however take you hence the
occasion; to let those see, who say they are my friends; how much more
reasnable I am (even according to their own rules) then the authors of these
desorders; which can never be appeased unless they agree with me: they know
what will satisfy me; but the botom of these men's designs, is not easily
sownded: upon the place where you are, you know best how to urge this, with the
most efficacy. According to the advice, your next letter brings me, I shall
take my measures. Send the enclosed to my wife; and deliver the other your
self to my Lord Dumfermlin; and keep my correspondence with him secret.
farewell

Your friend CHARLES R.


Sect. 46. Upon the answer which I made to this letter, which contained very
many matters of fact of great importance, betwixt the Parliament and army,
whose differences flew very high; with the opinion of others, as well as my
own there upon, the particulars where of, all thowgh to long to be Here
Mentioned, may be guessed at by the Kings answer, which follows.

May the 16.
SEct. 47. Monday last, I received yours; which put such thowghts into my head;
that I could not delay the dispatching my Message to the twoe houses; for
undoubtedly, reason will be sooner heard by unreasnable men; when they dispute
who shall be master; then when there is no opposition: and certainly, seeing
many of those in the Parliament; who pretend to be my friends; make so little
account; of what you have offered them in my name; I can expect nothing from
them, but extremest rigor, when they have no competitors; for in the
incertainty of their affairs; they may judge me necessary, but then useless.
What I send you now, is no more then what you know already, touching the four
chief propositions: and for the covenant, I have. Done as much as I promised
them. Cause my message, to be printed, and published all you can. Make my
excuse to the french Ambassador, for what he has written to me in his last, is
of so little concernment; that it is not worth the payns to answer it in
cipher to him self.

Assure him, from me, that neither Dumfermlin (who is now here) nor any else
(saving you) shall know what passes betwixt him and me. Send the enclosed to my
wife; to whom fail. Not to give an account of all that passes, farewell.

Your friend CHARLES. R.


Sect. 48. I have many other letters, from his Matie. touching these
negotiations, at that time, not necessary here to be inserted, for the end I
propose to my self. The Parliament had past an ordinance, in both houses, for
the disbanding of the army; which would not obey: their refusal, and
proceedings there upon, were very high, and factions; and out of the power of
the houses to restrain; their only force, lying in their votes, and orders;
which the other laughed at, and despised; who having thus begun, fownd
themselves obliged to go on; or perish. The Parliament, was here at much
alarmed; and the wisest amongst them began to repent, their having rejected a
proposition, which was secretly made to them, and often urged, with weighty
reasons: not to send the Scotch army out of England entirely, and at once; but
at the same time to disband part of their own; and send away a like proportion
of the Scots; and so by degrees make them selves quit of both. But this was
refused, without aleaging any solid reason against it; but only depending on
Parlementary authority, which they said, the army would never dare to disobey:
they were likewise sorry, they had so long, and so much neglected, the great
advances which the King had made; and told me plainly; they would endeavor the
passing of a vote, in both houses, for the Kings coming to London; but that
they apprehended, the army, there upon, would seize upon his person, before he
could come thither.

Sect. 49. They desired me to write to his Matie. to know his inclination. I
told them I would go my self; to a friends house, within less then an hour
from Holmby, and would write from thence, which I did all the same night post.
Arriving where I intended before noon, the next day from thence I wrote I
mediately to his Matie. enclosing my letter, in one to the Earl of Dumfermlin:
I acquainted him with the great danger he was in, of being seized by the army;
to prevent which, I saw no means, unless his Matie. would, and could save
himself by night in desguise; and that I would have horses ready, very near
the place; to bring him to London; where (as affairs stood) I was persuaded,
he might come to a reasnable accord, on the fowndation of his Message. The next
morning he sent my Lord Dumfermlin to me; who gave me, the following lerter.

Holmby June 4.
SEct. 50. Referring particulars to the Earl of Dumfermlin, I shall only tell
you, that what you proposed to me by your letter of yesterday, is quickly to be
answered; that ever since I heard of the armies refusal to disband; I have
often thowght, of what you now propownd; and am resolved, not to fall into
their hands, if I can avoyde it: I have sownded the commissioners; about the
expedient which you mention, of escaping with them to London: I have assured
them to confirm my last message; and to treat with the Parliament concerning
the other things in question: I have laid before them, the public danger, as
well as of my person; in case I should be taken by the army; all agree to it
except two; who say they connot Consent, without order from the Parliament, it
being to betray their trust; so that I see no way to shun falling into the
hands of the army, if they have the design to take me; as soon as Dumfermlin
returns; I will try again, what may be done with those who make the greatest
difficulty. Expecting your answer this evening; if I can put in execution by
any means, what you move; you shall know my resolution speedily; to which end,
you shall do well to remain where you are, farewell.

Your friend CARLES R.


Sect. 51. My answer to this letter was very short, having acquainted my Lord
Dumfermlin fully with all things; who had likewise himself, received letters
from some of the Scotch Commissioners at London, which confirmed all I had
written, and savd; and therefore concluded some thing was to be done out of
hand, for the Kings escape. He named the twoe persons to me who opposed it;
one where of commanding the troops which guarded his Matie., without him it was
not possible to have been done. The next morning, in stead of receiving any
advice from the King, how I might serve him in his escape; the news came, of
his being secured by a party of the army, commanded by a cornet named Joyce, by
his trade a taylour. His, Matie. demanded of him; what commission, or autorite
he had, to offer him the violence he did: without so much as mouving his hat,
or showing the King the least respect; he showed him with his hand, the five or
600 soldiers which he commanded; saying there is my commission; his Matie.
without any (the least) emotion smilingly replied, it was written in avery fair
hand. In short; he was carried away to the army: some furious spirits amongst
them, as Major General Harrison, and others, were for the putting of him to
death, by an unammous sentence of the army: but Cromwell, Ireton, and the most
politic heads, were for delay, and temporising, so long, by amusing the King
with hopes that they would restore him; till they had entirely broken the
Presbiterean party, and rendered them powerless; and themselves more absolute.
Upon this fowndation, Cromwell, Ireton; and other principal persons of the
army, became very Civil, and some thing respectfull to his Matie. making
great protestations of having no other design but the setting him, with
honor, upon his throne; on his granting them a free liberty of Conscience;
with such a power in the Militia; as they judged convenient for their
assurance; that they might not be deprived thereof at pleasure: but that time
was needful, to prepare the way; and to dispose the minds of the army, to a
submission thereunto.

Sect. 52. These promises, and deep Protestations, seconded by a free
permission of his friends to wait on him: of some of his domstiques to serve
him; and of his chapelens to perform their functions, in his devotions;
according to the Constitutions, and Customs of the Church of England; wrought
very much upon the King; especially from the hopes he had; of not being
constrained in his Conscience, in Matter of Divine worship, and church
Gouverment wherein he was much more sencible; then in what concerned his
prerogative, or the rights of the crown.

Sect. 53. The chiefs of the army (especially Cromwell, and Ierton, who were
great masters in that art) made large promises, and specious apparencies,
without effecting of any thing; or making any demandes tending to a positive
conclusion, of what would satisfy them, or of what they would do for his
Matie.: and which was then to me remarquable, and worthy at all times of
observation; that amidest all these fair pretenses, the armies adherents, in
both houses, who did not any thing, but by secret concert with Cromwell,
continually clamoured in Parliament, at the seeming liberty which the King had;
often aleadging that he should be more restrained, and that the chief
delinquents (which was the Phraise in those times) owght to be brouwght to
condign punishment.

Sect. 54. Twoe or three of the leading men, who thirsted for his blood,
several times let fly expressions of that kind, directly against his person;
and others a little cautious; more obliquely: but so, that both the end, and
the way to it, which these men had long projected, by mutual agreement, was
in my opinion sufficiently visible; where of I advertised the King constantly;
and frequently, the Queen; by my constant adresses to the Earl of St. Albanes,
who lived when I wrote, and intended to Print this relation. As I mentioned
all particulars of that nature, spoken in both, or either house, so I named
the authors; having had ordnarily once in four and twenty hours, knowledge
of all that passed, which concerned the King, who was trained from place, to
place according to their apprehensions, and designs, during the space of
diverse months; till Colonel Hamond was made Gouvernour of the iste of wight,
and Kairesbrooke Castle more magnificently furnished, out of the public
warderobe; then was needful for him, or suitable to his condition; which by
some others was taken notice of; and by me especially, throwgh an unexpected
accident, to long to be here inserted; which gave me cause to suspect, and fear
what shortly after unhappely arrived; which important circomstance, joined to
diverse others, not of much less weight, put restless thowghts into my head,
till such time as I could obtain a particular audience from the King; to whom
I gave an exact account of my apprehensions, with the grownds of them.

Sect. 55. His Matie. answered; these reasons have weight, one may fear as
well to little, as to much, especially as my condition is, yet if there be any
faith in them, they will never come to such extremities; however their feeding
me hitherto, with good words, and deep protestations, without real effects; or
coming in all this time, to any particular, or positive conclusion; makes me
some times doubt the event; but on the other side, I cannot fall into all your
apprehentions, which seem, now and then, to hyppocondriacal.

Sect. 56. I replied, I beseech God thy may all prove so; where unto I added,
that I hoped there was yet an expedient, either to constrain them to do his
business, or to have it done without them. He smiled, and told me such a
proposition was well worth the hearing, asking me what it was.

Sect. 57. I answered, some of the most considerable persons of both houses
(who I named) were unchangeabley convinced, that the army jugled with him,
who were resolved upon a totalle change of the Gouverment; which design (they
who had sat during the space of five, or six years, in the same assembly,
with them; and had been privy, to their principles, and debates; and (without
doubt) to many of their most secret contrivements) could see further into them
then any else; and wished his Matie. would bring them to a short, and peremtory
resolution, touching what would content them; as likewise what they would do
for him: because that every day, they gained power; and others who really
desired his Maties. Conservation, and reestablishment lost it.

Sect. 58. If they meant syncerely, as they pretended; Cromwell, and Ireton,
Could absolutely, engage, that party in both houses, to a concurrance with
them; who were inseperably linked to his interests: and that the
Presbitereans, would not hinder, but further it; to prevent what they
reasnably, and exceedingly feared; to late finding that they had raised a
spirit, which they could not easily lay again. And that the event was very
uncertayne, in their opposing of that power, which insencibly they had let
glide out of their own hands, and nourisht against themselves, to long, to be
able to give limits to it.

Sect. 59. They considered that if the liberty of Conscience, which the army
seemed to insist upon, were consented to, and the penal statutes repealed, the
Presbitereans would have been included, as well as others; and for the power of
the Militia, which was demanded for security, it must have resided in King,
Parliament, or both: for in the Officers of the army, it could not be, without
keeping up a continued standing Militia, which the nation Could not bear, as
unsafe, both for King, Parliament, and people.

Sect. 60. They were therefore of opinion, that his Matie without further delay,
should have pleased to press them to a particular, and Catigoricall explanation
of their full demands; which if he fownd such, as he could agree to; and that
the armies party in both houses, would syncerely concur; there Could be no
insuperable difficulty in the business; nor any opposition, saveing what the
Scotch Ministers, could have stirred up, who would never have approuved of a
liberty of Conscience, nor of any thing less then a Presbiterean Gouverment
jure Divino; which the armies adherents in both houses, were declaredly
against; and I dare boldly say (for I understood at that time, the temper, and
costitution, of that Parliament, as it really was) ten of those, who went by
the name of Presbitereans, were not of the Schots opinion; but either for a
moderate episcopacy, as the King had volontarily offered it, at the treaty at
uxbridge, when he was under no force, as the wisest expedient, to have remouved
all jalousies about Religeon; or else were erastians; and for having the
politic Gouverment of the church dependant, on the civil, as it had been
from the middle of Henry the eights reign, to that very time, (the six years of
Queen Mary, only excepted.) And undoubtedly there was great, and clear reason;
foreseeing, that where the Ecclesiasticale policy of the church, in the one, or
the other extreme, is received (or shall be) as Jure Divino, the Hyrarchy, has,
and will gouverne more absolutely, then the civil, and supreme Magistrate;
which has been manifest, for many ages, and is as demonstrable for the future,
as any problem of euclide; from which clear, and experienced ground, it may be
thowght, that no wise souveraigne Authority, will volontarily part with the best
half, and surest fowndation of its power.

Sect. 61. But insencibly, I forget my self; this not being my business; nor
was then, any part of my humble representation to his Matie. thowgh above a
year before, he had towght me that lesson, when he was at new castle; in so
much, that by what I have here said upon this subject, I become but his echoe.

Sect. 62. Wherefor I shall return, without goeing further astraye, to the
matter, which led me to this short digression; to conclude, as I did then, to
the King; that the opposition of the Scotch Ministers (thowgh it might have
made a little noise, could not have occasioned any interuption, to the success
of what has been said.

Sect. 63. But in case, his Matie. Could not bring the army to such a
conclusion, as this council imported; and that he fownd himself convinced;
that their promises, and protestations, were but delusory; they who gave this
advice, promised to endeavor, the passing of an order in both houses, to
command the army to retire further from London; and to permit the King to come
to some of his houses near the city, to treat personally, for a well Grownded
peace.

Sect. 64. His Matie. replied, this has some weight, being what I heartily
desire; but I much doubt, the armies obedience; either to leave me at so much
liberty; or to retire to such a distance. However, I will press them as far as
is possible, and prudent for me in the condition, I am; to a fixed, and
positive Conclusion with me; and by you, shall acquaint them with the success,
if I find it useful to me. These men who propownd this to you, see to late,
that they have improvidently cut out more work, then they can make up without
my help; but I cannot resolve to do it all, at my own expense.

Sect. 65. His Matie. (however) put this in practice with all the ernestness he
Could; but met with continual demurs, and delays: that things were not yet
sufficiently ripe: that the army was not so unanimous as was hoped it would
become: that there were desordres in it (which Cromwell underhand raised, to
have a color for protarction, and for other greater ends which appeared on the
the theater shortly after) that their friends in the Parliament, Could not be
wrowght to a full concurrence with them.

Sect. 66. These pretexts, were so gross, and obvious, that the Kings hopes
deminished daily. Where upon, those persons already mentioned, procured an
order in the twoe houses, that his Matie. should reside at Richmond house; that
he should be attended by the same persons, who were about him at Holmby;
thirdly that Colonel Rossiters regiment should guarde him. All which Cromwell
refused, and laughed at; declaring that the King should come no nearer to
London, then the Parliament permitted the armies quarter to be. Where upon I
al^aged, to those persons, that all their votes would signify nothing, unless
means could be fownd out, where by their orders, might be seconded, by such
force, as in some degree was able, to counterballance that of the army. To
which end none Could be thowght on, saveing the Militia of London: which at
that time, of trained bands, and auxillianes amounted to at least fiveteen, or
sixteen thousand foot, and to have been browght together in six hours time;
they were for much the greatest part Commanded by Presbiterean officers; which
in diverse battayles had done as good service, and fowght as well as those of
the army.

Sect. 67. Whereupon the Earls of Manchester, Holland, Lauderdalle (who
thowgh not of the Parliament, but one of the Scots Commissioners, had great
credit in the city) my Lord willowghby of Parham, my Lord Hollis, Sr. Phillip
Stapleton, Sr. William Waller, Major General Mastey, Major General Brown, all
which and diverse more, who had great influence on the city, judged it now the
crittical season, to engage it, to petition the Parliament, for the continuance
of their Militia, under the establishment it was; which Cromwell, and his
adherents labored to have changed; but secondly to order that the King, should
be left at his House at Richmond, in order to a personal treaty; thirdly that
the city should be autorised to raise forces, for the Parliaments, and its
own defense, and have power to choose their General Officers. Fourthly that
aleaven members of the Parliament who had been (a little before) throwgh an
impeachement of the army, sequestered from their cession, with their own
consent, should return to their places in Parliament; this design was Carried
on (in the beginning) with as great secrecy, as such a transaction Could be, by
the persons above mentioned, where in I slept not.

Sect. 68. I acquainted the King with it, who approuved the whole conduct:
withal commanding me, so to Gouverne my self, in my part there of; that he
might not be necessitated to appear there in; first for his personal safety,
as being in the power of the army: secondly that he might have been free, in
Conscience, and honor, to agree with the army, in case that this design
should drive them to the necessity, of making good their several
protestations to him, which without being forced to it, he perceaved they would
never do.

Sect. 69. Besides he told me, most of those with whom you treat, play now
their own after game; they began these trowbles, which have browght me to
this estate, and having by their own Improvidence, throwgh their rigid
dealing, when they had the power to have agreed with me, lost the dignity, and
authority of Parliament; would now recouver themselves by my hazard; wherefor,
I shall go as far along with them, as I find consistent, with the public;
and my own interest; chargeing you, not to engage my name further.

Sect. 70. I replied, that to communicate what measures his Matie. intended to
take, would never be approuved by those leading men; and might break of, and
Frustrate the whole dessein, upon which (one way or other) his personelle
safety, and restoration entirely depended: therefore the best course, I coud
steer, was not to let them know, that I had lately spoken to him about it; and
that in case, they should press me to it, that they might have his engagement,
to adhere to them, in their proceedings; I would employ all the adresse I
could, to divert them from urging his Matie. to any promise against them, in
whose hands, and power he was, and many of them (if not all) desperately
disposed to his destruction, which would undoubtedly produce violent, and
precipitate practices against him, if they came to the least knowledge, or even
jalousie, that his Matie. was in any kind of colusion against them. He
approuved of this expedient; adding, that it was neither more, nor less then
truth.

Sect. 71. Shortly after I was desired to mouve the King herein; where upon, I
aleaged the above mentioned reasons against it, with such enlargements, as they
were satisfied. In fin, the train took; the city put in excecution all that
had been secretly contrived: petitioning the Parliament, for the confirmation
of their Militia, according to the Establishment where in it was.

Secondly that they might have power to raise new forces, for the defense of
the Parliament, and themselves.

Thirdly that they might be empowered to choose their own General officers.
Fourthly, that the King should come to London, in order to a personal treaty;
and that the aleaven secluded members, should return to their cession in
Parliament.

Sect. 72. Here upon all Cromwels party, in both houses resorted to the army.
The rest which constituted more then the number requisite remained assembled,
voting all the cities demands. Who began to raise forces: chose their General
officers, which were Sr. William Waller, Major General Massy, and others.
These enrolled, both horse, and foot, which came howerly in to them.

Many officers, and soldiers; who had been reformed, at the instances of the
army, as being of different principles from them, were again employed. A
proposition was made of seazing all the horses, within the lines of
Communication, where withal, they Could have mounted 4 or 5000 troupers, which
joined to the city Militia, with the new leavied foot; would have made a more
considerable force, then that of the army; which they knew, and apprehended.
Where upon, Cromwell concluded, that the fox might on that occasion, do more
good, then the lion; employed all his artifices, even totum vlissem, to hinder
all accord betwixt his Matie. the Parliament, and city; and the Kings party
from joining: prognosticating the entire ruin of all his vast designs, with
the inevitable destruction of his person, and accomplices, from so fatal, and
ominous a conjoncture: which to prevent, he presented aleaven proposals to the
King.

Sect. 73. First for the repealing of all the penal Statuts against recusants;
with the taking away of all coercive authority from the Bishops.

Secondly, the repealing of all acts, constrayning the use of the common prayer.

Thirdly against the enforcing of the Covenant. The next proposal, was
compiled, in most ambiguous, and conditional terms; whereby (as I conceaved)
the very quintessence of this cheat was manifest, as follows here.

Fourthly the things before mentioned being sufficiently assured; and provision
made, for settling, and securing, the rights, liberties, safety, and peace of
the nation: his Maties. person, and Royal issue, may be restored, etc.

In this proposal, all man kind may see, that there was nothing positive, nor
to have been certainly depended on, for the Kings person, or posterity: the
means, for satisfaction in these great matters, which compose the body of the
proposal, being left indeffinite; must have been the subsequent, result, of a
new treaty, whereby a port remained open, to render the later clause of no
manner of Effect; seeing they might continually have declared, that no
concessions which the King Could consent to, with the preservation of Monarchy,
were judged by them sufficient, to have secured (in their sense) the rights,
liberties, safety, and peace of the Nation.

The seven following proposals, concerned entirely, the moderating of diverse
severities toward the Kings party; which were wise and just in themselves;
but most Achittophally politic, as to his end, which was only to bind up the
hands of the Royal party, at that conjoncture, and to hinder a coalition.

Sect. 74. To render all his offers to the King fruitless; he had this reserve,
which he had formerly made use of, on the like occasion; before his Matie.
escaped from Oxford: that thowgh he, and most of his officers, had thowght
those proposals, a good fowndation for the Kings reestablishment, and for the
nations safety; yet if the Parliament would not be led to the same opinion, he
could not constrain them. That he, the officers, and army, were but the
nations, and Parliaments servants, not their masters. That they could only
recommend their proposals, not enforce their acceptance.

Sect. 75. However, his Matie. having perused these proposals, debated them,
and lent to favorable an ear, to his, and his son inlawes explanations, and
deep protestations; did conceave very strong hopes, that they were in ernest,
and really intended his restoration, upon which grounds (whereunto was joined
the councels, and pressing persuations, of three persons, permitted by the army
at that time about him, and in great credit with him) as likewise, being in
their hands, and power, might apprehend, that his safety required his
compliance. At their desire, he signed a paper, utterly desavowing, and
disapprouving, the proceedings of the Parliament, and city; embracing the
armies proposals, as the surest fowndation for a well grounded, and durable
peace.

Cromwell having obtained this, caused some thowsands of copies, to be
imediately printed, and dispersed throwgh the city, and nation; which gave
so full a satisfaction, to almost all the Kings friends; that they dissuaded
what citizens, they could have influence upon, not to oppose the army.

Sect. 76. Having gained this great point, he marched furiously toward
London, where the desordre, and consternation was so great; by the paper his
Matie. had signed; by the endeavors of the Royal party; and of Cromwells own,
which were considerable in that place; as at his arrival, he fownd no
opposition. Sr. William Waller fled into Hollande, Sr. Phillip Stapleton to
calais, where he died in eight or ten days after; and many others retired to
several other places: diverse of both houses, as well as of the city, were
imprisoned. A great part of his army marched throwgh London, in triumph, he
made one of his own party Leutenant of the Tower, modelled the Militia to his
own pleasure, and interest; left some Regiments about the Mewes, and
Whitehall, to encourage his friends, and terrifye his enemies in Parliament.

Sect. 77. This thowgh (at that time) a bloodless victory, was in effect, one
of the greatest, that ever he gained; making way to that unbownded power,
which he after achieved, and waded to, throwgh a sea of blood, in all the
three nations; and which was most extraordinary, died in peace, and declared
his successor.

Sect. 78. This having succeeded, according to what he had long designed, yet
hardly hoped for, but was resolved to hazard; he began to put of the masque,
where withal he had hithirto desguised himself, as to what concerned the
King; thowgh not as to other subsequent, and great projections.

Sect. 79. He quartered part of his army, in the adjacent places near London:
Conveyed the King further from it; the councels of the officers, and agitators,
were assembled at putney: it was now thowght high time to break with his Matie.
and for him, with his Mirmidons, to appear in their pure naturals.

Sect. 80. Subjects for desperate, and bloody debates, touching the King, were
propownded in their meetings, by his, and his son in laws instruments and
secret instigations: thowgh it was yet unseasnable, that the scean of execution
showld be exposed.

Sect. 81. He seemed much concerned for the danger he had plunged the King
into, and would appear willing to quench a real fire, (which he had kindled,
nourished, and now chiefly, administered fuel to) with an imaginary water.

Sect. 82. This danger of his Matie. was communicated to him, both by his
friends, and enemies; but with very different intentions. Cromwell would not
appear the last, nor the least concerned for his security; which undoubtedly,
and visibly was, to have it provided for, in the Isle of wight. To which end he
wrote a letter to his Couzin, Commissary General Whaly; who had the guarde of
his Maties. person; signifying the desorders of the army, with the Kings
danger; which being communicated to his Matie. he recalled his word, which had
been given, that he would not endeavor to escape: notwithstanding, whaly took
not the least care to prevent it, which he undoubtedly would have done, had he
not foreknowne, what arrived very shortly after.

Peradventure being at that time a preacher, (as most of the officers then
were) he was likewise a prophet; and Could divine, that his Maties. escape,
would prove but a translation, from an ill imprisonment, to a worse. In short
he left Hamton Court (I will not say saved himself from it) few knew what path
he had taken (thowgh some I am confident did, besides those with him) till the
news came to the Parliament, of his being in the hands of Colonel Hamond in
the Isle of wight.

It not being my business here, to enlarge to much, or to discant upon other
men's alegations, for the excuse of Cromwells, and Iretons after proceedings, as
extorted from them, throwgh danger, and necessity, for their own preservation;
some whereof being falce; others frivolous, and childish; I shall leave them as
they are, without further reflections; passing on cursorily, to some few matters
of weight, leading to the fatal event of this most unhappy business.

The King being in the Isle of wight, and not finding his entertainment,
answerable to his hopes; and that the personal security, oraculously promised
him, was to be interpreted, in the sense of his enemies, tending directly, to
his stricter, and surer confinement; and in the extremest danger which could
threaten him; his escape was become much more difficult, if not impossible; and
being advertised from London (means having been sudainly fownd out for
correspondence with him) of those things which most nearly concerned him: and
particularly, that propositions were preparing to be sent him. to obviate
which, that he foresaw would be to his prejudice. He wrote a letter to the
Parliament; confirning what he had offered them, in his Message from Holmby,
some months before, with other very considerable additions; of the Militias
being in their hands during his life; together, with the choosing the council,
and Ministers of State; as likewise the payment of the arrears of the army; and
concerning other things; he ernestly pressed, that he might with honor, and
safety, have come to a personal treaty at Londen.

Sect. 83. In answer where unto; the Parliament passed four bills to be sent to
the King, provisionally, for his ratification; which being returned as acts,
his Matie. should be admitted to a personal treaty. These bills were large;
and needless to be recited here verbatim; the first regarded the Melitia, both
by sea and land, to be entirely in their hands; and for the raising money, for
the maintenance there of, the last by inevitable consequence, must have
contiued that Parliament to all perpetuity, by investing them with full power,
to prorogue, and meet again at their pleasure. By twoe of these acts, the King
must have divested himself, and his posterity of the sword, and treasury, and
established them in it. And by the last; given them such a power, as was little
less then the legislative; which in a short time, they would undoubtedly have
drawn to themselves. It is here, remarquable, that Cromwell, and ireton, who
six or seven months before, by an adresse from the army, had in a mennacing
manner, demanded of the Parliament, to resolve upon, and declare a fixed
period, to their cession; thereby to make room for a trienniall to be
assembled; in this occasion were the most violent in pressing these four acts;
before his Matie. were admitted to any personal treaty. And when the King had
passed all, at this time demanded; and came to a treaty, it was in their power,
whither they would have agreed with him or not; from all which considerations,
and diverse others, which undoubtedly he had; he waved the ratifying of any
acts, until all were agreed.

Sect. 84. Upon this refusal (which he foresaw from the very nature of the
demands must ensue) Ireton after an invective speech, tending to the Kings
rejection, and to the settling the Gouverment without him, moved, that it might
be resolved to make no more adresses to him; the debate lasted long, and as
Ireton began, Cromwell ended, with bitter reproaches against his Matie. and
threatings of the Parliament, if they passed it not: at length, this
resolution, was forced out, not without vigorous opposition, of near the half
in both houses.

Sect. 85. First, that no further adresses be made to the King.

Secondly that no application be made to the King, by any of his subjects,
without permistion of Parliament, under the penalty of high treason.

The last vote, was relative to the first as before these votes (all most as
soon as he was in the Isle of wight) I had fownd out means of correspondence
with him, and of giving his Matie. constant advertisements, of all
occurrencies, which concerned him, so notwithstanding this danger, of being
punished as a traitor; I continued it even to the last: continuing to write to
him, and to receive letters from him, both for my self, and others; the
greatest part, of his intelligence, both with english, and Scotch passing
throwgh my hands, whilst I remained in England, not without great hazard, (as
may easily be conceaved,) which had it ever been discouvered, no humane means
that I saw, could have secured my head.

Sect. 86. Cromwell having (as I have already said, and demonstrated) from
time, to time, opposed, and by his several artifices; prevented all treaties
(as much as he possibly could) and agreements betwixt the King, and the
Presbitereans; by degrees, wrowght the Earl of Essex, Bedford, and Manchester;
the General Waller, Major General Massy, Major General Brown, and all those
Military persons, out of all employment, whom he judged capable, to bring any
opstacle to his projects; in some Kind reduced the city of London: and jugled
the King prisoner into the Isle of wight, in the custody of Colonel Hammon, one
of his creatures, he belived his game sure; which was the sole reason, why I
ever declined, all treaty, or colusion, with those people, foreseeing clearly
their ends, and as visibly their ways to them; even when the Generallity of the
Kings party, assured themselves, that they would infallibly restore, both him,
and them.

Sect. 87. My stedfastness, in the contrary opinion, and my endeavors, against
that gross delusion; not prostituting my reason, to other men's fantasies,
procured me many enemies, with very severe sensures; leading diverse to a
jalousie, that I had rivited my self into that interest, rather for my own
private ends; then for his Matie. service, or for the public behoof of the
Nation; which most groundless, and unreasnable credulity, together, with the
animosities, and calomnies which arose therefrom, had prepared the way, and
facilitated my after mine, all thowgh I solemnly, and syncerely protest; that I
alone declined the one party, as being unchangeably convinced, that they
designed his Maties. destruction; nor applied my self to the other, then by
his commands, and (as things were in those times) that I Could perceave no
other means for his preservation.

Sect. 88. Upon advertisements, I gave the King (which I know he had from other
hands (of the foregoeing votes, as likewise of what Cromwell, and Ierton, had
said against him, he saw to late, how perfidiously they had jugled with him,
which first disposed him to treat with the Scotch, and with as many of the
Presbitereans in England, as safely Could, and would be treated with: which
evidently refutes that rediculous assertion of some, who pretend to be the
Kings friends; that Cromwell, and Ireton, broke with his Matie. because he
treated with the Scots; making the effect, the cause; it being notorious to
all, who had any transactions in (and knowledge of) the affairs at those
separate times; that the King (after the armies proposalls) had no treaty with
the Scots, or any else, till the votes of non adresses; and unanimous
protestation of the army, to live and dye with the Parliament, in the persuance
of those votes; and for the setlement of the Gouverment, without his Matie. and
a little after; the like was done, by the Parliament, to live and dye with the
army, for the same ends: and which was the wonder, of wonders; the house of
Lords Passed this resolution first; with great zeal; and sent it down to the
Commons for their concurrence; who for some time opposed it vigorously; till
threatenings and fear, caused many members to absent themselves; so that it was
carried in the affirmative, by five or six vooices. Thus the commons contended
to preserve the Peerage; for the abolishing of which, the Peers themselves laid
this fowndation; which ensued in about a year after.

Sect. 89. These proceedings having been visible; and, his Matie. no other
recource for the gaining of his liberty, with the preservation of his crown,
and life; came to a conclusion with the Scotch Commissioners, who were
permitted by the Parliament to, repair to the King, about the Gouverment of
their own nation.

Sect. 90. The agreement with them, gave such satisfaction; that they engaged
themselves to enter into England with an army, as speedily, as well could be;
and in order to conjonction with them, several treaties were secretly
managed, with the principal persons of the Presbiterean party. In a
Parliamentary way; nothing Could be done with them, nor by them; because of the
awe of the army; and the incertainty of many amongst themselves; who in diverse
debates, voted with the contrary party. Besides, that the very late
resolutions, and protestations of both houses; rendered all propositions of that
Kind, vain, and exceeding dangerous: in so much, that there remained no
other way, but to treat with them a part, and with the greatest Privacy. The
result was; that they should declare at the same time with the Scotch, the
Kings party being to join with them. Upon the Scotch commissioners leaving the
Isle of wight; his Matie. was more severely guarded then ever. Not with
standing, I had constant correspondence with him: all (or much the greatest
part of) his intelligencies, either with the Kingdom of Scotland, or England,
passed my hands; not without great difficulty, danger, and expense. When all
these transactions were concluded; the King sent me the following letter of
credit, to be communicated, to as many of the Gentilemen of the Eastern
assotiation, as I should think fit; with the advice of those, with whom I had
before treated. The Duke of Lauderdalle did me the honor to deliver it me, at
his return from Cairsbrook Castle; and to let me know what was concluded,
betwixt his Matie. and the sotch Commissioners.

Cairsbrooke December: 1647.
SEct. 91. Gentilemen, I have been long since advertised by Colonel Bamfield,
who I have often employed to you; of your good affections to my service: and
since there may fall out, in a short time, an occasion, wherein they may be
useful to me; in the present condition I am, it may prove inconvenient for me;
and to you dangerous, that I should give you Particular directions under my
hand; I have left it to Colonel Bamfield, who knows my affairs; and has order
to communicate to you as much of them; as is necessary for the direction of
your Councels; and endeavors; for the public good of your country; and for
him who is.

Your most assured friend CHARLES. R.
For the Gentilemen of the Eastern association.

Jan. the 24.
SEct. 92. I have received yours of the 17 present; but have not as yet
decypherd, the other letters enclosed; because I would first fiuish this
despatch to my wife, the Earl of Laneric, and my Lord Willowby: wherefor
excuse me to the Earl of Southampton, that I have not answered his; which I
shall do by the first occasion: I am advertised, that it has been deliberated,
by some of the army, to possess themselves of the Duke of York: consider if
you cannot find means to convey him out of England; cause the enclosed, to be
delivered to him; for it concerns me nearly to have correspondence with him at
this time: let me know as soon as may be, your opinion touching this
business; farewell.

Your assured friend CHARLES R.


Sect. 93. Upon the receipt of this letter, I caused the enclosed for his
Royale Highness, the Duke of York to be delivered him by a sure hand, who had
that access to him which I could not have: and unless my memory fails me, (as
I am persuaded it does not) he had been pleased, not long before, by Message;
to let me know, that he had promised the King his father, whilst he was in
the hands of the army; to make his escape out of England, as soon as he Could
attempt it, on any reasnable appearance of success; demanding if Could not
serve him in it; which I am confident I had undertaken; in which resolution I
was fully confirmed, by these his Maties. commands; and not knowing whither by
this occasion he had mentioned the business to the Duke or not; with his own
letter, I sent his Royalle Highness mine; which was transmitted again to me;
and upon his resolution, and answer; I framed mine to his Father. The Duke was
pleased to command me, not to precipitate the business; but to take necessary
time; and use all circomspection, not to plunge him into a worse condition then
he was; Having duly considered what measures were fittest for me to take
herein; and given the King an account there of: his Matie. was pleased to write
me the following letter.

Cairsbrooke the 22 Feb.
SEct. 94. I have received yours of the 14 present; and being weary with
decyphering it; I cannot answer to all its particulars; nor is it needful: I
will only tell you in General; that I approve what you have already done; and
what you propose, for the saveing of the Duke of York. I confirm the promise
he has made to Howard; and the assurances, you have given him in my name; to be
continued in the Charge of Master of his horse, allthowgh the Parliament has
made him so. The rest I leave to your conduct; committing you to Gods
Providence: trawble not your self, about my other affairs; but think only of
what you have now in your hands: bring him (if possible) either to his Mother,
or sister; farewell

Your assured friend CHARLES R.


Sect. 95. For some Important reasons, which I acquainted his Matie. with, I
delayed this business until the end of April following; at which time, it
succeeded happily; to the great contentment of the King, and of the Royalle
famely: his Highness arrived first in Zealand; and the next day in Holland.

Sect. 96. About six weeks after, the Parliaments whole fleet, quitted their
unlawful masters, came to anchor in Goree Rode; delivering themselves up to the
Duke of York as their Admiral; which they knew he was by the King his fathers
patent; and was really the occasion of their coming thither; and submitting to
him.

Sect. 97. The wind which was favorable to bring them into Holland; prouved a
storm to me, which occasioned my wrack ever since; having unhappily given
some council concerning that fleet (it seems) with to much precipitation;
which was well meant; very ill taken, because most bitterly represented, by a
person of quality, and (to do him but Justice) of merit; betwixt whom, and
me, there was at that time some competition, about particular matters; who
according to the ordinary practice in such cases; to ruin my credit, and
increase his own; held it expedient, to couver his private animosity, under
the specious veil of Zeal to a more public interest. I shall again declare,
what I have ever protested; that I had no other end, or design; then either
freeing the King out of his Imprisonment in the Isle of wight; or (if it were
fownd Impossible, which I did not then belive (nor do now) that is was) to
have landed 1500. or 2000. men at yarmouth, to have countenanced a rising in
northfolke, suffolk, and the other adjacent Provinces of the eastern
assotiation: the probabillity of the one, or of the other, I shall here expose
to any reasnable consideration.

Sect. 98. First touching the Kings freedom; I had been assured out of
England, of a landing place in the Island; which I looked upon, as the greatest
difficulty.

Sect. 99. Secondly, that we Could have landed with 2000 Men; having raised at
that very time in Holland about 1200 English Soldiers, of the reduction, which
the States had then made of the troops of our nation, and might well have
added to them upon such an occasion; 1000 sea men chosen out of the Fleet;
besides that great assurances were given, that the inhabitants, would have
risen, with us, if we could have furnished them with arms, which was to have
been done.

Sect. 100. Thirdly, I could never conceave (in case of a free descent on land)
any great, or long opposition we Could have met with by sea, not the least;
the Parliament, not having had one ship of war fitted out, in ten weeks, or
three months after. By land, as little; except what Colonel Hamond Could have
made, with not above 5 or 600 foot, which was all he had; nor Could have hoped
for more. Cromwell with the greater part of the army was marched against the
Scots; Fairefax engaged before Colchester; and some considerable parties, of
the army, diverted into walls, by risings there for the King at the same time.
Moreover, if they Could have sent an army entire to portsmouth; or any other
part upon that coast; to have been transported into the Island; not a barque,
or bote Could have passed, without either being sunk, or taken. Besides there
were many of the bravest, and best officers, who had served his Matie. who
were Embarked in the fleet: as Prince Mauris, Sr. John Boyce, Colonel
Washington, Sr. Francis Mackworth, and very Many more; who we fownd retired
into Holland at our arivall, and some followd; nor is it to be Imagined, that
in so glorious an enterprise; but that the greatest contestation would have
been, who should have been readiest to have sacrifised themselves. For my part
I never could apprehend any other difficulty in this attempt, then to have
landed; which we had great, and likely assurances of; and in all events, our
retreat was sure, and the fleet at liberty for any other design, in case that
could not have been effected.

Sect. 101. Which was, to have landed at yarmouth; where we were sure of a free
reception: and did persuade my self, that a body of 2000 Soldiers would have
had the reputation of double the number; and have encouraged the whole county
of northfolke to have risen: which had been very well prepared by my
transactions before my leaving of England; with Sr. John Hobart, and diverse
more of the Gentry of that shire, by the Kings commands and credentials.

Sect. 102. These were ye only ends I had in that transaction, which was then
ye first step to my utter ruin: if there were any little irregularity as to
some formalities, in the way leading there unto; the most it Could have
amounted to, was an error committed throwgh to much precipitation, and
ernestness, which (I hoped) could not have been considered as a crime.

To have given advertisement to the Queen, and Prince; fourteen days time (at
least) must have been lost; which might have rendered the whole dessein, either
Impossible, or much more difficult, and hazardous. More over, if it should have
been refused (as peradventure it might) to have gone forewarde with any
enterprise, how necessary, how profitable, or how glorious soever, would have
been considered as desobedience, and have fallen under the interpretation of
contempt.

Moreover, I considered, that the first, and chief duty which then lay upon
me, was to contribute all I could toward the conservation; and liberty of the
King; being likewise pressed by a second, which I concluded, weighed not much
less, both of dependence, and obligation; from all which reasons joined to the
Importance of the design, which Could not admit delay, I thowght the wisest
course was to put it Imediately in practice, and after, to have excused the
omission of some circomstances, by the weight and pressure of the affair.
Besides, I considered, that if the success followed, which was reasnable to
hope for; a small error would have needed no great appologie: and if it did
not; I was resolved to bear the blame; which. I have abondantly done, thowgh I
did not foresee, it would have fallen so heavy on me, nor have dured to
perpetuity.

In the midst of these transactions, his late Matie. arrived at Helvot sluice;
to whom a very bitter representation was made, of my proceedings;
notwithstanding, twoe days after, his Majesty was graciously pleased, to
vouchafe me a free, and particular audience, to hear indifferently what I
could say; either for my Justification, or excuse, which. was much to the
purpose, I have here aleaged. Having patiently heard me; his answer was, very
near in the following words, or at least, exactly to the same sense. Colonel
Bamfield, I am unwilling to belive all I have been informed, concerning your
late proceedings, about this fleet; for if I did, I should trust you no longer;
wherefor I am willing to credit what you say, as to the ends you had; but even
according to your own acknowledgment, you cannot deny, but that you have (in
the way to them) very much failed in your duty, and respect to me; but being
contented to hope, that it has been throwgh haste, and inconsideration, without
malice; I pardone this fault freely, and charge you not to be discontented; for
if I shall ever perceave that you are, I shall be more displeased with you,
then I am, for what you have now done.

I confess nothing could have been, more generous, nor more gracious; and I
resented it accordingly; with that humility, and thanckfullness, which. I was
obliged to do.

About the same time, the Scots with an army, of 20000. Men, marched into
England, answerable to the accord, that their commissioners, not long before,
had made with the late King, of ever happy Memory: his faithful subjects in
England, began to rise in several parts of the nation; as had before been
agreed upon; it began in Kent, some thing unseasnably, and throwgh ye little
(or rather no) experience of those who commanded, was more easily, and more
speedyly dissipated, then was expected; had they understoode their undertaking;
to have left their own province, and marched to Arundel, in sussex; ye near
adjoining county; which. was prepared to have risen with them, before I left
England: having possessed themselves of that fast place, defended on the one
side by a navigable niver; on another, by a strong castle, situated on all most
an in accessible elevation; on a third by a deep lake; near musket Shot over;
and by cutting a narrow dam betwixt it, and the river; the water Could have
fallen into it if needful; on ye fourth, by a wall, and ditch, thowgh without
flanque, which in twenty four hours Could have been cast up, after the manner
of a good intrenchment: about 200 paces further advanced; was an old rampart of
Earth, sufficiently high, which reached from the elivation of grownd, where on
ye Castle stands, to the side of the lake, which was a singular help, to a most
advantageous retrenchment; which in eight and forty hours, by many hands,
Could have been rendered of Admirable defense; by the direction of any, who
understood the advantages of ground, for an encampment; and that had any
indifferent, general knowledge of fortification; which most officers, of any
consideration, either understand reasnably, or owght to do: besides, if it
came to be forced; all the ground within it, was commanded, both by the Castle,
and town; and this part was the weakest of the four; I mention this only, as
one of the strongest, and most Important posts in England, or any where else
that I have seen, for the defensible encampment of any reasnable body of an
army; which that rising in Kent, then amounted to; and would have been double
the number had they marched to Arrundel, by the addition of force, they would
have had, out of sussex, and Hamshire; both which Provinces, were for diverse
months before prepared to rise, with the first reasnable occasion; and posting
themselves fastly for defense, I much question whither the army of Fairfax
(which consisted nor at that time of 7000 foot) would have attempted them as
they might have layne: at least, would have fownd a long work to have reduced
them; and given time, and aportunity to the rest of the nation to have risen;
and formed themselves, into some considerable, and solid bodies. And as this
had been, the most councellable, and altogether Practicable, in that part, and
occasion; so had it been much more needful, and profitable to the whole
undertakeing, and common interest of the King, and his faithful prople; had
the Scots army taken the same measures, when they were advertised that Cromwell
advanced toward them; and having encamped themselves advantagiously, with a
sufficient intrenchment, as they had places in abondance, where they marched to
have done, almost Impregnably; and by that means have kept themselves from the
necessity of fighting, unless upon such certain advantages, as must probably
have produced the ruin of their enemy.

As it was Cromwells interest, and resolution, to fight them as soon as
possibly he Could; so was it no less theirs to temporise, by a defensive war.
After them; diverse of ye nobility, and chief Gentry, in Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Yorkshire, were in a combination together; and
raising of forces with all diligence; in so much, that had the Scots but
avoided fighting, for the space of one month; which with great ease they might
have done, by the advantageous posts, whereof in diverse places throwgh which
they had marched, they Could have had their choice: by a good entrenchment
(which at other times, was observed, they sufficiently understoode) the forces
of the four Provinces I have named, would have in that time, composed a solid
body of an army, more considerable for Number, and in all other regards, then
that of the Scots amounted to. Besides those of the eastern assotiation, were
fully, and unanimously resolved to rife: Cornwell; Devon, Somerset, and Dorset,
the like; and wanted only a month or six weeks time: in sine, the whole nation
was prepared as to the same end; and were in the way toward it; when the
strange, and almost wonderful defeat of the Scots army; by Cromwells, not
consisting of half their number; broake all other measures, which had been
taken upon that fowndation, by concert some months before.

As they had neglected what I have already mentioned, touching encampment; so
when they came to fight (as if there had been a fatallity, both in the conduct;
and success, they neither made use of the great advantages of their number,
their army having been so ranged, that the greatest half of their troops
never came to fight; nor profited themselves, of that benefit of the choice of
grownd, and other commodities, which a defensive army may have, against an
enemy who attacques it; which owght allways to be held in chief
consideration, by all experienced; and Provident soldiers.

But to cease from all further reflections; that army was unfortunately beaten,
and so totally dissipated, that it was not believed that 5000. of them, ever
returned to Scotland: this miscarriage and misforture, stifled diverse great
designs abortively, upon the point of their production; and cut of others,
which were begun, before they Could come to any maturity.

Having been at that time, privy to all the designs, and measures, formed and
taken, in that conjoncture, and in those transactions; as likewise actively
industrious, in the contriving, and advancing of most of them; which
(according to humane Judgment) I was fully persuaded, could not have fayld of
the end, where unto they were directed; of the Kings liberty, and happy
restoration, both for himself, his porsterity, and subjects.

His late Matie. was out of the hands of his enemies; the King now reigning
escaped out of England; the Parliaments whole fleet leaving them, returned to
their obedience to their Souveraigne; the Scots entered into ye heart of
England, with the formed body of an army of twenty thousand men; risings in
several places; an universal, and well formed resolution, throwgh the whole
nation, to do the same; and upon the very point of being put in execution; one
great (and indeed unreasnable) error; and twoe, or three others, not much less
(which to avoid tediousness, as well as for other reasons I mention not) ruined
all; and shortly after, the whole fabrique of Gouverment; causing such a
violent, and General Conflagration, as I fear even to this day, has never been
totally extinguished; but as fire hid in the cavernes of the earth, is often
subject to make very dangerous irruptions.

The Scotch army totally defeated; Cromwell Marched toward Scotland; all other
parties in England, which had declared for his Matie. were easily dissipated,
and all places sudainly reduced; the humane cause, of this extraordnary, and
most un apprehended ruin of the Scots forces, was attributed, to the secret
correspondence, which was more then believed, to have been, betwixt some of the
dissenting clergy (which were much the greatest number) with other of the
nobillity, who had opposed most violently, that expedition into England; and
Cromwell. As likewise to the great influence they had upon a considerable part
of that army; which was known to some; and had very convincing appearences to
all: both from their extraordinary conduct, in suffering themselves to be
constrained to fight against their wills, and contrary to the common interest,
of the Cause they had in hand; and when they engaged; so Improvidently to have
ordered the business; as not to have browght half their army to fight: as
likewise from the transactions, and accord, betwixt Cromwell, and that party
of the Scotch, when he came upon their borders.

The whole face of things, being thus unexpectedly changed, the more severe
part of the Presbitereans, who had not long before concurred, with the armies
party in both houses, to the vote, of non adresses to the King, apprehending
(when it was to late) the danger of the total subversion, of the ancient
Gouverment, of the three Nations; by these almost prodigeous successes of the
army, changed their minds; forsook the army party; and joining themselves, to
the moderate Presbitereans (who in truth, and reallity, were strong
Protestants, but no Presbitereans) were by much; the more numerous in both
houses; nullified the former resolution of non adresses to the King; and agreed
to a speedy treaty with him; hopeing to have concluded it before Cromwells
army, Could March southward, and join with Fairefax; so to have browght his
Matie. with freedom, Honor, and safety to London: to have voted all the
General officers commissions void; to have employed others in their charges;
and at the same time, to have raised a niew army in, and about London: by which
means, it was hoped, all parties would have agreed together, who were friends
to the ancient Gouverment; and to the laws of the Nation; which were
undoubtedly, nine parts of ten, in all three Kingdoms.

A day was prefixed, for the beginning of the treaty, forty days limited for
its continuation; thowgh that it was belived, it would have been concluded, in
ten; throwgh the necessity of the interests on both sides. Which had it been, I
am confident the King had been happily restored, and a multitude of Calamities
prevented; which ensued at (and since) his death; and (as may be feared) are
not yet so entirely ended, as wise, and honest men may wish. Artickles were
drawn up, and Commissioners sent away with them to the Isle of wight. About
which time, Mr. William Moray then of the bedchambre to his Royale Highness,
who was permitted to be about the King, during the treaty; wrote me word, that
his Matie. had commanded him, to let me know, that if I Could come into
England, either by permission of the Parliament (where the Presbitereans had at
that time the power) or secretly; my negotiations, at that conjoncture with
those who had formerly had communication with me, about his affairs; and my
advertisements to him, might be of great use.

As soon as I had received the letter, without much ballancing, concerning the
danger which I exposed my self to; I repaired to flushing, hired a fisher
boat of expressly, having desguised my self, as much as I could, arriving in
twoe days at London, where I remained secretly during the treaty. Very shortly
after, having spoaken with Mr. Moray, who the King sent expressly to me, with
a letter, and with his Commands; I fownd means to speak with General Waller
(who was returned from the Hague, whither he was constrained to fly, some
months before, and sat now again in Parliament) and by his means, and
ordnarily at his house, with diverse others of both houses. The great, and
severe demands about church Gouverment, which really, and sencibly, touched his
Maties. conscience, in regard of his oath, and of other considerations, the
first forty days to which the treaty was limited were expired, without coming
to a conclusion; in which time I had written very often to the King, and
received letters from him; in all I writ, I humbly, and yet freely (as the
matter required) represented to him, the dangerous, and almost desperate
condition of his affairs, by the protraction of time; and dit not fail on the
other side; to lay before those persons, of both houses, with whom I had daily
Communication; as demonstrably, and as forcibly, as my reason Could reach to;
the horrible confusion, which would inevitably arrive, both in religion; and
the Politic Gouverment, to the utter ruin of the nation; the consequencies
where of, their posterity might feel, and bewaille, in case the accord were not
concluded time enough, to make some reasnable, and solid Provision; against the
desperate designs of Cromwell, and his army (which was on its march furiously
toward London) before it Could arrive there; desiring them to consider; that
they would find empty Imaginations, supported only by the votes of both
houses; to weak to encounter the real dangers, which threatened them, and the
Nation; by the audatious violence of those, who had already gone so far
toward their pernicious projects, that they Could never think themselves
secure, but by goeing boldly on to ye bloody accomplishment of it: which was
clearly, and daily perceaved, by the comportment of Cromwells party in both
houses.

I wrote an ample letter, as sencibly, and convincingly as I could to the same
effect, to the late Lord Hollis, which to my knowledge, having effaced my name
(whither for his own, or my consideration I know not) he read to others of the
commissioners; and fownd means to let the King see it: thowgh at the same time,
I wrote fully to his Matie. particularly, and plainly: it being then no season
to lessen, or render objects more agreeable, then they were in themselves. I
represented, that Cromwells army advanced with all possible diligence, I
acquainted him with the practices of his party, both in the Parliament, the
city of London, and in several other parts of the Nation where they had
influence: humbly beseeching him to conclude the treaty, before the army Could
approache, to hinder the effects of it: that the Parliament might have had
time, to have declared all the General officers commissions void; and some
others, who were most desperately active: to make niew Generals, and to raise
an army in the city of London, and in the nearest adjacent Provinces: and to
bring his Matie. with honor, and freedom to London: and since it was feared;
that he who commanded the Guards about the King, would not have obeyed; as to
what concerned his person; in such an unhappy event, I added some particulars;
which I thowght most conducible, not only to the prevention of the greatest,
and nearest danger to which his Maties. person lay exposed; but in the worst
which could fall out, to the preservation of Monarchy, in the persons of his
posterity, in their just degrees, according to the due course of law, in that
case provided, and not otherwise: it is most true, that upon a weighty matter,
I had a most just, and necessary occasion, to mention nominally twoe of his
children to him (as I had done when I judged it requisite very often before)
adding for the conclusion of that paragraffe, which contained my humble opinion
(for it was no more) these following words: that it would undoubtedly be a
great security to his affairs, and of no less encouragement to his friends;
when his children were at the head of those who should appear for him; where
withal I ended my letter, which was the last that ever I had the honor to
write to him. Had it been then printed, would have fully convinced all men who
might have read it, of my Loyallty, and Zeal, to the King; and for the
preservation of his person; and no less of my fidelity, and affection to the
service of his lawful successors in their just degrees; as God, Nature, and
the laws of the Land had ordained; without ever mentioning, or so much as
thinking upon, that villainous, and most foolish hysteron, proteron which I was
secretly accused of (not long after the Kings death) by one single person
alone, to have inserted in that letter. Had it been so; it neither was, nor is
comprehensible, how he Could have known it; I never trusted him enough; to
let him have seen any letter I either wrote, or received: nordid I ever know,
any person of what quality soever, more exactly circomspect, in Keeping of his
correspondencies secret; and the letters of those who wrote to him, then his
late Matie. was: nor Could he have had any end, which might have
counterballanced, the inconveniences that were reasnable to apprehend for his
service; by communicating that letter to him; or indeed to any else; unless it
had been for their Council (which this person in the judgment of all who knew
him, was no ways capable of, nor proper for) in which regard his Matie. would
rather have communicated it to some other persons, of the greatest capacity in
the nation; and of the greatest credit with him; and were at that time
permitted about him; then to a yongue Man, of no Importance; and who had never
served him: the truth is; had I wrote, what I was accused to have done; it had
been in the highest degree, factious, and seditious; as well, as the most
foolish project, and proposition, which Could have entered into the thowghts of
any man, not actually in a frenzy; and fitter for bedlam, then for any
reasnable society: nor Could I ever observe, that my greatest enemies; were at
any time inclined to place me in that cattegory. In fin my letter was never
produced; nor seen by any man, that I Could hear of; but by my accuser; nor by
him neither, in that sense he reported it. I well know to what an extent words
written, as well as spoken, may be wrested; if there can in them, be any
possibility of a double sense, the change of a point, of a comma, or of the
least accent, may vary a whole sentence, or periode; as may be confirmed by a
multitude of examples, both in history, and frequent modern practice: but in
what I wrote, there was nothing but simple and categorique naratives, of
matters of fact; pregnant, and visible dangers; and humble representations,
touching the best, and likeliest means, to obviate, and prevent them: where of
his Matie. himself, was the most competent judge, whither they were reasnable,
honest, and appliquable to the condition he then was; to have been made use of,
or rejected; according to his own prudence, and pleasure. I shall here
conclude this; where upon I have the longer insisted, as being the fowndation
of my utter ruin: the source, of my great sufferings, during six, or seven
years; and those calamities, and necessities whereinto I was plonged, at that
time, the causes of my offending his Matie. to that degree he ever remained.

It is beyond the limits I propownd to my self, to enlarge to a particular
relation, of the artickles presented to the King, of the debates, and disputes
there upon, during the treaty, which has been already the work of other pens
more proper for it then mine, I shall only say, that had his Matie. and the
Parliaments Commissioners, come to the same conclusion, they at last did, fut
twenty days sooner (which they might have done, for to the best of my
remembrance, there were twice fourteen days added to the first forty, which
was spun out to the last three or four) the King in my opinion, had not come to
a violent death; the Nation, and the protestante Religeon, had been free from
the infamy there of; and secured, against the cruel confusions, which
Imediately followed the effusion of that blood; all thowgh his Matie. and the
Parliament were fully agreed; and his concessions voted entirely satisfactory;
and a sufficient fowndation, for a happy peace, and firm establishment in all
his Dominions; yet by the violence of the army, which over whelmed all; very
much the greatest part of the Parliament were secluded; and allways kept out;
till Imediately before the Present Kings restoration; diverse of the members
emprisoned, and others constrained to save themselves beyond sea.

In this deplorable condition of things, his Matie. a little before he was
remouved from Niewport by the army to Hurst Castle, apparently calling to mind
what I had several times represented to him, was graciously pleased to send me
by Mr. William Moray, the ensuing letter.

THe danger, to which you expose your self, cannot be contreballanced, by any
service, there now remains for you to do me; the severity of the
Presbitereans, having ruined me, and themselves. You will do well, to save
your self, and to return to your Master; and I command you, not to Council
him to any thing, touching public matters, without the knowledge, and
approbation of the Queen his Mother, and of the Prince his Eldest brother;
having no more to say to you, then to commit you to the protection of the
Allmighty God, I remain.

Your assured friend CHARLES R.


Imediately after his Maties death; I was suspended from the Honor of waiting
where I had done; and my coming to the court prohibited; which caused me to
continue secretly, and desguised in England, in several places, not knowing
well (in the disgrace I then was plonged) how to subsist else where; besides
that I hoped there, to find some favorable occasion, of serving the King;
where by to remouve his displeasure, thowgh it prouved not so easy a matter,
as some to Consolate me, flattered me with the belief of.

I remained in that condition about a year, some times in one place, and some
times in another; till at length, I was betrayed by one who had served me long,
whom I had bred up from a boy, and much obliged. I was taken, and Imprisoned,
and had certainly lost my head; unless by the extraordnary Providence of God, I
had fownd the means of saveing my self throwgh a window of the Prison; which
(all circonstances considered) was little less then Miraculous: the sea ports
were so laid for me, that I was constrained to remain secretly in the city
of London, in faithful friends houses during the space of three weeks, when at
last, I was conveyed over into Holland, by Sr. Roger de Lyvedy Captain of a
Man of war belonging to Rotterdam, whose brother was since vice Admiral of the
Meuse; twoe or three years after, his ship was seized upon at Hull, he put in
Prison, where I have heard he dyed.

I had no sooner set foot on land, but I was forced into another misfortune,
which was unavoydable, that constrained me for some time, to take my refuge at
vienna near utrect; which added to his Maties. indignation; but it pleased God,
that the occasion in few weeks was taken away; where upon I repaired to Breda,
where the King was in treaty with the Scots Commissioners; his Matie. would not
permit me to appear in his Presence, nor at his court; he agreed with them,
went into Scotland; it was not allowed me to wait on him thither, thowgh I made
use of the intercession of some great persons, in no less credit with him, to
obtain that Grace.

Shortly after I followed, in company with the with the Earl of Disert, where
being arrived Duke William Hamilton, who was killed at woster, the late Duke
of Lauderdalle, with most of the Nobility of Scotland, who were then about his
person, employed their mediation, as ernestly, as duty, and descretion would
admit, to bring me into grace, but Could not obtain any thing; which
constrained me to return again into Holland.

In this State I continued about five years, endeavoring to do all the
services I Could: frequently, agitated, betwixt hope, and despair; till at
length I had the happiness to perform such a service as that some very great
persons, both in quality, and credit, Improuved it all they Could, to restore
me to his Maties. favor; who prevayled so far, as that he was pleased, to
admit me into his Presence, and to kiss his hand; as allsoe to receive the
account I had to give him, of some matters which regarded his service; and to
deliver his opinion freely enough, concerning persons, and things, relative
there unto.

Which gave occasion for me, and such as wished a period to my misfortunes, to
hope that by degrees, I might have recouvered his Matie. favor; which I belive
I had not come short of; unless unfortunately I had offended, a person of
quality, and at that time in the greatest Credit and trust about him, who
before my disgrace, had been one of my best friends, and very highly obliged me
in many occasions; and after my misfortune, had carried himself indifferently,
without doing me either good, or harm; until at that conjoncture, he began
again to favor me; ( giveing) me his promise to do me what good offices he
Could; but being diametrally opposite in his Jugdment, Counsels, and
Proceedings; to my humble opinions, touching the likeliest means, leading
toward the Kings restoration; I unhappily used to much freedom in my
argumentations with himself; and excessively more, in my discources with
others, concerning him: in a letter I had written to the Earl of Difert, then
at Antwerp; which was intercepted (to avow the truth) I had made some bitter
reflections upon his conduct; thowgh without ( nameing) him; but being examined
before his Matie. and his Council, whither I had written that letter or not;
thowgh only a copy was produced; and but three or four lines read (at first) to
me; I owned it. The reading ended, I was asked who I meant, by the person not
named, on whom I had made diverse reflections; I waved the declaring thereof, by
all the evasions that my invention Could furnish me with; foreseeing into what
a laberinthe of niewe trowbles I should wind my self; if I entered into the
list with him: I knew it would be in all kinds, impar congressus A chilli: at
length, the King himself commanded me to declare who I meant: which without
the highest contumacy, I was obliged to do: thus finding my self in
volontarily engaged; I undertook the Justifying of all the particulars of my
letter; which I endeavored with much more ardor, then was suitable to the
condition where in I at that time was; whereby I offended his Matie. in the
highest degree; and was blamed even by those present, who wished me well.

This niew wound prouved incurable; leading the King to a resolution of
remouving me entirely out of his service, whereof, I wanted not information:
which made me seek an opportunity to have audience by him: which at length I
obtained.

I began to speak about things, which concerned his service in Scotland;
having heard me; and demanded some questions, which naturally arose from what
I had represented; I Could perceave by his answer in the conclusion; that he
had no mind to have that string further touched upon: in so much that I
passed from it; to my own particular concernments: after having laid before
him, the unhappiness of my condition, throwgh the long continuance of his
displeasure; I humbly besowght him to grant me any one of three things; he was
pleased to reject all; thowgh they were easy; of small Importance, and without
the possibility (as I conceaved) of any harmfull consequence: where upon, I
threw my self on my knie, humbly beseeching him not to cast me entirely of;
that I had served his Royal father; his Matie. himself, and the Crown;
faithfully from my youth: that I had the same affection to his Person, and
fidelity to his service, which I had ever professed; and in many occasions,
signally demonstrated: that nothing Could deminish my Zeal, but unresistable
necessity.

His Matie. answered, he Could not belive, that those would serve him
faithfully, who he did not think well affected to him: that I had ways of my
own, and followed my own counsels in his business, which he would not
suffer; I replied, that if I had done so; it had been when I was at such a
distance from him, that I Could not receive his orders, and that what I did, I
thowght best for his service; but that in the future, I would never do any
thing relating to public affairs, without his Majesty's positive commands:
he replied, I cannot grant any of the things you desire; one of them at this
time, is not in my power; not being in a condition to help those I would: the
other twoe, I do not think for my service; nor have I any further employment
for you. The to sencible anxiety, wherein I was; finding my self irreparably
ruined; utterly deprived of all means to subsist, and hopeless for the future:
so trowbled my reason, that I broke out of those bowndes of duty, and profownd
respect; which in all conditions, I owght as a subject; much more as a meniall
servant, to have confined my self to; and said, it is Impossible for me to
live thus any longer; if your Matie. will absolutely abandon me, I can have no
other refuge, then to endeavor to return into England; and seek my bread
amongst your enemies, who I have hitherto opposed, with all the vigor, and
industry, I Could: where upon he rose from the cheer where he gave me audience,
and told me; I have no more to say to you, nor will ever have more to do with
you; and so retired out of the chamber.

Some persons of the greatest Calibre, by whose means I had obtained that
audience, who were present at a little distance, and had heard all that was
said, reproched me with indignation, for my last words; calling them rash,
undutifull, and insolent; and that none of my friends (afterward) Could speak
more in my favor; with many other such like expressions; and indeed, I fownd
them ever after much more Cold then formerly: I procured an audience again
from one of them; not without some difficulty; which was likewise, the last, I
ever had; where representing the hardness of my condition, and mentioning (as
modestly as I Could dress my complaints up) my past services for diverse years,
which were very well known to the person to whom I spoke; one who was by,
made answer in some kind of heat; all your past services, are lost in the ill
success of the Kings business: Other expressions, as sharp as that, were
added; which I then thowght (as I now do) were spoken, to drive me off from
the hopes of subsistence, from those to whom I had adressed my self; fearing
(peradventure) that my aim was to pin my self on them, who at that
conjoncture, were in no very oppulent condition. I sowght, and (in private for
all were cautious of me, seeing the Kings great, and declared displeasure)
obtained an audience, from another, where I had placed my last hope, and
refuge: he heard me attentively, but said little: only in the conclusion, he
told me he was very sorry for me, but saw not how he Could help me: to appear
in my behalf would make my condition rather worse, then better; as he said I
might my self easily conceave; and Could in some kind prove disadvantagious
to himself; upon which terms I retired, never having spoken to him since;
nor is it likely, that I ever shall.

Thus finding my disease (under which I had long languished) become incurable;
and that all those, who had either kindeness, or compassion for me; began to
apprehend my sickness as contagious: as is done in the pest ( with a Lord have
mercy upon me) had abandonned me: as perishing men in a shipwreck, save
themselves as they can; so I returned into England, having no other refuge in
nature: which I did openly, and avowedly, as I had before declared I should be
constrained to do.

During the intervall betwixt that time, and his Maties. restoration, I did
many things, which gave him Just reason to continue, and to augment his
indignation, if that were possible.

The King was out of his dominions, another authority established; where unto
the three nations either volontarily, or by constrainte had submitted. Being
thus Thrown out of his service, and out of all trust, and Employment; I
abandonned my self to those councels, which an insupportable necessity
sugested to me, that according to the Judgment of the supreme legislator,
renders diverse other laws dispensable.

I stayed not long in England; had no conversation with any of the Kings friends;
which I avoided more then many of them did me. I was seldom there; but having
concluded a very advantageous capitulation, with Monsieur de Tillier, at
present Chancellor of France; for the raising of a Regiment of 2500 English,
and Scots, and had obtained liberty to do it; I returned to London, to procure
Marchands security, for my performing the conditions, on my part agreed upon,
before the money I was to receive, Could be paid me. Having accomplished, what
was demanded, to the contentment of those concerned; a man of war was offered
me, for my retransport to Deep, without my demanding it: I wondered a little, at
the great civility; considering it, as a good presage, that I should meet with
no niew interuption, in the progress of my business: I went the next day post
to Dover; sending thence to the Downs, the order I had for a frigate to come
thither, where I thowght to have embarked my self: whilst I waited for it,
dreaming of nothing less then Imprisonment; the Gouvernour of the Castle, with
the Major of the Town, together with some Soldiers came into my chamber,
showing me an order from Cromwell, to seize all my papers, and to bring me, and
my servants, prisonners into the castle; not one of them, having been
permitted about me; nor to speak together, before they were examined; which the
next day was performed: but my turn came not until three or four days after;
which was executed with great formality, and no less severity, upon seven
Artickles: which I looked upon, as very strange, and without any the least
possibility of fowndation; in so much, that my answers, were positive, and
some thing negligent; sufficiently knowing, that according to their own
constitution, in those times; they Could do no more to me, then to revoke what
had been granted, concerning my leavies, and to keep me in restraint for some
time. In a few days, I was again examined for the second time; not in the order
I had been at first, but very confusedly, hopeing to have intrapped me in some
contradiction; but my answers, having been in substance the same, as at first,
no advantage Could be fownd against me, by that course; and to have prouved any
material point, I knew was Impossible: which made me appear very indifferent,
notwithstanding, the uncivile, and rude threatenings, of one of my Commissaryes.

The only thing, which had any shadow of truth, or reason, was; that a few days
before my parting from London, a Gentileman with whom; I was very intimate,
being at that time Gouvernour of a considerable place who in his heart, I knew
was not passionately in love with the cause he was engaged in; having told me
in confidence, that another, underhand solicited his charge, and he feared
might deprive him of it. I was very free, and open, in my Counsels to him,
touching the best means to conserve it; adding in the conclusion, that as long
as he held that post, in all events which Could happen, he might keep himself
considerable: he answered me not a word touching that point: but after a short,
and deep Meditation; diverted his discource, to another subject: the next day
he acquainted Cromwell with the Council, I had given him; not without, both
change, and addition: whither this had been concerted before, and that he was
employed to counterfeit, jalousy, and discontent to in snare me; or that he
thowght to profit himself in that occasion, by manifesting his integrety
throwgh his discouvery, to preserve his charge I Could wever know, nor with my
self determine; this information, gave more credit to other Articles, then
otherwise, they would have met with; which Cromwell himselve, as lenght
reflected on, as artificial contrivements, of some who he knew (by many
intercepted letters) were not my friends, to obstruct my levies; and to ruin my
credit in England, at that time; to prevent my doing the harm, they
apprehended, which I never meant: at this very conjoncture, there happened a
misunderstanding at the Kings Court (then) at Bridges in Flanders; some persons
having retired thence to the Hage; where upon purposely to ruin me,
advertisement was given to Cromwell; that all beit, I was very deep in his
Maties. displeasure (which he knew as well as they) yet I was well with others,
who were no less his enemies; and that my pretext for liberty, to make levyes
for France, was but to couver the design I had, to begin a fowndation, for the
advancement of another interest; some circomstances, relating to my affairs
(where of he was not ignorant) afforded no small probability to this
information, where in he was the more confirmed, by the Gouvernours
advertisement, who I have mentioned, being likewise strengthened, by another,
of little less Importance: which was, that Imediately, before my parting from
paris, I had said something occasionally, to a person of quality of my own
nation, in confidence; that concerned England, and Spain; he contrary to his
promise, acquainted one of the French Ministers with it, who wrote it to
Monsieur Bourdaux then Ambassador in England, and by him was communicated to
Cromwell; these twoe circomstances gave much credit to the chief information.

Having layne under this restraint, three weeks, and nothing to have been
prouved, but the Gouvernours advertisement, the business of Bruges being
accommodated; the grownds whereof he at last knew; and was fully convinced that
I was not faulty in the great design. Which being urged by Sr. John Renolds,
with some others, throwgh their frequent solicitations for my liberty; and for
my permission to proceed in my levies; he acknowledged that nothing stuck with
him, saveing the council I had given to the Gouvernour I have already
mentioned: they aleaged, that all humane affairs were subject to mutation; and
that if any change should happen, my words Implied no more then a bare
possibility thereof; but not that I knew of any; or that I did wish, or would
further it. That the Council I gave, was to a friend, who demanded it; who
then was, and who allways had been in his interests; and that any man, upon
the like occasion, might have given the same Council.

His final answer was; that after having Imprisoned Colonel Bamfield, we can
neither trust him, nor he us: wherefor I cannot now consent to his levies, nor
to his continuance in any of the dominions of this common wealth: his liberty
he shall have, upon his engagement, to retire abroad within four days; and not
to return into any of the three Nations, without leave of the Gouverment:
which I did, was set at liberty; and to keep my word more exactly then I was
constrained to; having stayed one day at Dover; the next, I hired off an open
shaloup to calais; where I fell sick of a violent fever; which confined me for
some time to that place. Thus I fownd my self utterly ruined in his Maties.
favor, cast out of his service for ever: and by this contrivement, and
accident (for both were in the business) to gain my liberty, was constrained
to enter into a volontary exile: lost with the Gouverment which then was;
totally frustrated of the chief end (for which I had broken with all my former
friends; by procuring leave, (contrary to their Councels;) for my return into
England) which was to have gotten my self to the head of a Regiment of 2500.
Men of my own Nation, in the King of Frances service; whereby I Could have
subsisted with honor; and Gouverned my self in other things, according to
events.

During my sickness, which was violent, I fownd my self suffiently contented
to dye; for being ruined with all the world, small hopes remaining to recouver
my self; I Could better have submitted to a quiet death, then to have suffered
those bitter anxieties of a turbulent, and afflicted life; which I fore saw I
was likely to undergo, as has befallen me, from that very time, to this day;
but the periode, either of our lives, or trowbles comes not, as we often
desire: Having recouvered my health; I endeavored to calm my mind; which
was not without disordre; and to bear patiently those calamities, which I then
felt: and to fortify my self to suffer those, which I foresawe, I was likely
to undergo; by a decree greater, and more souveraigne then solomans; which
would require a support, sublimer, then what reason, or Philosophy, Could
afford; feeling in my self, Just cause for what I apprehended; when I deeply
reflected, on the violent passions, inordinate affections, and to great
infirmities of my life past. I knew, plethorique bodies, repleat with vicious
humors (if there were any hope of cure) had need of strong, and searching
physic. Which preparitories, have kept me from being entirely overwhelmed,
with what I have since undergone.

I returned no more into England, till the death of Cromwell; which came to
pass, near twoe years after: Sr. William Lockart, who was then Cromwels
Ambassador in France, and Gouvernour of Dunkirck, to whom I had been known,
before he fell into that interest; gave me a pass; with a letter of
recommandation to one of his friends, who was at that time in great credit.

The factions, and divisions, in the army: the vinversall discontents, in all
the three-Nations; which Could not longer bear, the confusions; of those times;
being destitute of all Principles of Gouverment; either in church or state: the
weakness of him who succeeded; and of those who followed him; that amidst the
greatest Anarchy in the world, figured to themselves, a chimerical Democratie;
which one of them Called a republique, as durable as the sun, and moon;
wherein he vanted himself to have more greatness, then he wished for; which in
eight months time afterward, terminated in a strict Imprisonment in the Tower
of London where he dyed; and his republique (as usually Anarchies do) ended in
Monarchy, many of the greatest, and wisest men of the three Nations taking
occasion of those desorders, which underhand some of them increased, all they
Could; opened the way to his Maties. re-establishment.

The next day after his arivall at whitehall, I was committed close Prisonner to
the Tour of London, into the custody of a person, who had been one of the late
Kings Judges, who was not only pardoned, but continued for some time, as
Lieutenant of that place this may deservedly be considered as a wonderful
dispensation, to see me (who had very often hazarded my life, for the service
of the crown, and especially for the preservation of that King) become a
prisoner under the care of one who had a principal hand in his death; because
he was cunning enowgh, to help to destroy his fellows, but a few days before
the late Kings restoration, and when he plainly perceaved, there was no humane
possibility to hinder it. I remained under a severe restraint about aleaven
months; when by order, I was browght by Sr. John Robinson (then Commanding the
Tower, the former having been remouved) to whitehall to be examined; which I
was upon diverse Artickles; by the Earl of Clarendon, at that time Lord
Chancellor, and by the twoe Secretaries of State, Sr. Edward Nicolas, and Sr.
William Maurits. What was true, I acknowledged; pleading an inevitable
necessity for what I had done; aleadging that those things, Could not amount to
the crime, mentioned in the warrant for my committment; which was upon
suspicion of misprision of treason; my Lord Chancellor told me I was browght
thither, only to answer cattegorically, to what was demanded of me. That
pleading of my cause, was for another place, if it should be thowght fit to
bring me thither: notwithstanding that rebuke, upon my further examination; as
the matter required, and Could permit, I defended my self, as reasnably as I
Could; in so much, that his Lordship told me, Colonel Bamfield, I can
perceave, that you have not been altogether Idle in the Tower; seeing you are
arrived at so much knowledge in the law, at least as you belive; but I must
tell you, that your wisest, and surest refuge will be, to have your recourse to
the Kings clemency, and not to your Justification. I answered him, I had great
need of his Maties. Grace; that I threw my self at his feet, and Implored it
with all humility; but was fully persuaded that his LoPP. desired not, that I
should acknowledge my self, more guilty then I was: he replied no God forbid;
but it behouves you to be very Careful, that some things you deny, come not to
be prouved, which the King has been informed of, and belives: I added no more,
but if they Could be prouved, I desired no Grace.

This examination lasted longer there; then is necessary, it should do here.
In the conclusion, I was commanded to withdraw into an ante chamber, where
some of the nobility, and diverse Gentilemen were, standing by the fire; and I
went alone to a window over against them; about half an hour after; my Lord
chancellor, and the Secretaries Came out; and being ready to pass by me; his
LoPP. drew a little toward me, and I with a profownde reverence, nearer to
him: he said aloude in the hearing of all present: Colonel Bamfield, I am your
friend: Mr. Secretaries, and I, are sencible of your sufferings, and will do
all we can to obtain you the Kings Grace, and to procure your liberty. And
turning to Sr. John Robinson, said, Mr. Lieutenant you may let him have the
full liberty of the Tower; and all his friends who desire it, the freedom to
visit him as we returned back in the barge, to the tower; amongst other
discource (for then he was become very civil, who before had treated me
exceeding rudely) St. John Robinson told me, that he had conceaved my business
to have been much otherwise then he fownd it: that my Lord Chancellor, had
been as moderate in his reflections on my answers, after I was gone out, as he
had been in the examination; and at the end of the debate, spoke these
following words. The sum of all is, that Colonel Bamfield has served the
Crown from his youth; and when we left him, he left us.

About three months after; his Matie. sent an order for my liberty. I continued
some time in London, where I lived with the greatest circomspection Imaginable,
not to give cause of jalousy, or offense to any. Till at length Sr. Allen Apsly
(treasurer to his Royale Highness) who did me the honor some times to see me,
with a civil and friendly introduction, to very ill niews; told me in plain
terms, that the court was again abondantly unsatisfyed with me; and that
Particularly, his Royale Highness, the Duke of York, had commanded him to tell
me, that I owght to be careful of my comportment, that if I fell into any
trowble, he would have nothing to do with me; adding these words, the Duke is
so displeased with you; that I belive it easier for you to recouver the Kings
favor then his.

I with some Importunity urged him to tell me, if he knew any thing of the
cause; to which he gave no other answer, then that the best cource he Could
advise me to, was, for some time to retire my self out of England; till the
public affairs were so re-settled, that there might remain no grounds of
jalousy concerning me. I replied, I shall take this night to think of it, and
would the next day give him an account of my resolution; which I did the
morning following before he was out of his bed.

I told him, that I had duly weighed his council, and was determined to follow
it; that thowgh the storm I had stood out, seemed to have been abated, yet I
Could perceave the sea was still unquiet, the wind contrary, and my ankers not
the surest; in so much that I should seek another port; his answer was, you
do very wisely; for in case the least new disorder should arise; I am so
much your friend, as to tell you freely, that I persuade my self, you would be
confined to a perpetuaile Imprisonment. I replied I had rather dye; he told me
brusquly, that; you may easily do, if you have a mind to it.

I besowght him to acquaint his Matie. that if he pleased to give me leave; I
would for some time retire out of his Dominions, till the affairs of state
were so settled to his contentment, that my return might give no ombrage.

The apprehension of a continuel Imprisonment, had so alarmed me; that I was
willing to be gone as soon as I could; which made me hasten to him again,
twoe days after: he told me he had fownd occasion to represent to the King my
humble resolution of retirement; which his Matie. approuved.

He added likewise, that he had acquainted my Lord Chancellor therewith; who
he said commended my discretion; councelled me to carry my self abroad,
circomspectly, and Dutifully, not having to do with factious, or scismaticall
people; by which means he hoped to see me (in some time) recalled from my
volontary banishment. These discources of his, together with some
advertisements I had, from a person of great Importance, at that time of his
Maties. council, who either out of compassion, or friendship; by one of his
near relations, had desired to meet me in a third place; caused me to hasten my
departure with so much precipitation, as to leave my torn affairs, in a very
desorderly condition: for he gave me some light, into the reasons of my niew
desgrace; as my often frequenting of some places, thowgh most publicly; which
was interpreted to my disadvantage, as all things in nature, at that time, by
some would have been: secondly that I had spoken words, to a certain person,
with greater confidence, then discretion; which were looked upon, as marquis of
remaining discontent, and of factious inclinations; he told me the expressions,
but assured me, that he knew not who the reporter was: where upon I named the
person; avowing that I had said those words, or to the same effect. Acquainting
him with the occasion; which was that this Gentileman, was not at that time in
very much greater grace, in the court, then I; with whom some times I met
occasionally; and at other oportunities he did me the honor to visit me; one
day I retained him with me at dinner; at the table, we discourced of many
indifferent things, as I took them to be; for as long as he was there, one of
my servants was present, and (till near the end of dinner) his footeman; who
being gone out of the chamber, he said some words to me absolutely in rallerie,
which was custumary amongst the great wits, of which number, he really was,
both by nature, and acquisition, as any I knew of the Nation; the substance
was, a paralelle he made, betwixt me, and one dead some time before, who had
not been of the Kings most dutyfull subjects; referring to the future course of
things, as he said they might fall out: I (I suspecting nothing, for we had
lived during the space of twelve, or thirtien years, with great kindeness and
familiarity) answered him, in the same dialect in pure, and manifest rallerie;
nor could the thing it self, about which he had spoken, bear any other sense,
if weighed without passion; and my answer, much less: if the antecedent, as
well as the consequent had been reported; but he in another place, and to other
persons, repeated only (and that grammatically) my words, as separate from his
own, which he never mentioned; in so much that where twoe sentences are
relatives, if the later be reported, without the former, to which it related;
the sense may be wrested oftentimes, to what one will. Having recited exactly
the whole Matter, with all the circomstances, to this noble person; he shook
his head, and said, these are dangerous times, and such are most dangerous
men; I besowght him that he would acquaint my Lord Chancellor with this
business, and all its circomstances. He replied his Lordship knows nothing of
my speaking with you, much less of what I say to you; and I desire he never
may, nor any else. I have wished you well, as long as I have known you; and
have been very sorry, for your misfortunes; and out of pure pity, have
adventured to speak with you; to hinder your falling into greater; which may
prove as lasting as your life; and therefore I hope you will keep this meeting,
and what I have said to you secret; otherwise, you will deal unwisely as to you
self, and unthanckfully as to me. Some persons of the greatest Calibre, are
so prepossested against you; that your clearing your self in this point, will
in no kind help you; for the words themselves, can bear no action in law, nor
be of any other consequence, then to confirm some in the belief long rooted in
them; that you are discontented, and that your heart swells with mutinous, and
revengfull thowghts; which is so ingrafted, that if an Angel should descend
from Heaven to declare the contrary, I may question, whither it would avayle
you. Retire your self as soon as you can, be very circomspect in your whole
comportment, and especially in your discources; wherein your best friends,
condemn you, as often to free:

Speaking to him about his Royale Highness the Duke of York, and my Lord
Chancellor; he told me, the Duke is not (as I hear) inclined to you as he has
been; and I easily belive, that Sr. Allen Apsley said the truth to you (for I
had told him what it was) that his Master will not meddle in your concernments.

My Lord Chancellor had kindeness for you; wrowght out your liberty; was
opinion when you first came out of the Tower, that you might have been employed
at sea; for the King would not endure to hear of your coming to Court; but now
those thowghts of his Lordship are off; and thowgh I can perceave, that he
wishes not your utter ruin; yet if you should fall into any new trowble; you
will find no favor from him.

I have here inserted the substance of this noble persons discource, and (as
far as I can possibly recollect) his words. Upon these advices, twoe, or three
days after, I embarked my self in a ship of Zealand, and landed at
Midelburgh, where (meeting with very great civility, and kindeness, from all
persons in general) I remained near four years; when by the councels, and very
effectual recommendations of some of my friends I went to the Hague, where by
their credit, and by the power of some persons in Holland, whom they had
engaged to favor me; I had the honor to be received into the service of the
State. Shortly after, Colonel Dolman and I were summoned by proclamation
(without the specification of any crime, as the cause) to render our selves in
England by a day, which neither of us doing, we were both proscribed; and
which (I belive) was never done before, by act of Parliament, without any
Criminal charge aleadged against either; I shall not wear out time, with
fruitless complaints, nor with any other kind of reflections, which can signify
nothing. I only solemnly protest, that after my proscription, which was (I
think) in the very beginning of the year 1666, till the month of April in the
year 1674, I never wrote letter, nor sent message to any creature, in any of
his Majesty's Dominions; nor did receive any. Having not had in all that time
(being about eight years) the least correspondence directly, or indirectly,
either to good, or bad ends.

In the month of April 1674, when the peace was concluded, by the last treaty
of Breda; I wrote three, or four letters, to twoe persons of great quality, in
the most eminent employments about his Majesty, and in no less credit. Who
had been bred up from their youth in the service of the crown; one (with whom
I had formerly long and great correspondence) returned me no other answer, then
verbally, to him who delivered him my letter; that he was very sorry for the
unhappiness of my condition, but that the conjoncture Could not permit any man,
to speak in favor of that unfortunate Gentileman. The other (I know) did move
his Matie. in my behalf for my return into England several times; but Could
obtain no Grace.

Thus finding my self, most entirely ruined, and hopeless of ever recouvering,
either in England, or else where; I betook my self to a resolution, as
contrary to my temper, humor, and custom, as one opposite, can well be to
another; where unto I could never constrain my inclination, throwgh the whole
course of my life, until that time: which was to retire my self not only from
all kind of affairs, of what nature soeever; but even from the usual
contentment, of humane conversation; as far forth as the possibility of
subsisting Could admit; and to lead an Hermitical kind of life; to which end,
having throwgh the friendship of a worthy person, to whom I was known;
procured in the country, a little house in a garden; (but as great as my
design.) Thither I retired my self; and so continued during the space of
five years; having had in all that time, very little other society, then my
books, and meditations. notwithstanding this great circomspection; and
harmless way of living; I Could not be entirely free from some practices, which
had been (for a long time) one of the chief causes, of my great calamity; in
so much that I then did (and do now) think; that if the very trees Could
have had the discoursive faculty; they would have been employed to my
disadvantage; which made me as much as was decently possible, to avoid the
speaking with all man kind: but in this egiptiene darkness (by intervalls) God
extraordinaryly afforded me such glimerings of light, that I Could discouver,
the first mouvers, reasons, ends, and instruments, of all these practices; as
likewise that passion in the first; and interest in the last, produced these
effects; from which (I plainly saw) no manner of life, that I Could consine my
self unto, was of sufficient force to free me.

These considerations which were solid, and real; exempt from all
Hypocondriacall vapors, or chimeraes; together with the very sencible decay of
my health, throwgh this way of living; as likewise, that melancholy sencibility
of my to heavy distress, not having been Stoicien enough, to have lost my
feeling; together with other reasons that I shall not mention; I concluded my
return to Leuwarden (at least for the winter) more conducible to my health, to
my security, and more convenient in other considerations then the country,
about the end of September 1679, I posted my self there; where I lived as
free, from all conversation, as I had done at Bergum. In the year 1680, coming
to the knowledge of some things which concerned me in the highest degree; that I
Could be touched with; and perceaving by the prints (which were frequent, and
filled therewith) that the desordres in England, were risen to that Height;
that the storm seemed to blow, from all points of the compass; and not only
conjecturing that I should be suspected, but knowing that I was so (thowgh
innocent, as to all those transactions, as the child who had never seen the
light) I begun to think with my self, what course was fittest for me to
steer; and after much deliberation, I concluded it absolutely best, to write
into England; which accordingly I did, to a person who I thowght Could not be
exposed to any suspicion; and by their means, (if they would have adventured
it) to have letters delivered to some of the Court, who had formerly been my
friends; this person answered my letter, and undertook what I desired. Where
upon calling the saying to mind, that he that wallkes circomspectly, walks
surely (allbeit I saw no necessity to have done it, as things were betwixt
England and this State) I demanded leave, from those, who had the power to
accord it me; for my writing to such of my friends, as would have endeavored to
get my proscription taken off, free and entire liberty, was granted me, very
Generously; without those limitations, which I offered to Impose upon my self.

I wrote three letters, to persons of Importance at the court; one took time
to resolve whither he would receive his, or not; but after three or four days
consideration excused it: the other twoe received my letters, promised answers;
but as I have since known, not finding means to obtain any thing in my
favor, wrote not to me. However, at length, one who had credit, was Induced
to receive letters from me, and to write to me;

My end, and endeavor was; first to make my innocence appear demonstrably,
touching all correspondence, or colusion with any of his Maties. subjects;
either in, or out of his Dominions; nor to have had so much as knowledge, of
any contrivements or designs, tending in any kind, or degree, to the
prejudice of his person, or disturbance of his Gouverment. And nevertheless,
that I knew, negatives were most difficult to be prouved; yet by inductions,
and necessary consequencies, much may be clearly demonstrated. Besides, I was
certain, that it Could not be in the power of mankind, to prouve any such
matter against me; having ever since my residing in Freezland, been so
exactly circumspect, not to give any just occasion of jalousie; that I have
entirely avoided the speaking with any, who I knew, or did but Imagine, to
have been suspected, by his Matie. as disaffected to his person, or Gouverment:
and if any such, have desired any communication with me, I have civily excused
it; as that which Could not have been benificiall to them, and might have
proved domageable to my self. Nor have I ever done it, to this moment; either
by interview, speech, writing, or Message; sent, or received.

Nor have I had any other knowledge, of those plots, and practices, during
these last ten years (which have filled all Christendom with noise) saveing
what I have seen in print; and not before it was public.

These truths having been so made appear, as that they neither had been, nor
Could be contradicted, by any lawful evidence, or reasnable appearance, I
flattered my self (as indeed I have done) into the hopes of getting my
proscription taken off; and might have met with no opposition from England
(which has allways befallen me) to my obtaining employment abroad, in case of a
foraigne war, which till about eigh^een months since, I concluded unavoydable;
having been positively resolved, to throw my self, into the first
engagement, where I best Could, with the satisfaction of my Conscience, thereby
to have honorably ended (if God had thowght it fit) an unhappy, and a
burdensome life, more to my contentment; then the continuation thereof for
many years has been.

Perceaving now no means remaining, in this dead calm, which is Joyfully
believed of 20 years continuance, for the lawful persuance of my design;
being likewise deprived of all hopes in England; I resolve, during the short
rest of my life with as much tranquillity, as God shall please to voutsafe me,
to submit to his holy will, in whose book, the nombers of our days are
registered, waiting on him till my change comes, who sways all men, and
actions, to those ends for which he has ordained them: in this course, to meet
with the less interuption; I yet determine neither to discompose my self, nor
give any ombrage to others, by meddling with wordly affairs, further then the
necessity of my subsistence may constrain me to it: which I conceave cannot
happen, if I am dealt justly with, by those for whom I have visibly suffered,
to great extremities, for Diverse years.

This being my sincere intention; I shall sum up the principal points, which
have (in some kind) constrained me to become public, to the following heads,
and so conclude.

First I here declare, and protest, (which I do with a clear, and safe
conscience) that since my leaving of England, with his Maties. permission; I
have had no correspondence, by writing, receaving of letters, or Messages,
into, or out of England, or of any other part of his Dominions, nor have had
any consultations, or contrivements with any of his subjects abroad, tending to
the raising, or fomenting any discontents, uproors, seditions, or treasons,
against his person, or Gouverment.

Secondly that from the year 1665, after the first war was declared by England
against this State; I neither wrote, nor received any letter or Message, into,
or out of England, or any other of the Kings Dominions, until the year 1674.
after the last peace concluded at Breda, and then only (as I have already
said) unto twoe persons of as great honor, and fidelity to the King, as I have
ever known, and of the nearest places, and trust about him: at which time, I
wrote but twoe, or three letters, with Communication of some persons, in the
greatest consideration in the Gouverment of this state. Nothing at that time,
having been obtaynedned for me: I wrote not more, till the end of 1679, or the
beginning of 1680; and then writh free leave of those in chief authority where
I was; and only for the ends, I have already mentioned.

Thirdly and lastly, knowing positively, and particularly, that by some very
ill persons, I have been accused, to have spoken, undecently, and undutifully,
concerning the late King, of happy Memory, as likewise of some other Princes
abroad of the Royale blood; which has been believed, and contributed as much to
my late Calamities, as those other matters of a higher nature, and may yet
reduce me to greater extremities, then I think decent for me to mention.
Wherefor I do declare, that I have never at any time, nor on any occasion,
mentioned his late Matie. neither any other Prince of the blood, capable of a
legal succession (at any time, or event which can happen) to the crown, but
with that due respect and modesty, which became a subject to speak of his
Souveraigne; or a sober man, of such who are in a legal possibility to become
so.

Few men can be ignorant (and to many not insencible) of the prodigious
liberty, which has of late years been taken, of false informations in secret,
(which being belived, without due examination; no man can be safe) as likewise,
of Improbable, untrue, and contradictory evidences in public, and of most
Impudent perjury, which renders it a bold hazard, for any man to lay himself
open to, yet such is my innocence (as to all these matters) and so great, and
full the satisfaction of my conscience, that I shall venture to declare; that
if any man upon the earth; either of his Maties. subjects, or strangers, will
say, and can suffiently, and authentically prove, the contrary to any one of
these assertions; I shall freely with my soul forgive him, if he does it, and
be contented to suffer death.

As I began, so I shall end: that false accusations, with secret and
detestable practices, to destroy me, or at least, to continue me under the
Calamity which has long layne heavy upon me (much worse to me, then death) have
constrained me to this course, as unfit for me, as I am for it; referring my
self to the equitable sensure of unpreoccupied persons; the judgment of my
cause to God, and my soul in all events, to his incomprehensible mercy.

FINIS.

