Jesu-VVorship CONFUTED, OR, CERTAIN ARGUMENTS Against bowing at the Name
JESUS. Proving it to be Idolatrous and Superstitious, and so utterly unlawful.
WITH Objections to the contrary fully Answered. By H. B.

ISAIAH 2. 9. The mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself,
therefore pardon them not. LONDON: Printed for H. C. in Popes-head-Alley, in
the Year 1660.

ARGUMENTS AGAINST JESU-WORSHIP, OR, Bowing at the Name JESUS.
Argument 1.
ALL Idolatry is utterly to be abhorred. Propositi: Assumption. Conclusion.


But, Adoration or Bowing at the name JESUS is Idolatry.

Therefore such adoration is altogether to be abhorred.

First, That all idolatry is to be abhorred the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 10. 14.
And all men confess it.

Secondly, That adotation at the name, or naming the name JESUS is idolatry, is
thus proved: That name that is adored before, or above the name JEHOVAH, is
made an Idol, and so the adoration of it is idolatry; But, adoration at the
name JESUS, is to adote that name above the name JEHOVAH. Therefore the name
JESUS, so adored, is an idol, and it is adoration is idolatry.

The reason of this act is taken from the practice of the IESU-Worshippers, who
never use any adoration or sign of reverence when JEHOVAH is named, but only
when JESUS is named they give both outward and inward adoration to the name
JESUS, but not to the name JEHOVAH: So that they adore the name JeSUS above the
name JEHOVAH.

If they say their adoration of the name JESUS is not terminated, not bounded
in the word or syllables JESUS, but passet^ to the person of JESUS.

I answer, It is but a frivolous, absurd and rediculous shift which Dr. Fulk on
Phil. 2. 10. against the Rhemists, confuteth in the Jesuits, saying; That this
their evasion is too short a Cloak to cover their Idolatry. As also in the case
of Image Worship, the Papists use the very same shift; namely, that their
worship rests not in the Image, but passes through it to the thing represented
by it. Agustinie in Ps. 113. Sermon. 2. Origin contra celsum: lib: 7. Lactan:
fixtus. Seneca li. 1. Biblioth. 247. and others.
And the ancient idolatrous Gentiles could plead the same for their worshipping
of Images, which the ancient Fathers showed the vanity of. And again, It is as
clear that this IESU-Worship is terminated in the very name JESUS, by the
common and singular Worshippers of it, as Image Worship is by ordinary Papists
(at least) terminated in the very Image, as Augustine ibidem. Quis (says he)
adorat, velorat, Who adoreth or prays, looking upon an Image, and is not so
affected that he thinks he is not heard of it which he prays to; ducit enim
says he, etc. for the similitude of a form, and the apt frame of the members
in a Picture or Image, does draw and carry along with it the weak hearts of
mortal men by a kind of base affection; and so this use of bowing at the name
JESUS intimates unto the peoples minds an opinion of some excellency in this
name above JEHOVAH.

And if they do by this name JESUS worship the person JESUS, yet this teaches
the people a most gross and impious error, in preferring JESUS before God the
Father. And Chrysostom reciting those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 2. To us
there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, think not (says
he) that one of these names is greater then another in their signification, or
more excellent; and to prefer one before another, argues a contentious
disposition, to introduce into the orthodox doctrine, men's own inventions; yea,
its plain; that they prefer the name JESUS before the person of Christ, seeing
when JESUS is named they worship with Cap and Knee, but none at all when Christ
is named; so as they show hereby, that this their wor^hip appropriated unto,
and terminated in the very name and syllables of JESUS, as Bishop Andrews
blusheth not to affirm, in his Court Sermon on Phil: 2. 10.

Argument 2.
A Second Argument proving JESU-worship, or bowing and capping at the name
JESUS when it is mentioned or sounded in the ear, to be idolatry, is, If the
adoration of the name JESUS when it is painted on a Wall be idolatry, then the
adoration of the name when it is heard or pronounced with the mouth, is also
idolatry, but the first is true, therefore also the second, namely that the
worshipping of the name JESUS when it is heard pronounced with the mouth is
idolatry.

That the first is true, to wit, that the worshipping of the name JESUS painted
on a Wall is idolatry, no good and sound Protestant will deny, for, there is
this same reason thereof, as of all other Image Worship, names being a kind of
the things they represent or intend.

That the second is as true as the first, I prove thus, Because it skils not by
which of the senses idolatry is committed, for it may be indifferently and
alike committed by all the senses. For example, the Scripture shows idolatry to
be committed, sometimes by the sense of tasting, as eating and drinking, 1 Cor.
10. 17. Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written, the
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Sometimes by the sense
of touching, as kissing of Baals mouth, 1 Kings 19. 18. Sometimes by the sense
of smelling, as burning of Incense to Idols was idolatry committed, Jer. 11.
12. And as in Julians time offering of incense, and sweet perfumes. Frequently
also by the sense of seeing is idolatry committed. And lastly idolatry is made,
(and now adays no less frequently committed by pressing this JESU-worship) by
the sense of hearing, as when the Papists at the very sound of the Bell that
goes tinkling before their Breaden-god, or Host carried to the sick, or in
procession wheresoever they be, or whatsoever they are doing; though they see
nothing, yet they must slap down on their Marrow-bones. Thus by the sense of
Hearing their God in the Host being presented or conveyed to their minds, they
commit idolatry as if it were presented to their eye: And therefore the
provincial Synod of Leno in France, resolved (in the behalf of their
Image Worship) that there was the same reason of adoration, when the Image of
Christ is represented to the eye, as when the name JESUS is sounded in the ear,
for that which the one insinuates into the mind by the ear, the other
insinuates the same by the eye. If therefore it be idolatry to worship the name
JESUS written on a Wall, then it is no less idolatry to give adoration when it
is uttered with the mouth.

Argument 3.
THat which is not the name above every name, is not to be adored or reverenced
above of before other names. But the name JESUS is not the name above every
name; therefore it is not to be reverenced or adored before, or above all other
names.

The Major is clear, for that which is honored above others has some
excellency above others; either really in it self, or else in the opinion of
honor. And that the name JESUS is the name above other names, what Divine is
so doltish as to imagine it, so bold as to avow it? Even the JESU-worshippers
themselves have been much beaten off from their false gloss of a late
devising, and by one of their greatest Patrones hereof, falsely fathered upon
all the Fathers, whereas not one of them did ever so interpret that place,
Phil. 2. 10. For as they dare not affirm it, so its clear that the Text is
clean otherwise interpreted by two other places; as Isa. 45. 23. and Romans 14.
10. As they are conferred in the Margents of our Bibles, which (at least) are
far more ancient and authentic, then any authority which can produce the
contrary, whatsoever, as I suppose and believe.

Argument 4.
A Fourth Argument may be framed thus; All will worship, devised, prescribed
and imposed by the will, commandments and doctrines of men, whatsoever
pretense and specious show it has of wisdom or piety, is condemned by the
Apostle, and so is damnable for Christians to conform and yield unto it. But
such is the adoration or worshipping of the name JESUS: I say it is a mere will
worship of man's devising, prescribing, and imposing. For proof, Pope Gregory a
superstitious Pope (as all of them write) and very zealous in setting up new
guids of worship, was the first that under a Canon for this Jesu-worship to be
used, especially in the Mass, and in the reading of the Gospel. And another
Pope John 21. granted indulgence and pardon of sins to all such worshippers of
the name JESUS; such a high esteem have men of these things which themselves
have devised, as part of Gods worship, but indeed will worship, (as the Crow
thinks her own birds fairest) that they therefore prefer them before Gods
Ordinances and Commandments, and will favor and encourage such as conform to
them and more severely punish those that out of tenderness and truth of
conscience refuse so to do. Yea, the Papists have a Holy Day dedicated to the
name of Jesu, and Jesu-worshippers have even thrust it into our Kalenders, but
in black letters, mourning that it is not in scarlet, as their hope is it will
shortly be, if it can find worshippers enough! And our Jesu-worshippers
confess that they are bound in conscience to bow at the name JESUS, because
the By the Church is meant the Bishops.
Church commands it, that is, because men do command it; Ergo, by their own
confession being devised by man, and having no ground in Scripture, it is a
will worship, and so damnable, and surely they condemned in their own
consciences.

But where I pray does the Church command this Jesu-worshipping? in the Canons
say they, I deny it, for the Canon says, when the Lord Jesus is mentioned due
reverence shall be given; now the Lord Jesus is not the name Jesus, nor the
name Jesus, the Lord Jesus, and to confound the name Jesus with the Lord Jesus
deserves a hissing, but they are at a Non-plus-ultra; but if they will force
the letter of the Canon to serve their corrupt sense, they are together to be
exploded, seeing they fight against a canonical Scripture, the only Canon and
right rule of the worship of God.

Objections answered.
Object. 1. Some say, this adoration is a thing indifferent, therefore it may
be used or not used.

Answer. If it be a thing indifferent, why is it then so rigidly imposed, as a
thing of absolute necessity to be observed? This destroys the nature of a
thing indifferent, which the Scripture condemns, this being a will worship of
humane invention.

Object: 2. But it is a pious Ceremony and conducing much to the honor of God.

Answer. Seem it never so pious and specious to man's carnal fancy, yet being
idolatrous (as has been proved) it is but pious idolatry, or idolatrous piety;
and God abhors that piety and pretended honor as vain, which is taught by
the precepts of men, Matthew: 15. 9.

Object: 3. But bowing at the name of Jesus is a slighter, a lesser matter then
that a man should suffer himself to be deprived of the use of his Ministry for
refusal of it.

Answer. A man's Ministry is precious indeed, and the calling high and
honorable, and to be preferred before all the world; but it is not so precious
as to be valued above a good conscience and the Kingdom of Heaven, but to do
the least evil wilfully, for the greatest good, makes damnation just: Nor is
the least idolatry or superstitious act to be counted light, for having but an
appearance of idolatry, and being of no good report, it ought to be avoided,
for the least kind or degree of idolatry being once committed and given way
unto, it is an inducement to that which is most gross, and does naturally
enfeeble a man's spirit, making it less able to resist and repulse greater
abominations; and commonly God gives over such to grosser sins of impietyes,
who make not conscience of the least, and such as seem but light. It is the
saying of a Divine, Qui modicas spernit, paulatim decidit, He that makes light
account of small sins falls by little and little, and sins that seem less are
so much the more perilous because they are the more easily committed, and
securely retained, and less carefully repented. As for this Jesu-worship, why
should any Minister think it a small matter, when the Imposers themselves set
such a penalty upon it, as the loss of a man's Ministry for not conforming to
it?

Object: 4. But it is imposed only for unity and peace sake.

Answer. It is no good peace that breaks the peace of a good conscience, and a
man's peace with God: That is no good unity, which devides a man from the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Object: 5. But if one Ceremony be yielded to, we shall then quickly enjoy our
Ministry, and the Gospel without any more impositions.

Answer. And how know you that? but suppose it were so, were not your peace
bought at too dear a rate? But, why should any deceive himself of so vain a
hope, when he sees the contrary before his eyes? who sees not that those are
but the beginnings, and inducements to greater matters, and he that is caught
in the snare is easily brought to yield to more hard conditions?

Object: 6. But to yield to this world, not be offensive to the people, who
generally can digest it well enough, and therefore less danger in it.

Answer. Though it would not offend the ignorant sort, which are the greatest
number, yet it would scandalize and wound the weak brother, grieving his soul
to see thee fall, and giving examples to others to follow thee in a way that is
not warrantable, but sinful, For whatsoever is not of faith (as this is not)
is sin.

FINIS.

