The Celestial Race.

A DISCOURSE Persuading to the PRACTICE OF Celerity, Constancy, and Sincerity
IN THE WAYS of GOD.

Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Knock, Daughter of Mr. Thomas Knock,
of Edgerton in Kent, who died January 2. Anno Dom. 1692. in the Eleventh year
of her Age.

By William Bush Minister of the Gospel.

Non dormentibus provenit regnum coelorum nec otio and desidiae torpentibus
beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. Prosp. de vi. contempl. LONDON: Printed for
John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry. MDC^XCII.

TO THE Christian Readers, Especially the AUDITORS OF THIS SERMON.
HAving now compli'd with the Desires of those that were the Hearers of this
Discourse, to make it Public, I hope 'twill meet with that Acceptance as
Discourses of this Nature should among Christians. That the Subject might have
been managed after a better manner, is not at all doubted of, but acknowledged;
and I hope the Reader will be more favorable than to Censure me as Proud or
Conceited of my own Labors, or Ambitious of appearing in Print; assuring you,
I had not done it now, had it been possible for me fairly to have avoided it.
And although the manner after which the Subject is managed, be mean and
despisable, yet the Matter it self may be useful (by the Blessing of the
Almighty) to excite Slothful Christians to a greater diligence in their Duty;
to reduce the wandering to the right way; to keep such as are going on in the
ways of God, from Apostatizing; and to discover and beat down that great sin,
Hypocrisy, that is ('it is to be feared) predominant in a great many seeming
serious Christians, and in some as much unknown to themselves as to others. If
any object against it, because of its plainness, I hope this Answer will
satisfy them; It was not designed to please Persons Fancies, but to profit
their Souls; and I had rather be understood, than admired. I now hope,
Christians, you will propose the same end to your selves in Reading, as I do in
Writing, which is, That your Souls might receive benefit and comfort hereby. I
shall say no more, but beseech the God of all Grace to help and enable you so
to run the Race that is set before you, that you may at last obtain a Crown of
Glory. And this I shall do particularly for you that were the Hearers of this
Sermon, and that usually attend upon my Ministry. I conclude my self,

Your Souls Friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ Jesus, W. BUSH.

THE CELESTIAL RACE.
1 COR. ix. 24. latter part. So run, that ye may obtain.


WHEN we seriously reflect upon the certainty of our Die ng, and the
uncertainty of the time when; when we consider too, that the longest time of
living is but short, so short, that if it were well improved in working out our
Salvation, we should find very few spare minutes; or that we had too much, we
should seldom be heard to complain. I say, when we seriously consider of these
things, surely we shall be moved to a greater diligence in preparing for
Eternity, in making ready our Accounts, in running swiftly the Race that is set
before us, lest Death overtake us as we are loytering, and stop us before our
Course be finished, and then we are eternally undone. I therefore pray and
beseech you, in the Name of my Master Christ, not only to give serious
Attention to this seasonable Exhortation that the Apostle gives you in my Text,
but also to make it your practice so to run, as to obtain.

In the former part of the verse, the Apostle borrows a Similitude from those
that run a Terrestial Race for a Temporary Reward; that as in that Race, tho
many run, yet it is only he that out-runs the rest that persevereth to the end,
that obtains the Prize; even so in the Race of Godliness, none shall be
crowned, but those that hold out to the end of their lives. Yet,
notwithstanding, there is this difference in this Similitude, In the Race
Terrestial, he only is rewarded that comes first to the Mark; but in the Race
Celestial, not only one, but all that run lawfully, shall obtain.

The Doctrine that I shall (by the assistance of the Almighty) discourse of
from the words, is this,

That the greatest Speediness and Celerity in the ways of God, must be
constantly practiced by those that would obtain everlasting Life.

The Method that I shall follow in speaking to this Doctrine, will be this,

1. I shall give you Reasons for the proof of it.

2. Show you how you may fit and prepare your selves to run speedily and
swiftly in this heavenly Race.

3. Speak of the Reward impli'd in my Text, which will be certainly given to
those that run lawfully. And,

4. And lastly, Apply it.

That those that run in this heavenly Race, must run swiftly and speedily, I
shall prove by these three Reasons.

The first may be drawn from the celerity, brevity, and uncertainty of our
Lives, which here in my Text, is compared to a Race for swiftness in passing
away; for so run that ye may obtain, is as if the Apostle had said, So live
under the Gospel of Christ Jesus, that ye may obtain Life everlasting. The Life
of Man is always (in Scripture) compared to such things as denote the celerity,
the brevity, and the uncertainty of it; sometimes it is compared to a shadow, as
Psalm 109.23. sometimes to a vapor, as James 4.14. that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away. Job Job 9.20.
considering the swift passage of man's Life, compares it to the swift motion
of the Eagle when hasting to her prey; or the swift Ships on the Waters; that
which is of least duration, and of most speedy passage, may be a fit Comparison
of the Life of Man; the youngest, and the strongest in a very short space must
be removed hence. Active Youth is quickly metamorphosed into crooked Age; so
frail and uncertain are our lives, that for ought we know, one week, or day, or
hour, yea, perhaps one moment more, may put a period to them. We have daily
Examples of the uncertainty of the time of our departure hence; we see one cut
down in his early Spring, and in his blooming greener Youth, and his Sun is
covered with Darkness, almost as soon as it begins to rise, whilst another
weathers out the Storms, and grows to a mature and full Age. One does but peep
as it were into the World, takes a short view of it, and is commanded out
again; and is at his Journeys end in the morning of his Life; and another is
allowed to travel till the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, according
to their most regular Advances, and till the threescore and ten, that is the
usual date of long Life, is expired. One is quickly summoned to the great
Tribunal and judged, whilst another has a longer space wherein to prepare for
his Trial, Vid. Mr: Roger's Practical Discourse of Sickness and Recovery, page
13.
and his final Doom. You may now, for ought you know, be hearing of your last
Sermon, and offer up now your last Prayer, and have no other opportunity than
this that you now enjoy, to prepare and make ready for Eternity, but be
immediately summoned to appear at the Tribunal of God, to render an Account to
him of all your public and secret Actions, for all that you have ever thought,
ever spoke, or done; for all the Talents, the Time, the Mercies, the Health,
the Strength, the Opportunities, and the Seasons, and Days of Grace that you
ever had; for all the Evil that you might have avoided; for all the Good that
you might have done, and did not, and all this before that Judge, who has
beheld your ways from your Birth to the Grave; Vid. Mr. Roger's Practical
Discourse of Sickness and Recovery, page 49.
before that Judge who cannot be deceived, and who will not be imposed upon.
And is there not then a necessity of being speedy in your Course? Do you
apprehend so much as one minute to loyter in, seeing you know not whether you
may live so small a space of time longer? And when this Life is ended, our work
is done, for after this Life there will be no place for Pardon, nor space for
Repentance; There is no work, Eccl. 9.10.
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither we are all going.
Therefore must we be speedy in the ways of God, because the time of our lives
(which is all the time we have) is so short, so uncertain, and hasting away so
fast from us.

The second Reason may be drawn from the great Work that we have to do in this
little time. How many Corruptions have we to subdue, and Lusts to mortify, and
Temptations to resist? What loads of Sin yet lie upon many of us unpardoned,
because unrepented of? What subtle, politic, powerful Enemies have we to
engage with, such as the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? The World is daily
enticeing of us with its Pleasures, Profits, or Honors, persuading us to place
our Affections upon these fading Vanities, and to accept of its favors, which,
alas, are but as the Salutes of an Enemy; and yet how hard is it for the best
of God's People to keep themselves from the Pollutions of it! That it is so,
our own daily Experience teaches us; and yet this so enticing an Enemy we must
keep our selves from the loving of; for if any Man love the World, i. e. with a
predominant Love, or the things that are in the world, 1 John 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him. A second Enemy is the Flesh, which
always murmurs at Subjection, and is at continual variance with the Spirit;
Gal. 5.17.
and there is great difficulty in overcoming so near a Foe: This was it, that
made that great Apostle, volens nolens, become a Captive. Romans 7.19
Caesar being once asked, What was the most difficult thing to overcome in this
Life? Answered, Seipsum vincere, to overcome himself and his untamed
Affections. The third is the Devil, called, (...), Vid. Leigh's Crit. Sacra. p.
235.
from the Hebrew word, (...), Sitnah, which is Adversarius, an Adversary; he is
really the implacable Enemy of our Souls, and joins his Assistance to the World
and Flesh, that so by one means or other he might destroy us; this is he that
tempts so subtly, so frequently, that we must, and ought to be always
prepared for him; and unless we are furnished with the whole Armor of God,
Ephesians. 4. from 13. to 18.
it is impossible for us to withstand him; so subtle and potent is he, that the
holiest Souls, at some time or other, have been overcome by him. Now, what
great reason is there for us to use the greatest speed we can, that have not
only so little time, and so much work to do in it, but also such subtle and
potent Enemies to contend with, and to overcome? Well might the Apostle say
Phil. 2.12. Non dicit Apostolus nude (...) sed (...), id est, accurate magnoque
cum studio operamini. Chrysostom.
, Work (not play, or idle) out your salvation with fear and trembling. Well may
the Church of God be called Ecclesia Militans, seeing it has so many, and so
great Enemies, continually to engage with.

A third, and last, may be drawn from Example: Those that run an earthly Race,
tho but for a mean Reward, what pains do they take, how extremely do they
strain themselves, that they may run swiftly to obtain? And shall we that run
the Celestial Race (and that for so great a Reward as Heaven is) run slowly?
Shall they take greater pains, and be more swift and speedy for a perishing
Reward, than we for an eternal one? God forbid! The Sun too, may be an Example
to us in this respect, Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,
Psalm 19.5.
and rejoices as a strong man to run his race. And not only is the Sun an
Example to us, but also our Lord himself, who whilst he was in the World, was
never idle: He wrought the works of him that sent him, John ^.4.
while it was day. He left the bosom of his Father, and came into the World,
and became Man, and was like unto Man in all things, Sin only excepted;
overcame Death and Hell, fulfilled the Law of God, and satisfied his Justice
for us, appeased his Wrath against us, and has purchased for his People, by his
Death, Everlasting Life. Thus was all his time vigorously employed in
performing the work he came about; well might the Church compare him (for his
swiftness) to a Roe, Cant. 2.9.
or a young Heart.

Thus have I proved, That Celerity and Speed in the ways of God, must of
necessity be practiced by those that would obtain Everlasting Life. And that,
First, because of the shortness of our Lives, and their speedy passing away
from us; so soon are our days done, that if we are not speedy, they will be
gone before our work be done.

Secondly, Because of the great work we have to do in this little time, which
is so great, that we have need of more, rather than spare (for Sin and Vanity)
any of that we have.

Thirdly, Because of the Examples of Swiftness and Speediness, that we have,
not only of Persons that run with the greatest speediness an earthly Race, for
the fading Vanities of the World; and of the Sun; but also of our Lord himself,
who was most speedy in working out our Redemption, and ought to be imitated of
all Christians. For every Action of Christ ought to be instruction unto us,
Omnis Christi actio, nostra debet esse instructio. Gregor. Joh. 14.6.
he has left us an Example; let us therefore tread in his steps, who is the
way, the truth, and the life.

Now this Celerity, this Speediness in the ways of God must be constantly and
continually practiced without giving over, and that to the end of your lives;
for beginning well in the ways of Godliness, is nothing, unless perseverance be
resolved; for as those that run a Race, tho they run never so directly, never
so swiftly, shall not obtain the prize unless they persevere to the end of it,
even so if we continue not in the ways of God to the end of our lives, we shall
miss of Heaven. The Soldier is not rewarded with Spoil, till he has obtained
the Victory, neither shall we be crowned, till we have been more than
Conquerors in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.37.
Should you live in the Profession of the Gospel for many years, and at last
prove Apostates, you would miss of Salvation; it is none but those that endure
to the end that shall be saved; Matthew. 10.2^.
and yet notwithstanding, there are many that are guilty in this respect; this
Age abounds with short-winded Professors, that are eager for a spurt, and then
give over; that for fear of Affliction, or Reproach, or the Impair of their
Credit, or Esteem in the World; nay, some such Fools there are, (for I can call
them by no fitter Name) that for a Scoff, or a Jeer, will turn back, will carry
the Lord his Livery home again, and will wear it no longer: But it had been
better for such, that they had never known the ways of God, than thus to depart
from them; nay, it had been better that they had never been born, for God
abhors Apostates with his Soul; Heb. 10.38.
therefore if you would obtain Heaven, pull not your Necks out of Christ's Yoke,
keep forward, give not over upon any account; but the very first step you take
in the ways of Godliness, resolve (by the assistance of Divine Grace) to
persevere to the end of your Lives, for it must (you see) of necessity be done.
Remember Lot's Wife, who for looking back was turned into a Pillar of Salt, for
an Example to all those that hereafter should turn their backs upon God. Let
the Apostle, therefore, be our Pattern in this respect, Phil. 3 14.
To press forward toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

Having thus proved the Doctrine, I proceed to the second particular, namely,
to show you how you may fit and prepare your selves to run speedily and swiftly
in this Heavenly Race.

If therefore you would be fitted and prepared to run speedily and swiftly in
the ways of God, observe these three things:

First, Avoid wicked Company, which has been the ruin of many a Soul. When
Conscience is once thoroughly awakened, and Persons come to be convinced of the
Soul-destroying Nature of their Sins, amongst other their complaints, do we not
sometimes hear them utter such as these; O that I had never known the Names,
nor seen the Faces of such and such Persons! These were they that enticed me to
Sin, to ruin my Soul; these were they that taught me to speak the Language of
Hell; these were they that taught me to damn, and to sink my own, and others
precious Souls; these were they (that by the help of the Devil, and my own
corrupt Inclinations) made me in love with all manner of Iniquity, and to hate
the thoughts of Piety, and living to my Creator and God; these were they that
made me out of love with the ways of Holiness, and to become an utter Enemy to
those that walk in them; these were they that encouraged me in every thing that
was offensive to the Almighty, in every thing that might further the ruin of my
poor Soul; to despise the Counsel of my Godly Parents, Relations, and Friends;
to mock at the wholesome Instructions of Gods Ministers, and to laugh and jeer
at Hell and Damnation. O that I should adhere to their devilish Counsel! O that
I should be so easily drawn away to my own ruin! I say, are not these sometimes
the complaints of many poor Souls? And who is able to express the Sorrows they
undergo upon this account, before their Comfort comes, if not, go mourning to
their Graves. O consider when you are gaming, or swearing, or drinking to
excess, or profaning the Lords day, etc. with your wicked Companions, how
unlikely you are to make haste to Heaven, when you are going in the ready way
that leads to Hell. Now this I would have all take special notice of, but
especially young Persons, for they are more subject to be drawn away; the green
Twig is easily bent; O young Persons, I beseech you (if you would run with
speed in the ways of God) take heed of wicked Company; though they entice you
never so frequently, never so strongly; like those, Proverbs 1. from 11. to 15.
though they pretend never such Friendship and Love; Yet, as one says, never
count them your Friends, nor such as will do you any kindness, that would lead
you to Sin, the Devil, and Damnation. Though they tell you of time enough when
you are old, to seek after Heaven and Happiness, and that it is Folly and
Madness, to spend the prime of your time in seeking for uncertainties, and
bringing your selves to such a Course of Life, as deprives you of all Comfort,
Delight, and Pleasure; though they endeavor to dissuade you from going
forward, by telling you of Lions in the way, and would have you turn back
again, and Sin your selves to Hell with them; and endeavor to stay you so long
till you have not time enough (should you be never so speedy) to reach your
Journeys end, yet hearken to none of their Delusions, bid defiance to them all.
As to their persuading you to let alone your Repentance till old Age; tell
them, late Repentance is seldom safe. Tell them there is no reason that God
should accept of the lame and rotten Service of your old Age, when you have
given the prime of your strength to the Devil. Therefore take Solomon's
Counsel, Prove. 1.10. and 15.
My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. My son, walk not thou in the
way with them, refrain thy feet from their path. It was not lawful for a Jew to
converse with a Samaritane, neither might the Hebrew eat with the Egyptian, but
it was accounted abominable; neither is it lawful for us that are going to
Heaven to be the Familiars of those that are going to Hell. We are commanded to
withdraw our selves from those that walk disorderly, 2 Thessal. 3.6. I beseech
you therefore a second time (particularly young ones) to abandon such, for they
will greatly impede and hinder you in your way: Psalm. 119.63.
O be like the Psalmist, A companion of all them that fear the Lord, and that
keep his precepts; These will further you in your way, and excite you to be
speedy in your Course, and encourage you by helping of you forward all they
can, and accompany you in your way, which will be great Comfort. But so much as
to the first particular, namely, That if we would run with speediness in the
ways of God, we must avoid wicked Company, which if we do not, will be a very
great, yea, a continual, if not an eternal hindrance to us.

Secondly, If we would be prepared to run speedily and swiftly in this heavenly
Race, we must be unloaded of the things of this World. Persons that run a
Terrestrial Race divest themselves of their Garments, that they may run more
swiftly; so if we would run swiftly in the ways of Holiness, we must be
disburdened so far of the things of this World, as that they may not impede our
course, or make us run slowly; some are so cumber'd with the world that they
cannot wag a foot toward Heaven; and others so clogged that if they do go at
all, it is very heavily, hardly set one foot before another, as we say: O how do
they suffer the world to take up so much of their precious time, Mr. Gouges
Word to Sinners, etc. page 135.
that they can scarce find any leisure either for Closet-devotions, or
Family-Prayers, but make their Religion give place to their worldly businesses.
And when at any time they fall upon the performance of Holy Duties, how are
their hearts at that very time taken up with worldly thoughts, and
imaginations; so that instead of conversing with God in his Holy Ordinances,
and enjoying Communion with him therein, they converse with the world, and hold
Communion with the Devil. Too many there are whose actions tell us, that they
have no time to pray in their Families, no time to instruct their Children and
Servants in the things of God; no time to think of God, nor of their Duty to
him; much less to perform it; no time to prepare for Death and Eternity, nor to
consider of the state of their poor Souls. Surely such as these will not dare
to make such a plea at the Bar of God, when he shall ask them, Why did you not
obey my Commands, and observe to do my pleasure? Why did you not take care of
your Souls, and mind Eternity by preparing for it? I say surely such as these
dare not reply, Lord, we had no time, which is in effect to say, Lord, we spent
so much time in Trading for Earth, that we had no time to Trade for Heaven: We
had so much business in the Shop, that we could not frequent our Closets much:
In truth, Lord, we had so much love for the things of the world, that we had
none for thee nor our poor souls. Good God! what will be the state of such
souls! surely, if there may be noted degrees of torments in a place of such
misery as Hell is, these must have the hottest there. Now it is love to the
world that makes persons so eager after it; if they did not love the world and
the things thereof, they would not spend so much time and pains in seeking
after the vanities thereof; and it is this that makes you right worldlings, for
it is not the bare having, or possessing of the things of this world that makes
you such. Now it is impossible for those to run speedily and swiftly in the ways
of God, that have placed their affections on the world; a worldling may make,
indeed, a fair profession, and show great forwardness, and speediness in the
ways of God, like the rich young man, Vid. Mat. 19.20, 21, 22.
but when it comes to this, That their worldly enjoyments must be parted with,
if they would keep themselves in God's ways; if they would run so as to obtain,
which is speedily, why then they leave going any farther, and are with him,
seemingly sorry, that Heaven cannot be had at cheaper rates, so that their love
to God and his ways is but from the teeth outward, as we say; it is no more than
what may serve their interest in the world; so that in reality, the world is
their God, their treasure is here, and their hearts must of necessity be here
too, Mat. 6.21.
for where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. O therefore, whatever
we have of the things of this world, let us not set our hearts upon them, let
us not incumber our selves so much with them, as to let them take up all, or so
much of our time, as to have none (or not enough) to spare for, to seek after
(so as to obtain) Heaven: let us no longer so love the world, nor the things of
it, as to suffer it to keep us back, Vid. Mr. Roger's Pract. Discourse of
Sickn. and Recov. pa. 226, 227.
or to hinder us in our running this Heavenly race. Let us not paint it with
more alluring Colors, lest we be still more in love with it, and more loath to
leave it; for shall we more easily part with things sumptuous and splendid,
than with things that are meaner and less suited to a fleshly mind and life? We
are Pilgrims, and shall we be so industrious to plant, and build, and sow in a
strange Country, when we confess we are distant from our home? What man would
set himself to adorn his Inn, from which he may dislodg the next morning, and
it may be never see it any more? Surely the fadingness of the things of this
world, might make us out of love with them: You may be rich and honorable to
day, and by the morrow, Beggars. He that seriously considers of the many and
great enjoyments that Job was possessed with, Job 1.
and how soon he was deprived of all, and brought to the Dunghill, certainly
can say no more of this world and things of it, than what the Wiseman says,
Eccles. 1.2
Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Why should sick Dreams
run away with our hearts? Mr. Gale's Sermon. in the Supplem. to the Morn.
Exercise, etc.
what are all those things your hearts lust after, but the scum, froth, dross,
and refuse of the Creatition? Ah poor fools! why are your hearts so much
bewitched with these night-visions, whorish Idols, or cursed nothings of time?
Remember how dear you pay for your beloved Idols, how much they are salted with
the curse of God. What fools are we to suffer our selves to be hindered in our
way to Heaven, by and for such things as are of so short a duration and
continuance. Were the things of this world never so excellent, delightful and
profitable, yet the consideration of their speedy passing away, should be, (one
would think) an argument sufficient to wean our love from them, and to keep us
from suffering any thing of the world to stop or hinder us in running our race.
'Twas a great saying of that Jansenist, I would never begin to love that, which
one day I must cease to love.

3ly. And lastly, As we must be unladen without, so we must also be empty
within: Now that which clogs us within, and hinders us from running speedily in
the ways of God, is sin; this is a dead weight to the soul, and it is impossible
for you to take one right step toward Heaven, (much less to run with speed)
whilst you remain in a state of sin. For while you are in such a state, you are
in a dead state, Mr. Rogers Pra. Disco. of Sickn. and Reco. p. 114.
you taste not the goodness of God, nor hear his loudest Calls; you tremble not
at his most dreadful threats, neither are you drawn with his love, nor start at
his approaching wrath. Your ignorance has deprived your souls of all knowledge
of your own miseries; you are in a state of death and insensibility; and your
case is the more sad, because you are like to fall under the power of eternal
death; and though your temporal life is prolonged for a season, yet we may say
of you as of Malefactors under the sentence of the Law for their crimes, They
are dead men, though there be a Reprieve, or a delay of execution for a little
space. You may as well expect a dead Corpse to go or run, as expect such as are
in a state of sin, to do so in this Heavenly race. Or a person loaded with a
burden, that he is scarce able to stand under, to be as speedy in going, as one
that has no burden at all. And although persons in a state of unregeneracy and
sin, are not sensible what a burden sin is; that it will sink 'em to Hell if it
be not removed; yet when once Conscience is awakned, they will then say of
their sins as David did of his, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me;
Psalm. 38.4.
too heavy for me to bear long; so heavy, that if Infinite mercy does not ease
nor release me, I must fall under it. If the yoke of Christ be easy, Mat.
11.30.
and his burden light, than of necessity on the contrary, must the yoke of the
Devil, which is sin, be uneasy, heavy, and intolerable to be born; and yet
how many are there, that by the course of their lives seem to be of the
opinion, that it is possible for them (notwithstanding the burden of their sins)
to be speedy enough in the ways of God, to obtain Heaven; that their external
profession (without any such thing as repentance and a holy life) will save
them; but O how greatly will they be mistaken! no doubt but there are many in
Hell, that have heard and prayed as much, or more than ever you have done. Thus
you see how great a burden sin is, and how vast a hinderance it is to you in
your way; nay, such a weight and burden is sin, that it will hinder you from
ever obtaining Heaven, if it be not removed before death. O therefore endeavor
to get rid of this burden; loath, detest, and abhor sin, because God does
loath, detest, and abhor you for sin; because it seeks the utter ruin of your
precious souls; beg of God to make you sensible that sin is a burden, and then
when you feel the weight of it, you will not be unwilling to part with it;
beseech him to quicken you who are dead in trespasses and sins; Ephesians. 2.1.
plead with him earnestly to make you sincerely willing to part with your whole
burden, with all your sins; for every sin must be left, Mr. Gouges Word to
Sinners, etc. pa^ 167.
or you had as good keep them all. Can you let all your sins go but this one?
even this must go too, or your life must go for it: O set your selves against
every sin, great and small, open and secret, carnal and spiritual; set your
selves against them heartily; be willing to prosper and overcome; and set upon
them speedily; let not iniquity live a day longer, nor sleep a night more in
quiet with you. O let not that which is so much your hinderance, be retained by
you; let God see your weariness of sin, by your earnestness to be rid of it;
and the great sense you have of the impossibility of getting to Heaven with it;
that so by patient continuing in your Duty, you may at last have a gracious
release.

I should now speak of the Reward implied in my Text; but before I do this,
give me leave to speak of one thing that is worthy of your strictest
Observation; the Apostle does not say, in my Text, seem so to run as to obtain;
or make an outward show of running; but so run that ye may obtain; now, in thus
expressing of himself, he excludes all Hypocrisy, and counterfeit Godliness;
and there is great reason for his doing thus. For in the visible Church, it is
certain, that there are many that outwardly profess Christ, but inwardly and
with their heart deny him; that are Christians by Name, but not such indeed.
Many Hypocrites there are, like painted Sepulchers, fair without, but within
nothing but rottenness. Here then let me put you upon Examination, whether or
no you are not of this number? Hypocrisy is spun of a very fine Thread, Vid.
Bishop Sanderson 's Sermon, 1. ad populum, p. 175.
and is not easily discernable without very diligent Examination; and things
are not to be measured by the outward show, or by the Lump and Bulk, but by an
exacter Rule, whether they be true or no: do thou bewail thy Sins with Tears?
Do thou avoid gross Sins with care? Do thou oppose against common
Corruptions with zeal? Why all this thou may do, and yet be a Hypocrite.
Page 172.
Nay, you may, as the same Author says, be touched with a deep feeling of your
Sins, and with heavy Hearts and many Tears confess and bewail them, and not
only promise, but also purpose amendment; you may be superficially affected
with, and find some overly comfort and refreshing from the Contemplation of
those gracious promises of Mercy, and Reconciliation, and Salvation, which are
contained in the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and have some
degrees of persuasion that these promises are true, and some flashes of
Confidence withal of your own personal Interest therein; all this and much more
may you do, and yet be rotten (as he says) at Heart; wholly carnal and
unrenewed, quite empty of sound Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience, and every
good Grace; full of damnable Pride and Hypocrisy, as you may see Examples in
Readiness care for the destroying of Witches; in Jehu's zeal in killing; 1 Samuel
28.3. 2 Kings 10.16, 28. Mark 6.20. 1 Kings 21.27.
Baal's Worshippers; in Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly, and doing many
things too; in Ahab's Repentance and Humiliation. O therefore look to your
hearts, be willing to know what they are, and don't play the Hypocrite with
your Souls! Consider, there is no Sin more odious in the sight of God than this.
Simulata sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas.
You shall never enter Heaven notwithstanding all your Prayers and Tears, if
you are Hypocrites. When you shall plead for Mercy at the Day of Judgment,
Christ will tell you, Matthew. 7.23.
he knows you not. May I a little also gloss upon your Misery when you come to
Hell, which will be most intolerable; you will share in the greatest of them.
The loose and profane Wretches that lived like Devils Incarnate in the World,
that spent very little or no time in Prayer, or Hearing, or any other Duties,
and that took you always for Saints, because of your seeming strictness in the
ways of God, when they shall see you in the same dreadful Condition with
themselves, 'twill make them (if 'twere possible) laugh in Hell, to see that
this is the end of your Profession, of your strictness in the ways of God, of
your praying, and hearing, and the like; this will greatly aggravate your
Torment. O therefore, for Christ's sake, and the sake of your own precious
Souls, beware of Hypocrisy. I would (had I time) have given you some particular
Marks of Hypocrisy; at present then make but this out clearly, That Hypocrisy
is not predominant in you, but that in simplicity and sincerity of heart (and
not with fleshly Wisdom) you have your Conversations in the World; you may then
be sure you are not in the number of those Hypocrites that shall be banished
for ever from the Presence of the Lord, and turned into Hell.

I now return to my third and last Doctrinal head, namely, to speak of the
Reward implied in my Text, which shall be certainly given to those that run
lawfully, that run thus speedily and swiftly, constantly and sincerely in this
Heavenly Race; and this Reward is no other, nor can be no better than Heaven it
self; Luke 12.32.
It Is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Now, to speak fully
of this glorious place, and the Felicities that God has prepared there for his
People, is impossible; we are not able fully to conceive of them; therefore
whatever I may now speak concerning the Glories, the Felicities of Heaven; if
you ever come there, you will say, behold the thousand part was not told me;
but according to what discoveries the Holy Ghost has made of it in Scripture,
we may speak of it, and we may see the Glories of it set forth to us, by the
diversity and greatness of the Names thereof, and the Society we shall there
enjoy. I shall speak to two or three of the Names thereof briefly.

1. It Is called the Kingdom of God and Christ, Revel. 12.10. Luke 23.42.
because Christ having overcome Death, Hell, and Damnation, together with all
the Enemies that did oppose and hinder us in our way to Heaven, does rule
there, and govern his Church Triumphant with Heavenly Peace, and Everlasting
Tranquillity. Beverly's Great Soul of Man, p. 278.
If we could imagine, as indeed we cannot, because experience so mightily
contradicts it, that any Prince should live in all those delights and pleasures
the most spendid Court affords, without any tediousness, or satiety ten
thousand years; what a dark Representation were this of this Kingdom, tho he
could do, and enjoy all he would.

2. It Is called by the Name of Paradise, Luke 23.43.
in respect of the abundant plenty of the greatest of Pleasures which the
Saints can either wish for, or desire.

3. It Is called Eternal Life, Joh. 3.15. Matthew. 25.46.
because there shall be no more Death, nor Lamentation, nor Sorrow: We shall
quit a vale of Tears, for Rivers of Eternal Pleasures; Mr. Silvester's Sermon
in the Supplement to the Morning Exercise.
an Element of Joys succeeds our bitter Cup; our Rights can never be invaded
there, nothing can stain the Comforts of that World; no Blots nor Wounds are
there contracted or endured; no Troubles in that Israel; there are no pauses of
Astonishment through surprisals of Afflictions; Death smites no Corners there;
Providence makes no Storms; there lies that Ark wherein no vile or wicked Cham
shall dwell; the Glory of that place it knows no Eclipse, nor Cloud, no dim
Discoveries, or flat Notes shall be the Exercise or Entertainment of that
State. I might give you more Illustrations upon the great and glorious Names of
this Kingdom, but this may serve as a taste of the Glories, the Joys of that
blessed place, by which you may discern the excellency thereof.

But now as to the Society that there we shall enjoy. There we shall have the
Company of God and Christ, Saints and Angels, and all our Godly Friends and
Relations, and join with them in singing Hallelujahs to the Lord God Almighty,
and to the Lamb his Son, that sits upon the Throne for evermore. Vid. Mr.
Rogers's Practical Discourse of Sickness and Recovery, page 97.
O how vastly different is that Assembly from such a one as this! Here we are
with our unbelief, with our Fears, with our strong Corruptions, and with our
many Sins; whereas they are all perfect and complete in Holiness. We shall then
be no more disturbed with the Abuses of the Wicked, we shall be no more grieved
with their Oaths and Curses, nor troubled with their Company, but be in the
happy Society of those that will delight us, and such as to Eternity we shall
enjoy; and not only shall our Souls enjoy these Felicities, Phil. 3.21.
but at the Resurrection our Bodies shall be joined to them, and both shall be
happy: Our Bodies shall not be what now they are, foul, unactive Lumps of Clay,
Mr. Silvester's Sermon in the Supplement to the Morning Exercise.
they are now pierced with Cold, and worn with Labors, appaled with Griefs and
Dangers, and gripped with Pains, and macerated with keen and envious Passions,
and after all, mouldred to Dust by Death and Rottenness; but there neither
Deformity, Pains, nor Death, shall be their fear nor exercise. Thus have I
briefly showed you what this Reward is, that that those shall obtain that run,
as I have shown you, in this Heavenly Race, and the Happinesses, the
Felicities, the Glories that there they shall enjoy. And after all, I must
conclude somewhat like the Apostle, That eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 1
Cor. 2.^.
neither has it entered into the heart of man fully to conceive of the things
that God has prepared in heaven for them that love him.

Having now done what I promised, as to the Doctrinal part, I proceed to the
Application.

Is it so then, that the greatest Speediness and Celerity in the Ways of God,
must be constantly practiced by those that would obtain everlasting Life? Then,

First, From hence we may draw a Use of Reproof for those Persons that are
creeping (as it were) to Heaven, instead of running swiftly; that go as if they
did not care whether they came there or no, or as if they had an Eternity of
Time allowed them for their Journey. What do you mean, Sirs? Your Sun is
setting, the Night draws on, the Shadows of the Evening have overtaken you,
stir up your selves, O slothful Souls, you are upon the very Borders of
Eternity; your Lives are but as a Vapor, James 4.14.
and what will become of your Souls, if your day is gone before your work be
done? Are you not ashamed to see so many overtake you? Are you not ashamed to
make no further progress, that have so many helps provided for you, and
tendered to you? Are you not ashamed that God should see you loytering by the
way? Are you not ashamed that every trivial matter should stop you? O for shame
cast away all your hindrances, get rid of your Obstructions, and run; you will be
be-lated, O Souls! Don't you see what haste Sinners make to Hell? Shall they
strive and run for Damnation, more than you for Salvation? O take this timely
Reproof, you lazy, slothful ones. What will become of you, if you shall idle
till Christ calls you to an account? How will that word sound in your ears,
Matthew. 25.26.
Thou wicked and slothful servant. The true cause of thy neglect, is thy
slothfulness, and not thy Inability; and when that follows, Verse 30. Cast ye
the unprofitable servant into utter darkness; throw him into Hell, let him see
my Face no more. Then will you wish (tho too late) that you had been speedy in
your Course, that you had improved your Time and Talents, but then no more
Time, nor Talents will be granted; then you are undone to Eternity. Are you
Young? Therefore do you loyter? Do you not see Young die as well as Old? Have
you not a proof of this now before your Eyes? Are you in Health and Strength?
Therefore do you loyter? Don't you see as strong as the strongest of you, and
as healthy as the most healthful, suddenly snatched away. O therefore loyter no
longer, begin now to be speedy, lest an hereafter be never granted. Behold! 2
Cor. 6.2.
now is the accepted time! behold, now is the day of salvation. This Life is
the time wherein your Calling and Election must be made sure. This Life is the
time wherein you must work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. This
Life is the time wherein you must be admitted into the Kingdom of Grace, if
ever you expect to be admitted into the Kingdom of Glory. This Life is the time
wherein you must run with speed and patience, the Race that is set before you,
if ever you expect to receive that great and glorious Reward that is prepared
for such as are speedy, constant, and sincere in their Course: O, therefore
mend your pace, lest you should be be-lated to Heaven.

Let a second Use, be a Use of Advice, and that to two sorts of Persons. First,
To those that having begun and continued for a time, are now drawing back. I
advise you that have begun to run in this Heavenly Race, to hold on, and that
to the end; 'twill be your own another day; will not these Promises allure you;
Matthew. 10.22.
He that endures to the end, shall be saved. Can you desire a better Reward
for your Pains than Salvation? It Is no wonder if at any time we see a poor
Sinner draw back from serving the Devil; for he may well grow weary of his
work, because of his wages; Romans 6.23.
he will be dreadfully Rewarded. But indeed it may be admired at, to see any turn
their backs upon God, and grow weary of his Service, who will be so well
rewarded, greatly above what they do deserve. To see Persons turn their backs
upon Salvation, we may admire at their Folly and Madness; what think you of
that other Promise? Be thou faithful unto death, Rev. 2.10
and I will give you a crown of life, or an unfaidable Crown of Glory, as the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.4:
(...). Sirs, you that are weary of Gods ways, that grow tired of that which
will (if you continue therein) end in your eternal Happiness; produce such a
Promise as this from the World, Sin or Satan, if you can; no, they have no such
Reward; pray then be persuaded to hold on, to persevere. Sirs, you cannot
imagine the misery you will bring upon your selves, by drawing back; you will incur
God's hatred, and you had better have the hatred of the whole World. Hebr.
10.38.
Read and consider; resolve therefore whatever comes on it, to hold out to the
end, that so you may be happy. But,

Secondly, Let it be a Use of Advice to the Hypocrites; you have heard how far
a Hypocrite may go, and yet be rotten at heart; and you have heard something of
the heinousness of Sin; and the punishment that will follow. I do now advise
you, if you tender your Souls good, to go no further in such a state and
condition, for you will be damned for your pains: O whatever you do, be upright;
let God have your hearts in all your Actions; make us no longer believe that
you are what you are not, for it is you that will be the losers at last. Read
that Scripture often, and I leave you at this time, Matthew. 5.20. Christ tells
you plainly, That except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now
what was their Righteousness? Why truly, 'twas an outside Righteousness; they
were very Hypocrites, as Christ often calls them, Matthew. 23.13, 14, 15. and in
many more places. And surely, if any thing moves to Sincerity, it will be the
thoughts of the Punishment of Hypocrisy. But then

Thirdly, Let us take up an Use of Lamentation, and that upon the account of
those poor Souls, that instead of running in the ways of God that lead to
Heaven, they are running headlong to Hell: Poor Souls! don't you tremble to
think of your end; methinks my heart bleeds for you! O join with me,
Christians, in my sorrow for these poor Souls! Lord, what a Grief must it needs
be to any compassionate heart, to think of their sad Condition! O that poor
creatures should with such delight work out their own ruin! O that they will be
their own butchers, not of their bodies, but (which is worse) of their precious
Souls! Who can forbear to weep, to see sinners go cheerfully to Hell! O that
Christ and his Grace should be slighted by them that have so much need of both!
O that overtures of Reconciliation should be refused by such as are just
dropping into Hell, into the midst of Everlasting Burnings! Lord pity them!
Lord open their eyes! O that they might see their danger, before they feel it;
that so they might timely turn back, and escape it, that we may have cause to
rejoice in thy Mercy toward them!

One Use more, and that shall be of Comfort to the godly, to those that run
speedily, constantly, and sincerely in the ways of God. Lift up your heads with
comfort, for you are happy souls, you are in the way of your duty, and you
shall be rewarded; tho your Race be toilsome to the flesh, let the Reward that
will follow upon your continuing steadfast to the end, be your Cordial and
Comfort. Consider; It Is but a little while, and all your labor will be over,
Rev. 14.13.
and you shall have an Eternal Rest. Do you object by way of Complaint, I
suffer so much by reason of many and great Afflictions and Troubles, and by
reason of God's taking away my Comforts, my Children, my Relations and Friends,
that I find my self greatly hindered in my way to Heaven; and I fear that I
shall not hold out long; I doubt I shall not persevere to the end.

I shall endeavor to answer you fully, and so close: You must then believe
this as a great truth, That Afflictions must of necessity come upon those that
run in this Heavenly Race; nay, it is impossible to be freed from them; all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution; for whom God loves, 2 Timothy 3.12.
he chastens; and scourges every son whom he receives. We are Bastards, and not
Sons, if we are free from Affliction. Those Beasts that are appointed for the
Slaughter, are let run in Fat Pastures; but those that are not appointed for
such an end, are daily wrought, and subject to the yoke: The Stones that were
for Solomon's Building, 1 Kings 7.9.
were squared and hewn before they were laid therein; and so must every
Christian be squared and hewn too, by Affliction, that is to be a lively Stone
in this Spiritual Building, Psalm. 118.22.
of which Christ Jesus is the Head Cornerstone. The Lord spares some for a
time, that he may punish them for ever; and he chastens some for a time, that
he may spare them for ever: Dives, that was spared on earth, was tormented in
Hell; and Lazarus that was afflicted on earth, was received into Heaven. Luke
16.19. ad finem.
He that would reign with Christ in the Kingdom of Glory, must suffer for him
in the vale of Tears. He that would obtain Christ, must follow him; and he that
does follow him, must do it with his Cross. Christ suffered before he entered
into Glory; and so must Christians before they can be glorified. Surely the
Servant must not be above his Master. If we suffer, we shall reign: We must not
expect to drink of those Rivers of Pleasures, that run through the Celestial
Paradise, unless we are willing to drink of the bitter Cup of Affliction: Many
are the Troubles of the Righteous; one affliction seldom comes alone, for God
is not like the wasp, that having stung once, can sting no more, but there is a
plurality of Crosses with God, he can sting again and again. As one sorrowful
messenger came to Job after another, even so one affliction visits the
Christian after another. Those therefore that run in the race of Godliness,
must not think this strange, neither must they think to be free from
affliction. Thus you see that of necessity afflictions must come upon the
people of God, upon those that run in this Heavenly race. You say further, that
God takes away your Comforts, your Children, your Relations, your Friends, and
this makes you fear you shall not hold on, but rather draw back. In answer to
this, consider, Has God dealt worse with you than with others of his Children
that have been as precious in his sight as you, and have done as much for his
Glory. Pray compare your case with Job's, read that Chapter seriously at your
leisure, you will there find that God deprived him of all his outward Comforts,
and of his Children too; and (blessed be God) he has not dealt so severely
with you, you have yet a great many blessings and comforts, that God is yet
pleased to continue to you, Job 1.
and particularly as to Children. God has not taken your All, and cannot you
spare God one Lamb or two out of your Flock without repining. Observe what Job
says, when deprived of all his outward Comforts, The Lord gave, Job 1.21.
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord: He acknowledges
him to be both good and just in all his ways, and blesses him for all, whether
giving or taking. O do you learn Job's spirit.

But by this time you may readily ask, what reasons can be given for God's thus
suffering his Children to be afflicted? I answer, there are many reasons that
may be given for this; I shall give you a few of them.

1. God suffers his Children to be afflicted, that he might wean them from the
love of this world; which we are naturally prone to dote upon, but especially
in a prosperous state; then we are apt and ready to be forgetful of God, and of
our selves too, then the weeds are ready to overgrow the corn, and the flesh
ready to domineer over the spirit; but by affliction we are brought to hate
that which before we loved, and to embrace that which before we loathed. In
time of prosperity we are apt to pride our selves in our worldly enjoyments, in
our Goods and Possessions, and to have high and lofty thoughts of our selves,
as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I have built for
the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty? But when the Lord takes him to task, making of him to live with the
beasts of the field, and to eat grass like oxen, then he was brought to
acknowledge one above him, Dan. 4.37.
to acknowledge that he was able to abase all those that walk in pride. By
dealing thus with us, he brings us experimentally to know, that the world and
the things thereof are vanity, and that they are at his disposal to give and
take away at his pleasure. Thus therefore does God suffer his Children to be
afflicted, that he might withdraw their affections from the fading vanities of
the world.

2ly, To draw us to amendment of life; Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted (says the Psalmist) I went astray, but now have I kept
thy Word. Affliction was the cause of his reformation; when we sin, and go on
therein, then God out of love strikes us with the rod of affliction, to cause
us to remember our sins, and to repent of them. The affliction of the Body many
times proves wholesome Physic for the soul; though it wounds the outward man,
it many times renews the inward man. God cannot endure to see the blemish of sin
upon the faces of his Children, but he presently washes it off with the water
of affliction.

3ly, God suffers his Children to be afflicted, that they might the more
earnestly call upon him, and the more speedily seek unto him. It Is hard to keep
silence when in grievous pain. Affliction makes us run to God for help and
releasement; Jon. 2.
thus did Jonah when in the Whale. Our requests are then commonly more earnest
and fervent; how earnest are they in their distress! Jon. 1.14.
We beseech thee, Lord, we beseech thee. Thus therefore does God many times
oppress us, that we might cry unto him; crying unto him, he might hear us; and
hearing us, might deliver us; and delivering us, he might be glorified of us.

4. For the exercise of their Graces, as Faith, Hope, Love, Obedience,
Patience, and Humility.

1. Faith is exercised in Affliction, by considering the causes of God's
Permission, and believing most assuredly his Promises concerning our
Deliverance: We look by an Eye of Faith beyond all outward Helps and Means, to
that unseen Hand of Power that is able and willing to deliver us; and we
believe and know it shall be so, because of his Word.

2. Hope; By assuring our selves of the Rewards promised to those that suffer
patiently; hope keeps our hearts from breaking, and it being a well-grounded
hope, it is (when exercised) in the greatest afflictions comfortable.

3. Love is exercised in affliction, by considering the love of Christ in
suffering for us, and thereby we are engaged to suffer for him again.

4. Obedience; by conforming our wills to the will of God. Must I suffer? well,
says the soul, I am contented, seeing it is my Father's pleasure; I freely
submit, because my Lord has taught me so to do; and in obedience to God's will,
the soul will submissively say, Not my will, but thine be done; tho it be never
so contrary to nature, tho never so hard to bear. In the greatest afflictions
the Child of God will submissively say, Lord, this is nothing to what thou
did undergo for me.

5. Patience is exercised in affliction, by suffering quietly, willingly, and
cheerfully. Thus was the Lord pleased to exercise Job's Patience; and although
God had permitted Satan to tempt him, Job 1.
his enemies to undo him, his Children by sudden death to be taken from him,
his body to be afflicted with boils and sores, having no part free from pain
and grief; his Wife to be an occasion of offense unto him, which in these
distresses should have been a comfort; yet notwithstanding all this, Job sinned
not against his Maker. Thus was the Patience of the Apostles, and Martyrs,
tried and exercised, namely, by and in Affliction, who were so far from being
impatient, and from murmuring, that they quietly and cheerfully laid down their
Lives for the Gospel.

6. Humility, by abasing our selves in the sight of God, acknowledging that
these Sufferings, these Afflictions, are nothing in comparison of Hell, which
for our Sins we have deserved; tho our Affliction may be many times more than
we are able to bear, yet it is not so much as we do deserve.

Lastly, The Lord suffers his People to be afflicted, that the greatness of
his Power, and the infiniteness of his Mercy might be shown in the delivery of
us. You read, that when the Disciples asked our Savior the reason why the Man
was born blind: He tells them, Not for his own sins, nor for the sins of his
parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him, John 9.2, 3.
from which we may truly gather thus much, That the Man was born blind, that
Christ might have occasion to show the greatness of his Power in restoring his
sight. So it is said of Lazarus, Joh. 11.4.
that he died to this end, that God might be glorified in raising him from the
dead. Thus have I shown you for what reasons God suffers his People to be
afflicted. Now from all that has been said, we may see, that Afflictions are
rather helps, than hindrances to us in this Heavenly Race; therefore be not
discouraged because of Afflictions, for the Lord in his due time will deliver
you out of them all; rather pray that God would sanctify your Afflictions, than
remove them; and endeavor to arm your selves with the whole armor of God,
Ephesians. 6.13.
that so you may not by reason of Satan's Temptations, and the prevalency of
your own Corruptions, fall under them. And seeing Afflictions are so convenient
for us, let us learn to bless God for them; for had it not been for these, we
might have been yet (for ought we know) in love with the World and Sin, which
at last would have brought us to Hell. Thus (by Divine Assistance) have I
spoken what I designed on this Subject. O that God would now be pleased to make
it effectual for you Souls good, for the stirring of you up to be more speedy,
constant, and sincere in running your Race. O that at the Day of Judgment, I
might meet you all that are here this day, at the Right Hand of Jesus Christ,
which will be an assurance to us of our entering into Glory; for it is to these
he will say, Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world. Now, the little time that remains, let us resolve to
improve, by being more speedy, constant, and sincere in running our Race. O let
us be steadfast, unmovable, 1 Cor. 15.58.
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

