THE ROMAN. THE CONVERSATION OF THE ROMANS AND MAECENAS, In Three Excellent
DISCOURSES, Written in French By Monsieur de BALSAC.

Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for J. Holden at the Anchor in the New Exchange. 1652.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
NOthing but great Subjects can fall from the pen of Monsieur de Balsac, who
having formerly ravished the world with his immortal Prince, has now for a
choice cabinet piece illuminated in small an invincible Roman; Neither can any
pen so powerfully commend his, as his own: Even commending Antiquity he has
outdone it; So that the present Age may glory, that the Virtue of well speaking
is as high as ever. Nay, he has so highly praised our Predecessors, that with
an unheard of Rhetoric he forcibly persuades the contrary, and ravisheth for
himself what he seems to bestow on them; So that by his example we need not
doubt but Posterity is as capable of true Nobility. And that Antiquity it self
must confess, that in parallel lines, although the parallel must be after the
first, yet it may as well be drawn above as below it. But as he of Hero's, so we
may say of Writers, there is but one Balsac. And indeed his Translator thought
it a bold attempt to make him speak English like himself, and to dare copy so
high a subject after so illustrious an hand. And therefore conceals himself,
behind the Curtain, and timerously bids me enquire of you whither he has don
the Author right. If you are therefore pleased, we are all so; But we are all
at a loss, unless you favorably pardon the escapes of the Press, which are
many, and require thy judgment as well as the help of this Errata.

ERRATA.
Page 23. line 15. read ever. p. 45 l. 6. r. Heroes: p. 48. l. 11. Conversation
begins the Paragraph: Id. l. 18. r. Nations: p. 98. l. 22. r. writes: p. 120.
l, 11. r. he never fell: p. 123. l. ult. r. nobleness: p. 125. l. 19. r.
could: p. 126. l. 1. r. modest: p. 133. l. ult. r. appeased: Ib. l. 14. r. it:
p. 134. l. 6. r. debated: p. 135. l. 2. r. when: p. 136. l. 8. r. even: p. 137.
l. ult. r. thorns. p. 142. l. 16. r. of.

THE ROMAN, TO The Lady Marquess of RAMBOVILLET.
Discourse I.
WHAT has been told you Madam is most true, and if you desire an illustrious
witness, I will confirm it, Caesar shall assure you in two or three places of
his commentaries. There is no doubt but those great souls of which we have so
often discoursed, were lodged in bodies of a mean size; your Ancestors were
Hero's, but were not Giants, and the most part of their enemies had the
advantage, both in stature and bulk: This historical truth being without
difficulty received, there can be nothing more just, then the consequences
drawn from thence; That had the men of those times been weighed, and valued by
weight; an Alman had been near upon worth two Romans.

The Almans were both longer and larger; The Galls were stronger and more
numerous; The Affricans richer and craftier; The Greeks better polished, and
better skilled in the excercises of wrestling and coursing; But the Romans
fitter for command, better disciplined, and more knowing in war; And with this
discipline which some have called, the foundation of the Empire, the source of
their Triumphs, they have subjugated the strength, the number, the wealth, the
subtilty, and even the virtue of other Nations.

You ought not to doubt but there was virtue in the Provinces; The despising of
death was common among the Barbarians: The love of liberty, and the desire of
glory were not unknown unto them. But, Madam, the true use of al these things
was to be found at Rome: Rome was the Shop where the gifts of Heaven were
wrought, and where the goods of Nature were perfected. It was she, who, first
of all showed to the world juditious Armies, and wise Wars: It was she knew how
to mix, as it ought to be, Art with Adventure, Conduct with Fury, and the
Divine quality of the Understanding, with the brutal actions of the Irascible
part.

Whereby it appears, That the Soul is Sovereign Artisan, of all things, as well
of Military Actions, as of Civil Affairs: The principal part of valor depends
not on the organs of the Body; neither is it a privation of reason, and a
simple overflowing of the Gall, as the People fancy it; It Is neither the eyes
that see, nor the ears that hear, nor the arms that move; It Is the Soul, as a
Poet says, quoted by Aristotle; It Is the Soul that does all, whithout which the
eyes were blind, the ears deaf, the arms paralitical; It is the principle, and
the author of all the operations of man.

By the Soul a child has cast down a Giant, and Bulls are led in a string; By
the Soul an Architect sitting still, orders the work of a thousand Masons, and
builds Temples and Palaces; By the Soul a Pilot without stirring, works more
then all the Slaves at the oar, and a man would vainly sweat to hoise and
loose the sails, did he not find his way by the Stars; By the Soul, Madam, a
Consul having been commanded to make war against a King, an Enemy to the
Republic, studied the way so well, and became so knowing in a profession,
wherein he was altogether ignorant; That going from the City a man of Peace, he
arrived at the Army a Great Captain, and divests his robes to gain presently a
battle: Thus did your Predecessors commence; Thus did they manage their first
Arms; Their Prentiship was a Masterpiece.

I am confident you would see one of those people? Can we find out no way to
show you a Roman Consul? Is there no safer and more innocent means, then that
of Magic, to bring him whole from the place where he is? For, without doubt,
you would see him, both in body and mind, with that gravity, which bred
respect in the heart of Kings, and ravished the people with admiration; you
would see him, with that visible and acknowledgeable Authority, which
accompanied him to Prison and banishment, which dwelt with him when he had lost
all, whereof Fortune could not dispoyl him, when she had reduced him to his
shirt. Here he is, Madam, who comes not from the Elizian fields, nor from a
fabulous habitation; He comes forth of the Histories of Polibius or of some
such like Country, and methinks he deserves very well to be looked upon.

First, he no less knows how to obey the Laws, then he knows how to command
men, and with an elevation of spirit, which sees the Crowns of Sovereigns
beneath him, he has a soul wholly subject to the power of the people; He
reveres the sanctity of that power in the hands of a Tribun, or of a furious
Man, or of an Enemy, or perhaps of both. Believing, that to fail is the only
ill that can happen to an honest man; He believes there are no faults little,
and making a religion of the least part of his duty, he even thinks he cannot
be negligent thereof without impiety; He more esteems a day employed in virtue,
then a long delitious life; A moment of glory, more, then an age of
voluptuousness; He measures time by success, and not by its durance.

Acting by this principle, he is always prepared to hazardous undertakings; He
is always ready to devot himself, for the good of his Citizens, to take upon
him the ill fortune of the Commonwealth; And whether the Oracle direct him, or
the Inspiration come from his own spirit, he thanks the Gods, as the greatest
grace they ever conferred on him; for that it was their will he should be the
General, which was to be killed of that Army which should gain the Victory. In
pursuit of this, Madam, there is nothing but must be easy to him, and nothing
but we may believe of him; He knows neither nature, nor alliance, nor
affection, where the interest of his Country is concerned; He has no other
particular interest but that, and neither loves nor hates, but for public
concernments.

A soul without a body, and rid of matter could agitate in no other manner, nor
could it be less incommodated with its passions; but let us say more; It could
not be less sensible of the vain appearance of humane things, as well those which
astonish, and those which dazel us; The Bravadoes of the day make no more
impression on his constancy, then yesterdaies caresses: Princes are as weak
against him with their wild beasts, as with their treasures. And if he had
never seen Elephants, and were it possible from behind the tapistry to bring
forth all those which are in Africa, or in the Indies, he would consider them
but as a sport, or the mummeries of Pirrhus, and not as a frightful and
threatening thing for Fabritius. All what ever is frightful and terrible, in the
world, is not capable to make him wink; All what is splendid and precious
cannot afford him temtation; He is neither to be overcome; Nor to be wonn.

He is of those courages, Madam, which were invincible, were they assaulted
only with a lively force, and were a man always to fight, and always to make
war. But proposing for the object of their valor, to overcome what was most to
be feared in their enemies, they imagine it unnecessary to mistrust the rest,
and are least careful in those things which they believe less difficult; whence
perhaps that fancy of the Poets comes, that the Demy-Gods had a part about them
which was subject to death, and a place whereby they were mortal: Because
according to my opinion, there is always imperfection in the works of nature,
and that she never takes so much care in finishing what she makes, but that she
always leaves the one side weaker then the other: Now, Madam, it is not to be
doubted, but that this commonly is the weak part of great courages, and here
their hearts are of flesh, which every where else are of Diamond. There needs
not so much resolution to resist the violence of Tyrants, as to defend ones
self from their favors; and the power which was given them to do ill, is less
dangerous then the means they have whereby to oblige men.

Yet do all these means fail, when they are to be employed against a Roman.
This mortal part is not to be found in his soul; he is equally strong on all
sides; He is impenetrable to vanity, as well as to fear and avarice; His severity
cannot be sweetened, not even with the complements and flatteries of the King of
the Parthians; He at once subverts discovered endeavors, and guards, himself
from hidden artifices; Nothing is contagious to a mind naturally so sound, and
so well purged by the discipline of his Country; Neither the poison brought
from far, nor the neighboring corrupted air, nor stranger, nor citizen have
the power to change the goodness of his constitution.

Malcontents lose their time and their pains, if they think to make him relish
novelties, by infusing in him an ill opinion of the present; How specious
soever the pretenses are they propose, though they speak the public good or
liberty, he understands not the language; You were as good court a Vestal; It Is
not a human enterprise to shake his immovable fidelity; A Poet said the
Capitol was not so stable, And that Rome might sooner change place; He would
rather destroy Tyranny, then share it with any man, and rather declare himself
an Enemy, then a Colleague with an Usurper.

Can any thing be added to so great a Title. This one thing more, to witness
the highest proof of his virtue: The Republic, Madam, cannot lose him, how
negligent so ever she be to preserve him; He suffers not only patiently, but
gladly injuries and injustices. It never sunk into his mind to revenge himself
of her by a civil war, and he prefers the name of an innocent Banditi, to that
of a guilty Victor; He has been persuaded from his childhood, and since never
doubted, That a son can never acquit himself of all he owes to a mother, though
a wicked mother, though even she became a Stepmother. And that a Citizen is for
ever obliged to his Country, even to his ungrateful Country, which even has
used him like an Enemy.

Behold, Madam, you have near upon sounded the bottom of our Consuls heart,
and the root of those wonderful things which you shall read in the Histories
of Polybius and Titus Livius.

Let Us now a while look on his outside, on that part which is more exposed to
the sight of men.

You may observe in his Actions neither a Cowardly or a heavy Coldness, nor a
temerous and precipitat Vehemence. He softly makes haste, and advances with an
insensible Motion: Without disquieting himself, he moves inferior things
neither more nor less, Then the Intelligences without tiring themselves move
the Celestial Spheres. To see him so little troubled about his business, a man
would say, That he were not the Undertaker, and there appears so much
facility in the most painful functions of the Charge he executes, That although
he does nothing meanly, Yet he does nothing with Violence. Observe how with
his Eyes he leads the whole Army? How a Nod of his head keeps all the World in
their duty? How his presence only establishes Order, and drives away
Confusion? Truly, there is a delight even for Philosophers themselves; and even
for those who take no interest in humane Affairs to observe him in those
occasions. The least Motions of his body are accompanied with some Virtue which
renders him lovely. 'Twere hard to tell, Whether he be more necessary to the
Republic, or more pleasing to the Citizens. He Commands well but it becomes
him well to command. His command, Madam, is so grateful, That there is a
crowd, There is an ambition, that there is a sensible pleasure to obey him.

That good Grace which shines in all he does, being infused into solid
qualities, and being joined with Understanding and other necessary qualities,
is an admirable charm and enchantment for him to sweeten the bitterness of
disgustfull Orders; so that he can execute them without trouble of Mind, or
repugnancy of will: It has a strange force to winn the heart of the Soldiery,
and draw their inclinations, were they harder to move, and more insensible then
the iron and steel they use.

By this charm they bind themselves not only to him, but they unloose
themselves from all other things; They mind neither Pay, Plunder, or
Recompense; They neither care for the feasts of Rome, nor for delights of
Italy; They demand and desire nothing but their General, of whom they are so
enamored, even so jealous, that they apprehend the end of the war, for fear
only they should lose him by a peace: They murmur against the Senate, when he
is revoked, neither can they consolate themselves with a Victory which
ravisheth the Victor from them.

What an one, good God! Must so passionate a Militia be; It Is not obedience in
pursuit of command; It Is zeal which even prevents it; It Is not affection which
obliges them to the cause of their Chief; It Is a transport which ravisheth
them from themselves, and makes him say, I am going with the tenth Legion
against the Enemy, of which I am no less confident, then of mine own person; I
know it would pass through the midst of flames naked, did honor, will, or
necessity require it. So that, Madam, they are no more soldiers of his army
which march with him; They are as the members of his body, which move when he
stirs; They are as we may say, stranger parts of himself, which are more united
to him then his natural.

On the other side, the respect they bare him, is no less powerful, then the
love they show him; at least its more powerful, then the right of life and
death, which he has over them; This respect governs and rules all his troops;
He drives or stops them, as he needs their different obedience; He might be
unto them instead of Discipline. Let no man think, that it is the laws of war,
or military orders, which hinders the soldiers from committing offenses; It Is
his presence and his testimony. When they fail, they fear more least he should
know it, then they fear to be punished, and diverse have been kept in their
duties with apprehension of displeasing him, which would nether have done it
for fear of punishment, or dishonor.

That, Madam, was the only thing, which the Roman Army feared; and never did
Soldiers so much slight their Enemy, nor so much redoubt their Chief. There
never was at once Spirits so fierce and so docile, did overflow the Field with
more impetuosity, and retire to their places in the Camp with less appearance
of having even gone out. After they had done wonders for Courage, they came to
enquire whether they had done well or no; They came to render an account of
their Victory, whereof they were sometimes fain to justify themselves, and for
which they were sometimes punished.

This fear of Piety and Religion, has produced thousands of examples in pure
Antiquity, and in the Colleges they past over them, they are so common, and so
numerous: But we must choose what we are to present you; I must show you,
Madam, a mark of that generous fame, even when the Empire declined, when Rome
was no more then the sepulcher of Rome; When Nature according to my Opinion,
would preserve her Rights, and make known that the Ashes of things soveraignly
excellent are still rich and precious.

Under the Empire of Justinian, a Captain named Fulcar, inconsiderately casting
himself amongst the enemies, and having engaged his Troop in a disadvantageous
fight, when a certain man in that extremity, represented to him, That if he
would he might yet retreat with a good part of his men. 'Twere better to die,
said he, For how shall I be able after this, to endure the sight of Narses.
'Twas not that Narses was cruel, but that the sovereign virtue is redoubtable.
It Is that the Mine of the General of a Roman Army is frightful to those who
have it not from naked swords, or assured death. With a look he pierces the
guilty to the heart, and punishes them with his sight.

Is not this, Madam, an effect of that Authority which comes from Heaven; of that
Authority inherent in the person of him who has it distinct and separate from
that other authority bred by the power given him by the Republic, verified by
the Senate, and to be read in Pattents of Parchment, and confirmed with Eagles,
and Dragons in picture, by Rods, Axes, and Archers?

This second Authority of which you presume I should say somewhat, which as yet
was never said, Is a certain light of glory, and a certain character of
greatness, which heroic virtue imprints in the countenance of men. And this
Character, and this Light, corrects the defects and the imperfections of
nature, makes little men appear great, imbellisheth ugly faces, defends the
solitariness and nakedness of a person exposed to the outrages of fortune,
over-prest under the ruins of a destroyed party, abandoned of his own wishes,
and of his own hopes.

This Character, Madam, is to this person a safeguard from Heaven, against the
violences of the Earth; Renders him inviolable to his provoked enemies; binds
the hands of Traitors which com against him with ill designs; finds respect
and tenderness amongst Scythes and Tartars.

By this mark the Roman Princes were known by their enemies in the Wars,
although they disguised themselves, although they were mixed in a crowd of
soldiers, although they had never been seen before. Nothing is able to blot out
this character, nor to obscure this light, not even disgraces, imprisonment,
and the chains of a poor Captive. The Executioner falls backwards at sight of
his patient, and can scarce forbear to beg his life of him. He fancies that a
great flame issues out of his eyes, which enlightens the Dungeon, and that he
hears a hideous voice which cries out, Who art thou unhappy man, who dare lay
thy hand en Cajus Marius.

Are not these, Madam, give me leave once more to ask you, are not these the
highest and the dearest favors which can be received from the Supreme virtue.
And this second Authority which survives the first; This Authority which
preserves it self in the ruins of power, which consecrates misfortunes,
chains, and dungeons, which renders affliction holy and venerable. Is it not
far a more noble thing then the unworthy prosperity of the happy? Then all the
Scepters, all the Diadems, and all the Magnificence of idle Kings.

Questionless, Authority is far more noble then power, and that which is formed
from the reverence of virtue, far more worthy then that which is established by
the terror of punishments. The pure and innocent triumph of an infinite many
subjected hearts, is far a more illustrious and glorious sight, then the bloody
and miserable trophies of some castdown heads. I mean cast away without any
extreme necessity, and for a show only of a tyrannical and savage power, and if
the Poets Fables are the Philosophers mysteries. Me thinks, Madam, that their
Jupiter did an action far more admirable and more worthy the Father of the
Gods, and the King of Men, when he removed all things with one of his
eyebrowes, and shaking his head caused Olympus to tremble, then when by force
of thunder and tempest, he tears up Trees, and breaks down Roofs.

Power is a heavy and material thing, which draws after it a long Train of
humane means, without which it would remain immovable. It acts only with Land
and Sea Armies. Upon a march it must have a thousand springs, a thousand
wheels, and a thousand Machines. It commits a violence in fetching a step.
Authority on the contrary, which holds from the Nobility of its Origin, and
from the virtue of divine things, quietly works its wonders, Needs neither
instruments nor materials, nor even time to set them on work. Its all wrapped up
in the person of who exercises it, without seeking aid, or demanding a second.
Its strong, though naked; and alone fights, though it be disarmed.

Authority needs but one word to persuade; Three of its syllables, Madam,
humbles the bold, makes the rebel repent, stops the impetuosity, of mutinous
Legions, stifles sedition at its birth, and those whom the General was wont to
call my companions, cannot endure that he should name them either my Friends, or
Sirs, Gentlemen of Rome, or how you please to render Quirites. They fancy that
that very word has already degraded them, That those three syllables have torn
their belts and swords from them, that it has put them amongst the scum of the
most unclean, and most vile populacy.

I would but ask you the question, Madam, whether the name of Quirites, coming
out of any other mouth, but that of Caesar, would have entered so far into the
hearts of the Legions, and would have had the same power over their minds. For
my part I should hardly believe it. I know the height of Rhetoric, and
understand the virtue of the best pronounced words. But it reaches not so far.
Authority is incomparably more persuasive, then Eloquence. The soldiers would
have mocked a dozen of Ciceroes Orations, and yet yield themselves at one of
Caesar's words.

Nay, I do verily believe they would have yielded to his silence, had he been
content to have given them but a sign of leaving the Camp, without having taken
the pains to have spoken to them. By this dumb condemnation, treating them as
accursed, and excommunicated by their Country, and declaring them unworthy of
any kind of society with their General, beyond that of complaints and
reproaches which he might have made them. Such a scorn would have so grieved
them, that they would have begged death for a favor, and would have cast
themselves at his feet to pray him that he would handsomely dispatch them.

But I am vexed that so great a word which was so great an action, was not of
some Roman in the good and healthful time of the Republic, that I might not
allege a doubtful virtue, whose cause was undecided, as was that of Caesar. I
would, Madam, that this example of Military Authority were either of Scipio, or
of Fabritius, that I might justly join it with that other example of Civil
Authority, after which you will give me leave to conclude.

You know well that honest Man Appius Claudius, look upon him I beseech you,
burdened with years and diseases, who so long time never stirred out of his
chamber, and can scarce get himself from his bed to his chimney. Yet in that
condition, he resolves to be carried to the Senate, to quarrel with all the
Senators single, and to oppose himself to the shameful peace they were about to
conclude. It Is to be believed, Madam, that they were no less frighted to see
that hideous old man, then if it had been a ghost, which entered the Council
Chamber, and in my thought, they did not at first take him for Appius Claudius,
They took him for his shadow, or his fantasme, which came from the other world
to give them Lessons, and make them Remonstrances. Who came to tell them with a
tone of command, and a strong voice, which his anger raised in the weakness of
his confiscate body. Who ever was the Author of so filthy a Proposition, is no
true nor legitimate Roman. He must either be a Forainer or a Bastard. He must
be the son of one of our slaves, or he has not a drop of blood left of our
fathers, which his baseness has not corrupted.

What would not this angry old man have done had he had his eyes, and the rest
of his body at liberty? Would he not have beaten those which he was content
to chide only? Would he not have deposed Pyrrhus, and interdicted him his
Kingdom far from relinquishing by Treaty an inch of Land in Italy? I know not
what he could have done. But I know very well, Madam, that he did very much.
Rome and Pyrrhus were agreed upon conditions for a Treaty of Peace. Claudius
opposes it, and at the conclusion, comes and breaks it off. So that he proves
stronger then Rome and Pyrrhus both together, and carries it away from either
of them.

When so strange a News was told Cyneas, its likely he cried out, Behold, a
greater thing then I have yet admired in Rome. I have there seen a multitude of
Kings, but as yet I had not seen their Tutor. It Is this blind Man who is the
light of the Commonwealth. It Is this sick Man, who wars against us. It Is this
good Man, who was unable to stir from his bed, who drives us out of Italy. It Is
this Chair which bore him to the Senate, which is more to be feared, then our
Towers full of soldiers, then our Elephants, then our Machins.

A Discourse of the Conversation of the Romans. TO The Lady Marquess of
RAMBOVILLET.
Discourse II.
But this was while your Ancestors of old
For virtue with the Gods their names enrolled.
Nature in wonders fruitful was, and young,
The world with Hero's peopled stout as strong,
Our ages vigor now, alas, was spent,
The languors o^ old age it does resent,
Your Rome is d^^^, and all its glory gone,
The supreme virtue is in History alone.
Let Us be content their active strife t'admire,
Which made that fatal place 'bove all aspire
The example of those Grandies let us adore,
With incense let us your sought for temples store.

It Is near the matter, Madam, What I yesterday answered you in our common
Discourse, when I took my leave. I have since found the sense of my prose in
the Verses of a Poet, who never made any but those. And I conceived it was not
amiss after that manner to enter upon this days Conference, and to bind with
a knot, which perhaps will not displease you, the things I told, with those
which you would have me write unto you. Let Us again, Madam, confess it. Its
certain, that at the beginning, God dispensed great largesses, and although his
arm is no shorter then it was, yet are his hands less open then they were.
Besides, birthright, which Antiquity has over the latter times, it has had
other advantages which ended with it, and are not to be found in the
succession. It has had virtues which our age is not capable of. It belongs not
to us to be Camillas, and Catoes, we want the vigor of such Men as those
instead to provoke our courages, they make our ambition despair. They have
rather braved us then instructed us by their actions. By giving us examples,
they have obliged us to an uprofitable trouble. They have given us what we
cannot take. These examples being of that height that there is no way to attain
unto them.

I do not say, Madam, that in the most miserable times, God cannot send some
chosen Soul to make us remember his first Magnificence. I will not deny but
that he may take a particular care of that soul, and but that he has means
to preserve it from the vices of the Court, and the contagion of Custom. In the
most general stupidity of the world, there is some one found to awake^ the
rest, who breaks the bounds of the age, who is capable to conceiv the Idea of
ancient virtue, and to show us that the miracles of History are still possible
things. Its true, Madam, there is such an one: But this one makes no number; he
marks even sterility, neither does he hinder this solitude. Is there a
privileged soul, an extraordinary person, an Hero or two in all the world. Yet
is there not a multitude of Heroes. There is no people of extraordinary
persons. There is no more a Rome, nor Romans. We must seek them under ruins,
and in their Monuments. We must adore their Relics in the Books I have told
you of, and in the places I have desired you to observe.

I at first thought to be quit, having marked those places, and chosen you
those Books. Yet are you not satisfied therewith, and it seems you pretend that
I should add what is wanting to those Books. The glories and triumphs of Rome,
satisfy not your curiosity. It enquires of me some things more particular and
less known. You would desire, Madam, that I should show you the Romans, when
they hid themselves, and that I should open to you the door of their Cabinets.
After having seen them out of ceremony, you would be acquainted with their
conversation, and know from me if so direct and elevated a greatness, could
stoop to the use of a common life, could descend from affairs and employments
even to sports and divertisements.

I doubt it not, Madam, all the hours of wise men's lives are not equally
serious. Their souls are not always extended, nor always contracted, and yet in
the same vigor, though not the same action. Does any man believe that the
Sibarites only loved Feasts, and that they alone rejoiced. The Romans did it
also: But they did it in another manner, and loved other manner of Feasts.

A voluptuousness which rises higher then sense, which seeks the superior
part, and fills it with images: That holy, chaste, and altogether innocent
pleasure, which acts on the mind without changing it, or moves it with so much
sweetness, that it stirs not out of its place, or with so much address, that
it removes it to a better place then it had. This pleasure, Madam, was not a
passion unworthy of your Romans, Scipio and Laelius, used it without scruple.
Augustus and his friends were of those honest voluptuous persons.

The Senate and the Field, Civil affairs and Military actions, had their
seasons conversation. The Theater and Verse had theirs. The pleasures of the
mind were never better tasted, then by them, and with the same hands with which
they gained Victories, and signed the fate of Nariaeis, they wrote Comedies, or
applauded those who acted them before them.

There is not every day Hannibals to be conquered, nor an Africa to be
subjugated. Antony and the sons of Pompey died but every one once. And then
came the general Calm in which the most turbulent were at leisure, and the
world suffered it self to be as peaceably governed, as if it had been but one
family. So that they have sometimes wanted enemies, and sometimes rested in
peace. And in this State, Madam, why should they have made wars against
themselves? why should they have sought enemies in their own bowels? why
should they give themselves a prey to a distemper worse then Hannibal, and more
cruel then Africa? Why should they be afraid to rejoice, there being no body
to disturb their joy. The Sicilian Sea being scoured, and Egypt reduced into a
Province, Sixius Pompey, and Mark Antony, being only names and phantasmes. I
must confess, Madam, the desire of glory was a ruling passion: But Tyrants
themselves do not always reign tyrannically. 'Twas the feavour of their
minds, but this feavour did not always burn them with an equal ardour, it had
as well its releases, as its doubles. And do you not believ Scipio was out of
his high fit, when he gathered Cockles on the Sea shore with his friend, or
when he lent his words to Cremes and Micio in the Fables of Terence.

I undertake not here to decide whether he and his friend were the true
Authors of those Fables. It suffices me to say, That probably they were the
first approvers, and that they loved them, if they did not make them. And it
may even be, That the Poet changed the disposition of some scenes by their
advice, and that some half verses of theirs may be there. And what we find
finest and best aju^ed, was not so much what he borrowed from the works of
Menander, as what he h^d learnt from the conversation of Scipio.

As for the Emperor Augustus, in whose person I consider the end of their good
days, as I do the flower of them in that of Scipio. Its most true, Madam, that
he has judged most wholesomly of the value and merit of every thing, and that
he loved Glory, but that he hated not Pleasure. I speak of Pleasure in general,
because he tasted of all, and having afforded his senses very much, he refused
his Mind nothing. He discerned good and fair in all the subjects wherein it was
to be found; and for that enquiry, he employed the best skilled, and most
curious spies, so that they left nothing for the succeeding ages to discover.

I dare not say, as one has already said, that the Muses were his Buffoons and
Iesters; it is an injurious and an uncivil word; I shall only say, they had the
honor to be his familiars and his domestics, and at that time they were of
his Court and Cabinet.

They were at least called at hours of conversation, if not to the
deliberation of affairs; and if it be too much to say, that Virgil was the
Fourth of the Council held between Augustus and his two friends, To know
whether he should Maintain the Empire, or Restore Liberty. I somewhat suspect
the History of that Council, and I can scarce persuade my self, that the
gallant spirits of those times were so much the Emperors confidents that he
should communicate with them affairs of that nature. I am satisfied to believe
that they intended his virtuous pleasures without aspiring to a more important
direction; and that he caused the Palace gates to be open for them, when they
were shut to Supplicants and Petitioners.

But when in far distant Countries; nay, in the midst of the Palaces clouds
did rise, which obscured the Calm I spoke of; It was then, Madam, when the Muses
were no less necessary, then they had formerly been agreeable: 'Twas then they
did him service, and helped Livia to uphold her husband; who began already to
stoop with cares and under affairs. During this diseased and impatient season,
they were only employed to seek pleasures and divertisements for him: They did
strive only to charm his pains with their songs; they studied to appease and
set at rest that impaatient part of his soul which incessantly watched and
tormented it self, To estrange his fancy only from the debauches of his
daughter, and from the defeat of his Legions; To take away the sight of
troublesome subjects by the interposition of pleasing ones.

Now, Madam, as it was no small matter of merit for human Men sometimes to make
Augustus sleep, and sometimes to cheer him, the good Goddesses thereby justified
themselves from the calumny of the Barbarians, who accused them as useless to
the Republic, and as fit to have no rank in the world. This good Prince
suffering them also to extend the too large violence of his thoughts, and by
taking some intervals of release in those spectacles which they took care to
provide for him at the same time they did diverse good acts. For besides that
they avowed themselves to be his. They protected the innocent against the
License of the old soldiers, and the cruelty of the civil victory. He got
pratlers which use to be heard in all ages; and honoring them with
familiarity, he rendered them triburary to his glory. But chiefly, Madam, he
followed the Council of Nature, which will have all who work, rest; which
entertains its durance by moderation, and threatens violence with an end.

I know well that this Sovereign Understanding which was given to Princes for
the Conduct of human things, is incapable of being tired, and would agitate
continually, could it be alone. But being engaged with the body, and having
Organs which are extremely frail and delicate, it must manage them for their
benefit, and in spite of it self, fit it self, to the necessities of a
society, with which it is engaged. Princes cannot always be Angels, divorced
from sense, and enjoy the purity of a simple being; They must sometimes be Men
mixed with Matter and Subject to the changes of things composed. There must,
Madam, after the Tempests of Affairs, and the anxious Objects of the ills they
are to combat, be a care taken to find them pleasures. Ports to divert and
refresh their Minds, and attracting Perspectives which may untire and rejoice
their eyes. They are the needs of human life, how rich and sufficient so ever
it may otherwise be of it self. Labor would weaken the strongest Minds, had
they not their helps and stays to support them. Melancholy would suffocate
them, did they not thus respire. To speak properly they are the voluptuousness
of reason, and the delights of the understanding. And he who has discovered
all the Truths under Heaven, and was ignorant of nothing which could be known
without Revelation, made so particular an esteem of it in the Fourth Book of
his Ethics, that he was not afraid to say, That sport and divertisement were
no less necessary to life, then rest and nourishment.

Its true, he makes a difference as well as we of plays and divertisements.
He is not a Councellor of all kinds of debauches; neither will he have wise
men pass their time as the Vulgar do. He has discovered a Mean approved by
reason betwixt an ill humor, and a buffoone in which the soul dilates itself
by a moderate motion, and does not enervate it self by a violent dissolution.
And of this Mean, Madam, he has made a Moral virtue, which respects the good of
company, in pursuit of two others, which he proposes to us in the same
Chapter, for the same end. The first of these three Virtues is a certain
sweetness and facility of Manners, which can accommodate it self without
servility, and approves not all that is said without choice; neither by
distaste does he disapprove it. The second is a clear freedom, and a custom
to speak the Truth even in indifferent things, in as far a degree estranged
from vain ostentation, and an affected restraint. I intimated before what the
third was, and their three virtuous habits, according to the opinion of
Aristotle, rule all the commerce of words, and extend themselves to all the
entertainements which Men have of one another, whether we hold pleasing or
distasteful disputes, whether true or false, whether sad or joyful. So that,
Madam, without the first of these three Virtues, the Assemblies of Men would
be but Troops of Enemies mixed together, who would scratch and fly in one
another faces, or Circles of Lovers, who would adore their own defects, and
esteem their wrinkles fair. Without the second, they would but be the schools
of Dissemblers, who would scarce tell us what of the clock it were, or that it
were day at Noon, so fearful are they of mistaking. Or Theaters for Captains,
who say more then they know, or then they have done, or then indeed could have
been done. In fine, without the Third, of which we have spoken, the Assemblies
of Men being too sad or too merry, would seem either as the Convoyes of
afflicted persons, and the representation of a public grief, or spectacles of
naked persons and the image of those licentious Feasts, which durst not appear
before Cato.

The Mean betwixt these two is a Virtue of a truth, neither so splendent nor so
high as Wisdom and Magnanimity; yet its a Virtue allowed by the Philosophers,
even by the Philosophy of Cato. And should we banish it out of our Morals, the
communication we have with one another, would have bin but dry and thorny. Our
Discourse would rather have been a toil and a labor of the Tongue, then an
ease and a discharge of the heart: and Society if we had permission only to
dispute and to contradict, would trouble us far more then Solitariness, wherein
we at least may laugh out of memory, and rejoice in our own thoughts.

I cannot assure you, Madam, that the Romans were acquainted with so
praiseworthy a quality in the Infancy of the Republic; and although one of
their Poets reports well of King Numa, and of the Nymph of Egeria, the
Conferences which they had together, passing without witness, they could speak
of them but by conjecture.

These Victorious Peasants knowing nothing but husbandry and fighting, were
sensible only of gross pleasures proportionable to the hardship of their
births; there is no great likelihood that they did possess a Virtue directly
opposite to the rudeness they made profession of, and which seldom accompanies
poverty, which is almost always followed with an ill humor.

So long as their Eloquence, to use the terms of Varro, smelt of Garlic and
Onions, we could expect nothing very exquisite, and it was hard for so sad an
austerity as theirs to hearken to raillery, and to be touched with joy. First,
then they were without weakening to soften themselves; They must sweeten their
courages, and unrust their Manners, That at last they might advise to cultivate
themselves, as they did their Gardens and their Lands.

They indeed did it with so much success, and found so happy a foundation, That
presently the good Genius was amongst them a popular thing. This politeness
past from the Senate to inferior degrees, even to the lowest form of the
meaner people. And if in their cause their own witness is to be believed, they
have blotted out all the Graces, and all the Virtues of Greece, and have left
the Atticism thereof far short of their Urbanity.

Its that, Madam, which they called that lovely Virtue of Society, after having
practiced it many years without having given it a Name, and should use have
ripened amongst us a word of so ill a savor, and have corrected the
bitterness which might have been found in it. We might accustom our selves
thereunto, as to others, which we borrowed from the same language.

Now whether that word expresses in Ours a certain Air of the great World, and
a color and tincture of the Court, which not only marks words and opinions,
but even the tone of the voice, and the motion of the body. Or whether it
signify a less perceptible motion which is known but by chance, which has
nothing but is noble and high, and nothing which appears studied or learnt;
which is felt, and is not seen, and inspires, a secret Genius, which we lose in
seeking it. Or whether in a farther stretched signification, it means the
Science of Conversation, and the gift to please in good company: Or restraining
of it, it be taken for an address to touch the Spirit with I know not what
kind of pricking, yet whose pungency is pleasing to who receives it, because it
tickles, and hurts not, because it leaves a wound without grief, and awakens
only that part which malice offends. To conclude, Madam, according to the
judgment of a good Judge in such cases, It was a knowledge abused by the
Greeks, which other people were ignorant of, and from whom the Romans only
learnt the true and lawful use. Being so fit for them, and so incommunicable to
their nearest neighbors, that those even of Italy; could not acquire it
without some failings, nor so nicely counterfeit it, that the resemblance
should not mark the diversity.

It was then according to this account, a domestic plant which could grow up
but on the shore of the Tiber, or on the Mount Palatin, or at the foot of the
Capitol, or near the Camp of Mars, and near some other quarter of that Capital
City of the world.

Is it possible that the Heaven and the Sun of Rome, should have so much force
and so much virtue? Did they so sensibly agitate on the spirits of men? Were
they so absolutely necessary to make them good company? I fear not of my self
to say it, not to wrong the rest of Italy, and the rest of the civilized
Provinces. But to speak in general, its certain, Madam, that the Citizens of
Rome, had great advantages in the world, owed much to their Mothers, and to
their Breeding, and knew many things which no body taught them: there is no
doubt but in their most familiar entertainment, some graces were neglected,
some ornaments without art, which the Doctors are ignorant of, and which are
above rules and precepts. I doubted not but when I had seen it Thunder, and
Heaven and Earth mix in the O^ations of the Tribunals, but it was a change most
agreeably pleasing, to consider them under more then an humane appearance,
disarmed of their Enthymemes, and of their figures, having left their feigned
exclamations, and artificial angers, appearing in a condition wherein one might
say, They were truly themselves.

'Twas there, Madam, for example, where Cicero was neither Sophist, nor
Rhetorician, neither Idolater of this man, nor furious against that; neither of
this, nor of that party: There he was the true Cicero, and after mocked
himself privately of what he had adored publicly. 'Twas there he defined Men,
and painted them not, where he spoke of Cato as of a Pedant of the Portico, or
at most but as of a Citizen of Plato's Republic, where he said, That the
purple of the Senate was finer, but the steel of the Rebels was better, where
he confessed Caesar was the Contriver of his own Fortune, and that Pompey was but
the work of his.

These sentiments which parted from the heart, were hidden in great Assemblies,
and were discovered but between two or three friends, and as many faithful
domestics, and with whom he communicated this secret felicity. And if some of
them have said that they reigned all the time they Oration'd, so sovereign was
the power they exercised over men's minds; we may speak even of those which in
their conversation restored the liberty which they had taken away in their
Orations, That they set at large and at ease the minds of those they oppressed
and tormented; and that they drew them from that admiration which had agitated
them with violence, to make them sensible of a sweeter transport, and ravish
them with less force. I have seen a great Prince in the low countries, who in
that envied the fortune of their free men, and of those inferior friends, and
of the meaner sort, which they had brought out of slavery, to choose them their
confidents; and in effect, it was a wonderful contentment to be a witness of
their interior lives, and to be private to the more particular hours of their
leisure. And it were an incomparable satisfaction to know those good things
which have been said of Scipio and Laelius Atticus and Cicero, and other honest
people of every age, To have the History of their conversation and Cabinets to
add to those of Affairs and State.

Being born in the Empire, and bred up in Triumphs, all what proceeded from
them bore the Character of Nobleness, which distinguished the^ from Subjects.
All of them were sensible of Command and Authority, though government and
conduct were not in question; all was remarkable and exemplary, even their
Secrets and Solitude.

Having from their infancy seen Kings led Captives through the streets, and
other Kings Petitioners and Solicitors come in person to demand Justice, and
expect at the door of the Senate their good or ill success. They could retain
nothing that was low in such raised and purged spirits from such spectacles.
The very lees of such a people were precious: and if by mischance some
Gentlemen were found who had vulgar spirits, its to be believed that such great
objects would presently have raised them. Its likely, that being not only
covered and environed, but penetrated, even filled with so much light which
resplended even on their least actions, which they could not lessen nor hide so
well, but that they always were strong and illustrious. I speak as I believe,
and you know well the dead have no flatterers. 'Twas impossible for them wholly
to divest themselves of their greatness, because it was in their hearts and in
their minds, because it was rooted in them, and was not applied to their
fortunes. No gesture, nor outward motion of theirs was unworthy the Sovereignty
of the world: Even they laughed and sported with some kind of dignity. It Is
what I fear not Madam, to present unto you, who descend not only from the same
Origin and from the same blood, but who beyond all this, are the daughter of
their discipline and spirit, and retain no less a share of the Magnanimity of
the Caesar's, and of the Scipios, the^ of the honesty of the Lelia's, and of the
Comelia's.

Your Ancestors were great even in the least things. And since formerly a Sect
did believe, That a wise man sleeping, was like himself; neither did he then
forbear to be wise, (It was an Idol and a Wise man formed at pleasure) since
that Sect has left it for a dogma, That the dreams of this imaginary Wise man
were reasonable and judicious. We may have leave to believe, That truly Wise
men might rule with gravity by their reason, and conduct one part of their
lives, which is more capable of either then sleeping, and that their less
violent and less serious actions were animated with vigor and the Majesty of
the Republic.

Would you have me verify what I tell you, and raise my self higher then
Scipio's time, To show you that their was always wit in Rome; But that there
was always Authority and Greatness mixed with this wit: It shall be only the
good Fabritius, whose Letter you saw to Pyrrhus, which will furnish the example
we seek. And I pray consider it, Madam, in that celebrous conversation which
he had with the same Pyrrhus, and with Cyneas the head of his Council. Cyneas
having made a long Discourse in praise of a Contemplative life, and amongst
other things having said, That there was a great person at Athens named
Epicurus, who preached Rest and Voluptuousness, and held the Government of
States unworthy the employment of the Wise, Because Wise men ought not to
disturb themselves for fools, for ungrateful persons, for men. Fabritius had the
patience to hear the vanity of the Grecians, although he approved them not:
Yet with a disdainful smile which he addressed to him who brought them forth. O
said he, How soon would the Romans have done, if all the world would be but
Epicurian.

Do you not believe, Madam, that Cyneas was surprised with so unexpected an
answer, and so far from the admiration he looked for from so unlettered a Man,
whom he thought he had ravished with his Eloquence. That little saying at one
blow overthrew the opinions of that great man of Athens, and the Eloquence of
that brave Orator. And a regular refutation of Epicurian Philosophy undertaken
by a Stoic prepared for the business, would not have had the force which this
exclamation of one line had, which rendered Epicurus ridiculous, which confounded
Cyneas, and astonished Pyrrhus.

Yet Fabritius, Madam, did use to astonish Pyrrhus with his answers; he
usually laughed at the Propositions which the King seriously made; And when he
once offered him the first place next to him in his Kingdom, supposing that
he would not dispute so advantageous a grant, and that without difficulty he
would change poverty for riches: The poor Citizen answered the rich Prince in
these words, which I have drawn from a Greek Manu script: I love you Pyrrhus
too well, to accept the conditions you offer. If to day I were your Favorite,
who could assure you but that to morrow I might be your Master? Of a truth you
are worth much, yet you cost more; And do you not believe, That did your
subjects know me, but that they would rather receive exemptions from me with
the security of all they have, then to pay Tribute to you, and have nothing
they can call their own: Make me therefore no more of these offers, which might
ruin you if I took you at your word; and never promise me what you cannot keep
without the loss of your Crown. A ^ough Commonwealths man born with the hatred
of Monarchy, would have answered rudely, that he would have nothing to do with
a King nor to be Lieutenant General of the Kingdom. But, Fabritius, who was
harsh in fight only, and knew only how to offend armed Kings, being unwilling
to receive what was offered, yet would he refuse with a good grace: He would
by that gallant and ingenious refusal, once more make himself to be desired by
Pyrrhus, and show him that he was not only a man of very great use, but also a
man of good Conversation.

These, Madam, are the first essays of Politenesse, and as it were the design
of Urbanity in a Republic of Brass and Iron amongst simple and innocent
Citizens; but simple and innocent in such a way, that we cannot say their
simplicity was smooth, and their innocence spiritual: The Consuls and the
Dictators laughed after this manner. Thus they spoke when they did not speak
seriously; and the seriousness of the Grecians was worth nothing to the rude
and imperious raillery of the Romans.

Even the Censors, Madam, although Grief seemed to be one of the functions of
their charge, did not absolutely renounce all kind of raillery: They did not
opinion at themselves to an eternal severity; And that hasty and insufferable
honest man, I mean the first Cato, did sometimes forbear to be angry and
insupportable; He had rays of joy, and the intervals of a good humor; Sayings
have escaped him which were nothing ungrateful; And if you please, Madam, you
may judge of others by this.

He married a well fashioned woman; and Histories observe, that she extremely
feared thunder, as she did extremely love her husband; these two passions
counseled her the same thing; She ever chose her husband for her shelter
against thunder, and cast her self into his arms; at the first murmr, she
imagined she heard from Heaven Cato, who was pleased with the storm, and who
was not angry to be carressed more then ordinary, could not retain the joy of
his heart. He reveals this domestic secret to his friends, and tells them,
speaking of his wife, That she had found out a way to make him wish for ill
weather; and that he was never so happy, as when Jupiter was angry. Severity
it self rejoiced in this manner: It was extreme rigidnesse: 'Twas Sovereign
Justice, which thus laughed; and indeed, Madam, although he and the rest were
incorruptible Judges, yet must we not therefore say, that their good
dispensation of justice proceeded from their ill humor: They knew how to change
virtue according to the diversity of time and place: They received at night in
their closets, the favors they had in the morning rejected on the Tribunal.
But the Graces being at home with them, they were neither affected, nor
licentious: They were wise and modest; They painted not Majesty; They dressed her
the least they could, and hindered her only from frighting others. These
Graces, Madam, and this Majesty, were at last separated; and the Graces
appeared again under their Emperors: But they appeared alone for that Majesty,
I mean the Majesty of words was lost with their Liberty. Fabritius his style
lasted but till Brutus and Cassius; and indeed its very observable whether it
be in some of their Letters which are still visible, or in the Discourse they
had together the Eve before the Philippi battle.

There is no man so much a stranger to Antiquity, who is ignorant of Brutus his
evil Angel, and who knows not their Dialogue. Next day after their Funeral
Conference, Brutus related it to Cassius, with more trouble and disturbance
then he had when the Demon appeared unto him. But observe, Madam, with what a
bias turned so distastful a matter, and how he made it profitable for the use
of Conversation.

Without appearing an astonished admirer, or an incredulous opiniator, he
laughing, told his friend, That the cares of the Mind, the contention of the
spirit, the weariness of the body, and the darkness of the night might be the
cause of his vision, and had formed unto him those strange Images. That as for
him from the principles of Philosophy, which he professed, he could not believe
there were Demons, and much less that they were visible: Yet nevertheless,
he wished there were, and that his Philosophy were false; Forasmuch as
apparently those spirits without bodies ought to be just and virtuous. The
action of the Ides of March was so fair, and the cause so honest, that
undoubtedly they would bear their part in it. And that so they would be friends
and allies of whom he had not thought, of which would come to his relief, and
Troops of reserve, which at a need would fight for them; which being granted,
he ought not to reckon of their party, only so many Companies of foot, so many
Cornets of horse, so many Legions, and so many Vessels: But besides that, there
was an immortal people, and a most happy Militia, which needed no pay, and
declared themselves for the good cause, and which he never need fear would
serve Antony against Brutus, or prefer Tyranny before Liberty.

These words, Madam, were the last words of the Republic, which she uttered
before she gave up the ghost, and after which she expired: 'Twas the Character
of the spirit of Rome; It was the natural language of its Majesty: And do you
not find that Cassius was very Eloquent in that Tongue? Would you not be well
pleased to be more particularly acquainted with that Excellent Man, to see him
in other society then this, and to hear him discourse on less ungrateful
subjects, and at another time then the Eve of the Philippin Battle.

The mischief is, that a quick voice dies as soon as its brought forth, and
leaves nothing after it, forming no subsisting bodies in the air: Words have
wings, you know its Homers Epithete, and a Syrian Poet has made a sort of
language amongst birds: So that, Madam, if we stop not these Fugitives by
Writing, they easily escape our Memory.

Even all that is written, is not sure to last; and Books perish as Tradition
is forgot: Time, which ends Marble and Iron, wants not strength against frailer
subjects. And the Northern people who seemed to come to hasten time and
precipitate the end of the world, declared so particular a war to written
things, that it was not wanting in them, but that even the Alphabet had been
abolished.

Elsewhere, Madam, there is a fate of Letters which loses and saves without
choice the motions of human intelligence, which pardon ill verses, and ill
intended fables, to suppress Oracles, and deprive the world of the Light of
needful History. The Ancients acknowledged a Demon, who presides at the birth
of Books, and Soveraignly disposes of their fortune and success; whether they
result well or ill, whether they are short or long-lived, as it succeeds either
favorable or adverse.

Now its certain, if this Demon were an ill willer to the Public, and envious
of honest curiosity, and contrary to the reputation of great persons, it was
principally in that part of their Memories, which designed their humor, which
acquainted us with the relishes and delicacies of their Minds, which
discovered the truth of their Manners to posterity, and the secrets of their
private lives.

What a misfortune it is, Madam, that we cannot accost them by that accessible
part and proportionable to the debility of our strength; that we have lost that
easy object, and which we could better bear then a higher elevation of their
glory; That we know the most part of their battles, and order of their Militia,
and yet are ignorant of their calm Conferences, and of the Method they used in
their treaties with one another, knowing of their solemn Feasts, and great
Ceremonies, and yet have no share in their familiarity, or in their domestic
affairs.

Truly, Madam it had been no small unhappiness, had it altogether so befallen
us; yet me thinks we cannot with reason deny but that some amongst them have
had a care of us, nor justly complain, that we have been frustrated of what by
succession belongs unto us. Two or three by way of Comedy have left us the
tract of four and twenty hours; I mean the representation of some merrily past
day, and others have showed them us in their Dialogues, and in their Letters.

These Dialogues, and these Letters are their immortal entertainments:
Conversations which are still lasting, whereto we have every hour free
admittance; where that Idea of virtue is preserved, of which Aristotle speaks
in the Fourth Book of his Ethics, where the first Master of this noble and
Patrician raillery, as they call it, is to be found, which was so compatible
with the Roman gravity.

These Copies are more correct and clearer perhaps then their first Originals
were; and if they have not the advantage of a lively voice and presence, which
persuades the senses, and gives a luster to vile things; they have that of
attention, and of a second view, which polisheth the rude, and unmixeth the
confused, which adds what is commonly wanting to sudden and carnal actions.

Here is enough Madam, to satisfy a Mind possessed only with languishing
passions, and to content a hunger which is satisfied with a little nourishment:
But being desirous of much, and greedy of new knowledge, and lovers of change;
we must confess that there is no more then to whet our appetites. We are not
children quite disinherited; neither are we heirs extremely rich: And the goods
left us, are nothing so great as the losses we have made.

My intention here is not to lament the calamities of Learnings Commonwealth; I
will say nothing of the ill fortune of History, of its breaches and ruins. The
name of Luceius is scarce come to our ears; of that Luceius, Madam, in whose
Histories Cicero solicited and begged a place. Our Salust is but a part of
that Salust which your Fathers had: Where is the second Decad of Titus Livius?
Where are his Civil Wars? Where are those of Asinius, Pollio and Crematius
Cordus, which were Masterpieces of the Roman Liberty and Eloquence? All these
Madam, are no more; and if we would know the news of a season which has so
much relation and conformity with the times we have seen, we must enquire of
some stranger of Greece, who commonly is what he knows not.

Nevertheless I perceive, that in the humor we now in these days are, and in
the disgust of a distempered age, which prefers fawces to meat, and its fancy
to health. It Is not the great and serious amongst the Romans, which we must
regret, and are most angry to have lost; We might easily pass over the Annals
of their wars and fields, had we but a Iournal of their divertisements and
winter quarters. And we should without much trouble consolate our selves at
the shipwreck of needful Histories, could their fair Fables have escaped.

It were indeed an excellent consolation to afflicted spirits, for the loss of
Titus Livius his Decads, could we recover the Comedies of Plautus and Terence,
which we have no more, without mentioning other Poets of the Theater, from
whose wrack there remains only a few lame Verses, and some halting Sentences.

The Satyrs of Varro, who was the Painter of the Life and of the Mind, would
also afford us very grateful knowledges: For though most serious Philosophy
were in those Satyrs, yet was it as it were on flowers, and as in a place for
debauch, all painted and perfumed with the gallantry of those times.

There we should have seen the Conscript Fathers dispatching of their Clients,
dismantled of their long robes in the purity of their nature; such as they were
in the pleasures of their jollity, and in the liberties they took after supper:
Such as you have asked me to see them, when you thought I could say somewhat to
their Books. We should then have had Lions whole, whereas now we have but
their claws; and if the fate of Books would have had it so, The conversations
of Brutus and Cassius, the entertainments of Voluminous and of Papirius Poetus,
would have been as long lived, as the Controversies of the Rhetoricians, of
Seneca, and the Declamations of Quintilian. We should judge, Madam, of Urbanity
by it self, and in whole and perfect figures, instead that we can now judge
but by our suspicions, and by obscure and imperfect tracts.

Had it pleased the same destiny, the first Caesar would yet be one of those
Authors whom I alleged upon this subject: He with care had gathered what had
been said, and what was every day most remarkably said. Tyron also made a
Collection of all the good Sayings of Cicero, and an ancient Grammarian
speaks of two Books of Tacitus, the title of which was the Conceits Facetiae.
But particularly, Madam, the Court of the second Caesar, of which was spoken in
the beginning of this Discourse. That gallant and witty Court which mocked the
conceits of Plautus, and the raillery of Antiquity, would furnish me wherewith
to entertain you whole days, with a virtue which belonged unto them in
property, and which from thence had received its last form: For we must
confess with the leave of the Republic, that the age of Augustus judged very
subtly of things, perfectly purified by reason, gave lights to the Mind which
it had not before. It was the golden Age of Arts and Discipline, and generally
of all fair Literature. All was polisht and refined under his reign; All were
knowing and ingenious in that Court from Augustus even to his Grooms.

Its written, that fire and lightning came from his eyes; whereto I would add,
Madam, that they also issued out of his mouth, but more quick and glittering
then those, which dazzled the Courtiers of those times, which obliged the one of
them to complain, that it was not possible to look him in the face: He composed
verses and suppressed them; and suppressing them, he gave out a word of the ill
work he had made, which was worth as much as the best work which could be
made. He in four words answered the long Oration of the Spanish Ambassadors;
but those four words deserved another Oration longer then the former to commend
them.

Besides the Commentaries of his life, there was a long time in the world a
volume of his Letters; and you may believe, Madam, they were not always
concerning State-Affaires nor all addressed to the Senate or to the Legions; some
were of raillery, some of confidence to his friends; others of love, and of the
gallantry of his Mistresses, and of the same style with those which his Uncle
writ to Queen Cleopatra, on tablets of Corinthians and Saphirs.

But I am coming, Madam, to astonish you. Do you believe, that at this day
there is any where any fragments to be found of those Letters written to
Cleopatra? And that love, and the love letters of Caesar, survived her hatred,
and her Anti-Cato's. This rarity has been preserved in an old Greek
Manuscript, which happily came to my hands, whence I have taken what I have
already told you of Fabritius, of Cato, and of Cassius.

The Author of this Manuscript is not unknown, is not the Son of Earth, he
has a name, and a Country, and bears the marks of his Nativity: He lived
under the Empire of the Antonines; he seemed to have the same design with the
Sophist Aelian: But his manner of writing is more at large, and his work may be
called a mixture of common with rare things.

Yet truly, Madam, I cannot speak so affirmatively of the truth of these
letters, but that you still have leave to suspend your judgment. I dare not
assure you, that they were found in Cleopatra's Cabinet, when the Inventory of
her goods was made by order of Augustus. Besides, the Sophist are men, whom I
trust but in some sort: The Roman Poet teaches us to fear the Greeks, even
when they present us; and the Cardinal Historian of the Church made use of his
advice on the subject of the donation of Rome, made to Pope Silvester by the
Emperor Constantin. Since then the Largesses which come from Greece ought to be
suspected by us, and that in that Country there is a number of good willing
people which are at leisure: Since the Sophists served as Secretaries to
Falaris and other Princes; I know not how many ages after their deaths, they
may have rendered the same service to Caesar upon this occasion: But before we
determine thereupon, it will not be amiss to consult the infallible. * * * *

Their answers which formerly were rendered at Delphos, were not more certain
then his. All the Impostors of Antiquity; All the Sinons, and all the Ulisses
of Greece, are not subtle enough to make him take one for another: And he
will instantly resolve, whether what we present him be legitimate or base;
whether it be gold from the Mine, or gold of Chemistry.

However it be, I believe its Antiquity; And had those pieces which the Greek
Sophist alleges been counterfeit, it would have according to my opinion
awhile after Caesar, and perhaps in the time of Augustus. We will in another
observe them with what remains concerning that age; Unless you, Madam, esteem
it as already done, and the Age also; and affording me the favor of a second
Discourse, you would spare the pains of tiring my self with disquieting you.

MAECENAS TO The Lady Marquess of RAMBOVILLET.
Discourse III.
THE last time I had the honor to see you, the Emperor Augustus was the chief
subject of our Discourse. I brought you to consider him in the beginning,
continuance, and perfection of his glory: You observed how at nineteen he vyed,
with the age and experience of Cicero; How in one work he acted three or four
different persons; How he showed the Conscript Fathers, who would have treated
him like a young man; that although he had not studied so long as they, yet he
had learnt more; And how he did with address employ their Forces to make his
designs succeed, instead that he thought to use his own name and credit to
establish his authority.

I past as lightly as I could that bloody Act of the Triumvirat, whereof there
was no way to clear his reputation; and I wished for his honor, that that part
of his History were blotted out of the memory of things; I staid at the
frequent broils, the plaistered reconcilements, and the last rupture betwixt
him and Mark Antony, and accompanied him even to Rome, and even to the day of
his triumph, after the fatal voyage of Egypt. It was not without informing you
by the way, that the dexterity of his Mind was always mixed with the good
fortune of his arms: And that having overthrown in the Philippick plains the
two dear sons of the Republic, he thought he had done nothing, could he not
free himself from the two coheirs he had in the succession of his Unckles
power, that he might secure what he had done.

The Conduct of that work was admirable, he went beyond his Uncle, and placed
himself in a better seat. The opposing virtue was unhappy; Force was found
impotent: Hinderance made him a passage to arrive thither. And then, Madam, the
Romans began to know the design of Providence, and the mortal disease of the
old Republic. At last they loved to have rather an assured Master, and a
peaceable servitude, then changes every day, and a perpetual fright of Civil
War. Rest, which they did believe to be an essential good, was to them in lieu
of liberty, which seemed now no more then a delight of the fancy. Every man was
pleased to be quiet after such troublesome affairs, and the sweetness of
quietness did so agreeably slide into their Minds, that they even wished not
for their first condition, when Augustus with assurance would have restored it;
they were so weary of Leagues and Parties, that they acknowledged him for a
Benefactor, who would take from the^ the trouble of governing themselves; and
blessed his Usurpation, who delivered them from their ill Conduct. Since he leads
us, said they, let us sleep in our Vessel with security; let us if we will
debauch our selves; let us laugh at Bacchus and Pirates: It Is impossible we should
be lost, Caesar is responsible for our safety. Even the grandchildren of the
Consuls and Dictators forgot their honor to follow their interest, and forsook
a ruinous and imaginary liberty, to yield to an obedience which was convenient
and full of effective advantages. They were the most subtle and most watchful
Courtiers, and although they bore the names, which had made the Kings of the
Earth tremble, they cared not to be seen in the crowd amongst those which give
good morrows, asking favors at the door of one of their own Citizens. They
said their fortune had showed them the example of their duty, and the way to
the Palace of Augustus. That they went whether the Gods were gone before them;
and that if they had changed party, the Destin of things, and the Demon of
Rome, had done so before them; Thus this Sovereign Soul, and of the first rank,
which had a Navual Empire over all other Minds, found neither contradiction
nor resistance: The proudest submitted to the yoke, yielded to the superiority
of his spirit without difficulty past under so elevated an height, and
submitted humane virtues to somewhat of divine, which they acknowledged in the
person of Augustus. There was no fierce courage, Madam, now to be daunted;
neither Cato nor Brutus to resuscitate a dead party. Mutiny lost even its
breath and noise, envy was changed in to admiration.

Whence I conclude, if I remember right, That Envy goes not always so far as
Virtue. That Opinion is at last tired in following its constancy, and that
there is a degree whereat Desert having arrived, it is beyond the reach of the
ill wishes, and the ill will of Men. In pursuit whereof, Madam, an
irreproachable Judge as you may call Monsieur Chappellain, raising his voice
but a little more then ordinary, pronounced this fair Decree in favor of
Augustus, and his new Dominion. Who is that presumptuous man that dares
complain, that Heaven is above him, that thinks it strange, that the most
luminous amongst creatures, is the highest, and that the worthiest is the
greatest?

No man did ever appeal from that Decree Augustus was Crowned by, the suffrage
of all the company after his life was made after my manner in little. But
because Agrippa and Maecenas were forgot in that life, you witnessed at our
issuing out of your Cabinet, that you would not be displeased, if I should tell
you what I knew of either of them. And that it would be grateful to you if I
made you a particular relation of Moecenas, of whom so many have unknowingly
spoken. You shall be obeyed after my fashion, and I wish it may be to your
content: But as I usually do, Madam, I will give you the things you ask as they
fall into my mind, and rather according to the liberty of Discourse, then the
course of History.

Agrippa was bold and wise in War, infatigable in Military labors, a religious
observer of Discipline, and had all the other parts of a good Captain: But on
the other side, he wanted those sweet and sociable Virtues which are necessary
for an able Courtier: He did better understand the Science of the Field, then
of the Cabinet; Stratagems, then Intricacies, and what was in time of trouble
valor in him, became in time of rest, rudeness.

The same cannot be said of Moecenas; He was esteemed the honestest man of his
time, and had nothing in his person which nature had not found with care, and
which Letters and the great World had not polished. Yet Madam, you may observe,
that the tincture which is taken at this great Light, and which gives a color
to natural goods, was taken from him with a reserve, and advanced not to the
painting and disguise of intentions, so that it fell from the total alteration
of Probity. He had the graces of the Court, but not the vices, and his actions
were even as direct as his manner of acting was pleasing.

Although the Court may debauch Saints, and commonly at first infects what it
receivs pure, yet it contaminated not Maecenas. It made him show, that besides
the use of preservatives, which the study of wisdom furnishes, there may be
disposition inwardly so good, that they are stronger then all corruptions from
without. It Was he that gave the first example to the world, that was ever seen
of an innocent and modest prospering.

He preserved in the Court the Maxims he brought thither, and in a place where
all is false and masked, he would appear what he was.

But he had no need take care, Madam, to counterfeit the Liberal and the
Generous: He could not but have been much troubled to have hindered himself
from being so: For which he needed neither labor nor fighting; Giving but way
to the course of his own inclination, he never fell but on good, and on virtue.
And so his good actions flowing from the spring and not being drawn by
strength of arms, as those of some Hero's of this age, the easiness and
liberty of them was no less esteemed then the Splendour and Magnificence: It Was
said of him that he was the honor of his Age, and of the Roman Empire; That he
was the general Good of the World; That the Sun would sooner cease to shine,
and the Rivers to run, then Maecenas to do good. A brave man of his time cries
out in a Poem which he addressed to him, It Is too much given, Moecenas, I am but
too rich; And indeed the discretion only of those who received his benefits,
could make stop of his liberality. If his friends would have believed him, he
would have left himself nothing. Neither durst a man praise at his house either
a picture sent for a rarity from Greece, or a statue of Corinthian Brass, or a
service of Crystal Glass, lest he presently should dispoil his Palace of
those precious movables, and force him that praised them to accept of them.

Excess and Vanity might imitate Moecenas: But natural goodness only could
reach his height. But we must remember, Madam, that this Noble man of spirit
was not solitary and unaccompanied; All the Virtues marched in its Train; 'Twas
a strong and courageous Goodness, an able and an intelligent Goodness; and
out of the same fountain whence particulars drew favors and courtesies, the
public was furnished with councels and resolutions. How great a Doctor he was
in the Science of governing; The fate of Affairs never deceived him; He never
was a false Politician, neither did he wander to appear a good speaker in the
vast spaces of verisimilies. He always went right out to truth, and so clearly
saw the sequel of things in their first disposition, That the most irregular
successes did hardly belly the conjectures he made.

Is it not true that the Emperor would have done wrong to so excellent a
person, had he not honored him with his confidence, and had he not given him a
share in the government of the world? Being as he was a just esteemer of men,
and knowing the value of every thing, he could not legitimately make twelve to
be worth no more then two. That a many eminent qualities should not be of more
use then a mean sufficiency. That the most powerful in reason should not have
the first place in Affairs. In a word Madam, Augustus told not but that
Moecenas must have been Favorite to Augustus; And although he was to give long
and opinionated battles against the restraints of so modern a spirit to make
him accept what he deserved, and that he was much troubled to overcome him. Yet
was he worthy of the Magnanimity of the greatest Prince in the world, that in
this occasion he would not suffer himself to be overcome, and not give way.
That his acknowledgement should be inferior to the modesty of one of his
friends.

He did then much good to this friend, but it was as you have already seen, to
distribute it and divide it every way. To inlighten and rejoice all the earth
with the light of his riches. With this wealth Moecenas bought for Augustus all
hearts and all tongues, and consequently rendered them of so much the better,
more noble, and of the more durable species: So that considering so new a
commerce, he who gave was less liberal then he was a good husband; and who
received from him was rather his Factor then his Favorite. But, Madam, what I
am going to tell you, deserves to be well observed: He was ever of the
Religion, To receiv nothing which might not justly be given, he would have
nothing which might be reproached him, not only from the public complaint of
his renown, but also by the secret sight of an interessed particular. Those who
since had the same favor under other Reigns, used it not so. Their morrals
were larger and more indulgent to their passions. They had none of those
delicacies of Conscience.

When they died not soon enough of a natural death, they had recourse to
accusations to advance the term of the account they made: They caused Innocents
to be condemned to make their Charges vacant, and in the sight of afflicted
Orphans, they bore the marks of their Fathers fortune which were not yet dry of
his blood. Moecenas his proceedings were far different from these; he would
have believed himself sullied with the confiscated goods of one proscribed, and
as you may guess, How many places and houses has he refused, because he
would not touch Funeral spoils, nor take away the successions of unhappy men.

I shall say more, and his scruples went farther; he has often sent back the
presents and gratifications of the Provinces, which he had eased, fearing lest
the lightest sign of their gratitude, and that a Nosegay received in such an
encounter, made not the least resentation of interest appear in his advice. He
oftener set aside the profitable, which was not dishonest to embrace, what was
honest barren and unfruitful; He preferred a simple satisfaction of Mind to
those things which the world esteems solid and essential.

I believe, Madam, that so discreet and limited a greatness raised no
jealousies in his Prince. There was no Treason to be feared from so
superstitious an integrity. How should he be a pensioner to Mark Antony, had
he not accepted all kind of Augustus his favors? And how should he desire new
things to meliorat his condition, since he contented himself with a little part
of those advantages, which the present offered. O rare example for happy Men!
Such a man is not to be found. How strong and solid a piece he was in the
foundation of a growing principality. Tyranny it self might have been justified
by the innocence of this Minister, as it might have been upheld by the rest of
his more lively and more ardent virtues.

Yet would I not deny, but that his delicate complexion sometimes rendered him
less fit for the labors of his body, and for the toils of war, and was the
cause that ordinarily his Mind could only work. But, Madam, without being
pressed he did not forbear to do much, and to render as useful services to the
State, as his Colleague, although they were not followed with so much noise and
pomp. The Solitude he built himself in Town, and the shadows of his Gardens,
hid the half of his virtue. His employments were covered with an outward
appearance of laziness. And perhaps Agrippa, who appeared was praised for the
conduct of Moecenas, whilst he was retired.

The Emperor had more inclination for this; but remembering the battles gotten
in Sicilia and Egypt, he esteemed the other more. The one he believed loved him
more, and the other had obliged more. All these deliberated of general Affairs:
But sometimes he consulted only Moecenas concerning the life and fortune of
Agrippa. Witness Madam, that little word, upon which one of Machiavels
Disciples composed a great Discourse. You must either put him to death, or make
him your son in Law. That is to say, you must either lose him, or quite gain
him. You must secure your self of a greatness which is suspected to you either
by taking him out of the world, or planting him in your House.

You may thereby observe that Moecenas regarded only his Master: I speak like
a French man, and thought only of confirming his Authority. Agrippa had a
taste of the lost liberty, and turned his head about from time to time toward
the ancient Republic This never proposed counsels but such as were purely
honest; but his companion wherein concerned the good of the State, would add
profit to honesty. The first had the command of Armies, and fought the Enemies
of the Empire. The second exercised his power even over the Emperors Mind,
and therein appeased the motions which rose up against Reason.

Which he did Madam, with so much liberty, that the Prince being once on the
seat of Justice, where some criminal process was deba^^ed, and where he began
to be carried away with the deceits and calumnies of the accusers. Moecenas
thereupon arriving, and being unable to divide the crowd, which hindered his
passage to him, he handed a Note to him, wherein were these words: Hangman,
will thou not come away from them? Augustus in stead of taking offense at the
boldness of the word, and of so pricking a familiarity, took his friends zeal
kindly: And at the same time broke up the Assembly and descended from his
Tribunal, whom perhaps he had not innocently gotten down, had he staid longer.

He often received such like proofs of his fidelity. It Was Maecenas who tempered
the heat of his passions, and sweetened the sharpness of his spirit; who healed
the wounds when he could not prevent the blows; who consolated him, when he was
not in a condition to admit of joy.

Augustus very well understood the desert and value of this Friendship. He
perceived well that his person being nearer to him then his fortune, such like
services were to be valued in his Mind, more then the taking of Towns, and
gaining of Battles. He witnessed him also all the acknowledgments you can
imagine from a just Prince, and who knew how to distinguish inclination from
duty, and those who loved Caesar, only from those who mixed other passions
therewith. Even after his death, he continued to acknowledge it to his Memory;
and whenever any domestic affliction befell him, or some outward displeasure,
sighing he would say, This would not have befaln me had Moecenas been living.
He thought himself unhappy in possessing the Empire of the world, since he had
lost his Moecenas.

He had indeed a great deal of reason to regret a person so equally good and
intelligent, who could neither deceive nor be deceived; who could do ill
neither out of weakness, nor out of design. He had great cause to weep the
loss of a friend, who was both so necessary and so pleasing. A friend at all
hours, and at all times, in whom he found all he sought, which was his Table
and Common place Book, the Witness and the Repository of his thoughts; the
treasury of his mind, even his second soul.

In effect, Madam, (to show you the worth of a faithful friend about a great
Prince) how much do you think he confirmed, fortified, and augmented the
reason of Augustus? How many thrones has he drawn out of those businesses he
has had to dispatch? How many expedients did he propose to himself to
facilitate his designs? How many platforms has he made to raise his works?
You need not doubt but he has often spared the pains of his foresight, and
charged himself with the cares and disquiets of the future, that he might leave
him entirely in the action. That the vigor of his spirit might not by being
divided, be diminished. That I might with truth at this time say, That they
divided amongst themselves the several functions of the same duty, and that
they both lived but one life.

The faithful Moecenas diverse times, Madam, upheld Augustus, when he was tired
with the search of difficult good, and presented him with the image of a
crowned and enjoyed virtue, to divert his sight from the sad object of
suffering and laboring virtue, after a discovered Conspiracy, and when he
judged Clemency better then Justice. He fancied glory to him fairer and more
attractive, then she was, to provoke him the more to the love thereof, to
oblige him to convert wicked persons to honest men. By changing sentences of
death into abolitions, to do so that he preferred the praise of goodness,
which lasts as long as the families and races are preserved, before vengeance,
which passes as quickly as the stroke of a hatchet can be given, and an head
cut off.

And after this you may if you please believe Seneca, who condemns the style
and eloquence of Moecenas. Me thinks Madam, that to obtain such like graces
from a provoked soul, a man should not want Eloquence. I speak of that good and
wise Eloquence, the Eloquence of Affairs and Action bred in the Sun, and in the
light of the great World, incomparably stronger then the Rhetoric of the
Sophists, although that can far better hide and dissemble its strength.

There is no doubt but its absolutely necessary to speak well, for to have to
do with Princes, who commonly cannot relish reason if it be not delicately
prepared. It Is not enough that there be virtue in the remedies they are to
use, they will have no bitterness in them. It Is not sufficient that the things
we present them be good, if they are not as well good in their form, as in
their matter.

But it is not Princes only who desire pleasing words, and who are offended
against the Reason which reproves them. To speak generally, there being nothing
so free and elevated as the Mind of Man, it will be treated according to the
nobleness of its nature: That is to say, with sweetness, method, and
address. Thereby Madam, the will is carried away without much resistance, and
from the Will we come to the Understanding, which is so much an enemy to
constraint, that to eschew it, it estrangeth it self from its proper object,
and rejects the truth when any one will cause another to embrace it by force.

Its certain that the Understanding of an Art so necessary to Government, was
Sovereign in the person of Moecenas. As he was most clear sighted in
discerning of wits, he was full of address in their conduct; and was no less
subtle in handling them, then he had light to discover them. With this
efficacious Eloquence which is nothing but the right use of prudence, which is
communicated to Men by speech; he gained Augustus an infinite many servants,
and after he had persuaded him moderation, he persuaded them obedience.

All the Conferences which were held in his Palace, were sacrifices of praise
and glory for Augustus. He was there adored every day in Prose and in Verse.
They began to reform then the ancient Language of the Republic, and to swear
by the Genius and good fortune of the Prince. The Temples which at first were
built for him in Spain, and in Asia, and since in other Povinces of the Roman
world, were designed in that place. And to take it from its rise, a man may
say, Madam, that Maecenas with his Orators and his Poets, was Founder of all
those Temples, was the Institutor of that new Religion which consecrated a
living man.

Believe me and all Antiquity rather then Seneca; That incomparable Favorite
left always I know not what sting in the heart, which provoked the courages of
the hardest to the love of the Prince and Country, to the study of virtue and
wisdom. A man could not get from him without a sweet esmotion able to awaken
the deadness of those who were not sensible of the felicity of the reign of
Augustus, who never dreamt of the beauty of good things. The air of his face,
the tone of his voice, and what the Rhetoricians comprehended under the
eloquence of the body, gained the outward sense in an instant, and made even to
the soul by the facility of whose guard it was presently taken.

He persuaded even with the negligence of the most familiar entertainment. In
his free conversation when he divested the pomp of the Court, and gravity of
his Ministry, when he forsook what dazzled the people, he still had many
ornaments left which he could not leave; he had unvoluntary charms about him
which he minded not, which every where accompanied him. These charms, Madam,
particularly inspired all he said: It supplied the default of his favor; and
even when he did not grant requests, he did not forbear to give satisfaction:
For you know well, that all things are not always possible, and that a man must
sometimes refuse. But I beseech you, what must those presents be which enriched
so charming a Mouth, since the refusals which issued were not displeasing, and
that in speaking he so much pleased that with his words alone he could have
paid his debts.

Yet Nero's Tutor will not have the Confident of Augustus, to speak well. He
reproaches his delicacies and affectednesse, even the softness and debauches
of his speech, and as he says, he was the first corrupter of the Roman
Eloquence. He broached forth sayings, which to him seemed lighter then they
ought, but which he has cut from a work whose matter and design we are
ignorant of. And thereupon without telling us whether Moecenas spoke in cold
blood, or whether he only had a mind to laugh, he declaims against the liberty
of his style with all the sharpness and all the rage of his.

To tell you the truth Madam, I doubt there was somewhat of the Philarchus, and
of ill will in the proceeding of Seneca: If the pieces he makes at, were seen
whole, we should see that he distinguishes not the two Characters, and that
he takes a suit once used at a Mask for the Robes of a Senator, which he every
day wears to the council. Doubtless he seems not to understand raillery. He
certainly is one of those testy Hypomies, who would have Plays as serious as
Affairs, and Comedies as sad as Funeral Orations. Let Us draw him back in all
the occasions of Moecenas. His aversion toward him is too visible and too
discovered. And after having scratched at his writings, he falls on his
manners, with so much passion, that a man may easily perceive the spirit of his
sect possessed him, and that he had a design to appear a reformed Stoic in
prejudice of the honestest Epicurian that ever was.

I do not say, to weaken the testimony of Seneca, that he was a Doctor of the
Court, who Philosophis'd in purple, and with ease discoursed of virtue. And
that even perhaps he exclaimed against voluptuousness, that he might wholly
enjoy it, and no man envy it in him. I only say in justification of Moecenas,
that its impossible the Soul should give without enervating it self, and that
as there is a composed and melancholy folly, there may be a free and jovial
wisdom.

I have heard, Madam, from our Learned Monsieur***; but he said it far
handsomer then I can repeat it, that there is an Art of using pleasure
innocently; that this Art was taught by Aristippus in Greece; That since it was
corrupted at Rome by Petronius and by Tigillin, who abused it as poisoners have
Physic. He added that the practice of that Art was not defended by the Laws of
your Country. That on the contrary, they had created Magistrates expressly to
have a care of the pleasures of the people. That besides the Edicts of the
Republic, there was under the Emperors spoken of a Tribune for pleasures. And
that he had seen a Science and a Discipline of pleasure in the formularies of
Cassiodorus. He concluded, Madam, that it was not just to accuse the purity of
things for the intemperance of men, and that it is not credible that the goods
of this life should have been made only for the wicked.

It is not credible I am of the same opinion with this rare soul, that God
should have sent virtue into the world for the punishment of poor men, and that
it is not virtue if it combat not against grief, unless it march on thorns, if
it lodge not in an Hospital, if it even inhabit not sepulchers. Moecenas would
expect till he was dead to take possession of so displeasing a dwelling; and if
he were alive, and had changed Rome for Paris, I am confident a man should
oftener find him in some place which I know, where there is nothing which
contents not the eyes and the mind, then in other places which I will not name,
where there is nothing opposes them not. What a pleasure you would take to
learn his History from himself? What a glory would he receive to have some of
your Audiences? How would your modest conversation touch his mind? You could
not hide your self, Madam, he would discover that Sovereign Understanding,
which you vail with all the restraint, and all the sweetness of your Sex. He
would admire you in despite of you. We would reconcile his enemy with him at
the first request you should make him, and even without a request, so confident
am I of the sweetness and facility of his manners. The serenity of his mind
would not be disturbed by the fumes and flourishes of the violent Sophists. He
would but laugh at the pettishnesse and paradoxes of Seneca. He would tell you
only, Madam, that we must suffer all from the race of Zeno, and the Nation of
the Stoics. That all is permitted to a Philosopher, who called Alexander a
fool, who its believed had a better Title then the King of Persia to be King of
Kings. And what particularly makes for our subject, who was so much an enemy of
life, that he councelled Men to hang themselves when they were never so little
disturbed, or in an ill humor.

FINIS.

