THE SAINTS INHERITANCE. AND THE WORLDLINGS PORTION.

Representing The Glorious condition of a child of God, and the Misery of
having ones Portion in this World.

Unfolding the State of true happiness with the Marks, Means, and Members
thereof.

By IER. BUROUGHS.

Psalm. 144.15. Blessed is that People whose God is the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, at the Marigold in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1657.

The Authors Epistle to the Reader.
IT has been the way of God in speaking to men, and drawing their hearts to
him, to apply himself to them, in those things they have skill of and are
acquainted with. When Christ was revealed to the Wise men that came from the
East, it was by a Star: they were Astronomers, and conversed much in the
contemplation of the Stars, and God speaks to them accordingly: When our
Savior called Fishermen to follow him, he tells them. He will make them
Fishers of men; he expresses himself unto them in their own way.

And it may be the sutablenesse of these subjects may invite some to read this
treatise, especially it being the desires of many that heard the same, and
found some work of God upon their hearts by them, to have it by them; at first
I was unwilling to let such sudden things appear so public, but after
considering, that some way it may be useful, and a little good is worth much
of my time and labor, who knows what a truth, what a hint fitted to the
apprehensions of people in their own way may do, therefore here you have it,
and the Lord prosper it to you.

Yours in Christ, IER. BUROUGHS.

KNow Christian Reader, that Part of this Work was perfected by the Author in
his life time. But it pleased God to take him away before the rest was
finished, whereby the Copy was for a time mislayed, and with some difficulty
at length procured, which is now published for thy good. Bless God for
preserving such a Jewel; and see thy soul be enriched by it. Let it not be
said, there was a Prize put into thy hand, but thou had not a heart to make
use of it. Remember thou have an immortal soul, and art capable of living in
immortal glory, therefore be not put off with the things of this life. Let not
that satisfy thy soul, which may stand with the eternal hatred of the great
God, least while others partake of an Inheritance above, thou have a Portion
with reprobates below. Thou might have been past reading or hearing of these
things, and have found by sad experience, what it is to be excluded the Saints
felicities. Embrace the Opportunity and pass by the escapes of Printing. So

Farewell.
THE WORLDLINGS PORTION.
17. Psalm. 14. From men of the world, who have their portion in this life.


THis Psalm is David's moan unto God under Saul's persecution; sine dubio Saulum
(says Molerus upon it) without doubt the Psalmist aims at Saul in it, wherein
we have these 4. things.

First he appeals unto God to judge the uprightness of his heart, toward
Saul. Verse 2.
Let my sentence come from my presence; from Saul and his Courtiers there comes
a hard sentence, they call me Traitor, they call me Rebel, but Lord leave me
not unto their sentence, let my sentence come from thy presence that I know
will be another sentence, then what comes from them, for thou have proved me
and tried me, and find nothing in me; that is the first thing.

Secondly, his prayer to God to keep him in his way, his going, and his
footsteps from sliding, Verse 5.
Lord whatsoever the wrath of Saul be against me, yet let neither that, nor any
other thing put me out of thy way but keep my heart close unto thee, and keep
my paths in thy way, let not my footsteps so much as slide from thee, for Lord
they watch at my halting, if they can find but the least slip from me, they
take advantage of it to the utmost, and I am a poor, weak creature; therefore
Lord keep me that my footsteps may not slide.

Thirdly, he prays for deliverance, Verse 7.
show thy marveillous loving kindness to me O Lord; my straights they are
marveillous, I know not what to do, nor whether to turn me, but my eyes are
toward thee, as my straights are marveillous, so let thy loving kindness be
marveillous toward me, and keep me as the apple of thy eye, O Lord, I am but
as a dog, a vile creature in the eyes of Saul, and those about him, but blessed
be thy name, I can look up to thee, and know that I am dear unto thee, as the
apple of thy eye; all the Saints of God are dear to God, at all times, but the
persecuted Saints, they are the apple of Gods eye; if at any time they are dear
to God, then especially when they are most persecuted, they are the apple of
his eye, and the apple of an eye you know is weak, and little able to resist
any hurt, which makes men the more tender of it; the more weak and shiftlesse
Gods people are for themselves, the Lord is so much the more tender over them.

And one argument that the Psalmist uses in praying against his enemies is
this, and a special one, because they prospered so much in this world, they
are enclosed in fat, and have their hearts desire, and thou fillest their
bellies with thy hid treasure, they leave to their babes, they have their
portion in this life; Lord keep me from them.

Lastly he does profess his resolution, yet notwithstanding all the dangers he
was in, to go on in the ways of God, and expects a gracious issue, but I
(says he) will behold, thy face in righteousness; indeed I cannot behold the
face of the King without danger, there are a great many that run to kill me,
and I desire his face, but though I cannot see his face, yet Lord I shall
behold thy face, I will behold thy face, and it shall be in righteousness, I
will still keep on in the ways of righteousness, and when I awake, for I
believe that these troubles will not hold long: I shall not sleep a perpetual
sleep, but I shall be delivered, and satisfied with thy likeness, there shall
be the manifestation of thy glory to me, that shall satisfy me for all the
troubles that I have endured for thy names sake, that my soul shall say, I have
enough; this is the sum of this Psalm.

Now the words read unto you, are a description of David's adversaries, implying
an argument, why he would be delivered from them; they are described to be men
of this world, they were only those that were adversaries to him; and a
comfort it must needs be to the Saints of God, to see that none are their
enemies, but wordly persons, men of this world, who have their portion in this
life; they have somewhat here, and here is all they are like to have.

Secondly, it implies the argument, why he would be delivered; Lord deliver me
from them, because they are men of this world, who have their portion in this
life; where lies the force of this argument, that he would be delivered from
them because they were men of this world, that have their portion in this life;
It consists first in this, Lord, they care not what injustice they do, they
have no regard of any thing but in this world, therefore be it right or wrong,
may they have but their lusts in this world, that is all they care for; Lord
deliver me from such men; Secondly, here is all their good, their portion is in
this life, and therefore they are greedy upon this, and if they may have this,
let it be with the ruin of never so many men, though it be to raise their
estates by my ruin, and the ruins of others, that are never so innocent, what
care they they are greedy upon having their lusts satisfied, for here is all
their portion; they care not for religion, they will make use of pretenses of
religion any way for their own ends; what care they what pretenses they make
for religion, so they may thrive in the world they regard not anything in
religion, so they may have their own ends; Lord, deliver me from such men;
Thirdly, they have their portion in this world, hence is it that their hearts
are so swelled with pride in their lusts, and so warm, their malice is so
heated that it is outrageous; O let not the foot of pride come upon me; deliver
me from proud men that flusht with the enjoyment of their hearts desires; As
long as they may have their own ends, and fulfill their lusts, they will be
exceedingly hardened in their own ways, they will give no glory to thee, but
will be so much the more enraged against thy people, by taking that as an
argument that their ways are good, Lord, therefore deliver me from those men;
they scorn at prayer, or any thing that is said, concerning the tenderness of
Conscience; they despise Conscience and Prayer; Lord, let me never fall into
the hands of such; deliver me from the men of this world, who have their
portion in this life; The words opened.
from the men of the world, that is from mortal men, from men though of the
world, yet are not like to enjoy the world long, so some translate it, 89.
Psalm. 47.
Remember how short my time is, says David how short, what little time I have
in this world, the men of this world, shall have but a little time here, the
Hebrew word that is translated men, with the change of the position of one
prick, signifies dead men, mortui, as well as viri, (I say) with the change not
of a prick, but only of the position of one prick, of one point, it signifies
dead men; they are men of the world, but such men as are within one prick of
death, within one point of death, howsoever they rejoice in this life; They are
men that have all they have but only leased for their lives, nay, not so much
as leased, they have but an estate of life at the most, and this present life
unto them, as in stead of all lives.

There are these 2. doctrinall conclusions in the words, that lie plainly
before you; The first is, there are a generation of men, to whom God gives some
outward good things for a while, but these are all that ever they are like to
have, they shall never have any more good from God, then that they have here
for the present; Secondly, that Gods Saints do desire to be delivered from such
kind of men; these 2. contain in them the hope of the holy ghost in the words.

First; there are a generation of men unto whom God gives out a portion, Doct.
1.
some comforts in this world, and here is all that they are like to have; And
now set your hearts I beseech you, unto what I have to say in this argument,
for meditating what to pitch upon for such an assembly, I could not determine
of an argument that I thought might more reach unto the hearts of those to whom
I was to speak then this, and I hope before I have done, you will find it such
a serious argument that concerns us all.

I have read of Gregory that being advanced to preferment, he professed that
there was no Scripture that went so to his heart, that struck such a trembling
into his spirit, and daunted him so much as that Scripture did, Here you have
your reward, Son in your life time you have had your pleasure; O this was a
dreadful Scripture that sounded in his ears continually; as Jerome speaks of
that Scripture, arise ye dead, and come to judgment; night and day he thought
that Scripture sounded in his ears; so Gregory here, you have your reward in
this life, you have had your pleasure; this was the Scripture that night and
day sounded in his ears; O that it might please God to assist me so far this
day, that I might make this Scripture ring in your ears, even when you lie
upon your beds, after the Sermon is done, that you may not forget the sound of
it, Men of this world, who have their portion in this life; if this Scripture
should prove to be the portion of any one of you, of the richest in this place,
woe unto him, that ever he was born, which I shall anon make out fully to you.

But (you will say) do you think to preach to men that have their portion here in
this life? I fear me, I may meet with such, whom it nearly concerns in this
congregation, therefore be not any of you too ready to put off this from you,
to think your selves, out of the danger of this Scripture; for it was spoken
concerning Saul, and Saul might have (for ought I know) as strong arguments of
Gods love to him, as many of you, I fear have this day.

Saul was a man chosen immediately by God himself to be the first King that
ever was over his own people, and was not that a great favor.

Saul for his person was one of the godliest men that was amongst all Israel;
higher from the shoulders to the head, then any of them; and for his endowments
he was a man, whom God did endow with admirable gifts of government, he caused
another spirit to come upon him; he was a man that when he heard of his
preferment, seemed to be very humble, as judging himself unworthy of such a
dignity, saying, 1 Samuel 9.21.
who am I,and what is my Fathers house, that I should be thus exalted; and when
he had been chosen, some that would reject him, notwithstanding Gods honoring
of him, Saul had a mighty power over his spirit, he was very week and a quiet
man; for the Text says, 1 Samuel 10.27.
he held his peace, when the Children of Belial said, what have we to do with
him; yea.

Israel, the Text says, that 1 Samuel 11.16.
his anger did rise within him; an excellent pattern for all Governors, for
all in public places, to be very silent, quiet, self-denying putting up
wrongs, in their own cause, but to be full of zeal for the public cause; to
reserve their spirits for a public good; Many, when they are angered in their
private cause, and so full of violence, and spend their spirit there so much,
that they have no spirit at all, when it comes to a public cause, Saul went
beyond them in this.

Further, Saul was one who was much troubled at the sin of the people against
God, he had not only a spirit to vindicate public wrongs, but when he saw the
people sin against God, his heart was much troubled thereat, and grieved for
it, and being mighty sollicitous and careful to prevent sin in the people,
this you shall have in the first of Samuel 14.33. they told Saul there that the
people had sinned in eating with blood, upon that, Saul shows himself
displeased, come (says he) and do not sin against the Lord, roll a stone
hither; he would see with his own eyes, that they did slay the cattle, and they
did power forth the blood that they might not sin against God in eating blood;
this was his care; yea he was very diligent to enquire of God what he should do
in businesses of great consequence, he would not go out, till he had first
enquired of God. 1 Samuel 14.27.


Yea more then all this, he was a man that had a very reverend esteem of the
Prophets of God; when Samuel came to him, 1 Samuel 15.13.
O thou blessed of the Lord (says Saul to him) when Samuel showed unto him,
what his sin was, he come and confessed it before the people, saying, 1 Samuel
15.30.
I have sinned, I have sinned against the Lord, merely at the conviction of
one Prophet.

And God seemed to be with Saul very much, showing great respect to him, to
make him an instrument of much good to Israel; he granted unto him as glorious
a victory as ever man had in this world, for so we may call it, and if there be
any outward thing in the world, might be gathered as an argument of Gods love,
such a remarkable victory as he had over his enemies; well might the victory
you shall find in the first of Samuel 13. where the Philistines were risen up
against him and there were 30000 chariots, 1 Samuel 15. and 14. chapters.
of his adversaries, and 6000. horsemen, and people as the sand of the Sea for
multitude; well, here was a mighty enemy, what had Saul to oppose these? you
shall find that there were but 600. men with Saul; there was of one side 30000.
Chariots, 6000 horsemen, and people as the sand of the Sea without number, and
Saul had but 600. with him at this time, yea and of those 600. there was not
any one of them, that had a sword, but only Saul and Jonathan; for the
Philistines were wise enough to disarm all the malignants that they accounted
so, and would not let so much as a smith be amongst them; they would not only
take away their arms, but they would look to them to see that they had no arms
supplied unto them, that was the wisdom of the Philistines, yet we find, if
you read afterward in the Scripture, that God was so far with Saul, and
blessed him, and gave him victory over all these; besides all this, God blessed
Saul with a very gracious child, a Godly Son of a sweet nature, Jonathan, which
indeed if any outward argument in the world, might be an argument of Gods love;
that might be.

Now put all these things together, and yet here is the man that has his
portion in this world; I now challenge him that has certain evidence of a
mighty work of God upon him in Christ, let him show me greater arguments of
Gods love to him, then Saul might have done, and yet it proved to be Saul's
condition to have only his portion in this world; God herein shows that his
mercy is his own, and that he will let out his mercy as he pleases, it is your
Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom; the Father deals out the portion as he
pleases unto his children; God will let the line of his mercy go thus far to
one and there stop, and so far to another and there stop, and then come in a
cross line again unto him.

God so disposes of his mercy, that there are some that shall have heaven and
earth to be their portion, and there portion is blessed, indeed, there are some
that shall have earth, but not heaven, and their portion is poor, and sad;
there are others, that shall have heaven, but not earth, and their portion is
rich and blessed; there are others that shall neither have heaven nor earth,
and their portion, (you will say) is miserable indeed, Gods mercy is his own to
dispose off as he will; 21. Genes. 14.
we read of Abraham: He calls for Ishmael and Hagar, and he gives them a
piece of bread, a bottle of water and sends them away, there is an end of them;
so Jehoshaphat: He gave his other Son (says the Text) gifts, 2. Chron. 21.3.
but the Kingdom he gave to Iehoram; so God has people to whom he gives pieces
of bread, bottles of water, yea some, to whom he gives great gifts in this
world, but he keeps his inheritance for his Isaacs, he keeps the Kingdom for
Iehoram; Esau he had his portion in this world, and such a portion as he
thought to be a very good portion too: Brother (says he) I have enough. 33.
Genes. 19.


Most rich men go not so far as Esau, they have their portion, and yet complain
of it, Esau had his portion, and thought he had enough; Christ's auditors, in
the 6. of Luke 24. had their portion in this world, woe to you, here is your
consolation, (says Christ unto them) O dreadful speech, woe to this man, woe to
such wretches, here is their consolation; Dives he had his portion in this
world, 16. Luke 25.
Son remember in thy life time thou had thy pleasure, in thy life time, and
thou had thy good things, they were thy good things, those things that were
measured out for thee, thou had them in thy life time.

In the handling of this argument, I shall divide what I have to say into these
6. particulars, that you may every one of you go the more readily along with
me; first, why it is that God will deal out somewhat to wicked men in this
world, why they shall have any portion at all; Secondly, that this their
portion, it is confined to this life; and why so; Thirdly, some Corollaries
that you will see will naturally flow from those two; Fourthly, we shall
consider the condition of these men, who are such that have their portion in
this world; and fifthly, we shall endeavor to show unto you, who are those
men, to cull out of the congregation, what that man is, and which is that
woman, that is like to have their portion in this world, and then sixthly,
conclude in the words of exhortation unto you all.

Why God gives any thing to wicked men.
says Iehu concerning Iezebel, go take away this cursed woman, show some
respect unto her, let her not lie in the streets, for she is the daughter of a
King; so says God, well, though these be vile persons, yet they are my
creatures, some respect they shall have from me, some good I Will communicate to
them.

It is not an argument strong enough, that because you are Gods creatures,
therefore God should be merciful eternally to you; but it may be argument
strong enough, because you are his creatures, you shall have somewhat here; for
this time of life, is the time of patience, the day of Gods long suffering, and
therefore somewhat you shall have.

Ezekiel: 29. Ezekiel 18.19.20.
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon caused his army to do great service against
Tyrus, yet had he no wages for it. Therefore God enquires about this, and seems
to complain why Nebuchadnezzar should be all this while without his wages;
therefore, behold I will give the land of Egypt unto him, he shall take her
spoil, and her prey, and that shall be his wages.

Many wicked men, God does make use of in diverse services, and much refreshing
and good his Churches shall have from them, the Lord causes the very earth to
help the woman, earthly men to be of use to the Church; and God will not be
beholding to them for their work; A thorn may serve to stop a gap, though it be
but a thornbush, and if it serve to stop a gap and be of any use, it has some
benefit by it, all that while it is kept from the fire; whereas were it not of
use, it might presently be brought to the fire; An argument by the way for all
men to be of as much use to the Church of God, as possibly they can, it may be
that is the very thing that keeps them from the fire; thou art a thorn, but God
has use of thee, and therefore brings thee not to the fire, but if thou once
come to be unusefull, the fire is the next thing thou shall hear off, I
remember Austin, Aug. de Civitate Dei 5. book 12. chap.
speaking of the Romans that had such a flourishing condition for a while,
gives this for one reason of it, that the Romans had brave spirits, they were
men that had excellent morallities, and heroique kind of spirits, they were
delivered from that baseness of spirit, that other people had, and therefore
God showed some kind of respect to them; many instances might be in this kind.

Indians that know not God, have them more then you; and if these things had
any great worth in them, certainly God would never give them to wicked men; as
it is an argument, there is no great evil in afflictions in this world,
because the Saints are so much afflicted; so its no great argument there is any
great good in this world, because the wicked they enjoy so much of it, Luther
in G^nes.
Luther has such an expression as this.

The Turkish Empire, as great as it is, is but a crumme that the Mr of the
family casts to dogs; such an esteem had Luther of the whole Turkish Empire,
and indeed God in giving of them worldly goods to Turks and wicked ones, who
are his enemies shows there is not much excellency in them; God therefore casts
them promiscuously up and down the world, because he looks upon them as
worthless things, God does not so much regard whether subjects be prepared to
give him his glory of them, yea or no, you shall have them however, he is
content to venture them.

Indeed when God comes unto his choice mercies in Christ, there he looks to
have glory from them, and he does never give them to any, but first he prepares
them that they may give him the glory of those mercies; but it is otherwise
with others; as suppose you see a man but gathering of crabs although swine be
under the tree, he cares not much to drive them away, they are but crabs, let
them have them; but if he were gathering any choice and precious fruit, if any
swine should come under he drives them away: so as for outward things, Crabs,
the Lord suffers the swine of the world to come grunting and take them up, but
when he comes to the choice mercies in his Christ, there he makes a
distinction; O that is precious fruit; a Blacksmith that is working upon iron,
though a great many cinders and little bits of iron fly up and down he regards
them not, but a Goldsmith that is working upon gold, he preserves every ray
and every dust of gold; and a Lapidary that is working upon precious stones,
every little bit he will be sure to preserve; a Carpenter that is only hewing
of timber, he much regards it not, if chips fly up and down, but it is not so
with a Lapidary; so these outward things are but as the chips, and cinders, and
such like trash, and therefore God gives a portion to wicked men out of them.

he has time enough to manifest his justice upon them, he has an eternity
hereafter for the declaration of his justice against sinners; and therefore
lets them have somewhat, for a while; as you know it is natural in all, when
they see a man going to execution, that is not like to live above an hour or
two, every one is ready to pity him, and to be any way officious to him, O
says one, the man shall not have comfort long, we cannot do much for him, he
will have misery enough, shortly, and it is observable, let a man go to
execution for wickedness, and then he is pitied by all; but if a man should
suffer for godliness, then perhaps they will not be so full of pity toward
him; as I remember in the book of Martyrs, there is a story of Mr John Frith, a
learned godly Minister, and Andrew Huet that were martyrs, and were to suffer
for their consciences, and the story tells us of one Dr Cook a Parson in
London, that openly admonished the people that they should pray for them no
more then they would do for a dog, that charity of theirs that they talk so
much of, is such toward them that suffer out of conscience; and as amongst
Papists, so amongst ungodly men, let a man suffer out of conscience, they will
rather rail at him, and when they are in their sufferings, they will rather
give them gall and vinegar to drink, as they once did Christ upon the Cross;
though in other sufferings they will pity men.

prosperity that wicked men have in this world, God does declare to his
children, and he would have them argue from thence, what then has he reserved
for his beloved ones, for his Saints, for his Children that are so dear unto
him.

33. Isaiah 1.
We to thee who spoilest, and were not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and
were not dealt treacherously with all, when thou shall cease to spoil, thou
shall be spoiled; I Will let thee go on, thou shall spoil as much as thou will,
and when thou have done spoiling, thou shall be spoiled thy self; sometimes God
does it, to fetch about this end, namely, to chastise his own people with the
prosperity of the wicked, as I have read of one, being a Monk was advanced to
come into an Episcopal seat, and being a lewd wicked man, he began to be proud
of his advancement, whereupon he heard a voice uttering these words, cur
superbus O infelix, etc. why art thou so proud, O unhappy man, thou art not
advanced, because thou art worthy of this honor, but because this City is so
ill, that it deserves such a Prelate to be over it, in way of judgment to that
place. God advances some man out of ways of heavy judgments unto others, God
gives them such a portion not out of love to them, though they are ready to
gather the argument, but out of his displeasure unto others; and then, he gives
a plentiful portion to many, to teach us all to do good unto our enemies, not
only humanitati as they say, but homini not only to humane nature, but to
men, to men that are wicked, some good must be done unto them.

And besides the Lord would show hereby, that he would have no argument of love
or hatred to be drawn from these outward things; and indeed because he would
not have them to expect any more; it may be many men that are ungodly,
prospering in this world, they gather this argument, that therefore God loves
them, and intends mercy to them; no, you may rather gather an argument quite
the other way because God intends no further good unto you hereafter, therefore
it is, you have so much now; we use to answer men that come for their doal,
when they come twice, why do you come again, you have had your doal already; so
will God answer to many men, when they shall cry to him for mercy at that day,
why come you to me for more, you have had your doal already; have you not had
already more then your works comes to, more then you have done; you have had
your part and portion already; indeed men speak much of Gods mercy, and the
mercy of God we acknowledge to be very great, and glorious; well, God does show
himself glorious in mercy that thou being so wicked have so much as thou have
in this world; and therefore though thou should be denied of eternal mercy
hereafter, yet thou have cause to tell devils and damned creatures that shall
be thy company, that God was very merciful to thee, while thou did live in
this world.

The portion of the wicked is confined to this life. 17 Ierem. 13.14. Revel. 3.
But secondly, here is all that ever thou art like to have; 1. because there are
some men whose names are written in the earth, whereas the Saints are described
to be men that are redeemed from the earth. It is their happiness to be
redeemed from the earth, and all the happiness thou have is that thou art
written in the earth. 2. here is their portion, because they are vile in the
eyes of God; if you should ask the question, why you give bones to the dog, and
swill to the swine, and nothing else, why the answer would be, because it is a
dog that has it, and because it is a swine, it is dogs meat; certainly God
does speak exceeding contemptibly of all ungodly ones in the world, let them be
never so great in regard, of outward; a vile person shall arise says Daniel;
11. Dan. 21.
what is this vile person? Interpreters generally consent in this, that it is
meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, that was a mighty great Prince, such a Prince as
when the Samaritans did write to him, they writ Antiocho magno Deo, to
Antiochus the great God, and his very name shows him to be a great one,
Antiochus Epiphanes, as much as Antiochus the illustrious, and the famous, and
yet when the holy Ghost speaks of him, it is Antiochus a vile person, they are
vile in the eyes of God; if there be any in a family that you care not much
for, you make no great provision for them; does God take care for Oxen?
somewhat they have but little; does God take care for ungodly men. 3. Here is
their portion, it is confined to this life, why they chose it themselves, and
in that they have no wrong, they make choice of this portion themselves; Moses
speaking to the people says he, I set before you life and death; so do the
Ministers of God in preaching to you, they set before you life and death, what
do you choose now? you choose the way that goes to death, you have but your
choice; you choose vanity to be your portion, God does you no wrong to give you
vanity; now you that will indent with God for your penny, you cannot take it
ill, if when the end of the day comes, God puts you off with your penny.

You know those in the vineyard, that agreed for their penny, they began to
murmr indeed, when they came to receive their wages; but says the Mr of the
vineyard, did you not agree with me so? so you agree with God; all you intend
in Gods service is, that you may have some present comfort in this world, you
dare not trust God for the future, and here is that that God will show his
infinite displeasure against the sin of distrust by, that when the Lord
propounds now in this day of grace, such glorious and blessed things to the
children of men, and for ought you know, any of you may have your portion in
them, as well as others, and yet you dare not trust God for these gracious
things; you think rather with your selves, let me have somewhat now, somewhat
for the present, that for the present is real, that which you talk off, is to
come, and I know not whether they be imaginations or no; Therefore you mean it
seems to serve God for your present pay, and present pay you shall have and no
more; there are some servants that are your day laborers, that expect their
pay at night, and if you give them that there is an end, but there are other
servants, that will serve you in expectation of a reversion, and expectation of
preferment, especially when they serve noble men and Princes, though they have
no present pay given them at night, yet they go on cheerfully in their service,
they expect some great reversions and leases, and preferments afterward; and
now though they have nothing at present, yet when the other befalls them, they
and their posterities are enriched; this is the direct difference between the
men of the world and Gods children; the men of the world will do nothing
without present pay, that which is just before them they must needs have, their
hearts are upon that; but the Saints they hear what a blessed thing God has
revealed in his word, what a blessed Covenant of grace there is, what rich
promises of glorious things to come, now they believe God, and trust in God for
these, and they say, Lord let me have my portion in the life to come, and what
ever thou do with me here, I care not; as it was the speech of Austin, Lord,
here burn, here cut me, but spare me hereafter; I am content (Lord) to be
burnt, to be cut, to endure any thing in the world, only hereafter I look for
somewhat else, and i will wait for hereafter.

You Will not wait for hereafter, but you must have it for the present, and that
is the reason you are put off here; O it is a serious thing, I speak off to
you, many a soul will wring its hands, and curse it self eternally, that it was
not content to trust God for hereafter, but would have present pay; you that
are great Merchants, if you buy a thing that is but a trifle, you pull out your
purse, and give the money down presently, but suppose you go to the exchange and
bargain for 1000 l. there you may give a little down now, but the great pay
must come upon pay days afterward, it is not expected it should be presently
done; so there are some men in the world will trade with God, but they trade
with God for pidling things, for their credit, and applause, and for their
preferments and estates: God gives down the pay presently, you shall have it,
there is your money presently, it is done; but now there are other of Gods
Saints that trade with God for great things, for immortality and glory, and a
Kingdom, and the Crown of eternal life, now they expect not to have it down
presently they are content to stay; O these are the best Traders, the best
Merchants, that will trade with God for great things, and be content to stay.

Further these things that are here, they are the only suitable things to your
hearts, and what will you do with any more hereafter, these things do
exceedingly please you, and give you content as agreeable to you, and the things
that are to come, are disagreable; what would men do that are carnal and
wicked now, what would they do in heaven, certainly if you hate Gods Saints
now, that have but a little grace, you would hate them infinitely more
afterward, when they are perfect in grace; and when all your common gifts
shall be taken away, for so it shall be; now the things of God are unsuitable
to you, though you have now many common gifts, and you now abhor the grace of
God, though it be imperfect, what then, when all common gifts shall be taken
from you, and grace made perfect, how insuitable will it be then to you;
therefore expect nothing hereafter.

Again 5. You abuse your portion you have now, what will you do with more, who
will trust you with the true riches, you abuse that you have; indeed men of the
world that are wicked, and very rich, and preferred to places of honor and
power, O what a deal of mischief they do in the world, what dreadful evils
are they unto the earth; such men, how do they abuse their portions; why now as
it is with a tooth in a man's head, a tooth indeed is preferred to have an
eminent place in the head, but when the tooth comes to be rotten, painful,
what do we, but pull it out, and throw it away: so though God preferres men to
eminent places, when through their wickedness they grow rotten, and do hurt,
the Lord pluckes them out in his anger; they abuse their portion, and do a
great deal of mischief, therefore must expect to be thrown away.

But above all, the argument is, because they have no interest in Jesus Christ;
the rich treasures of the infinite grace of God, are let out in Christ; God
has diverse conduit pipes, (as I may say) of his grace, to let out unto his
creatures; there are some lesser conduit pipes, and those conduit pipes may be
opened through the general bounty of God; but now the Lord has the great
current of his eternal mercies, for some that he does intend eternal good
unto, and this great current of his, it is stopped by justice, the infinite
justice of God does stop this great current, so as it cannot be opened to have
any drop of that mercy let out, until the divine justice comes to be
satisfied; in the mean time the other smaller pipes run, the general bounty of
God still flows; Christ therefore out of pity to mankind that they may not be
put off, with these general outward comforts, he comes and satisfies Gods
infinite justice, that he might open the current, the sluice of his infinite and
eternal grace to others; now happy are those creatures, who have interest in
the Lord Christ, for this is his work to satisfy the justice of the Father,
that so the great pipe may be opened, and then flows in all grace, infinite
eternal grace, when that comes once to be opened, no mervail though we hear of
such glorious things, that the Saints of God have in the life to come, no
mervaile, why Christ does come and opens the great sluice of Gods infinite grace
and mercy to them; as for the men of the world, they have but a little of the
drislings of Gods general bounty through some crannies, but the floudgates of
Gods grace are opened in Christ: therefore till divine justice be satisfied,
there can be no further good for poor man, but merely the fruits of Gods
general bounty, and patience.

There are some creatures, whom the Lord has left to the course of justice,
they shall have what they earne, and no more; others there are, whom God has
set his heart upon, and whether they earn or no, God intends eternal mercies
to them, here is the difference of the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of
grace, and therefore the one is left to himself: and the other, Christ the head
of the Covenant comes to undertake for him what he cannot do; they who are not
children, and must not expect childrens portions, as many of you rich men, when
you die, you will leave your servants some legacy; perhaps you will give every
servant in your house 5. l. or so, but when you come to your children, to write
in your will, what such a son, and such a daughter shall have, that is another
manner of business, then 40 s. or 5. l. Great things you leave to them.

So the world may be divided between children and servants, for though the
truth is, all men are at defiance with God, yet God makes them servants one
way or other, and there is some little legacy that servants shall have but they
must not expect the childrens portion; therefore they have it here, but must
not have it hereafter.

Thus says the Lord, if the Prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the
inheritance shall be his sons, but if to his servant, then it shall be but till
Iubilee; this was Gods law, that if a Prince gave a gift to his son, his son
should inherit it for ever, but if he give it to a servant; it should continue
with him but for a while; Here is the difference of Gods administration of all
his gifts, he gives some to servants, and these shall continue for a time,
with in a little while all will be called for again, all the good and all the
comfort thou have, God will call for it again; but now that which he gives to
his children, they shall have for ever, their pleasures are durable and their
mercies everlasting.

Again the portion that the world has here comes from Gods patience, now there
will be an end of the manifestation of the glory of patience in this world; as
there are some graces of the Spirit of God in the Saints, that shall have an
end in regard of their exercise in this world, so there are some attributes of
God that shall have an end in regard of the manifestation of them in that way
that God does now manifest them in this life, and that is the patience of God
toward ungodly ones, now if they hold all upon patience (mark, they hold all
upon patience) when that expires, then all their good is at an end.

And ungodly men, shall have to deal with God immediately in the world to come
(I beseech you observe but this answer) now they have to deal with God through
creatures, and while they have to deal with God through creatures, they may get
a great deal, and may make shift for much, but when they shall come to have to
deal with God immediately, then it will be otherwise with them, as for example,
there are a great many hang-byes at great men's houses, perhaps when they come
to have to deal with the servants, they get some bits and scraps, and many
things of the servants; but if they know they can have nothing, but from the
very hand of the Knight or Lord of the house himself, then they will expect no
great matter; so wicked men in this world, they are as hang-byes and all that
they have, are but as scraps from the servants, they have to deal only with
creatures, they look no further; But hereafter things shall be settled another
way, and all things shall be weighed by God himself, in a balance of justice,
and distributed by the hands of God himself immediately, and then things will
be carried after another manner, the Lord himself will come to dispose of
things.

Then it was a speech of a German Divine, though he were a good man, and lived
very innocently, when he lay upon his sick bed and apprehended death, he was in
great terrors of spirit, mightily troubled, and some of his friends came to
him, and asked him, why should you be so troubled, that have lived so good a
life as you have done? this was his answer: The judgments of God are one, and
the judgments of men are another, I have now to deal with God, it is true, I
lived thus before men, and men gave their verdict of me as good, and thought I
was in a good condition, but O, I am now to go to God, and to deal immediately
with him, and Gods judgments and man's judgments are different things; when
God shall come to weigh all men's portions out, as it will be, then so much
righteousness, so much happiness; you will say then, Lord what shall become of
us all, all our righteousness is as the menstruous cloth; I but for the
Saints, the righteousness of Christ will be put into one scoale, and their
portion into the other, and their portion will be weighed by the righteousness
of Christ; Now when thou come to God, thou must come to the scoale, and thou will put in thy good servings of God, and thy coming to Church, and some good
civil actions and moral things thou have done, thou will put them in the
scoale, God will say, that thou have had already, weighs down all those. Have
thou nothing to put into the scoales but this? thou have had thy reward already
for all this, and much more, then, if there be nothing to put into the scoale
but this, thou art undone, and there is nothing for thee for eternity; and
these are the 2. first things; now then some Corollaries from hence, and then
we will proceed unto the other.

Use 1.
Is it so that wicked men have a portion here, and that is all they shall have.
1. then, we may see a reason, why the men of the world are so cuning in the
things of the world, why they can make a better shift for themselves, in the
world, then other men can, why, here is their portion, their very happiness,
and good is here; no mervail though they speed so well as they do: 1 Corinthians.
2.12.
We have not received the spirit of the world (says the Apostle,) we cannot
tell how to shift in the world, so as other men do, for indeed we look further
then these things; you know a swine though it goes away abroad all day
wandering up and down, it knows the way to the trough at night; but if a sheep
wander a little out of his place, it knows not how to come back again, but
wanders up and down till it be lost; swine are not so, ungodly men, though they
go up and down wandering, they know how to come to their trough at night, they
have better skill in the world they are more artificial in the things of this
life, as the Scripture speaks, the children of this world, are wiser in their
generation, then the children of light; why is it? why, their portion is in
this world.

Use 2.
Secondly, here we see the reason, why there are so great ones in the world,
that regard religion so little as they do, and the ways of God, and the Church
of God, why it is not their portion: those things that concerns another life,
is not any part of their portion: they mind what it is that concerns the
present life, because this is their portion; when many come into places of
dignity, and power, what are their thoughts, why now they think of gratifying
their servants; now they think of respect and honor that they shall have
abroad in the world, and be accounted some body, now they think of revenging
all their wrongs, of making up of all their broken titles, etc. this has been
heretofore very ordinary in men advanced amongst you, these are all their
thoughts as for doing service for God, and for the Church, and vindicating the
truth of God, and his honor, that is scarce in all their thoughts, for they do
not look upon that as part of their portion; here is the reason, why so many
magistrates are like to 18. Acts 17.
Gallio, caring for none of those things; they were to him but matter of words,
and yet they were about the great fundamental points of religion, whether
Christ were the true Messiah, and whether he were God or no, but to Gallio
these things were but matter of words; and so the great things of God and
religion to carnal hearts, are things, of no great consequence; yea, when as
Sosthenes that was the ruler of the Sinagogue for countenancing of Paul, had
the rude multitude of the City, rose up to apprehend him; Gallio cared for
none of these things; what did he care for rectifying any thing that was amiss
in religion.

O let us, (say they, that have their portion here) what ever becomes of
things) let us have peace (say they) that we may live peaceably in our houses,
and enjoy that we have quietly, they look no further then that, because their
portion is here; As for truth, how do they reject that, and contemn it; such a
speech (as is credibly reported) has come from a Citizen here even in cursing
of truth, so, as had he lived amongst the Jews, he would certainly have been
stoned to death; let us have peace, and a pox of truth; I say, such a speech as
this, among the Jews would have caused him to have been stoned to death, being
such horrible blasphemy, but how many are ready to say with Pilate; 18. John 38.
when as Christ talked to him of truth; truth (says Pilate) what is truth? as
if he had said, what a strange man is this, the man is in danger of his life,
and he talks of truth, what is truth? (says Pilate) and turns it back upon him
presently; just thus for all the world, are the hearts of many, they think what
should we look at truth, or at any thing now, but to preserve our lives and
estates, and outward comforts in the world; what is truth?

They are a company of mad-braind-fellows, that are factious and seditious; who
talk of truth, but know not what they say, come let us have peace though it be
upon any terms; who is there in this place that desires it not, the Lord knows,
peace it is the desire of those that are accused most for want of desires in
this thing; yea, we dare challenge any of you, with this challenge; those who
have been most at the Throne of grace begging unto God for peace for England,
let them carry the day those that have put forth most prayers for peace before
the Throne of grace, we are willing they shall have the day; we read that
amongst all the tribes, that came up in a warlike-way to help the people of God
against oppression in Judges: 5. Judges 18.
that of all Nephtali was the only tribe, that joined with Zebulun, that
jeoparded their lives in the cause of God, that would take up arms to defend
themselves and the people against oppression; surely these 2. tribes by the
others that would not venture themselves, were at that time accounted very
factious, and very seditious; what they only, Zebulun and Nephtali? why, yet
that is observable, though there where none joined with Zebulun but only
Nepthtali, there is no tribe of which it is so much spoken, to be a tribe full
of courtesy and civilitie, of a peaceable and quiet disposition, as Nephtali
was; you shall find that, if you read the 49. of Genesis: 49. Genes. 21.
there are these 2. things said of Nephtali, 1. that he was as a Hind let
loose, and gave goodly words; I, but they may be but words of complement, and
false; nay, when Moses comes with the blessing (you shall find these 2. places,
one in Genesis, and the other in Deuteronomie; when Moses comes with the
blessing upon Nephtali; Nephtali filled with favor, and with the blessing of
the Lord; what is the meaning? Nephtali was a tribe that had most courtesy, and
civility of all, compared to a goodly Hind, of a quiet disposition, and
courteous language, one that had the favor of God, and the favor of men, and
yet this Nepthali was the tribe that would jeopard their lives, and take up
arms in defense of the people of God, against oppression in those times, above
all.

And Phinehas that was so zealous, and would make use of the sword, God said,
25. Numbers 12.13.
he would make a Covenant of peace with him; even with Phinehas that is such a
fiery hot man, a Covenant of peace must be made with him, by God himself, for
he did indeed by that way procure peace to Israel; for so the Text says there
in that place of Numbers, that because Phinehas was so zealous, it was (says
God) that I might not consume them in my jealousy; As if he should have said,
if there had not been some amongst them, that had been zealous, and as they
account fiery, I would have been zealous my self, and fiery my self, and
consumed them; and it was well they had such amongst them; and one day those
that cry out of them, may come to see cause, to bless God for them; we had
such, would not have the world put off, and gulled with the fair name of peace;
we know the devil has made much use of words in former times, and would fain
make use of it, as if those that desired truth most, were not greatest friends
unto peace, God forbid, but it should be so, why though it is true, we think
not we have our portion here, and therefore we would not have peace upon any
terms; Indeed we confess our portion lies higher, and that wherein our portion
does consist, we would have upon any terms; and therefore desire with Paul, 3.
Philip.
If by any means, I may attain to the resurrection of the dead; so if by any
means, upon any terms, that I may have peace at the great day whatsoever I
endure here; we would be glad that all our mountains were mountains of Olivet,
but yet we would be loath to have them mountains of corruption; You read in the
Kings of a 2. Kings 23.13.
mountain of corruption,of offense, so it is in the old Latin, now if we
compare one Scripture with another, we shall find, that was no other but mount
Olivet; mount Olivet was made a mountain of corruption: there Solomon did build
idolatrous Temples for the honor of the Gods of his Queen, those gods that his
Queen did worship, 1. Kings 11.7.
Solomon built Temples for to gratify her, and it was upon the Mount before
Jerusalem, which was the mount of Olivet, now you know the Mount Olivet had his
name from Olives that did grow there, and were emblems of peace, but yet the
mount Olivet may be made a mount of corruption; we would be glad that we might
live upon mount Olivet, all our days, but are loath this mount Olivet should be
made a mount of corruption.

^
Give me leave but in a few words, yet to put some considerations to you, and if
I speak not reason in them, reject them; 1. because that you are so greedy of
comforts in this world, you would fain have peace, but I hope a safe peace, and
that is all we do desire; if the peace be not safe, O the blood that may follow
after; we read in the 27. of the Acts v. 13. That there was indeed a calm, and
the South Wind did blow softly for a while, but presently there did rise a
tempestuous wind called Euroclydon; take we heed (my brethren) that we be not
deluded with the softly South Wind, take heed that there be not an Euroclydon,
that blows presently after; were we sure to be delivered from that same
Euroclydon, we should be glad of continuance of soft blowings of the South Wind.

Can you think of a safe peace, to live under any arbitrary governments; no,
that you will say; and therefore we account our condition ill now, for we have
arbitrary governments amongst us still, do not the Parliament themselves govern
in that kind?

^
Give me leave in a word to answer this; consider of the difference between the
arbitrary government the Parliament complains off, and what now you feel; 1.
that was then when the Kingdom was in a settled way, and especially when there
was no contra arbitrary power to oppose it, yet then it went on, and surely
then it did but make way for worse arbitrary government, but now it is in a
way, when the Kingdom is unsettled, and in a way where there is a necessity
of some help beyond the ordinary course of law, because of a contra arbitrary
power that is opposed; and is it possible for any man that has any wisdom,
or understanding not to see the difference betvveen these two?

But I Will show you a greater difference then this, that that was before,
those that governed then, suffered nothing in it themselves; but gained all;
now those that are accused for the present, if that be arbitrary they suffer
themselves as much as we do, and their posterity suffers as much as ours,
therefore the thing is far different from what was before.

only at the dispose of the King? do you not think that those that are with
him, and give such strength and assistance to him, that you must not lie at
their mercy too, and will that be safe for you; I put it to every man's
conscience, whether he can think that it is safer, for Church, or Commonwealth
to be governed by the King with those that are now about him, and an army of
Papists, or to be governed by the King with his 2. Houses of Parliament, which
is the safest way in the consciences of any men living.

Yet further, consider, if you have your eyes in your heads, that perhaps what
you aim at as your end, your adversaries may aim to be as their means, and
what will become of you then, if that that you would have as an end, they shall
look at but as a medium; consider what consequences, may come of that.

And lastly, you that do desire so much peace to preserve your own portions
here, would not you willingly have such peace, as those that have appeared for
you in houses of Parliament, in City, in Ministry, that have been most active
be preserved too? are you so desirous of it, as to be willing to leave them to
the fury and rage of their adversaries? were not this one of the horriblest
wickednesses that ever was committed in a Kingdom, when men from a desire to
save their own estates particularly, should betray those that have been
faithful to them in their places of trust.

It was a speech of Demosthenes, to one that would fain have peace. It is a
vain and preposterous thing to desire peace with the flock, upon this
condition, that the keepers of the flock may be betrayed; The fair name of
peace will never prevail with a wise man, when this shall come to be the
condition of it, (the good people in Chrysostomes time) thought it such a
thing, to have but the mouth of one Chrysostom stopped, that they professed,
if the Sun should turn back, and keep in her rays, it were more tolerable,
then that the mouth of John Chrysostom should be stopped; they had such a high
esteem, of a faithful Minister in those times; therefore if you would be faith
full to God, and to his Kingdom, and to those that have appeared for you, look
after such peace, wherein you and they may be safe.

God knows they would have been willing, to have been as silent as you, but
suppose all the Ministers of the Kingdom, and men that had ability to appear
publicly, had all been silent, so as the business had been wholly betrayed,
and at length an army of Papists had risen, when you had had no help to have
resisted them, would you not have cried to Ministers? would you not have cried
to Magistrates? would you not have cried to Parliament men? if they have
ventured themselves to be faithful for you, know, you can have no peace except
they have it; and it were an unworthy thing to think of your safety without
theirs.

But you will say, we would not have our estates, and peace, thus (as you speak)
upon any terms, without any regard to religion, we have our portion in
religion, as well as you, and we have our consciences to look after as well as
you; and God forbid it should be otherwise, but that religion should prosper
too with our peace, but we would not have such Sects to be maintained in the
Kingdom; let us have truth and religion, but away with the sectaries.

when as when it comes to be scanned, the difference between you and them will
prove not to be so great.



Turks have as much peace in their religion, as any religion has in all the
world, and there is as little difference of opinions amongst the Turks, as
there is in any religion weatsoever; but well may that coat have no seam, that
has no shape; if the truth of religion comes to appear, certainly it is
impossible, but many differences of opinion must come, and it is a most
intolerable pride of heart and tyranny in any whatsoever to think, by violent
means to force all, to be of the same opinions that they are of in matters that
are not of the foundation, and that may stand with the peace of a Commonwealth,
too; you take upon you in that, more then Christ does, more then the Apostles
ever did.

But you will say, if men be in an error, why should they not be forced, shall
every man be left to his opinion, to do what he will?

No, I plead not for that neither; therefore I except all opinions. 1. against
the foundation of religion. 2. and that are against the foundation of civil
government; take those 2. aside, and then for other opinions that are of a
lower, inferior nature, (I say) there you take too much upon you, whosoever
you are, if you should think to force men to be of the same opinion as you are,
and there is no such way to make a disturbance in Churches, and Commonwealths,
then to force men to be of the same opinion in things, that are of an inferior
nature.

I, but you will still say, if it be an error, they must not be left to live in
it, if it be an error; nay stay there, a man may be in an error; and yet you
have nothing to do to offer violence unto him, to bring him out of his error;
you may seek to convince him as much as you can: but to offer violence, you
undertake more, then God has given you commission to do, what ever you are;
and I give this Scripture for it, with is clear in the Romans: One believes
that he may eat all things, Romans 14.2.
another eats herbs, let not him that eats, despise him that eats not,
and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats; for who art thou that
judge another? who art thou that judge? certainly one of these was a sin at
that time, but yet, though one were a sin, yet they that were in the right must
not by violence force those, that were in the vvrong, to their opinion; but
they must leave them to God; (I say,) in matters of such consequence as these,
it is a point of Antichristian tyranny, and notorious pride in men, that have
taken so much upon them, as to force all to be of the same opinion; this is not
the way certainly for true peace; but thus much for the 2. Corollary; The 3.
follows.

Use 3.
If men have their portion in this world, here is the reason why there is such a
stir in the world by men, to maintain this their portion; what rending and
tearing is there among men to preserve their estates? especially if they have a
higher portion in the world then others; O, what a deal of stir is there to
keep up their honor and reputation. There was such striving for the Popedom
in Henry the fourth his days, that it cost many thousand men's lives. Such
blustering men make to be great in the world, it cost the blood of twenty
thousand persons merely to satisfy the wills of a few; certainly one day the
world will be wiser, and understand that they are men, and not dogs, to be
subject to the humors and lusts of others, and that no man has now any
further power over them, but what they have by agreement from them, I hope men
will be wise enough to understand this, and not sacrifice their lives, for the
satisfying of the wills of a few men in the world; it is their God, and do you
say what ails me, when you have taken away my Gods? here is the ground of all
the stirs and combustions in the world, because carnal hearts look upon what
they enjoy as their portion.

But how comes it thus to pass, that men should be so greedy of this their
portion? it is such an excellent portion, that they are so greedy of it? is it
worth so much, that they contend so about it? this makes way for me to slip
into the 4. particular, to enquire, what kind of portion this is, that these
men of the world have, therefore consider. 1. what poor things they are, that
they make such a stir about; secondly, consider the tenure upon which they
hold, what ever they enjoy; and thirdly, consider the mixture of evil that
there is in that they enjoy; and fourthly, the blessed portion that they loose,
and lastly, the dreadful end that there will be to such men, that have their
portion here.

What poor things worldly men strive for.
in the 8. of Hosea, Ephraim feeds upon the wind; and when a bladder is full of
wind, one prick lets it quite out: so when death comes, it lets out all their
comforts; will thou set thy heart upon that which is not, it is not, it has no
realitie in it; in the 25. of the Acts; 25. Acts.
when Bernice and Agrippa came in great pomp, to the assembly; that which you
have in your books translated, great pomp, it is in the Greek great fancy; all
the pomp and jollity of the world, is but a mere fancy, this is their portion.

concerns the soul, all the portion they have here, therefore says the Text
here, thou fillest their belly; it is but a belly full, and what is that to the
soul? indeed the rich man in the Gospel, could say, Soul take thy ease, eat
and drink, etc. Soul take thy ease; because you have goods laid up, and because
you may eat and drink; what is all this to the soul? Ambrose has such a speech
upon the place: if the man had had the soul of a swine, what could he have said
otherwise; for indeed these things were suitable to the soul of a swine; you
shall find that a man is not the better, because of outward things not a whit;
the heart of the wicked is little worth; his estate may be somewhat worth, his
house may be somewhat worth, his lands may be somewhat worth; but the hears of
the wicked is little worth, 10. Proverbs.
says Solomon. And would, not you think that to be a great evil, that when
you go up and down abroad, you should certainly know, that there is no man
gives you any entertainment, or any respect, but it is for your servants sake
that tends upon you, would not that trouble you; indeed you come to such a man's
house, and he seems to make you welcome, and you have entertainment; I but you
come to know afterward, that it was not for your sake, but for your servants
sake, that he loved you, would not this discourage you? the truth is so, all
that you have in this world, it is for your servants sake, for your goods, your
house and lands: it is not for any worth that is in you. It was aspeech that
Socrates spoke once to one -- when he had a fine house, and a many brave
things; what (says he) there are many come to see thy house and thy fine
things there, but no body comes to see thee, they know there is a worth in thy
fine house, and in thy fine furniture, but they see no worth in thee, indeed
all these things are not souls meat, it is not man's meat they feed upon, it is
but ashes, it is nothing to the soul of a man.

very poor pittance, thou have not all the world neither, though thou have thy
portion in this world; if thou had the whole world at command, yea, if God
should make a 1000. worlds more for thee to command, that were all but a poor
pittance, to put off an immortal soul with all; but what thou have is but a
little minuin in the world. All the nations of the earth are but as the dust of
the balance, and a drop of the bucket to God, what is thy dust then? what is
thy house and land then? as Socrates wittily rebuked the pride of Alcibiades,
when he was very proud, that he had so much land lay together, he brought the
map of the world to him, and (says he) pray show me, where your land ^ies
here, one prick of a pen would make a description of all.

England, Ireland, and Scotland, are but 3. little spots unto the world, and
what are your farms and your mannours? you have but a little portion, if you
had all it were no great matter; the truth is all you have in this world,
cannot be enough to make you live in fashion in the world, like a man; it is
not enough (I say) for to live like a man in the world, to live like one that
has an immortal soul, like one that has the image of God upon him, and was
sent hither into the world, to do so great services, as every one of you were
sent hither to do, and therefore it is but a mean thing, little cause you have
to rejoice in it.

It is true they that are godly, account themselves unworthy of the least thing
they have here in the world; but i will tell you a mystery of religion now, a
practical maxim of religion, that is a great mystery to the world, which is
this, that a gracious heart, though he thinks himself unworthy of the least
crum of bread, yet all the creatures in heaven and earth, will not serve him to
be his portion, will not satisfy him; though he has a heart that will be
satisfied with any thing, as counting himself unworthy of the meanest condition
in this world, as a present gift of God; but if God should give him heaven and
earth, he had such an unsatisfying heart, as he would not be satisfied with
heaven and earth, except God gives him himself too; therefore certainly thy
portion, it is a but a very little portion.

26. Job 7.
so all the things of the earth do: therefore it is said of Abraham, that he
sought a City, that had foundations; 10. Hebr.
all other things, are as things that have no foundation at all; there is a
worm in every creature that will consume it in time; and the Scripture calls
all our riches uncertain riches.

Christian, thou art made for an eternal condition; these things are fading;
when thou come to enter in upon thy eternal estate, if thou should then
ask, what shall I have now, I have now thus much, and thus much in my whole
life; but what shall I have now I come to enter in upon my eternal estate?
truly nothing at all. If a man were to go a great voyage to the Indies, and all
the provision he makes is this, he gets a vessel that can make shift to carry
him as far as Gravesend, that he will do, and what need he has of provision to
Gravesend, or perhaps to the Downs he provides for, he goes on, and should go
on now from the Downs, and begins his voyage, to go to the Indies, and is
gotten into the Ocean; alas, his vessel is a rotten vessel; were not this an
unwise man? truly this is the condition of thousands in the world; man, woman,
thou art made for an eternal condition, God intends eternity for every
mothers child that is here this day, and God expects that thy life should be
spent in making provision for this eternal estate of thine, and thou think
of nothing, but that thou may provide for a few years here, and live in some
fashion, and be some body in the world. O when thou come to enter upon the
Ocean of eternity, thou will give a dreadful shrik, and cry out, I am undone,
I am undone, I have nothing provided, for eternal life.

Again consider whatever thou have in this world, it is no other, but what may
stand with the eternal hatred of an infinite God toward thee: it may be the
portion of a reprobate, and will this serve thy turn? will this satisfy thee?
will that satisfy thy soul, that may be the portion of a reprobate? there are
many that are now sweltring under the wrath of the infinite God, that have had
20. times as much as any of you have that are here before the Lord this day,
they have had greater estates then you, and lived merrier lives then you, and
yet are now under the wrath of God, will a reprobates portion serve thy turn:
therefore consider that to enjoy the dominion of all the world, may stand with
Gods eternal hatred, but to have the least dram of saving grace, intitles men
to the favor of God which is better then life. What a difference is there
then, between the having the least dram of grace, and the enjoyment of all the
world, and what a goodly portion is there here that thou so much rejoycest in?
certainly, thy heart is strait, that thou think these things to be so big,
as in a narrow vessel a thing will appear big, but in a mighty wide vessel it
appears little; so when the Lord by grace shall widen and enlarge thy heart,
then all the things of the world will be little to thee.

Indeed if a man be below here, he looks upon that, which is next to him, that
has any bigness in it, as somewhat great, but if a man were advanced on high,
on the top of a pinnacle, then that which seemed great appears but little to
him; so the men of the world that are here, lie graveling below, and the curse
of the serpent is upon them, and they think the things of the world great
matters, but grace lifts up the heart on high to God and Christ, mounts it up
to eternity, and then we look upon all things here below as mean, this was the
reason that Luther, when he had great gifts sent to him by many of the great
men of Saxony, he began to be afraid, least the Lord should reward him here in
this world, and he has this expression, Luther.
I did vehemently protest, God should not put me off so; that is his word,
according to the manner of his language: thus he speaks, when there came in
things of the world, and he began to be tickled with honor, and great men did
respect him, O (thought he) I shall be some body now in the world; thus
corruption began to work, but grace did prevail, and he breaks out with this
expression, I did profess, God should not put me off so; the Lord shall not
put me off with worldly honors and dignities; there are other things I look
for, things that are better and higher, these are poor pittances, for this soul
of mine to be put off with all, there are other things I must have from the
Lord, or else I cannot be satisfied; that is the first thing, the poor things
of the world, which is the portion of wicked men.

Secondly consider the tenure by which they hold it; all you have in the world,
you hold it not by very good tenure, it is not held in Capite. I confess this,
I think not the men of the world to be usurpers, for what they lawfully get in
the world: I think not they shall answer merely for their using what they do,
merely for their right to use what they have; but they shall answer for their
not right using the same; they shall not answer (I say) for their right to use,
but for their not right using; they have some right, but what right is it.

There is a 3. fold right. 1. a right of justice, that we may claim to a thing
as a due: what is not your right, you cannot claim. 2. there is a right of
Creation, that God gave to man at first: you have lost that right now. 3. there
is a right of promise; God has promised all good things to his people; you
have not that right neither: you have neither the right of justice to claim,
nor the right of your Creation, nor the right of promise; what right then?

There is a fourth right, and that I confess you have, which is a right of
donation; God is pleased to give to you. And thus you hold all your honors,
and estates, that are ungodly men; just thus, even as a man that is condemned
to dye, and there being a little reprieving for 2. or 3. days, before his
execution, the Prince out of his indulgence gives order to have provision made
for him, according to his quality, that if he be a Gentleman, he should have
such provision, if a Knight, or a Nobleman, he shall have provision according
to his quality, till his execution; now no man can say, this man usurpes,
though he has forfeited all his right to his lands and estates, yet if the
King will give him this refreshment, he is no usurper, but it is a poor right
he has, it is a right of donation; and thus God gives the ungodly men in this
world their right to outward comforts; you have your portion, but you see how
you hold it.

The next thing to be considered, is, that this portion here, as it is poor in
regard of the mean things, and the Tenure; so there is a great deal of mixture
there in, and the truth is, all the good things wicked men enjoy in this world,
will scarce bear charges; that is, there is so much trouble they meet withal
in this world, with their portion, that what they have will scarce bear
charges; and if a man goes a voyage, we use not to count any thing he spends by
the way, to be part of his treasury; now all we have here in this world is but
spending money to bear our charges in religion: God knows we shall be at a
great deal of charges, and afflictions we shall meet with here; but besides,
there is a mixture of Curse in every portion of an ungodly man; if any of you
think you get such a rich match, you get an heir that is a very rich match,
and you get her portion, and if it be in money, there you go and fetch away the
bags of gold, that are her portion, but if it should prove that every bag of
gold, you have of your wives portion, had the plague in it, it were but a poor
portion; certainly it is thus with all ungodly ones in the world, that all the
while they live, whatsoever they enjoy, (continuing wicked men) they have a
curse of God that goes along with it, and makes way unto eternal misery for
them; as those that are godly have the blessing of God in outward things that
makes way for their eternal good; so thou have the curse of the Lord mingled
with all thy outward things that makes way for eternal evil unto thee.

And then consider what portion thou loosest, thou have got one, but thou
loosest a great deal more; if a man had been at the exchange and made a bargain
about some petty thing, and afterward when he comes home, knows that by not
being at home, he has lost a purchase that would have made him, and his
posterity: he has little cause of rejoicing in that bargain; so though thou
have got a portion, that may seem to satisfy thee somewhat, know thou have
lost a portion of infinite worth and value.

It is impossible to show you, what this portion is; for the devil could show
Christ all the glory of the world in the twinkling of an eye; but if I should
come to show you the glory of Heaven, I had need have eternity to show you,
what the portion of the Saints is; but though I cannot show it you all, I will
only give you a hint or two, that you know somewhat what it is.

1. It is such a portion as is fit for the spouse of the Lamb, as is fit for
the spouse of one that is to marry the Son of God, the second person in
Trinity; 2. it is such a portion as is fit and suitable to an heir of life and
glory, an heir of Heaven and Earth; yea, it is such a portion, as God does
give men, to this very end, to declare what the infinite power of God is able
to do, to raise a poor creature to the height of happiness; what think you
this must be, that (I say) it must therefore be done, that it might declare to
Angels and all creatures, what the infinite power of God is able to do, to
raise a poor creature to happiness and glory; this must be somewhat.

Again, it must be such a one as in which, God must attain unto the great
design, that he had from all eternity, in making of Heaven and Earth, which
was to magnify the riches of his grace to a Company, that he had set apart to
glory; it must be such a portion; and guess you what this must needs be.

Yea, it is such a portion as must require the infinite power of God, to
support a creature to bear the weight of that glory; and all this must be now
to all eternity; I remember when Esau did but hear Isaac his Father, tell what
a blessing he had given unto Jacob, he fell a weeping; O that God would so
strike unto the hearts of men, that have so little minded any thing, but the
world: Thou hear but a few words, to what the Lord has reserved to all
eternity, for his Saints; and compare but that with what is thy portion, and
thou have cause to weep.

I but more cause you will have to weep, if you consider the last thing, and that
is, what is like to be the end of all thy portion in this world; if indeed thou
could ruffle it out in this world, and enjoy thy hearts desire, and there an
end: it were somewhat; O, but there is somewhat else remains afterward; as. 1.
O, the perplexity of spirit, that any worldly man will have when death comes,
when he shall see an end of all the comforts of this world, now farewell house,
farewell lands, and farewell friends, farewell acquaintance, and all merry
meetings, and joviallities, I shall never have comfort more in you; as it was
the speech of Pope Adrian, when he was to die, O thou my soul, my soul, whither
art thou going? whither art thou going? thou shall never have more jests, nor
be merry, nor be jocund any more; where art thou going? so may a man that has
his portion in this world, say at his death, where is this poor soul of mine
going? I have lived here thus many years, and I have had many merry meetings, I
have eaten with the strongest, and have drunk the sweetest, and gone in brave
array, but now my day is gone, what shall become of me, what peace have I now,
when all is gone.

I remember Latimer has a story in one of his Sermons, that he preached before
King Edward, of a rich man, that when he lay upon his sick bed, there came one
to him, and tells him, that certainly by all reason they can judge, he was like
to be a man for another world, a dead man: as soon as ever he hears but these
words, what must I die, send for a Physician, wounds, sides, heart, must I die?
wounds, sides, heart, must I die? and thus he goes on, and there could be
nothing got from him, but wounds, sides, heart, must I die? must I die, and go
from all these? here was all, here was the end of this man that made his
portion in this world.

Another rich man that lived not far from the place, that I my self lived in
heretofore; when he heard his sickness was deadly, he sends for his bags of
money, and hugs them in his arms, O must I leave you? O must I leave you? And
another, lying upon his sickbed, laid a bag of gold to his heart, and then
bids them, take it away, it will not do, it will not do; Another, when he lay
upon his sickbed, his servants came to him, and said, what lack you? would you
have any beer? what do you want? O (says he) I want only one thing, peace of
conscience, that I would have, it is not beer, nor friends, nor an easy pillow
I want, but ease of conscience; O consider, whether there be not like to be
perplexity in your spirits.

And then (brethren) you must be called to an account for all, though (as I
told you before) not to account for the right to use; but for not right using;
and do but think with your selves, if you now have so much as you cannot
reckon, how then will you be able to reckon for it, if now you cannot count,
how will you be able to give an account at the last day, especially when you
have had no thoughts of this before hand.

There will be a dreadful portion indeed at the day of judgment, O the shame
and confusion that will be upon the faces of the men of the world in that
hour, when they shall see their poor neighbors have their portion with Christ
in glory; perhaps, a poor servant in the house advanced to glory, and they
stand on the left hand to be cast out; perhaps some of these poor hospital
boys shall be advanced to eternal glory, when as some of you, that are their
great masters, shall be cast out eternally; what an infinite shame and
confusion will this be to you.

O now I see what it is to trust in God, and not to trust in him; those are
happy that would trust for the future, but I miserable, that dared not trust in
him: 11. Psalm. 6.24 Matthew. 51.
The Lord will rain snares, and fire, and brimstones, here is the portion of
the ungodly at last; appoint him his portion with hypocrites, says Christ,
where there is weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth; that is the portion
of hypocrites in the conclusion; Now here thou see the end of all, what do
thou think then of thy portion now? think but of one Text, and I have done.

27. Job 8.
What hope has an hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his
soul? Mark, there are many hypocrites that aimed to get estates in the world,
but cannot thrive, God crosses them: well, but suppose thou aymest to gain, and
have got all thou would desire; what hope has an hypocrite, though he has
gained? though he has grown never so rich, and got all he desires, when God
takes away his soul? this time is coming, it will be ere long, and it may be
suddenly, the portion of some that are here present, and perhaps this Text of
mine, may then ring in their ears, when they lie upon their sick beds, perhaps
within a month, or six weeks, when Gods time shall be, and then conscience may
repeat in your ears; I heard such a day there were a generation of men that
have their portion in this world, and now I am afraid, I am one of them; and
there is an end of my portion, only I must go to my other portion, that will
be very dreadful.

I but who have you spoke too all this while? who is the man that has his
portion in this world? it is a poor portion, as you have set out to us, but
every one will go away and say, I hope it is not I, I hope God has a better
portion for me then this; therefore give me leave to speak in the name of God
to you, and out of his word, to point out the man and woman that is like to
have their portion here, living and dying in such a condition.

1. Signs of a man whose portion is in this world.
First, that man to whom God gives in this life, nothing but what belongs to
this life, that is the man apparently; if God give thee thy estate, and if he
gives thee not somewhat besides thy estate, that is a principle, that is a seed
of eternal life in thee, certainly he never intends good to thee in the world
to come. There are many men have a great deal in this world and they say they
hope, God will be merciful to them in the world to come. Now this is a certain
truth, that man to whom God denies spiritual mercy in this world, God will
deny eternal mercy to him in the world to come; this therefore should be thy
care, does God increase my estate in this world? O that the Lord would give a
proportionable measure of grace, or else it is nothing; Lord, thou give me
here a great estate, if thou give not to me together with it, a
proportionable measure of grace to use it to thy name, I had better have been
without this.

Is this thy care? I put it to thy conscience; as thy estate increases, art
thou solicitous at the Throne of grace, that the Lord would give thee a
proportionable measure of grace, to manage thy estate for his glory; then peace
be to thee, thou art not the man.

You may further examine it, by the workings of your hearts about your present
portions; As. 1 whether you enjoy what you have for it self, and whether your
hearts be terminated in what you do enjoy; one that is godly has his portion
beyond these things, he enjoyes the creatures. I but it is God that he enjoyes
in them; that is sweet to me, that I can see, and taste the love of God in; I
but a Carnal heart enjoyes the creatures, and runs away, and is terminated
there; looks much at the creature, but at little in God; as diverse of your
hospital children here, look more at the men that were their friends, to bring
them into the hospital, when they were Fatherless and Motherlesse, and
shiftlesse, then they look at the founders of the Hospital, they little think
of them, to thank God for them, but if they meet with him that was the next
cause to bring them in, they will thank him for his kindness; so it is with
most men, they look at outward means and secondary causes, but a godly heart
looks at the root of all things; I remember one that came into the
Treasurehouse of Venice, where he saw Tables of gold and silver, and he pointed
down, looking at the bottom of the Table, whereupon one asked him, why is your
eye so at the bottom? O (says he) I am looking at the root of all this; Alas,
it is a small matter for a man that has a great trade, to have a great stock.

A godly man though he has but a little, yet he looks at the root, at the love
of God, and the Covenant of grace, which is the spring of all, and the chief
thing that satisfies his heart, it is the goodness of God that satisfies a
gracious heart, and not the bare creature.

Therefore examine, how your hearts are set upon these things of the world,
whether your hearts go out with full strength to them; if you make your bellies
to be your God, then your end will be destruction: That man that has his heart
swallowed up in the world, like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that were swallowed
in the earth; if the things of the earth be a gulf to swallow thy heart up,
there is another gulf to swallow thee up hereafter. Consider how do the loss
of the things of the world, take thy heart; do not thou account thy self an
undone man, when thou had lost some comforts? do thou not come home to thy
wife and children, I say, I am an undone man? why what is the matter? I have
lost some part of my estate; O carnal heart! one that is Gods child may have
some crosses, but no losses at all; because he enjoyes all in God, and has God
still. The truth is, if thou were truly Godly, whatever afflictions thou
meetest with all, (as we say, a man may put all his gain in his eye; so you
may,) if you be godly, put all your crosses in your eyes; you are so far from
being undone.

Examine then whether these things of the world, be not the only suitable
things to your hearts? whether you bless not your selves in these, as in your
happiness; the Ivy will claspe about a rotten tree, and cannot be taken off
it, without tearing; and so the heart of a worldling, will clasp about these
rotten comforts, as the only agreeable things. You may hear them sometimes tell
with joy that we were in such a place, and were so merry, and had the bravest
meeting, and what was there? there was singing and drinking, and blaspheming of
the name of God, and yet it was the bravest meeting that could be.

When did you ever come from an ordinance of God, and say, O it was a brave day
to me, the Lord has spoken to my heart this day; did you never go from the
word, with as merry a heart, and rejoice of it amongst your friends, as you did
from a merry meeting? you may fear you are the man that have your portion here.

If I were to give but one evidence. whether a man has grace or no? I would
give this as soon as any one; Suppose thou have got some estate in the word, I
put this to thee, what do thou account to be the chiefest good of thy estate,
more then thou did before. A man that has got an estate more then he had
before, thinks with himself, now I may live at a better fashion, then I could,
now I may have more freedom then before, now I may have more credit in the
world then I had now, I may have my own mind, and satisfy my lust more then I
did, or then another man can do; is not this the thing thou most rejoycest in;
nay, is not this a truth, that some of your hearts (if your hearts were ripped
up, this would be the language of them) most rejoice in, because hereby you
have most fuel for your lusts; a poor man has not so much fuel for his
uncleanesse as you have, nor so much fuel for his pride and malice as you
have, and many rich men account the blessing and happiness of their estates to
consist in this very thing, that now they may have a larger scope for their
lusts then ever they could before; alas, a poor man cannot go abroad, and
drink, as you can do; a poor man cannot lay out so much upon a whore, and an
unclean wretch, as you can do, and you rejoice in this, if this man has not
his portion in this world, who has? the Lord strike thy wretched heart.

A gracious man, when God blesses him in this world, though there be but a
little grace in him, it will work thus: the Lord has raised my condition above
my brother, and why? the Lord gives me a larger opportunity to do him
service, then my brother has, or then I had before: there is such a poor man,
he is an honest man, but (God knows) he can do but little in the place where he
is, he has but little means; but God has given me means, and this means
enlarges my opportunities to do God service, and for this my soul blesses God,
I account my estate happier then before, I now may be of more use, and do God
more service then otherwise I could do; have you such workings in heart, you
rich men if: you have not never be at quiet till you get your hearts working in
this manner; this will be a blessed testimony, that God gives you a portion
here, and intends another portion for you in the world to come.

Again, what is that thing that you strive to make most sure? that which a man
strives to make most sure, that he counts his happiness to consist in; O for
thy Land, and debts, thou strivest with all thy might to make them sure, but as
for the matter of thy salvation, and peace in Christ, thou have a good hope
thereof, but take no pains to make it sure.

See what thou do most admire men for? O such a man is happy, he has so much
coming in, and has so much a year; but do thou call the vile man happy? this
is a sign that thou have not thy eye enlightened: can thou look upon those
that are poor and mean in this world, as most happy creatures, because the Lord
gives them the grace of his spirit? and think, well, it is true, I have a
greater estate then such a poor man that is my neighbor, or then such a poor
kindsman, but God knows, he does God more service then I do, he prays more,
and more heartily in one day then I do in a whole year. O, the Lord has other
manner of prayers, and sighs come from his poor cottage, then ever he had from
my brave palace: I have my city house and my country house, but they were
never so perfumed with prayers; some that live in poor cellars, send up more
prayers, and God has more honor from them, then he has from me; in my
family (perhaps) there is cursing and blaspheming of God, in such poor
cottages, there is (perhaps) blessing and praising of God, now can thou look
upon them, as the most happy people in the world.

Lastly, what art thou most careful to lay up for thy children? if the things
of the world take up thy care for thy children most, it is an argument thou
think, thy children shall have a good portion if thou can leave them so
many thousands; and it is like it is thy portion too; if thou countest it
theirs.

Examine also thy services what they are; do thou put off God with slight
services, then know thy portion is like to be of Gods slight mercies; Again,
art thou hypocritical in thy service, do thou aim at the praise of men in
outward duties, that is a sign thou have thy reward here; and are thy services
forced, that thou art compelled, it is merely conscience compells thee, and
not an inward agreablenesse between the frame of thy heart, and holy things:
then it is like, a servants portion will be thine, and not a child's portion.

Further, have thou heretofore been a forward professor in religion, and have
now forsaken the ways of God; I Will give you a dreadful Scripture for this, in
the 17. of Jeremiah 17. Ierem. 13.
: All you that forsake the Lord shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me,
shall be written in the earth; if thou have been forward heretofore, and now
thou come to be more ancient, and now thou art dead, and dull, and cold --;
here is a Text for thee, go home, and tremble, least thou be a man, whose name
is written in the earth. And does not God for the present curse thy portion?
thou find the more thou have, the worse thou growest; as if a man should eat
meat at ones table, and as soon as he has eaten it, begin to swell, he will
conclude certainly the meat was poisoned, so when thy estate rises, thy heart
rises with pride, surely it was poisoned with the curse of God that was in it.

Again I Will only name one sign more; what say thou to this, that man that
spends his days without having some fear, least God should put him off with
the things of this world: there may be some danger of that; it is said of some,
that they feed themselves without fear; Jude 12.
you can go to a merry meeting, and feed upon the cheer, and eat without fear;
but never have such a thought as this in your heart, what if God should put me
off with these things? I hear indeed there are some menare put of so, what if
that should prove to be my portion what a miserable creature were I? I fear
there were some men never had such a thought in their lives, what if it should
prove so with me, what a miserable creature were I.

I have one word of exhortation to you all, and then I have done, and this
exhortation must be divided: First, unto you that have some evidences that God
has given you a better portion, that God has not put you off with the portion
of this world; O bless the Lord for his goodness to you, that ever he has
showed you better things then the world affoords, your line is fallen into a
good ground, you have a goodly inheritance; though thou have not so much as
others have, yet thou have that that will make thee happy forever.

I have read of one Didimus, a learned godly Preacher, but he was blind,
whereof he complained, and was much troubled for his want of sight, whereupon a
Christian friend rebuked him sharply; what (says he) has God given you that
that is the excellency of an Apostle, of a Minister of Christ; and are you
troubled for want of your sight, that a pismire may have, that a bruit beast
may have, for the want of thy sight, that the rats and mice may have, are you
troubled with that, and rather not taught to bless God, that has given you so
great a mercy, as to make you such an instrument of his service? so may I say
to you that are godly, has God given you Jesus Christ? has he given you his
Son, has he given you his Spirit, has he given you himself, to be your
portion, and are you troubled that you have not more of that, that beasts may
have, as well as your selves? O be ashamed of any mournful discontentments for
want of the comforts of this world.

And do not envy wicked men for their outward prosperity; I remember a story of
a poor soldier that was condemned to die merely fortaking a bunch of grapes
from a Vine, for there was a strict law that who ever should take any thing
from that place they went through, he should dye for it. Now he had taken a
bunch of grapes, and was condemned to die, and as he went to execution, he went
eating of his bunch of grapes, and some came to him, and said, do thou go
eating thy grapes, thou should think of somewhat else; he answers, I beseech
you (Sir) do not envy me my grapes, they will cost me dear; so may I say of all
the men of the world; we have no need to envy them of any thing they have, it
will cost them very dear one day.

Thirdly, live like such as God has not put off with the portion of this
world? manifest in it your conversations that you look for higher and better
things, then what this world affoords; show they are but slight in your eyes;
look upon your estates as despicable, be willing to improve them all for
public good, yea, to jeopard not estates only but your names, your liberties,
and your lives in a public cause; and those that shall do so, however the
world may look upon them in a sad condition, and say, O such a man is like to
be undone, and his life is in danger; I tell you such a one that shall out of a
good principle, be willing to venture life and estate and appear for God, that
man shall be most honored, and be found the most happy man at last; and indeed
herein he shows himself to be a man that looks for a higher portion, then these
things here; as those in the Hebrews: By that they said and did, 11. Hebr. 14.
they showed plainly, they looked for another Country; so see you men that
might live as comfortably in outward things as you, and (did their consciences
give way) they could be as quiet as you; but conscience puts them upon it, that
seeing God calls them to a public place, they can be content to put all at
Gods feet.

Now though you may think that such are in most danger, they show plainly they
are men of another country, and should be most honored; and take but this
principle with you, the more any one gives up his estate to God, the more
comfort he has in his estate, whether in the enjoyment of it, or in the loss
of it; I express it thus: when one resignes up all he has, his estate,
liberty, name, life to God, the oftener it comes into Gods hands, the better it
comes, when God gives it him again; a carnal heart when once he has these
things, he will not trust God with them, but he will have them in his own
keeping; but a gracious heart, though he has all these from God, yet every day
he is willing to give up all to him, and to trust God with them again; though
he be a rich man, he is willing every day to come and beg his bread at his
Fathers gate, and give up all; now he gives up all in the truth of his heart to
God, and God gives it him all again; as long as in a lawful way he enjoyes it,
he has it a fresh from God; now this (I say) the oftener any thing comes out
of Gods hand, the sweeter and the better it is; wicked men's estates come but
once out of Gods hands, and therefore there is not so much comfort in them, but
a godly man's estate comes 100. and 100. times from God; for every resignation
gives it to God, and God gives it him again; and therein is comfort, and O
blessed are they that live so, as that they declare they look for another
Country, and that their portion is not here; let the men of the world think
them foolish, that will venture themselves so, God and his Saints have declared
that their portion it not here.

And now to you all, the word of exhortation from God is, that every one in
this place, would put on to make more sure of another portion, besides the
portion of this world; put on, I say for you are all made capable of higher and
better things, then the things of the world; and never a one here but has an
immortal soul, and is capable of Communion with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and that is another manner of business, then to eat and drink, and have
pleasure with the flesh, here for a while; God has made your natures capable
of such glory, do not debase your selves, to rest satisfied with husks, when
you may have meat enough in your Fathers house; and therefore put on, and let
the poorest sort put on, that have but a little portion here; yet there is as
fair way for you to have the God of Heaven and Earth to be your portion, to
have whatsoever Jesus Christ has purchased by his blood to be your portion, to
have eternity, and immortality to be your portion; (I say) there is as fair a
way for it, as for the greatest Princes in the earth; you may come to have a
portion here.

Indeed many a poor apprentice may say; my Father is dead, and has left me no
portion: I, but you that are poor apprentices, and others, and the poor
Hospital boys, that live upon charity, it is possible some poor wretches
there may come to have their portion in God and Christ, and immortality, as
well as the greatest, and richest of all; therefore raise up your hearts here,
you that are the poorest and meanest, and know you are born for high things.

If I should come and tell one that is a poor boy in a blew coat now, what ever
you are now, there is such a rich man will adopt you to be his child, and make
you his heir, that would raise up his heart; well, how ever meanly you live
now, you may be a glorious creature hereafter, if so be you have now a heart to
put upon it, and to seek after it for your portion.

But you will say, Lord what should we do, that our portion may be a higher
portion, then in this world; the first thing I would put you upon, is this; let
the whole course of your life be steared (as it were) with the fear of God,
have a continual jealousy, least God should put you off with the things of
this life; hold forth this in every action, that any one may see by your
conversation, surely this man, this woman has some fears, least God should put
him off with a portion in this world; and especially you that have great
portions in this life, and have done God little service; you know there are
many poor people that live upon alms, have done God more service then you; you
have most cause to fear; they that are Rulers and Governors have mighty cause
to fear, unless they have good evidence in their hearts; Chrysostom upon the
13. of the Hebrews, speaking of those that are Governors; says, I wonder that
any Governor should be saved; he has such a speech there: I will not say so,
but there is a great deal of hazard; Christ tells us, that a man that has a
great portion in this world, (though it is possible he may have more
hereafter,) yet it is doubtful; whether he shall inherit heaven.

It was the counsel of one to a King; says he, I desire but this favor, that
every day you would think of this Text, what profits it a man, to gain the
whole world, and to loose his own soul? spend some little time in considering
of it every morning when you arise, and every night when you lie down, what
will it advantage me to be great here and miserable hereafter. The same
council I give to you, daily pray to God, to make you understand, what there
is in this Text, that there are a generation of men, who have their portion in
this world only.

Secondly, if you would not have your portion here, labor to take off your
hearts from all outward comforts; he that will be rich, shall fall into many
temptations; know it is not necessary, you should have an estate in this world,
but it is necessary, you should make your peace with God; it is necessary I
should provide for my soul; but how things go with me here, is not so much
necessary.

Thirdly, set the glory of Heaven and eternity daily before your eyes, and be
trading for higher things then the world affords: many poor people go up and
down the streets, crying some mean thing, and think it well, if they get 18d.
in a whole day, but a rich Merchant can go out in the morning, and make a
bargain, and perhaps get 500. l. in an hour, he trades somewhat like; so the
men of this world labor for the meat that perishes; but a godly man has
communion with God, and in a quarter of an hour gets that, he would not loose
for thousands.

It was a speech of Cleopatra to Anthony, thou art not to fish for Gudgeons and
Trowts, but thou art to angle for Castles and Cities; so may I say, if thou
have an immortal soul with thee, thou art not so much to angle for meat and
drink, and clothes, to make provision for the flesh, but for heaven and
immortality.

The next thing is this: Honor God with thy substance. Lay out thy portion
here for God. O, that I could but convince you of one principle of divinity
more, and that is this, that there is more excellency and good in one virtuous
action, then there is in all the creatures in heaven and earth, (besides the
blessed Angels, and glorious Saints above, I say others of the Saints,
excepting these) take all creatures, Sun, Moon, Stars, Seas, Earth, all the
Pearls and Jewels of the world, Pearls, put them all together, yet this is true
divinity, that there is more excellency in one virtuous action, then there is,
if thou had all these things to be thy possession; if men were convinced of
this, they would be abundant in good works: Thou think it a brave thing, to
have so much coming in by the year, do but one good action for God, out of an
upright principle, ANd there is more excellency in that one action, then there
is in thy great revenue, if thou have 1000. times more added to it.

Me thinks this should make them that are rich, to be rich in good works; so
says the Scripture, Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be rich
in good works, O, there is a richness in good works, as well as in great
revenues; O, improve, lay out thy estate now for God; Ambrose says upon that
place, of the rich man: is it not more honor, that so many children shall
account you as their Father, then that so many pieces of gold shall call you
their Lord? These pieces of gold, do (as it were) call you Lord, and there are
2. or 3. children shall call you Father; and is it not more excellent to have a
couple of poor Orphans, while you are alive in this world, to call you Father,
then to have so many bags of gold call you Mr? O, therefore, give a portion to
6. and to 7.

Again, if you would not be put off with a portion in this world, be sure that
all the services you perform to God be choice services, if you expect choice
mercies, let your services be choice services, be sure all your works be
supernatural works; you will say how shall I know that? if I had time, I could
make it out clear. A supernatural work is that that has a supernatural
principle, done to a supernatural end, and in a supernatural manner; A
supernatural principle, that is grace, which makes it suitable to my heart,
not that I do it out of conviction of conscience only, and a supernatural end,
that is, when I aim at God, and not at my self in any duty.

But what is this supernatural manner of serving God? I shall explain it thus.
Seneca in giving his rule how to know the affections, when they are natural,
and when not; says, you shall know a natural affection by this, if it be kept
with in bound, it is natural, if it be out of bounds, it is not natural; I Will
make use of it in another way; when you come to the service of God, if you
think to limit God in his service, this is but a natural service, you will go so
far and there stop, but if it be a supernatural service, you will let out your
hearts, if it were possible infinitely to God; you cannot be infinite, that is
true, but you will propound no bounds, nor limits to your service, and this is
indeed the truth of grace, when it has the impression of gracious
infiniteness upon it; infiniteness is that whereby God is without all limits;
so when the soul is without all limits and bounds in the way of grace, it is
desirous to honor God, if it were possible in an infinite way; these are
supernatural works.

Lastly, would you not have your portion in this world, be willing to cast away
whatever of your portion you have got sinfully; this in the name of God, I
declare as a special thing; therefore take it home with you; what ever man or
woman in this place would not have his portion in this world, but would have
his portion in the world to come; whatsoever of thy portion, thou have got in a
sinful course, cast it away presently, never sleep with it, lie not down one
night with it, rest not till thou art cleared of it.

It is an old rule, but a true one; all the repentance in the world, and all
your sorrowing for sin whatsoever, will never obtain pardon without
restitution, unless you restore what you are able, you can never have comfort
of the pardon of that sin; If you have got it when you were young, being an
apprentice, or at first setting up, away with it, else it will spoil all, and
you will never have any other portion from God; these hands of mine, had that once
given them, to restore that was got wrongfully 50. years before; the wrong was
done 50. years ago, yet after 50. years space, the conscience of the man
troubles him, and he comes to make restitution, and satisfy the wrong, he had
done desiring me to conveye it to such a man whom he had wronged in such a
place.

Know therefore that all the sweet morsels, that at any time you have so
delight fully got down, they must up again; therefore willingly part with them;
resolve before thou go out of this place, whatever thou have got wrongfully,
not to keep it one minute: and do it willingly, else thou can have no comfort
here or hereafter: if there be any true divinity in the world, this is true
divinity; and yet it is hard to convince covetous men that have got their
means this way.

If there be any that have done wrong in things betrusted to them, as those
that be Masters of Hospitalls, be sure you keep not that, for certainly you will
curse the time, you ever took it; therefore let the charge of God be strong
upon you this day, cast out whatever you have got falsely. I have read a story
of one, who hearing that place of Scripture read; 5. Isaaih 8.
Woe to them that join house to house, he burst out in a loud cry, woe to me,
and to my children then. So you, that are enriched through fraud and
circumvention of others, have cause to say, woe to me and my family, what
shall become of us if this be true? Oh cast away this lumber, this trash,
prefer your soul before all things whatsoever.

And if you would have your portion in another life, be willing to join with
the sufferers for Christ; so Moses did, though he were in the way of
preferment, yet he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasur's of sin for a season: Prise the Saints, associate
with them, rather then with the jolly blades of the world. It is safer joining
with sufferers, then with those brave spirits that scorn goodness, jolly
blades of the world, it is safer to join with the sufferers, then to join with
those that are the jolly, and the brave spirits; And so I have done; only
desiring that the Lord would settle all home upon your spirits, if it may be,
because something may not be so pleasing to the pallat of every one, as some
other, but if for that, you should reject what has been said, and go away and
slight this word of God; know that this Text one day may prove to be as
scalding lead in your consciences; and that what is said concerning Doeg, in
Psalm 52.7. may prove to be your portion. It is spoken of Doeg; This is the
man (says the Psalmist) that did not make God his trust, but trusted in his
great riches; this is the man. So you may be pointed out one day, this is the
man; Doeg was a great courtier, and because he was an Officer to King Saul, and
because he had his favor, he trusted in the favor of the King, and in his
riches, and what did he care for David? yet by the Text it appears? he was one
that made some show of religion too; in the first of Samuel 21.7. He was
detained before the Lord; Tremelius thinks, either out of some religious vow,
or to keep the Sabbath; or somewhat concerning that law, he was detained before
the Lord; and yet he was a vile malignant against David, and all because he
trusted in the great countenance he had at Court; now this is the man that made
not God his trust, but that trusted in his great riches. The Lord forbid, this
Scripture should be made true of any of you; I leave this Text with you that
are rich men, take heed. I leave this Text with you that are in places of
dignity and honor, take heed. I leave this Text with you that are voluptuous
men, given up to your pleasure. Take heed you hear not one day this, Son,
remember in thy life time, thou had thy pleasure; I leave it with all that
will not trust God, for a portion to come; and above all, I leave it with all
hypocrites, let them take heed, it be not said to them, here is your reward;
Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS INHERITANCE.
Psalm 16.3. But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in
whom is all my delight.


THey that understand the whole Psalm to foresee the Messiah, and foretell of
Christ, make this place parallel with that of John 17.19. And for their sake I
sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth. But
here in the beginning of the Psalm, David prays to God for preservation, and
for deliverance out of some great evil, that it seems was upon him, or that he
was in danger of. The argument that he uses, is, First his trust in God, as in
the first verse, Preserve me O God, for in thee do I put my trust. And it was
not an ungrounded and unwarranted trust, but that which proceeded from his
interest he had in God, as in the second verse, O my soul, thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord: thou art mine, and my only God, in whom is all my
confidence. But what if David should now perish in this distress, should God
be any looser by it? David seems to acknowledge this, that though he should not
be preserved, yet God was bound to preserve his own name, and his own cause; as
it follows in the second verse, my goodness extends not to thee. Though I
should live, yet it is little that I could do for thee. But to the saints that
are in the earth, Though my goodness extends not unto thee, yet may I be of
use to thy people, and unto thy Saints while I live; for it extends to them,
and they are those that my soul closes with and has delight in. O, therefore
do I desire to live, and to be preserved, that I may be useful to them, that
are thy Saints.

It is a great argument to prevail with God, when any of you are in danger, and
seek for preservation, if your hearts work thus to God, that the desire you
have to be preserved is, that whatever you are, and whatever you can do, may
extend to the Saints, that you may live to be of use and service in the world
to Gods people. Many of you when you apprehend your selves to be in trouble,
you then cry to God to be preserved: but to what end? wherefore would you be
preserved? wherefore would you live? If we may judge of your ends according to
your practice, you would live that you may have more time to satisfy your
lusts, that you may have more time to dishonor God, that you may have more
time to do mischief in the places where you live. There is this in the heart,
and God sees it: God sees whatsoever will be after in your lives; God sees
before what was in your hearts when you cried to be preserved. But now one that
is gracious, he desires therefore to be preserved: O, says he, that I might
live to be of use in that place where God has placed me. If God should take me
away now, my conscience tells me that it is little service that I have done for
him. I have been of little use in the place where God has set me, O, that I
might be preserved for this end, that what I am, or have, or have been might
extend to the Saints on earth, even the excellent in whom is all my delight.
Thus you have the scope of the words, and the dependence of them. And in them
there are these two things observable.

1. Observation.First, the high esteem of the Saints; They are the excellent of
the earth.

2 Observation.And secondly, the sweet delight that David's heart had in them;
in whom is all my delight.

For the first, the high esteem that David had of the Saints, and the Saints
that were on earth, the Excellent. The point is this, that the Saints of God,
those that are godly, are the excellent in the earth.

Then secondly, from this that he says, in whom is all my delight. Observe
this, that a gracious heart above all things in this world, takes the most
contentment in the Saints of God; he is much delighted in them.

The first is but a preparation to the second: therefore I shall pass it over
briefly. They are the excellent in the earth, therefore my delight is in them.

They are the excellent in the earth. Let them be what they will in regard of
their outward meanness, yet there is an excellency in them. Job scraping upon
the dunghill; and Jeremy sticking in the mire in the dungeon, yet they had more
glory and beauty upon them, then the greatest Potentates of the earth when they
sat upon their thrones. Though they lie among the pots (as the Psalmist says)
yet are they as Doves, their wings are the wings of Doves, whose feathers are
of gold, and silver; Psalm. 68.13. beautiful and glorious. You know the
judgment that the holy Ghost passes upon the Saints in old time, that were
outwardly mean enough, there is as much meanness on them as the malice of the
world could put: the Text says, Hebr. 11.36.
they had trials of mockings, of scourgings, of bonds, and imprisonments, they
were sawen assunder, they were tempted, they wandered in sheepskins, and goats
skins: destitute, afflicted, tormented. What kind of creatures were these,
surely they were some wretched men, and women that were thus hunted up and down
to wander in sheepsskins and goats-skins, destitute, afflicted and tormented?
No such matter, they were such of whom the world was not worthy: v. 38. that is
the judgment of the holy Ghost upon such, the world was not worthy of them.

The men of the world would have thought, and did think that they were such as
were not worthy to live in the world: but the judgment of the holy Ghost was
such, that the world was not worthy of them. I remember Chrysostom has this
interpretation of the phrase, they are such as are worth more then all the
world, more then many thousands of the world; one of them is worth more then
all the men of the world besides. It is a truth so; one Saint of God, though
never so mean, one poor youth, one servant that is truly gracious, is worth
more then all the men of the world besides that are not so. All the Monarchs
and Princes on earth, have not that excellency in them that one poor child or
servant has that is gracious, and belongs to God.

But the ordinary interpretation is thus, they are such as have that
excellency, as that the world is not worthy to enjoy them, they are not worthy
of their presence, that they should so much as live among them; they are rather
fit to be set as stars in heaven, and be before the Lord in his glory: the
world is not worthy of them.

But what is there in the Saints that makes them the excellent in the earth?
The Saints that are the excellent. The word in the original signifies the
magnificent ones; those that have magnificent spirits, and are exceeding
glorious.

There is this in them (that I may briefly pass over this first.)

The Saints have the Image of God.
They have the image of God upon them, and therefore they must needs be the
excellent on earth. The image of God makes them to resemble God in that which
the creature is able to conceive of; That which is the height of Gods
excellency: though it be true, whatsoever is in God is God himself: yet we
conceiving of God according to our manner of speaking, there is something of
God that appears most excellent, and glorious. And it must needs be in regard
of that expression, because grace is called the image of God. Now when we draw
the image of a thing, we draw it as near as we can according to that which is
the most proper excellency of that thing. If I would draw the image of a man, I
do not draw the likeness of a piece of flesh, a beast has that as well as a
man; or I do not draw feet or legs, or the back parts of a man: but when the
image of a man is drawn, his face is chiefly looked after to be drawn, which is
the most excellentest part of man; and there we endeavor to express his life,
and spirit as much as can be: for that is the most excellent part; and though
the spirit cannot be drawn, and there can be no picture of it; yet because it
is shown most in the face, that is, as near as we can go, that is drawn there.

So the image of God, is that wherein the creature resembles God in height of
excellency and glory. It is not every resemblance of God that is Gods image:
there are some things that set out some of the glory of God, and they are but
called Gods footsteps, or his back parts. All the resemblance of God in his
creatures; and the expressions of his power, and wisdom; the invisible things
of God that we see in the creature, they are all but his footsteps, and
backparts; they are not his image, Why? because they do not resemble God in
that which he has set out to us to be the height of his glory. What is that?
The holiness of God, that is the height of his excellency. Therefore it is
said of God himself, Psalm. 111.9.
holy and reverend is his name. Gods name comes to be reverend by holiness:
were it not for his holiness, notwithstanding all the rest, (if it were
possible to separate them) his name would not be reverend. Therefore when the
Saints in heaven glorify God for his chiefest excellency, it is thus Isai 6.3.
Revel. 4.8.
holy, holy, holy. We find not in Scripture any of Gods Attributes thrice
repeated, Wise, Wise, Wise, or Almighty, Almighty, Almighty, but holy, holy,
holy, because the excellency of God consists chiefly in Holiness: the LORD
only is Holy. Rev. 15.4.


Now because where grace is in the creature, resembling this holiness of God,
there is that principle whereby the creature is able to act as God himself
acts: for that is holiness, the working of God to his own end in all things
suitable to his nature. So when the creature works to God as his last end, and
in some measure is suitable to that God with which the creature has to do,
here is the Image of God.

Therefore the Scripture expresses grace by these 4. things, as The Image of
God. The Life of God. The glory of God, and The Divine nature.


There are these 4. expressions for the work of grace.

The Image of God, it resembles God in his excellency. The life of God himself,
Ephesians. 4. alienated from the life of God, that notes acting like God himself.
And then it is the glory of God himself; and the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.3. So
that there must needs be excellency in the Saints that have grace that is of
this nature.

Certainly, there is more of God in the meanest Saint, in the meanest gracious
man or woman; there is more of the glory of God, then in all the world besides,
then in heaven and earth. Take all the creatures, all the glory of God in the
heavens, in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and put all into one. Take all the
glory of God in the seas, those vast Oceans, and put that into one; take all
the glory of God that appears in the earth, all the riches of the earth, and
all arts and sciences, and what you will; put all into one, and the meanest
youth or servant that has the least degree of grace, has more of the glory of
God then all this is. There is more of the shining of God in the least degree
of grace in the poorest Christian in the world, then there is in all these
creatures. If there were a quintessence of all the excellency, and glory,
extracted, and drawn, and put into one, yet there were not so much of God, God
could not see so much of himself in that one creature that should have the
excellency of all creatures put together, as he sees in the meanest Saint that
has the work of grace.

And surely then they are the excellent of the earth, if there be so much of
God in them.

The work of grace is that which has most of God in it; and wheresoever it is,
it is that which is the proper work of Gods eternal love; it is a beam of it,
therefore there is a great deal of excellency in it. Take all other creatures,
and it is possible to enjoy all the good that is in all the creatures in heaven
and earth (excepting this only, the grace of God) through the bounty of God,
and the pleasure of God.

There is nothing that the creature has, but may be communicated as a fruit of
Gods general bounty except spiritual blessings in Christ: but where ever this
is, though in the least degree, it is of that nature, that it cannot come but
only from the eternal election of God. It is that which is the principle of
Eternal life, wheresoever it is, it is that which will grow up to eternal
glory.

All common gifts will never grow up to glory, though they grow up to the
height of glory, but the grace of God, true grace, it is of the same nature
with eternal glory. Therefore for the kind of it, it is the greatest good that
ever God did, or that ever he will communicate to any creature for all
eternity. I say, where ever God has communicated any dram of grace, Grace is
the chiefest good that God does bestow.
that is the greatest good that ever God did, or ever will communicate to all
eternity, to any of his creatures, therefore it is exceeding excellent.

Only excepting the work of God in the hypostaticall union of the two natures,
wherein he joined the humane, and the divine nature together in one person;
excepting that, the work of grace in any soul is the greatest work that ever
God did from all eternity, or that ever he will do, for the kind of it.

Now that which has so much of God in it, and comes from the eternal election
and love of God; and is the greatest work that ever was done, or ever shall be
done; and the greatest good that ever was, or shall be communicated to any
creature for ever, truly this must needs be the greatest excellency. For God
made the world for that end, that he might communicate his excellency, and
glory to the world, to the creature. Now that which was the greatest thing that
God intended from all eternity; for the communicating of all his glory, it must
needs make the creature excellent. This is the first thing, that the Saints are
the excellent on earth in regard of the image of God upon them, and the work of
grace in them.

But secondly, they are the excellent of the earth, in regard of the separating
of them for God: they are those that God set his thoughts upon from all
eternity, that they might enjoy him. The great counsels that God wrought from
all eternity, especially were set on work upon this great thing of separating
of certain creatures for himself from the rest of the world.

Now when God shall set as it were (to speak after the manner of men) his
thoughts and counsels on work from all eternity to set apart a few creatures
for himself; if these can be known who they are, certainly, we cannot but look
on them as the excellent on earth: Now wheresoever we see the work of grace in
any, we may by that know that these God has separated for himself, as setting
his infinite wisdom on work from all eternity above that. That was the thing
he was most exercised in before the world, about the work of separating such
and such for himself. The Psalmist says, O ye sons of men, how long will ye
turn my glory into shame? How long will ye love vanity and seek after leasing?
But know, that the Lord has set a part him that is Godly, for himself. Psalm.
4.2.3. Here you see that God has set apart the godly for himself, they are
those that are dedicated, and consecrated to God, therefore there is a
wonderful excellency put upon them.

The excellency of things consecrated.
As you know any thing that is dedicated and consecrated, though it be never so
mean in it self, yet being once dedicated, being once made a consecrated thing,
there is a great deal of excellency put upon that thing. As in the law, if it
were but a piece of wood in the Tabernacle, if it were but a Badgers skin; if
it were but brass or goats hair or any such thing that were mean in it self,
yet if it were once consecrated and made holy to God, they looked upon it as
having a great deal of excellency on it.

Now I reason thus; if a piece of wood, or a little hair, or leather
consecrated to God had an excellency in it: what then has an immortal soul,
that has the graces of the spirit, as so many pearls in it, when that is
consecrated and set apart to God to the glory and praise of his grace to all
eternity; here must needs be much excellency and most eminent preheminences.

When a thing is consecrated we look on it no more according to the quality of
the thing, but to the consecration. As I remember I read of some people in
India, that when they have but lost an Apes tooth that was consecrated to their
god, they will give an unspeakable sum of money for the redemption of it
again, because it was a thing that was consecrated to their god. So I read of
another that being raised from a mean birth, he took this way to make himself
to be highly esteemed of the people, he had a golden basin that he used to wash
his feet in, he took that and made an idol of it, and consecrated it, and then
every one fell down, and worshipped it when it was consecrated. Nay, says he,
if this which was mean before it was set apart to this use, comes so to be
honored, then I that am mean by birth, being set apart to the government, may
as well be honored by you.

Thus then if the superstition, and will of man having consecrated a thing,
thinks he puts so much excellency on it, how much more when God himself, and
the great and special work of the holy Ghost that he is designed to, it is a
special work of his office to consecrate souls to God, and to set them apart
to himself, what an excellency must this needs be that is put upon them? They
are the excellent of the earth. That is the second.

The Saints Relation to God.
Thirdly, if we consider that relation that the Saints have to God; they are the
nearest relations that can be expressed. Of children to parents; they are the
children of God. Of a spouse to her husband; they are the spouse of Jesus
Christ, the second person in Trinity; and in that regard they are more nearly
united to God then the Angels themselves are, in being the spouse of the Son of
God. Yea the very members of his body, they have a nearer relation in that
respect to the divine nature, to the second person in Trinity then the Angels
themselves: for they have not such a relation as this, therefore they are the
excellent of the earth.

The Saints Privileges.
Again, fourthly, if we consider the great privileges that the Saints have, we
shall see them the excellent of the earth. Not to speak of their deliverance
from sin and guiltiness, and those immunities that they have from others. But
consider they have this privilege, that God in all his attributes and works,
he is continually working for their good.

There is this excellent prerogative of the Saints, there is no attribute of
God but it is continually working good to every Saint of God. There is no work
of Gods providence, but it works and acts continually for their good.

It would be a mighty excellent honor put upon any man, if but such an
honorable assembly as the Parliament, should take thought for such an one, and
all their purposes and plots, and councels all the time they are sitting should
tend to the good of such an one in particular, taking notice in particular of
him. It is that which I said, all your wisdom, and power and mercy, and
faithfulness, and the infinite alsufficiency of God is continually every
moment working, not only for the good of those that love God in general, but
for every particular Saint of God. God takes special notice of them, and sets
all his attributes continually on work for their good, and wellbeing.

And the heavens continually work for them. They have this privilege, that the
whole world is made for them, God has given them the world, they are the heirs
of the world; as it is said of Abraham, he was the heir of the world. Romans 4.
Abraham had little himself, yet he had the world. Now the children inherit
their fathers estate; if the world were Abraham's inheritance, then it is the
inheritance of every child of Abraham: for so the children of Abraham are heirs
to all that Abraham had, that is, as far as concerns them, therefore they that
are his heirs, are heirs likewise of the world, so the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
3.22.23. All are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So that God,
and the creatures are theirs, here is a mighty privilege indeed.

Again, the privileges that they have in all the good of the Covenant of
grace, Whatsoever good there is in the Covenant of grace, all the rich promises
in the Covenant of grace are the privileges of the godly Saints. It is
admirable privileges that the precious promises in the Scripture speak of, to
have interest in them all.

The Saints immunities that come by the Covenant of Grace.
Besides, not only the promises, but the immunities that come from the Covenant
of grace, as this; that they are not to stand or fall for their eternal
estate, by any thing that they are able to do themselves, they are freed from
this, their eternal estate hangs not on that which they can do. Whereas
others, that are not saints, that are not in the Covenant of grace, their
eternal estate hangs on their endeavors, and actions, God dealing with them
according to the Covenant of works, being in that condition: though they may be
such as may after come to be Saints, and as God has elected, and in love may
look on them as he intends toward them: but for the present they are in such a
condition, as that they know not, but that their eternal estate depends on
that which they do themselves. Now to be delivered from this, to have this
immunity that such a thing of such a consequence, as our eternal estate should
depend upon a sure foundation, upon that which is done by Christ, and done
already; it is an infinite privilege. Others cannot challenge to themselves
this privilege, that God will accept of their endeavors; do what they can,
yet not being in the Covenant of grace, those endeavors are not accepted. That
it pleases God to accept the will for the deed; it is one of the privileges
of the Saints, that comes by the Covenant of grace: but it belongs not to
others, they have not to do with this immunity and privilege. So I might name
diverse others, but then I should go out too far.

The Saints have access to the Throne of Grace.
Again, this is a glorious privilege of access to the throne of grace, to come
to God in prayer. God gives them the key of all his treasures to come, and open
them, and take what they will; it is a glorious privilege that belongs to the
Saints in any condition. God gives them a gracious praying heart, and that is
the key of all the treasures of God, of all the excellencies of God, that they
have liberty to come and take out what they will, be it unto thee as thou will.
These are the excellent of the earth, that have these privileges.

The Saints are the excellent on earth.
Again, they are the excellent in earth in regard of that which comes from them.
As the work of grace is so excellent as has been spoken of: so every gracious
action that comes from a gracious heart there is a wondrous excellency in it.
There is not any one gracious action, but it has more excellency then heaven
and earth. Not only grace it self, but any action that comes from grace, has
more of God in it, and God more delights in it, then in all other things in
heaven or earth.

Luther an advancer of faith and holiness.
It is an expression of Luther, (though he were a great advancer of faith, yet
he was also an advancer of holiness as well as of faith; therefore speaking of
any gracious work of a godly man or woman, says he, preciosa etc. it is more
precious then heaven and earth. And then he goes on with another expression I
had rather be able to perform any one gracious act, of the poorest woman, or
maid; of the poorest Christian that is, then to be able to do all that ever
Alexander, or Julius Caesar had done. The least act that comes from faith, from
a sanctified heart, he had rather be able to do it, then to get all the
victories of Julius Caesar and Alexander: all their triumphs and trophies were
nothing to the least breathing of the work of grace in those that are godly,
that which comes from them are exceeding excellent. Now I reason, they must
needs be excellent, that have such excellent things come from them. As when
there were such excellent things came from the body of Paul, (...)
that had such virtue in them, that had such virtue in them, that noted that
there was a great deal of excellency that God conferred upon that Apostle, and
a great deal of honor that was put upon him: So when there comes flowing such
precious liquor, such precious things from the Saints, as an holy action is, it
shows that there is a great deal of excellency in them.

Use.
Which (by the way) should teach us to abound in holy duties; though our actions
as they are from us corrupted, we look on them as despicable, yet know that God
looks on them as the most glorious things in the world, any breathing of a
gracious heart, therefore he despises not the broken heart, nor the sighing of
a contrite spirit. Psalm. 51.17. God can despise Monarchs, and Princes of the
world: but God cannot despise a broken heart, nor any breathings from it.
Though thou may despise it thy self, and look on it as despicable, the Lord
cannot despise it: he sees so much excellency in it, though it be mixed with
thy corruptions; yet there is that remainder of excellency in it, if there be
but so much as may denominate it a gracious act, it is a glorious thing in the
eye of God.

Lastly, (to name no more) the excellency of the Saints appears in this, the
great use that they are of in the world. As especially this is one thing that
God attains in them his great aim and end in creating the whole world. Were it
not for a few gracious men, and women, what glory should God have in all the
world? They are those that hold up the glory of God in the world, by which God
has his glory actively; for that is that God aims at. It is true God can force
glory in spite of men's hearts, he will be glorified in spite of Devils: but
God has no active glory, but from gracious, godly people (I speak of the
inferior world) it is only the godly that God has glory from. Therefore were
it not for them God (in some kind) had made all the world for nothing. Now
those that are employed in such a great work, and are of this great use in the
world, as to bring to God that which he made the world for, the main, and great
end that he made heaven and earth for; certainly these are principal in Gods
esteem, and excellent. God can say I have my end in these: Take any town where
there are but two or three that are godly, what glory has God but of these? So
for other places where has God glory but for a few contemptibile ones? They
are these that God glorifies in high and great services: these are the lights
of the world, the salt of the earth: they are these that are the blessings of
the world wheresoever they are; they are these for whom the world continues so
as it does. There is a notable expression in Isaiah, In that day shall Israel
be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of
the Land, whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, blessed be Egypt my
people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. Isaiah
19.24.25. Wheresoever they are in a Kingdom, or a family, or a town, they are a
blessing in that Kingdom, in that town, and in that family. Israel shall be a
blessing in the midst of the Land. These are they that are the excellent of
the earth.

I would now willingly be over this that I may come to the other, but only
there is a word or two of applicatian. And that is.

First, to show what a vast difference there is between those that are godly,
and those that are wicked. Many things I might show that the Scripture
expresses of wicked ones in all their glory: let all the glory of the world be
put upon them, yet the Scripture speaks exceedingly contemptuously of them. I
must not spend time in those expressions, only one, and that is Daniel. And in
his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honor
of the Kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom by
flatteries. Daniel 11.21. It is spoken (as most Interpreters carry it) of
Antiochus Epiphanes, he is called a vile person, we may observe that David does
here more fully set out the love and affection he bears toward those that
fear God by the contrary effect of hatred wherewith he does prosecute the
wicked, as in the 4. v. of this Psalm, and in the 4. verse. of the foregoing
Psalm, the Psalmist says, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the LORD. Psalm. 15.4. Of this Antiochus there are
three things observed, yet he is called a vile person. First, he was a great
enemy to many sins. Secondly, when the Jews wrote to him, because they feared
his wrath, he being a persecutor of the Jews; there were some that lived in
Samaria that were Samaritans that wrote to him to desire his favor, that were
not their own selves Jews, but Samaritans: and Josephus says, they wrote to
him in this style, To Antiochus, etc. Antiochus the mighty God; they gave him
this title of honor. He was a great man on earth accounted where he lived;
among the Samaritans, a mighty god; yet the Scripture calls him a vile person.
And then his name Epiphanes, which is as much as illustrious or glorious. He
has that title of almighty god, and illustrious, and glorious, and yet he was
a vile person. Thus it is, where God sees not the work of grace.

Use.
The consideration of this might give us some hope that there will be a time
wherein God will appear for his Saints. It is not probable that God will
always suffer his Jewels to be trodden under feet in the world; that God will
always look upon such as are excellent on earth, and see them so abused in the
world, and so contemptible as they are; surely this will not be always, God
has this time to make it manifest to the world, that they are the excellent of
the earth. They are now Jewels, yet they are such as are in the dirt, and so
are despised and contemned: but there is a promise, that the Lord their God
shall save them in that day as the flock of his people for they shall be as the
stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his Land. Zach. 9.16. As the
stones of a Crown, God will lift them up and make them honorable.

And there is another Text which is very observable; for every one to take
notice of Gods intention to make these excellent ones famous on earth. The
governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem
shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God. Zach. 12.5. There was a
time when the governors of Judah despised those that were gracious and godly;
but God has promised that the governors of Judah shall be convinced of their
error, and shall say in their hearts the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my
strength in the Lord of hosts their God: However now through the calumnies of
the world; however now through the reproaches that are cast upon the Saints of
God, it falls out many time, that even the governors of Judah despise and
contemn them, and say they are seduced people, that they are factious and
turbulent, and so their hearts are against them, and hate, and abhor them,
and look upon them with such an evil eye, as those that they name puritans:
yet there is a time promised when the governors of Judah shall say in their
hearts the inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord of hosts. O ye
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Gods Church and people, his sanctified ones (for
Jerusalem typified the estate of Gods people under the Gospel; Gods sanctified
ones under the Gospel) shall be such as the governors of Judah in their
hearts shall say, My strength is in them. I see they are my best subjects, my
chief strength is in them, and they are of principal use for me, and my
Kingdom is upheld in peace for them, and there is the blessing of God on them,
they shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God. Now I see God is
their God; God hears their prayers, and has done much for them, we are
convinced of it. O this will be a blessed time, when it shall be that the
governors of Judah shall say so.

Blessed be God that they do say so in any measure, that the governors of
Judah say at all of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, of the godly, that their
strength is in them: that they may see those that are the excellent of the
earth, in any measure to be truly the excellent of the earth.

It were a ruefull spectacle, and would draw tears of blood, to see the
excellent ones to have that usage that they have had. But now to see those
excellent ones countenanced in a public way, especially in public courts of
Justice, it is glorious, when the governors of Judah shall do it. And this we
are to pray for, that it may be more and more seen amongst us, and to say no
more; let us learn to honor them that God has honored: since they are
excellent ones, and God has put excellency upon them, do you so too, look on
them according as God esteems them. It is observed, that God in the time of the
law did not require them to offer in sacrifice, Lions and Eagles, those brave
creatures; but Lambs and Doves, mean creatures, he would have offered in
sacrifice. So God does not regard the brave spirits of the world that strut it
out; but if there be any that be gracious and godly though they he never so
poor and mean, as Lambs and Doves, God honors and respects them, they are a
sacrifice to him; the broken heart is a sacrifice to God. Psalm 51.17.
The sacr^fices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
Lord, thou will not despise. Therefore when God would lift up himself in glory,
he says, Psalm. 34.18.
He that dwells in the high and lofty place. What of him? he looks to those
that are of humble, and contrite hearts, and saves such as be of a contrite
spirit. As if there were no other subject in the world worth looking upon, he
looks only to them. As a thing that is before ones eye that he prizeth, his
eye is fastened on that: so God looks on them as if they were the only object
to be looked at; therefore let them be looked at by us with reverence in our
hearts: it is fit that we should honor those that God honors.

The King of Babylons message to Hezekiah.
Therefore it is observed in the message of the King of Babylon to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. When Hezekiah was sick, and God had given him a sign of his
recovery that the sun did go backward: It was a wondrous honor that God put on
him that the sun should go backward. The ambassadors of the king of Babylon
came to congratulate with Hezekiah after his recovery: but what was the
business? not only to congratulate with him for his recovery; but to enquire
of the great miracle, so the Text says, the ambassadors of the Prince of
Babylon were sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land;
Why did they enquire of this wonder? there were many wonders done, but they
were not sent to enquire of others but of this. Because they worshipped the sun
for their god and because their god had put such an honor upon Hezekiah; they
perceived the altering of the sun that it went backward, and they enquired of
the matter, concerning the alteration in the sun, and after enquiry there was
news that it was for the sake of Hezekiah. Now because they worshipped the Sun
as their god, and so apprehended that their god had put such an honor upon
Hezekiah, they honored him too. Though Hezekiah were king of the Jews, and
they were enemies one to another, Jerusalem and Babylon, yet when God had
honored him, they sent to congratulate one another, then they put honor and
respect one upon another upon that occasion.

That should teach us, if the heathens when they see their God put honor on
any, they honor such as God honors, then when you see or hear that God
honors gracious and godly men, and women, do you so too; prize them, let them
have high esteem in your hearts. You have heard this day what honor God puts
upon his Saints, therefore learn you to honor them. And much might be said, to
draw the hearts of all people to the love of the people of God. Somewhat for
the people of God; to walk as excellent ones, not to defile one another. And
for others, if they would be those here in the world that be excellent and
glorious; it is not the outward things of the world that hang on you; as
clothes, and riches that make you excellent ones in the eye of God, but it is
grace, and godliness. By faith the fathers obtained good report.

Some think there is no way to get esteem, but by outward bravery, great
livings, fine clothes and the like; and men think that the way to be accounted
more eminent then others, is to be rich, and to wear fine clothes and get
honors and such like; but these are fading and not permanent. So there are
many ministers that think to get esteem if they be honored before great ones,
and go brave. But you know by experience, that a faithful godly minister, that
walks faithfully, and conscionably, he gets more esteem in the hearts and
consciences not only of those that are godly, but of those that have
enlightened consciences, then a hundred of those; and they vex at it that they
should do so; Why? they go a way to work to get more esteem, but they are
deceived; they look at excellency where it is not. It is not such things, but
in the work of grace, that prevails with the consciences of men. Boniface the
martyr when he was asked the question, Boniface.
if he might have the sacrament, if he would drink it in a wooden challice?
says he, the time was that there were wooden cups and golden priests, but now
there are golden cups and wooden priests. There was a time in the primitive
times, they were very mean, they were content with wooden vessels; but the men
were gold in regard of grace, and godliness, and so they were highly esteemed;
but now they have golden cups, that is a great deal of bravery and glory; but
they have wooden priests, those that have no true excellency in them. Prove.
10.20.
The heart of the wicked is little worth. It may be his estate, his houses, his
lands may be somewhat worth, but what is his heart worth? he has nothing in
himself to commend himself. But now the excellency of Gods people is in that,
it is in the soul and heart.

It were an uncomfortable thing to any of you, if suppose you have a servant
along with you where you go, and all the respect you have is for your servants
sake; if any entertain you into their house, it is not out of respect to you,
but respect to your man; they love your man, and for his sake they entertain
you; this would deject your hearts if you should know that you have no respect
for any good in your selves, but for your servants sake. So the men of the
world, they have respect, but what is it for? for their riches, for their
honor, for their brave clothes, for their money; all servants under them, they
have no respect for any thing in themselves, they have no spiritual
excellency; especially when they are to deal with God, and the consciences of
men, they have no respect. But godly men have not so many servants to gain
respect by outward things: but that respect they have of Gods Saints, and in
the consciences of men they have it from an internal excellency. But we let
this go.

The second point follows, The excellent of the earth. In whom is all my
delight.

It is but little that can be done I see, though it were the point I intended
most. That that has been said already makes way abundantly into the heart,
that if they be the excellent of the earth, there is cause that we should
delight in them. Observation.
That is the point, that a gracious heart takes great delight in the Saints on
earth.

First in their persons.

Or secondly in their society, and communion with them.

Or rather thus; they take delight in them, severally and jointly.

If they look upon any one Saint of God, they have deligt in him* but they have
more to look on all the Saints together jointly; so they can say their souls
delight in them, there is a sweet complacency taken in them jointly. And that
is that which I shall speak to at this time; The delight that is to be taken in
the Saints jointly together. There is delight in the Saints in regard of the
sweetness of their society and communion with them. For so this delight of
David is to be taken in a large sense; not only in one particular, because of
the good that he saw in their persons: but in regard of all the good he saw in
them, and by them in joining with them take them altogether jointly. All the
good that came from them; so he delighted in them. There is a great deal of
delight and contentment to be had in the Saints of God, especially jointly.

If you look at one sometimes (though in never so mean a condition) there is a
great deal of delight there. As Doctor Tailor the Martyr, that we read of in
the book of Martyrs coming to Bradford, he professed that it countervailed all
his trouble in prison, that he was acquainted with that Angel of God John
Bradford, meaning him in particular. And another that professed that he had
rather be with Cato, (a heathen) for his moral excellencies, in prison then
with Caesar in the Senate in all his pomp. To be shut up with one godly man is a
great deal of delight and contentment: what a great deal of delight is there
then in their being together, and in that way wherein most of their
excellencies appear? such delight is in them jointly.

Communion of Saints is comfortable.
First, because the most comfortable communion that possible can be is enjoyed
with them, and in them: for

First, is it not a most delightful thing to see a company of godly people
together to behold the resplendent beauty, and glory of the graces of Gods
spirit? If there were nothing else, what a delightful thing is it says the
heart? The very sight of good men is pleasing and delightful to those that
look upon their faces: wisdom makes their faces shine. The seeing of the
resplendent grace of God in them is very delightful. What is the delight of
God, but the seeing of the shining of his glory in his works? especially when
God sees that which is the shining of his highest glory, as his own grace and
holiness, that God delights in most. So when a gracious heart sees his own
image, and that grace that God has wrought in him, he sees it resplendently in
others, it is a delightful object.

Again, there is a comfortable communion with them in regard of the fragrancie
of grace. The beauty of grace is delightful, but the fragrancy, the breathings
of grace, are sweet in the heart. The beholding of it is delightful to the
eye, but the workings of their grace is exceeding sweet, and comfortable to the
heart: Therefore says the Church, Let my beloved go down into the gardens,
among the beds of spices to feed in the gardens, and to gather spices. Cant.
6.2. All the Churches of God in the world are as the garden of Christ; and
every particular Church in that garden is as a bed of spices; and every
particular Saint is as the several parts of that bed, and especially the
fragrant smell is very sweet.

It is said of Alexander, his very body was of such a constitution, that where
ever he went there was a sweet savor came from his body. Certainly, where
there is but one of Gods children, there is sweetness from him; but where
there is a company jointly, there is a wonderful unspeakable sweetness comes
from them, it is exceeding comfortable to a gracious heart to be among them.

Again, their communion is comfortable and delightful jointly, in regard of
the nearness; there being no communion under heaven, wherein there is that
nearness one to another, as of the Saints. Observe, (that you may see how near
they come together, and are made one, and so are exceeding delightful one to
another) any thing the more spiritual they are, the more they are united; the
more corporeal they are, the less union. A heap of stones are not united, as
the several beams of the sun, a thousand of them are united in one point,
because they are of a spiritual nature. So it is with the spirits of men, the
more carnal any men, and any society is, the less union: therefore the reason
why the people of God many times are divided, and not united is, because they
are carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3.
Are ye not carnal, says the Apostle,when there were divisions? were you
spiritual you would be more united one to another, but carnal men are
carnally minded.

It is with spiritual society in regard of spiritual union, as it is with the
society of wickedness. There is bodily, fleshly wickedness, and there is
spiritual wickedness. Now those that join together in gross bodily
wickedness, they are not so closely united as those that join in spiritual
wickedness. A companion of drunkards or whoremongers, they take delight in one
another, and join in wickedness, but it is corporal, therefore they soon fall
out, and fly in the faces one of another. But those that join in spiritual
wickedness, as politic ambitious men, men that join in mischief in a
spiritual way, they keep mighty close, and you cannot easily break their bond
of union; they will suffer much before they will discover one another, and
break union one with another, because their union is in a way of spiritual
wickedness. So on the contrary, when any are united in the spirit of
holiness, they are mightily united, there is no such union under heaven as
that.

We read of the curtains of the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. there were some of them
that were made of purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and their teaches that
held them together were pure gold. There were others of goats hair, and their
buckles were brass. So it may set out the different condition of men in the
Church: There are some in the Church that are truly gracious and godly, that
excel in grace; and they are united by tacks of gold; their union is mighty
strong and glorious in their hearts. There are others in the Church, outward
professors that are carnal, that are goats hair, goats in the Church; and
they maintain a union too, but it is but brass, the ground and bottom of the
union is but mean; it is not such a golden union, as the union of the hearts of
Gods people; there are no people under heaven so united as they.

It is true, through their corruption, there is a great deal of dissension (as
there is corruption in the best) but that is as far as they are carnal; the
more spiritual they grow, the more near is their union one to another, and the
more entire is their love, Cant. 6.9.
My beloved is one, says Christ to his Church, she is the choice of one of her
that bare her, and the daughters saw her and blessed her. There is an oneness,
and entireness in the hearts of the Saints, and this makes them to be blessed
by those that behold them, and makes their communion very delightful.

That is the first particular, their communion is most delightful of all other
communions: therefore David says, all my delight is in them, taking them
together.

But then in the second place, A gracious heart must needs delight in the
Saints, if you take them jointly; because that when they are together, there
God is worshipped: the solemnest worship that God has is from the Saints
joined together. As I told you before that the glory that God had in the world
was from them all: but the solemnity of Gods worship cannot be but from them
jointly together. Therefore the great delight of a gracious heart is to be with
the saints when they are jointly together: because there the name of God is
honored, and they worship God in a solemn way; God is honored among them.

Christ himself much delights in the Saints when they are joined together in
the duties of holy worship, do but compare two Texts of Scripture, that will
both make us in love with the Saints, and delight in joint communion with them.
Compare Psalm. 22.22. with Heb. 2.12. The Psalm is a prophecy of Christ; and
generally all interpreters go this way, that it is so, it appears by the Psalm
that Christ especially is meant: the Text says, I will declare thy name unto
my brethren in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. It is the
promise of Christ to declare the name of his father to his Church and people,
and in the midst of the congregation he shall praise God. Mark it, in Heb.
2.12. the Apostle applies it to the Saints joined together, saying, I will
declare the name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church, will I sing
praise unto thee. This was after Christ had been in the flesh, yet the Apostle
applies this to the Church, in the midst of the Church, will I sing praise
unto thee. This they gather hence, that Christ he delights in being with his
people when they are jointly together, because of the solemn worship of God,
that is tendered to God by them, and he joins with them in it as a delightful
work: as they are together to praise God, Christ is praising him; as they
worship, Christ is worshipping. Now every Saint of God has the spirit of
Christ in him, and so he delights in the society of the Saints on this ground,
because there is worshipping of God, and God is praised solemnly among them. If
there be any place in the world, wherein God has solemn worship, it cannot be
grieve a gracious heart, that he is not with them, for his heart is with them,
he delights to be with them, especially in such a work as that; it grieves him
that he cannot be there.

It is a note of an Interpreter that I have met with upon Isaiah. 6. where the
Angles cry Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts, the Prophet cries, Woe unto me for
I am undone, etc. says he, upon this ground, because he could not join with
those blessed creatures, and so magnify, and praise, and worship God; that he
through his sinfulness was not able to join with them, he cries, Woe is me, I
am undone. So when any gracious heart does but hear, that there is a people in
the world that are precious ones, the excellent on earth, that join in the
worship of God, and honor God in his own way, and enjoy communion with God,
and I cannot join with them, woe to me that there should be any let or
hinderance that I cannot come and join with them: for my heart is there, my
delight is in the Saints when they are jointly together: because Gods solemn
worship is there.

But thirdly, my delight is in the Saints jointly, in regard of the wonderful
delight God has in them. A gracious heart must needs delight in them, because
God himself takes so much delight in them: but especially when they are jointly
together. There are special expressions in Scripture of Gods taking delight in
the Saints jointly, as in Zephany Zeph. 3.17. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will
rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. What expressions are here
of Gods delighting in his people! The Lord thy God will rejoice, he will
rejoice over thee with joy; he will love, he will rest in his love, and joy,
and joy over thee with singing. And in Isaiah, you shall find that the Church
is called Hephzibah, Gods delight: Thou shall no more be termed, Forsaken;
neither shall thy Land any more be termed, Desolate: but thou shall be called
Hephzi bah, and thy land, Beulah: for the Lord delights in thee, and thy land
shall be married. Isaiah 62.4. it is a wondrous delight that God has in his
Saints.

There are wonderful expressions in Scripture for the manifesting of Gods
delight, even to admiration; especially in the Church jointly together. They
are such expressions as we could not think or invent: as namely, that he calls
his people his portion, his pleasant portion, for the Lords portion is his
people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. Deuteronomy. 32.9. God calls them his
inheritance, the lot of his inheritance: Ier. 12.7. he calls them the dearly
beloved of his soul; Exodus 19.5. he calls them his peculiar treasure. Now
therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall
be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people. God has treasures in the
world; the creatures that are called the good treasures of the Lord: Deuteronomy. 28.
but his people are called his peculiar treasure, there is a particularity:
There is another kind of excellency in the people of Gods delight, then in all
other creatures; they are his common treasure, but his people are his peculiar
treasure. God calls them his glory, I will glorify the house of my glory, I
will place salvation in Zion for my glory. Isa. 46.13. The crown of his glory,
Isa. 60.7. he calls them the Throne of his glory, Isa. 62.3. Thou shall be a
Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadeem in the hand of thy
God. In several places that I cannot stand on. His glory, the House of his
glory, the Crown of his glory, the Throne of his glory. He calls them the
royal Diadeem, he calls them his ornament, an ornament set in Majesty and
glory. There are the expressions, and more I might name of Gods delighting in
his people. Therefore if God delight in them and find satisfaction, much more
should we.

Christ's speaks of his Church, Cant. 5.1.
O my sister, my spouse, my heart is ravished with thee. It is a strange
expression, for Christ himself to be ravished with his people. It is an
expression beseeming the Church, to have said so to Christ, but for Christ to
say to the Church, it is wonderful. And again, My love, my dove, my undefiled
one, Cant. 2. and at that very time when the Church was in a state of security,
that Christ should call her his love, his dove, his undefiled; all to express
the abundance of delight in his people. Well if God have such delight in them,
much more should the Saints.

Again, if we consider further, the presence of God among his people, it is
another argument why the Saints of God should take so much delight in other
Saints, especially when they are joined together, because God is present there.
The Lord is here, is the name of all their assemblies, Psalm. 8.11.
The Lord dwells, and has his tabernacle in Sion. It is a strange expression
concerning the presence of God, in that he makes his people his habitation. As
the people of God call God their habitation: so God calls his Church his
habitation. God dwells in Sion. Psalm. 90. Would you not delight to keep house
with God? Where Gods people are, God keeps house: and we should long to have it
our own house, and not come as strangers. A man may come as a stranger, and
take a bit, and be refreshed in a family; but it is not his house, But now Gods
people when they go to others of the Saints they see God there, and they have
that house for their house. It is called (as I told you) the house of his
glory; that house that God desires to dwell in; he has a mighty love to that
house, to dwell among his people. In Psalm. 132. there are many great and
excellent expressions. For the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for
his habitation, Psalm. 132.13, 14. God desires Zion; what is Zion, but only his
Saints and people joined together? Zion was a type of the Church: so now all
the Saints of God together are Zion. Now God has a desire to this habitation.
God dwells in the high and holy place, the highest heaven is God habitation;
but though God have such a house in heaven, yet he is not (as it were)
contented with that house, but he desires another house: he has a desire to
Zion to be his habitation, and the house where his honor dwells. You know a
Prince may have some houses of meaner regard, when he goes to his sport, he may
have a mean house to lodge in for a while: but his palace where he shows his
Majesty, and honor, that is more glorious. So the people of God, and the
Church, is called the house of Gods honor, it is not a mean house, but a house
of honor.

Further, it is that house that he means to dwell in for ever, he loves it so
well. This is my house, I will dwell in it for ever. I am so well pleased with
it, I will rest in it for ever. Surely, we have cause to rest our hearts in
Gods people, when God finds rest there, and for ever.

It may be some of you are sometimes acquainted with the people of God, and at
the first delight in them: but your hearts being carnal you soon grow weary of
them. It is not so with God, he delights in his people, and rests there, and
rests there for ever.

Why God is said to dwel^ with his Saints.
But you will say, how is God present with his Saints more then in other places;
why is God said to dwell among his people, his Saints?

I answer, in two regards God is said to dwell among his people in a special
manner.

First, because he makes himself known to his people, more then to all the
world besides. There are none that know the counsel and mind of God, so as his
Saints do. God is known in Judah. Psalm. 29.9. There God opens himself, In his
Temple every man speaks of his glory.

Secondly, because God communicates himself most among his people, God is said
to be in heaven. Why? but because there he manifests his glory more then in
other places; therefore heaven is his habitation. If that be his habitation
where he manifests himself more, then his people are his habitation, because he
manifests himself most there.

Secondly, heaven is the place of Gods residence, because he communicates
himself most there: then also Gods people are his residence, he communicates
himself there. And he communicates himself to them in a special manner, in
four regards. 1. He communicates to his people more choice mercies. 2. He
communicates mercies more fully. 3. He communicates mercies more powerfully. 4.
More universally, then to others.


1. He communicates goodness among his people and Saints more choisely, more
choice mercies of God. There is a remarkable place in the Psalms, The Lord
that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion. Psalm. 143. ult. He says
not the Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee, either out of heaven or
earth, but out of Zion, as nothing that the choice mercies that God has to
communicate are out of Zion; among his people joined together in the way of
worship. Would you desire that God should bless you with the chief mercies
that he has? look upon God as blessing out of Zion; out of Zion God
communicates his choicest mercies: therefore it concerns all to be in Zion,
that they may have God to bless them out of Zion; there runs the sweetest of
Gods mercies indeed in Zion.

Again, God communicates his mercies more fully among his people then any other
way. Psalm. 36.7, 8. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore
the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make
them drink of the river of thy pleasures. They shall be abundantly satisfied;
how? not with the creatures, but with the fatness of thy house. Neither with
thy communication to them alone. God has abundance of mercies for his Saints
alone: but when they are among the Saints jointly together, then they shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he shall make them
drink of his rivers of pleasures. While they are alone in corners, they may
have many sweet drops of pleasure from God, but when they are joined with the
Saints, there are rivers of pleasure, and delight that come to their hearts:
therefore there is great delight to be had in the Saints of God when they are
joined together.

Thirdly, he communicates them more powerfully, mark, in Psalm. 133.3. As the
dew of Hermon, and the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there
the Lord commanded a blessing, even life for ever more. There was blessing, and
the Lord commanded it: there went a powerful work of Gods grace upon the
hearts of people there, when they were joined together in Zion: there God
commanded the blessing. If you would have God speaking powerfully to command a
blessing on your souls you must be among his people, you must join in a holy
fellowship with his people; there God commands it.

In the last place, more universally all the goodness of God is communicated
among his people, therefore the Church is called the perfection of beauty;
Psam. 50. that some translate, the universality of excellency and beauty. There
is a universality of all among the Church and people of God. And in another
place, All my springs are in thee. Psam. 87. speaking of joining with the
people of God, that is, all my springs of truth that are revealed to me; all
the springs of comfort that I have communicated to my soul, all the springs of
grace that I have; to quicken me, they are all in thee in the joint society and
communion with Gods people, I find all. Thus we see the presence of God among
his people in regard of the communication of himself to them, and therefore
what a great deal of cause there is to joy, and delight in the Saints jointly
together.

Again further there is abundance of cause to delight in them joined together,
in regard of their admirable privileges as they are joined together. They have
privileges as they are alone, but as they are joined they have committed to
them the oracles of God, Romans 3.2. all the ordinances by which God conveyes
himself. To them are committed the seal of the covenant, you cannot singly have
the seal of the covenant, but joined with the people of God, closing with them.
To them is committed the very power of Jesus Christ: says the Apostle, When ye
are together with the power of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4. a glorious privilege.
Yea, further, take this one thing they are inheritours to all the promises that
ever God made to the Church from the beginning of the world. There is no
society of Saints that join in Christian fellowship, but they are so. See a
remarkable place for that in Isa. 54.17. No weapon that is formed against thee
shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou
shall condemn: this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
righteousness is of me, says the LORD. That promise that God made to the
Churches before, this is their heritage. And conceive of this one now that is
of great use, that all that is said in Scripture concerning Gods delight to be
among his people, and in Zion, all were but to type out the excellent condition
of Gods Church in the times of the Gospel. The most of the expressions are of
Gods delight among his people in the time of the law: but know that all those
expressions were but mere types, and there is a great deal more in the Antitype
then in the type: therefore the Saints of God joined under the Gospel have
abundance more of the glory of God, of the presence of God, and of privileges,
then Zion had, or Jerusalem could have; because that was but a type of their
happy condition under the time of the Gospel.

Observation.
It is an observable place that we have in the Hebrews, it is said concerning
the state of the Church, that the law had but a shadow of good things to come.
Heb. 10.1. and not the very image of the things. It is not so much as an image:
observe, a shadow is not so much as an image; but an image is not so much as
the thing it self: but that was not an image, but a shadow. As a Painter that
takes an image, he draws first the dark shadow with a cole, there is a great
deal of difference between that shadow, and the image in beauty: so much
difference there is between all the glory of God in the Church in the time of
the law, and that glory of God that is among his people in the time of the
Gospel* We may safely say, there is the like difference between Gods
manifesting of himself to his people then, and now; as between a dark shadow
drawn with a cole in comparison of an image. But mark, it was but a shadow of
the image; that which we have now is but an image. As there is not so much in a
shadow as in the image, so there is not so much in the image as in the thing it
self. The presence of God and all his goodness to his people, and his glory to
his people now, it is but an image to that which shall be; there shall be
another presence of God, another communication, and revelation of God
hereafter, in another kind then there is now; all that we have now is but an
image of that which shall be; all that was in the law was but a shadow of that
image: therefore we should have a great deal of delight in the Saints.

Much might be said further, for delighting in them now, because they are those
that we shall live for ever with in heaven hereafter. Look to the Saints
especially together, they are those that we shall live eternally together with
in heaven, therefore they are those that we should delight in. They are those
that we shall be joined with for ever in everlasting halelujahs, before him
that sis upon the throne, and the Lamb. Look upon any Saint, though he be never
so mean in gifts and abilities, thou and he shall always joy in the presence of
God in glory.

Yea to be among Gods people is heaven it self* they are not only those that
we shall be with in heaven, but it is heaven. Behold, says the Lord, I create
a new heaven and a new earth. Isa. 65.17. The state of the Church is called
heaven, For what is there in heaven but is here? I might show the resemblance
of heaven, and that which is in heaven is here among us, and therefore if
heaven be a place to be delighted in, the Saints are.

Therefore have a high esteem of the Saints, close with them, and come into as
near communion as is possible. If they be so excellent, and to be delighted in,
then especially when they are joined together labor all to come in, and join
with the Saints in the nearest union that is possible, in that fellowship
wherein you may (as near as can be) have fellowship only with them, especially
that have the appearance of such.

The mixture of our communion does much hinder our delight. Cast dirt into the
fire, and it will damp it: so the mixture of ungodly ones, their spots and
blemishes hinder the delight of Gods people one in another. But now to come
among those that your hearts may close with, that you have comfortable
evidence, that they are not mere talkers of religion and professors at large,
but that the image of God is on them, O what closing is there with their
hearts, and what admirable good might we enjoy in the communion and society of
them. Therefore know that it is one of the greatest blessings that you are
capable of in this world to have the nearest communion with the Saints next to
your immediate communion with God himself; it is that which you should so
esteem; and your hearts should work after. Mark that Text Psalm. 36. what is
said of our joining with the people of God, how excellent is thy loving
kindness, wherein appears the excellency? They shall be satisfied with the
fatness of thy house. It is a fruit of the excellency of the loving kindness
of God for people to be of Gods house, and to partake of the fatness of it. To
have abundance of Gods creatures, and to have an estate, and friends, it is a
fruit of Gods kindness: but to join with Gods people in a way of worship and
in the nearest union, that is a fruit of the excellent loving kindness of God
to admiration. How excellent is thy loving kindness? it was so excellent that
he was not able to express the excellency of it.

It is made in Scripture to be the proper inheritance even of the elect of God;
to enjoy communion with the people of God, in the type, it is a fruit of the
very inheritance of the elect of God; so as it is opposed to all the vanities
of the world. Mark what God says by Isaiah, Isaiah 57.13.
Vanity shall take them away, but he that puts his trust in me shall
possess the Land, and shall inherit the holy Mountain and shall say, cast ye
up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of
my people, For thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones.

Here is a firm inheritance indeed, the Saints shall possess the holy
mountain. God dwells on high, in the highest heavens, and the Saints that are
of a contrite and humble spirit with him. Do you not perceive a joyful
revolution of the Saints, they shall be dwellers with God himself in eternity.
Job says, I shall see my Redeemer with these very eyes; though for a while,
they be as it were, closed up in darkness, yet at last they shall be glorified.
Nay, every part of the bodies of the Saints shall be glorified, Christ shall
make our vile bodies like his glorious body, says S. Paul. There is no
question, but his body is glorified throughout; there cannot be the least shade
of darkness, for he is the Sun of righteousness, and so shall all the just,
they shall shine as the Sun; every glorified Saint by the reflection, not only
of their mind, but if their ocular body upon one another by a mutual
reciprocation of their beams, every one shall shine in every one. The glory of
the soul shall transfuse it self, and redound to the body. Saint Paul in effect
speaks as much; as it is sown a natural body, it rises a spiritual body: As
the soul here is swallowed up of the body, to the body as it were shall be
swallowed up of the soul, in a word both soul and body shall be turned into
glory, and the glory shall be to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight.

FINIS.
THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S REFVGE.
Jeremiah 33.3. Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things, which thou know not.


THe Prophet Jeremiah in this and the foregoing Chapter, lays down sundry and
eminent mercies that he intends for the good of his elect people;
notwithstanding their provoking of God by their several relapses and sundry
backslidings; and though their enemies also did threaten them with utter
desolation, and that they should be desolate without man, and without
inhabitant, and without beast, yet the voice of joy and the voice of gladness,
the voice of the Bridegroom and the voice of the Bride, the voice of them that
shall say, praise the LORD of hosts, for the Lord is good* for his mercy
endures for ever; this voice shall be to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. But by
what means shall these mercies be bestowed on then? in this Text, he tells them
where ever they are afflicted or in any great distress, call unto me, and I
will answer thee. And as Christ in the Gospel, having the book of the Prophet
Esaias delivered unto him, when he was in the Synagogue, read apart of it, then
closed the book, and began his sermon to the people; this day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your ears, Luke 4.21. So may I say of this Text, that we have out
of this Prophecy read unto you.

Behold this day has the Lord fullfilled this word of his in our ears before
our eyes. And therefore is it that we are all here this day met before the
Lord, that we may witness unto this his good word and promise, Call unto me,
and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things, which thou
know not. In the two last Verses of this Chapter, the Lord promises to
establish a Covenant with David and raise up a deliverance to the seed of
Jacob, and cause them to return out of their captivities, and he will have
mercy on them.

That which he says to his people, he speaks it plainly and openly, I have not
spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth. The heathen Gods did speak
darkly and ambiguously to their worshippers, that they knew not what to make of
their words; but I have not done so to you, says God. They would have you
worship them, but they cannot help you when you have so done; it is not so with
me, Thus says the Lord, if my Covenant be not with day and night, and if I
have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth, then will I cast away
the seed of Jacob, that is, the Church of God, the Saints.

You will say, Why are the people of God called the seed of Jacob, rather then
the seed of Abraham, or the seed of Isaac? the seed of Jacob. The reasons may
be these two. First, because that all Jacobs posterity were the Church of God;
all Jacobs children the Patriarchs, were every one of the Church; All that came
from Abraham were not so, Ishmael was not so; All that came from Isaac were not
so, Esau was not; But all Jacobs children were: therefore speaking of the
people of God, of the Church that should be to the end of the world, they are
said here to be the seed of Jacob, rather then the seed of Abraham, or of Isaac.

Then secondly, the seed of Jacob, because the Lord is here speaking of the
blessing of his seed, namely in the hearing of their prayers. Call unto me, and
I will answer thee. Now because Jacob was the most eminent in prayer, (though
Abraham and Isaac no question were mighty with God in prayer yet,) the
Scripture does not put such an eminency either upon Abraham or Isaac for prayer
as upon Jacob. You have the most eminent expression for prayer that ever was
spoken of any man, never the like. Genesis 32.28. And he said, thy name shall be
called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a Prince have thou power with God and
with men, and have prevailed. O how eminent was he in prayer. Therefore it is
rather said, the seed of Jacob, then of Abraham or Isaac.

But you will say, then they should rather have been called the seed of Israel:
for his name of Israel was given him upon his prevailing with God.

We must not be too inquisitive. These names are used promiscuously. But, this
is one reason that is given, and it seems to have probability with it.

In Scripture when God speaks of the Church in a low condition, he puts the
name of Jacob on them rather then Israel: Fear not, thou worm Jacob: and it
follows, ye men of Israel, Isa. 41.14. He puts them in mind of their low
condition by this name rather then Israel; Fear not thou worm Jacob: For before
Jacobs name was changed, ye know what a low condition, and what streights he
was in. So here, the Lord speaking of his Churches deliverance out of distress,
he calls them the seed of Jacob, that they might see how by their prayers they
were brought from their streights, as Jacob was brought from his streights by
prayer. When he was Jacob before he was Israel, he was in great streights: so
shall the Church be till they seek God. Call unto me and I will answer thee,
and show thee great and mighty things which thou know not.

That is, first, I did require it of them, and my requiring did prevail with
them: I did not exhort them to it, or require it, and my words fell to the
ground and they did not call unto me; but what I required of them was effected
in them. When God speaks to a people, and they do not what he requires, his
word may seem to be slighted, there being no efficacy in his words to prevail.
But says God, Call unto me, and I will answer thee, that is, I called not on
my people to call unto me and they went their own way; but what I spoke to them
prevailed with them, and in them, and they did that which I required. This is a
blessed thing that we do that which the Lord requires of us to be done. That is
the first observation.

Secondly, call unto me, and I will answer thee, that is, I did not only
command, but I did promise to answer them. They calling unto me in a right
manner, by that way and means which I directed them, I promised to answer their
desires, when that they should call unto me.

I suppose that the principal scope of the holy Ghost is that which the words
plainly present to our view; That we must call upon God, before he will hear
and answer our requests. God requires his people to call unto him, and he is
pleased to be found of them; and not only to answer them, but to do abundantly
for them.

So then this point arises plainly out of the words, When God requires a
people to him, he will make it good to them that he will answer them.

Before I open this point I will give you a Scripture or two, one in the old
Testament, and another in the new, Deuteronomy. 4.7. For what Nation is there so
great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in all things that
we call upon him for? Here is an experiment of the fruit of calling unto God;
and it is spoken to show the honor of Gods people, the privilege of the seed
of Jacob, and the eminent condition they were in. God is nigh to them in all
things they call upon him for: therefore they are not required to seek God in
vain. So Matthew. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive. A very strange expression: Here might seem to be a
tautologie. One would think that it had been large enough to have said,
Whatsoever ye shall ask, ye shall receive: but here is, all things whatsoever.
We would not speak so in ordinary language. I will give you all things
whatsoever. Yet it may be, this may be intended, and I believe it is; And all
things, here is the general promise, that all things that ye ask ye shall
receive: and whatsoever, may refer to particulars, every particular thing
that ye ask ye shall receive. You will say, any one that understands reason or
Logic knows that particulars are included in the general. But there is this
illogicall reasoning of unbelief; that though we agree to the premises in
general, yet when we come to particulars, we think they will not be made good
to us. I suppose you find your unbelieving hearts so irrational, that though
they believe the general promise, yet when it comes to particulars, and you
cannot but say that such a particular is in the general, yet your hearts will
not come up to it. Therefore our Savior says not only, all things in
general, but also, whatsoever, in particular.

So, Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.
There is but one word in the original, (...), the working prayer; but it is
translated by two, effectual, fervent. Surely then prayer and seeking of God
is the ordinance which he has appointed for the turning about of the great
affairs of the world. T^ is the engine that does it inwardly* there are indeed
a great many outward wheels used, but the spring of all is within, prayer
turns all about. God never made use of any created power so much as of this. He
never did such great things by any created power as by the ordinance of prayer.
The Word is appointed for the converting of souls, but a great part of the
blessing of the Word depends on prayer.

In the opening of this point I will first give you some evidences of it;
Secondly, show you what great things prayer will do. Thirdly, wherein the
efficacy and power of it lies. Fourthly, the objections of troubled
unbelieving spirits against it. And then come to apply all. The evidences
hereof are first the many famous records in Scripture of the noble and glorious
exploits of prayer. If any of you should come to me to ask, as that King did of
the prophets servant, 2. Kings 8.4. What great things has thy master done? so
what great things has prayer done in the world? truly we might spend hours
and days in returning you an answer, a great part of holy Scripture being
spent in this very argument. And it is a very good exercise for you in the
night, when you cannot sleep, or at other times when you are troubled, to do as
that King did, Esther 6.1. call for the book of the Records of prayer. You that
read the Scriptures, mark what you read. The word of God will tell you how
prayer has stopped the Sun in the firmament, opened heaven, and shut it
again, raised from death to life, opened the prison doors, and what not?

Secondly, all Gods people are able to tell you great stories of what they have
gotten by prayer. This poor man cried, says David of himself, Psalm. 34.6. and
the Lord heard him. Who is it that cannot tell histories of Gods gracious
dealing with him upon his calling unto him? to be sure* our Nation has many
things to say this way; and every particular godly soul has many things to
say: they would not lose their income of prayer for all the world.

Thirdly, surely it is not in vain to call unto God: for there was never any
soul that ever would leave off, but would continue as long as he lived seeking
him: he would seek his face evermore; if he had had no answer, he would have
left off. When we see a Be stick on a Flower, and will not be driven off, or
if she be driven off, she will come again, we conclude certainly it finds honey
there. So all the Saints of God that have ever sought God truly, they would
never be beaten off this way. Let the world do what it will, persecute them,
set spies to watch them in their meetings of prayer, let it punish and imprison
them, let all the malice and rage of men be against them, yet they cannot
hinder them either from praying in their closets, or from enjoying the benefit
of the communion of Saints in prayer. Daniel had rather lose his life then be
kept from his prayers, though but for a day: but pray he would, and that
openly, yea three times a day, as he was wont; he would not forbear one time.
He did stick to prayer finding honey and sweetness in it. Oh how unlike are we
to Daniel, though the performance of this duty was exceeding hazzardable to
Daniel, yet he would not be deterred from it; but every light trifle takes off
our hearts.

It is not in vain for wicked men to call upon God, though they are not able to
seek God as they ought. The prayer of the wicked is abominable, says Solomon.
Prove. 15.8. That is not to be understood of the prayer of every man that is
unregenerate, wickedness is not so to be taken in that place. For we know that
God has regarded the prayers of men unregenerate. The prayers and fasting of
Niniveh were regarded of God: the praying and fasting of Ahab was regarded of
God. God has granted the wicked some mercies, he has looked on them as his
creatures. Though God sees enough in their prayers to cast them off, yet God
has manifested his regard to them. Therefore if it be not in vain for the
wicked to call unto the Lord, much less is it in vain for the seed of Jacob,
the elect of God, to call unto him.

Yea, the Lord hears the cry of the very Ravens and the beasts, Psalm 147.9.
and Psalm 104.21, 27, 28. Therefore the people of Niniveh would have the
beasts eat nothing, that they might cry unto God, Jonah 3.7, 8. Surely if the
brute beasts and the fouls be heard when they cry, it is good for the people of
God, to call unto him.

There is very great reason that we should call unto God, because the people of
God that have been wise and have conversed with God, and have known much of the
mind of God, have given up themselves and all their strength to the duty of
prayer. Now it were a weak part and an idle thing for any one to give up his
strength and all his might to that which in reason we could not expect, and
whereby there is no great thing to be obtained. It is said of Iehoshaphat 2.
Chron. 20.3. that he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord. It is translated
composuit faciem suam, he set his face, he gave himself up fully to seek the
Lord. They know what they do that give up themselves wholly to seek God.

Indeed carnal hearts condemn the people of God because they see them so
earnest in those things that they think to be frivolous: For it argues
weakness in any man to give up himself with all his strength to things that
are vanity, and have no strength in them. Therefore because carnal men look
upon the way of Religion, as a thing that has no end, they think it foolish
for men to be so earnest to give up their strength and their whole souls for
it: But the Saints of God know what they do when they give themselves up to
seek the Lord, they know if they call unto him, he will answer them.

Again, this is an evidence that there is much advantage by prayer, because men
that were wise and holy have so prized the prayers of the Saints, and made such
high account of them. Mark the expression of the Apostle, writing to the Saints
for their prayers. Romans 15.30. Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together in
prayer with me in your hearts to God for me. The Apostle Paul, so great a man,
and one that had a mighty spirit in prayer, writing to private Christians in
the Church of Rome, he beseeches them for the Lords sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that they strive in prayer for him: He knew that there was much to
be had this way.

Yea further, God is found of them that sought him not, Isaiah 65, 1. then
surely, the people of God that call upon him, shall receive answer from him.

Yea yet further, God when he intends to show no mercy, gives a straight
charge to his people not to pray, or he shuts up their hearts that they are
not able to pray. This is an argument that prayer is prevalent, because when
God will not show mercy, he would not have such a precious thing lost and spent
to no purpose.

Lastly, it is not in vain, because if it should, then a praying heart were not
always a mercy from God: but certainly it is. Therefore though perhaps you
cannot find the thing granted that you pray for, yet to have a continual
praying heart, know that it is a great mercy from God. And those that are
spiritual, prize more the continuance of a praying heart many times, then the
granting of the thing they pray for. All these put together are full evidences,
that it is not in vain to call unto the Lord.

There be many other evidences which I pass by one purpose, that I may have as
much time as may be for application.

But now, wherein does it appear that it is not in vain to seek the Lord? what
does prayer do?

First, it is not in vain to seek God, if there were nothing else in prayer but
the right exercise of the faculties of our souls and of our graces; this alone
were worth our time. The graces of our souls must be exercised about somewhat:
Now prayer serves for the exercise of all graces.

Secondly, it is not in vain if it were nothing but the performance of our duty
as creatures to God. There are many people that are weary of prayer, because
they have not that by it that they expect: But know that there are two
arguments to prayer; the performance of duty, and the obtaining of mercy: If
there were but only the former, that alone should suffice to keep thee praying
as long as thou live.

Thirdly, it were not in vain if it were nothing but the tendering that homage
and worship that we owe to God. Prayer is not only a duty, but a great part of
the worship that God has in the world. While we are worshipping of God it is
worth the time.

Again, it is not in vain, if there were nothing but this, that we come and
show what side we are of, that we join and side with God against his
adversaries and for his people. But these are not the things here intended.

Further, it is not in vain, because there is no faithful prayer that ever was
made but God accepts of it in heaven. There was never one of the seed of Jacob,
that ever put up a faithful petition to God, but God took it in his hand and
read it. A King or any superior, when you come with a petition may refuse to
take it, but God never refuses to take any petition from a faithful soul.
Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 6.9. The Lord has heard my supplication,
the Lord will receive my prayer. He will take it, and look on it, and read it;
and not only so, but he will also accept it, and take pleasure in it: A Prince
may take a petition, and look on it, and after frown and show anger in his
countenance; but God does not so with the prayers of his people: The prayer of
the upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8. he never reads a petition that his
people tenders, but with a smiling countenance. If it be a faithful petition,
he accepts it of them and receives it graciously. It is an expression of Luther
speaking of the prayer of a contrite heart, The least sigh of a contrite heart
so fills heaven with noise, that there is no noise of any thing in heaven or
earth heard at that time, but only the noise of prayer. Certainly a faithful
prayer takes the heart of God very much, yea every faithful prayer is
recorded in heaven. You keep your letters upon the file, that you may readily
find them, when you have occasion to look on such a letter sent from such a
country: so God has his file in heaven where all faithful prayers are kept
upon record. As Princes have their paper offices, where transaction between one
State and another are kept, so the Lord has his prayer-office, where he keeps
all the prayers of his Saints that ever were put up to him. Revel. 8.3. Another
Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden censer, and there was given
him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints. Where
were those prayers of all the Saints that he must take a censer and offer
incense with? God had them recorded with him, and now they were to be offered
to him. And see what great things follow upon the offering of the prayers of
the Saints, verse. 4. The smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of
the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. And the Angel took
the censer, etc. and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an
earthquake. These followed upon the prayers of the Saints. It signified the
time wherein all should come in remembrance before the Lord, as if an Angel
were offering, yea, Christ the Angel of the Covenant, has a time to take the
prayers presented long ago, and to offer them to God with his own incense. They
are all recorded in heaven, therefore they are not in vain. When a petition is
taken and put upon record, the petitioner petitioneth not in vain, his petition
is not thrown out. God does take all the petitions of the Saints and records
them; they are all filed up in heaven.

Yet further, there is no faithful petition but God puts his fiat to the
bottom of it, at the instant that it is put up to him. There is a decree in
heaven issued out for mercy, at the very instant that the petition is put up,
God deals not with us in this kind, as men do who are counted very gracious,
if they please to tell us they will consider of our petition: no; but your
petition is presently granted. A petitioner when there is time taken to
consider of his petition, trembles and shakes for fear it should not be
granted: but the petitions of the Saints of God are granted presently. When
Daniel had been seeking God at the evening sacrifice, an Angel comes to him,
and tells him, that at the beginning of his prayer there was a decree to grant
it, and that he was sent to him at the beginning of his prayer, Dan. 9.23. and
Psa. 56.9. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I
know, for God is for me. Did not David cry often, and yet his enemies did not
turn their backs when he cried? He cried often when his enemies prevailed: yet he
says, When I cried then mine enemies turned back: and this I know, why? for
God is for me. The meaning must be this, that at that instant that he cried,
there was a decree in heaven; the thing was done. He looked on it as done, even
as certainly as if he had seen it with his eyes.

This is the reason that the Saints after they have prayed, though the thing be
not actually done, fall to praising and blessing of God. We have a notable
example in Iehoshaphat, of whom we read 2. Chron. 20.3. that being in a great
fear bad set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all
Judah. He did not seek God slightly, but set himself to seek the Lord. And what
his prayer was, ye may see from verse. 6. to 12. And Iehoshaphat said* O Lord
God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and rulest over all Kingdoms?
Mark how he pleads with God for the Covenant he had made, verse. 8. Speaking
of the Sanctuary they had built for his names sake; If when evil comes upon
us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house) and cry unto thee
in our affliction, then thou will hear and help. He urges the promise made to
Solomon at the dedication of the Temple. For that prayer of Faith which Solomon
made, and God accepted, has the strength of a promise in it. O our God, says
he, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company
that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.
2 Chronicles. 20.21.
Though he professed that his enemies were so many, that he knew not what to do,
and that they had no might to resist them, yet after his prayer was done, and
before the battle began, when he had consulted with the people, he appointed
singers unto the Lord, that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went
out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for
ever, verse. 21.

Mark: he had not yet gotten the victory, the battle was not fought, yet as
soon as he had ended his prayer, he praised the Lord for his mercy indureth
for ever. He made account that the thing was done: It was decreed in heaven.
Therefore surely the people of God are answered when they call upon him.

Nay, it is not only decreed, but ere long God will satisfy his people, and
fill their longing souls with goodness, Psalm. 107.9. A time shall come when
they shall they say their prayers are heard, and that they have enough. Yea the
Lord gives more sometimes then his people mention in their prayer, they ask
temporal blessings, and he bestows spiritual, yea he gives them himself,
and that is all in all. Surely then the prayers of the Saints are heard and
answered.

But wherein lies the efficacy of prayer? What makes prayer so powerful with
God?

One thing is, because God delights in mercy, and in communicating himself to
the children of men. He takes more pleasure in doing good, then any can in
seeking it; yea, then any can in enjoying it from him. Our hearts cannot be so
strongly set to seek for any mercy from God, as he is to communicate mercy to
us. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18.

Another thing that renders prayer so effectual, is Gods Covenant and promise
to his people. It was the speech of Alchimedes, Give me a place to set my
Engine in, and I will shake the whole earth. Let prayer have a sure foundation
to set foot on, and it will do mighty things. Now the promises are the
foundation of prayer, whereof we have great abundance Numb. 23. You shall find
abundance of promises to the Saints of God, when Balaam was brought to curse
the people. But in Deuter. 33. there are admirable promises. There is none like
unto the God of I^shurun, who rides upon the heaven in thy help, and on the
sky in his excellency. The eternal God is his refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and
shall say, destroy them. Israel then shall dwell in safety alone, the fountain
of Jacob shall be upon a land of Corn and Wine, also his heavens shall drop
down dew. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the
Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is that sword of thy excellency, and
thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their
high places. Here are promises to the Saints of God. They shall have all things
that are good, and God will manifest himself, especially against his enemies.
There must be a mighty efficacy in such a plea, when there are such large
promises. So in the 14. Chapt. of this book of Isaiah, there are diverse
promises for Gods people, For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet
choose Israel and set them in their own land, and the stranger shall be joined
with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob, and the people shall
take them and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess
them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take
them captives, whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their
oppressors. And it shall come to pass that in the day that the Lord shall
give thee rest from thy sorrow and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage
wherein thou wast made to serve, etc. I make no question but some of the people
of God have been pleading this promise in prayer where the Lord has promised
to have mercy on Israel, and to give him rescue from his sorrows, and fears,
and hard bondage. It was hard bondage that we were made to serve in, not long
ago; here is a promise that God will give us rest from it; and upon the
pleading of this promise God has made it good to his people.

And in Isa. 41.8. there are large promises in that Chapter to the Saints of
God. But thou Israel my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham
my friend, Thou whom he have taken from the ends of the earth. Here are
promises for prayer to set foot upon, no marvel if it has so much power and
efficacy.

There are diverse others, and many things behind of the efficacy of prayer, as
it depends upon the promise and covenant that God has made with his people:
for every promise is but a several branch and expression of the covenant of
God: therefore we are to refer them all to the Covenant. I will give you but
one Scripture, Ier. 30.10, 11. Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob,
neither be dismayed O Israel: for lo, I will save thee from a far, and thy seed
from the land of their captivity, and Jacob shall return and be in rest and
quiet, and none shall make him afraid. For I am with thee says the Lord, to
save thee: though I make a full end of all nations, whither I have scattered
thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in
measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. There is somewhat that
God does, but yet still he remembers his promise in the midst of affliction,
that he will leave nothing of that undone: therefore though his people be under
great afflictions, the Lord will be good to them according to his promise.

Now again the Lord will regard the prayers of his people; the efficacy of
their prayers depends upon this, because it is Gods own work. That which is the
work of God is not in vain: God made none of his works in vain. Now all their
calling upon God, it is from God; it is Gods own work, and a most glorious
piece of the work of God. Every prayer that comes from the poorest Saints of
God; every gracious, and faithful prayer it is a glorious piece of Gods work;
It is a work of the holy Ghost, and therefore it is not in vain.

Again, as their prayers come from God, they seek God from God; so they seek
God for God, they seek the Lord for himself. If the people of God seek God
only for Corn, and Wine, and Oil; if they did seek him only for their own
ease, and outward liberties, and accommodations, and for the lives of their
enemies, perhaps they might seek in vain. No, but when they seek God, they seek
God for God, and thence they prevail so much with God, Ye ask amiss, that ye
may spend it on your lusts. James 4.3. You pray to God often to be delivered from
enemies, and you think your prayers (if it be in such a time as this) they come
in vain: No marvel if so you pray that you may have liberty to trade, and
deliverance from taxations; (these may be sought,) but the house of Jacob seeks
God for his name, that that may not be dishonored, and for his Gospel, that
that be not taken away, and the power of godliness trodden as dirt in the
street. When they seek God for God, no question, but God will hear and answer.

But the great efficacy of prayer is this, it is part of the purchase of the
blood of Christ: that God might hear the prayers of the Saints, it comes from
the merits of Christ, it is a part of his purchase that God should regard them,
it is in his name that we pray; so we are taught. It is by Christ that we have
access to the throne of grace, our privilege of seeking God is that which
Christ has purchased by his blood. So that our seeking of God is not only a
duty, and beneficial to us, but it is a high privilege purchased by the blood
of Christ; by him we have access with boldness, the word is, with liberty of
speech: liberty of speech is by the blood of Christ, that we may come before
the Lord, and open our minds fully, certainly there is a great deal of efficacy
in prayer. Whatsoever our prayers are, as they are from us, though they be vain
as they are from us, yet take them as Christ's purchase, here lies the great
efficacy of prayer.

Think not that the efficacy of prayer lies in earnestness, or enlargement:
though it be a comfort and an evidence that God enlarges us by his Spirit, (it
is not parts that enlarge, but the Spirit) but the virtue of prayer lies not
here: the strength whereby prayer does great things, it lies in secret, in the
purchase of Christ.

Again, Christ takes all the prayers of his people, and tenders them up to his
Father for acceptance. We have a more glorious way of coming to God then Adam
had in innocence, yea in some respects then the Angels themselves, by having
such an Intercessor that takes all our prayers and carries them to his father.

Yea, not only so, but he joins with us to the Father. There is a place in the
Hebrews quoted out of the Psalms, that shows that Christ praises God in the
congregation; it is not only the Saints that praise God but Christ himself.
Heb. 2.12. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the
Church will I sing praises unto thee. Christ in the midst of the Church sings
praise to God. When people meet to praise God, Christ praises him. It is a
mighty encouragement in praising God. So in prayer, when we meet to seek God
Christ seeks him: for he is at the right hand of the Father, making continual
intercession for the Saints; Christ himself joins with them in the work that
their prayers may be heard and answered.

Again, it is the style and title that God glories in, to be a God hearing
prayer, therefore he will hear and answer.

Again, prayer is the pouring forth of the spirit to God; the spirit that is so
be beautified with the graces of his own spirit; now the pouring forth of such
a precious spirit to God so beautified, and principled with the graces of the
holy Ghost, certainly this cannot but be answered by God. Indeed, the Scripture
says of the heart of the wicked, that it is little worth: Let their heart be
poured fourh, God does little mind, or regard it: but the heart of the
righteous is much worth; it is very precious before God: therefore when their
hearts are poured out, and God sees the beauty and glory of his graces on them,
it is exceeding delightful to him, and such pouring out of their hearts, are
heard and answered. If God have a bottle for all their tears, he has a bottle
also for all their expressions, and pouring out of their hearts in prayer.

Further, the exceeding delight that God has in his Saints must needs cause
God to regard their calling unto him. They are his darlings: now there is no
man that loves to deny a suit to any that he delights in.

Lastly, it were not for the honor of God, that his people should call unto
him, and not be answered, nor receive that comfort they pray for. It is
reported of Titus, though he were a heathen Emperor, yet he would not that any
man should go sad out of the presence of the Prince. God accounts it an honor
that none should go sad out of his presence. Therefore those are called on to
rejoice that seek the Lord. Let the hearts of them rejoice that seek the Lord,
Psalm. 105.3. not only let the heart of them rejoice that find the Lord, that
obtain that they seek, but those that seek the Lord, while they are seeking
should rejoice in seeking him.

But now I will only take away that great objection, and reasoning, that is in
the hearts of many men against this point, and then come to the application.

You tell us that the prayers of Gods people are not in vain. But when they
call unto him he will answer them, and by Gods mercy now and then, we have
found some comfortable hearing from heaven: but ordinarily we find it
otherwise. How many prayers have we put up to God, and find not the issue? we
pray, and pray, and the enemies prevail, though now and then God give us help.

Now for the taking away of all unbelieving reasonings against this point, I
will not go from the Text at this time.

Therefore the first answer is this: You say you have sought God, and have not
what you would have, and therefore God has not answered when you have called.

Though perhaps this that you now say is something, yet it makes not the text
void. Remember what has been before: heretofore you have sought God, and God
had answered your seekings, remember the times of old, let that for the present
a little stay you. It was that that stayed the Psalmist, he began to reason as
you do, that he had sought God without answer, Will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? etc. Psalm, 7, 8. here seems to be as much unbelief
as in your reasoning, but mark what follows, v. 10. And I said this is my
death: but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high. O, it
is my sin, and weakness that I should reason thus, I consider not what to do
when I reason thus: but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most
high, verse. 11. I will remember the works of the Lord: sure^y I will remember
the wonders of old. v. 12. I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of
thy doings. Thy way O God is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our
God? Thou art the God that do wonders, thou have declared thy strength among
the people, v. 14. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of
Jacob and Joseph, v. 15 Mark, at length he recovers himself with this, though
present things seem to go hard, yet he remembered what God had done; so do thou
in this case. In this book of Isaiah, you have a complaint of unbelieving
hearts, as if God had been sought in vain. Isa 40.27. Why say thou O Jacob,
and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed
over from my God. Art thou one of the seed of Jacob, and have sought God and
say, thou have had no answer? God reasons the case, and will confute their
unbelief. Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
the Lord, the creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is weary?
there is no searching of his understanding. He gives power to the faint, and
to them that have no might he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint
and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall. v. 28, 29, 30, 31. But they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary and they shall walk and not
faint. Has not God done great things heretofore, in 88. and in the powder plot
and at other times? and though we be in some streights, remember what God did
before.

This should appease your hearts, what though thou have not present audience
for the thing thou seek: yet think, I deal with a God that has an
understanding that I cannot search. God it may be lets the adversary prevail
sometimes, I cannot tell what glory God may get by it, I cannot conceive how
God can bring his own glory about when Israel flees before the Philistines. But
why say thou so O Jacob? there is no searching of Gods understanding, God
sees further then thou can see: that thing that thou think will make
against his name may make for it: therefore lay thine hand upon thine heart. He
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might. God stays till men
have no might, till they faint, and are ready to fail, and then he comes and
helps them. That is the meaning of that Scripture in Luke, where Christ says,
God will avenge his elect that cry night and day to him, though he tarry, he
will avenge them, he will hear their prayers, he will answer their requests.
But it follows upon it, notwithstanding when the Son of man comes shall he
find faith on earth? I verily think that that want of faith, has reference to
that very promise specially, that God will hear his elect that cry: but God may
stay so long, as that the very time when God shall come to perform it, and
shall intend to do it, it may be a time when their faith is overcome, and fails
in the promise, that they begin to give over, and think they have sought God in
vain. And usually the time when God comes to fulfill his promise, and to answer
the prayers of his people, it is that very time when they fail and are ready to
s^ck. Therefore that may be another argument, it may be thou have not believed
this promise. Thou say thou have prayed, and thou think thou have not
answer: have thou believed this promise in the Text? have thou relied on it?
God has commanded it, and have thou done as he commanded with belief, Call
unto me and I will answer thee.

The word of God shall be made good, but how? upon our faith: it shall be made
good to us upon our believing: though we be never so godly, and pray never so
well, yet if we will have the promises made good, it must be upon believing. If
thou have not laid the weight of thy soul on the promise, thou have no cause to
say that God has not made his word good; it may be thou have not faith: learn
to believe the word, and then thou shall have it fulfilled. Thou would have
it made good, and then thou would believe it; no, thou must first believe
the word, and then expect that God should fulfill his promise.

Again, God is a great God that we call unto, and it is fit for us to wait, and
and to wait long. He is great, and we call for great things, and we are poor,
mean, vile wretches. God has his prerogative sometimes to answer presently,
sometimes not so. Elias was a great praying man, he is set for an example of
prayer; he prays at one time for fire to come on the sacrifice, and fire came
down presently; another time he prayed for rain, and then he prayed seven
times, and bowed his head between his knees, and sent his servant, and sent him
again and again. At one time God comes in at the first, at another time not
till the seventh hour; it is Gods prerogative.

And take this note; it is a true sign of a gracious spirit, though God defer,
yet still for the soul to cling to God, to think well of God, and of the ways
of God, and of the duty of prayer; it is an excellent sign, and the ready way
to find favor with God. You have sometimes two beggars follow you for alms;
one perhaps has true need, pure need, and is of a soft tender spirit, the
other is a sturdy rugged beggar, you deny them both; he that has pure need,
and has a soft tender spirit, he thinks he is unworthy that the other man
should be bountiful to him and he falls a weeping: yet he thinks well of the
man, and will be ready to beg of him upon another occasion, he has good
thoughts of him. But the sturdy beggar rails, and breaks into an angry
passionate mood, and he will ask no more; who of them is like to prevail, the
soft spirit that has an ingenious disposition, or the sturdy spirit that soon
breaks off? Thus there are many passionate hearts, that are not froward with
men, but with God, they come, and ask mercy of God, but their hearts are stiff,
and froward and sturdy, if they have not that they would, they presently break
off, and say, why should we wait on God, and cry, it is in vain to seek the
Lord. But now a gracious, tender, ingenious disposition, though the thing come
not that he prays for, he justifies God in all, and speaks well of God, and
well of prayer, and loves that still, and waits on God in that way: this is the
soul that is likely to prevail.

But further, (to answer from the Text) it may be thou have not called unto
God, Call unto me, says God. It may be it is somewhat else that thou have
sought in prayer then God: though thou name God in thy prayer, it may be thy
heart has been after creature-helps, and thou have made more account of the
help of the creature, of Armies, and strength, thou have made account that they
would do it rather then prayer; and if there be no help but prayer, thou
think it but a dry business.

A carnal hearted man when he hears of an army of twenty thousand men well
clothed and the like, he thinks much may be done, but for the prayers of Gods
people they think they be nothing. Now if thou have sought help by creatures,
rather then by God, thou have not sought God all the while, Or if it have been
but outward safety, that thou have sought and not the face of God, thou have
not sought God, Seek my face, says God, Psalm 27. This is the generation of
them that seek thy face, O Jacob. Psalm. 24. Thou seek not God, without thou
seek Gods face, without thou seek God for himself. And ordinarily, God is not
sought, but thy estate is sought; and thou cryest out for the danger thou art
in. Therefore thou have no cause to say, it is in vain, look to thy prayers,
take up thy prayers again. Do as the fishermen do; if they find that there
comes nothing up, that they do not catch, they take up their net, it may be
there is a hole, a rent in the net. And so the Angler, if the fish do not bite
he takes up the bait, it may be there is somewhat wanting on the hook. So look
to thy prayers, it may be it is not God that thou have sought, take them up and
see what is amiss in them.

Another answer is this, it may be thy prayers have been vain and therefore no
marvel if nothing but vain come of them. Surely; God will not hear vanity, Job
35.13. If there be nothing but vanity, how can thou expect that God should
hear them? Our prayers are ordinarily without form, and void, that is, there is
nothing but vanity in them. Not that God regards so much the setting of a man's
words in form handsomely: for the groans and sighs of the spirit of God are
accepted, though they be not methodicall, as the making of a speech to men; God
looks not to that. Many pray, and they know not why, but because others do; but
they propound not the true end of prayer.

I appeal to thy conscience; when thou have gone to pray to God, have thou
propounded this end? I am going to tender up that worship and homage, that I a
poor creature, owe to to the infinite glorious first being of all things: you
call your families sometimes to come to prayer, and never think what you do,
what you aim at. I and my family are now going to seek the great God in prayer,
I am now going to join with my father or my master, now that we are altogether
in this family to tender up that worship and homage that we poor creatures owe
to that infinite glorious first being of all things whereby to testify our
high respect, and esteem of him. Now if thy prayer be a customary way of prayer
it is vanity, it has not a right end.

It may be thou go to prayer merely to satisfy conscience^ Or some have
this by end in prayer, a wicked end, that is, they think to satisfy God for
their former sinful wicked ways. They take liberty in company to drink and
please the flesh, and as they served themselves then, so now they will serve
God, and set one against another. Sometimes they will give liberty to the flesh
to take contentment that way, but they will not always do so, sometime they will
be devout and serve God. There is no man so wicked as to be always in the acts
of wickedness, but they think God must have his turn, and they must have their
turn sometimes. And this is the prayer of many people, to put their sins in one
scale, and so many devout prayers in the other scale, and the one shall poize
the other. This is vanity, this is not the end of prayer.

When God does not see thy expressions filled with the graces of the Spirit:
this is vanity; Take heed of vain expressions, when there is nothing but nature
in prayer; though there be never so much earnestness in prayer, if there be
but a natural spirit it is vanity, we must pray in the spirit as the Scripture
speaks.

And take heed of sluggishnesse in prayer, that makes it vanity. The breath
that comes from life in man's body is warm, but the breath that comes from
bellows is artificial and cold, some men's breath in prayer is artificial and
cold, but the prayer that comes from life, is warm breath that comes up to God.

Again, vanity in prayer is this, when all is eaten out with vain thoughts, thy
heart roves in prayer, thou know not where thou art, thou can not call
that which thou make a prayer. A prayer with vain thoughts it like beer, or
wine that is dead, and has lost the spirits. Vain thoughts are worms that eat
out the strength of a duty: would you present a dish to your superior that
were worm eaten, or that were gnawn on before? when we let out our thoughts in
duties, and present them to God, they are worm-eaten, and torn, the strength of
them is quite gone.

And after you have prayed, take heed that you make not your prayers vain, by
not looking after them, for the accomplishment of them; or by being proud of
your prayers and gifts, by resting in them.

And again it is vani^y when thou undoest all as soon as thou have done, by
going contrary to thy prayer in thy life, not adding watchfulness to prayer.
If a man take pains to weave a web, and spend so many hours in it, and then
ravell it out, this man spends his time in vain. So do most people with their
prayers, they pray for mercy, and grace, and as soon as they have done they go
quite contrary and ravell and undo all, is not this vanity? No marvel if thou
think it in vain, when there is nothing but vain thoughts in thy prayers.

And take heed that you make not the prayers of others vain. Luther writes to
Melancthon angerly, in regard of his fear of the power of his adversaries,
says he. You make our prayers void. So it may be said of many that are cold,
and lukewarm, and dead-hearted, and do not take to heart the cause of God;
that fear the displeasure of this body, and that body; you make our prayers
void. You that have praying friends, it may be fathers, and mothers that are
dead whose prayers are put up in heaven, take heed that you make not their
prayers void; that you give them not cause if they should come to live again
from the dead to weep and cry out, O how are our prayers made void by the
prayers of such and such.

But you will say; Lord, what will become of us? we have abundance of vanity
in our prayers.

Therefore, that you may not be discouraged, know, that though there be many
vain thoughts in prayer, yet if there be sighing and mourning, and humbling of
the soul, and panting of the heart after God in groaning, and sighing, and
though there be a mixture of vanity, yet there is a working of the Spirit of
God, and of grace in the heart after God; know that the Lord will not charge
this vanity on thee, the Lord will do away thy sin, therefore let not that
discourage thee. The efficacy lies not in the excellency of thy prayer, but in
the merits of Christ, and his mediation: Only Christ will have somewhat of thy
self in thy prayer, he will have thy heart pant, and work after him: but there
may be abundance of vanity, thou drawest a line, and make a blot, and
another line, and another blot, Christ draws all fair again, and presents to
his Father.

Who are Jacobs seed.
But another question is this, you say it is vain to pray. Can you make good
that you are one of the seed of Jacob? This privilege belongs to them; it may
be you are of the seed of Esau.

The seed of Esau, what is that?

Who are Esaus seed.
The Apostle speaks of Esau what his guise was. Heb. 12.6. and says, Take heed
that none of you be such as Esau, lest there be any fornicatour or profane
person as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. Now if thou
prove a fornicatour thou art of the seed of Esau, or a profane person; what is
that? for one morsel of meat he sold his birthright, that is, to please, and
satisfy and content the flesh he sold his birthright, that was the land of
Canaan; and so typified the privileges of the Church of God, and even a type
of heaven it was. His birthright had a spiritual meaning, it had reference to
the spiritual privileges, that the Saints of God have to this day in all the
ordinances of God.

That man or woman that priseth any carnal contentment before spiritual
privileges, they are of the seed of Esau, and not of Jacob. Thou think
there is some savor in money, and in a good trade, and in good cheer, and such
a day as this November 5. is better then a fastday, because of the good cheer:
but for the spiritual duties of this day, to come and magnify God, and to
attend upon his word, thou think they are circumstances, and by matters, and
thou art troubled if the Sermon be too long to hinder thee of thy dinner; thou
art a profane Esau, all that I have said belongs not to thee, thou do not
belong to Jacob but to Esau, that preferrest carnal things for the flesh
before the spiritual privileges of the Saints.

How are Jacobs seed known.
But how shall I know that I am one of the seed of Jacob.

How do you know such an ones child, but by his likeness to his father? One
that has the spirit of Jacob is of the seed of Jacob. There are many things
that the Scripture speaks concerning Jacob, and see if you do answer them.

First, Genesis 32.24.
Jacob was a mighty man in prayer, he was a wrestler with God, and he wrestled
till the day broke, and was as strong at the last as at the first: have thou
the spirit of thy father Jacob? art thou not discouraged in prayer? though
mercy come not presently, yet do thou wrestle all night, and resolve
whatsoever come, if thou die, thou will die wrestling; here is a child like the
father, therefore thou art of the seed of Jacob.

Secondly, Iecob was one that feared God, when God appeared to him he looked on
the presence of God as dreadful, How dreadful is this place? Genesis 28.
because God was there. So do thou look on the presence of God as dreadful,
that thou can say the fear of the great God is on thy soul: when thou come
into his presence? mark, for this is that expression in the Psalm, Ye that fear
the Lord praise him, all the seed of Jacob glorify him, and fear him all ye
seed of Israel, Psalm. 22.23. If you will be sure not to seek God in vain, but
that you may praise him in seeking him, fear the Lord all the seed of Jacob.

Thirdly, Jacobs heart was disingaged from the creature, a little of the
creature would serve his turn, Genesis 28. Lord says he, if thou will give me
meat to eat and raiment to put on. He looked no further, he minded no great
matters. Therefore in Ps. 24. there the generation of Jacob is set out, and one
thing is, he that has not lift up his soul to vanity. The men of the world
have great things in their eyes, they are vanity in Gods eye, though they be
great in theirs, and they lift up their hearts to them. Now the sons of Jacob
do not lift up their hearts to vanity, though the things of the world be
present, their hearts stir not, they rise not; but if God and Christ, and
heavenly things be presented, their hearts are lifted up. If thy heart be
lifted up to vanity, if thy heart be as iron and the vanities of the world
come and draw it up, thou art not a son of Jacob: a little would serve Jacob
though he were a great heir, He was a plain man and dwelt in tents, Genesis 25.
and had a plain spirit, he did not look after great things; whereas Esau looked
after great things abroad.

Again, he was one of a tender spirit: therefore where it is said he prevailed
with the Angel, it is said he wept, and made supplication unto him, he found
him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. That story of Jacob concerns us how
God dealt with our Father. If now thou have a tender spirit as he had; if when
thou go into the presence of God thou find thy spirit yield and melt, and
relent, thou art one like thy father Jacob.

Again further, Jacob did in the time of his streights repair to the covenant,
that was a great satisfaction to his heart; he looked to the covenant, he
fastened on that, and there he held as the main support of his spirit. Genesis
32.9. And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac,
the Lord which said unto me, return unto thy country, and to thy kindred,
and I will deal well with thee. etc. He heard that Esau was coming against him
with a great company; and what does Jacob? he gets him to God, O God of my
Father Abraham, and of my Father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me return into
thy country, etc. He repairs to the Covenant: Remember thy Covenant with
Abraham and Isaac, and with me to, I went on thy word. Here was the guise of
Jacob: can thou in a straight get thee a word, and a promise, and brood thy
soul over it, and clasp it close, and say this is the promise that must, and
will do me good?

Again, Jacob was of an humble spirit, I am not worthy of the least of thy
mercies. He admired at the mercy of God that he had any thing, and Gods mercies
made him more humble; this is an excellent disposition, we are many times
humble and lowly when we are under the hand of God in affliction: but when
mercies make us humble, that the more God is gracious the more vile we are in
our own eyes, this is excellent.

And he looked back to his former condition, he looked upon his poor beginning
and gives God the glory: I passed over this Jordan with my staff; Many of you
came with your staff, and God has given you two bands, you are grown great,
are you willing to think of it, and to acknowledge the poor estate that once
you were in, and to give God the glory, I was thus, and thus, of poor
parentage, and see how God had dealt with me.

Another thing remarkable is, that Jacob contented himself with God alone, he
accounted that he had enough in God alone, though all were taken from him, he
did not look upon himself as undone, but he had that that might make him for
ever. In Genesis 33. compare the 9. and 11. verses, you shall find a notable
difference between Esau and Jacob, yet the word in our books is the same, but
this Scripture is much wronged by the translation. In verse. 8. Esau when he
comes to Jacob, when Jacob would have given him his present, says he, what
meanest thou by all these droves which I met? he said these are to find grace
in the sight of my Lord: and Esau said, I have enough my brother. It was a
strange speech of Esau: A covetous wretch that is always pyning and murmuring
for having no more, and thinks, he shall want before he dye, he does not come
so far as Esau, and Esau could say, I have enough, are there not many of you
that never say you have enough? I pray thee take my present says Jacob, for I
have all things, nay says Esau, I have enough. The one says I have enough,
the other says I have all things, for ^o the word is Col; Esau had enough, he
did not want, he had meat and drink, and he saw none to interrupt him, he was
satisfied with his estate, as his portion; he had enough, he cared for nothing
more, they might talk of other things, but that was enough to him. Jacob comes,
and says I have enough; but this was another manner of enough: Esaus enough is
his estate, but Jacobs enough is God, for he says, I have all, Jacob was
meaner for his outward condition then Esau, for he had nothing but what he had
gotten in hard servitude. Now Esau says, I have enough: Jacob says, I have
all: that is, God is enough in the want of all, if Esau should strip him of all
he had, yet he had all in God. Now one that is of the seed of Jacob, in the
time of want (as some of you may be plundered, and then all is gone you say;)
no, if thou be of the seed of Jacob if thou have God thou have all. There is
such a promise, He that overcomes, shall inherit all things. How is that? and
I will be his God, Revel. 21.7 Therefore whatsoever thou want if God be
thine, if thou be Gods child, thou have all.

Further, one of the seed of Jacob is one of the Church of God: for all Jacobs
posterity was so: therefore the blessing in Ruth is, Ruth. 4.11.
The Lord bless thee like Rachel and Leah, which two did build up the house of
Israel. Why is it not, the Lord bless thee as Rebeccah, or Sarah, but as
Rachel and Leah. (It was a blessing upon a marriage condition) the reason is,
because from Rachel and Leah, came only those that were of the Church, that
were members of the Church of God; but there came others from Rebeccah, and of
Sarah came only Isaac, but Abraham's posterity was otherwise. And that Church
that was then was but a type of that which should be after; that is of a
company of people elected, and called out from the world to be partakers of the
Privileges of Jesus Christ. The people of the Jews, the seed of Jacob were the
Church of God, as the seed of such an one. And this typified the Church that
should be after; a company that are taken out of the world, to partake of the
privileges of Jesus Christ. Can thou say that thou art of the Church? The
word that we translate Church is a company that is called out from the world.
Can thou ever tell of a work of God separating thee from the world, that when
thou wentest according to the world, God gave thee a mighty call that made a
separation between thee and the world? For it is said so of the seed of Jacob,
Numb. 23.9. From the tops of the rocks I saw him, and from the hills I behold
him: lo, the people shall dwell alone, they shall not be reckoned among the
Nations. All the seed of Jacob are called out of the world, they are separated
from them by a mighty work of God to partake of Christ, and be a member of him.

And upon this, such an one mightily longs after all the outward privileges of
the Church, to enjoy all the outward ordinances of Christ after his way, those
that are of the seed of Jacob, they prize the excellency of Jacob as the
greatest excellency, their hearts are toward it, and they rejoice in that
above all the excellency in the world. If you ask what this excellency of Jacob
is? it is the joining of Gods people in the way of ordinances, and duties of
Gods worship in the purity of them. This in Scripture is called the excellency
of Jacob, Psalm. 47.4. He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of
Jacob whom he loved. It is an excellent Scripture. O, it is a blessed thing to
give all to God, to let God choose our inheritance. What is our inheritance? The
excellency of Jacob whom he loved. What was that? The worship of God, and his
ordinances, joining with the people of God in the way of his ordinances, in his
temple, those were the things that were the ordinances of God in those times;
those are called the excellency of Jacob; and so it is now the excellency of a
people to enjoy Gods ordinancies.

You have another expression to the same purpose. And I will bring forth a seed
out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritour of my mountain, and mine elect
shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. Isaiah 65.9. What is the
mountain of God? Gods Ordinances in his Church, I will bring a seed out of
Jacob, and Judah, and they shall inherit my mountain. So that the greatest
inheritance of the seed of Jacob is the mountain of the Lord: communion with
the Church of God, and his ordinances: if you be of the seed of Jacob, your
hearts prize, and rejoice in this, and that you have in Psalm. 24. verse. 3, 4,
5. you shall find how the seed of Jacob prize the enjoyment of God in his
Ordinances. Who shall ascend in to the hill of the Lord? who shall stand in his
holy place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up
his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from
the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the
generation of them that seek him: that seek thy face O Jacob. It is so in the
book* but the particle O, is not in the original: and therefore it may be read
thus, That seek the face of Jacob; it may be read in the Genitive case, as well
as in the Vocative. This is the generation of them that seek him, even of
Jacob, and then he turns to God, that seek thy face: but because his heart was
full of this, of seeking Gods face, (though he intend to mention what
generation it was, the generation of Jacob) he puts in that before, the
generation of Jacob that seek thy face: that is, this is the generation that so
prise God in his ordinances, and account it such a blessing of God; that join
themselves to the Church of God, and set up his ordinances and ways; this is
the blessed generation, these are those that seek God truly. We seek not God
truly unless we seek him in his own ways, unless we seek him in all his
ordinances, we cannot comfort our souls that we seek him in truth. For as in
the way of obedience, we cannot have comfort in our obedience that it is true,
except it be universal to all Gods commandments, so we cannot have comfort in
our seeking that it is true, except it be in all his ordinances, and ways:
therefore we must be of the generation of them that seek the face of the
Church, that seek thy face O Jacob. So it follows in that place, lift up your
heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may come in. Where should the King of glory come but into his Church? Who
is the King of glory? The Lord, strong and allmighty: still the Church is
called on to entertain Christ in his glory, so this is spoken of the Church.
Thus you may know, whether you be of the seed of Jacob.

Again, if you be the seed of Jacob you have the inheritance of Jacob, and
account it your inheritance. What was Jacobs inheritance? Deuter. 33.2. The
Lord came from Sinai and from his right hand came a fiery law. The law of God
is a fiery law; yet in verse 4. Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance
of the congregation of Jacob. So that though the law be a fiery law, a strict
law, a severe law, yet it is the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. If
you be of the congregation of Jacob you account the law of God to be part of
your inheritance: not only to be that which you are bound to, that you must
obey whether you will or no, but you rejoice in the law of God as your
inheritance. For my part I know not a more sure note of a gracious heart then
this; one that rejoices in Gods law as his inheritance: as you know what
expressions David has, he rejoiced in it more then in Gold and Silver, more
then in the honey, and the honeycomb. It is one thing to obey Gods Law, and
another to rejoice in it as an inheritance. If thou be of the seed of Jacob,
thou have the inheritance of the seed of Jacob.

Another is, he that is of the seed of Jacob is faithful in the place that God
has set him. Jacob in serving of Laban, Genesis 31.6. though he were churlish, he
professes that withal his power he served his father. It is an excellent Text
for servants; you would fain have time to seek God, and God forbid, but there
should be some time allowed the poorest and meanest servant to seek God alone.
But art thou of the seed of Jacob? then be like him in this, to serve with all,
thy power, though thou have a froward master or mistress, as Laban was, though
they use you hardly, yet show godliness in that relation. And for servants to
seem godly, he must go hear, this Sermon, this man, and the other man, and be
very earnest: (I blame them not for loving the word and desiring it: but for
servants to be earnest in hearing the word, and enjoying the ordinances, and
crying out against superstition, and Antichristianisme, and yet be sluggish,
and unfaithful in their service, and so as to give just offense to their
governors, it is a dishonor. Show your godliness in your relation: certainly
there is no man or woman godly, but those that are so in the relations and
places that they are set in: therefore manifest your selves thus to be the seed
of Jacob.

Again, the seed of Jacob is a taught seed, God teaches them, Psalm. 147.19. He
has not dealt so with other Nations, he gave his law to Jacob, and his word to
Israel. So in Deuteronomy. 33.10. Levi is appointed to teach Jacob. There is never a
one of the seed of Jacob that is ignorant, that is a fool in matters of
religion, he is taught.

And then, one of the seed of Jacob, is one that has a care of his family: so
we read of Jacob, Genesis 35.1. God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and
dwell there, and make there an altar unto God that appeared unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother. Then said Jacob to his household and
to all that were with him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be
clean, etc. When he was to go into Gods presence, he labored to reform his
family. When God calls you to fast days, and to the Sacrament, do you cleanse
your families, do you look what evils are in your families, and put out your
power to cleanse them?

But there is one more that I may not omit, that is, Jacob, when he was to die,
though he himself was to go the way of all flesh, yet this was his great
comfort and the comfort of those that he left behind, that God would make good
his word to his Church and people, Genesis 48.21. and Israel said to Joseph,
Behold, I die, but God will visit you, and bring you again to the land of your
Fathers. Behold I die, but I die in faith of the promise: because I am taken
away shall I think the promise shall be of no effect? no; God shall bring you
to the land of your fathers. Now when God shall cast you on your sick beds can
you say, Behold I die; but go you on, God will make good his word, I die in
faith that it shall go well with the Churches of God: there will be a time when
they shall get the victory, when Christ shall reign, and the Saints shall be
delivered from their oppressors? Here was the spirit of Jacob: if you be such
a seed of Jacob you shall not seek Gods face in vain, but when you call unto
him, he will answer you.

But you will say, it is true, some men may call unto God, and he will hear
him, but I am a poor contemptible and wretched creature, and if I do call unto
him, he will not hear nor answer me.

That place in the Psalm fully answers any objection against our poverty, or
the poverty of our prayers, Psalm. 102.17. He will regard the prayer of the
destitute, and will not despise their prayers. The prayer of the destitute, the
word signifies a poor shrub in the wilderness, a contemptible shrub, that is
trodden on by the feet of beasts, and none regards it; God regards such prayers.

If I could make an excellent prayer it were somewhat: No, he does not despise
thy prayer. It may be thy prayer is such as thou despisest, and that others
would despise, but God will not despise it.

But this was spoken perhaps to some in those times.

Mark what follows; This shall be written for the generation to come. This
Scripture, this promise of God, it is written for the generations to come. And
the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord. We that were not made
then, but were created since, let us praise the Lord for this Scripture, that
God will regard the prayers of poor shrubs, and not despise them.

But they are great things that I stand in need of, and it may be in vain for
me to pray for such great things at Gods hands; perhaps if I did pray for
ordinary things there might be hope, but I am to pray for great things, mercies
for the Church and for the Kingdom, and people of God; is it not in vain for
such a poor wretch as I to pray for such great things?

We may think that the things we pray for at Gods hands are too great for us to
beg, but they are not too great for God to give. It is observed of Perilla,
when Alexander would have him ask a dowry for his daughter; Alexander
presently promised him 50. talents; it is too much says he, 10. talents are
sufficient; Alexander answered him, if it be too great for you to ask, it is
not too great for me to give. God loves that his people should ask great things
of him: yea he loves that the poorest, and meanest of his people should ask him
great things; and therefore he says in this Text, Call unto me and I will
answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things. This is a promise to every
one of the seed of Jacob.

But when I pray in the time of affliction, and Gods hand is on me, will it not
be in vain to call unto him then?

It is true; to neglect God in former times, and then to pray only in
affliction, it is a dangerous condition: but this temptation comes upon such as
have sought God before. I, now you seek God, but this is in your affliction,
and will God regard you now? I speak it only to comfort such as are careful
to seek God in the time of their health: yet if thou have been negligent; it is
possible that God should regard thee in the time of affliction. Jonah prayed,
and said, I prayed and cried by reason of mine affliction to the Lord, and he
heard me, Jonah 2.2.

But suppose it be affliction for sin: for so the objection may arise. It is
true, if I did call unto God in the time of affliction that God did send for
trial, it may be God would hear me: but suppose Gods hand be on me for sin,
will God hear my prayers?

That one notable example of David may help the people of God against such a
temptation: Gods hand was on him for his sin, when he fled before Absalom, God
threatened that war should not depart from his house: yet David then prayed
against that wicked politition, and counselor, that the Lord would turn his
counsel to folly; and God heard David's prayer in his affliction that was for
sin, And the Lord turned the counsel of Achitophel to folly. Let us not be
discouraged though politicians work never so craftily; though Gods hand be on
us, and we have conscience accusing us, and say, I this is for your sins that
God leaves you thus in the hands of your enemies, that God gives them such
power; that they find such favor with the Prince as they do, though this be
for our sins, yet let us seek to God to turn the counsel of Achitopell to
folly. It shall not be, nor has not been in vain, we have found it so, that in
our affliction, and affliction for sin, yet crying to God to turn the counsel
of Achitophel to folly, God has done so graciously, and has encouraged us
more and more to cry and call unto him for that end.

But what need I seek to God, God has decreed and determined what he will do,
what God intends to do, he has decreed from eternity, therefore whether we
pray or no it shall come to pass, if we do not pray it shall come to pass. If
God have intended to deliver me out of a sickness, it shall be done whether I
pray or no; and when any ones time is come they shall die; and so when the time
of a Kingdom is come it shall be destroyed, and not till then; therefore what
good can prayer do?

Though I suppose you cannot but be satisfied, and think that this objection
has little weight, yet for answer, I will give you a Scripture or two, Psalm.
2. I will declare the decree, The decree of God concerning the advancement of
Christ in his resurrection, and so of the success of the work of Christ's
mediation. I will declare the decree, the Lord has said thou art my son this
day have I begotten thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Gods giving
of Christ the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth
for his possession; it was decreed of God, yet Christ must ask it of his Father
notwithstanding Gods decree. And another Text remarkable is in the prophecy of
Daniel, where the Text says Dan. 9.2. In the first year of his reign, I Daniel
understood by books, the number of the years whereof the word of the Lord came
to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish 70. years in the desolation
of Jerusalem. And I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer and
supplications. Mark, Daniel understood by books what God had determined
concerning Jerusalem; what need Daniel go further, he knew Gods mind what he
would do whether he did pray or no? but mark, verse. 3. I set my face to seek
the Lord. After he knew what God had decreed, and what he would do, and what he
had promised. Now we know not Gods decree: but if we did certainly know the
decree of God in showing mercy to the Land, yet it could no way hinder us, but
encourage us to set our faces to seek the Lord, and to seek him more earnestly:
therefore that is a vain objection.

Again, it is not in vain to call unto the Lord, if we examine all we have had
already: though we have not all we would have, yet if we consider the
supporting mercies, the preventing mercies, and the guiding mercies that God
has granted us, we shall find that it is not in vain that we have sought him.
There are abundance of mercies that thou have had already. It is an evil thing
to complain of Gods grace, when God has bestowed such mercies. Thou think
thou have nothing, because thou have not all thou would have; as a froward
child because it has not every thing to its mind casts away all. God has been
exceeding gracious to us; other souls would have adored God, and have blessed
him with their faces to the ground, if they had had but the hundred part of
those mercies that we have; yet because we have not all we desire, we are ready
to think it is in vain. O let us take heed of dishonouring the grace of God.

Again, further thou think it is in vain, because God sometimes denies in
granting, and grants in denying. Many times God grants that we pray for in
denying it, and denies that we pray for in granting it: our denyals are grants
to us. Woe to us, if all were granted to us that we pray for. Much good may be
gotten out of Gods denyalls: and God denies us to do us good, and to prepare us
for mercies: therefore it is not in vain that thou have fought God, because it
is not in vain that thou art denied.

But further, it may be God delights more in thy praying, then in thy praising
voice, therefore though thou have not that thou have sought for, give leave to
God to delight in thee which way he pleases. There is the praying, and the
praising voice of Gods people, thou delightest that God should hear thy
praising voice, it may be God delights to hear thy praying voice, and it may be
he should not if thou had what thou would have. Says God to the Church,
Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet. There is no man that will think the
King denies his petition, as long as the King loves to read it. If one present
a petition to the King, he does not say he will presently do it: but if he read
it, and when he has read it, calls for it again, and again, will any man think
it in vain that he has put up that petition? as long as the King hears it, and
delights to read it, it is not in vain. So, as long as God loves to hear thy
voice, and to read thy petition it is not in vain. As for thy praising voice,
God shall have enough of that in heaven, but he shall have none of thy praying
voice: therefore why should thou not be willing that God should have more of
thy praying voice here? All that ever God shall have of thy praying voice it is
in this worln, and after a little time God shall never hear us pray more.
Therefore let us be willing to go on, and continue in prayer, and not to wonder
why God keeps us on in a way of praying, because all the time that ever God
shall have to delight himself in the praying voice of his people it is in this
world: and for our praising voice, we would fain spend all our days in
praising God for his mercies, but that is reserved for another world.

Further, it may be Gods way to stay till he bring a great deal of mercy
together, and not by bitts and drops. As when men deal with great merchants,
they expect not to have payments, by six pences or shillings or Crowns at once:
but though there be two or three or ten pounds due, they stand not on that, but
stay for a greater sum. Now little traders that deal by retail, they take it
in by pence, and little sums, Christians that are to deal with God, they deal
for great things, and there are great transactions between God and a gracious
heart: therefore think not much that God stays with a greater sum. For as
God deals with the wicked in the way of justice, so he deals with godly men in
a way of mercy. He lets wicked men go on a great while, he comes not to
judgment for sin, but stays till all come together, till a great sum of
wrath and judgment come together. So he deals with the saints he comes not
with less mercies, but he stays till abundance come, and when Gods time is
come mercies will come to the full indeed.

Further, it may be God has so much mercy that thou have not a vessel capable
of it. Only know that heaven, and earth and all are working for thee. Is the
plowing, and the sowing of the husbandman, and all the showers in vain; because
the corn is not in the barn? we account it not so: so we must not account our
prayers lost, because the thing we pray for is not presently granted and owe
prayers answered. Now for Application.

First, if it be so, that God says, call upon me, and I will answer thee,
certainly there are great things for the Church to build on: God is to do
marvelous things for his people in these latter days. Why? because all the
Saints from the beginning of the world have been seeking God, not only for
their own times but for the Church to this very day: all their prayers are upon
the fyle, and must be answered one day. O what a glorious harvest will it be!
blessed are they that shall live to partake of it. We have a little, but
certainly, there are glorious things for the Church; because every prayer
shall be answered.

Secondly, you that are the Saints of God, know your honor, though you be
never so poor otherwise, God has given you that which makes you rich: you have
the key of heaven, you may open the treasures in heaven, and it shall never be
in vain. Gods people are such as are exceeding honorable in the eyes of God,
and in this regard that they have credit in heaven, that their prayers shall be
heard and answered. Bathsheba says to Solomon, 1 King. 2.20. I desire one
petition of thee, I pray thee, say me not nay, It is translated by some, Ne
confundas faciam, confound not my face. Indeed, the denying of a petition, it
is a dishonor, and a confounding of the face: but God will not confound the
faces of his people.

O, here see your privilege, and your riches, all the prayers that you have
made in your life time they are all trading in heaven, they are not lost. If a
man have ventured a stock abroad to the Indies, and do not hear of it in a
great while, he thinks it is lost and gone: but if he hear certain news that
all his stock is safe, and in the place where he would have it, and those that
are there faithfully improve his stock, he is revived by this, it rejoices his
spirit, and he can say blessed be God; I hope to be a rich man for all this. I
say to thee be of good comfort thy stock is not lost, it is trading in heaven,
and every prayer that thou have put up is there. We should account our prayers
as riches, as adventures sent to heaven, and not as children that shoot arrows
and do not mind them.

And then learn this, it is a great privilege to have a praying friend, a
praying companion. Many of you love friends that are delightful, of a cheerly
nature, and merry; but are they praying ones: praying friends are the special
friends: because prayer can prevail with God. To have a friend in the Court,
that can obtain any petition, we think it a privilege; to have one great
friend in heaven is a great privilege. Many people when they lie on their sick
beds, they send to such and such to pray for them: why do they not send to
their companions, that they did drink with, and swear with, to pray for them?
O, they dare not. Here is enough to convince any man's conscience, who are the
best men, whatsoever they say.

Suppose thy condition were thus, that thou did lie on thy deathbed, and
thy life did depend upon the prayers of four or five men. If God should speak
thus from heaven, thou art at the brink of destruction, only this favor thou
shall find; thou shall have leave to choose where thou will four or five men to
pray for thee, and according as they pray so it shall be with thee; thou have
liberty to choose through the world whom thou will. I appeal, would a drunkard
choose four or five drunkards, or a swearer choose swearers, or unclean ones
that they most delighted in all their life time? If all should depend upon it
thou would not choose such; therefore thou art convinced in thy conscience,
thou know that those are not precious in Gods eyes, (however thy lust have
prevailed) but that the other are better men, that are gracious and have more
credit in heaven. Learn to prise praying friends, that can prevail with God.

And let us set the crown upon prayers head, in the mercies we have from God,
in public mercies, and private deliverances of friends; attribute it not to
second means, to fortune and chance, take heed of denying God his glory.

It is a sign of a carnal spirit, when God has glorified himself in answering
the prayers of his people, to attribute it to any other means.

As I remember, I read of the Porphirian atheists, that followed the atheism
of Porphyrie, they darkened the work of God in delivering the children of Israel
out of Egypt thorough the red sea. They say that Moses had learned of the
Egyptians, and they were great Astronomers: and Moses knew when it would be a
low tide, and what constellations there would be at that time, and that the
tide would prove low then, more then ever in the age of man, and Moses took the
nick of time, end lead them through the sea. Thus atheists would darken the
works of God, and put them of to natural causes. So I find it related of the
old Prophet in Ieroboams time; Josephus has it related of him, he sent to
Jeroboam to stretch out his hand, he tells us that this was by accident, he was
wearied all the day long, and now he had the Palsy, and after it was restored
again; that which was done by prayer, he would have it by natural means.

Just thus it is, when God has so magnified his mercy to England, and wrought
such wonders yet many carnal atheistical spirits, say this was an
accidental thing, and the policy of such men brought it to pass, they
attribute all to natural causes, it is a sign of wretched profane heart: For
if God ever magnified prayer he has done it in these days. There are 2 or 3
Scriptures that since the world began were never more magnified, then by Gods
working at this day.

One is in Exodus 13. In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, God was above
them. Never since the world began was that more fulfilled. A second is that in
the 10. Psalm, The wicked are snared in the work of their own hands. If ever
there were a fulfilling of that Scripture since the beginning of the world, it
is as this day. A third is this in the Text. I said not to the seed of Jacob;
seek ye my face in vain. God (as I said) has raised a spirit of prayer among
the seed of Jacob more then ever any in the world knew; there was never the
like spirit of prayer raised, nor never the like things done for prayer.

And the Lord the rather honored the ordinance of prayer now, because men so
dishonored it before and persecuted it, that the people of God could not meet
and assemble to fast and pray, but presently it was a conventicle, and they
were persecuted as factious people. Because God saw this way despised, he has
honored it, and the former, and the latter mercies that we have received, we
are to attribute to the goodness of God by prayer, they were obtained by
prayer. Let us still be encouraged to call unto God for what we would have: for
God has said, call upon me and I will answer thee.

There are many of us now that can do little else: if God have delivered you
from sickness, and other evils, know that God has delivered you to pray, the
less you can do otherwise, the more you should do in prayer. I have read of a
heathen, Nu^a Pompylius, that he would never go about any thing but he would go
to the temple and pray: you that are instruments entrusted with our lives, and
liberties, you had need to pray much, go into your closets and sanctify all
your thoughts and resolutions by prayer, that your help and assistance may not
be in vain to us. And all others had need to assist you in seeking God in
prayer. This encouragement we have, that there is not any of us that seek God
alone, but we join with thousands: why should our place be found empty? why
should not our prayers join with the rest? We shall meet many prayers in
heaven; the prayers of our forefathers; the prayers of those that are dead and
gone that did not live to enjoy the fruit of their prayers, yet when we pray
for mercies our prayers meet with theirs in heaven: therefore let us be
encouraged to call unto the Lord.

And if mercies should come, what a daunting would this be to our hearts, that
mercies are come, but we have not sought them? and if mercies come not,
conscience will fly in our face that we have been sensual, carnal creatures,
and it is for our neglect of calling unto God, that God has denied us the
mercies that we expected.

And then it should be a use of rebuke to those that begin to seek God, and
continue not. O wretch, why have thou left? whether will thou go? Is it in vain
to serve the Lord? certainly thou were never acquainted with God and his ways;
thou will find it a dreadful change, when it shall appear that thou had left
God the fountain of living water, and have sought after vanity, and forsaken
thine own mercy.

But the main of all should have been for the applying of it to the present
occasion. The Lord has made good his word this day, call unto me, and I will
answer thee^ This day testifies it to be true that they are great things that
prayer has done. I have heard many years ago by credible testimony, that on
this fifth of November, when we had such a great mercy so many years ago,
that very day it was known, that a great many godly people in the city kept
in fasting and prayer, so as it was eminently known and delivered from hand to
hand of them in the city at that time, and you know what God did.

But what has he done of late? If our fathers should rise out of their graves,
and we should tell them that now the high commission (that they were so
troubled with) is down; that there shall be no more star chamber, that cutting
off of ears is gone, they would wonder how this should come to pass. And
whereas Parliaments were wont to be snapped in sunder, that this Parliament is
to continue by as firm an Act as any thing in the land is made by. And for
oppressors, all the Courts and Bishops Chanceries, they are down, and gone,
God has extirpated them: they were first cast out of the house, and now out of
the Kingdom. And though an army did rise and seek to bring us into slaverie,
yet God has given us victory (though some have suffered hardly) and brought
the adversaries very low to surrender their towns, and castles and arms. And
here we are to rejoice in God, and to bless him for all.

If many of our ancestors should rise, and hear what we speak, how we hold up
our hands and bless God, with what hearts would they join in the praising of
God, and wonder that ever such things should be done! Let not the grace of God
be in vain, as God has not said to us, seek my face in vain.

What use shall we make of it?

Let us give him real praise, and not only come to repeat it, and tell God of
it, but make his praise glorious, put a glory on it; and then we do it, when
we make a right use of his mercies, when we receive not his mercies in vain.

What is to make use of the memorial we celebrate?

First, the remembrance of these mercies must humble us; that is a sweet
humbling; it is better to be melted by the beams of the Sun, then by the
scorching of the fire.

You will say, humbled, for what?

There are three things that we have cause to be humbled for, upon the
consideration of the mercy of God toward us,

First, the sin of unbelief, consider, when we were straightened at any time,
when we heard ill news, that our armies fled, and came to danger, how our
spirits were down as if all were gone. Let us check our hearts, God rebuked us
in a kindly manner, we might have had a furious rebuke.

Secondly, be humbled for all our murmuring and repining, and discontent, O we
did not think that the wars would have held so long, and O what taxations are
upon us, and all our estates rent away? And how many are there that had rather
that all the good that God has done for his people since these times should
never have been done, then that they should suffer in their outward estates. Be
rebuked for all your murmuring and repyning at such difficulties as you have
met with in the great cause of God.

The third thing that this mercy should make us humbled for, and look back to,
is that if ever there have risen this thought in any of our hearts, that it had
been better for me if I had never appeared so much. I see how things are like
to be, the enemy prevails and is like to overrun all: had it not been better
that I had not engaged my self so much? that I had not appeared so much? are
they not wiser men that have kept themselves quiet and silent, and done as
little as they could, nothing but what they have been forced to? And when the
Kings party come, if they tax us, they can do no more then force us. If thou
have such a thought, pray to God to forgive that thought: Let this that God
has done rebuke thee. Art thou sorry for what thou have done? thou see God
will do it without thee. If thou have been a public instrument, and have done
good and yet if in fear of success thou have repented? God rebukes thee this
day.

Then labor to love prayer as long as you live, as David says, I will call
upon God as long as ever live. Prayer casts the scals, and has the advantage.

First, the other side they feared not to suffer much if they were overcome;
they think they have a head and they would be where he was, and he would
countenance them, and make good their condition for them, but this side if they
had been overcome, they had been men utterly undone: what a mighty advantage
was there one way more then another?

Then the Kings side if he had prevailed he had places of dignity to bestow;
if the Parliaments side prevail, we are but where we were, we do but maintain
our own, we cannot expect to raise our condition. But how many broken Gentry
expected to raise their condition on the other side? As it is said concerning
the Pope, and the general Counsel; the Pope prevailed, notwithstanding the
general Council, though that were above him, why? the Pope had Cardinal
ships, and Deaneries to bestow but the Council had none; they had the
advantage that way.

Again, those that appeared on the one side how were they discouraged
extraordinarily? on the other side they were encouraged to the utmost. On the
one side how unfaithful have they been? on the other side they have kept to
their principles, because their principles are suitable to the flesh: but there
are many on this side that have not gracious principles and had a public
cause, therefore they have been unfaithful. We have use of men that have not
principles to act by, but all the other go according to their own principles.
The one part acts that they may gratify men's lusts; now the generality of the
world love it; they know if the one party prevail they shall have liberty, and
licensciousness, but if the other prevail they shall live under laws. Now men
would have their lusts; therefore when they see on the one side they shall have
their lusts, and on the other side they shall be more curbed, they strive hard
for their lusts.

At the first I wondered that men should be so vile to fight to make themselves
slaves: but when I considered, they shall have slaves under them, and have
their lusts, and the other side be more curbed, then I was satisfied, and
wondered that God should cast the scale the other way, they having all the
advantages in a carnal way more then the other. Only here it is, we have
people that have prayed, and this has cast the scale. Love prayer, and praying
people, and join with them, be on their side, for God is with them, and will
not suffer them to pray in vain: a praying Christian is a useful Christian in
the world.

Again, make this use of all that has been done. Look how far thou think
the adversaries would have been hardened if they had prevailed against the cause
of God, be thou so much the more resolute in the cause of God. If they had
prevailed how would they have blasphemed? and many thousands of Atheist; would
have been made more then there was before: what a mighty offense, and
stumbling block would this have been? Now since God has turned it the other
way, justify God and his cause; settle your hearts in the love of God, and his
cause, and settle your selves more strongly in the reformation in hand.

Further, let us give him real praise, that we may not receive the grace of
God in vain. By this grace we hope that he has given us our estates that we
were afraid would have been rent from us; we have the continuance of our
liberties, and of the Gospel. Let our hearts be engaged to God to give up our
estates this day; let us renew our engagements to God in secret, between God
and our souls. Lord thou might have taken away my estate by the spoylers, it
was near it; and thou have done it to other of my brethren, and is mine
continued! That estate that should have been spent for their lusts, I am
resolved to spend it in thy service that have preserved it; and I account it a
great mercy that I have an estate to honor thy name, I feared I should not.

God expects, that ever henceforward you make a more holy use of your estates
then before. And call your hearts to question, what do I do with my estate for
God? what honor has God from my estate more then before? God expects more, or
else God may justly say, in vain have I preserved this wretched estate: there
are many of my servants, if I had preserved their estates, they would have
improved them in the towns and places they lived in, and here is a wretch I
have preserved his estate, and he is more greedy and scrapes up for himself,
and all his thought is, how to repair what he has lost by taxations, etc. The
Lord may repent of what he has done, and the curse of God may follow such a
man's estate. Take heed, know that there is an engagement after this time.

And so for the liberty of the Gospel, God expects that you should prise the
Gospel more then ever. Lord, we were afraid the Gospel would have been gone,
if thou had given us up into the hands of our enemies, and our eyes should
not have seen their teachers; we should not have heard things that refresh our
hearts; shall we have the Gospel, and hope that our posterity shall have it?
we hope that we shall never provoke thee as we have done heretofore to take it
away. A man that has been in danger to loose his estate, and has recovered
it, will be careful after. Our slighting of the Gospel because we had it so
ordinary might have caused God to take it from us; and has God restored it?
let us take heed we provoke not God now, but attend upon the word more then
ever we did.

Lastly, does God say to us, Call upon me, and I will answer thee, then when
God seeks us, let us be found of him. There is all the reason for it in the
world. If God be so gracious to poor base worms, sinful creatures, that if we
do but chatter, our prayers are answered: Is it not reason when God calls upon
us, that we should call upon him? When God calls out of his word to perform
such, and such duties, God seeks thee; then make use of this Text, I have
called upon God, and he has answered my requests. And now I go to hear the
word, and out of the word he calls unto me, and seeks me, let me say, Lord what
say thou to thy servant? The Lord is ready to hear your call, be you ready
to receive his answer, and go on, go on with encouragement, the Lord has
encouraged us this day. And let all your prayers and endeavors break through
all difficulties, and the Lords mercy shall break through all oppositions: for
he has said, Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things, which thou know not.

FINIS.
These Books are lately Printed for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
THe Leaper cleansed, or the Return of Richard Bellamy of Tiverton in Devon,
from Anabaptisme to the Truth, wherein their wiles to deceive are also laid
open. 3. Treatises. First, The young man's Memento. Second, Now if ever. Third,
The danger of being almost a Christian: published by John Chishull, Minister of
Gods Word at Tiverton in Devon.

These Books following are now in the Press.
Mr. David Dickson his excellent Expositon on all St. Paul's Epistles lately
translated into English, and Printing in Fol. A new vol. of Dr. Prestons, never
before published. Choice and rare experiments both in Physic and Surgery,
with variety of excellent receipts, for any distemper of the body never before
published, discovered by the Elaborate pains and industry of Mr. Tho. Collins,
Practitioner of Physic, near the City of Gloucester.

