THE PROTESTATION PROTESTED: OR, A short Remonstrance, showing what is
principally required of all those that have or do take the last Parliamentary
PROTESTATION.

ECCL. 5. 45. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he
has no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is that
thou should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay. Printed in
the year. MDCXLI.

THE PROTESTATION PROTESTED.
ECCLES. 5. 4, 5. When thou vowest a vow unto GOD, defer not to pay it: for
he has no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is
that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay.
WHen in the Scale of Conscience rightly informed, I weigh the words of the
Protestation, and of this Exhortation of the Holy GHOST together, I cannot but
tremble, when I see what small account most men do make of so solemn a Vow,
as they so solemnly take upon them in the said PROTESTATION.

For when Ministers and People have taken the Protestation, and have solemnly
vowed to maintain the Doctrine of our Church, so far as it is opposite to
Popery; Do they withal presently set upon the performance of this their Vow?
Do they not further defer to pay it? Surely if they do defer it, the holy
Ghost calls them fools, in whom God has no pleasure. And it had been better
for them never to hay vowed, then to vow and not pay.

Object. But how do they defer to pay their Vow thus made?

Answ. In that they do not presently renounce, and protest against all Popery,
and for ever disclaim and abandon all Communion with it.

Obj. Why, will they say, what Communion have we Protestants with Popery? We do
all renounce it.

Answ. In words we do renounce it, but indeed we retain it, and have close
Communion with it: so far are we from keeping the Vow thus made.

Obj. But what Popery do we Protestants of the Church of England retain with
us, or hold Communion with?

Answ. We hold Communion with Popery, so long as we do publicly retain and
maintain any of the Doctrines of Popery. And the Doctrines of Popery which we
retain and maintain, are these. First, The imposition of the Liturgy.
Secondly, The Discipline. Thirdly, The Government. Fourthly, The Ceremonies.

Obj. But these being as yet established by Law, we may not cast them off,
till the Law which set them up, be abrogated, which must be by Act of
Parliament. And we protest against Popery to cast it out, as far as lawfully
we may, and no otherwise.

Answ. First, All Laws are to be interpreted according to their clear
intention and end. Now the Law for Reformation never intended to allow or set
up Popery in this Church of England. Secondly, If any humane Laws be found to
be contrary to Gods Word, they are invalid and void ipso facto. And it will
appear, that imposition of a devised Liturgy, humane Rites and Ceremonies,
Praelaticall government and Discipline, are directly contrary to Gods word.
Thirdly Having once made this solemn Protestation and vow, against all Popery,
and finding that the particulars aforesaid are branches of Popery, we are
bound ipso facto forthwith to have no more Communion with them, but utterly to
renounce them.

Ob. But what if the Parliament did not intend or understand by Popery, the
foresaid things, as the Liturgy, Discipline, Government, Ceremonies used in
our Church, and by Law established? Shall we presume to extend the sense of the
Protestation further then the first makers thereof intended. And the Prelates
(we presume) would never so readily have subscribed to the Protestation, had
they dreamed any such sense to lie hid under the name of Popery, as their
Hierarchy, with their Liturgy, Rites, Ceremonies, Discipline, Government; for
then they had in the Protestation protested against all these, and should have
given their hands and votes, for the rooting of them out of this Church.

Answ. First, This we are sure of, and it is most clear by the express words
of the Protestation, that they intended it against all Popery. Secondly, They
express themselves and profess thus far, that the words of the Protestation
are not to be extended to the maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline,
or Government; nor of any Rites or Ceremonies in the said Church of England.
Ergo, we do not, we may not protest for the maintenance of these. Thirdly,
suppose that at the first making of the Protestation in the Parliament, these
particulars aforementioned were not reckoned in the Catalogue of all Popery:
yet no good Christian will or can deny, that the Honorable House of Commons
did not at all intend to exclude what ever should be found to pertain to
Popery as a branch thereof. And therefore we may boldly conclude, that if the
forementioned things shall be found to be, and that no small branches of
Popery* the Protestation has an edge to cut them off all at one stroke.
Fourthly, we are all in an erected hope of such a Reformation intended by this
most noble Parliament, as cannot justly challenge the name of Reformation,
unless all Popery be made to be packing, which of necessity must carry with
her all trinkets and baggage, with all her pompous equipage, among whose
sumpters, the Hierarchy, with all its Pontificalibus of Service, Ceremonies,
Discipline, Train, Courts may challenge to go in the foremost rank. Fifthly,
and lastly, suppose it could be supposed by any rational man, that the House
of Commons could have no such thought as implicitly to include the aforesaid
particulars in the fardell of Popery: or that they could possibly intend the
maintaining of those things still, of which they expressly say, That the words
of the Protestation are not to be extended to the maintaining of any Form of
Worship, Discipline, or Government, Rites or Ceremonies; or that these things
should not be removed but maintained still: What then? Shall private and
particular Christians, knowing these things to be Popery and Antichristian,
being also bound by their solemn Vow and Protestation, never reform
themselves, until they see a general Reformation over the whole Land? What if
they shall never live to see this? Will they against their Conscience, against
their knowledge, against their Vow and Protestation, live and die Votaries and
Communicants in that Service, Schoole-boyes and Punies under the Ferula of that
Discipline* Vassals under that Government, Conformists to those Rites and
Ceremonies, all which are very Popery and Popish Innovations?

Ob. But how does it appear, that the forementioned particulars are branches
of Popery? If our Conscience could be convinced hereof by the Word of God, then
surely are we bound both by Gods Word, and by our Vow and Protestation
presently to renounce and abandon these things, and to have no longer any
Communion with them.

Ans. It is most true, that nothing can resolve, regulate, and settle the
Conscience, but the Word of God in the evidence of it. Now most clear it is by
the Scripture, that the Liturgy, Discipline, Government, Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England, are all of them so many branches of Popery. For
proof hereof: first for the Liturgy; this is a branch of Popery in two
general respects: First, in regard of the whole frame and matter of it, as
being translated out of the Romish Latin Liturgy, as is confessed in the Book
of Martyrs; see for this the late Parallel between the English Liturgy, and
the Masse-booke. I omit to say any thing here of the many vicious particulars
throughout the Service-booke, which run as the corrupt blood through all the
veins of it, and are by others sufficiently discovered. This is enough to show
it to be Popish. The second general is, the imposition of it upon all men's
Consciences. Which bare imposition alone, were the Liturgy in it self never
so free from other faults, yet being a Service of men's devising, the imposition
(I say) makes it a branch of Popery. For Popery (we know) is
Antichristianisme. And Antichristianisme is an opposition to Christ, so as this
imposition upon the Conscience is an opposing and overthrowing of Christ's
Kingly Office, who is the sole King and Lord over the Soul and Conscience; an
office incommunicable to any Creature, or Power in Heaven or Earth. Whereupon
John says, (...)
Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ, He is Antechrist.
Now to deny Jesus to be the sole anointed King of his Church, is to deny him
to be the Christ. And he that sets up man as Lord over the Conscience, in
prescribing and imposing what Service of God he pleases of humane invention,
denies Jesus to be the Christ, to wit, to be the sole King of his Church, who
is the sole Lawgiver to the Commonwealth of Israel, in his spiritual
Kingdom.

And for this cause the Pope is proved to be that Antichrist, who is ^2 These.
2. 4.
the Advesary that exalts himself above all that is called GOD, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sits in or over the Temple of God (which is
every man's conscience) showing himself that he is GOD. Now in nothing does
Antichrist exalt himself more, then in usurping Christ's power in giving Laws,
whereby he exercises a Tyranny over the true Temple of God, over the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ. And this tyranny is chiefly exercised in
usurping dominion over our Faith and Conscience in the worship and service of
God, which they place in the Liturgy. This is the highest pride and
presumption of Antichrist that possibly can be. This is that Will Worship, or a
worship invented of man's will and choice, which the Apostle Col, 2^ 23.
expressly condemns and brandeth, as the highest Tyranny, which to be
subject unto is the spoiling and cheating men of their salvation (as we read at
large Col. 2. v. 8. 18.) and a separating us from our Head and King Christ, v.
19. and an evacuating of his death, v. 20. The Imposition therefore of a
Liturgy upon the Conscience devised by men, and pretended for the worship and
service of God, yea and the only divine public worship of his Church, is a
maine branch of Popery, as being the Character of Antichrist or
Antichristianisme, which is the very with Popery; Popery and Antichria^isme
being convertible terms. Thus it is as plain, as brief, that the imposing of
a Liturgy of man's devising upon the Conscience is the pretended Service of God
(though indeed it is rather the service of many, Math. 15. 9,
and which God condemns as a a vain worship of him) is a maine branch of
Popery.

Secondly, for Ceremonies of man's devising in the worship of God, and imposed
upon the Conscience, these being the same nature with, as being a part of the
Liturgy, are by the same reasons (as before) proved to be Popery.

Third^y, for Discipline (which stands chiefly in correction of manners, and
inflicting of Censures* as Excommunication, such as is and has been exercised
in the Church of England by the Prela^^s ever since the pretended Reformation
in this po^^t) that this is also another maine branch of Popery, do but
compare it with that Discipline in the Church of Rome, and you shall find it in
all points so to jump and agree, as you must of necessity conclude, i^ Rom^s
Discip^i^^ be Popery, then certainly our English D^scipline is Popery too. For
in nothing (I say) do they differ, so as Discipline of our Church being false,
and counterfeit, because Popish; and so our Church wanting the true Discipline,
which ought to be one of the three marks of a vi^^ble true Church, as it is
noted in our Homilies: the Church of England wants this mark at the least. And
if the Sacraments be not duty administered, as being mixed and corrupted with a
service of man's devising, and ministered pell mell (as in the Lords Super) to
ignorant and profane persons: then for ought I see, it wants a second mark of
a visible true Church. And if (as lately, and still in many places) the word of
God in the preaching of it be generally corrupted, as when the full, and free
liberty of it in sundry points of Evangelicall truth, is restrained and
prohibited by orders and edicts, not yet called in, and damned; by this
reckoning it should want the third mark, and so much the more, in case the
calling of the Ministry it self should prove a piece of Popery too. But this
by the way only it leads us the way to the next point, which is the Government
of the Church of England.

Fourthly then, for the Government of the Church of England, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, D^anes, Commissaries, Officials, and the rest of that
fraternity: if this be not Popery, yea and a top-branch of it, I know not what
is? sure we are, not any one of all this rabble is found to be in the
Scripture; and therefore of divine Institution this Government is not: And
consequently, Christian it is not. It must needs then be of Antichrists Order,
and Papal merely. So as if Romes Hierarchy be the top-branch of Popery in
that Church: how can it be denied, that the Hierarchy here in England is the
top-branch of Popery in this Church? For if we look upon this Hierarchy from
Canterbury to ^arlile, and go through all their Courts, their Officers, their
Offices, and Administrations therein, we shall therein behold the perfect
image of the Papal Beast, from horn to hoof. And if any will object here
that the subordinate Ministers bear a part in this Government: (alas!) that is
but a mere mockery. For these are but the Prelates Curates, and a company of
Priests little differing from Romes Order of Priestho^d in the estimate of our
Prelates, saving that they are not shaven, and have been of late prevented of
being Sacrificers. But a part in the Hierarchicall Government they have none,
unless a dumb Priest commonly, or some Doctor now and then be the mouth to
thunder out Excommunication in their Courts, which the poor Curate at the
Commissaries beck must publish in the Congregation. And to these Curates
consideration I refer it, whether they be able truly out of good premises to
conclude themselves to be the Ministers of Christ lawfully called, whom all of
them do immediately derive their Ministry from the Antichristian Hierarchy, or
Papal Prelacie, as the sole foundation thereof. But this suffice briefly to
prove the government of the Church of England by Archbishops and Bishops, etc.
(False and usurped Titles) to be a top-branch of Popery. Object.
If here it be objected, that the Government of Archbishops and Diocesan
Bishops was before Popery came up, or Antichrist was mounted on his throne: I
answer, first, that the Government of Archbishops and Diocesan Bishops was
anciently much different from the Papal Hierarchicall Government afterward,
whose Courts and sole Prelaticall Jurisdictions were not known in the Primitive
Ages long after the Apostles. Secondly, the Government of Archbishops and
Diocesan Bishops, at the very best, and when they first sprung up, was even
from the wel-head corrupted, as being an huma^ device, and the first spring of
the Mystery of iniquity which the further it run, the more corrupt it grew,
till it had its ^ull confluence in muddy Tiber, the Sea of Rome, by whose
innundation Antichrist, having boysed up his maine sails, could easily
compass in the whole (...) World. Thirdly, the Hierarchicall Government in
England, as a maine arm of that sea; so (...) has altered nothing of its
former property, when it was a limb of the Papacy* Saving that before the
Reformation they held immediately from the Pope, and now especially of later
days, they hold by the same false pretended title which the Pope himself
holds by, namely from Christ, and by divine Authority. Witness Dr. Hals
sweatty discourses. And Dr. ^oclington shows us a brief Pedigree of the
present titular Archbishop of Canterbury, saying, * Mis^rable men were we, if
he that now sits Arch Bishop of Canterbury, could not derive his succession
from Saint Augustine, St. Augustine from St. Gregory, St. Gregory from St.
Peter. So he* Only, here he fails, and so becomes miserable, that though he
can prove Canterburies succession from Rome, yet never Rome's from Peter. And
so a several misery follows upon it, that our Hierarchicall Government being a
limb of the Papal, and so a top-branch of Popery, it is now universally of all
good Christians in England protested against, as worthy to be cut off and cast
out, as a fruitless withering branch, and to be plucked up by the roots as a
tree twice dead, and as a plant not of Gods planting.

Ob. But if it be thus, that for the reasons aforesaid the whole Government of
the Church of England ought to be irradicated, together with the Liturgy,
Discipline, and Ceremonies, in stead thereof.

I answer briefly: First, understanding the Church of England to be none
other, then a national Church it will be very difficult, if not rather
impossible to constitute it so, as is agreeable in all points to a true and
visible Congregation of Christ. For a particular Church, or congregation
rightly collected and constituted, consists of none, but such as are visible
living members of Christ the head, and visible Saints under him, the one and
only King of Saints: but so is it not with a National Church: all the members
thereof are not visible Saints, or visible living members, when the greatest
part of a Nation commonly is found to consist of persons either ignorant or
profane. Isa. ^^. 22
For as the Scripture says, Though the Children of Israel be as the sand of
the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved. And yet that was a National Church
without parallel: so as in the Reformation of such a national Church as this,
which has been so universally overspread with profaneness, and darkness, so
long beslaved under the yoke of Prelaticall tyranny, under Egyptian
Taskmasters, under manifold Romish Superstitions, formal service, wilworship,
universal false and loose Discipline, innumerable either false, or
unprofitable, or idle Teachers, Non-residents, Isa. 26. 10.
dumb dogs, so as whole Counties for want of good Ministers, (who have been
every where cast out) and whole Countries, yea the whole Land in comparison are
overgrowne with Papists, or Atheists, or those that know not what true Religion
means: where shall we begin to reform? Alas! in comparison of the true
Religion indeed (which stands not in abare profession, but in power not in a
bare name of Christianity, but in the nature of it; not in the mixture of men's
inventions, but in the purity of Christ's own Ordinances) the Religion in
England is very far degenerate, and but a while ago was almost wholly
slidden back into the very puddle of Popery: yet not all, but as it was said of
the Church of Sardis, Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead; yet
in it were a * few names, which had not defiled their garments: Even so in
England, there are a few, yea I trust many thousands of Saints, though (in
comparison of the whole Land) but a few names, a remnant; whose hearts are
perfect before God. Where then shall the Reformation begin now in England?
surely in the new forming of a Church, such as God requires in his word,
Christ's voice must first be heard, to call forth his sheep, and to gather them
into their flocks, and folds. For (...) the Church is properly a congregation
of believers, called out from the rest of the world. For so says the Lord 2
Cor. ^* 17.
Come out from among them and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing,
and I will receive you. A strange speech, And be ye separate? Surely Gods
people must be seperatists from the world, and from false Churches, to become
a pure and holy people unto the Lord. And he says to the Prophet Jeremy,
(...). 15,
If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth; let
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. And surely in a corrupt
Church (as this is, and a long time has been, by reason of the great
Aposta^^^, and especially the wickedness of the Prelates) we (...) do as the
Apostles did when they came to plant (...) in a Country where the Gospel had
not been (...). * First they taught the people, and (...) heard and believed,
were form^d (...) be God) many people already fitted to make up holy assemblies
or Churches. Well then, let it be the first degree of Reformation to begin and
call forth all those into several Congregations, who are fitted, and who
desire to draw near unto Christ in a holy Communion with him in the purity of
his Ordinances* And thus let Gods word run, and have a free passage, in calling
in such as God shall draw unto him, in what place soever they shall be found.
Nor can we think at the first especially, that every assembly of people
collected in their several Parishes, is fit to make up a Congregation, and so
qualified, as Christ requires For how many Parishes in England will be found,
where scarce one is able to give a reason of the hope that is in him?

Ob. But shall not good Preachers be set up in every Parish, that the People
may be instructed, and so fitted to be members of a Congregation, such as before
is mentioned.

Ans. No doubt of that, so so far as is possible to provide Preachers.

Ob. But what shall the People do in the mean time, who are ignorant, and
profane, though not notoriously wicked? For have they not received Baptism?
Are they not Christians? shall they not then be admitted into the Communion of
the other Sacrament?

Ans. For this, every Minister ought to be very diligent and careful to see,
that ordinary profane and ignorant persons be not admitted to the Sacrament
(...) 21
The lame or the blind is not to be offered up in Sacrifice.

Ob. But admit that such as are ordinary profane persons, and have little or no
knowledge of God, be admitted to the Sacrament pell mell: may not godly
persons communicate with them, and therein not sin?

Ans. For that, let such as are godly look to it. For if Gods Ordinances be
profaned (as they are by profane and ignorant persons coming to the Lords
Table, then others also that communicate with them are guilty of the same
profanation with them. (...)
A little leven leveneth the whole lump. The Apostle applies it to a mixed
Communion. Let us keep the feast (says he) to wit, in participating of Christ
our Passover in the Sacrament, not with the old leven, etc. And thereupon he
tells them, I writ unto you in an Epistle not to company with fornicators, etc.
And (...)
This ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, has
any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ. Be not therefore partakers with them.

Ob. But in Congregations be so mixed, as they cannot, or are not secured,
shall godly men for that cause deprive themselves of the Ordinance?

Answ. First, there is no necessity, that men in using the Ordinance should sin
by communicating with others in the profanation of holy things. Secondly, It is
not Gods Ordinance, that his holy things should be profaned. (...)
Cast not your pearls before Swine, nor your holy things to dogs. (...)
Who required these things at your hands, to tread in my Courts? And yet their
Oblations, their Sabbaths, their solemn assemblies, were Gods Ord. But
bebecause they were polluted and profaned by those that joined in them,
therefore the Lord abhors them. (...)
Wash you, make you clean, etc.

Ob. But what is this to godly persons communicating with profane?

Ans. To communicate with known evil doers (which even in their presuming to
communicate in the Ordinances, do evil in their doing of evil, is to partake of
their evil deeds. (...).
Be not mingled with such (says) the Apostle) that they may be ashamed. And v.
6. We command you Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother, that walks disorderly, etc.

Ob. But if it be so, where can a godly man communicate without sin? For where
are not the Congregations mixed?

Ans. It is true, that if there be none other Congregations allowed, but such
as are in Parishes, this confession cannot be avoided. Therefore of necessity
there must be Liberty granted of setting up Churches, or Congregations, where
Christ's Ordinances are administered in their purity, and so where none are
admitted members of the Congregation, but such as are approved of by the whole
Assembly for their profession and conversation, as against which there is no
just exception.

Ob. But would you have other Congregations, then such as are limited to every
Parish? How will this stand with a National Church, such as is the Church of
England? This would make a division, and separation.

Ans. We must look in the first place, what Christ commands, and what manner
of Congregations he requires, and how qualified. If a State will set up a
National Church, wherein many things out of reason of State are tolerated, and
prescribed for order sake (as they call it) and if there be such a necessity,
necessity has no Law: but let not this exclude and bar out the free use of
such Congregations, as whereof the spiritual Commonwealth of Israel
consists, over which Christ as King immediately reigns by his Spirit and
Word in the beauty and purity of his ordinances. Let not the Consciences of
Gods people be bound, where Christ has purchased liberty. And where Christ's
Congregations are set up, however they are separate from the world in the
corruptions thereof, yet they are not separate from the Civil State, but are
peaceable members thereof, subject and obedient to all the good and just Laws
thereof. Yea where such Congregations are erected and allowed or by a Civil
State, they are both a strength and beauty, (...)
and procure many blessings unto it. They are unto a Civil State, as that
fulminatrix legio, that thundering Legion in the Emperor Antoninus his Army (as
he called it) which consisting wholly of Christians, among his other Heathen
Legions, did by their Prayers procure refreshing showers to the whole Army,
when it was sore distressed with drowt, and terrible storms on the other side,
to the disconfeiture of the enemy. And therefore the Apostle exhorts his
Christians (...)
to pray for Kings and such as are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And ^er. 29, 7. Pray unto the
Lord for the City of your captivity: for in the peace thereof shall ye have
peace; implying, if it is the duty of Civil Princes and states, heathen or
Christian, to protect, or tolerate the true Christian Religion in their
Kingdoms as well; as of the true Christians, and Professors to pray for them.
For Christ's Kingdom being spiritual, is so far from being any prejudice to
Civil states, that it is the very glory and safety of them. And therefore the
Emperor Domilian (under whom was moved the second persecution, and by whom the
Apostle John was banished into Pathmos) hearing that Christ's Kingdom was
celestial, and not of this World, recalled his Edict for the Persecution (
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. li. 3. c. 15.) so as thereupon it ceased.

Ob. But that there shallbe an order of Church government established in a
national Church, and withal a liberty left ^or other Church assemblies,
exempted from this government, this may be a means to soment factious and
envious emulations in a State, to the disturbing of the peace thereof.

Ans. For this, first, there be good Laws for civil government. Seriously,
that any one among the exempted Congregations do incorrigably misbehave
themselves, the Law can take order with them. Thirdly, let no man blame them,
before they cry them. Fourthly, it has been an old stratageme of Satan still
to lay all the blame of what ever disaster, upon the Christians, as Nero did.
Fifthly, it cannot be expected, but where ever the Gospel comes in its power
and purity, it will kindle coals, and stir up debate, as Christ says, it
sets the Father against the Son, and the Son against the Father, (...) 10
21.
etc. But this is accidentally, in respect of the malegnant objects it meets
withal, though natural too, in respect of the good subjects, in whom it is,
and by whom it is sincerely professed, for it fills them with zeal and plain
dealing in reproving of sin, which the world cannot away withal. Thus it
has done in all ages. And God in the (...)
beginning after the fall, upon the revealing of Christ, put an unreconcileable
enmity, and deadly forehead between the seed of the Serpent, and of the woman,
between the Elect and Reprobate to the worlds end. And if for this every
civil state should shut out the true Religion, where would there be left any
true Church upon the earth?

Obj. But the Church Way of independency is too strict, and cannot be content
with a mediocrity, but aspires to such a perfection of purity, as men are not
capable of; and therefore such will of necessity be envied and maligned, which
will be cause of divisions.

Ans. As i fall true Christians were not exhorted evry where, and so bound, to
strive for perfection, so much as is possible, As we read Matthew. 5. 20. 48.
Phil. 3. 12. Col. 1. 28. and 4. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 17. and every where in the
Scripture is perfect holiness required, as Ephesians. 4. 12. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us
(says the Apostle) cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. See also Heb. 5. 12. and 6.
1. etc. And for envy, were there but once set up amongst us some such
Congregations, as come nearest to the rule of Gods Word, both in
Church-constitutions, and in Graces suitable, they would draw no less love and
liking to them, when we should see in them the beauty and glory of Christ more
shining forth in them, then ever this Land has yet seen. And however the
world accounts strictness, yet none are admitted members thereof, but such as
are both willing and desirous, and do freely enter into Covenant to observe
all the condiditions and orders thereof according to Gods Word: and who so are
over, in, and of this Congregation, they find in it nothing that is grievous,
but Christ's sweetness Mat. 11. 29, 30.
whose yoke is easy, and his burden light.

Obj. But if such Congregations were set up, which are not confined to any one
Parish, but collected out of many places, or out of many Parishes, it would
perhaps stir up the Patochiall Ministers, or some at least, to envy and
malignity, when they should see the best Christians in all their Parish to be
under another Ministry, and members of another Congregation, and by this means
also should their wages be diminished.

Ans. First, if Christians, living in a Parish, shall find just cause of
separating themselves from such a Congregation, as wherein great Scandalls and
offenses are constantly given, so as they cannot with a good conscience, and
without dishonor to God and his Ordinances communicate with such an assembly,
whereof the greatest part consists of profane and ignorant persons (as
aforesaid) but are forced to join themselves with such Congregations, where no
such offenses be: shall any Ministers be so unchristian, as to envy this? Or if
they do, let them reform their own Congregations, and take away all such
scandalls, and separate the precious from the vile, and administer the
Ordinances of Christ purely and holily, and set up Christ's government in their
Congregations, that so they may retain those honest souls, which otherwise
are forced to forsake the pudled streams, to enjoy the sweet, fresh, and pure
fountain of living waters. Nor will the Ministers and Pastors of such
Independent Congregations look after any such wages, as the Parochial
Ministers challenge to themselves, as Tithes, or the like. No surely, they are,
and will be content that such competent maintenance as the members of their
several Congregations respectively, shall freely, without any compulsion (as
is used in Tithes) allow unto them. Now let any that profess to be the
Ministers of Christ, malign other, either Ministers or people, who are
desirous to enjoy Christ's Ordinances, in as much purity as may be, and with as
much liberty of conscience, as Christ has privileged them withal.

Obj. But the Parliament now being about a Reformation, as the removing of all
Antichristianisme and Popery, as the Hierarchicall Government, and Ceremonies
purged, the Liturgy, and Discipline, what government shall be set up in this
National Church?

Ans. The Lord strengthen and direct the Parliament in so great and glorious a
Work; and blessed be God who has raised up such instrumens for such a work,
and who has put in their hearts to be so zealous and unanimous for the
perfecting of it so far as is possible, and may stand with the nature of a
National Church. But as for the manner of Government of a National Church,
because it has no pattern in the Scripture now under the Gospel, who can
herein perscribe or advise any thing. But first of all, if good Preachers be
set up in every Parish, the noughty and scandalous being removed, and then for
the better and speedier supply hereof, the Universities and Grammar Schools be
purged, and better Governors and Ministers set up: so shall the people be
taught, that they perish not for want of knowledge. As for the manner of
Government of Parishes, whether by a Presbytry, or otherwise, that (as being,
for its external form and frame, of a politic Nation) I leave to the
prudence of those, in whose hands it is put: let it be what it will, so as
still a due respect be had to those Congregations, and Churches, which desire
an exemption and liberty of enjoying Christ's ordinances in such a purity, as a
national Church, is not possibly capable of. And what ever Liturgy, or
Ceremonies, or Discipline, are left to accompany this Natural
Church Government, it is indifferent with us, so we may enjoy our Christian
liberty in the true use of such ordinances, and of such independent
Church Government, as Christ the only Lawgiver of his Church, and Lord of the
conscience, has left unto us in his word.

Obj. But independent Churches, being absolute in themselves, and exempted from
a superior Jurisdiction of others, and yet not exempt from posibility of
erring: what Law is left to reduce them from their error? or that they persist
in their obstinacy, what power shall censure, or correct them.

Ans. First, they have Christ's Law to regulate them. Secondly, they have the
Law of Christ, which is by love to serve one another. They have the law of
association and confederation with other Churches to consult, advise, and
confer with, in matters of doubt or question. And if after all other remedies
any be obstinate in his, or their error, they are liable to excommunication,
either in the same Congregation, if it be a particular person, and the error
great, or from other Churches, if the whole Congregation have offended, and do
stiffely maintain a dangerous error, which yet is rarely seen in a well
constituted Congregation, consisting of meet members. And if at any time such a
thing should fall out, which cannot grow but from some root of apostasy,
particular or general: if the offense do reflect also upon the Laws of the
civil state, which are made against known Heresies, or blasphemy, or
Idolrtry, and the like, the offenders are obnoxious to the civil power. So
little fear there is, that any independent Congregation, or any member
thereof, should be exempt from condign censure, where just cause is given
either Ecclesiastical or civil.

FINIS.

