THE HVMBLE PETITIONS OF Mr. Burton, and Dr. Bastwicke.

PRESENTED TO THE HONORABLE The KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and Burgesses, of the
Commons house of PARLIAMENT.

Printed in the year. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Henry Burton, late exile, and close Prisoner in Castle
Cornet, in the I Will of Garnesey. In all humbleness shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner, on the 5 of November. 1636, did preach two Sermons
in his own Parish Church, in St. Matthew Friday-street, London, for the which
he was in December then next following, summoned to appear before D. Ducke,
one of the Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, at Cheswicke, in the
County of Middlesex: where (with the Register of the High Commission Court) the
said D. Ducke tendered to the Petitioner, the Oath Ex Officio, to answer to
certain Articles there presented: which Oath the Petitioner refusing to take,
did then and there appeal from the said Court, unto the Kings Majesty: which
appeal the said D. Ducke did admit, and the said Register by D. Ducks
direction, did then, and there enter in writing.

Notwithstanding which said appeal, a special High Commission Court was
shortly after called at London, consisting of four or five Doctors, where the
said Commissioners proceeded illegally, to suspend the Petitioner in his
absence, by means whereof, as of the threatenings of the said Commissioners,
he was enforced to keep his house, until a Sergeant at Arms, with diverse
Pursevants and other armed Officers, assiisted by Alderman Abel, then Sheriff
of London beset the Petitioners House, at 11 of the Clock at night, and
violently broke open his doors with Iron crows, and the like, and surprised
him in his house, he making no resistance at all: where having first searched
his study, and taking away such Books as they pleased, they carried your
Petitioner to prison, whence, the next day being the second of Feb. by a
pretended Order from the Lords of the Counsel, he was conveyed to the Fleet,
and there kept close prisoner.

During which imprisonment, an information was exhibited against the
Petitioner, and others in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber, whereby he was
charged ( inter alia) with publishing of a certain Book, containing an
Apology for an Appeal, with his said two Sermons, Entitled, For God and the
King, wherein he taught Subjects to yield all manner of due obedience to their
lawful King, and reproved all lawless Innovations in Religion, etc. Which
Information, the Petitioner upon his Oath under the hand of M. Holt, being then
of his counsel, assigned by special order from the said Court, did put in his
answer, wherein he alleged such things only, as his said Counsel conceived
to be material, and pertinent for his just defense in publishing the said
book, but denied all other matters in the said Information contained, which
said Answer, being admitted and received in Court, the petitioner (being then a
close prisoner) not only attended the exhibiting of Interrogatories, according
to the custom of that Court, but withal, after some universal delay, did
write unto the Kings Attorney to hasten them: but before the examiner came,
the petitioner heard that his said Answer was referred to S. Ioh Bramston,
Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench: Sir John Finch, then chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and was by them wholly expunged as impertinent and
Scandalous (save only the not-guilty) And the petitioner understanding the
answer he was to make to the Interrogatories was to be reckned as a part of his
answer, admitted in court, but afterward expunged as impertinent and scandalous
(as aforesaid): so as if he should then have answered the Interogatories, he
should thereby have assented to the said act of the said Judges, and so to the
condemnation of his cause before the hearing, whereby he should have contracted
his former Oath, that his said Answer was a true Answer, and so should justly
have brought himself under the guilt of wilful perjury, and his cause under
just censure. For that very reason he held himself not bound, (as he
conceived) to answer the Interrogatories, for that his said answer was so
expunged, and the ( Not-Guilty) as the foot so tied to the head without the
maine body, (and that in the Judges own words) as the Petitioner could not in
any sort take or acknowledge it now for other then the Judges own answer, as
may appear upon Record in the same Court.

Nevertheless, the Court taking the same information Pro-confesso, and
refusing to admit a copy of the Petitioners own true answer, as also of his
reasons of not answering the Interrogatories, both which at his Censure, he
tendered to the Court, desiring they might be then and there publicly read the
14. of June, 13. Caroli Regis, proceeded to censure, whereby your Petitioner was
censured in a Fine of 5000. li. to his Majesty, To be deprived of his
ecclesiastical benefice, degraded from his Ministerial function and degrees in
the University, and ordered to be set on the Pillory, where both his ears were
to be cut off, confined to perpetual close imprisonment in Lancaster Castle,
debarred the access of his wife or any other, to come to him, but only his
Keeper, and denied the use of pen, ink, and paper. All which (except the
Fine) was executed accordingly. And after his close imprisonment for twelve
weeks in the common Jail in the said Castle, he was (by what extrajudicial
order he knows not) transported by the conduct of one Brian Burton appointed by
the High Sheriff of Lancaster, (who used your Petitioner very basely and
deceitfully, (in that his transportation) which was in the Winter season
through dangerous seas; to the apparent hazard both of his health and life) to
the said Castle of Garnsey, where he has remained a close prisoner and exile
almost three whole years, his wife utterly prohibited upon pain of
imprisonement to set her foot upon any part of the Island, where she might but
enquire how her husband did, contrary to the Laws of God, and the liberties of
this Kingdom.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take the Petitioners sad
cause into consideration, and for the better manifestation of his grievance in
this cause, to assign him for Counsel Master Sergeant Atkins, Master Tomlins,
and Master Gurdon, to assist him in his cause, and to command that he may take
out such copies Gratis out of the said several Courts, as do or may concern
his said cause.

And your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall daily pray for your prosperities.
HENRY BURTON.

TO THE HONORABLE The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House
of Parliament.
The humble Petition of John Bastwicke, Doctor in Physic, lately retained
close Prisoner and Exile in the Island of SYLLY. Most humbly shows;
THat your Petitioner having about six years since set out a Book in Latin
called Elenchus Religionis Papisticae, with an Addition thereunto called
Flagellum Pontificis, and Episcoporum Latialium; being thereunto provoked by
one Richard Short, a Papist that maintained the Popes Supremacy, the Mass,
and Papal Religion; In which Book your Petitioner (for preventing all
misinterpretations, of his pious, and good intentions therein) in his Epistle
to the Reader, fully declared himself, that your Petitioner meant nothing
against such Bishops as acknowledged their Authority from Kings and Emperors,
yet because your Petitioner (the better ever to show the Papal usurpation of
other Princes) therein, only maintained by way of Argument (as other Orthodox
writers of that Subject usually have done) a parity of the said Bishop of Rome,
or all other Bishops or Presbyters, by the word of God, denying his and their
Supremacy over other Ministers to be by the Divine institution.

Thereupon a Pursevant by Authority from the High Commission Court came into
your Petitioners house at Colchester in Essex, in his absence; and the said
Pursevant assisted with the then Bayliffes and Constables of Colchester
aforesaid, ransacked his said house, together with his Chests and Trunks, and
with great violence broke open your Petitioners Study, which was in his
Apothecaries house, and took and carried away diverse of your Petitioners
Books, Writings, Letters, and what else the Pursevant pleased, without making
of restitution of them to your Petitioner.

And then your Petitioner was prosecuted in the said high Commission Court,
principally for his said Book; where after a long and charitable prosecution,
he was the 12. of Feb. 1634, fined 1000.li. to the King, excommunicated,
debarred to practice Physic, the chiefest means of his liveli-hood, his said
Book ordered to be burnt; That he should pay cost of suit, and be imprisoned
till he should make a recantation: the which heavy censure was only for the
said Book, wherein your Petitioner maintained the Prerogative of a King against
the Papacy. Whereas one Thomas Chawney of Essex, lately wrote a Book in
maintenance of the Papal Religion, and in defense of the Church of Rome, and
averres it to be a true Church, the which Book is dedicated to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and was and is patronized and defended by the said Archbishop,
and the said Chawney never troubled for it. After which censure declared as
aforesaid; all the Bishops that were then present denied openly that they held
their jurisdiction from his Majesty, and affirmed that they had it from God
only; and the Archbishop of Canterbury amongst many other erroneous sayings
uttered by him, maintained the said Chawneys Book, and maintained that the
Church of Rome was a true Church, and that it erred not in fundamentals: and
he, and other the said Bishops, there defamed the holy Scriptures, and abused
reverend Mr. Calvin. In regard whereof, and for the vindicating of your
Petitioners innocence in the matters for which he was most unjustly censured,
as aforesaid, your Petitioner published in print another Book in Latin
Entitled, Apologeticus ad Praesules Anglicanos, expressing the truth of his
proceedings, and speeches of his said censure. For which last mentioned Book,
and his Book called the Let any (not then in print) an information was
exhibited against him and others in the Star Chamber, to which your Petitioners
answer being drawn and engrossed, was only subscribed by himself, because he
could get no counsel to set their hands to it: your Petitioner tendered the
said Answer first at the Star Chamber Office, and after in open Court at the
Star Chamber Bar, but it would not be accepted for want of Counselors hands to
it, contrary to former Presidents. But the Court of Star Chamber took the said
information Pro confesso, and censured your Petitioner 5000.li. fine to the
King, to stand in the Pillory, and to loose both his ears, and to be close
prisoner in Lancaster Castle in Cornwall: all which has been executed upon
him with great extremity, to the peril of his life. After all which
extremity, your Petitioner (by what order he knows it not, it being no part
of his Censure in Star Chamber) was transported from the said Castle, to the
Island of SYLLY, a place so barren, that it affords not ordinary necessaries,
where he has been enclose duration for three years or more, and not suffered
to have any of his friends come at him, (his very Wife being prohibited by the
Lords of the Counsels order) under pain of imprisonment, not to set her foot
upon any part of the said Island to enquire of his welfare. So that your,
Petitioner has been exiled from his wife and diverse small children 3. years
and more, besides the great straits and miseries which he has sustained
during the said time. All which is contrary to the law of God and man, and the
Liberties of a free Subject, and to the utter undoing of your Petitioner, his
Wife and children.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to take these pressing
grievances of your Petitioner into your considerations, and to afford him such
relief the rein, as in your grave wisdoms shall seem consonant to Justice
and equity, and to assign him for Counsel, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Ludbore, Mr.
Tomlins, Mr. Gurdon, and Mr. Randall, to assist him in this his complaint, and
to order that your Petitioner may take out Gratis such Copies of the said
Censures, Warrants and Orders, and other the proceedings in the said several
Courts as shall or may any way concern this his sad, yet most just complaint,
with warrant from this Honorable house, to bring in his witness.

And your Petitioner as in duty bound, shall ever pray for your prosperities;
JOHN BASTWICKE.


