A SOVERAIN REMEDY For all Kinds of GRIEF.

Opened and Applied in a SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOHN LANGHAM THE Eldest
Son of Sr. James Langham Knight) a Child of five years and an half old, who
dyed at Cottesbrook in Northamptonshire, July 29. 1657.

WITH A Narrative of sundry Remarkable Passages concerning Him, before, and in
the time of his sickness.

THE SECOND EDITION.

By THOMAS BURROUGHES, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Baker at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1662.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Langham Baronet, and to his eldest Son Sir
James Langham Knight, the one, my much honored Patron, both, my worthy and
much valued Friends.
Right Worshipful,
THese ensuing Meditations, which were first Preached, at your desires, upon
occasion of your sad parting with that sweet and hopeful Little one, in whose
life so much of your Comfort and life were Gen 44. 30.
bound up, I make bold, now again, to offer to you, from the Press. Not out of
any ambition that I have to be in Print: For I know there are so many excellent
Sermons, and other Treatises, already extant, in English, upon almost every
Subject in Divinity, that (with many Readers) the great choice they have, does
even hinder choice, and makes them uncertain what to read. Besides, I am a
little acquainted with the Genius of this Age, which is hardly taken with any
thing but what is new, or at the least, trimmed up after the new Mode and Dress;
an humor, which as I have not learned, so neither do I much care to learn the
Art of pleasing. All that I have aimed at in this small Piece (how far I have
attained it, I am no competent Judge) is to clear up, and handle known and
practical truths, in a plain and convincing way, so as to work upon the
Conscience, with which we Ministers are chiefly to deal: to show what Reason
there is, why we should take all well that God does: and how the Soul may be
framed to Silence and Submission under Gods correcting hand, in his sharpest
Dispensations. You will (I doubt not) accept of what I here do offer you, as in
other respects, so because you shall here find mention of that Dear One of
yours, who, when alive, was accounted by you as your Crown; Prove. 17. 6.
and had so much room in all your hearts; and who, though he be gone hence out
of sight, (to be seen no more by you in this World) will not (I believe) in
have, be out of your minds. I know, you meet, every day, with something or
other that still represents him to your thoughts; and your sores being often
rubbed, by those Remembrances, are apt to bleed a fresh. But here (I hope) you
shall find not only what may occasion your ruminating upon your loss, but that
also which (by the blessing of God) may conduce to quiet and compose your
Spirits, to assuage your grief, and by degrees to raise you above it, if not to
make you forget your sorrow altogether. The truth is, the Considerations here
suggested are of unspeakable use to support the Soul, not only under such a
cross as this of yours (which yet I confess is heavy) but under all griefs and
troubles whatsoever. In which respect, these Cordials, which were (in the first
place) prepared for you, may serve for others of Gods Sons and Daughters of
affliction, to revive and cheer them also in their sufferings.

Of my Address, at this time, to you (if any desire a further Reason) this is
the account. There being some necessity of printing this Sermon, I was very
willing to take the opportunity of presenting you with it, as a Testimonial
(little things, you know, do often signify great matters) of my very great
obligations to you. The truth is, this piece (I would it were more worthy for
your sakes) is yours upon a double account; both because it was preached at
your desires, and with reference principally, to comfort you under the sad
affliction beforementioned: and because you have made the Author himself yours
by your manifold favors to him. To the Right Worshipful Sir John; my honored
Patron, I owe my presentation to this place, which (though I had also a
concurrent, and unanimous call from the people, without any contradiction) he
freely conferred upon me, being moved to it by that good opinion of me, which
he was pleased to entertain, without any suit of mine, or solicitation of any
other in my behalf. Here I do (I bless God for it) by his means enjoy a
comfortable subsistence, and eat not the bread, either of direct or indirect
Simony: a mercy, Epist. Ded. before the Book of his reverend Father, called The
Doctrine of Fasting, etc.
which (Reverend Mr. Samuil Hildersam tells me) many of our Cloth do not (the
more is the pity) through the corruption of the times enjoy. Since that, I, and
mine have, from you and yours, upon all occasions, received very many favors,
and real kindnesses; among which, I account that respect you have always
showed, and the countenance you have given to my Ministry, not the least. So
that I have had cause, and still have to bless God for you, who has (by you)
freed me from much opposition, others of my Brethren have (in the late times)
met with, and vouchsafed me much encouragement in my work, they have wanted.
This I (here) willingly do, and upon all occasions shall make a thankful
acknowledgement of, and having no better way to express my gratitude, shall do
it by my prayers for you, and serviceableness (as I am able) to your souls.

The God of Heaven requite all your love, and multiply his mercies upon you and
yours, his distinguishing mercies specially; make up your late sad loss by
giving to you, and continuing with you other Sons (as hopeful) in the room of
that dear one, whom he has taken to himself: however vouchsafe you a name
better than that of Sons and Daughters, teach you to live by Faith, give you
more and more to know what belongs to Esa 56. 5. 1 John 1. 3.
Communion with the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ (a favor, in comparison
of which no outward mercy is worth the mentioning) and take delight to use you,
and yours after you, as blessed Instruments of his Honor. This is the unfeigned
prayer of

Your Worships very much obliged servant in the Lord, THO. BUROUGHS.
Cotteslrook, April 10. 1662.
Psalm 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
AS touching the Author, and Penman of this Psalm, there is no question. But
if I were asked, at what time, and upon what particular occasion, it was
written, I could not so easily give an answer. Nor is it much material to our
purpose. This is enough, and may certainly be gathered from the centext, that
the Psalm relates to some very sore, and heart-piercing affliction under which
the Prophet groaned. It may be it was the rebellion of that ungracious Son of
his, Absalom: some passages in the Psalm seem to look that way. Happily it might
be some other cross: for he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs of
all kinds, like as Esa. 53. 13.
the Lord Jesus, of whom he was an eminent Type. Whatever it was ailed him,
it is sure, it was such an affliction, as he thought would have killed him, such
an one, that if God should not speedily put an end to his misery, he made no
other account, but that his misery would quickly make an end of him. This may
be collected from ver. 4. and 13. It was such an one, that the grief and sorrow
it had caused, did eat, and consume him like a moth, ver. 13. There was such a
tempest of passion raised in his soul, by reason of his present affliction,
that his faith and patience were put to it to the uttermost, and all the grace
he had was but little enough to keep him from dashing, and being split upon the
rocks. In this sad case, what it was relieved, and eased his soul, what it was
quieted, and stilled the tempest, is more worth our inquiry; and herein, the
Holy Ghost was pleased not to leave us at a loss, but has ordered that it
should be recorded, for the good of all the sons and daughters of affliction,
to the worlds end, that they may learn what they have to do when they are Esa.
54. 11.
afflicted and tossed with tempests, when their hearts are upon any sad
occasion, Psalm. 42. 5.
cast down and disquieted within them. And to that end God has commanded this
holy man, in the words of my Text, to tell you;

1. What a strange cure was wrought upon him.

2. What the remedy was he used for that purpose. The first in these words; I
was dumb, I opened not my mouth: the Augustinus legit, [quia tu fecisti me] ac
proinde erravit in hujus loci iaterpretation^.
second in these; because thou did it. The tempest that was in his soul
cease, and there is a calm; and it was his faith presenting God unto his
soul, from whose hand the affliction came, that made all hush't and quiet.

I shall explain the Text, in the handling of the several Doctrines.

Time will not permit me to stand gathering all the precious fruits (that
otherwise I might) which grow upon this Tree of Paradise; all the Doctrines
which this Text would afford; I shall therefore collect but three.

That nothing in the world is more sure, than that all the hand of God.

That nothing does better become us, when God lays to be dumb, and not to open
our mouths.

That nothing is more effectual to make us dumb under Gods correcting hand,
than this very consideration, that it is Gods hand from which our afflictions
come.

For the first, This is a thing we may resolve upon, when any evil of
affliction betides us, It Is Gods doing. Let the instruments and second causes
be who, and what they will, this is certain, Gods hand is in all.

I am not, at present, any whit concerned to meddle with the point of Gods
providence, in or about the evil of sin, and therefore shall pass it by. Our
business is about the hand that God has in the evils of affliction and misery,
(strictly so called) and those only which light upon the sons and daughters of
men in this life: such as be pains, diseases, losses and crosses in estates,
and children, death of friends, and dear relations, with all others of the like
nature, which are many more than can easily be numbered. I deal not now with the
meritorious cause of men's sufferings in these kinds, which cannot be denied to
be sin. It Is the author from whence they come, and by whom they are inflicted,
that I am to speak of; And we may be bold to say, It Is God. I know Physicians
will tell us, that this, and that is the cause of such and such a disease: and
there are few other disasters and calamities befall men, but happily causes (with
ease) may be assigned of them, and we may say it was long of this thing; and
that, else all had been well. But when all is said, God is the cause of causes,
and there is none of these things happen to any, but there is an hand of Divine
providence, which orders and disposes them; God does all, for;

1. He singleth out the Job 1. 8. Lam. 3. 12.
person that is to suffer. 2. He appoints what the Job 1. 12.
affliction shall be. 3. He sets down the Psa. 31. 15: Esa. 16. 14. Joh 7.
36.
time when. 4. He determines Genesis 15. 13 Rev. 2. 10.
how long. 5. He assigns the Mat. 26. 55.
place where. 6. He prescribes Job 1 12. and 2. 6.
the manner how. 7. He Psa. 78. 50. He weighs a path to his anger (...)
weighs the measure, how much. 8. He orders Joh. 19. 11
all second causes and means. 9. He Esa. 9. 13.
lays the affliction on. 10. He governs and guides every Mat. 10. 29.
contingency.
None of these things come to pass at an adventure, or by chance; nor are
second causes so left to themselves, but that God does supervise, and act, and
order all in all. To instance in the case of sickness; it is Gods doing that
this disease, finds out this person, just at this time, in this very place,
holds him so long, handles him thus and thus, that he is now better, and now
worse, and that at last, he either recovers, or dies. There is nothing of
fortune or meet chance in any of these things. And it is so in all other
afflictions. Afflictions in Scripture are compared to Psalm. 91. 5. Lam. 3. 12.
arrows, but they are not like that, 1 King. 22. 24.
which I know not who, shot at, he could not tell whom, and hit him he could
not tell where, and hurt him he knew not how much, or how little, but did all
at a venture. No! these arrows are shot by an Almighty hand, guided to their
mark by an unerring wisdom, according to a will that is righteousness and
holiness it self.

If you demand how this may be proved, I shall evidence it by two sorts of
Testimonies.

1. The Testimony of the best, and most holy persons 1. The Testimony of the
godly.
that ye read of in Scripture. Let the Sabeans and Chaldeans plunder Job of his
estate, let the Devil himself raise a wind to blow down the house upon his
childrens heads, and slay them all; Job will tell you, Job 1. 21.
It was God from whom he had received so much good, that now sent upon him all
this evil; It was God, who first gave him that estate, that now took it away
again; It was God who had given him those children, that did now bereave him of
them: God has given, God has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Let
Shimei come out, and throw stones at David as he passes along, let him curse
and spit venom at him, according to his pleasure; the holy man looks upward,
and both sees, and owns Gods hand in this, 2 Sum. 16. 11
God has bidden him curse David. Let wicked persons rage and persecute, as if
they thought not only their Psalm. 12. 4.
tongues, but their hands were their own to do what they list, without any Lord
over them; the Prophet (for all that) looks upon them, but as a Psalm. 17. 13.
sword in the hand of God; overruled and ordered by him. And as to the
business of diseases, hear what he says, Whom our blessed Savior commends for
a faith that was greater than any he found in Israel: They come and go, seize
upon a person, and depart from him, just as God gives them Commission to go or
come; Mat. 8. 9.
When he says Go, they go, when he says Come, they come; what he commands,
that they do.

2. But what need we any farther witnesses of this truth? Hear what God himself
says to this point; and that not 2. The Testimony of God himself.
once or twice, but often; not obscurely, and in parables, but plainly and
expressly. I shall quote you but two or three Texts, and your selves, if you
mind them, may meet with many scores of them in your reading. Esa. 45. 7.
I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace; and create evil, I the
Lord do all these things. What can be more clear? Hearken again, Esa. 9. 13.
This people turns not to him that smites them. Who is that? the next words
tell you, Neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Hearken once more, Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? As if he
should say, It is not possible there should. And there is the same reason for
the Country too. There is no evil at all (that is of affliction) either in
City or Country, but ye see God owneth it as his doing; and if he own it as
his doing, we may boldly say it is so. And to speak to the point of diseases;
Hence it is that God Deuteronomy. 28. 21, 22. and 7. 15.
threatens to send sicknesses, and promises to remove them, according as he
shall be pleased or displeased with a people, to show that his hand does all
these things: And the truth is, he that denies him this providence, does in
effect, deny him to be God.

To clear this point a little (for I must not dwell upon it) and to prevent
some objections which our carnal and foolish hearts will be making against it,
take these three Rules.

1. That which is hard for us to do, yea more, that providence? But alas! What
is the World and all that is in it unto God? Esa. 40. 15.
Behold the nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance; bohold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. Ver.
17.
All nations before him are as nothing, and are counted to him less than
nothing. Ver. 12.
He measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meteth heaven with a
span. What toil, or labor, what difficulty then can there be to him, in the
ordering of all these things! Know, (O man!) it is infinitely easier for the
great God to govern the World, and all things in it, (though there be so many
Myriads of creatures) than it is for the wisest among men, to order and govern
the several affairs of a small family, that consists but of three or four
persons.

2. That things fall out otherwise than we think they Victriae causa Deo
placuit, sed victa Catoni. Carncades, said it was the misery of Athens, that
what wise men debated, fools judged of.
Sun to that blind Goddess of their own setting up. But this is to take too
much upon us with a witness: this is no less than damnable presumption, for us
to prescribe God those rules, which if he will not go by, and be tied to, we
will not own and acknowledge his providence in the World any longer. Esa. 55.
8, 9
His thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are our ways his ways. For as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher than our ways, and
his thoughts than our thoughts.

3. Though many things seem to come to pass by mere chance, it does but seem
so, for there is no such thing. There is a secret unseen hand of providence,
that orders every motion and event, even those which are most Exo. 21. 13.
compare Deuteronomy. 19. 5.
casual. That instance, which I hinted before, is very remarkable, among many.
God had, by Micaiah, told Ahab, before he went to Ramoth Gilead, what he must
trust to, 1 King. 22 28.
If thou come again in safety (says the man of God) I am no Prophet: But how
was his death effected? Verse 34.
A certain man drew a bow at a venture, and an invisible hand of providence
guides the arrow to the right man, and directs it to hit the right place just
between the joints of his armor, and there to give him his deaths wound. The
Scripture (I deny not) does sometimes speak of chance. Eccl. 9. 11.
Time and chance happens to all: and Luke 10. 3^
By chance (says our Savior) there came down a certain Priest that way. But
that is according to us, and so far as we are able to discern, while we look
upon second causes: for when we are at a loss (as very often we are) and know not
whence such or such a thing is, we use to say, it happens by chance; and in a
sense we may do so. But all this while, there is no such thing as mere chance.
Mere chance, I call that, when things come to pass, not only in such a way, of
which we are able to give no account, and by such means as we are not aware of,
but in such a way also, that God has nothing, by his providence to do in the
ordering or disposing of them. This to think is blasphemous. For still in the
most casual events, and greatest contingencies, there is an invisible hand of
the infinitely-wise God, that linketh one thing to another, though in such a
way, that we know not, nor that is fit we should know how.

A word only of application, and I pass to the next Jam. 1. 12, 13.
When a man is tempted, he must not say, he is tempted of God: But when a man
is afflicted, he may safely say, yea he ought to say, It Is God afflicts him.
The blind and Heathenish Philistims (indeed) when they smarted under Gods
judgments, fansied it might be 1 Samuel 6. 9.
only some chance had happened unto them, and there was an end: But as for us
we have been taught to know God better than so, and therefore ought to
entertain no such Paganish conceits. It is our duty to see and acknowledge Gods
hand in all the blows that light upon us, and to turn Esa. 9. 13.
to him that strikes us.

We proceed to the second Doctrine, viz.

That, nothing does become us better, when God lays be dumb, and to take heed
we open not our mouths. God (ye see,) has here set before us, the Prophet for
a pattern, that of him we may learn how to carry our selves under our
sufferings.

We shall enquire what kind of dumbness and silence, this of the Psalmist was,
which he is commended for, and which would so well beseem us when we smart
under the Rod of God, and then the Doctrine will be, in a great measure,
evident by its own light.

We shall proceed in our enquiry: 1. Negatively to prevent mistakes: 2.
Positively, and show you what it does import.

First, Negatively (to pass by this, that it is not to be supposed, that it was
any dumbness in the proper and literal sense.)

1. This dumbness does not import any such thing, as 1. What is not meant by
this dumbness.
if the Prophet had been brought to that pass, that he had nothing to say to
God, by way of prayer, and supplication. He was not so dumb, but that he could
pray and cry too; Verse 8.
Deliver me (says he) from all my transgr^ssions, and make me not there proach
of the foolish. And again, Verse 10, 11.
Remove thy stroke away from me. Hear my prayer, O Lora! give ear unto my cry,
hold not thy peace at my tears. And so, Psalm. 22. 1, 2.
at another time, when he was as dumb, and opened his mouth as little as now,
ye shall yet read of his crying in the day time, and in the night season also;
yea, it is expressly said, he r^ared, and was not silent. Nay in this case we
are commanded to pray and cry (on this fashion) and not to spare. Jam. 5. 13.
Is any man afflicted (says the Apostle) let him pray. And O Israel (says the
Prophet) Hos. 4. 1, 2.
return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity: Take
with you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously.

2. Nor was he so dumb, as that he could not frame to the confession and
bewailing of his sins. It Is true the Prophet was once troubled with such a dumb
spirit, that he could not (for a while) be brought ingenuously to acknowledge
what he had done amiss: But this was a silence; that did neither tend to please
God, nor conduce any whit to his own ease and comfort. Psalm. 32. 3.
When he kept silence, (thus) his bones waxed old through his roaring all the
day long. So that he was forced to confess all, and to keep the Devils counsel
no longer, he Verse 5.
confessed his sin to God, and did not hide his iniquity, and then found ease.
Yea, whereas the Holy Ghost directs us, when God afflicts us, Lam. 3. 28, 29
to sit alone, and to keep silence, to put our mouths in the dust, that is, (in
the Psalmists phrase) to be dumb (for all comes to one) he commands us also,
Ver. 40, 41, 42
to search and try our ways, to lift up hearts and hands to heaven and cry; We
have transgressed, we have rebelled.

3. Nor was it a dumbness of stupidity and senslesness. It does not imply any
such thing, as if by degrees he grew to that pass, he cared not for, or made no
matter of his affliction; but set (as the Proverb is) an hard heart, against
his hard hap. No, he did (for all his silence) make his moan to God, and as he
smarted, so he did lament under the sense of his afflicting hand: Hear how
bitterly this dumb man complains in this very Psalm, Ver. 11, 12.
Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed with the blow of thy hand. When
thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume as a moth. Read the Psalm 38. also, and ye shall have him in the same
tune again.

4. Neither was he so dumb, as not to answer Gods voice in the Rod that was
upon him. God has many ways whereby he speaks to man, one of them is by his
Rod: So the Prophet tells you Micah 6: 9.
The Lords voice cries to the City-hear ye the rod, and who has appointedit.
It Is fullenness and stubbornness, it is sign a man is possessed with a Dumb
Devil indeed, that will not return an answer when God speaks to him, so far is
it from being any commendable silence.

5. Much less (lastly) was he dumb and kept silence in any such sort as they
did of whom Amos speaks (according as some expound the place) that in their
misery took up a resolution to mention the name of God no more, in whom they
Gualter in loc. ut and Mercerus
had gloried formerly. Amos 6: 10.
Hold thy peace, for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord; Talk no
more of Religion, and of Gods service. Some make these to be the words of
forlorn and desperate wretches that regarded not God at all, nor would once
make mention of his name, Large Annotat
though at the last gasp, but rather shunned it as ominous. Job 21. 16.
The counsel of such wicked wretches was far from our Prophet: he still
professes his hope in God, and resolves he would not be driven away from God,
for all this that had befallen him, for Verse. 7.
Now Lord (says he) what wait I for? my hope is even in thee.

Secondly, Affirmatively, How then is this dumbness to 2. What is meant by this
dumbness.
be understood? and what does it import? That I shall show you in the next
place. But this I must first premise in the general, that the silence in my
Text is not of the voice and tongue alone, but of the heart and soul also. For
though men hear only those words which come out of our lips, yet with God, even
the most retired thoughts and motions of our souls do go forwards, and he takes
cognizance and knowledge of them. If Psalm. 14. 1.
the fool do but say any thing in his heart, God hears it, and can charge him
with it. The Prophets heart and tongue were both dumb (and so must ours in the
like case) and that in five respects.

1. He was dumb so as neither to complain of, nor quarrel with Gods providence,
nor to entertain any hard thoughts against him; complain to God he did, but
against him he durst not. Mourn under Gods hand he did, and knew he might, but
to murmr he knew was sinful and dangerous, and therefore as to that was dumb.
No doubt he had sinful risings and motions in his heart (who does not feel
them?) but by prayer and meditation he did endeavor to quell and stifle them,
as fast as they bubled up. When the waves of the sea leave rolling, and the
tempest cease, the sea is said to be Mat. 4. 39. (...).
silent and dumb. Now our hearts are by nature like the Esa. 57. 20.
raging sea when it cannot rest (Gods own people find it too much so with them,
through the imperfection of their sanctification) casting up mire and dirt. Ah,
what tempests and storms are often raised in our spirits by that passion, and
pride, and self-love, and impatience, and discontent, which the best are not
perfectly freed from? Now what does the Psalmist do in this case? He says to
his heart (enabled by the grace that was in him) as Christ did unto the sea,
Peace, be dumb, and thereupon a calm followed. Job is commended by the Holy
Ghost for this dumbness, Job 1. 22.
In all this he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. We think we have a great
deal to say against what God does, and we could hold argument, as we imagine,
with God himself, if we might be suffered. But it is meet 2 Pet. 2. 15.
the ignorance of our foolish hearts should be silenced. Romans 9. 20.
Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God? See the carriage of
the Psalmist at another time, in the like case (or rather of our blessed
Savior, of whom that Psalm was a Prophecy) I Psa. 22. 1, 2, 3.
cry in the day time, and thou hear not; and in the night season -- But thou
art holy. He Esa. 53. 7.
was afflicted and oppressed, yet opened not he his mouth. As a sheep before
the shearer is dumb, so opened not he his mouth, though none ever met with that
injurious, base, and unworthy usage he did. -- quid tot durasse per annos
Profuit immunem corrupti moribus aevi? Hoc solum longae pretium virtutis
habebis? Lut*


2. He was dumb: that is, He neither did nor durst quarrel or fall out with the
ways of holiness for all his sufferings. A thing we are naturally prone unto.
2 King. 6. 33.
This evil is from the Lord, (says that wicked King Jehoram) what should I
wait for the Lord any longer? What he was, and did, we all are, and should do,
if we were left unto our selves. Once the Psalmist tells us he was near to have
done so. He began to think he had Psa. 73. 13.
washed his hands in vain, because all the day long he had been plagued, and
chastned every morning, but in the end he calls himself (k) fool and beast for
so doing. Jobs wife was set on by the Devil to persuade her Verse 22.
husband to this, (l) Curse God (says she) and die: will thou Job 2. 9.
still retain thy integrity? But he good man, was dumb, had nothing of that
kind to say, yea, he abhorred the suggestion; Thou speak (says he) like a
foolish woman. He liked Religion and the ways of godliness never a whit the
worse for all the evils that had befallen him.

3. He was dumb, so as not to defend himself, or justify his own ways before
God, as if they were righteous, and he had not deserved what he suffered. Yea,
he Verse 8, 11.
acknowledges his affliction was procured by his sins, and implores Gods mercy
for the pardon of them. Sometimes indeed he stands upon his own defense, and
pleads his innocence and Psa. 7. 3.
righteousness, but that is in respect of men, from whom he had deserved no
such ill measure, as he met with from their hands. But when he has to do with
God, and so far as his afflictions are Gods doing, he has nothing to say for
himself. It is enjoined to servants as a duty, in respect of their earthly
Masters, that they do not Tit. 2. 2. (...). non responsatores. B. z.
answer again, that is, that they be not such as will be always justifying
themselves, and stand it out, and never yield they be in any fault, but maunder
as if they thought they were always chidden and blamed undeservedly. Yea, they
are commanded to 1 Pet. 2. 18.
be subject with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. And if this be the duty of servants to their Masters who are but men,
much more does it become us, when God corrects us, to be dumb and silent, to
take heed of any such answering again.

4. He was dumb, so as to hearken to the voice of the Mic. 6. 9.
Rod. I Psa. 85. 8.
will (says he in another place) hearken what God says. Now a man cannot
listen to another while he will have all the talk and discourse to himself.
Many there be, which abound in their own sense, that will not be persuaded to
hold their peace, and hear others speak. While God is correcting us, he is Psa.
94. 12. Vexatio dat intellectum.
teaching us in his Law, showing us our sins, calling upon us for reformation,
reading us a Lecture of Repentance, when he takes away any creature-comfort
that we promised our selves too much from, he does as it were say, will ye be
always Jer. 2. 19.
forsaking the fountain of living waters? Will ye never leave digging to your
selves broken Cisterns? How often must I break your reeds ere you will learn to
take heed of leaning over much upon them? When we begin to think of taking up
on this side Jordan, and then find a thorn in our nest, what does such a
providence say, but Jer. 50. 6.
You have forgot your resting place, Mic. 2. 10.
Arise, depart, this is not it. Would you be in Canaan, before you be out of
the Wilderness? Now when God is thus disciplining of us, it is meet we should
say to him, Lord Job 6. 24.
teach me, and I will hold my tongue, and cause me to understand wherein I have
erred. Job 34. 32.
That which I see not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do so
no more. But this cannot be till we silence our own carnal reasonings, and make
flesh and blood to hold its tongue.

5. Lastly, the Prophet was dumb: that is, he did acquiesce, and rest satisfied
with Gods dispensation, and that not only as good, but as best. Job speaking
how it was with him in his prosperity, tells us, that Job 29. 21.
unto him men gave ear, and waited and kept silence at his counsel; the meaning
is, by their silence, they gave consent to what he said; they showed, by
holding their peace, their approbation of what he spoke, confessed better counsel
could not be given; and that therefore it was to no purpose to say any more,
seeing his advice and counsel could not be mended. It is much more meet we
should be thus silent before God, who works by an infinite and unerring
wisdom, and therefore Mar. 7. 37.
does all things well. Thus ye read of Hezekiah when sore calamities had been
threatened from God by the Prophet, he says no more, but Esa. 39. 8.
Good is the Word of the Lord, by his silence subscribing to Gods wisdom and
goodness in all his providence.

By what has been said; we may conceive, what this dumbness of the Prophet
was, wherein he is by the Holy Ghost propounded to us, for an example to
imitate, when ever we shall feel Gods hand lie heavy upon us in any affliction.

How fit and meet it is, that we should lay hands upon our mouth, and impose a
Law of silence upon our selves, in the manner specified; what motives there be
to persuade to it, and by what means such a frame of spirit may be attained,
will appear farther in the next Doctrine, to which I hasten.

There is no such way to make us dumb, when God strikes it is Gods hand that is
upon us. Ye see this was it that turned the storm, in the Psalmists soul, into
a calm, and made all the tumultuous risings in his heart to vanish. When he
bethought himself of this seriously, that it was Gods doing, the uproar among
his affections ceased. Just as the appearing of some grave person, or man of
Authority, is enough to scatter an Ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta
est Seditio -- Tum pietate gravem -- Virg.
unruly rout, and to reduce them to some good behavior, though they were all
in a combustion before: such an effect will the presenting of God to our souls,
by faith, work among our discomposed affections. Mat. 14. 27.
It is I (says our Savior) be not afraid. The same argument will serve to
stifle any other sinful motions of the heart. It is God, be not impatient, do
not fret; It is God, do not murmr, nor repine.

There are three great duties of a Christian (yea, all Christianity is
comprised in these three) Faith in God, Obedience to him, and Patience under
his hand. And by one and the same way the soul is framed, and bowed to the
practice and performance of them all. Look as there is no way to work the soul
to faith, but the consideration of this; That it is God that speaks; And no way
to bow it to obedience, but this consideration; It is God that commands: So
there is no way to frame the soul to a patient submission (the dumbness we
speak of) under affliction, but this consideration, It Is God that does it. The
looking upon a promise as made by God, will strengthen the soul to believe it,
against all arguings and objections of flesh and blood: The looking upon a
command as given by God, will frame the soul to the obedience of it, fall back,
fall edge. The looking upon an affliction as coming from God, and laid on by
his hand, will make a man dumb and silent, will make him patient and calm; able
to give up himself to be done with, as God shall think fit. Though there were
nothing but tumults in the soul before, though his heart were like a troubled
sea, as soon as he comes to eye Gods hand, and to take due notice of it, all
will be hushed and quiet; there will be a calm, as there was in the Mat. 14. 32.
ship, after our Saviors coming into it. When God but appears to the believing
soul, and by the eye of Faith a discovery is made that it is he, darkness, and
sadness, and discontent, and dismayedness, and drooping, and despondency do
vanish at his presence, and are no more.

Many of the sons of men, and they who have been the wisest of all others in
their generation, have spent much Quemadmodum in domo Jairi tibicines carmina
sunebria quidem canebant, Christus autem solus mortuum excitabat: sic scientiae
humanae multa quidem utiliter monent, etc. at Theolegia solus, etc.
time, and made it their work to find out the right Cure of grief and
discontent, and some of them have pitched upon one way, and some upon another,
but going to work without the light of Scripture to guide them, could never hit
upon the true Remedy, but have all become Romans 1. 21.
vain in their imaginations, and showed themselves to be Job. 13. 4.
Physicians of no value. It is God only which Hos. 6. 1.
wounds, that can cure the wounds he makes, and that alone can teach us, what
is the way to bear with patience and calmness of spirit those afflictions,
which drive others to their wits end, and make them sick of sorrow, even to
death. And here ye have, in my Text, a remedy against all kind of grief, of
Gods own prescribing, and therefore an approved one it must needs be.

I shall only give you a few instances of the admirable Cures, that have been
wrought by this Remedy alone, upon some whose afflictions have been most heavy,
and whose cases in appearance most desperate, and then come to a word of
Exhortation.

Whose heart would not have been struck dead within 1. Eli.
him, by those tidings wherewith Samuel 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13.
acquainted Eli from God? How could Elie's heart choose but break at the
apprehension of those dreadful judgments denounced against his family, the
very mention whereof was enough to make the ears of strangers to tingle at the
hearing? And yet with what admirable patience does he take it? How calm is he?
How far from murmuring? And what wrought him to this pass? even this
consideration, Verse 18. 2. Job.
It is the Lord, let him do as seems him good.

You have heard of the sufferings of Job, yea, I am sure you never heard of any
mere man's sufferings like his. He was so afflicted in his estate, in his
servants, in his children, in his wife, in his friends, in his body from head
to foot, in his soul, that there seemed to be no place left, wherein to inflict
a new wound. How does he take all this? Does he not storm, and rage? does he
not despond, and despair? No, he kisseth the rod, is dumb, and holds his peace,
though provoked to impatience by the instigation of his wife, and upbraided by
her, for serving a God that used him no better. What was it, that could
possibly make a man take all this so patiently? This very consideration in my
Text wrought him to this composedness; Job 1. 21.
God has given, God has taken. And when afterward he had a little forgotten
himself, and spoken unadvisedly, God was pleased but to remember him, whose Job
38.
hand his afflictions came from, and that presently reduced his soul to his
first calmness. Job 40. 4, 5.
I am vile, what shall I answer? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I
spoken, but I will not answer, yea, twice, but I will proceed no farther.

I might tell you how the Prophet David found the rare 3. David.
effect of this Consideration, for the quieting of his heart, many a time and
often, and in many a sad case he was in, and not when he penned this Psalm only.

But I will give an instance in one greater by far than Eli, 4. Christ.
or Job, or David, and one whose sufferings did far surpass all theirs put
together, who, by this very consideration in the Text, comforted himself in the
bearing of them. The person I mean was the Lord Jesus Christ; the sufferings I
speak of was that wrath and curse of God, which he was to undergo for them
whose Surety and Mediator he was, that Cup, which made him Luke 22. 44.
sweat, as it were drops of blood falling down to the ground. This Cup
(dreadful though it was) he took it into his hand, and drank it up, with this
very Consideration in his mind: Joh. 18. 11.
The Cup which my father has given me, shall I not drink it? And again, Not
Mat. 26. 39.
as I will, but as thou will. This may suffice to show what an effectual Remedy
this is to work us, in our afflictions, to such a dumbness and silence, as the
Prophet in my Text is commended for.

We shall now make use of this, and the precedent point Use.
both together, and that only by way of Exhortation. All ye sons and daughters
of affliction (therefore) into whose hands God has put any bitter Cup, drink
it, and hold your peace, though the ingredients be Gall and Wormwood; Be dumb,
do not open your mouths. If you say, I may as well bid one in a cold fit of an
Ague, that he should not be chill: How can I be patient under such sufferings
as mine are? so great, so sudden, so unexpected, so irrepairable? Know, you
are allowed to mourn, so you do not murmr; you are not forbidden to grieve,
so ye be not dejected. He is an unreasonable man that thinks one should feel no
pain, when one limb is torn and pulled from another. All that I drive at is,
that you would labor for such a dumbness under Gods afflicting hand, as was
before described; that is, Take heed of quarrelling with Gods providence, take
heed of falling out with ways of holiness; stand not justifying your selves
and your own doings; by prayer and meditation do your endeavor to quell all
tumultuous risings in your hearts: hold your peace, and hearken that you may
take out these lessons, God is now reading to you in his School of affliction;
acquiesce and rest satisfied with Gods dispensations: subscribe to his Wisdom,
Justice, Holiness, Goodness, and Truth. This is, that you are to be exhorted
to; This is the work that now lies before you. But you will say to me, Do you
think you can persuade us to all this? I answer, The truth is, God must
persuade; yea, and he must bless the Physic, else all is in vain. But this I
am sure of, I can tell you, what it is that Gods people have found to be the
most Sovereign Remedy, for the curing of the most heart-aking griefs; and that
is this in my Text.

I remember Pliny writing to a friend of his, and acquainting him how much he
took to heart the death of Corellius, Lib. 1. Epist. 12 Proinde ad hibe solatia
mihi: non haec, senex erat, infirmus erat (hoc enim novi) sed nova aliqua, sed
magna quae audierim nunquam, legerim nunquam. Nam quae audivi, quae legi,
sponte succurrunt, sed tanto dolor superantur.
an aged person, one whom he exceedingly loved and valued; wished his friend to
suggest something, that might comfort him. But says he, Do not think to do it
by telling me he was an old man, and infirm, and one that in the course of
Nature could not live long. These things I know, tell me something that is new,
something that is great, something I never read, something I never heard
before; for those things which I have heard, I often think of, but my grief is
too strong and vehement to be qualified, and allayed by them. Now if any of you
should impose such a Law upon me, and bid me either tell you some new thing to
comfort you, that you never heard of before, or else your sorrow is such, that
it will scorn all that I can say, (as Job 41. 29.
Leviathan does the shaking of a spear) and the spirit of impatience, that is
in you, will not be laid: Though the task be hard, yet thus much, by Gods
grace, I shall undertake.

1. To suggest such Arguments to calm your spirits, as neither Pliny, nor any
Heathen of them all ever heard, or dreamed of.

2. To tell you some things, which (if you do know) it is to be feared you have
forgot, or to be sure, do not mind Tantum quisque scit, quantum memoria tenet.
and take sufficiently to heart. And it is no small mercy to have known truths
brought unto our remembrance upon occasion. It is a courtesy any of us would
thank a man for, if he do but help us to our purse again, when we have lost it,
though he give us nothing but what we had before. But peradventure some may
hear that, of which till now, they were utterly ignorant: This I dare say
concerning the Remedy I am now giving you the receipt of, it is the best in the
world; it has, by the blessing of God, done admirable Cures upon the most sad
souls, under the most heavy afflictions. What David said of Goliah's Sword, may
be affirmed of it; 1 Samuel 21. 9.
There is none like it.

I shall reduce all that I have to say farther about this point to these two
Heads.

1. How, and after what manner the consideration of Gods hand, works the heart
to such a dumbness and silence, as has been spoken of. 2. What there is
contained in this consideration, for such a purpose; or what the Ingredients of
this Medicine be.
Now for the way and manner, how this Consideration of Gods hand, works such
an effect in the afflicted soul, as has been spoken of: It is,

1. Partly by frighting us out of our impatience and discontent. One passion is
often cured, or (at least) repressed by another. The apprehension of Gods hand
in our sufferings stirs up fear, and fear drives away sinful distempers. Saul's
thirst after David's blood was frighted away, (at least for the present) by an
apprehension of the danger he was in from the Philistims. If by the Eye of
Faith, we do but once see God, it will so terrify us, as to Job 42. 5, 6.
make us abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes.

2. Partly by furnishing us with matter of Consolation, something to put into
the other Scale, to weigh against our sorrow. Consolation is properly a kind of
reasoning, whereby we lay one thing against, and compare it with another, that
by the consideration of the one, we may be able to bear the other better. When
you would make both ends of the balance even, ye still put more and more into
the one end, till ye get the other up. Now this Consideration of Gods hand,
does furnish us (as we shall hear anon) with sundry weighty Arguments of
Consolation, enough to raise the soul that is sunk deepest in despondency, and
so must needs be effectual to quiet and compose the heart.

3. Partly it turns one sorrow into another; a 2. Cor. 7. 10.
sorrow that causes death, into a sorrow that brings repentance never to be
repented of: a sorrow for suffering, into a sorrow for sin: and so it works a
tranquillity in the soul by diverting our passions into another channel, where
they may take their course without any danger. Thus Physicians to stop bleeding
in one place, do use the way of Revulsion, and open a vein some other where.
The consideration of Gods hand, will raise in our hearts a sorrow according to
God, and that (as Moses his Serpent did with those of the Magicians) will eat
up our sorrows of other kinds.

4. It works (lastly) a calmness in our spirits, by turning our sorrow at
length into joy, converting our Wormwood and Gall into Wine, and inabling us by
degrees to say, Psa. 119. 71.
It is good for me. The due apprehension of Gods hand in all our losses and
sufferings, will first strike us dumb, and make us silent; but those who are
thus dumb (as has been showed) shall in due season find that promise verified
to them, Esa. 35. 6.
The lame man shall leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing. And
thus it was with our Prophet at last. Psa. 94. 12.
Blessed is the man (as he sings sweetly) whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law. Psa. 119. 71.
It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Only you must know; that these effects will not be produced on a sudden; it
is not to be expected, that in an hour, or a day, such an alteration should be
made; There must be frequent application of the Remedy, and the soul must dwell
in these meditations and thoughts; 1 Timothy 4. 15. (...)
Be in them (as the Apostles phrase is) chase them therein by often and much
musing upon them, and hearty prayer to God, withal, for the setting them home.

We proceed now to acquaint you, what there is in this Consideration of Gods
hand in our afflictions, to produce such effects upon the soul, that is duly
possessed with it.

This only I must premise, that though it be a Meditation very useful for all
men, in all their miseries, yet, that one may receive the full benefit of this
Truth, it is necessary he be a Child of God, one that has an interest in him,
as David had: For alas! otherwise a man's case is so forlorn, that nothing can
be said to comfort him, and keep him from despair, farther than he is willing,
and labors to be in such a condition as may make him a subject capable of the
comfort.

Now there are 24 Arguments, comprised in these words [Thou did it] the
consideration of which, by the blessing of God, will be very effectual, to
allay our sorrow, to quiet our spirits; in a word, to make us dumb under Gods
correcting hand.

I shall divide them in three sorts.

1. Some of them concern all people in general, that be in any kind of misery.

2. Others of them belong in a peculiar manner to such as David was, [viz. the
children of God] in all their afflictions.

3. The third sort have a special reference to Gods people too, but such of
them, as suffer under the loss of a dear and hopeful Child, such a loss as has
occasioned our sad meeting here to day.

First, For those Arguments that may be fetched from this meditation ['Tis Gods
doing] to induce all whosoever to lay 1.
a Law of silence upon their hearts and mouths, when they are afflicted; They
are nine.

It is He afflicts you, who is Omnipotent, and can easily do whatsoever he
will. Job 9. 4, 5.
He is mighty in strength: he removes the mountains, and they know it not; he
over-turneth them in his anger. Which shakes the earth out of her place, and
the pillars thereof tremble. Verse 12.
Behold he takes away, who can hinder him? Power alone, and of it self, is
very dreadful, and carries a great awe along with it. Eccl. 8. 4.
Where the word of a King is (though he be but a mortal man) there is power,
and who may say to him, what do thou? Prove. 20. 2.
The fear of a King (whose breath is in his nostrils) is as the roaring of a
Lion; he that provokes him to anger sins against his own soul. If Power be
so formidable in an earthly Potentate; how shall any of us dare to murmr
against his proceedings, in comparison of whom the most potent Monarchs of the
earth are no better then so many impotent and silly worms?

2. Remember your sufferings come from the hand of him, who Psalm. 66. 5.
is terrible in his doings to the children of men; yea, to the greatest of
them; who brings down Luke 1. 52.
the mightiest from their Thrones, and makes Lam. 4. 5.
such as were bred up in scarlet, to embrace dung-hills; ruins them and their
families, when they seemed to be settled past danger of shaking. The other
Argument was taken from Gods Power to do what he pleases, this from those
dreadful effects of his power which are to be seen. He not only can do, but
actually does that which may well make us dumb, when he meddles with us, or any
thing that is ours. How often does he destroy whole Kingdoms, and lay them wast,
and not make breaches in private families only?

3. Think of this; your afflictions come from his hand, who is Lord of all; I
told you what he can do; and what he does: Now we speak of the right he has to
do what he pleases. Such is his Dominion and Sovereignty, that he may do by
right, what ever he can do by might: He is not accountable to any for his
proceedings, nor tied to any Rule to go by, but his own will. The Potter has
not so much power and right, to do what he list with his clay, as God has over
us and ours. When men meddle with persons and businesses, that they have
nothing to do with, it is unsufferable, and who can bear it? But when God
meddles with us and ours, even the dearest things we have, it is only in what
he has to do, and more to do than we, as being Lord of all. He is not
therefore to ask our leave, or to stay for our good will, but may save us, or
destroy us, build us, or pluck us down, settle us, or root us up, as he thinks
good. He has an absolute, unlimited and arbitrary Job 33. 13.
power, and therefore uncontrollable. And if God do but what he may, what are
we, that we should complain? It will not be amiss a little to consider, whence
this Dominion of God comes, and what right he has to it, the more to calm our
hearts under his Dispensations.

Dominion among men is founded upon one or more of these six Titles.

1. Occupation; He that first finds or lights upon any Azor. Inst. Mor. pars.
3. p. 47. etc
thing, of which none can give any tidings who is the owner, does thereby
become the Lord and Owner of it.

2. Donation; This and that men come to be possessed of as theirs, by gift from
such, to whom those things once of right appertained.

3. Succession; So children come to inherit after their fathers death, that
which was their fathers.

4. Purchase; If a man can say, This is mine, and I am Lord of it, I bought it
with my money, or made a contract for it, it is accounted a good Title.

5. Usurpation; So some attain that Dominion they have, invading the right of
others, and wresting it from them by force; by their might overcoming the
others Right. This is as bad a Title as may be.

6. Prescription; That which a man has so many years quietly enjoyed (no great
matter how he came by it) he is judged among men to have a Title to.

But none of all these ways comes God by his Dominion and Lordship over us;
no, his Sovereignty is founded upon infinitely better Titles than any of these,
viz.

1. His Creating of all things by his own power, out of Lessius de Attrib. p.
126.
nothing, His making all, gives him the Kingdom over All.

2. His preserving and upholding all things in the being he gave them at first.
For all creatures would return to nothing (as ice does to water, when the cold
cease) if they were not supported Heb. 1. 3.
by the word of his power.

3. His being the last end of all, for whose sake all things were made. Joh.
11. 36.
Of him, through him, and to him are all things. Rev. 4. 11.
He [not only] has created all things, [but] for his pleasure they are and
were created. What exception then can any man make against his Dominion, and
absolute Sovereignty? What shadow of an objection can there lie against his
Title? And therefore what can be more reasonable and fitting than to acquiesce
in his Dispensations, and by our dumbness to testify our consent to what he
does? If God had nothing to do with us and ours, or if he were to ask our leave
first, and yet should, without craving our good will, meddle and do with us as
he pleases, there were some ground for murmuring. But whose mouth must not
presently be stopped, if God should say to us in our impatiency, what? Shall not
I (for all you) do what I think fit with mine own? Shall I make Creatures for
mine own sake, and shall not I (without your leave) dispose of them as I please?

4. Take notice your afflictions come from his hand, who is infinitely wise,
Mar. 17. 37.
and does all things well. Do we not all stand amazed at that Wisdom, by which
the Heavens and Earth, and all Creatures in both were made? And can we think
God does not order his Creatures, and govern, and dispose of them, with as much
wisdom as he made them? Doubtless, there is nothing amiss in his
administrations. He cannot be subject to any error. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
His work is perfect. If we could tell how to mend any thing that he does, we
might be born with in our complaining and finding fault. But dare any of you
undertake that? Must you not confess your selves to be fools, and unfit to be
of his Counsel? Why then do you not lay your hands upon your mouth, and
acquiesce in what he does as best of all? Who could choose but be struck dumb,
if God should say, Where Is Job 38. 2.
the man that darkneth counsel, by words without knowledge? Must I come and ask
your advice, and take your direction for what I am to do? Must my Wisdom be
taught by your folly? Must I do nothing before I have first called you to
counsel? If God should challenge us thus, it would make us be in Jobs case; I
Job 42. 6.
abhor my self, Job 40. 5.
I have spoken once, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no
farther, I repent in dust and ashes.

5. When you are afflicted (to keep you from impatience) do not forget your
sufferings come from his hand, of whose mere indulgence it is, that you have
the comfort you yet enjoy: yea by whose goodness you yet enjoy more mercies,
than you have lost, as you might soon see, if you would set your selves to
adjust the account. When people have lost so much, that they think they can
lose no more, nor be any worse than they are, then they grow desperate, speak
and do they care not what. But while men have something to lose, it keeps them
in awe, specially, if they hold what they have, at the courtesy of him who
has taken away what they have lost. This is our case; all our losses and
sufferings are inflicted by him, of whose mere grace we hold the rest of our
Comforts, and therefore it is best for us to be dumb, Wherefore does a living
man complain? If our Lam. 3. 39.
own lives be spared, it is an unreasonable thing to repine.

6. Bethink your selves; Is not he who now afflicts you, one whose will you
have often crossed? One to whom you have walked contrary? will you not take the
coin you pay? Must you have a liberty to cross God, and God none to cross you?
May you (think you) set light by his will, and must he, mean while, do nothing
to displease, or thwart yours? Who made this Law? Or do you think it equal?
Gal. 6. 7.
Do ye reap any thing, but what ye have sown? Lev. 26. 23, 24.
May not God walk contrary to you, as well as you walk contrary to him?

7. Consider, Does not be afflict you, whom you have provoked to deal a great
deal worse with you? Have not you deserved (let Conscience speak) to be
punished, not only thus, but Lev. 26. 24.
seven times more. You have lost one or two of your comforts, but you deserve
to be stripped of all. Now when Job 11. 6.
God exacteth less of us than our iniquities deserve, what cause is there of
complaining? shall he that should of right be whipped with Scorpions, grumble
when he is but corrected with rods? There is so little reason for that, that he
may rather bless God, if he escape so well.

8. But what speak I of our deserving more evils from God in this life: If we
consider it seriously, we shall find our afflictions are laid on by his hand,
of whose infinite mercy it is, we are yet on this side hell. Shall those repine
against temporal chastisements, that might justly be sent to that place, Mar.
9. 48.
Where the worm dies not, and the fire goes not out. Lam. 3. 22.
It is of the Lords mercy that we are not [utterly] corsumed. If a man be but
burnt in the hand, when he deserves to be executed, he does not repine at the
hard measure he meets with, but falls down upon his knees, and acknowledges
the mercy of the Bench. This is our case, and therefore we may well go our way,
and hold our tongue, and be glad if it fare no worse with us. Think therefore
with your selves, let your condition be as bad as it will, it is better with
you, than it would be in hell, whither you have deserved he should dispatch
you, that has laid this affliction on you.

9. It is he, by contending and murmuring against whom, nothing is to be gotten
but the multiplications of our blows. Who Job. 9. 4, 5.
ever hardened himself against him and prospered? He is one that will break
those, (be they never so stout) that do refuse to bend; The great contest
betwixt God and us, is only this; Whose Jer. 44. 28.
will shall stand; Whether he or we shall have the disposing of our selves and
ours. Now he will do with us and ours as he pleases, whether we will or no.
Job 34. 33.
Should it be according to thy mind? (says Elihu) He will recompense, whether
thou refuse, or whether thou choose. What got Pharaoh by standing it out against
God, and resusing to humble himself? Esa. 45. 9.
Woe to him that striveth with his Maker: Let the pot-sheard strive with the
pot-skeards of the earth. There is no good to be gotten by contending with one
that is so infinitely above our match. Our wisest way is to be dumb, and to
hold our peace when he pleads with us, by any of his judgments.

II. Secondly, There are (yet) other Arguments to induce us to this dumbness
under Gods hand, couched in these words [Thou did it] which do peculiarly
concern Gods people, though those beforementioned do concern them also.

1. Those that are the people of God, may well take patiently any blows that
are reached them by his hand, He being their God in Covenant, through Christ,
One that has made them his children by adoption. An ingenuous and dutiful son
will bear and put up a great deal at a Fathers hand, without sullenness and
pouting, though he could not swallow it from any other; Heb. 12. 8, 9.
We have had (says the Apostle) fathers of our flesh, who have corrected us
after their own pleasure, and yet we have showed them reverence; persevered in
our duty and observance of them. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to
the father of spirits? This was the Consideration with which our blessed
Savior drank up that dreadful Cup mentioned before, Joh. 18. 11.
Shall not I drink the Cup, that my Father gives me to drink?

2. Such as are the Saints of God may be assured all their evils of sufferings
are laid upon them, by one that intends them no hurt at all. Afflictions
(indeed) look with a terrible aspect to flesh and blood, they have the
appearance of Serpents and Scorpions, and the like baneful things, but they are
sent by him that means them no ill: These Mar. 16. 18.
sufferings of theirs, though they seem to be deadly (and so indeed they are to
unbelievers) and to tend to their undoing, are but Serpents without stings, and
shall not so much as Psa. 91. 10.
touch them to do them any real prejudice; but are like unto the Viper on Paul's
hand, which he shaked off, and received no harm, Act. 28. 13. This which I say,
cannot seem strange to a child of God, when even the Heathen man could tell his
adversaries that threatened his Socrates, ut habet Epictet. cap. 79.
death; Ye may kill me, if you will, but you cannot hurt me.

3. Did I say, the afflictions of Gods Saints come from one that intends them
no hurt? That is but a small matter in comparison. He that afflicts them
intends their good, Mala paenalia non suat vere mala, quia fluunt a summo bono,
erant in summo bono, and ducunt ad summum donum.
and will work them much good by it. Romans 8. 28.
All things shall work together for good to those that love God. Do not ask me
how? and which way? What thing is it that He cannot bring out of any thing,
that 2 Cor. 4. 6.
commanded the light to shine out of darkness? That spoke the word, and caused
all things to come out of nothing? Have patience a little (ye children of God,
that are now under the Rod) and ye shall see it, and confess it your selves,
that all Heb 12 10.
is for your profit, that you may be made partakers of his holiness: That Joh.
13. 7. The Latins call prosperous things res secundas; because they are not to
be had till afterward. They that know no sorrow, usually know no God. Oration
sine malis est sicut avis sine alis.
which you see not now, you shall see and thank God for afterward. It would be
too long, at present, to tell you how many several ways afflictions tend to
the advantage of Gods people, by bringing them unto a more clear knowledge of
God, and themselves, by weaning them from the World, and raising their hearts
heavenward, by putting an edge upon their prayer, by discovering to them their
defects, improving their faith and all other graces, by being like Mar. 9. 49.
fire and salt to eat out those corruptions, which would otherwise breed worms
in their Conscience, and hinder their inward peace, by keeping them from 1 Cor.
11. 32.
being condemned with the world. These and many other benefits, such as belong
to God get by being afflicted. God making the Judge. 14. 14.
eater to yield them meat (according to Sampsons riddle) and the strong to
afford them sweetness. Their losses and crosses are such as they Heb. 12, 9, 10
live by, and do prove their greatest gain; and therefore (if they cannot do it
yet) they shall ere long be able to say, as he did, I had been undone if I had
not been undone. Themistocl.


4. But this is not all; Gods peoples sufferings are inflicted by one, who has
already bestowed upon them, that which may counter-ballance and weigh against
all their sorrows; God has given them those things which are more than enough
and enough again, to fetch up their hearts when they are sunk lowest in
despondency because of any outward cross. To know God and Christ, what an
infinite mercy is it? John 17. 3.
It is life eternal: He that has attained this knowledge, God himself allows
him to Jer. 9. 24.
glory. To have pardon of sin, to be justified in Gods sight, see what some bid
for such a mercy, Mic. 6. 6, 7.
thousands of rams, ten thousands of rivers of oil, the first born of their
body; they would part with any of these things for it, and think they made a
good purchase too: To be adopted the child of God, what would not a man give
for such a privilege, if it were to be bought? To have part in Christ, to have
Union and Communion with him, is there any thing in the World worth the talking
of the same day with it? All these things (and yet these are not all) God has
conferred upon those that are his. Now take your calamities, (you people of
God) and Job 6. 2, 3.
weigh them in a balance, and admit them to be heavier than the sand; yet is
not here enough to weigh against them? Will none of those things, will not all
of them countervail those losses and afflictions you are under? Is the Cup God
has given you to drink so bitter, that all those things are as good as nothing
to sweeten it? Can ye have more cause to be dejected either for one thing or
another, than ye have to be cheered in the apprehension of your interest in
such things as these? Suppose Christ should say to you, as to the man sick of
the Palsy, Mat. 9. 2.
Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven; would you take this comfort for
a thing so trivial, that it would tend nothing to relieve you in your sadness?
If these things work not with you, if these Job 15. 11.
consolations of God be small in your eyes, assure your selves it is long of
your unbelief, for which you have infinite cause to be humbled.

5. Yet farther: your afflictions come (I speak of the godly) from the hand of
him, who has (as if what he has Sermo non valet^ exprimere, Experimento opus
est.
given you for present were little) spoken of what he will do for you
hereafter, and given you lively hopes of such things, as 1 Cor. 2. 9.
eye never saw, ear never heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive. See how contemptibly the Apostle speaks of the sufferings of this
life in comparison of these things. Romans 8. 18. Nec coelum, nec Christus patitr
hyperbolem.
I count not the sufferings of this present time, worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed. One would think a lively hope of being
admitted to the Beatifical Vision, and eternal enjoyment of God, should be more
than enough to dry up all our tears. And doubtless, if our hopes of heaven were
more firm and steadfast, though they could not privilege us from affliction,
yet they would arm our hearts so, that it would not be possible for any
affliction to pierce them through.

6. Again, The godly may rest assured that their afflictions are sent from no
other but him, who has (in the mean season, till they come to heaven) engaged
Heb. 13. 6.
he will never leave them, nor forsake them, Esa. 43. 2.
but will be with them when they pass through the fire and water, will not
leave them destitute of his grace and mercy, but will be present with them, by
his Spirit, in all their sufferings. If God should cast us into the water, and
there leave us to shift for our selves, and take no farther care of us, whether
we sink or swim, our case would be sad: and it would be hard to find any thing
that might yield us comfort. But that man's unbelief is his greatest misery,
that thinks his misery to be greater, than to be allayed with a promise of Gods
presence with him.

7. Consider, Is not this affliction of yours his doing, to whom ye have vowed
and sworn Obedience; Obedience active, to do that which may please him;
Obedience passive, to be pleased with what he does? And is there not reason
then for you to be dumb, and to hold your peace? Will you make vows to God, and
break them when ye have done? Bind your selves to God by Covenant, as by bonds
and cords, and will you, when you are put upon the trial, how you will take any
thing at Gods hand, carry your selves, as if you never meant (for all your
vows) he should either meddle with you or yours, farther than you your selves
should think fit? Is not this mocking of God? Nay, God will not be mocked, but
this will prove bitterness in the latter end.

8. Is not this God who afflicts you, he whose will ye have prayed may be done
on earth, as it is done in heaven? Have ye not often made this your petition
unto his Majesty? Nos imperaro volumus, nobis imperari nolumus. Said Anastas.
to Hormisd.
And will ye now be angry, and impatient, that God should rather have his will
done, than you yours? Will you take on, as if it were more meet God should
submit to your will, than you to his?

9. Lastly, let not this be forgotten; you sons and daughters of affliction are
under his hand, who does Lam. 3. 33.
not willingly correct; he would not do it, if you needed it not, and therefore
Psa. 119 75.
afflicts you in very faithfulness. God makes his people 1 Pet. 1. 6.
heavy, but when need requires; as wise and loving parents correct their
children, lest otherwise they should be spoiled. A child left to himself,
brings his father to shame, and himself to ruin, and therefore a rod of
correction is but requisite to drive Pro 22. 15.
away the folly, that is bound up in his heart. Hence is that pathetical
expression, Jer. 9. 7.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold I will melt them and try them, for how
shall I do for the daughter of my people? As if he should say, There is no
other remedy. If other warning would serve the turn, God would not teach us by
briars and thorns. But better weep here, than gnash our teeth hereafter. And as
God corrects, but only when need requires, so he corrects no more, nor no
longer. There is not one ingredient, not one jot of gall put into our Cup, more
than he judges necessary for us. All these things considered, what cause have
any of Gods people to be impatient? How fit and meet is it they should be dumb
under his afflicting hand?

III. Thirdly, I now proceed to those arguments of patience, which may be
fetched from these words [Thou did it] that concern specially such servants of
God, as suffer in the loss of a dear and hopeful Child, such a loss as has, to
day, occasioned our sad meeting here.

1. It is he afflicts you thus, to whose indulgence you are thankfully to
ascribe it, that your 1 Cor. 10. 13.
tentation is but common and ordinary. It is a sad thing for one to be
afflicted in an exemplary way, such an one, as either cannot at all, or not
easily be parallelled. Some of Gods people have been so afflicted, that they
might say, Lam. 1. 12.
Is there any bodies sorrow like unto my sorrow? And God owes you no more than
he did them: Yet even in such a case, though very sad, ye have seen how Job did
bear up his spirit by this consideration, Job 1. 21.
that all was Gods doing, when he could not find, or hear of any in the world,
whose sufferings were comparable to his. Now to lose a Child that we dearly
loved, one that was hopeful, and that we had ground to think God had made his
by Adoption, what affliction is it more than thousands of Gods people have had
trial of?

2. But secondly, I pray consider, it is he has taken him, who has showed you
more favor, in taking one that came out of your loins to wait upon himself,
and see his face in glory, than he has done you injury in removing him from
you. Was it not your ambition he might go to heaven, and will you be troubled
overmuch now he is gone? Did 1 Samuel 16. 19
Saul do Jesse any wrong, or did he think it would be so interpreted, when he
sent for his son David to come and wait upon him at Court? But you would not
have had him gone so soon: you would still have enjoyed him a little, and a
little longer, and have had him to have lingered here. It seems then all the
difference betwixt God and you, is only in point of a little time more or less:
That which God has done now, you would have had him done hereafter. But can
there be any good reason why you should be tormented, because God has made one
of yours happy so soon?

3. Tell me, Is not God who has taken your Child, he whose your Child was,
infinitely more than he was yours? Did you frame him, and fashion him? Did you
either make his Soul, or so much as one part or member of his Body? Or if any
one had been wanting, could you have made up that defect? Though you might
challenge more interest in him, than any upon earth, yet what was your interest
in him, if compared with Gods? Do not you know, that in respect of that
interest God had in him, you (though his Parents) were no more than persons
only entrusted to breed him, and bring him up for his heavenly Father? And must
he not go, or will you be troubled if he go, when his Father and yours sends
for him? Our blessed Savior is propounded to us for a pattern of obedience,
and Luke 2. 49. cum. 51.
subjection to earthly parents: but he must go, and be, whither, and where his
heavenly Father called him, and enjoined him, for all them: and they must
submit, and talk no more of their interest, when God challenges his.

4. It is he has taken him, who is wiser than you, and only knows from how
many evils and miseries, he, by death, is freed, that we who are left behind
may live to see and suffer; who can tell what sad times are coming? and is it
not then a mercy to us, and ought we not, not only to be patient but thankful
(though it is an hard lesson) when we have cause to hope that any of ours are
got safe to heaven, where flesh, and devil, and world, shall not be able any
more to annoy them, to all eternity?

5. When you think who it is has taken him from you, remember it is he to whom
when he was baptized you did voluntarily dedicate and devote him. We and all
ours are at Gods disposal, whether we will or no (as we heard before) and there
is no help for it; yet God loves that we should freely make a surrender to him
of what is his own, (which else he will distrain for, and have at his pleasure,
do we what we can to the contrary) and he accepts in graciously when we do so,
as an act of our service and homage to him. But shall we give and take?
Surrender up ours to God, and pretend to do it cordially, and when it comes to
the point, struggle, and hold back as far as we are able, and part with that,
which we have by our own act given to God grudgingly, and with an ill will? If
we do not mean to give up our selves, and ours to God, why do we play the
hypocrites, and pretend it? If we do it really and in good earnest, why do we
repine when God takes but that, which is not only his own, but which we have
freely given him?

6. I shall add but one Consideration more; which was suggested by a Reverend
and worthy Man, It Is he has taken your Son, who did so freely give you his.
God spared Mr. A.
not his only Son for you, but was willing to give him up even to the death,
and thought not much to part with him; and while you think of what God has
done in this kind, it cannot but seem a poor thing, (in your own eyes) for you
to part with yours when he will have it to be so.

All these things said together, I suppose you will say, the consideration of
Gods hand in all our afflictions has enough in it to make us submiss and calm,
to make us patient, and contented, in a word, to make us dumb and silent under
his sharpest Dispensations.

And now I shall adventure to open and search the wound of those our worthy
friends who are most concerned (and with whom we sympathize) in this sad loss:
and for whose sake (specially) I have provided the plaster, the ingredients of
which I have been so long giving you the account of. And though I shall (I
believe) make the wound bleed afresh, by telling you, in their hearing, what it
is they mourn thus for; yet having a Remedy at hand so sovereign, and so
approved, I hope by the application of it, their sorrow will, in some good
sort, be allayed.

I had thought to have reduced what I have to say concerning this sweet Child
that is gone (and so I easily might) to three heads; his parts, which appeared
in him very early: his piety, of which he gave good evidence; and his
dutifulness to his Parents, which was as remarkable as the other two. But I my
self was so affected with sundry passages concerning him (which I have to tell
you) as they came suddenly to my mind, that I shall even represent them to you,
in the same order, wherein mine own thoughts at first met with them, not
standing upon any method.

This sweet Child was five years and an half old complete, within two or three
days, when God took him: But he had arrived to that in five years, and a
little more, that some which are here (I am afraid) have not arrived to in ten
times that space.

He had learned his The Assemblies shorter Catechism.
Catechism throughout, and began to learn it over again, with the proofs out of
the Scripture at large, wherein he had made some progress. Yet did he not learn
these things as a Parrot by rote, without understanding what he said, but could
give a good account (much beyond what might be expected in one of his years) of
the sense and meaning of what he learned. Of this, both others, and I my self
have made some experience.

Neither did he look upon his Catechism only as a task imposed upon him by his
Parents, which he was to learn, for fear of the rod; but took a great deal of
pleasure in it, and would often have it at night to bed with him. Some good
acquaintance also he had gotten with the Scripture story. These things argue
both parts, and something of a pious disposition likewise. How few such of his
age are to be found?

He met one day (in a Gentlewomans Chamber, who lives in the house) with a book
that treated of the passion of Christ, and reading a little in it, said he
liked the Book well, and that he would read it over. So he began and read some
few pages, then turned the leaf down, and the next day came again and began
where he left, and so from day to day, till he had read a considerable part of
it.

He was a very dutiful Child to his Parents, and would exceedingly rejoice,
when he had done any thing, or carried himself so, as to please them.

He was taken with the Book called, The Practice of Piety, and delighted to be
reading in it.

His Father speaking to him one day about the Devil and Hell, and things of
that nature, asked him if he were not afraid to be alone? He answered no: for
God would defend him. His Father asked him, why he thought so? He replied, that
he loved God, and that he hoped God loved him. But (says his Father) you have
been a sinner, and God loves not sinners. But I am sorry for my sins (says he)
and do repent. Repent (replied his Father) do you know what repentance means,
and what belongs unto it? And he gave him a good account of the apprehension he
had of the nature of that Grace, according to what he had learned in his
Catechism, but yet in his own words and expressions.

He would often ask his Sister (who was somewhat younger than himself) whether
she trusted in God, and loved God? and would tell her, that if she sought God,
God would be found of her, but if she forsook God, God would cast her off for
ever.

He took that delight in his book, that his Father and Mother have seen cause
sometimes to hide away his book from him.

He was never observed to discover any pouting or discontent, when upon any
occasion he was corrected. And you must not think I am telling you the story of
one, in whom Adam (as they feign of Bonaventure) never sinned. There is that
foolishness bound up in all childrens hearts, that will sometimes need the rod
of correction; though there be very Prove. 22. 15.
few in whom there appeared less than in him.

The day before he died, he desired me to pray for him: I told him, if he would
have me to pray for him, he must tell me, what I should pray for; and what he
would have God to do for him! He answered, To pardon my sins.

Often upon his sickbed he would be repeating to himself the 55 Chapter of Esaias,
and other pieces of Scripture, which in the time of his health he had learned
by heart.

But that passage in the forementioned Chapter was most frequently in his
mouth, and uttered by him with much affection: My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are my ways your ways, says the Lord: For as the heavens
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
thoughts than your thoughts: as if God (out of this sweet Babes mouth) had, in
these words, read to his Parents a Lecture of silence and submission under his
hand, and taught them that he must be dealt with and disposed of, not as they,
but as his heavenly Father (whose thoughts were far different) should think
fitting.

One time he brake out into this expression, My God, my God, deliver me out of
this misery, and from the pains of hell for ever.

A little before his death he brake out into these words, My sins pardon, my
soul save for Christ his sake.

I cannot blame those worthy persons so nearly related to him, though they
mourn at parting with such a sweet and hopeful Child; any more than I could
blame them for feeling pain, if one of their limbs were torn from another. Only
they must not mourn to despondency; and I hope I gave them sufficient reason
why, before.

What an instrument of Gods glory might he have proved? What a deal of service
might he have done to God (in all likelihood) had he lived to old age? But it
was Gods doing.

I shall only make two or three Animadversions upon the whole, and conclude all
with five words of application.

How many are there that live to fifty or threescore years, of whose life so
good an account cannot be given as of this little one, of five years of age and
an half?

How many Gentlemen be there, of whom when they die, all that can be said is
this, They were born, they did eat, and drink, and play, and hunt, and hawk,
and lived like so many wild Ass-colts, never minding any thing that concerned
Job 11. 12.
Gods glory, or their own salvation, either when they were children, or after
they came to man's estate, and so died, and dropped into hell?

How many others be there, of whom when they die, all that can be said is this;
They were born, they did eat and drink, and moil and labor for the bread that
perishes with all their might, but neither knew, nor cared to know what they
were born for, like bruit creatures, only minding present things, and thus
spent fifty or threescore years, and so died, and went down to hell?

How much more comfortably might a Minister of the Gospel admit to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper such a Child as this, notwithstanding his years,
than those of ten times his age that are children (would to God they were like
some children) in understanding?

I shall make Application of what has been said touching him, in five words.

1. To all in general, to admire and adore Gods Grace, which does show it self,
and work thus in little ones. Do not say, All this was nothing but his
education. Blessed -- Lauds sive tuas in Christo, sive magis in te lauds
Christi. Aug. ad Valor. Com.
be God for his education: and those children have cause to bless God, whose
Parents have been careful to bring them up in his fear. But sure it was
something else, for we see how different ways those take, that have one and
the same education. If education would have done the thing (without Gods
blessing) doubtless Eli, and David, and many others of Gods Saints, had never
had their hearts broken by the ungraciousness of their children.

2. To Parents, to encourage them to be dropping principles of Religion into
their little ones, and to be doing it betime; to season the Vessel first, if
possible, with the fear of God. We know not how soon God may be pleased to work
upon the hearts of our children, even the youngest of them.

3. To young ones, that they would learn to imitate and follow this example,
that has been set before them. Learn to know God, and remember your Creator
betimes: Learn to pay the duty and observance you owe unto your Parents. This
is a thing well-pleasing unto God.

4. To old ones, that come short of this sweet Child; Blush and be ashamed
(man!) to be forty or fifty years of age (it may be more) and yet out-stripped
by a Child of five years and an half, not to have attained so much knowledge of
God, and the things that concern your souls, in all these years, as he had
attained in so short a space. Learn to know God at last, get acquaintance with
the principles of Religion, while you have yet a day, while ye have yet an hour
left, before ye go hence, and be seen no more. You will say, would you have us
old folks, (as this age) go learn Object.
the Catechism like children?

If you do not know those things already, why not? I Answ. 2 These. 1. 8.
am sure you were better do so, Than have Christ come in flaming fire to take
vengeance on you because you know not God. It is better by far to set your
selves to the learning of the points in the Catechism, than to go to hell for
your ignorance.

5. To those worthy persons, the near Relations of this sweet Babe that is
gone; God has but taken up this little Lamb to heaven, to make you, in your
hearts and affections to follow after. There is a part of you in heaven
already: He must not come again to you, make sure that you meet him there. And
when you think how dearly you miss him, remember but who has taken him. Submit
to, and acquiesce in Gods Dispensation. Remember it is his hand. Some do think
there is no such Remedy for the Disease called the King's Evil, as a touch with
the Kings Hand: but this I am sure of, there is no such way to abate the
anguish of our souls under any smarting blow from Gods Hand, as the serious
consideration of Gods Hand, from whence the pain comes. Do not forget the Text,
Be dumb, open not your mouths: not one word: It is Gods doing.

Imprimatur

EDM. CALAMY.
September. 10th. 1657.


FINIS.
In Memoriam Johannis Langham summae spei pueruli, D. Jacobi Langham, Eq Aur.
filii.
FElix ingenio, and cui laeva in part mamille,
Nil cordis, bone, necquicquam quererere magister.
Mollis ad obsequium flecti (sine moribus hilum
Non valet ingenium) and cui displicuisse parenti
Paenagravis, sine paena alia. Non ille salubres
(Quod pueri faciunt) monitus committere, ventis:
Non odisse libros imo his incumbere, totis
Viriculis, ludo est: jamdudum clamitat (O he:
Jam satis est fili) genitor, requiesce parumper:
Ille, operi intentus, divelli sustinet aegre.
Tantus amor libri, tantique scientia rerum.
Omnibus accessit pietas, quae maxima virtus:
(Qua sine nil prodest habuisse, atque omnia nosse)
Non, pueri pro more, preces (ut inania verba)
Effudit sine mente. Obiter non Biblia legit,
Hunc librum mane and sero versare juvabat.
Indeque decerpsit quae mente reponeret alta,
Quaeque animo secum pia nocte dieque revolvat.
Saepe videns pater haec, and vix sua gaudia celans,
Jam juvat O: vixisse, inquit, juvate esse maritum,
Te tanta mihi prole: Tibi O! sunt Nestoris anni.
Saepe eadem charae genetrici men's, and eodem
Illa Deum voto pia cord and voce fatigat.
Saepe sua venerandus Avus, sed saepe nepotis
Causa gavisus; mea spes, mi Scipio, dixit,
Vive, meosque oculos, and patris claude superstes.
Saepe and Fortunas aliquis laudabat amicus
Vestras, and secum; si tali ego prole beatus!
Heu! quantum caecae mortalia pectora noctis,
Quantum noctis habent! quoties heu! fallere nostrum
Nos solet augurium! Non quae potiora miselli
Censemus, sic visa Deo: retinere parents
In terris satagunt: Hunc caelo destinat, illuc
Vult Deus ut properet, vocat; and parere necessum est.
Ergo abiisse preces in sumos? ergo dolori
Indulgere? absit; neque enim periisse putandum
Morte caput charum hoc: illi tantum alia columbae
Concessa; and procul a terrenis faecibus istis
Fugit, ubi aeternum requies, ubi vilia habentur
Maxima quae censent mortales cuncta: Quid ergo
Oppugnant capitis tam chari gaudia vestris?
LEt those that have an Elephant to make
Of some poor silly worm, themselves betake
To invoke their Muses, for to inspire their brains
With some poetic, high-flown ranting strains.
But, for my part, as I have no such task,
So from the Muses I no help do ask.
He is a Little One of whom I treat,
But yet of worth sufficiently great.
Those fictions, with which some do use t'adorn
Such as they praise, we from our hearts do scorn.
Precise and measured truths here only be,
Strange, without help of all Hyperbole.
That he, so young, should be so ripe in parts,
So dutiful, so skilled in the innocent arts
Of pleasing's Parents: so well pleased when he
Had done, what by them he approved did see:
So pliant to their counsels (things which most
Throw at their heels and suffer to be lost)
So docil, so delighted with his book,
(On which as on their torment, others look)
So pious (that is the chief) and fearing God,
And all this with so little help of rod.
These things are strange, and some may think, scarce true,
But all this, by experience, many knew:
And witness will, that this is no device,
To make men take for gold a Copper-piece.
You his Relations, to whose hearts so near
This Jewel lay, and lye's be of good cheer:
He is not lost, whom you so dearly miss,
He has but found some shorter Cut to bliss.
So you have known a Seaman by a wind
Serving his turn, and blowing to his mind
Soon brought, with joyful speed unto his home
In a few weeks, when many others come
(Tossed with adverse tempests) sad, and late,
Sore weather-beaten, moaning their hard fate:
To wish thee here, would be thy injury,
Rather, let us wish our selves (dear soul!) with thee,
T. B.

In praeproperum satum charissimi sibi adolescentuli Summaspei flosculi
Johannis Langham dibectissimi sui fratris D. Jacobi Langham Eque Aur. filioli.
COndones lachrymis puer (haec tua Justa) beat,
Font hoc lustrali, Sacra adeunda tua.
Quamvis excelsis splendet tua gloria caelis
Solemn spectamus cum madidis oculis.
Vidimus hic vires, puerili in corpore, adultas;
Augusta augustam men's tenuitque donum.
Taedebat vitae, maturum caetera caelis:
Longa fuit virtus vita fit ergo brevis.
Emicat haud aliter fugitivo numine fulgur
Aer nec longa luce coruscus erit.
Sic subito placidi cecidere ex arbore fructus,
Sic hyemem nullam dulcia poma ferunt.
Exiguus durat cum parvo lumine juncus,
Clarior at magnis quam cito flamma perit:
Angustare, oculsque Tubis transmittere visuns
Ut stellas videant, Tu Galilaee doces.
Clarus ab exiguo penetrabat corpore Caelos
Hic puer, utque Tubo Corporefunctus erat.
Quis vellet longae jam ducere taedia vitae
Cum brevis ad superos possit adire dolor.
Ille hic qui tenui modulatus arundine Caelum est,
Inter caelestes non Cherubinus erit?
Sic flevit mastissimus patruus Guil. Langham M. D.

MY tears are just, these distillations are
Not issues of a Rheumatick Catarrhe:
Nor call them womanish, I hate to be
Esteemed as a Mourner but in Fee.
You Will say the cause was small, I yield he was;
Yet a small child, a giant may surpass.
Virtue excels bulk, and goes beyond,
Great is the loss of a small Diamond.
As for his Soul, 'twas of the biggest sizes,
Enrich't with all the chiefest rarities.
So have I seen a little case contain
All the whole lineaments of a goodly man.
In smallest things Art is more rich and pure,
He was a picture drawn in Menuture.
This little Child had as great faith as any,
The ten Commandments written in a penny.
His soul in those straight lodgings to too pent,
Removed to a larger apartiment.
His Meditations, and his fervent prayers,
Were higher, stronger than his tender years.
Through the inner Cypress Veil (we call it Love)
Of's innocent body, Heaven did more warmly move.
We e're choked with thicker clay, and muffled on,
As prisoners are at execution:
We e're full of darkness, horror, and despair,
And when we die, replenished with fear.
Death found him joyful, and has left him so,
Whilst we like Mourners'bout the street do go.
And ha'nt we cause? whilst we delight to wear
His Memory like pendents in the ear?
William Langham, M. D.

To the most Hon. Sir Ja. L. Knight, and his most virtuous Lady, in memory of
their young Scient newly transplanted Jo. L.
SAy, is it not a sacred injury to rehearse
Past griefs, and make you suffer over again in verse?
But that the subtilty of love has found out arts
(Rifling his Vrn) to cossin him in eyes and hearts,
Where lives embalmed an early piety, their view
This Orient Pearl fresh made of that morning dew
Under whose name (thus veiled, least that we fondly pry
Too near in Sorrows Lodging) there you may descry
Ingenious Innocence an hollowed Wit
A stranger to those blacker Crimes that poison it:
Grown perfect Man by thriving Education
Spares some Refinings of a Resurrection.
Here me thinks I see that pretty Questionist
Catechize his teachers unto his own acquist
Of Truths, there satisfied, (chiding that busy sect
Of restless heads, those Picklocks of Heavens Cabinet)
A morning Penitent see him beg pardon when
'Twas hard to say, which first, the Penance, or the sin;
Waters, which to each thirsty soul may given be
Taught by a Prophecy, may well be spent on thee.
Tasting such sweets, we find mortality did much
Thirst after crasie mortals, deeming all were such,
Men were in love with sadness, States for sorrows call,
Sickness became the Natives Epidemical,
But stay! Let now no German Confident from hence
Dlazon the Glories of his youthful Excellence Dru. in Na.

'Bove the Europian World, who did at twice seven become
A Psalmists Paraphrast in his own Idiom.
But in these Herse-cloaths this young Catechist you see
Bound up, a little volum of Divinity;
But why so fast? Sweet St. was it to keep pace in Hymns
The hallowed Reason, with those winged Cherubims?
And you his near Relates who sublimated are
Into an height in Natures Crusible, so far,
Could you then well expect your next extract should be
Cleared and refined to less than immortality?
Whilst Heaven's so friendly by this gainful violence
To Court you thither where he has his Residence,
Steals the affectionate, raises the Souls to bear
A part with whom your love was placed, and to lodge there
Speed, is successful, quickens joys, and in a throng
It Is so, we think him best at ease that stays not long.
Dry up those crystal streams, 'twas not too soon,
He gains the prize that first his course has run.
Lod. Downs, D. D.

In Obitum Johannes Langham generosi and optimae spei puelli, qui nondum
pueritiam excedens vitam hanc mortalem cum immortali commutavit, Julii die 29.
An. D. 1657. (...).
SOl loca terrarum rediens Antarctica versus,
Partibus aestatem reddit Borealibus orbis;
Induit haec agros maturis frugibus, atque
Exuit, agricolis tandem sua vota rependens,
Falciferae manui flavas dum praebet aristas.
Interea cadit haec matura, at spica tenella,
Falce necis properae, potius generosa-ve planta
Decidit, Autumno nondum nudante capillis
Arboreos ramos; inopino funere monstrans
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula, nempe caducis
Vel foliis quod sunt leviora ut justa doloris.
Causa, tamen cum plena spei, modus esto querelis.
Semen ut obtectum, caro sic tellure resurget.
Ad decus eximium, and vires renovata perennes.
Oh sua qui toties ventis commisit and undis,
Non sine successu, de terra, ne anxius esto,
Quin sibi commissam prolem cum faenore reddet.
Debtor usuram pariter cum sort negabit,
Agricolis potius nec reddent arva laborum
Fructus, sperato lucro mercator ab Indis
Nec fruiturus erit, quam non rediturus ab urna
Filius hic lucis, qui spe requiescit in illa.
Nam prius angusto ex men's corpore viva recessit
Ad patriam superam, cumulatis dotibus aucta
Munere divino, sic decrescente Johanne.
Cresceret ut Christus sancto formatus, in isto,
Ad culmen surgens, quo non perfectio major
Sperari queat; a lachrymis hoc temperet omnes,
Queis aliter talem sobolem periisse doleret.
Francise Markham.

MEn in their strength being counted trees, the young
Are plants, or buds, and blossoms, when the strong
Are but as flowers, the aged being like sheep
In deaths-fold ready to be laid on sleep,
Children are lambs: if these be made a prey
To death, and nipped first, their noon of day
Being by night prevented, it is not new,
Nor should seem strange, being so often true
In lambs and buds, that are the forwardest,
Such plants being first removed that promise best,
Men, dealing thus with creatures them below
If God above deal so with us, may know
We clay before him should be dumb, this rod
Being deserved too at the hand of God.
It Is fitting sinful creatures should be meek
When smitten, then to turn the other check,
And Adam's sin it was to spare no tree
His seed since mortal are by just decree.
So that no tree, nor plant, nor graft, nor oak,
Can be secured from deaths fatal stroke.
In Paradise no one untoucht might stand,
None outed thence scapes deaths impartial hand.
Yet death's no death to him being in that trice
Transplanted to the heavenly Paradise,
Being gathered from the weeds here left on ground,
For ever in life's bundle to be bound,
Taken from the flock in that pure Virgins train
Which are with the lamb of God for to remain.
Then count not this for death, night call not this,
But a dark cloud conveighing him to bliss,
Dark on Survivers side, to him 'twas bright,
Whom it translated to eternal light.
All tears being wiped then from his eyes that is gone,
Wipe those away, this does occasion.
When he received was, he was but lent,
Not lost, now gone, but is before us sent,
Thither where is had that one days full delight,
Which is an endless Sabbath without night.
Francis Markham.

An Encomiastique upon the death of that precious Child Mr. John Langham, the
son of Sir James Langham Knight.
HAd I the vein to versifie as some,
My pen should write although my tongue was dumb.
A Poets pate I never had, nor shall,
My fancy seldom wrought that way at all;
Yet give me leave to try, though Muses nine
Stand a far off, the Bays shall never be mine.
JOHN LANGHAM, a man, on high.
A Child, and yet a Man, no Paradox:
There are few men can show such fruitful stocks
Of sacred wisdom, sorrow, faith, love, zeal,
Which grew on thee, and thou did much reveal;
So wise, so young! May we not liken thee
To Solomon in's youth? to Timothy
For Scripture skill; and for hearts tenderness
To sweet Josiah; thus did God thee bless;
Thy faith entitled thee blessed Abraham's son,
For thou believing did as he had done;
This difference observed, his faith was strong
When he was old: but thine when thou were young.
So great to thy dear Lord was thy affection,
The loving thou were, and the beloved John;
Yet more! for zeal, may we not thee compare
To Isreal's singer? an example rare,
The most choice virtues of these three and three,
Did all concenter and concur in thee.
On high thou art now gone, where thou have more
Of Man and God, than we who stand on shore;
Thy parts are perfect, and thy lovely grace
Is ratified: for no dross has place
In heaven: And now could thy Parents dear,
But think how blessed thou art, surely no tear
Would drop from their too mournful eyes, but they
Would, as they should, rejoice to see this day
Of thy souls triumph over sin, death, and hell;
Who did well living, and being dead art well,
Wait but a while, and thy most precious dust
Shall rise again when God shall raise the Just;
When soul and body both complete shall be,
Fully enjoying God to eternity.
Samuel Ainsworth,
Minister of the Gospel at Kelmersh.

