A most Godly SERMON: Preached at St. Albons in Woodstreet on Sunday last,
being the 10. of October, 1641. Showing the necessity of Selfe-denyall and
Humiliation, by Prayer and Fasting before the Lord; in regard of the present
Plague we now lie under. Which God, in his good time, remove from amongst us.

By that faithful Minister, and Witness of Jesus Christ, M. Henry Burton.



LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, MDCXLI.

A GODLY SERMON, Luke 9.23. Let him deny himself.
DOCT. I.
THE first Lesson is the A. B. C. that CHRIST teaches us in his School, is
this, For a man to deny himself, and so is it also the highest task that is
set to any.

These words were spoken to them all, a great many professed Christ, and
thronged upon him. Therefore Christ taught them a lesson, that most of them
never thought of. If any one will follow me, let him deny himself. The
Condition is, let him deny himself, the terms are selfe-denyall.

Self-denial consists, 1. In denying our selves in all good things. 2. In
all evil Things.


1. In all good things, Selfe-denyall ought to be in all good things. 1.
Internal. 2. External. Internal as the understanding, will, and affection.
So in moral Habits, as Temperance, Fortitude, Wisdom, etc. 3. In labor of
knowledge, even of such as are gotten by study. 2. Selfe-denyall ought to be in
External good things.

1. In matters of duty. 2. In Objects.

1. Jn matters of duty, that is toward God, where is discovered a main duty
between true exercise of Piety, and Counterfeit, Those are true, which are set
down in Scripture, and none else; for God will be served of himself, he
commands not as man prescript. 2 Here appears the vainness of that duty
which is prescribed of men.

Those of men may be known like trees by their fruits.

That of humane invention, set upon the Conscience, those who maintain it,
cannot but confess the superstition which they maintain.

The next thing, is the duty we owe to our Neighbor, as of charity, of equity,
of mercy: when we have done all that is commanded, we must confess we are
unprofitable Servants. Here is selfe-denyall* yet there may be duties of Piety,
where there is a want hereof, as 1. Cor. 13.3. There may be seeming charity,
yet falls. There may be a giving up of the body to be burned, yet want of
charity; because not proceeding from Faith. Even in these works a Christian
must deny himself.

Use 1. To condemn all Popish Charity, and many which they call good works,
instead of denying themselves in those works, they deny Christ; for in those
works, they say they deserve the Kingdom of Heaven. For there is salvation in
none other but in Christ Jesus only.

Use 2. To condemn another sort of carnal profane men that build their
salvation on common duties, works of morality; who say that they do all men
right ( though perhaps they are compelled so to do) this overthrowes the
Doctrine of Christ, this is not to deny themselves, but to deny Christ.

Use 3. To put a difference between true charity and false, some men are
naturally given to be upright, to do Justice, to deal upright. This is not to
deny ones self, to build in these; for this is not of Grace: for works of
Grace humble a man. This may be a trial of our grace; if they be of grace,
thou will deny thy self in them. In the next place, we are to consider of
certain objects, of a threefold relation.

1. A Natural. 2. A Civil. 3. A sensitive Relation.

Doct. 2.
ANd first a Natural Relation, as to Father, Mother, wife, Children, kindred,
etc. we must deny our selves in all relation, where they stand in opposition
unto Christ, for proof hereof. Luke 14.26. If father, mother, wife, children,
etc. call us to stand in opposition to Christ, In that respe^t we must hate
them. Mat. 10.35. No marvel then if the world cry out of Christ, and call him
a seditious Person. For a man to hate his Parents, as he is a Father; but to
deny obodience to his father, so far as he is hindered from coming to
Christ. A noteable Example is in Deutr. 13.6. The Son must not conceal the
Father, if he seek to bring him to Idolatry. We must not acknowledge Father
and Mother in bidding us to do that which Christ forbids. Mat. 23.9. So
there is a noteable Psalm. Deutr. 33.9. This denial brought a blessing upon
them, and it is a Type of the Gospel. For every true Believer is a Priest, and
must not in that respect look upon outward Relation, in competition with
Christ: but deny our selves in those things, which otherwise we are bound to
love by the Law of Nature. Trample upon thy Father, cast off thy wife and
children, says a Father, if they seek to draw thee from Christ.

Use. To condemn the Papist who hang all their Faith and Religion on their
Ancestors; because they lived and died in this Religion: this is to set up the
Parents against Christ.

Use 2. To reprove too many Papists in this Land, that do propagate their
Children* and Childrens Children in that Religion. Many amongst us, that send
their Children to Monasteries in Rome, to make them bondslaves in darkness for
ever. God be thanked we have good Laws, and I hope we shall have them
increased by the happy Parliament; but happy were it, if there were good
Magistrates to put those Laws in practice.

Use 3. For Parents that profess Religion. When the spirit of Christ touches
the heart, then they see the true way whose heart is so touched.

Yet how many Parents cannot endure that their children do outstrip their
Parents in purity, even for this they abhor their own children, and sometime
dispossess them; and cannot endure them: this is lamentable: Kings in their
own Thrones, are not above Christ, much less Parents in their Families. If God
come into their Families, into the hearts of their children; shall Parents lift
their hands up against Christ to abhor and hate their own children, because
of this? The body is received from the Parents, but the soul from God; Parents
may instruct their children, but not to keep them from Christ.

Use 4. For Children that have received a greater measure of light from Christ,
then the Parents they must be modest and humble, and bear their reproaches
patiently for Christ: but if the Parents will keep them from Christ, we must
hate and deny our Parents: but in the mean time to be patient to convince them,
and (if possible) to persuade them 5. To persuade these children, that they
follow this light, and not let their Parents, nor any friend in the world draw
them from Christ.

The 2. Relation is civil,

Doct. A Christian must deny himself in all civil Relation, if Princes or
States make Laws against the Law of Christ, against his Religion, and his pure
Ordinances, threatening punishment to those that will not observe them.

Herein a true Christian must deny himself, both in matter of terror, and in
matter of favor. 1. In matter of terror, whatsoever is threatened against a
man, Mat. 10.28. a Christian may say, I am lower then all the terrors of the
world can hurt me. We should deny our selves with Paul, and be reday, not only
to be bound, but to dye for Christ. Theodorus (an Heathen man) was told, that
he should rot above ground, I care not (says he) it is all one to me, to rot
above, or under ground. Thus a Christian should resolve against all fears, and
terror whatsoever, for Christ. So for matter of favor, as Polyc Carpus had
great promotion promised in the time of persecution, answered, I have served
Christ, says he, forty and he has always bin a good Master to me, and I
will not deny him now, this is selfe-denyall. How many have bin overcome with
these things for want of self-denial. Those that are compelled to Popery and
Popish ways, are not Christ's followers, but the followers of Antichrist.

Obj. Some may say, what need we to have such a Doctrine, as this of
selfe-denyall, in respect of civil Relation to be taught as now?

Ans. God be thanked, it is true, the storm is over of this oppressing: yet
this Doctrine may be very useful for this very season, we are in the
expectation of a true Reformation, and in the very Reformation, selfe-denyall
is to be used. 2. If some by Reformation be reformed, and not others, will they
be quiet? No, the nearer we come to Christ, the more we must look for
persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Let us not look for a true powerful Reformation of
Religion without persecution. 3. The next thing is the consideration of such
things as are.

Doct. 3.
THe sensitive part of man, which has 3 Heads, Pleasure, Profit, Honor, these
3 must be denied; they were in great esteem amongst the Heathen, these 3 were
all represented to Eve, in the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.6. and it took such an
impression then, that every mothers child of us, have the print of it remaining
upon us. I heard a story of a fish in Garn^sie, when I was there, by some of
the best there, that there is a fish in those sands, that being stuck by the
Fisherman, her young, if she has any in her belly, are all wounded in the
very same place. This is a direct Emblem of Mankind, 1 John 2.16. and with
these 3 weapons the Devil assailed Christ, tempting him, Luke. 4. beginning,
these are often in Scripture together, Phil. 3.

Do^^. 4.
A Christian must deny himself in pleasure and delight, even the delights of
meat and drink, and lawful recreation, which are in themselves lawful meat
and drink in a continual moderation, keeping himself from excess, and
sometime in a total abstinence for a time.

1. To avoid excess at all times, Luke 21.14. Many Reasons there are, why we
should deny our selves in the immoderate use of the Creature. 1. It is an Enemy
to the soul, a Enemy to all Christian duties, 1. Pet. 2.11.

2. They do hinder us in the Christian race. 1. Cor. 9.2* When a soul is
overcharged, he is more fit to lie down then to run. 3. It brings many evils
upon a state, Luke 20. Swilling in drink brought a deluge. So in Lots time*
Sodom and Gomorrah did eat and drink, and swill, till fire came down from
Heaven, and burnt them all to Ashes, Psalm. 76. 4. It brings a man in the way to
hell. Luke 16. Dives there, he was so full that he forgot poor Lazarus, and
now he must pinch for it in Hell-flames, burning in torments for ever. A
Christian may have great occasion of mirth: but then we must have most care of
all. As the wise man says, when thou come to a full Table, if thou have an
appetite, put a knife to thy throat. This duty is requisite for all true
Christians.

1. Sometime we should wholly abstain from the Creature: as for the removeall
of some calamity we ly under, or to prevent a calamity coming upon us, or to
procure a blessing to be fitter for some good duties Examples we have many. 2 Samuel 12. and Jonah 3. Ezra 8. so 1 Cor. 7. Fasting keeps the spirit of Prayer
awake.

Use. Here is an heavy charge that lies upon many Professors, it is to be
wished, that the whole Kingdom were not to be blamed in this, like the
Children of Israel. Isay. 22.3. cramming themselves with a desperate saying,
let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we must dye. Is this a time of eating and
drinking. etc. when the Plague is so hot amongst us? Is this a time to be so
desperate? It is true, perhaps tomorrow we shall dye, but is this a time to
drink and swill, and feast: no it is rather a time to deny our selves; for we
may be shut up in our houses before tomorrow night, and perhaps dye tomorrow,
and be swept away with the Plague: is this a time to gorge our selves with
eating and drinking?

what issue may we expect from hence: we had indeed a day of Thanksgiving, but
we had need, that the next day should have bin a day of Humiliation; for then
was the Plague amongst us.

Indeed, when the motion of humiliation was made, one in the City (and that of
great note too) made answer, that Winter was coming on, and then the Plague
would be stayed.

Object. We have had many days of Humiliation, both public, and private.

Answ. Those that do so, do well, Ezekiel. 9.4. If they do it in sincerity.
Many that do it in their private Families shall have a blessing on them. But
let not this content us, that others do it; but let us all, each in our
Families, humble our selves by Fasting and Prayer, every Parish, and every
Family. I hope this is not against the Law, I am sure it is not against Gods
Law, to have such meetings.

The Lord stir up the hearts of all those whom it does concern to call for
Fasting and Prayer, in these evil times.

FINIS.

