The BOW: OR The LAMENTATION of DAVID over SAUL and JONATHAN, Applied to the
Royal and Blessed MARTYR K. Charles the I. IN A SERMON Preached the 30th. of
January, At the Cathedral Church of S. Peter in EXON.

BY ARTH. BVRY one of the Prebendaries.

Published to stop the mouth of Calumny.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun, Ivy-lane. 1662.

2 SAMUEL 1. 18. Also he bad them teach the Children of Juda (the use of) the
Bow.
THis strange Text cannot be more impertinent to the business of this sad day,
then that which occasioned it.

The words immediately foregoing tell us that David lamented with this
lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son, as we do now over a greater
King then Saul and a kinder man than Jonathan.

To believe the Jewish interpretation, that David took warning from the wounds
which Saul received from the Philistian Archers: to teach the children of Juda
that military art, were to confess an unpardonable ignorance: it was their
usual weapon.

The learned Grotius observing the lamentation to be musical, came so far
toward the discovery of the truth as to say, David would have them taught to
use Music in their Wars. But what Music with a bow? Were the Jews taught
(that practice which the ancient Germans used in their wars) to encourage
themselves with the, sprightly twang of their beaten Bow-strings, as we do by
beat of Drum? What harmony will that interpretation keep with the lamentation,
thus harshly interrupted?

The omission of the LXX. and the Vulgar Latin give us a fair hint for a smooth
interpretation, for they omitting all mention of the Bow read the words thus.
And David lamented -- Also he bad them teach it the Children of Juda. Good
sense, but no good fidelity! Our Tindal approving the sense but not the
infidelity, retains the word, but translateth it with new infidelity. Reading
thus, He bad them teach the Children of Juda the staves thereof, a good
Paraphrase; but a bad translation.

Upon these hints our excellent Gregory clears all difficulties.

He observes it usual for Poets to bestow upon their Odes some Title suitable
to their Subject. Thus our Psalmist titleth some of his Psalms. Altashith,
Sosannim, Mahaloth. And now having composed a threne in memory of Saul wounded
by the Bowmen, and of Jonathan that dear Archer, who shot his Arrow beyond the
Lad and thereby expressed a love exceeding the love of Women, honored the
memory of so dear a friend with a passionate threne, and that threne with a
name most endearing the instrument of so rare a kindness And now the sense is
smooth and Musical. David composed this epicedium in memory of Saul and
Jonathan, and caused them to teach it the Children of Juda calling it the Bow,
in memory of the fatal wounds which Saul received from the Bowmen of the enemy,
and the rare kindness which himself received from the Bow of Jonathan at that
passionate parting, when they kissed one another and wept 1. Sam. 20.
one with another, until David exceeded.

And to this clear sense does the Hebrew not only invite us, by leaving out the
word use, but force us too, by the necessary concord of the participle written
with the substantive Bow, both of them feminines.

The demonstration being Grammatical: The word (...) Written must marry the
word (...) Bow: therefore the Bow it self (not the story of it) was written:
therefore it was writable: therefore a form of words: therefore this very form
of lamentation, commanded to be taught the Children of Juda and recorded in the
book of Jasher.

What the book of Jasher was, is as needless to enquire as impossible to find,
we find but one mention more of it, and that Poetical. Josh. 10. 13. your
margins tell you the word signifies an upright man: and happily it may be an
abbreviation of the word Israel, and the book a Poetical register of the
public occurrences of that Nation.

Whatever that book were, it is lost, and so is the story of it. But this we
have found, that in that book was written this Lamentation, which David made
and called The Bow and commanded to be taught the Children of Juda.

Having thus found the Bow we shall view it a little and then exercise with it.

1. Observe. That under the Law it self Kings had power (as they saw occasion)
to make additions and alterations in the form of public Worship.

For David bad them to whom he directed his Odes, the chief Musicians, to teach
the Children of Juda this Bow, that they might use it with other of his Psalms
in the public service of God.

That this was usual, witness the many other Psalms which are superscribed To
the chief Musician and sometimes by name To Asaph: which were publicly sung as
occasion required: as appears by their praising God in the words of the 136.
Psalm, when the ark was brought into the oracle in Solomon's Temple.

Was it a small alteration to change the ambulatory Tabernacle to a standing
Temple: contrary to the pattern showed in the Mount, and without any command of
God? Yet God commends and blesses David for that intention though he
suspendeth the performance.

The Number. 4. 3.
law required thirty years of age to qualify the children of Levi for the
service of the congregation. Yet 1 Chro. 23. 27,
David commanded them to be numbered from twenty years.

The law forbad any unclean person to eat the passover. Lev. 7. 10. and 22. yet
Ezekia dispensed with it, as also with the Levites performing the Priests
office in killing the Sacrifices. 2. Chro. 30. 17, 18.

Now if under the law (where every punctilio was so exactly prescribed) the
Kings, the best of the Kings, made such alterations: How much more under the
Gospel (where there is only this generally directory enjoined, Let all things
be done decently and in order; and the particulars left to the wisdom of the
governors of the Church) shall it be in the power of Kings to prescribe such
forms as they shall judge most decent?

Is it a blessing to the Church to have Kings her nursing fathers, and shall it
not be her duty to submit to their government?

Was there ever any Religion which questioned the power of their rulers in
things acknowledged to be indifferent? And shall the Christian only which of
all others does most earnestly and frequently enjoin obedience, shall that
only dispense with it; and that without any color of necessity, but under
pretense of freedom from any obligation?

Well; but grant the Christian Kings the only Ciphers of Religion, not able to
bind the conscience by any direct obligation: will not that love of peace which
is so earnestly recommended to us, require (though by accident only) to obey
all their innocent injunctions? Does it become a peaceable and humble Christian
thus to dispute with his King? You have no power to command me and therefore I
will not obey. And not rather thus? Though you have no power to command me yet
for peace sake I will obey? Because as much as in me lies if it be possible I
will live peaceably with all men. Admit we did not owe the King obedience to
such commands as are only innocent, not necessary by the Word of God; do we not
owe so much obedience to the great commandment of Christ, Love and Peace: as to
submit a little privilege for the purchase of charity?

That Christian humility may be banished with obedience we have the most
ridiculous device, that ever adventured to cheat a people: a pretense that in
such a case obedience is not only needless, but sinful: The conscience (take
heed) cannot be bound to obedience, but it is to disobedience: To conform to
the commands of the King in matters of Worship, however otherwise indifferent
becomes sinful, by a secret venom drawn from obedience.

Strange sword of justice, which has an edge in the handle, and none in the
blade! Strange power of the magistrate which so takes away the indifference of
things, as to forbid by commanding and command by forbidding!

What? must the Scripture be reformed too according to the example of the best
reformed Churches? Must those texts be sequestered from the Word of God which
teach those malignant doctrines, obedience, conformity, charity? They must!
they must! or this new gospel can never be propagated. A little change of a
trifling syllable or two will make Saint Paul a nonconformist, saying, Let no
soul be subject to the higher power: and Saint Peter too, will as easily be
brought to teach to submit to no ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc.

And will not such a Reformation make a rare Gospel? will not the Church be
rarely provided for the edifying of it self in love?

But we cannot stay to admire this rare platform of the new model: which
denies Christian Kings that power which David exercised here, in commanding
them to teach the Children of Juda the Bow.

2 Observe. Music becomes the voice of mourning as well as the voice of joy.
The sweet singer of Israel sang not only the praises of God, but his own sins,
and miseries, and lamentations.

It was that blessed Kings fate, to bear the jeers of Michal for his cheerful
dancing, and his sons bear the jeers of her Children for singing; her Children;
for though her wit made her childlesse to the day of her death: yet since her
death she has a multitude of children, who imitate her sloutings, and jeer our
Church-musick for singing sad Anthems: upon this pitiful mistake, they think
all Music must express mirth.

But what wonder if they be no friends to Music, whose principles are all
discords? whose harsh untunable spirits can by no means be brought to an
unison? how can they sing their lamentations, whose very praises are expressed
by howlings and groans?

But say; you that think all Music to be frolic: what think you of Elisha's
minstrell, which from rage reduced him to such a temper, as qualified him for
the entertainment of the Prophetic spirit; was that a Jigg, think you? What
think you of that Hymn wherein our Savior breathed out the resentments of his
approaching passion? was that a Coranto, think you?

And let not the 137 Psalm. deceive you: wherein the Psalmist personateth a
captive refusing to sing: for that refusal is it self a song: nor does it
refuse singing indefinitely, but those merry songs, which the enemy required
Verse. 3. the songs of Sion, the cheerful praises of God: These he refuses with
this execration, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning: If I do not remember thee let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth;
i. e. let me forget both to play and sing. A cold curse to forget that which
must never more be used!

The meaning therefore of the Psalmist is not to give himself the lie, by
singing that he will not sing: but to answer the enemy that required cheerful
Music in a time of sadness. The captive will sing, not the songs of Sion,
praising God with the voice of Joy: but such mournful songs, as suited the sad
ruin of their Temple: So that this Psalm is so far from denying Music: that
indeed it professes some sorts of Music to be suitable to the most dismal
calamities.

If then this very complaint were a Song, if all the crying and penitential
Psalms were so many songs, if our Saviors last Hymn were a song, if this sad
Bow were a song; then certainly David and the greater son of David must bear
their parts in those scoffs which are made the portion of our Church, only for
this, because she uses mournful Anthems.

But whosoever has any skill, I do not say in Music, but Philosophy, or
History, or any kind of literature, knows that Music can suit as well the
Melancholy as the Sanguine temper, and carry the soul into all kinds of
passions, so forcibly that some Philosophers thought the soul it self to be
nothing but harmony.

This we are sure, that the animal spirits are exact dancers, keeping just
measures with good Music: and harmoniously moving the passions.

For whether the praises of God be sung with the voice of joy, they are
quickened by the shorter service into such a sprightly dance as David used
before the Ark: Or whether the sins or miseries of a people be lamented with
doleful strains, the slow-paced Pavin with tender flats and sharps melts
them down to such a lumpish heaviness, that they dance Ahab's mournful
measures when he humbled himself and walked softly.

Indeed, whatever eloquence can do, the same can Music: Music being but an
eloquent sound as eloquence is a Musical voice: Orpheus his Harp-strings draw
as strongly as Hercules's golden chain.

There was a contention between Cicero the best Orator, and Roscius the best
Actor, which of them could express a passion with greatest life and variety,
the one by phrase, or the other by gesture: The like wager might well lie
between a good Orator, and a good Musician: It is not easily determined which
way this Bow would pierce deepest, whether set to a mournful Anthem, or to an
eloquent Oration.

In this therefore we must confess the harsh principles of the enemies of
Church-Musick have something of harmony: They will banish both Music and
Eloquence out of the public worship, upon this mistake: they think them both
wanton. God is not pleased says one of them with wanton words of Rhetoric,
therefore no set form of prayer: God is not pleased with wanton Music
therefore no Organ. But however these principles suit well enough with one and
another, and with the untunable spirits of their patrons: yet they are very
disagreeing both with David's Pen and his harp, and his command; for he
composed this lamenting Bow and bad them teach it the Children of Juda.

3 Observe. It is proper to celebrate the memory of eminent losses as well as of
eminent deliverances: This Epicedion upon the death of Saul was written in the
book of Jasher as well as that Epinikion upon the victory of Joshua. The
daughters of Israel did as constantly lament the daughter of Jeptha as they
celebrated the feast of the passover: And we do as solemnly observe the 30. of
Jan. as the 5. of November.

It is considerable, though perhaps incredible, to some men: that this public
and settled way of preaching, wherein they think the whole service of God to
consist, deriveth from the observation of Holy days kept in honor of the
first Martyrs: at whose burying places the people solemnly assembling were
entertained by the eloquent Fathers with funeral Orations, in memory of those
Martyrs: from which use our Churchyards are still called (...), and the word
Panegyric which grammatically signifies any public speech, was by the
frequent use of such assemblies contracted to a more patticular sense;
signifying such speeches only as were publicly made to the praise of some
eminent person.

But the pious Fathers of the Church finding it more advantagous to godliness,
changed those Panegyricks to Sermons; and caused Churches to be built for the
greater convenience of such assemblies.

And this I thought necessary to observe, that I might not seem to abuse this
place by employing it to a Panegyric rather then a Sermon: The business of
this anniversary calling us back to that primitive practice; that by embalming
the memory of this royal Martyr, our name may be reskued from that infamy
which has so long made us stink in the nostrils of our neighbors: and his
reputation from that obscurity wherein it has so long been buried: so
fulfilling that his confident prophesy: that His reputation should like the Sun
(after Owls and Bats had had the freedom of the night and darker times) rise
and recover it self to such a degree of splendour, as those Feral birds should
be grieved to behold and unable to bear. For never were any Princes more
glorious than those, whom God has suffered to be tried in the Furnace of
afflictions by their injurious Subjects. A long, long night it was, wherein
those Feral Birds triumphed; a hot Furnace was that wherein God suffered this
excellent Prince to lie under a tedious trial; Blessed be his name that has
restored us to a power of honoring this Martyred Prophet, in a measure suitable
to his sufferings. For as his injurious Subjects passed all examples in the
cruelty of their persecutions, so do his loving subjects outvy all the honors
that ever were paid to the memory of the most glorious King, by this
anniversary reskuing his honor from their slanderous abuses, as the valiant
men of Jabesh Gilead did the bodies of Saul and his sons from the Walls of
Bethshan: and by this Solemn lamentation which we thus practice in imitation of
this Bow of David, which he bad them teach the Children of Juda.

Let us then pass from viewing this Bow to handling it; and that in a suitable
panegyrical way: A suitable way? No, that is a task for one of our David's: him
that made it, or him that we celebrate with it: Were my tongue as the Pen of
either of those ready Writers, I would pierce the hardest heart among you, and
in this sense from the fat of the mighty, from the blood of the slain this Bow
of Jonathan should not return empty.

However, I will manage it as I can; upon this hope, that what is wanting in my
feeble Rhetoric shall be supplied by your loyal affections.

It takes up the whole remainder of the Chapter: but the most material
strains, are contained in the three next verses, upon which the rest do only
descant.

Verse. 19. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
mighty fallen!

20. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askalon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised
Triumph.

21. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be any rain
upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely
cast away; the shield of Saul as though he had not been anointed with oil.

In these three strains does this Psalmist express 3 Passions.

1 Grief, ver. 19. 2 Shame, verse. 20. 3 Detestation, verse. 21.

With these in their order shall I exercise the remainder of your patience.

Your patience said I? No, your passions, your impatience. He is a stock or a
traitor that can be patient when such wounds are searching.

1. Grief is exercised upon consideration of the person slain. The only
considerable quality in Saul was his greatness: which therefore makes the
burden of the Song, How are the mighty fallen! Thus is Abner lamented, though
no otherwise considerable. Know you not that there is a Prince and a great man
fallen this day in Israel? Thus did Jeremy lament Zedekia, who had nothing
kingly but his power. The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord is
taken in their pits. Yet I doubt whether Saul should have been honored with
lamentation if Jonathan had not fallen with him.

They both met in our Martyred King, whose might was the least part of his
praise: his virtues were more glorious then his Crown.

Which that I may not dim by an incompetent description, I shall contract all
into this short Elogy. Had his father bequeathed his Crown (as the great
Alexander did) to the most worthy: he had then been as clearly heir apparent by
his worth, as now he was by his birth.

If you desire a more particular and lively character, you shall find it in
that rare Pourtraiture drawn by his own Pen, with such exactness of art, that
it appeared some considerable recompense for the multitude of his heavy
afflictions: which he expresses with equal satisfaction, but more modesty then
that Jamq opus exegi, etc.
Roman Poet.

It is (says he) same kind of deceiving and lessening the injury of my long
restraint, when I find my leisure and solitude have produced something worthy
of my self, and useful to you, that neither you, nor any other may hereafter
measure my cause by the success, nor way judgment of things by my misfortunes.

Whoever will see a book worthy to justle the Apocrypha out of it is place, let
him study that piece, and confess that the Spirit of God has not forsaken the
withered world.

In what glory does this second David sit there, under his Crown of Thorns,
attended with such a stately train of graces and virtues, as to make his other
pompous coronation confess it self a childish May Game! while he manageth (his,
now, only weapon) his Pen, with such a graceful Majesty, that whoever does
not acknowledge his absolute Sovereignty in Rhetoric, must be as great a Rebel
in point of literature, as those others were in point of duty, and yet with
such a splendid mixture of wisdom, piety, charity, patience, magnanimity, and
all other Royal and Christian graces, that the elegance of the style is the
least part of the beauty of the work.

How is height of fancy married with depth of judgment! Golden sentences
enameled with Florid expressions, and set with Orient Metaphors: Infallible
predictions, not only of events, but even of circumstances; and that in such
minute particularities, that few Historians do so lively relate things already
acted. (Some may question whether these predictions were dictated by the Spirit
of Prophecy; but who dares question a mighty influence of the Spirit of
Wisdom!)

And how are these rare sufficiences sanctified with all Christian graces?

What undaunted magnanimity, outfacing a long series of danger, and never
deserting those interests which he knew it his duty to maintain!

What invincible patience outliving the witherings of his gourd without
discontent or peevishness; or the least complaint to these who wanted nothing
to complete their mirth, but only such Music, or any other shrinking from
that Majesty which graced him most in his lowest ebbs.

What fervent Piety, firing his devout heart with a steady and permanent heat:
yet no volatile zeal, like theirs which show no other proof, but their boasts
and their levity; but fixed with a judicious constancy to that Religion which
he protected with his life.

And Oh! what Charity! what sweet love! what tender Bowels!

His enemies did him this only right, they thought none but the greatest
injuries to be competent trials of his patience: yet great as they were, his
charity outvied them. It is a small matter with him to pardon them, he pitieth
them, he prays for them.

I thank God (says he) I never found but my pity was above my anger: nor have
my passions ever so prevailed against me, as to exclude my most compassionate
prayers for them, whom devout errors more then their own malice have betrayed
to a most religious Rebellion.

Nay he is ready to reward them too. I do not (says he) more willingly forgive
their seductions, then I am ambitious by all princely merits to redeem from
their unjust suspicions, and reward them for their good intentions. These were
the passions, these were the revenges, which that intolerable load of
calumnies, affronts, prisons, and all kind of persecutions, begat in the breast
of that excellent King: the sweetness of whose temper could not receive any
tincture of brackishnesse though it ran a long, long course through a brinish
sea of troubles.

And if such were his tenderness to his enemies, Oh how dear where his
affections to his friends and loving Subjects! which he testified, while he had
power, by such gracious concessions, that all posterity will stand astonished,
both at the goodness which granted them and the baseness which abused them:
and when he had no power but of his Pen, by his last declaration, wherein he
protested before the face of Heaven that his own afflictions afflicted him not
so much as his peoples sufferings. Thus were Saul and Jonathan united in one
person, wisdom and eloquence, greatness and goodness, magnanimity and
patience, piety and charity were lovely in his life and in his writings they
were not divided.

Such was this mighty King mighty in the greatness of Saul, but mightier in
the sweetness of Jonathan: mighty in the number and strength of his kingdoms,
but mightier in the greater number and perfections of his virtues: mighty in
the love of his friends, but mightier by the malice of his enemies: who made
him a great and glorious King by exercising and evidencing his greatness, by
his diminutions, his glory by his ecclipses, his height by his fall, his might
by his weakness.

Had they not thus performed their promise he might have layen in level with
common Princes, who retain to their crowns for all their greatness: we had not
known him from a comet but by his parallaxes; we had not known his brightness
but by his clouds, nor his height but by his setting.

For how did the mighty fall? like Saul and Jonathan, by the arrows of the
Philistines? No, God covered his head in the day of battle. By the decays of
Age? No, he was but newly past the meridian. By the excesses of luxury? No,
those vices which could not stain, could not destroy his life. How did this
mighty fall? He will tell you himself.

He fell a King, by the hands of his own Subjects, a violent, sudden, and
barbarous death, in the strength of his years, in the midst of his Kingdom; his
friends and loving Subjects being helpless spectators, his enemies insolent
revilers and triumphers over him, living, dying, and dead.

Surely as David lamented Abner, so may we him. As a man falls before wicked
men, so fellest thou. Thy vineyard made thee a blasphemer, a fast is
proclaimed, a High Court of Justice established, witnesses prepared, an unjust
sentence procured and executed, that thy vineyard might be possessed; As Naboth
fell before Jezabell, so fellest thou.

But Naboth was perhaps rich enough by the inheritance of his fathers, not
mighty by the power of the Sword: Abner had the Sword too, yet fell by the
Sword of Joab, who got within him under pretense of kindness: Great
complements are used, they are his faithful and loyal Subjects, his great
counsel, will make him a great and glorious King. As Abner fell before Joab, so
fellest thou.

But Joab was Abner's enemy, not only upon the public quarrel, but a private
grudge: And it is the heavy complaint of this afflicted King, If they had been
mine open and forain enemies, I could have born it, but they must be mine own
Subjects, who are next mine own Children, dear to me, and for the restoring of
whose tranquillity I could willingly be the Jonah. He was destroyed by them,
for whom he was destroyed.

As Christ fell before the Jews, so fellest thou. So fellest thou, so prayedst
thou: so fellest for their good, so prayedst for their pardon, so did thou by
all means in life and death seek their happiness.

But how did the mighty fall! How did he fall by his own weight? By those
perfections, which are preservatives to others, and fatal only to him! How
might he have expostulated in that strange question of his Savior! Many good
works have I done, for which of them do you kill me?

Yea, for which of them did not kill him? which of his perfections was there,
that did not furnish them with a tentation or advantage to destroy him? His
Greatness? That made him an enemy, because it would reward them with spoils.
His Goodness? That weakened him by such a multitude of disarming concessions.
His Charity? That encouraged them to go on, because they knew they could not
out go his pardon. His Love to the people? That provoked them, because it
would not suffer him to make them slaves to an arbitrary power. His Firmness
in Religion? That enraged them, because it kept them from swallowing the
Revenues of the Church. His Wisdom? That frighted them with jealousies of
being at last discovered, loathed and ruined. How did the mighty fall like Saul
upon his own Sword, which should have defended him!

But how did the mighty fall? how did he take his fall? Died Abner as a fool
dies? Did he whine away his Soul with childish moans? did he crouch to his
merciless enemies, that he might beg his life of them by the oratory of his
tears, or purchase it with the Revenues of the Crown and Church? No, his last
Declaration speaks other language.

I thank my God (says he) I have armed my self against their fury: and now let
the Arrows of their envy fly at me, I have a breast to receive them, and a
heart possessed with patience to sustain them: for God is my Rock and my Shield,
therefore will I not fear what man can do unto me.

His tedious Imprisonment could not extort one word of complaint from him, the
horror of their cruel Bar could not stoop him to plead much less to pray for
his life. The terrors of the bloody Scaffold, could not make him let fall a
word unworthy of His Majesty. He discoursed upon that fatal Theater, in that
cruel company, as if he had been among His Lords in Parliament, unconcerned in
any thing but the care of his people. A few words bestowed upon his own
necessary vindication, and all the rest in directions to the way of peace: A
discourse which we then admired for the magnanimity, and now for the wisdom of
it. God having now declared, that to be the only right way which that Blessed
Martyr then showed; though those times had only need, not capacity of such
directions.

Thus did the mighty fall, as man falls before wicked men: with a fall
suitable to his life in point of constancy and pious charity; and most unsuitable
in point of those other circumstances of formal justice.

Thus were Saul and Jonathan, greatness and goodness, magnanimity and love,
wisdom in counsel, and care of the people, lovely in his life and in his death
they were not divided.

Oh ye daughters of Israel (says our Psalmist verse. 24.) weep over Saul, who
clothed you in Skarlet, with olker delights, who put on ornaments of Gold upon
your apparel. Ye daughters of England weep over Charles, who clothed you with
Silks, with other braveries, whose peaceful and righteous reign protected your
fathers, while they gathered that wealth you now enjoy; rendering the Sea safe
to the Merchant, and the land to the Husbandman: keeping you in a happy
ignorance of Excise, Contributions, quarterings, plunderings, etc. and in the
Church, of Quakers, Seekers, Ranters, etc. he clothed you in Silk, not Garments
rolled in Blood, he kept your eyes and the Sword dry: Let those tears be now
paid as a just tribute to his memory which he then saved by the righteousness
of his government.

Weep over him whose watchings defended your sleeps, whose cares secured your
pleasures, whose Sword guarded your peace, whose prisons protected your
liberty, whose death preserved your Laws.

Weep over Saul, but more over Jonathan: Remember that rich treasure of his
virtues which made him the delight of all good men, the hate of all evil:
remember that firmness of his constancy, that sweetness of his love, that
tenderness of his charity, that universal graciousnesse of his disposition; We
are distressed for thee most dear Sovereign, very pleasant have thou been to
us, thy love to us was wonderful, passing the love of women; Oh! had thou
been some Nero or Caligula, some bloody or filthy Tyrant, that never spared man
in their anger, nor woman in their lust, had thou been such as thy enemies
were, and accused thee to be; we would have reserved our tears for our private
sorrows, and suffered thy memory to perish with thy life.

Or had thou fallen by the usual ways of mortality, we would have comforted
our selves with such a common infelicity: But to have such a King so destroyed,
in the name of the people, under formalities of justice, by the hands of
mushroms, under thine own window, and all this only for being excessively good
--

How shall we raise our lamentations, to a proportion suitable to thy
excellencies or our griefs? We are distressed for thee, most dear Sovereign,
thy love to us was wonderful, passing the love of women: and our love to thee
shall be sutably great and durable; we will annually remove thy marble and
embalm thy ashes with pious tears, and spicy Elogies; that the enemies of thy
virtues may know the greatness of their guilt, and the enemies of our Nation
and Religion may know our innocence.

Though we cannot restore thy life, we will eternise thy memory: though we
cannot raise thy ashes, yet we will revive our own credit:

Those rivers of tears which we thus solemnly and annually offer up to thy dear
name, will not indeed wash away some men's guilt, who love their Negro
blackness; but they will our shame.

2. Our shame: which is the ground of the next strain of this mournful Bow,
expressed in the next verse, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not, etc.

It is a double misery, when our loss and shame is our enemies gain and glory.

Nations have thought it worthy a war to remove the trophies of their defeats;
yea more men have sacrificed their lives to the honor then to any other
interest of their country. Moses uses this argument to God himself, prays
him not to destory Israel, lest the heathen should triumph. Cleopatra could
have been content to have outlived the loss of her Kingdoms, if she might
have escaped the triumph of Augustus:

But when the Philistines fasten the bodies of Saul and his sons to the wall of
Bethshan, then the valiant men of Jabesh Gilead, hazard their lives to remove
such a Trophee of their shameful defeat.

And indeed, whoever pretends any affection to his country, will feel quick
resentments, not only of its losses, but its dishoners: a strong motive to
those our honored Patriots, who by this command of an annual lustration, have
taken care to wash away this Royal Blood that it may not defile the land.

Such indeed was the charitable temper of that Blessed Martyr, that he would
not gratify the malice of a few with sinister thoughts of the generality: But
such is the precipitancy of vulgar censurers, that they brand whole nations
with infamy due only to to some particulars.

How do such men justify (that old slander) that the King of England is a King
of devils! How did that divilish villainy make the name of an Englishman stink
in the nostrils of all nations! How often have our Merchants and traveling
Gentry chose rather to deny their country then endure this shame! -- But what
do we talk of the honor of our Nation?

Our Religion! Our Religion is shamed by it; both in general as Christian, and
in particular as Protestant.

Tell it not in the Regions of darkness, publish it not among the heathen
persecutors; lest those bloody tormentors of the Christian Church triumph, as
in a posthumous justification of their cruelties, as a necessary policy to
weaken a sect, so pernicious to their lives and estates.

Let those Blessed Martyrs, whose blood sealed not only the truth of their
Religion, but the firmness of their loyalty, let them not blush to see the
professors of the same Religion, persecuting them with the same slanders as
their enemies did: impudently outfacing the apologies of their fathers, and
justifying the calumnies of their enemies, by pretending that they used those
tame weapons prayers and tears only for want of the military Sword and Spear.

Miscreant persecutors of Crowns! will you depose the very Martyrs too from
those Crowns which they purchased as much by their meekness as their faith!

Was not this the only controversy beetween them and their persecutors, that
the one believed them inclined to propagate their religion by force, the other
protested that they would not so defend their lives? And do not you join with
their persecutors? do not you persecute them afresh and put them to an open
shame?

Would not they have resisted their bloody Tyrants? and do you persecute your
own King, the best of your Kings? Is it thus you rejoice in persecutions? by
inflicting, not by undergoing them? by inflicting them upon the Defendor of the
Faith.

How basely have you confuted the Apologies of Tertullian and other defendors
of the Christian faith? How unchristianly have you justified the bloody
persecutors thereof? How heathenishly have you strengthened those slanders
wherewith they persecuted it no less bitterly and unjustly then with the Sword?

Where shall we hide this shame? How shall we reskue our holy Religion and
innocent Martyrs from this disgrace, poured upon them, not so much by their
persecutors as their professors.

Nay, how shall we ever hope to propagate our Religion for the future? What
black Indian of the East or West, what wild African or American, will change
that Devil Worship which their fathers have practiced without any such guilt,
for the Christian Religion whose professors call it Godliness to be inhumane?
Tell it not in Quinsay, publish it not in the hoords of the Nomades, lest those
Miscreants triumph in the greater purity of their infidelity.

What Turk or Jew will ever be brought to a tolerable charity toward that
Religion whose professors call the horridest Treasons the cause of God? Tell it
not in Constantinople, publish it not in the Streets of Bagdat, lest those
circumcised Infidels triumph in the greater piety of their own profession.

Is this the propagation of the Gospel? Is this the advancement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ?

Ah! must the Christian, the Christian Religion, which was first planted, and
always watered, and always thrived with the Blood of her defendors, and
professors shed by their persecutors, now wither by the blood of her defendors
shed by her own Children? Is the patience, and meekness, and peaceablenesse,
so much recommended by the great Author of our faith, not only by his Sermons
but his sufferings, and always practiced by his disciples: Is that sweet
beauty of our Religion which won so great a part of the world to her embraces,
now disfigured with such a ghastly deformity, that she must for ever despair of
gaining any more Lovers: and that not by the witherings of age, but by the
manglings of her unnatural children?

But these perhaps are remote considerations, and our zeal against our
neighbor, Babylon, may excuse the inconvenience of that Scandal which probably
may never reach the more distant Heathen,

And is it thus we hope to root out Popery? what? by strengthening their most
plausible pretenses? Is not this the great clamor of their popular
declamations? That we no sooner forsake unity with the Catholic Church but we
are wildered by the unsteadinesse of our own rambling fancies, or abused by the
craft of such other seducers as our unhappiness or our curiosity may expose us
to: That there is nothing in doctrine so absurd, in practice impious, which a
smooth tongue and a zealous look may not prefer to an easy and credulous
belief, as a holy truth: That there is no security from the most horrid
impieties and blasphemies but in the bosom of the mother Church, the only
determiner of controversies: Witness those swarms of ridiculous Sects, witness
those horrible confusions in Church and State: Witness the execrable massacre
of the defender of your faith. Whence came these horrible plagues but from your
separation from us? and how can you ever be secure from further crumblings till
you are again united with us?

Tell it not in Rome, publish it not in the covents of their Friars, and
Colleges of their Jesuits, lest the conclave rejoice, lest their priests
triumph in the ruin of the strongest pillar of our Religion, and the
strengthening of their own pretenses.

Yet all this and other their plausiblest harangues are fully answered by this
Royal defender of the Faith who thus armeth the heir of his Kingdoms. The
scandal of the late troubles which some may object and urge to you against the
Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to them or your
own thoughts in this, that scarce any one who has been a beginner or an active
prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the Laws, and Me^; either was,
or is a true lover, imbracer, or practicer of the Protestant Religion
established in England; which neither gives such rules, nor ever before set
such examples.

The Protestant Religion gives no such rules: but does not the Romish? Is not
Rebellion a doctrine as properly Popish, and more pernicious, then Purgatory
indulgences, or any other? Who first taught it lawful to resist Kings? was it
not the Pope? Who first taught it not only lawful but pious to depose Kings,
if they be Heretics? was it not the Pope? Who first taught that the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy are dispensed with by the interest of Religion? was it
not the Pope? Does not the Solemn League and Covenant of the English
Schismatics with their Scottish brethren, bear the lively image of the holy
Ligue between the French Jesuits and their brethren of Spain?

The Protestant Religion never before set such examples: but how often has
that Antichristian See armed not only Subjects against their Sovereigns, but
Sons against their Royal Fathers, adding unnaturalness to Rebellion! How came
it to it is present grandeur, but by vexing their Sovereigns the Empp. with holy
Rebellions? How many Henn. and Fread. and other Empp. and K K. have their
Saints butchered? What Nation has not heard the roaring of their Bulls
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance? Who has not heard of the Holy Ligue
of France, the Guelphs and Gibellines of Italy? Let this execrable regicide
committed upon those principles, which you maintain and we detest, make another
Item in the goodly Inventory of your holy Rebellions and Regicides. For no true
lover of the Protestant Religion established in England, was an active
prosecutor of this war against the Church, the Laws and the King. But what
multitudes of your Priests and Jesuits under the vizors of gifted brethren and
Independent Soldiers, envenoming the Army and inflaming the Rebellion! were
these Volunteers in such an important service? No; their absolute obedience to
their superiors is too well known, to leave any probability of their
undertaking such designs without command.

Tell it now in Rome, publish it in all their Covents and Colleges: but tell
it truly, That the Church of England did not act but suffer in this hideous
Rebellion: That she requires all her Sons to profess by Oath their
detestation of it as a doctrine damnable and heretical. But a faction infected
with that damnable doctrine, wherewith Rome efferated the meekness and stained
the purity of the Christian Religion: acted this devilish inhumanity upon the
principles and instigations of Popish incendiaries; to the grief and ruin of
the true Sons of our Church, who hazarded their lives to prevent it, and do
thus solemnly profess their detestation of it.

When the Sons of Rom^ shall practice such a a public repentance for that
multitude of Rebellions and Regicides which their Popes and their doctrines
have acted through the Christian world; we will acknowledge an equality of
shame due to us and them: We will be content that this one Murder shall out
weigh that multitude of theirs, as much as this one King did excel all theirs:
and to make the scales even, we will cast in so much charity, as not to impute
those doctrines and impieties to their Church, but to factiousnesse of the
Jesuits and the ambition of the Popes.

We will yield to any the most unreasonable composition, if they will thus
solemnly and authentically renounce that damnable doctrine: But until they do;
let them not upbraid us with the Splinter (so our Saviors (...) signifies)
let them not upbraid us with the Splinter that is in our eye, while there is a
beam in their own eye: That beam, from whence our Splinter came, which we thus
carefully pull out of our watering eye.

But these still are remote enemies: we have others within our own pale, that
shame us more. Enemies, not to the Christian or the Protestant but to All
Religion: Men whose God is their belly, whose Heaven is the Tavern, whose
Religion is Debauchery.

These men to ease themselves from the trouble (as they take it) of holiness,
will needs force themselves and tempt others to believe that Religion is only
an engine of State, that Zeal is but an implement of ambition, that the
precisest Saints are but insinuating hypocrites, who disguise the basest and
bloudiest designs under the mortified countenance of sanctity and humility.
Witness (say they) the furies of the German and the greater furies of the
English Sectaries. These men rail at our harmless good fellowship and
themselves destroy the peace of the world. Make great scruple to take the other
Cup, and make themselves drunk with the blood of Kings. Make long prayers and
devour widows houses. These, these are they whose Triumphs shame us while they
condemn all holiness and godly zeal as tending to the furious wickedness of
the Fanatics.

Tell it not therefore in the Taverns, publish it not in the Alehouses, lest
the Drunkards rejoice, lest the Atheists Triumph: lest every devout christian
be condemned for a Puritan: and every professor of zeal for a Fanatic, yet
these misprisions are easily wiped away by our Holy Martyr himself. Let not
(says he) counterfeit and disorderly zeal abate your value and esteem of true
piety. Both of them are known by their fruits: the sweetness of the vine and
fig tree are not to be despised though the Bramble and Thorn should pretend to
bear figs and grapes, thereby to rule over the trees.

But say; you that accuse Religion of the abuses which it suffered; can you
wash your hands from the blood of this just person? Did not your wickedness
ruin him by provoking God and Man against that righteous cause which you
engaged in? Did not your detestable rudeness fright thousands out of their
wits and their allegiance, who loved the King more heartily then your selves,
and would have followed his party if they could have endured such company as
fought against heaven by their profaneness, and earth by their opressions.
Does not the Law declare you Traitors, that alienate Subjects affections from
their Sovereign? Does not this gracious Kings first Proclamation disclaim you
as those that do him more mischief by your lewdness, then you can recompense
by your valors? Does not our Church disclaim you as greater non conformists by
your disobedience to her doctrines, then others are by their disobedience to
her discipline? What impudence has steeled your foreheads, that you dare call
your selves the Kings good Subjects and the true sons of the Church, when you
are disobedient to both and renounced by both.

And did you not make the Rebels prosperous too as well as numerous? Did God
give up his holy army to the rout for the sin of one Achan: and must he not
forsake whole Armies of Achans? Did you not even compel him to desert a
righteous King that he might not prosper a profane party?

But stay! can we not avoid one shame without splitting upon another? and must
we yield the Rebels their so much vanted title of The Godly party. Tell it not
in Amsterdam publish it not in the conventicles of the Schismatics, lest they
boast against the Episcopal discipline as a nurse of profaneness, because the
new discipline is maintained by Godly people and the old by profane.

Yet the unjustice of such a boast will betray it self, if we consider that
those very persons whose piety they boast of, received their piety from the
Ministry of the Episcopal way, and only their faction from them, who made
profession of zeal, a bait to betray them.

Is there any thing more credulous then zeal? and is it any wonder if those who
were most zealous, had the strongest byas toward that party, that made the
most glorious professions of it?

The Episcopal Government then, may say to the new discipline, as Laban did to
Jacob: These Children are my Children, and these Saints are my Saints, why have
thou stolen them from me? What Godly men have thou, whom thou did not receive
from me! And if thou did receive them, why boastest thou as if thou did not
receive them?

And on the other side; what wonder if the prophaner sort were not caught when
the baits were not fitted for them?

Thus far then we are ingeniously humble: we acknowledge they have cheated many
of our Godly, and few of our profane.

Yet must not that humility make us yield them the glory of greater Sanctity.
Admit they have deluded a multitude of vulgar hearts, full of sail and void of
ballast; with fancies inflamed with zeal, and understanding dazeled with every
blaze: Are the multitude the judge of truth? Does justice pass Sentence by her
Counters and not by her Balance?

Or had the Episcopal party no Saints, who hazzarded their lives, and afterward
took cheerfully the spoiling of their Goods, and imprisonment of their Persons,
to save their consciences, without any hope of recompense from their now ruined
party?

If we granted you a greater multitude, yet would we challenge you to come to
the balance for men of judicious and fixed sanctity.

Match if you can, our Charles among your Laity, and our Hammond among your
Clergy: If you cannot, then cast in so many thousands of your most eminent
Saints, as may outweigh those two: And when you have done so, we will so stifle
you with a multiude of Halls, Brownrigs, Oldsworths, Mortons and others, whereof
some are yet alive and many are fallen asleep, that you shall be glad to shrink
out of the press: and impudence it self shall blush to pretend, that the
Episcopal party are only a pack of unsanctified men.

Yet what if they were? was not David's troop a rabble of Bankrupts and
Malevolo's? yet himself and his cause holy in the sight of God?

If you will convince the Church of England to be accessory to the
profaneness of any of her children; you must indict some of her authentic
constitutions; her Doctrine, Discipline, Government or Worship.

Convince any of these as accessory to profaneness, we will cast that Sheba's
head over the wall.

But if our doctrines be as holy, our Discipline as severe, our Government as
judicious, our Worship as devout, and all our establishments as pious, as any
in the world; is it not now as great a cruelty as injustice, to endeavor to
shame us with that profaneness, which does sufficiently grieve us already?

How irrational is that consequence which argues from accidental events to
necessary causes? yea, from non-causes to causes?

Such wild extravagances ill become the gravity of sober reasonings; though
they may sure well enough with the intemperate ravings of transporting
passions; which furiously fly upon every thing they meet with; bearing the
least aspect, though without the least influence, upon their grief.

Thus Job fell a cursing the day of his birth: Thus our Psalmist flies out
into curses upon the innocent Mountains of Gilboa; for this poor reason because
there the shield of Saul was vilely cast away as though he had not been
anointed with oil.

Poor reason, but rich poetry! which then personateth a raging passion most
lively, when it stormeth most irrationally, against every thing that comes in
its way.

And therefore though we cannot pardon the looseness of such reasonings as
conclude from the persons to the cause; yet we need not condemn such a picture
of grief, as falls into those wild, irrational ravings, which are the usual
Symptoms of an unruly passion: such is

The third strayn of this Bow: expressed in the 21. Verse. Ye Mountains of
Gilboa, let there be no dew, etc.

How shall we exercise this passion? What shall we curse?

The place? God forbid! who has blessed it with the presence of the royal heir.

The men? God forbid! who gave the injured King himself, such grace as to
bless them with his prayers, that repentance might be their only punishment.

What then shall we curse? We will curse those doctrines, that taught some men
to shake hands with allegiance under pretense of taking faster hold on Religion.

You unchristian! you Antichristian! you inhumane doctrines! Let no honest
Christian be ever deluded again by you! let no Christian Prince or people ever
tolerate you! let every one that pretends to any thing of conscience or
humanity for ever loath you! For by you the best, the wisest, the meekest, the
holiest of Kings was vilely cast away as though he had not been anointed with
oil.

And may this execration blast, not only Belzabub the Prince of divelish
doctrines, which teaches to kill Kings; but every legionary devil, that may be
but suspected to contribute the lest encouragement to any kind of disobedience;
that does but scatter ambiguos de principe sermones, quaque alia turbamenta
vulgi.

(...)
O wretched daughter of Babel! happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy
little ones against the Stones.

That no root of bitterness springing up trouble us any more; whereby many
have been defiled, and many ruined, and many destroyed, and among others that
blessed King, who alone was more then many.

Did not this root of bitterness first peep up with a smooth and tender head,
and then by insensible progression grow up to such a bulk and roughness as to
overdrop the royal cedar?

Give me a standing and I will move the whole earth; said Archimedes: and
Geometry demonstrateth it faisible. So says Rebellion too, Give me footing I
will turn the world upside down.

Archimedes probably designed the Skrew for his engine: to whose insensible,
but forcible motions our martyred Prince most appositely compares the creeping
insinuations of Rebellion: which Skreweth men on from questioning the lawful
commands of superiors, to disliking them, thence to disobeying, then to
resisting, then to assalting, and at last to destroying the Prince.

Do we not perceive? do we not this day lament the truth of Machiavel's Maxim.
Whoever draws his Sword against the Prince must throw away the Scabbard; for
he must not think of sheathing it, otherwise then in the Bowels of that
provoked Prince: Which our learned Cook thus translateth to an Oracle of Law:
in the case of the E. of Essex arraigned for seeking the Queens life, and
appealing to the Queen her self as Judge of his zeal for her safety. The Law
(says he) interprets it as a seeking the Princes life when any one seeks
to force the Prince: because such an one will never think himself safe
otherwise then by the Princes death. Oh what a tentation it is to be engaged!
How easily are they drawn to follow Absalon in the blackest villainies who at
first thought of nothing but a vow to Hebron!

I must be more particular.

I am confident (as the good King was) that the far greatest part of the
Presbyterians, are men of very tender consciences and pious affections and if
that must have been their option twenty years since; they would rather have
delivered themselves up to the fire, then to that factious disobedience which
is now called the power of Godliness: Yet being once engaged, have been
skrewed on by their insinuating Leaders, to such a height of unnatural
Rebellion, as themselves upon clearer thoughts, would have abhorred with the
most vehement detestation: Nor can any such second, and cooler thoughts, as so
long a time of dismal confusion might have begotten in them, unmussell them
from those black errors which brought them first into disobedience, and thence
into hideous confusions.

How shall we undeceive these good men? Shall we urge the frequent and earnest
importunity of Scripture injoyning obedience? They read it with colored and
broken Spectacles, and a multitude of distinctions, and a new question, Who are
the higher powers? and how far do their commands oblige?

Shall we appeal for this to the Laws of the Land? There are hidden fundamental
Laws which must first be heard, notwithstanding a clear Statute making it
Treason so to oppose fundamental against known Laws.

Shall we vindicate the innocence of those particular injunctions which they
scruple to obey? They believe it sinful to obey all Ecclesiastical Injunctions,
which bring no positive particular Warrant from the Word of God.

How shall we convince these men? We will cite them to a new Topic, whose
authority and evidence they shall never be able to dispute. Their own
principles. Their own protestations. Their own first pretenses.

If they have renounced their own principles. If they have broken their own
protestations. If they have confuted their own pretenses: how can it be but men
of such tender consciences, finding themselves self condemned, should think it
necessary to repent of those actions, which they cannot justify: and seeing
they must needs take shame to themselves; blush rather at their exorbitances
then their Sobriety.

I shall not further rake up those actions, which the Kings mercy and our
charity have buried; then is necessary to discover the several changes of that
Insect cause, whose generation we are thence to conclude equivocall, that we
may observe the truth of that saying of Cicero clearly verified,

Qui semel modestiae fines transilierit, opportet ut sit gnaviter impudens. The
confluence of so great a number of Godly men, in the great Council of the
Kingdom, promised us a new heaven and a new earth wherein dwells
righteousness: But behold! the sons of Zerviah are too hard for the King, and
hinder his concurrence with his great Council. Who is he now that has any Zeal
for God, and will not do his best for removing such obstructions, by taking
away the wicked from before the King, though against his will?

That the lawfulness of the means may answer the goodness of the end; We must
make a distinction, yea a separation, yea an opposition between the power and
the person of the King: that so the godly party may disobey him in duty, and
fight against him in his defense, under an Engagement for King and Parliament.

And because this distinction might perhaps appear too nice for grosser
understandings, the law of God and the Land, must for once (to promote so good
a cause) give way to the law of Nature, which allows self defense in case of
imminent danger; and that again must allow a little straining; our fears and
jealousies may justify that for a defensive war, which is made to prevent a
foreseen danger: which that it may appear real a protestation, is enjoined to
defend the (much endangered, take heed) King, Parliament, Laws, and protestant
Religion established.

By this chain of fair pretenses are a multitude of well meaning men persuaded
to Hebron. Gods cause inviting them, but not to the least disobedience against
the King, whose power and person they protest to defend.

But how quickly is the Scene changed! they who just now protested to defend
the Religion established, now fight for the Subversion of a great part of it,
under the specious name of Reformation. They who took up arms only in their
necessary defense, will not grant the King peace, unless he purchase it with
delivering up his Sword: the power of the Militia, acknowledged by themselves
to be his undoubted right: And is not this now a most manifest rebellion, not
only against the Laws of God and the Land, but against their own protestation
and their public remonstrances.

But the godly party being once engaged, must needs go on, and are unawares
grown to be Fresbyterians.

They go on, and after forty messages from the King, importuning them for peace
(partly slighted, partly denied, partly yielded too, but upon unreasonable
terms) at last they gain a complete victory and make the Kings most secret
papers their Prisoners.

It might be expected from such faithful Subjects, as they profess themselves,
that they show him as much civility as Pompey did to his enemy Sertorius, whose
Letters he hurnt, or as the Emp. showed his enemy the Queen of Bohemia, whose
intercepted Letters he conveyed according to direction. No, these Letters
discover so many horrid plots against our Kingdom and Religion, that they
should be very unfaithful to the cause, if they should conceal them.

They are published, and what do they discover but this? that the Kings
intentions were most righteous, his desires of peace most ardent, his wisdom
most eminent, his affections to his people most tender, and all their own
pretenses most false.

What invention could have devised a way more convincingly to justify the King
and to condemn themselves? They had declared the King a good, but an easy
Prince, led away by evil counselors, and needing the guardianship of the
Parliament: this they confute by publishing those letters which demonstrate his
excellent wisdom, and care. They had declared the war on their own parts to be
merely defensive; and now they publish those letters which make it apparent
that the King is most desirous of peace. They had declared that the King
intended to bring in Popery, and now they publish those letters wherein his
firmness to the Protestant Religion is most apparent. They had declared his
intentions to be foul, and confute themselves by publishing the secretest
intentions of his very heart to be fair and innocent. Was not this to give
their cause a greater rout then they had given the Kings forces?

Yet the Presbyterians are Godly men: but being so far engaged they must go on
though Absalon be never so impudent. The cause is grown so strong as to defend
it self not only against the Laws of God and man, but against all its own
pretenses, and all appearance of modesty.

For now all fairer pretenses are laid aside, and Providence shall bear them
out, even against their own principles. They will do whatever shall seem most
advantageous, and no law nor religion shall withold them, for Providence leads
them. That is, they have gotten power, and as long as they prosper; their sword
shall justify what the balance condemns.

The distressed King, no longer able to defend himself, applies himself to the
natives of his person and his troubles; upon their engagement to assist him and
his party with their Armies and Forces: and accordingly at first they publish a
glorious manifesto, declaring it an odious baseness if they should deliver him
up to those Commissioners who were sent for him.

But having thus inhanced the price, they plainly make sale of him for a sum of
money: with a proviso notwithstanding for his honor and safety: (in pursuance
doubtless of their National covenant (sir reverence) which taught them to
suborder the Kings defense to the defense of Religion: which they (the Gospels
life guard) could no longer serve without pay. What proviso for the safety and
honor of the King is no other way made good, but by a fair imprisonment, and a
perpetual refusal of his repeated importunities for a Personal treaty. And is
not this a plain giving themselves the Lie, who pretended to fight only to
bring the King to his Parliament, and now will not suffer him to come?

Yet the Presbyterians are godly men, but being engaged are now carried on by
Providence to higher actions then at first appeared lawful: and they must be
excused if they change their principles with their condition, Providence thus
calling them to it.

At last the perpetual importunities of the King and Kingdom extort their
consent to a treaty, which they grant, but with this condition, that the King
first depose himself by signing four Bills, yiedling up himself, religion,
laws, friends, people and all to their Arbitrary power which because he cannot
but refuse to do, they fairly depose and excommunicate him, by voting against
all addresses to him or from him.

And is not this an accomplishment of the greatest self conviction in the
world; thus to depose him, whose lawful authority they had so often sworn to
defend?

Yet still the Presbyterians are godly men, but being engaged are led on by
Providence, to such actions as themselves had often declared sinful, but now
appear godly: because providence, calls upon them to change their principles
with their condition.

But what invention shall we find out to justify us against this last
pretense? providence it self fiighting also in its course against our last
actions as well as against all our first pretenses (and requiring us to return
where we first set out by changing those principles too with our condition.

I do not, I profess I do not, thus uncover their nakedness to upbraid but to
convince them, who are hardened against all other evidences. We appeal to
themselves, to their own public protestations, to those very principles, into
which their holy cause was first baptized. If they have not as peremptorily
resisted every one of them as the King himself, we shall yield them the honor
of being the only godly party. They professed to make him a great and glorious
King. How did they perform this? by illustrating his magnamity patience and
other suffering virtues?

They professed to bring him to his Parliament. How did they perform this? By
bringing his power thither and keeping away his person?

They promised to remove him from his evil Counselors. How did they perform
this? by keeping him from that his great Council?

They promised to defend the Protestant Religion established in England. How
did they perform this? By comparing the Loyalty of its principles, with those
of the new discipline?

At last, they made providence their rule. Let them do so now, and join with us
in detesting those principles, which providence it self has so manifestly
blasted: and which do so manifestly confess themselves not fit to be trusted,
as having skrewed up such Godly men to such a height of impiety.

But what is this to the Presbyterians? They did not kill the King: Grant it,
are they therefore the godly party because they did not come up to the very top
of wickedness? When they boast what they did not, they might do well to
remember what they did. They put the King, though not to death, yet upon the
certain expectations of death, as knowing there are but few steps between the
prisons and graves of Princes.

They did not kill the King, it is true. But it is as true they could not.

They would not if they could. How shall we know that? By their protestations?
let them show us how they made good any one protestation, and we will believe
them: How can they expect belief from us? how can they believe themselves,
whose principles run through so many changes.

They voted the Kings concessions a ground for peace. But when? when it was too
late; when they had no other way to oppose the Army: the Army, who first
pretended to restore the King, and then were opposed by the Parliament, as they
are now when they declare to destroy him.

They voted his concessions only a ground for a treaty: that they might engage
his friends to help them, and not engage themselves to restore the King.

But these things are past and pardoned. They are now his best Subjects. They
restored the King. Yes. As Marcus Livius was the cause of the taking of
Tarentum, because if he had not first lost it, it could not have been taken: So
were they cause of restoring the King, because if they had not driven him from
his Kingdom, he could not have been restored. But they restored him. They
restore him? Why then are they so mad that he was restored so freely without
articles?

The Scots show us the way of Presbyterians bringing in Kings. They declare him
their undoubted rightful King; but withal he must not exercise any power
until he have submitted to such conditions as they think good to prescribe.
Then they bestow a Crown upon him, but a thorny one; and make his Kingdom
worse then his banishment.

But the Presbyterians are the Kings faithful Subjects. If they will be
believed, let them make it credible by some evidence. Let them follow the
ingenuity of their brethren of Aberdeen. Let them show their affections to the
Son by their detestation of those principles which ruined the Father.

How jealous would a just resentment make them of every principle that has the
least appearance of evil? of every garment spotted with the flesh?

When Adonijab petitioned for Abishag (the warming-pan rather then) the
Concubine of David, what a storm of jealousy does this raise in Solomon to the
ruin of Adonijah, and his party? one slain, another degraded, another
confined! How would that jealously become every affectionate heart, toward all
those principles, which do though never so little, glance toward disobedience?
How should we suspect every questioning of the fitness of any royal command?
How should we curse The mountains of Gilboa, every thing that contributed
(though never so little) to the ruin of that Beauty of Israel! How should we
be jealous of our selves, how should we fear the jealousies of our Superiors,
while we foster those opinions of whose creeping venom we have had such
lamentable experience!

But why so much fondness for Absalom? Why must we be tempted to say like Joab,
you declare that you regard neither Prince nor People. For we perceive that if
your covenant had been brought in and the King kept out, it had pleased you
well.

What so great necessity of establishing the new and destroying the old
Government? What do you fear? Popery? This is that we crave, that you would
renounce those principles which are no less propetly Popish, then perniciously
Antichristian.

What age, what Nation, not only of the Christian, but universal world ever
denied the power of the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical affairs, until the
ambition or the Popes wrested it from the Emperors? who were they that refused
the doctrine and Oath of Supremacy, when first imposed in England, and ever
since?

Is it thus that you make your selves Antipodes to the Jesuits, that you may
carry your faces opposite ways, and dwell in the same longitude and latitude
from truth and charity? Is it thus you run from one another, only as Sampson's
foxes did, with countenances separate, and tayls united in those fiery
doctrines, to which the Church of Christ owes all her combustions?

Believe it, those Plebaeian doctrines of purgatory, Indulgences, Dirges, etc.
which only pick Purses, are not so properly and fundamentally Popish, as those
Jesuitish principles which destroy whole Nations, by teaching it a pious
devotion to turn Bankrupt in allegiance in hope to drive a quicker trade in
Religion: A French Catholic who acknowledges the Kings Supremacy, is not
half so dangerously Popish, as an English Schismatic which denies it.

This then, this, is that Thorough Reformation which the truly Godly party
longs for. These are the Popish doctrines, upon which the Pope first built,
and still maintains his greatness: These are the Antichristian doctrines,
which do so diametrically oppose that Great and Dear commandment and legacy
which Christ gave his Church: Peace and Love.

And why must this great duty and happiness be thrust out of the Church? What
do you fear? shame? Will your reputation grow cheap with the people, if you
build again the things you destroyed? Pacem contemnentes, and gloriam
quarentes, pacem perdunt and gloriam: He that thus saves his credit shall lose
it, but he that loses it shall save it.

What more glorious victory then to overcome our selves? What greater honor in
the sight of God and Angels, and wise, and good men, then such a magnanimous
embracing of shame? Did St. Augustine get more honor by any one, yea, or by
all his other books, then by his Retractations? Did Aberdeen ever perform an
Exercise so worthy the wisdom and piety of a Christian Accademy, as this to
which we invite you?

But if you will needs be covering your nakedness with fig leaves; you cannot
thereby hide, but proclaim your shame; your own first doctrines and public
protestations will tear those aprons, and convince you not only of error but
obstinacy. And the meanest understanding, will (when a little calm has settled
our troubled waters) plainly, perceive, how unfit they are to be trusted who
are at the same time self-condemned and self-justified.

But what if this were not? what if the common people could be perpetually
muffeled? Is the breath of the multitude the only sweet and whole air? are
not the wise and learned not only of this Nation, but of the whole Christian
world, worthy to be regarded! Is not the King worthy to be considered! Are not
the two great representatives of Church and State worthy to be thought on? Nay
is not God himself fit to be remembered? and all the inhabitants of heaven who
rejoice at the repentance of every sinner? Is not the Magistrate fit to be
feared? whose sword you tempt, by giving such manifest ombrages of jealousy,
while you justify those doctrines which we all are sadly convinced to be
pernicious.

If then you truly lament that inhumane murder which we thus solemnly deplore;
If you have any sense of those Long and Many, and Great miseries under which we
all groaned: If you really thirst for a Thorough Reformation from the
Antichristian doctrines of Rome.

If you desire that peace and love may be established on earth, and an Act of
Oblivion in heaven. If you will not perpetuate Jealousies in the Magistrate and
troubles in the Church:

Then join with us in singing this strayn of David's lamentation, by cursing
those Philistian doctrines which were, not the place, but the cause of our
woeful Tragedies.

You inhumane, you unchristian, etc.

Oh you bloody and Antichristian doctrines, may every pretender to Loyalty and
Christianity for ever detest you.

Whoever says it becomes a Subject to question the fitness of the Kings
commands, when they are not warranted by a particular Word of Scripture; Let
him be Anathema.

Whoever says the Kings commands do not bind the Conscience to obedience in
things not sinful, let him be Anathema.

For by such principles as these was the best King that ever governed a
Christian Kingdom, vilely cast away as if he had not been anointed with oil.

THE END.
Some Books Printed for H. Brom, at the Cun in Ivy-lane.
Justice Revived or the whole Office of a Country Justice, by Ed. Wingate Esquire.
A New Geographicall Dictionary, in 8. Trap on the Major Prophets, in folio,
Cases of Conscience in the late Rebellion, by Mr. Lyford. Mr. Grenfields Loyal
Sermon before the Parliament. Dr. Browns Scpulchal Urns and Garden of Cyrus, in
8. The life of Dr. Tho. Fuller, in 8. A Treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaul,
in 8. Mr. Stones' Sermon against Rebellion, preached at St. Paul's. Golden
Remains of the most Learned R. Stuart D. D. Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4.
The Harmony of the World. The Pourtraicture of his sacred Majesty King Charles
the Second, from his Birth 1630. till this present year 1661. being the whole
story of his escape at Worcaster, his travels and troubles. The Covenant
discharged, by John Russell, in 4. English Lovers a new Romance. Mr. Walwin's
Sermon on the happy return of King Charles the Second. Mr. Morton's Rule of
Life. A short view of the lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and Mary Princes of Orange deceased, by T. M Esquire in 8. Aeneas his
Voyage from Troy to Italy, an Essay upon the third Book of Virgil, by J. Boys
Esquire in 8. The alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the
Church of Engl. since the Reformation, by Hamon L'estrange Esquire in fol. Blood
for Blood in 35 Tragical stories.
Books written by R. L'estrange Esquire
A view of some late Remarkable Transactions leading to the happy Government
under our gracious Sovereign King Charles II. in 4. The Holy Cheat, proving
from the undeniable practices of the Presbyterians, that the whole design of
that party is to enslave both King and People under the color of Religion. A
Caveat to the Cavaliers. A Modest Plea both for the Author and Caveat. The
Relapsed Apostate. State Divinity. A Whip for the Schismatical Animadverter of
the Bishop of Worcester's Letter.

