A VINDICATION OF CHURCHES, COMMONLY CALLED INDEPENDENT: OR A BRIEF ANSWER to
two Books; the one, entitled, Twelve considerable serious Questions, touching
CHURCH GOVERNMENT: The other, INDEPENDENCY examined, unmasked, refuted, etc.
Both lately published by WILLIAM PRINNE, of LINCOLNES-Inne, Esquire.

By HENRY BURTON, a Brother of his, and late Companion in Tribulation.

MAT. 10. 34, 35, 36. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; I came
not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against
his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law
against her mother in law: And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, and follow me.

Luke 9. 23. The second Edition. Entered and printed according to Order.

LONDON; Printed for Henry Overton, in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

To Mr. WILLIAM PRINNE, etc.
MY dear Brother, and late companion in tribulation, you propound your twelve
Questions to all sober minded Christians, cordially affecting a speedy settled
Reformation, and brotherly Christian union in all the Churches, (as you write
in Front) and myself being one of these, (and no other you shall find me) do
with the right hand take your Propositions as made to me among the rest*
craving your leave to return you a brotherly Answer. And brotherly in nothing
more, then by a candid and Christian dealing with you all along, and that also
in a matter of such high moment, as concerns the kingdom and glory of Jesus
Christ. The zeal whereof is that alone, which puts me upon this task; it being
otherwise far beyond my thoughts, that you and I, having been fellow sufferers,
and spectacles to the world, upon that tragical stage of Antichristian
tyranny, should ever come upon the Theater as Antagonists, one against the
other, about the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. But surely as an Antagonist against
you I come not, but in the bowels of a brother. And had not the Book had your
name in the Front, my stomach had not stooped so low, as to take it up or
down. But because most men are apt to take all upon trust, where they find Mr.
Prinnes name engaged: and the Cause being so precious, as it has by right
taken up my whole heart, to become an Advocate to plead the excellency of it: I
could not, though the meanest of all, but for the love of Christ constraining
me, and by his grace assisting, undertake this task. Otherwise unwilling in
hoc ulcere esse unguis, as the Roman Orator said in another case. And this
Answer was brought to the birth soon after yours: but it wanted a Midwife,
whereof you have plenty. And I have had many interruptions. Nor am I so quick
of foot, as you. But I may say, as Jerome once to young Augustine; Bos lassus
fortius figit pedem. And so in the spirit of love I come to your Book.

A VINDICATION OF CHURCHES, COMMONLY CALLED INDEPENDENT.
YOu are for a speedy accomplishment of a Reformation. Page 2.
And so am I, and so our late Covenant taken, binds every man to begin with
himself, and those under him, and each to prevent other in the work. But yet
this is sooner said then done. For Esa. 66. 8.
shall a Nation be borne at once? Shall a corrupt, profane, polluted Land, not
yet washed from her old superstitions, not yet wained from the Egyptian
fleshpots, not yet wrought off from the spirit of bondage, become all on a
sudden a Reformed Nation? But yet Optandum est ut fiat, conandum est ut fiat,
(to use Augustins words of the Conversion of the Jews) It were to be wished,
and should be ind^voured. But as Rome was not built in one day, nor the mystery
of iniquity perfected in one day: so neither can Rome be so easily pulled
down in one day: nor can England become a Mount Sion in one day; first the old
rubbish will require some time to be removed out of your Church-walls, but how
much longer time out of men's hearts, where they have been so long, so fast
incorporated? And you know, that the materials of that typical Temple, the
timber, the stone, were all ^ewed first, and squared, before they came to make
up the building. Therefore soft and fair. The People are generally ignorant of
a right Reformation. A right Reformation is a setting up of Christ's spiritual
kingdom, first over the hearts and consciences, and then over the several
Churches. For this, the Zach. 20.
Carpenters and Masons must be set a work, godly and able Ministers must be
sought out, and sought for of the Lord, to fit the crooked timber, and rugged
stones, for the Spiritual Temple. For England is generally ignorant of the
mystery of Christ's Kingdom; the Prelates usurped all, suppressed altogether
this Spiritual kingdom; no Ministers durst so much as mutter a word of it. Who
durst say, that men's Consciences are subject to none, but Christ? That Christ
is the only Lawgiver of his Church? That the Churches of Christ ought not to
be burdened with any humane ordinances in Gods Worship? That all humane rites
and ceremonies invented by men, and imposed on men in Gods service, are all a
Col. 2. 23.
will worship, condemned by the Apostle? And the like. And yet we deny not
that every member in a Church is to be subject to the Officers thereof, holding
out the Word, for conscience sake, Hebr. 13. 17. Now if the People have not
heard of Christ thus a King, no, not to this day in most Congregations of
England do hear, or understand any thing of Christ's kingly Office over
Consciences and Churches, as whereupon a right reformation does principally
depend: how can such a Reformation be speedily set up, when the preaching up of
Christ's Kingdom is altogether silent, as if Ministers mouths were not yet
freed from their old muzzle? Therefore, I conceive, if the better heed be not
taken, there may be more host to a Reformation, then good speed: when among so
many Congregations, so many thousands in England, very few would be found to
have on the Wedding garment. A Reformation therefore, such as God requires,
will necessarily require longer time yet, that we may not go blindfold about
it.

You tell us, that importunity of some reverend friends has drawn from you
your digested subitane apprehensions of these distracting Controversies. Who
those reverend friends are, it matters not. But had I been accounted worthy to
be reckoned among those reverend friends, to have been made acquainted with
such a purpose, I should have used all importunity* seasoned with strong
reasons, to have dissuaded you from those subitane apprehensions. And seeing I
come to know them, though somewhat too late, in that they cannot be recalled;
admit your self were Aristotle, and your friend Plato, yet I will say, Amicus
Aristotle's, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. And therefore I must be
plain with you, otherwise I should neither love you, nor your friend, nor yet
the truth it self. To be plain therefore, though I know you to be a very
Heluo librorum, of vast and indefatigable reading, and to have a stomach
proportionable, of a strong digestion: yet give me leave to tell you, as my
loving and beloved friend and brother, that the subject you here deal with, is
not of so easy a digestion, as that subitane, or sudden apprehensions thereof
may be w^ll said to be digested. Strong meats, you know, taken down liberally
into the stomach, do require the longer time for a kindly digestion. And a
sudden digestion is apt to leave many indigested crud^^ies, ingendring
malignant humors in the body.

You digest your apprehensions into considerable Questions, (as you call them)
to be solemnly debated by sober minds: but passing along (brother) I find your
Questions turned into your own resolutions, so as in stead of debating them by
sober minded men, Page 3. Qu. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
you forestall them, and tell us, that these Independents, (as you style them)
are guilty of Arrogance, Schism, Contumacy, and liable to such penalties, as
are due to these offenses, in case they shall not submit to such a public
Church Government, Rites, Discipline, as a Synod and Parliament shall conceive
most consonant to Gods Word, etc. And all along, your Queries are so digested
by you, as that they cast up a very ill sent, if not rather a judicial
sentence against those Churches, which not honoris causa you name Independents.
But we shall answer to the particulars, as they come in order. Thus much of
your Proeme, or Preface.

To your first Question.
Before I punctually answer this, and so the rest of your Questions, let me
premise this, as an (...), which I must demand of you a due to my Profession:
that forasmuch as you are a learned Lawyer, and able to speak much of Laws,
and Customs of Nations, and Churches, and my self am a professor of
Divinity, the Rules and Principles whereof, are all of them laid down in the
Scripture, unto which alone all Questions about Faith and Religion are so
reducible, and finally determinable, as who so denies this, denies the faith,
and is not to be disputed with, as a denier of Principles: therefore I require
of you, Contranegantem principia non est disputandum.
as a Christian brother, to join issue with me in this point, that all your
Questions may be resolved by clear Scriptures, and reason, evidently deduced
from them; and this with all brevitie and perspicuitie.

Now to your first question, the sum whereof is, Whether every several
Nation, Republic, and National Church, has not under the Gospel a 1 Cor.
14. 40. and 11. 34.
liberty and latitude left them to choose and settle such an orderly form of
Church Government, Discipline, and Ecclesiastical Rites, as is most suitable
to their particular Civil government, laws, manners, customs, being not
repugnant to the word of God. This being (as I conceive) a generally received
truth among all Protestant Churches. And whether some things in all
Church-governments, Harm. of Confessions, sect. 10 11, 26.
Discipline, Ceremonies whatsoever, are not, and must not be left to humane
prudence, for which there is no direct precept nor pattern in sacred writ?
Which truth is assented to by all parties, Churches, whatsoever, in theory or
practice. This is the substance of your first Question.

To which I answer: And first to your quotation of the Harmony, I will answer
one for all. Sect. 16. August. Confessio 4. Traditiones de ^^riis, etc. We
condemn not Traditions of Holidays, of the Lords day, of the Nativity, of
Easter, and the rest, for a politic end. Here, you see, they put the
observation of the Lords day, among humane Traditions, which I suppose you do
not approve. Ibid. Observationes brevissimae in totam Harmoniam. sect. 19.
Append. sect. 10.
Again, they allow only such observations, as God by the Moral Law, and the
voice of Nature it self commands. And thirdly, That humane rites be not
imposed, Ne conscientiae onerentur, That men's consciences be not burdened.
And in a word: To shape Religion in point of Church Government, Discipline,
Ceremonies, to every Nation, Republic, National Church, and to Civil
Government, Laws, Manners, Customs, and so to humane Prudence, (as you say)
what is it but to shape a coat for the Moon? Whereas the Scripture holds forth
unto us, but only one form of Church Government, and Discipline, which ought
not to be altered according to the diversity of humane Laws and Customs in
all Kingdoms and Commonweals, as you affirm. And whereas you make a
proviso, Always provided, every thing be consonant, and no way repugnant to
the word of God: To what purpose is this, when the very liberty you give of
altering Church Government and Discipline as may be suitable to humane Laws and
Customs, is it self repugnant, and no way consonant to the word of God; as we
shall show by and by. This is Vide Appendices locorum, etc. ibid.
transformare Ecclesiam in humanam politiam, to transform the Church into a
humane Polity. Ibid.
Hae imaginationes omnibus aetatibus inde usque ab initio mundi nocuerunt
Ecclesiae, and semper nocebunt, These imaginations, or fancies, have in all
ages from the beginning of the world hurt the Church, and will always hu^t.
Thus the Harmony See also the close of Gualter. Homil. in the Acts.


Now, brother, whereas you seem to challenge us infallibly to evidence by any
Gospel Text, that Christ has peremptorily prescribed one and the self-same
form of Ecclesiastical government, Discipline, Rites, to all Nations,
Churches, in all particulars, from which they may in no case vary, under pain
of mortal sin, schism, or being no true Churches of Christ, with whom good
Christians may not safely communicate: First, what evidence from Scripture can
you bring, why it should not necessarily be so? You would seem to make this a
ground why Church Government, Discipline, Rites, should be alterable according
to the several laws and customs of several Nations: Because (say you) Christ
enjoined the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations and People whatsoever, who
have their several established defferent forms of Civil government, Laws,
Manners, Not but that we grant a vari^ty in the meth^d and manner in po(...)t
of circumstance, so the sub(...)ce b^ k(...), ^s repentance f^^m dead Work^,
and fai^^ toward our Savior Jesus Christ: So in Church Government.
Rules and Customs, suitable to their respective dispositions, Climes,
Republics. By this reason you might argue, that therefore the Gospel it self
may be preached variously, according to the variation of the climate *: and if
not so, then (say I) neither is the Church Government and Discipline to be
varied according to the diversity of Nations, Laws, Customs, Climates. For,
brother, the Church Government and Discipline now in the time of the Gospel, is
a part of the Gospel, as being the Gospel-government, and Discipline of the
Evan(...)l Churches. And, brother why should you think that Christ now under
the Gospel, or New Testament, has ^e^t a greater liberty to men to alter that
form of Church Government and Discipline, which in the New Testament is laid
down, then he did in the Old Testament under the Leviticall Law? What a strict
charge did this Lawmakers give to Moses? Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8. 5.
See (says he) that thou do all things according to the pattern showed thee in
the Mount. He must not vary one pin But we do not say that the same things are
prescribed under the Gospel, nor does it come to such circumstantia^s ^ but we
say, what it prescribes, is to be kept.
. But some will say, When the Tribes of Israel were reduced under a kingly
government, as in David's time, the service of God was in greater state and
external pomp, when the Temple was built, then it was before in the
Tabernacle; whereby it may appear, that there was a liberty left to David to
alter the form of worship so, as was suitable to the Regal state. But I answer,
Here was no liberty left to man to alter any thing in the worship of God, or in
the Church Government. For God was so exact in this, that he would not leave it
to David himself, though both a King and a Prophet, and a man after Gods own
heart, to set up what worship he pleased in the Temple, but God gave him an
exact pattern of all, and that not only by his Spirit, but in writing, that
he might neither add nor omit in the least tittle, 1 Chronicles. 28. And you know
it was never left to the Kings of Judah, to do the least thing in point of
Reformation, but only to see, that the Priests do all strictly, (not any thing
as seemed good to them, but all) according to the precise rule of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 31. Now was the great Lawgiver so strict under the old Testament, and
is he grown more remiss under the New? In Ezekiels vision of the Temple, or
Church in the time of the Gospel, Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11. we read of a pattern,
form, fashion of every particular thing of the House of God, which is his
Church, exactly set down, and measured by Gods own special direction. Or are
men more wise and more faithful now then David was, that Christ should trust
every Nation with such a liberty as this, to alter and diversifie
Church Government and Discipline, so as might be most agreeable to this or that
Kingdoms, Commonweals, Countries custom, commodity, conveniencie? And as for
your National Church here mentioned, we shall take a just measure of it when
we come to your ninth Question.

And whereas you quote in the Margin, 1 Cor. 14. 40. and 11. 34. on which you
ground your liberty to form your Church Government and Discipline sutably to
each particular Civil government: Alas, brother, these very Scriptures our
Prelates abused to maintain their unlimited liberty of setting up their rites
and ceremonies, as suitable to the Civil government; which absurdity I have
fully refelled in my Reply to Canterburies Relation. Whereas the Apostle there
exhorts, that all things be done decently and in order, according to those
rules they had received of him: to which agrees the other place alleged by
you, Other things will I set in order when I come, as Titus 1. 5. He left Titus
in Crete, that he might set in order the things that remained; but all
according to the Apostles direction for Church Government, and choice of
Officers. And we should have a mad world of it, if civil States in several
Countries should have liberty to frame Church Government and Discipline, as
should most suit with their particular conditions. This liberty is that which
both Ecclesiastical and Civil States usurping, turned the spiritual Kingdom
of Christ over Consciences and Churches, into a temporal and secular Kingdom,
or rather indeed an Antichristian Tyranny, or Hierarchy, so as by this means
it came to pass, that the second Beast ascending out of the earth, to wit, the
Pope, ( Revel. 13. 11.) commands the inhabitants of the earth to make an image,
that is, to set up a form of Religion and Church Government, suitable to the
Image of the first Beast, to wit, the Imperial State of Rome. And thus came to
be erected the Hierarchicall Church Government, in all pomp and points suitable
with the Roman Monarchy. So dangerous is that liberty which brings such
bondage. According to that, Licentia sumus omnes deteriores: this brings not
liberty, but licentiousness.

Your second Question is: Whether if any Kingdom or Nation shall by a
National Council, Synod and Parliament, upon serious debate, elect such a
public Church Government, Rites, Discipline, as they conceive to be most
consonant to Gods Word, to the Laws, Government under which they live, and
manners of their people, and then settle them by a general Law; all particular
Churches, members of that Kingdom and Nation, be not therefore actually
obliged in point of 1 Cor. 14. 32, 33. Romans 13. 1^. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. 1
Cor. 10. 32, 33.
conscience and Christianity, readily to submit thereto, and no ways to seek
an exemption from it, under pain of being guilty of arrogancy. schism,
contumacie, and liable to such penalties as are due to these offenses.

I answer: That is, Whether the Kingdom and Nation of England, etc. The sum
is, you would here make way for a political State Church Government, or a mixed
Church Government, partly, according to Gods word; and partly to the Laws and
government under which we live; and partly, to the manners of the people.
Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam. Or, populout placerent, etc. Truly,
brother, your very question is heretical, you must pardon the expression,
which otherwise would not come home to the full truth. And your word Elect,
imports no less. For Elect taken in that sense, as you here apply it, to set
up a form of Religion, of Church Government, and Discipline, with Rites and
ceremonies suitable to the Laws and customs of a State, and manners of the
people: and, AS MEN CONCEIVE, is of the same signification with (...), which
signifies a taking up an heresy upon humane election; or, as you say, As they
conceive. For you say not, Such a Church Government, etc. as is most consonant
to Gods word: but such as they conceive to be most consonant. So as you hang
your Church Government upon men's conceit, or opinion of consonancy with Gods
word, and not upon a real and essential consonancy. Just like the Prelate of
Canterbury, who in his Relation hangs the credit of the Scripture upon the
Author, and the opinion we have (says he) of his sufficiency. Which I have
noted in my Reply. But thus you open a wide sluice, to let in an ocean of
inundation of all sorts of Religion into all parts of the world, when every
Religion shall be measured by the line of man's conception, what men CONCEIVE
agreeable to Gods word. Thus might Henry 4. the late French King (to make his
way the easier to the Crown through so many difficulties) apostatize from the
Protestant Religion, and turn to Popery, as conceiving it suitable to the word
of God, to comply with the State of France, and the manners of the people, for
the establishing of his kingdom (as he conceived, though he was deceived) by
becoming himself a Popish King. And so Jeroboam with his Counsel might
CONCEIVE it agreeable enough to Gods word, to set up his Calves most suitable to
the new laws and customs of that State, and to the manners of the people, who
are apt enough to embrace idolatry and superstition, as Ephraim willingly
walked after the commandment, Hos. 5. 11. And so in the rest. Now that is an
heresy which is an error conceived and maintained against the word of God.
That the maintaining of such a liberty as you assume here, is so, we have in
part showed already from the Scripture, whence you are not able to bring the
least shadow of reason to maintain it. Nay, we need go no further for the
disfranchising of this your liberty, but your own words. Your words are
asistata, they cannot cohere in any true Theological sense. For first, we
ought not to assume, or pretend a liberty, as left us of God, when we want our
evidence, and are not able to produce our Charter out of the Magna Charta, the
Scripture. And this, brother, not you, nor any man can do. Again, nothing is
more presumptuous; then to attempt to mingle heaven and earth together, that
is, to mingle Christ's Kingdom with the kingdoms of the world, or to these to
frame and fashion that, which what is it else, but to set up a Babylonish
Church Government. Did the Apostles thus? Did they frame Christ's Kingdom and
Church Government to the laws and customs of the Romance Empire? Or did they
vary their orders for Church Government and Discipline, according to the
different manners and customs of those Nations, countries or Provinces where
they planted their Churches? Had they one order for the Church of Corinth, and
another for the Churches of Galatia, and a third for the Churches of Asia and
the rest? No: But * so ordain I in all Churches, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7.
17. 1 Cor. 16. 1.
And * concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. So also for making of Ministers and other
Church Officers, Act. 1. and 14. 23.

Again, Your Church Government must be conceived to be consonant to Gods Word,
yet with this restriction or limitation, that it be also consonant to the Laws
and Government under which we live. You speak indeed like a pure Lawyer, and
one that will stand for your Profession, were this the way to uphold it. But
cannot your Law, and our Gospel cotton together, unless the Gospel wear the
Laws livery, like to your Sergeants gown, made up of two several colours'; or
unless Law and Gospel be woven together into a linsey woolsey garment? But
what if your Law present, stand still in force for Church Government, without
being repealed? Must the Gospel be brought again under your Prelaticall
Church Government? Or rather why should not a general law (to use your words)
be enacted, to inhibite all forms of Church Government and Discipline, which
are not every way consonant to Gods Word, without this addition, And to the
Laws and Government under which we live? For certainly, if the Laws and
Government of the State under which we live, be good and just, there is no need
why you should put upon Christ's kingly Government in his Church, such hard
conditions, as not to be admitted, but so far as it is consonant to man's
Laws. As Tertullian said, when upon the Emperor Tiberius his motion to the
Roman Senate, that Christ might be admitted and enrowled among Romes gods, and
the Senate refused, because they had made a Law, that none should be chosen for
a god, unless first propounded by the Senate: Ergo nisi homini placuerit, Deus
non erit Deus; Therefore if it please not man, God shall not be God. So let it
be lawful for me to say; If it please not man, not the Senate, Christ shall
not be King, his kingdom shall have no place in this or that Nation. As if the
good Laws of a civil State, and the good Laws of Christ's kingdom, could not,
ought not to stand together in their distinct forms unmixed; when certainly a
State stands strongest, while most consonant to Gods Word, and to the
Church Government and Discipline of Christ, and not when Christ's kingdom and
Government is made suitable to the Laws and customs of the State.

Famous was that Answer of Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome, to Lucius King of
Britain, when this Country of Britain first received the faith (being the
first Province that received it) where the Gospel began freely to be preached,
without impeachment or inhibition of the Prince (as the Hollinshed^ Description
of Britain, Chap. 7. About the year 187.
Story says) and that without any ceremonies at all: King Lucius sending to
E^eutherius for some model, or form of Church Government and Discipline: he
received this Answer; That Christ had left sufficient Order in the Scripture
for the Government of the Church; and not only for that, but also for the
regiment of his whole Realm, if he would submit himself to follow that Rule.
You require of us (says he) the Roman Ordinances, with the Imperial Statutes
also to be sent unto you, which you desire to practice: The Roman Laws we may
find to be faulty, but Gods Laws never. You have received of late through Gods
mercy, in the Realm of Britain, the law and faith of Christ; you have with
you both volumes of the Scriptures: Out of them therefore by Gods grace, and
the counsel of your Realm, take you a law, and by that law through Gods
sufferance rule your kingdom. Now this Eleutherius being the 14th Bishop of
Rome, by Platina's account, it shows unto us the great difference between that,
and aftertimes, wherein the Mystery of Iniquity grew up to its height, in
assuming such an unlimited liberty to set up such a Church Government, and
ceremonies of humane invention, as were haled in by the head and shoulders. But
brother Prinne, you see here, how in those purer primitive times, even the
Bishop of Rome himself was so far from admitting a Church Government suitable
to the several laws and customs of every Nation, (as you would have it) as
he tells King Lucius, he has both the Testaments, by the rule whereof he should
not only see the Church to be governed, but his own Realm also. Ergo, the
Kingly government of Christ in his Church is not to be fashioned and molded
according to the laws and customs of temporal and civil States, but
contrarily the laws of Civil States are to be reduced to the rule of Gods
Word.

But you add also, And manners of their people: that is, in their several
Countries, and Commonweals. Surely this reflects mine eye upon that
Reformation begun in King Edwards reign. But now what Church Government and
Discipline was to be set up? Why, the manners of the people must be the line
and plummet to regulate this building by. The people of England had been so
long rooted in a superstitious Egyptian soil: but because fat, and filling
their fleshpots with Onions and Garlic, Fox his Monuments.
they could the better brook the burdens which their Taskma^^ers the Prelates
inured their shoulders withal. And withal they must have their Masse-Service,
though translated out of the Roman into the English language. This in King
Edward his letter to the Cornishmen, standing up for their Masse-book, stilled
the babes when they understood the English Service-booke was no other then the
Romish Mass clad in an English weed, though since it has put off many of
those rags, but not all it should. So much it imports, to have an eye to
the peoples manners, and how they stand affected. When the Lord Cromwell had
set forth the Primmer, or Psalter, without the Letany, all the Popishly
affected, which were not a few, could not be quiet till they had cried up the
Letany again into its old place. So as in sine, through the love of
superstition in the people, and the love of the world in the Prelates ( alias
the Reformers, many of whom afterward God reformed and purged in the flames of
Martyrdom) such a Reformation was set up, as for Church Government and
Discipline (only translating the Popes headship, and setting it upon the Kings
shoulders) was the very same with that which was in Henry 8. his days, and is
at this day in Rome; and did so well suit with the Civil Government and
manners of the people, that a General Law was enacted for the ratifying of
that Prelaticall Government and Discipline, which has bred such manners in the
people generally to this day, as if another Reformation shall be set up,
wherein the peoples manners shall be no less looked upon, then in the former
(as you here do more then seem to plead for) I can conjecture, if not
certainly divine, what a Reformation both for Church Government and Discipline,
your Church of England is like to have. For if you ask the Prelaticall party,
consisting of multitudes of their Priests, and of their ignorant and profane
people, together with all the Kings Army, they will all with one voice and
vote, roar it out at the Canons mouth, W will have the Bishops
Church Government and Discipline continued without alteration. If ye ask the
ordinary Protestant professors at large, they cry, No, no; not that; but we
will have such a Church Government, as under which we may enjoy no less
liberty for our manners, then we had under the Prelates.

But you refer us to the serious debate of a National Counsel, Synod,
Parliament. But yet give us leave to put a vast difference between all these,
and the Scripture, Christ's own voice. If they truly inform us of the mind
of Christ in the Scripture, we will bless God for it: but yet if we can find
out the mind of Christ by his immediate voice, we dare not suspend our belief
and practice of it, until we have it at the second hand from men. And should we
wait never so long upon the issae of their debate, commended unto us to be
such as men conceive to be agreeable and cons^nant to Gods Word: yet for as
much as we dare not Act. 17. 11.
pin our souls upon men's sleeves, as not knowing (as one Cambdens Remains.
said) whither they might possibly carry them: therefore we must examine all
men's determinations in matters of Religion by Act. 17. 11.
searching the Scriptures, and laying every thing to this line and rule. For
the Bereans are commended, as the more noble, in that they examined diligently
and daily, even the Apostles doctrine by the Scriptures: and much more are we
to try the spirits of men, that are not Apostles, and so not immediately
inspired by the Holy Ghost with infallibility of truth, as never any General
Council after the Apostles has been So as you know how miserably and
shamefully General Councels have erred. The first Council of Nice, consisting
of 318. Bishops, how did they all agree to bring in a Doctrine of Devils,
prohibiting Priests marriage, had not one Confessor, Paphnutius, by evidence of
Scripture, and reason, cried it down, and so swayed the whole Council? And
you know very well, that General Councels, as well as National, have not
infallibility of judgment in all things. And it cannot be unknown to you,
that even this Assembly of Divines are of different judgments about
Church-governement and Discipline; nor have they perhaps had so much time since
their being under the Prelacy, as to be thoroughly informed of the way of
Churches, commonly called Independent, but that many of them may possibly gain
much more knowledge of it, by spending some more time and study in it.

But Sir, besides all this, you seem to lead them such a way, (should they
follow you) as would necessarily bring them into an inevitable and inextricable
error, in case they should elect such a public Church Government, Rites,
Discipline, as they conceive to be most consonant to Gods Word, to the Laws,
Government under which we live, and manner of the people. For if they look
upon the manner of the people, which they must needs find to be for the most
part very loose (to speak nothing of Ignorants and Popish Malignants) some men
might conceive, that such a Church Government and Discipline were most suitable,
as does most comply with, and give some indulgence to such manners, as cannot
easily be brought to enter in at the strait gate, and narrow way, that leads
into Christ's kingdom. And whatsoever Church Government and Discipline comes
not full home in all things to the word of God, is not that which is consonant
thereunto* and so not pleasing unto God; and the more consonant it is to Gods
Word, the more strict and holy it will be found to be, and so the less
consonant to the common profane manners of this Nation at this day. Worthy of
our observation is that of the Lord to the Prophet Jeremy, Jere. 15. 19. If
thou take forth the pretions from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth; let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. Whereupon the most learned
Interpreter (as the learned Beza constantly styles him) Calvin, among many
other excellent observations on this place, thus concludes; Summa est,
veritatem Dei non debere flecti ad hominum arbitrium, quae Deus non mutatur*
ita nec verbum ejus ullam varietatem admittit: The sum is; That the truth of
God ought not to be bended according to man's will or conceit, because God is
not mutable, so neither does his Word admit of any change. Now the form of
Church-governement and Discipline laid down in the New Testament, is a
Doctrine of Christ, and no more alterable according to the varieties of men's
customs and manners in all nations and ages, then the Gospel it self is;
which the Apostle would not have to be altered into another Gospel; though
another Gospel cannot be; as neither another kingdom of Christ, another
Church-governement, another Church Discipline ought not to be, but that alone
which we find in Gods Word, which must not be reduced or conformed (as a nose
of wax, to which the Papists, as Hosius, and Pighius do compare the
Scripture) to the fashions of worldly governments, ( Romans 12. 2.) and popular
manners, but these must be conformed to the Scripture.

Hence it may appear, how rough your conclusion of this Question is, if to
such a general law, as you propose, all particular Churches, members of this
Kingdom and Nation, should not yield to be actually obliged in point of
conscience, and Christianity, and readily to submit thereunto, and no ways to
seek an exemption from it, under pain of being guilty of arrogance, schism,
c^ntumacy, and liable to such penalties, as are due to these offenses. Good
Brother, be not so legal. What if that resolution of an Assembly, and that
General Law for the confirmation of it, be such; as the conscience of godly
people cannot without sin submit thereunto? Must they either violate their
consciences, or be undone by your unavodable intolerable penalties, as both to
suffer in their good names for Arrogant, contumatious, Schismatick^, yea and in
their Consciences too under the guilt of these, and to be liable to I wot not
what penalties besides? and no ways to seek an exemption from it? Why, good
Brother, if we should go and live under the Turkish Government, and could not
in conscience turn Turks in the Religion there by Law established, yet there
is a way to seek an Exemption from it, namely, by becoming Tributary to that
State, as many Christians do.

Good Brother let us not have any of Dracoes Laws executed upon Innocents. And
remember how not long ago the Prelates served us; we could not have the
benefit of Law, of Appeal, no exemption from blood letting, and eare-cropping,
and pillorying, etc. And shall we now turn worse persecutors of the Saints,
then the Prelates were? Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, says that
heathen Princess.

But in the margent you put some places of Scripture to prove this. But truly,
when I well view the places, I find them not to answer to what you would seem
to prove by the Quotation. The first is, 1 Cor. 14. 32, 33. For the Spirit of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. And what of this? Ergo, the Spirit of
all the Prophets in England must be subject to the Prophets in the Assembly
upon pain of being guilty of Arrogance, Schism, Contumacy, and liable to
such penalties, as are due to these offenses. O brother Prynne, you must as
well note, as quote the place. But let me note it for you. The Apostle there
speaks both to, and of the Church of Corinth, when assembled together in one
place: that the Prophets should observe order, and give place each to other in
Prophesying; as the reason is rendered, and not of any such Assembly of that
sublime and supreme Authority, or the only Prophets, to whom all other
Prophets wheresoever dispersed must be subject. Ver. 33. For God is not the
Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. Which
place also is no less wide from your purpose. What? Will there be no peace,
but all confusion, unless all be subject to the Assembly upon such pain, as
before? The Apostle speaks here of the Order to be observed in every Church, as
in all the Churches of the Saints. The other places quoted by you, are no less
misapplyed. Will they prove, trow you, blind obedience?

But come on brother, (if you will needs put us upon such hard exigents, as to
give us no quarter, without present laying down our Arms and cause, and so
captivating our consciences to the Dictates and Decrees of men; If you will
make no covenant with us, but upon this one only condition, that 1 Samuel 11. 2.
you might thrust out all our right eyes; and if there be no other remedy, yet
give us leave to capitulate with you about some terms of accommodation, that we
may not altogether betray our consciences and liberties, which our Redeemer
Christ has so dearly purchased for us. And the first and main is this: First,
brother, make it clear unto us, that an Assembly of men learned, pious, what
you will, living in ages succeeding the Apostles, have, or ever had,
infallibility of judgment, so as to say, (as Acts 15. 28.) It pleased the holy
Ghost and Us, to make these Decrees, that so we may without further scruple of
conscience, submit and conform thereunto. But (I say) you must give us very
good assurance and evidence hereof, that they are infallibly guided by the holy
Ghost, that when they shall say, It pleased the holy Ghost and Us, we may
safely believe them. For when you can resolve us of their conclusions no
further, then as they conceive to be consonant to the word of God: Alas! Sir,
you leave us in a Wood, or Maze, whence no extricating of our selves, without
Ariadnes thread, Gods word, to set us where we were before. For you knew what
variety of conceits many men have, Quot capita, tot sententiae. This is the
first and main condition we stand upon; and truly it were sufficient alone. We
might in a second rank (but not equal to the former) name a self-denial, and
humble spirit, etc. You know the story of the Monks of Bangor coming before
Austin the first Archbishop of Canterbury, whom they seeing to fit in his
Pontifical Chair, and not rising up, nor moving unto them, they left him as a
man no^ sent of God: And so, if we should behold men carrying themselves
loftily over their brethren, who are not of their Counsel, we should be apt to
suspect that Christ's Spirit is not there, because there is not the spirit of
humility, neither the Spirit of truth to be found. A Cardinal in the Conclave
at Viterbium, after almost three years agitation about the election of a new
Pope, (as many years as we have been about to set up a Reformation, and the
foundation not yet laid) each Cardinal ambitiously a spiring to be the Pope, *
one of them rose up and said, Domine, etc. let us uncover the roose of this
Chamber, seeing the holy Ghost cannot get in unto us through so many tiles. But
this by the way. And so enough of this question.

The third and fourth Questions.
I come now to your third and fourth question. But lest my Quest. 3.
answers may prove too voluminous, and so fastidious to everyday-newes Readers,
I shall in the rest contract my self. And this I must do by trussi^g up your
questions within the list of a Syllogism, respectively. For (as I noted
before) all your questions are rather conclusive then interrogatory, rather
positive resolutions, then unresolved questions. The sum therefore of your
third and fourth questions (for this depends on that) is reduced into this
Syllogism: Rroposition.


That which has sufficient (if not best) warrant for it in the New Testament,
the examples of the Primitive Church, etc. most prevents heresies, schisms,
injustice; is to be received as a true and undoubted Church Government, and to
be preferred before that, which has no such express warrant in Scripture, no
pattern for it in the Primitive, or best reformed Churches, etc.

But the Presbyteriall form of Church Government, if rightly Assumptions which
takes up the fourth question. Conclusion.
ordered, has sufficient (if not best) warrant for it in the New Testament,
etc. The Independent not so.

Therefore the former is to be preferred and received before the latter,
without any long debate.

The Answer.
Both your Propositions are lame and interfeere one against the other.
Sufficient (if not best) warrant, will not prove so sufficient a warrant, as if
there be found a better. And so your Argument, by crossing shins with it self,
falls to ground. Again, your Presbyteriall government has neither best, nor
any sufficient warrant, as we judge, in the New Testament, no nor any warrant
at all in Gods word. But the true form of Church Government has both
sufficient, and (without comparison) best warrant in the Scripture. And in
truth, whereas you oppose presbyteriall and Independent (as you call it) one
against the other; let me tell you, that that which you call Independent, is
the only true, original, and primitive Presbyteriall. Which Presbytery is
proper and peculiar to every particular Church of Christ^ and is not a
Presbytery collective of many Churches by way of jurisdiction one, or many over
each, or of a National Church, as you term it. For neither of these can you
find either in the New Testamens, or in the Old. In the old we read of one
Church, to wit, that of the Nation of the Jews: But that whole Church was one
entire congregation, Act. 7. 38. they had one Church officer over all, it is
called the Tabernacle of the congregation in the singular; and they all
assembled three times in the year at Jerusalem, in the Temple, where they
offered Sacrifice, and not else where: So as the Church was a type of every
particular Church of Christ under the New Testament, as being both one entire
Church and absolute, subject to no other form of government, but only that of
the only Lawgiver and Mediator Jesus Christ; and no pattern of any such
National Church as you would have. Every particular Church now, consisting of
visible Saints, is under Christ, as the only Head, King, Governor, Lawgiver
of it, and so is subject to no other jurisdiction then that of Christ, his
Spirit, his Word. Were there none other particular Church in the world, then
one, as that of Abraham's Family, should it not be a complete Church, until
there were other Churches on whose jurisdiction it should depend; though for
ordinary Families, they cannot have such a number as is requisite to make up a
ministerial body, and so are bound to unite to others for this end. We hold
communion and consociation of Churches for counsel in doubts, and comfort in
distress: but we deny any such combination of Churches as whereby the true
liberty of every particular Church is taken away, And this communion of
Churches does no less (if not more) prevent Heresies, Schisms, Injustice,
then your Presbyteriall. Nor can you show reason to the contrary. And yet would
you have our Churches more perfect then those of the Apostles own planting and
gathering as to be altogether exempted from Heresies, Schisms, Injustice? Did
not the Apostle tell the Church of Corinth, There must be Heresies eve 1 Cor.
11*
among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest? And could those
Primitive Churches after the Apostles, preserve themselves from Heresics? How
soon did the whole world groan and wonder, that it was become an Arian? And
this within the fourth Century after the birth of Christ, when the Churches
were governed by the Bishops and their Presbyteries. And how soon did the
Kingdom of the Beast mount up to such a height, as it overtopt all the
Western Churches, and brought them under his dominion?

And for our truly and properly Presbyterian Churches (your Independents) to
which you deny express warrant in Scripture; the whole New Testament is both
an express and ample witness on our side. All those particular Churches which
the Apostles planted, were all of absolute* authority amongst themselves
respectively, and equal one of the other. You can show unto us no rule or
example to the contrary. That in Act. 15. is a transcendent, and stands alone,
not to be paralleld, and therefore very impertinently objected by many, before
you, as we shall have occasion to show afterward.

And for pattern in the Primative Churches after the Apostles we are not
curious to seek it in the corrupt current of succeeding ages, when we find it
the pure fountain. It appears, say the Centurists, Cent, 1. 7 Tit^de
consociatione Eccles. that the Government of Churches in the second hundredth
year, was almost popular, every Church had equal power of ordaining or
casting out, if need were, those Ministers they had ord^ined, with other
things very material in that whole Title, as also in the Title de Synodis
privatis. And for the best reformed Churches, if in them we cannot find that
pattern so fully followed as the Scripture holds forth unto us, we cruve
leave without prejudice, to take it as we find it in the Word, without the
least variation. And you may know^, in the beginning of Protestant Reformation,
could they* so clearly see in the dawning, as we may now in the meridian, if
we will but open our eyes? The reformed Churches have taken up one or other of
them upon the matter the maine things we contend for: 1. The Church of Holland
receive none to the Table, nor have a vote as a member of that Church; but such
as first give satisfaction to the Elderships and then to the Congregation: and
2. have a form of covenant propounded by them. Secondly, the French Churches
exercise excommunication in their particular congregations, though with liberty
of appeal. And this was the government of the Primitive Churches in the 2d
hundredth year, as appears, Cent. 2. c. 7. Tit. de Synodis: but especially.
Tit. de consociatione Eccles. So as no long debate need to be, if but Christ's
word alone may take place, without the necessary accommodation of humane Laws,
Customs, Manners of the people, as you do plead.

And lastly for appeals in case of Injustice, you know, brother, that if
injustice be done in any civil matter, if redress may not be had by the
mediation of the Church, whereof the parties are members, then the Law is open
there to appeal for justice. And if it be about the Churches censure for some
miscarriage of a member toward the Church* or any member thereof, if the
censure be unjust, the party grieved may desire to have his cause heard by
some other Churches, who may accordingly deal with their Sister-church to
require a brotherly account of the whole business, as is the duty of all the
Churches in such cases. And if it be in matter of opinion, here the appeal
lies principally and in the first place, to the Scripture, as the supreme
Judge; and if the things be obscure, and too hard for that Church to resolve by
the Scripture, then to call in the help of other Churches for their best
information. And in sum, brother, there is no case can fall out in any
Church, which has not as many helps by a free communion of Churches, wherein
every Churches peculiar liberties and privileges are preserved as they ought
to be: as any you can name to be in your obligatory combination of Churches,
whereby the liberty of each Church is by common consent sold over to others, by
which it cease now to be a free Church of Christ, under his only
jurisdiction and government. So as herby great mischiefs may redound even to
the purest Church, when once things come to be carried by the vote of a
general or Classical Assembly of Divines, swaying things besides the Rule,
and stretching them beyond their line. And therefore famous was that saying of
Nazianzens, See also Nicolas de Clemangus, super materia Concilii generalis,
circa initium. Non oportet nos Ecclesiae triumphantis, Ecclesiae titulos
ascribere, ut infallibilis sit, etc.
That he never saw any good to come of general Councels; because commonly
Camelion-like they change their hue with the nearest object, complying with the
condition of the present times, and State: as suppose Prelaticall Spirits
should turn to be your Presbyterians, or as when (in case the Lord Christ
shall resume his Kingdom over his Churches in a civil State) we should
perhaps see some of your Presbyterians as fast to turn Independants, were the
preferments suitable.

But some may object, that one Church standing by it self, is Obj.
more subject to fall into error, then when combined with other Churches.

To which I answer; That every particular Church enjoying Answ.
its own freedom, without any enjoined combination with other Churches, may
much longer preserve it self from danger of error, when it has its free
choice in matters of difference or difficulty, to consult only with those
Churches, which it knows to be most sound and orthodox, then when it is fast
bound, and incircled with this or that combination of Churches, being in number
twelve or twenty, or more or less, whose votes must carry every controversy,
according to the several humors of such and such, at all adventure. And
(brother Prynne) the world is not so plentiful of sound spirits, as to supply
every Hundred in the Land with twelve or twenty able and godly Ministers to be
of a combination. Nay, you may observe what poor shifts are used for the
supplying of places with godly and able Ministers, which are grown so geason,
that the City now is feign to be supplied with plundered country Ministers, in
stead of their outcast Malignants: And suppose all these to be as good as they
should be, where shall those country-places be supplied? And besides, such is
the penury of good Ministers (if not of care to provide better, if possible)
that such as are for their demerits cast out of one place, are (for I wot not
what merits) put upon some other people, where their good qualities are not
known. Being such as verify the Proverb, (...); They change their mansion,
but not their manners. And besides all this, he is one very meanly gifted now
adays, that will be wooed and won to take a Benefice under a hundred or
sixescore pounds. And brother, why should godly Ministers indeed be yoked with
such earth-wormes, and Mammonists, as are in some Parishes, and as some of your
Presbyterian combinations would necessitate us unto? If you say, if things go
amiss in lesser Classes, they may be remedied in a general Assembly: then I
say, there is the like reason of a general Assembly, that there is of all the
several classes put together. For, totius and partium eadem est ratio; if all
the members be corrupt, so also must the whole body be. Therefore the case must
needs be hard, when one or two Churches in a classis or combination, that are
sound, should be bound to the decisions of the rest being unsound; and so for
the general Assembly in the like proportion.

The fifth Question.
It is reduced thus;

That, whose grounds and reasons tend inevitably to endanger, Proposition.
overthrow, and embroyle Ecclesiastical or civil forms of Government, ought
not to be suffered.

But such is the Independent church government: it tends inevitably, Assumption.
etc. Therefore it ought not to be suffered,

I deny the Assumption: The grounds and reasons of true church government, do
not in their own nature tend to the indangering, overthrowing, and embroiling
of Ecclesiastical or civil forms of Government ( Horm. confess. sect. 11. of
the confess. of A^spurg. art. 7.) Power Ecclesiastical no more hinders the
civil, then the skill of music, neither is it to be confounded with civil.
And ibid. They, to wit, the Prelates, transform the church into a humane
Government. For they would do all in imitation of civil Government. But if
they produce any such effect, it is only accidental, and the maine cause is
in such Ecclesiastical or civil bodies, when they show some antipathy in
their constitution to Christ's kingdom and government, by their opposing or
oppressing of it. Hereupon Christ says; Mat. 10. 34.
Think not that I am come to send peace on the earth; I came not to send peace,
but a sword. And it was the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom, both by
Christ, and his Apostles, for which they were exclaimed against, and
persecuted, as troublers of the State, both Ecclesiastic and Politic, as
movers of Luke 23. 2. 14. Act. 14. 5.
sedition, and perverters of the people, and the like. And will you thereupon
conclude, that the preaching of the Gospel, and setting up of Christ's kingdom
in his churches, is a troubler of the State, and a mover of sedition, and a
seducer of the people, because Hierarchicall Government has an Antipathy with
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, and Church Government?

The sixth Question.
The sum where of is:

That which from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel Proposition.
downwards, till this present age, had no being in the world, can doubtless be
no Church Government of Christ's, or his Apostles.

But such (say you) is the Government of Independent Assumption.
Churches.

Therefore not Christ's; or the Apostles Church Government.

I deny your Assumption. And for further answer thereto, I refer you to my
Answer to your third and fourth Question, where is clearly proved, that all
the Churches, founded and planted by Christ and his Apostles, were in
themselves respectively absolute and free Churches, which though they had
communion with all their Sister-Churches, yet you can never prove your
classical, or Synodicall Jurisdiction of either a Provincial Church (as you
call it) or a General Counsel over every particular Church, to have the least
footing, or being at all in the Scripture. 2. In the Ecclesiastical Histories
for the first 200. years we find (as was noted above) sufficient ground for
it; but none for the combined coercive Presbytery; let that be shown;
afterward indeed, as times grow worse, you find your P^r^archall,
Metropoliticall, Prelaticall, National, Provincial church-governments,
General and Provincial councels, subordination and subjection of the lesser
Churches to the greater, by which very means the Papal Antichristian kingdom
came gradually to be erected; (as is noted before) but can you show us the
least print of one footstep in the Word of God, of any such Hierarchy, or of
any such subordination and subjection of one Church to another; And if the
mystery of iniquity began to work even in the Apostles own times, which was
the very Hierarchy it self, in the affection of Primacy; as we see practiced
by Di^trepes, who is noted to be (...), a lover of Primacy, or pre-eminence,
and that even above the Apostle John himself; with other like suitable
practices; This Mystery growing up and spreading mightily by degrees, after the
Apostles were dead, and so prevailing as a general deluge over the face of the
earth, as nothing could be seen but Diocesan Bishops seas, overflowing every
where: Therefore were there never such Churches extant? But suppose there were
no examples to be found of it in Church Story, which yet we have proved the
contrary, nevertheless, you know brother, when a man's evidences of lands are
lost, there be public Records, as the Rowles of Chancerie, where they may be
found again. And if there they be found, will you not allow them, because the
man cannot otherwise show them? Now we have the sacred Scripture, where our
Evidences are safely recorded. Suffice it then, that there we show them. The
contrary opinion does manifestly establish Traditions unwritten, as the Papists
do. And to give the Reader some intimation how the Churches of Christ came in
time (and that in short time after the Apostles) to lose their liberties; I
crave leave of you to note that passage in Ambrose (who lived Synagoga, and
postea Ecclesia s^n^o^^^ habu^t, quoru^ si^e ^onsis^o nihil age^atur in
Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsol^v^^it nescio, nisi Doctorum desidia, aut
magis sup^rbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. comment. Ambrosii in c. 5.
Epist. ad Tim. 1. 5.
within the fourth Century) upon 1 Timothy 5. Synagoga, and postea Ecclesia, etc.
The Jews Synagogue, and afterward the* Christian Church had Elders, without
whose counsel nothing was done in the Church. Which by what neglect it grew
out of use, I know not, unless is were perhaps the sl^ath, or rather pride of
the Teachers, whilst, alone, they would seeem to be some body. So Ambrose the
Bishop of Millan confessed. I confess I cannot show many such instances or
records, as perhaps your self in your multifarious reading may observe: But
this one, from such a reverend and ancient author too, of pious memory, may
serve instead of many; considering also that this is the greater rarity, and
antiquity, and much to be wondered at, how it escaped the expurgatorie Index, by
those that were the first fathers of the Mystery of Iniquity, that they did not
quite expunge this record also, that not a pin of the old pattern should
remain. Now that the Church this Ancient there speaks of, was particular
Congregation, answerable to the Synagogue, governed by the Counsel of its own
Elders, cannot be denied. Whereby all men may* clearly see, in how short a time
the Government of Churches, instituted by Christ and his Apostles, came to be
changed from being free Churches, to become servile and subject to the
usurpation of the greater, the Prelates and their clergy now making up the
Church, as if the congregations themselves were no Churchs, as being stripped
of all their Rights and Privileges, yea and of Crist their King, his Kingdom
now being turned into an Oligarcy* or Oligarchill Tyranny, mixed of two of the
worst forms of Government; though you seem to put Oligarchy in the rank of the
the best; but I suppose you would have said, instead of Oligarchy, (having
named Monarchical, and Aristocraticall) Democratie: Oligarchy being
Heterogeneall to the other two. But enough of this.

The seventh Question.
Thus reduced* Those Churches, which do not conform their Proposition.
Church Government to some one or other public form of Civil Government,
dividing themselves into many Parochial Churches, Dioceses, Provinces, but do
gather, Churches not out of Infidels, but of men already converted to* and
settled in the Chiristian faith, and do admit them into the Church by way of
Covenant; no one example, or direct Scripture, Reason, or Authority can be
produced, to satisfy conscience of the lawfulness of them.

But such are the Independent Churches, they do not conform as before;
Therefore conscience cannot be satisfied of the lawfulness of them.

The Argument (or Question) contains many branches, scarce Assumption
reducible to one head: but I have bundled them in one coard, as well as I
could. And for answer, first this Question is coincident with all that went
before, and so is already in that respect answered. Secondly, Your parallel
betwixt the civil association and Ecclesiastic, is not grounded on Scripture;
for neither God taught, neither the Churches practiced any such necessary
union and dependence of one Church on another, though they might have done it,
and had need of it, as being in times of persecution (which hindered it not, no
more then it does in France now) 2. You confidently affirm, that all
Ecclesiastical Histories testify so much, which is manifestly untrue, as has
been showed before. 3. Though churches springing out of other churches had
dependence on them, what is this to churches that are far distant one from
another, and never had such a ground of relation one to another? Besides the
Harmony of confessions, which you quote for you* (though I find not that in
those places they say any thing to the point) yet Sect. 11. cap. of the Keys,
that the Keys are committed to each particular, even the least Ecclesiastical
Society. Thirdy, Christ's true churches here on earth, are not to be John 4.
Acts. 10 35 Matthew 28. 20.
limited to this or that place; as, because there are so many Parishes,
Dioceses, Provinces, in a civil State, therefore those must be so many fixed,
Parocihall, Diocesan, Provincial churches. And here, Brother Prynne, would
reduce ( tanquam ex postliminio) the Provincial, Diocesan, Parochial church*
Government, to the same form it had before? Would you have the Provincial
Arichbishops* with their Diocesan Bishops, and Parochial clergy, or Priests
set up again? For a Province has relation to its Provincial, and a Diocese to
its Diocesan, and a Parish (to speak in the old Dialect) to its Parish Priest.
Da veniam verbo. And as for division of Provinces, Dioceses, and Parishes, into
so many churches, you know where and when it began. For in the year 267.
Dyonisius Bishop of Rome made this division: Polydor Vi^g^l de ^nven t^ ib
rerum. lib 4 cap 9.
which division turned the churches into a Babylonish confusion; when now all
that dwelt together in every Parish, and so in every Diocese, who ever they
were, Tag, and Rag, must make up a church, as so many members do one body:
whereas the churches planted by the Apostles, were called and gathered out of
the wide world, where the Word of God came, and took place. So as not every
city became a church, but so many as were called in 1 Cor. 1 2. so Romans 1. 7.
so Ephesians. 1. 1, etc
every city. Paul writes not to all in Corinth, but to the church there,
consisting of the Saints only.

But you object the gathering of churches, not of Infidels, but of men already
converted to, and settled in the christian faith, of which form of congregating
churches, you say you could never discern example, or any direct Scripture to
satisfy conscinces. We would gladly say Amen to that assertion, that the whole
Nation is christian, established in the faith; but if not, you dispute ex falso
supposito. May it please you then, brother, to take notice of the example both
of John Baptist and of Christ himself, and of the Apostles, who Mat. 3. 5. 7.
Io^. 4 1. Acts 2. 40.
all of them did call and gather christian churches out of the Jews church:
which might suffice to satisfy any man's conscience in this point; and so much
the more, when they consider this is a time of Reformation, and we have all
taken a covenant each to go before other, in reforming not only our selves, but
all others within our line, according to the word of God. And again, the case
between our Reformation at this time, and that of the Jews church, is much
alike: For as th a was the Gospell-Reformation, so is this; as that was a
gathering of such churches out of that of the Jews, as acknowledged Christ to
be their only King and Lawgiver, to govern consciences and churches by his
Word, when the rest of that church, even the main body of it, did reject
Christ, and renounce him for their King, this being the very Title set over him
on his cross, for which they crucified him: So the preaching up of Christ's
Kingdom in these days, is that which calls and gathers those unto Christ,
who acknowledge him alone for their King to govern them; and this out of those,
that do not, or will not submit unto his Kingly government, but depend upon
the sole determination of men, what kind of church-governement they will set
up in the Land, which you tell us must be suitable to the laws and customs of
the Realm, and manners of the people.

But there is yet one thing more, for which you say, you can see no ground, and
that is particular church government. Why, brother, why should the lawfulness
of this be doubted, whether explicit or implicit? It is the churches wisdom
and care, yea, conscience and duty too, as we humbly conceive to admit of none
but such as can give some account of the work of grace wrought in them, though
but in the least degree, yet in truth, so far as we may discern them to be
Saints: for such only are fit members of a church, or body of Christ, so as to
partake of those holy Ordinances of Christ, which none but visible Saints ought
to partake of. And who are fit to receive the Seals of the covenant, but such
as profess to be in covenant? And surely if any shall refuse to make this
profession of their being in covenant, as being ashamed thereof, with what
conscience can the Church admit them into fellowship? And you know this is a
time of Reformation, and we have long been under a yoke of
Antichristian-government, and of humane ordinances in the worship of God;
wherein we have all violated our vow and covenant made in our names in our
Baptism: Now, does not reason require, that we should renew our covenant in
our own persons, when we come to enter into the way of Reformation, and that in
as full a manner as possibly we can? And when the people Ierem. 50. 5.
of God came out of Babylon to inhabit Jerusalem again, they made a covenant
among themselves, when seeking the way with their faces thitherward, they say,
Come and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall
not be forgotten. The case is ours in a great measure, who are now inquiring
the war to Sion, with our faces thitherward; and shall we be abashed to come to
Sion from all the relics of Babylon, and not incite one another, as they did,
to enter into a perpetual covenant with the Lord Christ, as our only King not
to be forgotten? And the like we read Ezra 10. 5. and Nehem. 9. 38. so did
King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. Now if any require an example hereof in the New
Testament, I answer, what needs it, when we have it in the Old? What example
have we in the New Testament for baptizing of Infants? Yet having a *
commandment in the Old Gen 17 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
for circumcising the Infants of believing Abraham, as being included in the
same covenant with faithful Abraham* the intaile of this Covenant never yet
out off, but reaching to all Abraham's seed, walking in the steps of Abraham's
faith now under the Gospel; Romans 4. 11, 16
infants of believing parents professing to be in covenant, have the same right
unto baptism, as being within the covenant, which the infants of believing*
Abraham had unto circumcision (in stead whereof baptism by Gods institution
succeeded) and this by a strict charge and command from God ( Genesis 17. 13, 14.)
which is as strong now for baptizing of Infants of believing parents, as it was
to the infants of believing Abraham for circumcision. Again, what example, yea
or precept is there of giving women the Lords Supper in the New Testament? yet
upon good consequence it is drawn from thence. But this by the way. And to
conclude this point, what reason can any man bring against this particular
Church Covenant? And if any do disrelish it, they are only such as take a
disgust of the way itself, and then no marvel if every thing about it be
quarrelled and questioned, though no other reason can be given of it, but a
Nolumus: such as the Jews gave when they said of Christ, Nolumus: Luke 19. 14.
(...).
We will not have this man to reign over us. Which speech was the more
notorious, as being delivered by an Embassage, a solemn act of State of the
Eldership, and they his own Citizens, though a little after (verse. 27.) he
declares them his enemies, and for this very thing, that they would not he
should reign over them, commands them to be brought and slain before him.
But this by the way, though not unworthy of wise men's sad observation.

Object. But it will be said, we have covenanted already in the National
Covenant.

Answ. This is against things upon supposition, that we were convinced of the
evil of them, but not about our own persons, as enquiring whether we indeed
are willing to give up ourselves to the Lord Jesus. 2. This was put in by such
outward authority, that many for fear took it, which a Church Covenant under
the Gospel (where the people are to be such as come willingly) will not bear;
for under the Law indeed there was another order, but appointed by God, that
they might be forced to the covenant that they had received in their* fathers:
but our fathers were overawed, and secondly, no such order now.

The eighth Question.
This question, though somewhat involved and perplexed with many branches, yet
the scope being to prove a National Church, and so a common Presbyterian
Classical government, to which particular congregations, persons, ought to be
subordinate, and thereby an apparent subversion of the Novell Independent
invention. (These are your words.)

The whole I reduce into form thus:

Where there be infallible proofs of National Churches, Proposition.
there of necessity must be a common Presbyterian, Classical government, to
which particular congregations, persons, ought to be subordinate, to the
apparent subversion of the NOVEL INDEPENDENT INVENTION.

But there be infallible proofs of National Churches; as the Assumption.
Catholic Church, the National Church of the Jews, the Synodall Assembly of
the Apostles, Acts 15. who made and sent binding decrees to the Churches;
seconded with all Oecumenicall, National, Provincial Councels, Synods, and
the Church Government exercised throughout the world in all Christian Realms,
States, from their first reception of the Gospel, till this present; compared
with twelve places of Scripture at the least, etc.

Therefore there must be of necessity, a common Presbyterian Conclusion.
Classical government, to which particular Congregations, persons, ought to be
subordinate, to the apparent subversion of the Novell Independent Inventions.

Now for answer to this large Argument, brieflly: And first, to the
Proposition. I deny that you can bring any infallible proofs, or one proof,
that there either are, or ever have been any National Churches by any other
institution, but merely humane; nor any one of divine institution, but only
that of the Jews in the old Testament, and now wholly dissolved; of which we
have spoken sufficiently before: And which also was not only National, but in
a manner Oecumenick and universal, as appears Acts 2. and such therefore as I
hope you contend not for now; for then there would be a Pope, as there was an
high Priest then etc. And brother, you must give us leave to stand upon this,
as for our lives, that we dare not admit of any Churches, as the true and
genuine Churches of Christ, which are not of his own institution, that is,
such as are not called and gathered by the voice of Christ in his word, and by
that Scepter of his swayed, and by that alone Law of his governed. And
therefore be entreated, good brother, not to press upon us such your Churches,
whose not only institution in their several divisions, but government also in
their combinations, is merely humane, and therefore as a house founded on a
sand, which against a storm cannot stand You must first be able to found your
National Church in the Scripture, or assure yourselfe, if a man will build
upon it a common Presbyteriall Classical government, and dwell there, he will
bring an old house upon his head, when God shall begin to storm it.

But to come to your particular instances in the Assumption, for the proof of
your National Church. The first is, the Catholic Church throughout the
world. What is this to a National Church? Though the Catholic include all the
true Churches throughout the world, yer does it not therefore conclude any
Church to be National.

The second instance is, the National Church of the Jews, and from hence you
can conclude as little for your National Churches; as before we have showed.
For bring us any one National, that is one entire Church, or congregation, as
that of the Jews was: or, that is of one family, as that was: or, that is a
type of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, as that was: or, that is the universal
Church of God visible on earth, as that was: or, that is governed by the like
laws, that that was: when your self do confess, that the government of your
National Churches is to be regulated by humane Laws, Customs, Manners, and
not by Gods word alone; whereas that of the Jews was wholly governed by Gods
own Law, and not at all by the Laws of men, until it came to be corrupted,
contrary to the express Law of God. And you confess also, that the government
of your National Churches is alterable, according to the Laws, Customs,
Manners of several Nations: whereas the government of the Church of the Jews
was unalterable, till Christ himself did put a period to that Economy. In a
word, your National Churches are a mixed multitude, consisting for the
greatest part of profane persons, being as a confused lu^p, whereof there are
nine parts of leaven to one of pure flower, so as the whole is miserably
soured, and the flower made altogether unsavory: But that of the Jews, in its
natural and external constitution, was all holy, * an holy Nation, a Royal
Exodus 5, 6. (...). 1^. 3.
Priesthood, a peculiar People, * all the congregation holy, every one of them:
So as in no one particular, do your National Churches hold parallel with
that of the Jews, no not in the least resemblance*

Your third instance is the Synodall Assembly of the Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren at Jerusalem, Acts 15. who made and sent Binding Decrees, to the
Churches. And what of this, brother? Therefore National Churches, or general
Councels, or Provincial, have the like power to make and impose binding
Decrees, and send them to the Churches? Why, first of all, that Assembly was
not any National Church representative. Secondly, neither was it a General or
Provincial Council. Thirdly, being an Assembly of the Apostles* with the
Elders and Brethren, it could not err: for the Apostles had infallibility of
judgment, being guided by the holy Ghost infallibly, and the Elders and
Brethren did assent to their determinations. And was there ever such a
Synodicall Assembly since that? Had ever any Council besides that,
infallibility of judgment? Show it, brother, and then we will believe they
may make Binding Decrees, and we will submit unto them. Nay, dare any Assembly
of men on earth, say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and Us? That Is enough
for the black mouth of blasphemy, the Roman lying Oracle. But in your second
thoughts, you traverse this Act. 15.
place more largely, which we shall consider when we come to it. In the mean
time, what I have here and before said, may suffice to stay the Readers stomace.

But you add, All this is seconded with all Occumenicall, National,
Provincial Councels, Synods, and the Church Government throughout the world in
all Christian Realms, States, etc. Alas, brother, all these put together, are
in no sort suitable to make a second to that Apostolical Assembly; they cannot
hold the least proportion with it, to make a second to that unsampled sample,
though they make never so great a sum.

And whereas you make the up-shot of this your question, to the apparent sub
version of Novell Independent Invention, (these be your words) we have proved
it to be neither man's Invention, but Gods own institution, nor Novell, as
having its foundation in the New Testament; nor yet Independent, otherwise then
that it depends not upon any humane authority, or jurisdiction out of it self;
not upon any such conformity to humane laws, or customs, or manners of every
Nation or people, as you speak of. Neither do you take away our Argument from
the most usual phrase of the Apostles calling the Churches in the plural, by
saying, Historians often speak of the Churches in England: for they do not so
speak when they mean the congregations, but the material Temples: but speak of
England as one Church when they understand the people; and there has not been
shown any dependence of those Churches, as the dependency of the English
Churches is known.

The ninth Question.
Thus reduced in sum:

That liberty which the Apostles had and used in ordaining, Proposition.
supplying, instituting new Rites, Orders, Canons, etc. for the Churches peace
and welfare, they transmitted to posterity:

But the Apostles had and used such liberty etc. Assumption. Conclusion.


Therefore the same liberty have all Churches in the world, in all ages
succeeding the Apostles, in ordaining, supplying, instituting new Rites,
Orders, Canons, for the Churches peace and welfare.

I answer to the Proposition: 1. That the Apostles themselves had no other
liberty to do any thing about the calling, planting, ordering, and regulating
of Churches, but what they had immediarely given them by Christ, and his
Spirit. 2. This liberty so given them reached no further, then to those things
only which were given them in charge, and which they accordingly, as faithful
Stewards, did practice concerning the Churches. Heb. 3. ^.
Even as Christ himself, being the Son of God, and set over his house, was
faithful in all things, doing nothing, but what he had by special Commission
and Command from the Father. So as* if the Son himself, God blessed for ever,
took not the liberty to himself to do what himself pleased, as Mediator,
though as the Son he thought it no robbery to be equal with God the Father;
but did every thing as he had received commandment from him* how much less
have the servants of God any liberty to do what pleases them, but that, and
those things alone, which they have in command from their Master. If therefore
they who prosesse to succeed the Apostles in their several generations, will
challenge the same liberty, which the Apostles had and used about the Churches
of God, they must first of all show us their immediate Commission from Christ,
as the Apostles had. Secondly, They must all show us, that what they do in
Church Matters, under color and pretense of Apostolical liberty, is none
other, but what they have by express command from Christ by his Spirit. And
thirdly, because they are not able to show this, they must use their liberty no
further, then the lists and limits of Scripture do permit, which holds forth
an exact and perfect rule, for all precisely to observe, without the least
variation. As knowing that severe law of God, often used in Scripture, and
wherewith, as with a bounder-stone, the whole Book of God is closed up, and
that with a solemn protestation of Christ himself: If any man shall add unto
these things, God Revel. 22. 18, 19* So Deuteronomy. 4. 2* and 12. 32* Prove. 30. ^.
shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book; And if any man
shall diminish ought thereof, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the Holy City.

But some will happily object; This is meant, not in point of Church Government,
Discipline, Rites, Ceremonies, as left to man's liberty to ordain, add,
supply, institute, according to the diversity of the laws and customs of
every Nation; but in matter of Doctrine, Story, and Prophecy. To which I answer
(though sufficiently noted before, and now in one word) if God were so exact
about the form of the Tabernacle, (a type of Christ's Church under the Gospel)
to have all things observed according to the Pattern, even unto the least pin;
what reason can any reasonable man give, why Christ, the same Lawgiver* and
pattern it self, should be less careful over his Church in the New
Testament, so as to leave it at six and seven, to the liberty of all Kingdoms
and Nations of the world, to set up in the Church what Government, Discipline,
Rites, Ceremonies, Canons, they pleased, upon what pretense soever as for the
Churches peace and welfare? Has not the opening of this one sluice, let in such
an Inundation of all manner of humane inventions in this kind, as has wel-nigh
drowned the whole world in all manner of superstition and error? Therefore, my
dear brother Prinne, assure your self, not all the wits, not all the learning
in the world, will be able to assert this your assertion, but that it must of
necessity fall to around with its own weight; and there* brother* let it lie,
or father die, and bury it there, whence it came. All that Christ appointed is
exactly to be followed, though Christ was not so ^^act in circumstantials under
the Gospel; because 1. That was a typical and figurative worship. 2. Christ
now looks more to substantialls, Joh. 4. 24. wherein he is more strict, 1 Cor.
5.

And where you say, that as in the Apostles times, Christians multiplied, so
also their Churches, Church Officers, and their Church Government, Discipline
varied: Consider that here was no variation of the Rule; but by degrees the
rule of Church Government and Discipline was perfected, not varied. The Temple
was seven years in building, first hewing, squaring, then erecting 1 Chronicles. ^8.
stone after stone, timber after timber* each in his proper place, here was no
variation of the frame and form of the Temple all this while, but the work
went up day by day, till it came to perfection, according to the pattern in
writing given to David by the Spirit. Even so, while the spiritual Temple is
framing, the daily goings up of it by order after order, and rule after rule,
is no variation, but a graduall tending to perfection, till all be finished; as
we now see the whole frame of Church Government for all true Evangelicall
Churches so completed in the New Testament, as nothing under the pain
aforesaid, may either be diminished, or added to it. And the same Orders are
prescribed to all the Churches; So ordain I in all Churches, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 17. So for the collection for the Saints, and for the first
day of the week for public meetings (as before) the same order he gives to
the Church of Corinth which he does for the Churches of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16. 1,
2. So Officers chosen and ordained in every Church, Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. 7.
So as if one Church for the smalnesse of it have fewer Officers, and another
Church for the largeness of it more in number (as the Church in Jerusalem had
need of seven Deacons, both for the magnitude of the Congregation, and the
multitude of the poor therein, Act. 6.) yet this makes no variation in the
form of Church Government, as differing one from another either for substance,
or circumstance, saving only socundum magis and minus, as a little man is a
man, as well as the tallest man.

In a word, those Arguments, which you by way of derision set down in your
own form of words, with their Ergoes, for as much as they are of your own
devising, I therefore leave them with you to consider better of them. Only one
I cannot pass by, without wrong to Christ, to his word, to his Spirit, to his
Apostles.

Every man (say you) in his Infancy, is borne destitute of Religion, of the use
of speech, reason, understanding, faith, legs, etc.

Ergo, He ought to continue so, when he is grown a man.

Yet this is the maine Argument of some Independents; say you: O brother! Of
what Independents? As whence this Argument? Because they hold, that in nothing
they ought to swerve from the exact Rule, Gods Word, for the government of
Churches? And do you compare the Scripture (as it was in the Apostles time) to
a child in his Innocence, destitute, etc? So as, if we will not transgress the
bounds of Scripture for Church Government, we do as much in effect, as argue,
Every man in his Infancy is borne destitute of Religion, etc. Ergo, he ought to
continue so, when he is grown a man? We dare go no further, then the
Scripture leads us; therefore we are a company of Infants. Good brother, call
in these extravagants. 2. We say the Churches were as perfect then as ever
since; they had all Ordinances, the most eminent Officers, the most large
gifts, etc. and as many in a place called to the Faith, as can be shown in any
one place since, to have come in voluntarily to the Gospel, Act. 8. 10. 12.
Chap. 21. 20.

The tenth Question.
This Question is reduced thus;

Such as cannot produce any one solid reason, why they ought Proposition.
not (in point of conscience) willingly submit to a Presbyteriall Government,
in case it shall be established among us, by the general consent of the Synod,
and Parliament, as most consonant to Gods Word, the Laws and Government of our
Realm: ought to be reputed to be in a high degree of Obstinacy, Singularity,
Arrogance, self ends, and peremptory Schism.

But Independents cannot produce any one solid reason, why Assumption.
they ought not so to do, as aforesaid.

Therefore Independents ought to be reputed to be in a high Conclusion.
degree of Obstinacy, Singularity, Arrogance, self ends, and peremptory Schism.

Now truly brother, a heavy charge you lay upon those poor creatures you do
so becall Independents. As 1. of Obstinacy. If that be obstinacy, against men's
consciences not to yield blind obedience to men's commands in point of Religion.
2. Of singularity. If that be singularity, for a few to enter in at the strait
gate, and to walk in at the narrow way. If that be singularity, to do that
which the multitude will not do: to ^o^ne under the government of Christ's
Kingdom, in the Government of our consciences, and of his Churches which is a
Principle* you your self in terms cannot, dare not deny. 3. Of Arrogance: If
that be Arrogance, for one Church not to exalt it self over another, or for
Pastors not to Lord it over their flocks. 4. Of selfe-ends: If that be self
seeking* which (if any other) is a self-denying, and Luke 9. 23*
a taking up of our cross daily, as Malefactors ready to be crucified, as
without which resolution we cannot follow Christ. If that be selfe-seeking, to
strip our selves of the preferments and favors of the world, to be exposed
naked to the reproach of all, to be accounted the outcasts of the world, and
the offscouring of all things, as at this day. And lastly, Of peremptory
schism: If that be schism whereby we ought to separate our selves from all
doctrines contrary to what is delivered, Romans 16, 17. and so far as is
possible, from all the ^udiments of the world, from the Ordinances of men,
which are not after Christ, that so we might adhere to him, and walk in him,
being taught by him, as Ephesians. 1. 21* Col. 2. 6.
the t^^th is in Jesus.

But ^o^, that these Independents should undergo all these, (...), hard
speeckes, and yet not to be able to show one solid Jude 15.
rason for it, surely then, a fools cap and a bell were fittest for them. But I
hope, brother, if you have but read hitherto, and well weighed in a just
balance, the many reasons we have already given you, perhaps in some of them
at least, if not in all, you will find something, that may challenge the title
of solid, in your clearer and more solid judgment.

Now to your Argument* First of all I might deny the necessity of the
consequence of your Proposition. For it is not necessary that every truth
should cease to be truth, because every one cannot Formae rerum nesciuntur.
Scaliger. Exerci^*
show a solid reason for it. The fire has an essential form, and yet no man
can find it ou^, It burns, yet none can show a solid reason why. The Martyrs
some of them professed they could not dispute for that truth they held: but
(say they) we can dye for it. And what if that Church Government, which your
silly Independents hold, be a truth, and yet some of them not able to show one
solid reason for it? Must it therefore not be a truth? As the Apostle says;
What if some did not believe? Shall their unbeleefe make the Romans 3. 3.
says of God without effect?

But I flatly deny your Assumption; and affirm, that your Independents both
have, and do, and can produce many solid Reasons, why they may not, ought not
in point of Conscience, willingly submit to such a Presbiteriall Government, as
you prescribe, because framed by the general consent of a Synod and
Parliament, conc^^ved by them as consonant to Gods Word, the Laws and
Government of our Realm. One Reason is, Consonant to Gods Word, and conform
to the Laws of this, or any other Realm, cannot stand together; as before is
showed. And the reason hereof is, because Christ's Kingdom is so transcendent,
so absolute, distinct, Independent, (if you will) as it is not obliged to
conform and stoop to humane laws, and peoples manners, as you put a necessity
upon it. A second Reason; because you require obedience to that, which men
shall conceive consonant to Gods Word, etc. Touched also before, and now
again to put you in mind. And therefore upon this ground we ought not in point
of conscience to subject and captivate our says to men's opinions. A third
Reason, why we may not do it, is, because you require absolute obedience to
the general consent of Assembly and Parliament. Now we dare not pin our faith
upon generality of men's opinions, The generality of the votes of the Jews
State carried it away, to crucify their King. If the whole world might vote
this day, the generality would be against Christ, as he is indeed the only
Anoyn^ed King, Priest, and Prophet. What if the generality vote amiss, while
yet they may conceive all to be right, because consonant to what they most
^ffect? No, though orthodox and godly, as was showed before in the instance of
Paphnutius in the Council of Nice, A fourth Reason; Because we acknowledge
Christ alone to be Lord of our Conscience, and no power of men on earth herein
to be joined with him. Harm. Confess. sect. 11. The Magistrate rules the body,
not the mind. And therefore we dare not subjucate our conscience to humane
laws, customs, and manners, as to Gods Word, with which you do so equally
yoke them. So as we answer you with the Apostles, when all the syn^dri^n of
the Jewish State with one general voice interd^cted them from preaching in
Christ's Name: Whether it be equal in the sight of God, to o^ey you rather then
God, judge ye. A ^^^^^ Reason: Because the Holy Ghost by the Apostle expressly
condemns all humane Ordinances in matters of faith and Religion, whereof
Church Government is a branch. Act. 4. 1^. (...), etc.
and a doct^inall part, so as man's law therein may not bind the conscience; As
Col. 2. from verse 8. to the end of the Chapter. A sixth Reason: Because it is
Antichristian to deny Jesus to be the Christ, that is, the only King, Priest,
and Prophet of his Church He is an Antichrist, that denies any of these three
1 John 2. ^^*
Offices. But to deny Christ to be the only King of his Church, is to deny him
in one of his Incommunicable Offices. And they thus deny Jesus to be the
Christ, that place man with Christ in his throne, that set humane Laws and
Customs of all Nations cheek by jowle with the Word of God. Here Jesus is
denied to be the Christ. I could here add many more reasons to those: but
these may suffice, that you may see there be some Reasons which your
Independents can produce, and those so solid, as the Gates of hell shall not
prevail against.

But, say you, if we thus claim exemption from such binding Decrees of men in
the matters of Christ, and that in point of conscience, then may also Papists,
Anabaptists, and all other ^ects claim the like exemptiens, upon the like
groun^s. Brother, for that, I hope you will put a difference between orthodox
Churches, and he^erodox. But I say again, for any man's conscience, be it
never so erroneous, as that of Papists, yet certainly the conscience of such
simply considered in it self, nor you, nor any man in the world has any thing
to do, further then to instruct and admonish and labor to inform and
iectifie: enforce it you may not.

But shall we tolerate Popery, and so idolatry in our Land*

Obj.
I answer; ^t is one thing to tolerate Popery and Idolatry publicly Answ.
in a land, and another to tolerate a man in his Conscience. Magistrates may
not tolerate open Popery and Idolatry to be set up in the land: but the
conscience o^ a Papist, they are no masters, or judges of. If the Civil
Magistrate see any of Gods Commandments actually violated, he bears not the
sword Romans 13.
for naught; evil actions he must punish: but he has no power, over the
conscience of any, to punish a man for that, so long as he makes no open breach
of Gods Commandments, or the just laws of the Land And so in the rest. And,
brother, in your twelfth Question, you confess so much reproving (but how
justly) you Independents for censuring the very hearts and spiritual estates
of others; and alleging that Scripture, that forbids men to judge, because
God only knows men's hearts. Now, brother, that which you deny to others, as to
be judges of men's hearts, and spiritual estates, why will you either assume
it to your self, or attribute it to others, by placing them in Christ^ throne,
and thereby displacing Christ himself? As the Apostle says, Who art thou that
judge another servant? To his Master he Romans 14. 4.
stands, or falls. Much more, who art thou, that judge Gods servant? And
ver. 10. And why do thou judge thy brother? Or why do thou set at ^aught
thy brother? We shall all stand at the Judgment sent of Christ. Christ
therefore is the ^ole Judge o^ every man's conscience; even he alone, that is
the Judge of quick and dead. And brother, let me put it to your Conscience,
Do you think it equal, that either your conscience should be a rule of mine,
or mine of yours? And if no one man's conscience may be the rule of another;
certa^nly neither may all the men's consciences in the world be the Judge of any
one man's. 2 How ever we find neither rule, example, nor reason from Scripture,
to force men to Religion originally; ye the R^bins say, if man kept the seven
precepts of Noah, he might not be forced further.

The eleventh Question.
Concerning this question, it contains in it nothing but grievous invectives
against the way you call Independent: You call it a Seminary of Schisms and
dangerous divisions in Church, State: So did Tertullus the ^ews Advocate
against Paul, charge him for a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among
all the Jews, throughout the world, Acts 24. 5. You pretend to ponder it in the
balance of Scripture, or right reason; but you neither show us Scripture not
right reason, to balance it in. You call it a Floodgate to let in an
Inundation of herefies, errors, sects, libertinisme, and lawlesnesse, without
means of suppressing them, when introduced. For this you bring Mr. Williams his
bloody tenent. Now suppose him, or his book, heretical: will you make the way
of Christ so too? There was one Judas a traitor, shall therefore all the rest
of the Apostles, or their Apostolical calling, be so too? You allege also
Anabaptisticall, ^ntinomian, heretical, Ath^ishicall opinions, as of the
Souls mortality, Divorce at pleasure: will you therefore father all these upon
Ch^ists Kingly government? In Luthers time ^undry heresies sprung up; was
Luther therefore either the cause or occasion of them? Do we not know, that
Mothes are bied in the parest cloth? And the dunghills send forth strongest
savours when the Sun shines hottest. Is either the cloth the proper cause of
the moth, or the Sun of the stinking vapor? Never greater errors have bin,
then since the Gospel has clearly shined forth. True it is indeed, that th^se
divisions, and diversities of opinions, are with bleeding hearts to be
bewailed: But shall the Gospel of the Kingdom bear the burden of all? This
were, as with the Christians in Rome in Neroes time; when any judgment of God
fell upon the City, he would still im^^^e it to the Christians, and punish them
for it. But we are taught better. When the good* Husbandman sowed pure wheat
in in his field, the enemy came and supersemina^ed tares; shall we therefore
blame the wheat, because the t^res come up with them?

But that you impu^e to this way libertinisme and lawlesnesse: Good brother
conside^, are we Libertines? or are we lawless? Nay may we not herein plead
for our selves, that in all things we indeavou^ to conform ou^ selves wholly
to the law of Christ^ and if many thing we off^nd ju^^ly any just law o^ ^h^
l^n^, we re^u^e not to suffer. Only, brother, le^ not ^a^ Impe^iall Edict be
revived, that if any confessed themselves to be Christians they should be put
to death; so such as you call (...), should for this very name suffer. As
Tertullian said, Nomen pro^^^i^ine, when the very name of Christian was taken
for a crime* and for means of suppressing errors, what means could suppress
those many errors that sprung up to the successive ages o^ the Church? Was not
the word of God the only means, and not humane power? yea humane power is as
well a means to maintain heresies, as to suppress them. You know what
Constantine and his son did to maintain the Arrian heresy. And orthodox
Independent Churches are as good means as any other; together with the care and
countenance of the Magistrate, if it may be had, to defend them, and enable
them to send forth laborers, without which the Presbytery will be as barren,
breast and womb, as any other.

The twelfth Question.
The sundry passages of this question, as I find them scattered along, I shall
glean them, and so bundle them up for a conclusion at this time: For this
question seems to be a Lerna of Queries.

And first, you quarrel the Title of Independencie. Truly, brother, none of
all those whom you thus entitle, do at all glory in this name, so as to give
you thanks for your so often stiling them thus in one poor sheet of paper,
seeing they cannot imagine you do it honoris gratia, while every where you set
it as a brand. Notwithstanding we are not so ashamed of it, as utterly to
disclaim it; and that for two reasons. First, for distinction sake between us,
and that which you call your Presbyteriall government. The second is, because
this word Independent is to signify, that we hold all particular Churches of
Christ, to be of equal authority, and none to have or exercise jurisdiction
over another, but that each Church is under Christ's government, as the sole
Head, King* Lord, Law give^ thereof. But we would not that you should give us
this as a nick name, or a name of reproach, or badge of scorn: no^ that you
should call us so, as if we denied subjection to civil authority in matters of
civil government nor yet that you should mean such an Independe^cie, as if we
held not good correspondence with all sister-Churches, by way of conseciation,
consultation, communion, communication, mutual consolation, supportation and
(in a word) in all things, duties, offices, as wherein Christ's Kingdom is held
up, the graces of the Churches exercised, and the liberties of each Church
preserved entire, which is the glory of Christ, which we have touched before.
And therefore, brother, you mightily mistake the matter, when you interpret
Independency, as not needing both the Communion and assistance of other
persons, Nations, Churches.

Then secondly you question, Whether the National Covenant dothin sundry
respects strongly engage the Nation against Independency? Truly, brother, not
at all, so long as all our Reformation is to be reduced to, and regulated by
the word of God. And that is a sure foundation, whereon our Independencie
depends. In which respect the Nation is by the Covenant ^^g^ged for
Independencie.

Thirdly, you queree, whether if Independencie (rightly taken still as before)
if stripped of all disg^ising pretenses, be not Pharisaicall, vainglorious,
selfe-conceitednesse, etc. Here, brother, you lash us with a whip of many
cords, but that our armor is p^oo^. So you have done more then ten times, yea
all along. And that all this should come from a friend, a brother, a suffe^er,
from a companion, and counselor, how hard is it to be born? (...) you tell us
of disguising pretenses, if stripped; and for this, you have provided an
unma^king for us. O brother, we have no such d^sguisings, as to fear your
unmaskings. We may in this boldly answer with the Apostle, 1 I hess. 2. 3. 4.
5. And for Pharisaicall* Spiritual pride, vainglory, singularity,
selfe-constitednesse of superlative holiness, which as dirt you throw so
liberally in our face; To this brother, I will say no more but this: S^ sat est
accusasse* quis innoeens erit? It a bare and malicious accu^a^ion be e^ou^h to
fasten a crime, who shall be innocent? And did you ever enter into our hearts,
to see what secret spiritual tumors, and apostumations be there? and if not,
how come you presently, in the very same sentence, and with the same breath to
blow all this besmearing dust into your own face? For you charge us with
passing uncharitable censures upon men's hearts, and spiritual ^states; of which
(say you) God nver made us Judges, and forbids us for to judge because he only
knows men's hearts (as was noted before.) Now then, brother, why do you thus
judge the hearts and spiritual estates of your brethren? Consider it well in
cold blood. And, brother, what do you see in the Independencie, that you
should thus judge them? The Tree is known by the Fruits. Are they ambitions of
preferments, of glory of the world, of favor of great ones, of praise of men
that do voluntarily forsake all, and strip themselves of all to follow naked
Christ* Pharisees indeed loved the praise of men more then Nudum Christum,
nudus sequere* Hieron
the praise of God. That Is Pharisaicall, so in the rest. Therefore brother,
tell not the world what malice may suggest unto you to think of us, but what
you ^^e or observe in us. And yet, brother, the ^n^e of charity is, that you
should first tell your brother privately o^ his fault, before you blaze it to
the world. But thus at least we come to know our ^a^^t. And what is it? We
do, (say you d^^m our selves too transcendently hol^ s^^stified and religious
a^ov^o he^s; that we esteem them altogether unworthy of yea who^^ exclude them
from our Communion and ourch-society, as Publicans, heathens, or p^of^ne
^ersons (though perhaps as good, or better then our selves) unless they will
submit to their Church-covenants, and government, ref^sing ^l true brotherly
familiarity* society with them. So you. Now, brother Pryn, I confess I am one
of th^se, whom you call Independents* and did you ever observe any such
supercisious strang^nesse of ^^r^^age in me toward you, and other of your and
my friend* (...)e zealous against Independents, then your self, ^s youchange
us withal? Have there not been many interchangeable invitations between you
and me, with loving acceptations, whereby we have enjoyed mutual society, in
all friendly and brotherly entertainment, saving ^^ill some quarrels about
(...) way, but ever parting friends? And more frequent it had been, had your
occasions, and sometimes mine own, permitted* And neither at this day, since
these you^ invectives came forth, (though they were no small grief to me, and
that even for your sak^) am I become a greater stranger to you, either in face
or affection, then I was be o^^ For I am so persuaded of your good nature, thar
did you truly epprehend, and dive into the mystery of Christ's Kingly government
in his Churches and Children, certainly you would never have thus sharpened and
imbittered your style against your brethren; the Lord open your eyes to see it.
But however, brother, either be more moderate in censuring, or else censure not
at al^, without ju^^ cause.

But we exclude (say you) as good or better then our selves from communion and
Church-society with us. Surely it may be so; but, brother, we exclude them not;
but they exclude themselves. And you give the reason, because they will not
submit to the Churches government. But it does not hence follow, that we
therefore deem either our selves so transcende^tly holy (as you say) or others
altogether unworthy. But, brother, we esteem the government of Christ's Church
so holy* as we cannot think them fit to be admitted (be they never so good)
that think so slightly of the way, and of them that walk in it, that they
refuse to agree to walk in this way with the people of God. Would you admit of
a member into your family who is disaffected with your courses, and orders of
the family? What cause then has he to complain, if upon knowledge thereof you
refuse to entertain him? If therefore every family should be careful to
provide for its own peace, by having all in it of like affection and judgment,
(if possible) why not Christ's own house and family? And, brother, the truth
is, (for we love no disguising, as to need any unmasking) we love not in a
time of reformation, after a general tincture of superstition and
will worship, blindly to go to work, to admit of all comers, and to cast
Christ's Pearls and holy things to such as we know not. Or if we b^ persuaded
they be truly godly, and yet they are not persuaded of the warrantablenesse of
this way, how can they with a good conscience desire communion with us? And if
not, how can the Church receive them? Nor indeed do any such offer themselves;
nor does the Church impose any such conditions, as a godly Christian has cause
not to accept. We desire to do those things that please God, namely, such as
he commends and commands. Rev. 2. 2. Christ commends the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, for not hearing with those that are wicked, and for trying those
that said they were Apostles, and were not, but were found ly^rs. So some may
come that profess themselves to be Christians, that is, to be godly, to be
believers, but we dare not receive them without trial: if they refuse to be
tried, we may the more suspect them. And what interest has any to Church
Communion, that is not a member, or to the seal, that is not in Covenant? And
we love not to do that, for which to repent afterward. We desire all our
members may be such as they may peaceably and sweetly continue with us. We are
loath to have the world offended by the unworthy walking of any one member. And
we desire by our best providence to prevent, that none once admitted, should
ever be cast out again. And brother, all this we hold to be our duty, for the
preferring of the honor of Christ, and of his Ordinances, and of his Churches
in the beauties of holiness. Others may take a broader way, if they please;
we dare not. The Church and body of Christ is not of so slight account with
us, as that we should carelessly and promiscuously admit of every one that offer
themselves, without some trial of them, both for the Churches satisfaction,
and for the account she must make to Jesus Christ. How strict the Jews were,
Airsworth in Genesis 12. v. 17. relates out of the R^^bines. And even Bellarmine
himself had such a clear apprehension of the general nature of Christ's
Church, (though himself did not experimentally and particularly know it) that
he uses th^se words: Ecclesia precip^e, etc. The Church especially and
intention^lly, gathers only believers, such Ecclesia prae^^pue and ex
intention, fi ^^^s tantum ^ol^^ gi^, qui veram fidem in cord ^^^^nt. Cum
autem admiscentur a^^qui ^ic^i, qui vere non credunt, id accidit praeter
intention^m Ecclesiae si ^n^m cos n^sse posset, nunquam admitteret, aut c^su
admissos, continue excluder^t. Bellar. de Eccles. l 3. c. 10. See also D. Field
of the Church, Book 1. cap. 7.
as have true faith in their heart. And when any hypocrites are mingled among,
such as truly believe not* i^ falls out besides the intention of the Church.
For if it could know them, it would never admit them; or being casually
admitted, it would so thwith exclude them. Thus Bell^rmi e; which he sets down
as a most true speculative Prinple (though but ill applied, and worse practiced
by him and his, and such like,) which yet all true Churches should be careful
to observe, and pot in practice. And truly, brother, we desire to do this,
that, if it be possible, no misbeleever, no profane liver, no hypocrite be
admitted a member of Christ's body (though an hypocrite having his viz rd on,
may sometimes Such were called of old, (...) Eusebius.
creep in unawares into the Church) And therefore diligent circumspection is
used for prevention. And ^urpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur h^s^es: A guest
is in refairly kept out, then cast out. This, brother, is our course, that we
hold in admitting of members; we think we cannot be too wary, though too strict
we are not. We suspect the gold that will not abide the touch. A Christian name
may silver over the copper, such as the Scripture calls reprobate silver,
Ierem. 6. 30* Though we know each current coin has its allowance of allay; and
each believing Saint so many grains allowance; but all sincere, no thing
counterfeit. And as for Church covenant, we have sufficiently spoken before.

The last charge you lay upon Independencie, is, uncharitableness,
carelessness, and neglect of one another welfare, and the like. Brother, for
uncharitableness, let our practices, the best proofs of true charity* plead
for us. We ^^ve manifested our love and loyalty to the State, whereof we are
natural and political members. For the safety thereof we have powered out our
estates to the very bottom. We dare herein compare with all others of our rank
and means. My self a poor man, am out for the State* between four and five
hundred pounds; and, I bless God, I have done it with a cheerful heart, nor
for squint respects to lay out so much at once, to receive of the State so much
annuity. Yet I speak it not to glory, but you have compelled me. And besides
their means, none have more prodigally adventured and spent their lives for the
State, then your Independents have; and for none has the God of Battles
appeared more. And but for stirring up envy (which needs not) I should put you
in mind of Marston-moore. In a word, brother, we dare challenge all the world
in point of fidelity to the State, and our native country. Where be they that
more love, honor our Senate, Synod, Syn^drion? Who pray more frequently, more
fervently for them? So that herein you cannot say we are Independents, as for
want of true love, and that of the best kind, to the public Cause and State,
from which our Independencie is so far from separating our hearts and
affections, with all our abilities to serve it, as that it has cleared it self
to be as fast and firmly united unto it, as any other whatsoever. And for true
charitablenes* brother, where is it to be found, if not in those Churches you
call Independent? But you will say, this love is among our selves. And God
grant it may ever be so: Yet it ends not here, but extends to all* And,
brother, for a close, I challange you to show me any one parochial
Congregation in England, where in there is, or can be the like love one to
another, the like care one for another, the like spiritual watchfulness one
over another, the like union and communion of members in one mystical body, in
a sympathy of affections, in such a fraternity as is described, Psalm. 133. a
lively type of a true Church of Christ. Till you show us the like in any of
your Parochial Assemblies, consisting of your mixed multitude, good brother,
restrain your spirit so mightily imbittered against us, lest in charging us
with uncharitableness, your self alone be found to be uncharitable. And so I
have done with your first twelve Questions.

A VINDICATION OF CHURCHES, COMMONLY CALLED INDEPENDENT. OR AN ANSWER To Mr.
PRYNNES second Book.
MY dear Brother, to your twelve new Interrogatories I present you with a new
Answer. I call it new, because I shall cull out such passages, as I find new,
or not so much insisted on in your former twelve. Which as they are fewer, so I
shall be the shorter, for as much as in the former, I have been the larger. But
brother, I find not that in your Book, which you pretend in your Title, to wit,
the Unmasking of Independency. Nor can we expect it of you: for in your Proeme
you say, that the Independents have not dogmatically, and in direct terms,
discovered the full truth of what they assert. If not, what kind of visage will
you discover, when you have taken off the mask? Surely, by your handling of the
matter, you mean to unmask some hags face, such as pleased the Painter. Which
when you have done, it will appear to all the wise-hearted, that it is not the
face of Independency, as wherein there shines forth such a beauty, as it
seems you yet never saw.

In your Preface to the Courteous R^^der, you say, We politickly conceal the
principal grounds, and more deformed parts of our Church-Platforme, for fear
of miscarrying. Good brother, who told you so^ Remember your own lesson before,
Judge not. But indeed, had you reproved us (yet in love and meekness) for not
setting forth more fully a complete Model of this fabric, or spiritual
house, it had been something. Which yet if it were done, you would not impute
it to policy, that it was not * Ephesians. 2. 21.
sooner done. But when it is exactly done, you will find no deformed parts at
all in it: but contrariwise a greater beauty then in that famous Temple that
Solomon built, as being the spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ; so as I am sorry
you are put to the pains of pumping out our determinations (as you say) by
your Questions: Prove. 5. 16.
When as you should rather find it as a fountain flowing forth in the streets.
But brother, how do you write by Question, not decision (as you say) when your
Questions prove to be decisions, as your former twelve are? And what do you
else, but refute upon bare conjectures, Andabatarum more pugnando, as those at
blind-man-buff. For your Charges upon us are very sore, and (as many do say)
bitter, so far beyond reason, as you are not able truly to say, Wherefore.

For your first Question, Whether the Independent form of Church Government be
any where to be found in the Old or New Testament: this we have resolved in
your former Twelve Questions: so as this is no new Interrogatory, unless you
put the greater difference between Questions, and Interrogatories. And though
it were in no antiquity (which yet we have shown before) nevertheless, if it
be found in the Scripture (as there it is) whatsoever clouds of the mastery of
iniquity have darkened the luster of it for so many hundred years: yet this
cannot plead prescription against it. For if Nullum tempus occurrit Regi: then
surely no tract of time can prescribe against the law of Christ's kingdom,
which we find upon sacred record. But where, say you? Why, brother, this House
of God wherein Christ rules as King, stands upon so many Principles, as so many
maine pillars, not to be shaken. As

1. It is a spiritual house, whose only builder and governor 1.
is Christ, and not man. 2. It is a spiritual kingdom, whose only King is
Christ, 2.
and not man. 3. It is a spiritual Republic, whose only Lawgiver is 3.
Christ, and not man. 4. It is a spiritual Corporation, or body, whose only
head 4.
is Christ, and not man. 5. It is a Communion of Saints, governed by Christ's
Spirit, 5.
not man's. 6. Christ's Church is a Congregation called and gathered out 6.
of the world by Christ's Spirit and Word, and not by man.
These Principles are such, as the Adversaries themselves of this kingdom of
Christ, cannot, dare not deny. And out of these Principles do issue these
Conclusions.

1. That no man is the builder of this spiritual house. 1.
2. That no man, nor power on earth has a kingly power 2.
over this kingdom. 3. That no earthly Lawgivers may give Laws for the 3.
government of this Republic. 4. That no man may claim or exercise a headship
over this 4.
Body. 5. That no man can, or ought to undertake the Government 5.
of this Communion of Saints. Item, That none are of this Communion, but
visible Saints. Ergo, a true visible Church of Christ cannot be defined, or
confined to a parochial multitude. Item, that, that Government of this
Communion, is not extrinsecall, but intrinsecall, by the Spirit of the Word,
and by the Word of the Spirit. 6. That men may not appoint, limit, constitute
what Congregations 6.
of all sorts they please, to be Churches of Christ, as Nations and Parishes.
But you confess in general, Christ to be the Builder, the King, Obj.
the Lawgiver, the Head, the Governor, the Caller, the Gatherer of his
Churches.

If you do, you must approve of those Churches you call Independent, Ans.
as whereof Christ is the only Builder, King, Lawgiver, Head, Governor,
Caller, and Gatherer. If you do not, in denying Christ in these relations, you
deny Christ in his absolute Regalitie.

But in your Answer to your Antiquerist, page 6. you do in part grant Christ
to be King internally in the soul, which, you say, may pass for tolerable. O
brother! No more but may pass for tolerable? You that are so l^rge-^earred to
your friends, are you so strait-laced to Christ? Surely, Brother, Christ is the
full and sole King, reigning in the heart and conscience of every true
believer. It were intolerable, not to grant this in its full latitude. But you
absolutely deny Christ's sole kingly Government, external over his Churches.
Brother, this is no less Christ's kingly Prerogative, then the former. He that
is King over every part of the body, must needs be King over the whole body. It
therefore Christ be the only King over every man's conscience, so as no man, nor
power on earth, may sit with him in this his Throne: then consequently by the
se^f-same reason, must he by the Word of the kingdom, as the only Law thereof,
exercise his kingly office over his Churches; so as no humane power or law may
intermeddle to prescribe rules for the government, or forms of this spiritual
House, and Kingdom. For otherwise, if man should set up a form of Government
over the Church of Christ, to which all must conform; then of necessity
should man b^ Lord over the couscience, which is the highest presumption
against the most High. And then what mischiefs would follow^ What intolerable
tyranny over the conscience? Then must your words ( ibid.) come to pass: If a
moderated or regulated Ep^scopacie the same with Presbyterio, should by the
Synods advice, be unanim^usly established in Parliament, as most consonant to
the Scriptures, and most agrerable to the Civil Government, I shall readily
submit unto it without opposition, and why not you, and al^ others? So you. O
Brother, I stand amazed! But I go on.

Then again, the Scripture, as it sets down the qualifications of the members
of this body, so the forming of them in the body in the parts thereof, more
principal, and less, superior and inferior, for order and well-being: As
Pastors and Teachers, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Phil. ^. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Teaching and Ruling Elders, Helps, Governments, Bishops, and Deacons, or by
what other means soever they are diversified in Scripture. And this is one
uniforme form of Government, which Christ has fixed in his Churches, without
any difference at all, but secundum^magis and minus (as before) as lesser
Churches A^^^ 6. and 20.
have fewer Officers, greater more. So as, brother, if the old Wine be better,
old Presby^erie, old unlordly Episc^p^cy, surel* the Independents do justly
challenge it: Which had you once truly tasted of, you would never have desired
to drink other. The Lord remove that aguish humor ^alingen.
Vexatus f^bre recus^t ^ptima.

Your second Interrogatory is, about the lawful power of Civil Magistrates in
all matters of Church Government, wherein you tax some Independents for
extraordinary eclipsing the same. Some: what some may say, is one thing, must
therefore the Independent Church Government say it too? You allege for this a
passage in the Answer of two of the brethren to A. S. for which one of them is
lately questioned: but, I hope, he will clear himself. But the weight of this
whole Interrogatory lies in your Marginall note: where you peremptorily
conclude; That the chief Government and ordering of the Church, and power of
making Ecclesiastical Laws, or Canons to bind it, before the Law belonged to
the Patriarks and others, was not as they were Priests, but Rulers, and Fathers
of their Families: under the Law (say you) it belonged to Moses, to the Kings
of Judah, Israel, and the moral Assemblies or Congregations of the Princes,
Nobles, chief Captains, Heads, and Elders of the people: Therefore under the
Gospel, by like reason and equity, and because it is a part of Christ's kingly,
not Priestly, or Prophetical Office* it must needs belong to Christian
Princes, Magistrates, Parliaments, to whom Christ has delegated his kingly
Office; not to Ministers, to whom he has given only his Prophetical or
Priestly Authority, not the Royal, as the Scriptures at large relate: nor yet
to particular Congregations, who are not Magistrates, nor higher Powers,
invested with Christ's royal Authority.

So you, where you tell us many strange things, but prove nothing. But,
brother, in such a weighty Argument as this, your (...), will not serve the
turn: yea, you here overthrow those Principles forementioned, That Christ is
the only King, so the only Priest, the only Prophet of his Church; which his
three offices are incommunicable to any creature, as they are proper and
peculiar only to him; He is the only King, etc. Now to be solus, (...), The
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Lord of Lords; this is Christ's Regal prerogative, which is in communicable to
any, or to all the powers on earth. It is no less incommunicable, then his
omnipotency, his omniscience his omnipresence, and the rest of his
incommunicable Attributes; no less then his Mediatorship. Those Patriarchs and
Princes of Israel before the Law, and under the Law, from Adam to Christ, never
had this power or prerogative, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, or binding
Canons; no nor yet Moses, no^ Kings of Judah, Israel, and General Assemblies,
Princes, Nobles, chief Captains, and Elders of the people, as you muster them
up together in your marginall note. A seeming goodly Army indeed; but so many
shadows of men, for any such power they had, as you would with your penfull of
ink paint cut unto us. And first for those before the Law was given in Sinai:
had they this power you speak of? Cain and Abel brought their Sacrifices. Genesis
4. 4.
What? Was it a Heb. 13. 10. 15.
will worship of their own election? If so, God had regarded Abels sacrifice no
more then Cains. How Col. 2. 23.
then? Their Sacrifice was of Gods own appointment: Adam had it from God, and
his children from him. For as God revealed to Adam, Christ, so those
Sacrifices, types of Christ. Whence the learned Interpreter Calvin says,
Tenendum est, etc. We are Calv. Comment. in Genesis cap. 4. Tenendum est, non
fuisse temere ex cogitatu^ ab illis sacrificandi morem, sed traditum divinitus,
etc.
to hold, that the manner of sacrificing was not unadvisedly devised by them,
but delivered to them from God* For seeing the Apostle res^^res the dignity of
Abels sacrifice, as attributed to faith, it follows, he offered it not without
Gods commandment. So as it could not have pleased God, had it not been
according to his commandment. So Calvin. Nor is all here expressed: no doubt
they had an Altar also, whereon to offer for the sanctifying and accepting the
offering; which Altar was a type of Christ the true Heb. 13. 10. 15.
Altar, to whom Abels faith had respect. Though we read not of Altar before
Genesis 8. 28. We read also of difference of beasts clean, and unclean, Genesis 7. By
all which it is evident, that God gave a law to Adam and his offspring, suitable
to that in Mount Sinai, for a rule of divine worship; so also for
Church Government. And this further appears by the Law in Sinai afterward,
where Moses is expressly charged to do all things (both for worship and
Church Government) according to the pattern showed him in the Mount; as before
we noted. And when the Temple was to be built, God gave to David 1 Chronicles. 28.
11. 12, etc. to v. 19.
an exact pattern of all things, yea, of every particular, both in writing and
by his Spirit, not only for worship, but for the whole ministration about the
Temple, a type of Christ's Church under the Gospel, so as neither Moses nor
Kings of Judah, had the least power to devise any other form, then that
prescribed of God. The keeping of the Passover once in the second month by
Ezechiah, was extraordinary, upon a case of necessity. And for the Kings of
Israel, will you equal them with the Kings of Judah? Had they lawful power,
as Jerobam, to set up his two golden ^^lvs, and so to change the form of
worship and Church Government? When that King A^as set up his Damascen Altar,
was it by a Regal power invested in him from God? So of other Kings of Juda,
good or bad, they had no lawful power at all to alter the form prescribed of
God, one jor. And therefore, brother, you are wondered at, that being a man of
much reading, and mighty parts, you should utter such strange things ( ne quid
dicam durius) as these are, and that so confidently, when you neither do, nor
ever can bring the least proof, yea or color of what you affirm. And
therefore your inference upon such empty premises, that therefore under the
Gospel, by like reason and equity, it must needs belong to Christian Princes,
Magistrates, Parliaments, to whom Christ has delegated his Kingly office, etc.
is no consequence. Whence I note two things: 1. Like reason and equity. Now in
your premises there is neither reason nor equity, because no truth in them. 2.
Christ has not delegated his Kingly office to any Princes, Magistrates,
Parliaments, to set up any form of worship or Church Government of their
devising, or conceiving, no more then he did to all, or any of those you
reckon up in the Old Testament. I pray God give you a better understanding in
this mystery of Christ, and godly sorrow for these things. Take then the
counsel of this great King: Be wise therefore, and understand; and Psalm. 2.
kiss this King, this Son of God, by obeying him in all that he says, as
being not only the only King, but the only Prophet of his Church (as before)
whom whosoever hears not IN ALL THINGS, shall even be cut off from his people.
But how then Act. 3. 22.
do you say, This is a part of Christ's Kingly office, not Priestly, or
Prophetical, to set up a government; and, he has not communicated those
other offices to Princes and Parliaments: Whereas Christ does in all things
regulate his Kingly office by his Prophetical office? And again, how say you,
Christ has not given his Kingly office to Ministers, but only his Priestly
and Prophetical; and yet you make an Assembly of Ministers as Rector Chori to
be the leaders and guides to a Form of Reformation, and that necessarily? And
denying such to be Kings, or to have a Kingly office, you exclude them out of
the Albe of those faithful ones, whom Christ has made* a 1 Pet. 2. 4.
Royal Priesthood; even Revel. 1. 6.
Kings and Priests to God his Father. But so much of this second Interrogatory.

The third Interrogatory.
Touching this: 1. We assume not the power to gather Churches, but being sent
or called to preach the Word of the Kingdom, thereby people thus called of
God, come to be gathered into Church Fellowship, and so by consent do choose
their Officers.

2. Such as are thus called, to acknowledge Christ their only King, were not
begotten to this acknowledgment by such Ministers as you speak of, who deny,
disclaim, and preach against Christ's Kingly government over men's consciences
and Churches. So as such a conversion as you speak of, comes not home to whole
Christ: and such, with their converters, do deny Christ's Kingly government;
what kind of converts call you these? Or at least and best they are converted
but in part; and that main thing wanting, to wit, Christ's Kingly office, they
come up to by the preaching thereof.

3. Such Ministers, when they set up Christ's government, may (being agreed upon
by all sides) have those Parishioners again, that for want of it at the first
went from them.

4. Our solemn Vow and Covenant obliges us not to any thing that is
prejudicial to the authority of Gods word, and the liberty of a good
conscience, considering how Churches are gathered out of all the world, not
this place, nor that, not this house nor that, but out of Mat. 13. 19.
every nation, such as fear God, and Act. 10. 3^. Luke. 19. 6, 7, 8, 10.
out of every house the sons of peace, and out of Act. 10. 3^. Luke. 19. 6, 7,
8, 10.
every City or Town, all that receive the Gospel, are called and gathered to
Christ.

5. Concerning Christian liberty in joining to several Churches, as in the
same house some to affect one, some another: you know what Christ says, Luke
12. 51, 52, 53. And it is God that persuades I^ph^t to dwell in the Tents of
Shem. Genesis 9. 27.
And, brother, all that noise you make all along, with extreme aggravations,
as Confusion, Distraction, implacable Contestations, Schisms, Tum^lts, etc.
What are they but the very outcries which the Prelates ever used for the crying
and keeping up of their Hierarchy, built upon the same sandy foundation. This
is well noted in the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 11. Confession of Ausburg.
These Senater-like Declamations though they be very plausible, and incense the
minds of many against us, yet they may be confuted by most true and
substantial arguments. As, All the Prophets and Apostles were true lovers of
the peace and concord of Nations and people: yet were they constrained by the
commandment of God, to war against the Devils kingdom, to preach heavenly
doctrine, to collect a Church unto God, and the like. And, The true doctrine of
God, and his true worship, must needs be embraced and received; and all errors,
that tend to the dishonor of God, must be abhorred and forsaken, though all the
world should break and fall down. And much more there.

6. Though we are fully persuaded by Gods Word and Spirit* that this our way is
Christ's way; yet we neither do, nor dare judge others to be reprobates, that
walk not with us in it, but we leave all judgment to God, and heartily pray
for them: we our selves have been formerly ignorant of it, therefore we pity
others.

7. Where you object, that under pretense of Christian liberty, whole Houses,
Parishes, Counties, may thus come to be divided into several forms of
Churches, as some for the Presbyteriall, some for the Hierarchicall, and so
cause Schisms and ruins; or at least unavoidably subvert all ancient bounds
of Parishes, all settled maintenance for the Ministry by tithes, etc. Brother,
for Christian liberty, who shall persuade the conscience, or who has power
over it, but he that made it, even God, the only Judge thereof? And for
difference of men's judgments in points of Religion, how can it be avoided? And
yet it follows not, that upon such differences should come ruin to a State.
What serves the Magistrate, and the laws of a civil State for, but to keep
the peace? And as for Parishes, will you allow no Churches but Parishes? Or are
Parishes originally any other but of humane, politic, and civil
constitution, and for civil ends? Or can you say, that so many as inhabit in
every Parish respectively, shall be a Church? Should such Churches and
Parishes then necessarily be Churches of Gods calling and gathering? Are they
not congregations of man's collection, constitution and coaction merely? What
Churches then? And as for Tithes: what Tithes, I pray you, had the Apostles?
Such as be faithful and painful Ministers of Christ, he will certainly
provide for them: as when he sent forth his Disciples without any purse, or
provision, he asked them, Lacked you any thing? They said, Nothing. Surely, the
labourer is worthy of his hire. And as for Ministers maintenance by Tithes, I
refer you to the judgment of your learned brother Mr. Seldom. And as for your
Independent Ministers, they plead no other maintenance then the New Testament
holds forth, yet not denying the Magistrate and State a power to appoint
maintenance for the preaching of the word, as is done in New England, to those
that are not members of Churches. And where you charge them, for having the
faith of Christ in respect of persons, as if they admitted the rich, rather
then the poor: Brother, I hope it is not so with others; I am sure, not so
with me. And lastly, for your marginall young Interrogatories: As,

1. Of how many members each Congregation? I am sure your Congregations admit
neither augmentation nor diminution, but according to the capacity of every
Parish.

2. Within what precincts? Christ's Churches are not limited either to place or
number.

3. What set Stipends allowed? Sufficient more or less.

4. When and where Churches should assemble? For when? at times convenient. For
where? Not necessarily in this or that place.

5. Who shall prescribe extraordinary times of fasting, or thanksgiving to them
upon just occasions? If the occasion be the Churches peculiar Interest, the
Church agrees upon the time. But if it be public, concerning the Politic body
of the State, whereof we are native members, in whose weal or woe we
sympathize, either we keep days of our own appointment extraordinary, or if
the Civil State command and appoint a day, we refuse not to observe it.

6. Who shall rectify their Church-Covenants, Discipline, Censures,
Government, if erroneous, or unjust? First, Each Church uses her best means
left her of Christ, within her self. Secondly, If need require, she uses the
help of Sister-Churches. Thirdly, If any other, as the Civil State, be not
satisfied, she Act. 25. 11.
refuses not to yield an account of her actions, being required.

7. Show us (say you) a sufficient satisfactory Commission from Gods Word for
all they do, or desire, before they gather any Churches. Brother Prynne, you
say you will pump out our thoughts* yea, it seems, you will exanclate, pumpe
out every drop that is in us. But stay, brother, you are not yet a Magistrate.
And 2. we hope you will not take up again the Oath ex Officio to pump out all
our secrets. And 3. Though I have for my part dealt very freely with you, as my
brother, all along: yet give me leave to keep a Reserve, Done^ ad Triarios
redieritres, until it come to a dead lift, in case we shall be brought before
Mat. 10 ^^.
Princes and Rulers, to give an account of what we do, or desire. And 4. you
put us upon too unreasonable a task, to satisfy you in all that we DO, or
DESIRE. First make your particular exceptions, and demands for this, or that*
and then we shall know the better how to shape you an Answer, as you see we
have here done. What are all your books of Law*cases, all the Volumes of the
Casuists, to the resolution upon general grounds, of incident matters, which
could not be ruled till they happened? and yet the Government of States is one,
and the doctrine of the Scripture in all generally necessary points clear. And
we desire you not too too much to grow upon us, when you see we are so coming,
and free.

The fourth Interrogatory.
This is much like the next before. For that was about Ministers power to
gather Churches: this, concerning the peoples power in uniting themselves in a
Church, choosing their Minister, erecting such a Government, as they conceive
most suitable to the Scripture. And so all manner of heretics may set up
Churches, and all manner of heresies, sects, be brought in.

I answer, as before. A Church is a City of God, which by her Charter becomes
a City, being called of God, and by the same Charter (the Scripture) chooses
her own Officers: and sets up no other government, but what her Charter
prescribes. If any other do otherwise, and do pervert the Scripture, it is
not to be imputed to the Church of Christ. Her liberties are no law for others
licentiousness. It was so in the Apostles times, and the next ages after. The
true Churches liberties were no true cause of so many heresies; no more then
the Christians of old were the cause of the calamities of the City or Empire
of Rome, because Nero and other Tyrants falsely charged them, and as injuriously
dealt with them. Nor may we cast away the privileges of Christians, because
others abuse them. Yea, whether we use our privileges, or no, errors and
heresies will be. The Apostles, and Apostolic Churches, could neither keep,
nor cast them out; as is showed before.

But brother, where you say, that if this liberty of setting up an Independent
Church Government be admitted: then by the selfsame reason, they must have a
like liberty to elect, erect what Civil form of government they please: to
set up a new Independent Republic* Kingdom, etc. By the selfsame reason?
Surely by no reason at all. Show us a reason hereof, and take all. And you
know, that Republics, Kingdoms are Independent, though not of Churches
electing, erecting. It is unsatisfiable injury, and extreme irrationality thus
to argue; for has Christ given the same command to his people, as such who are
not of this world, nor their Kingdom, as he has done to them in spirituals
which he commands them to practice whosoever forbids? 2. They set up no form,
but take that which is prescribed, which God has not done in civil
government, but left it free, 1 Pet. 2 Romans 13.

The fifth Interrogatory.
Herein you make a comparison between Presbyteriall and Independent Churches;
Why not that, as well as this? And if this, why do we not show solid proof of
it? I answer: We desire to enjoy ours, without making comparison with yours*
For proof we have showed sufficient.

Then to a second Quere; the answer is, not the Minister alone, nor the
Congregation alone, but both together admit members, and set up Christ's
Government, not their own. And how ever you make us a Conventicle, consisting
of inconsiderable ignorant members: I believe, brother Prynne, when you shall
have any thing to do with the most contemptible of such Conventicles, as you
esteem us, you will not altogether find us such, as you are pleased to term
us. And for National Parliaments, States, we honor them with whatsoever
honor is due unto them, as Gods Romans 13. 7.
Word commands us. And for a National Council, as this is, called to
advise, not to be peremptory Judges in the matters of God over our consciences,
we detract not their due honor too, as they are pious, and learned men. 2.
Where you would have them have the same power in a Parliament and Synod, that
they have in a Church, if they be members, it is answered, that all power is
restrained to its own sphere and place, so that we may have a greater power in
another kind, and yet not that; as no Parliament man has the power of a Master
of a family in the Parliament, though he have a greater.

The sixth Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory has sundry branches: the answer whereunto respectively,
will intimate what they be.

1. We say, as before, None of our Ministers do by any usurped authority
gather Churches.

2. We cannot conceive, that any law of the Land is against the setting up of
Christ's kingdom in the hearts of his people; and in those Congregations called
and gathered by the voice of his Word. Nor does the Ministry of Christ's word
more in this, then it did by John Baptist, Christ himself, and his Apostles,
when they called Christian Congregations out of the Jews National Church.
Even the Imperial heathen Roman Laws gave way to the preaching of Christ's
kingdom, and gathering of Churches within their Territories, Provinces, Cities.

3. For Church Government, Covenant, we have said enough before.

4. Concerning a National Church also, we have spoke already in the former
Answer. And I desire brevitie, and not to answer all your repetitions and
aggravations, lest I may nauseam movere.

5. It is one thing for a State to set up a new form of Ecclesiastical
Government, and another to pull down the old. This they were bound unto by the
Word of God: but not so that, unless it be the same Church Government which
Christ sets down in his Word; besides which none other ought to be set up,
though never so much pretended, and by men conceived to be according to Gods
Word, when made suitable to the Laws, Customs of every Nation, and manners of
the people, as you affirm; of which before.

Lastly, This Church Government, which we profess, you shall never be able to
prove ridiculous and absurd, as you conclude your Interrogatory.

The seventh Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory is about the dismissing of members: 1. to become members of
Presbyteriall Churches: 2. Or of other Independent Churches. I answer, If any
will desert their Congregation, who can let them? Yet it is the Churches care
and duty to preserve it self, and all the members in unity of the body; and
also from whatsoever may be sinful. If any shall repent, and fall back,
Churches are not more free, then Ioh. 6. 66.
Christ himself was. If any for convenience sake, or necessary occasion,
desire to join with some other Church, do you think it unreasonable, first to
acquaint the Church with their desire? And do you not allow of Letters of
recommendation, when any is to pass to other Churches? May not else jealousies
and suspicions arise, and heartburnings between Churches? Do you not remember,
what divisions and emulations the want hereof did cause among the Churches of
old? And, brother, we desire to do all things in love. And we desire that
others should do no otherwise unto us, then we do unto them: as you object.
You twit us again, for respecting the rich, more then the poor. If it be
true, it is 1 Cor. 11, 22.
our fault, and ought not so to be: if not true, it is yours, and that so often
as (as you do) you cast it in our dish.

The eight Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory is to charge us, for not admitting to Baptism any Infants
of such Parents, who are not members of our Churches. And, brother, you make
this a most heinous and intolerable thing. Why, you know, if we would admit of
all, it would be no small benefit and advantage to us, especially when we are
to deal with rich men's children, such as you say we have in such high
estimation. Therefore that we do it not for rich men, you may think there is
something in it, that covetousness is not* so predominant in us* as to corrupt
our Conscience. And therefore brother, let some charitable thought take place
in you, that we do it rather of Conscience, then of Covetousness. And what
say you to this, brother? We preach Christ to the Parents. We preach him no
less a King, then a Priest and Prophet. We preach him the only King of our
Conscience, and the only Lawgiver and Governor of his Churches. We exhort
them to set up this King in their hearts. We exhort them to become and
profess to be those Saints, of whom he is King. For he is Revel. 15* 3.
King of Saints. But, brother, they will not believe us; they will not depend
upon Christ, as the only Lawgiver, and King over their consciences. Now, what
would you have us to do in this case? Baptize the Infants of such Parents, as
will not, in this respect, profess, nor confess Christ to be their King? Why,
do you not know, that no Infants have any title to Baptism, that are not
within the Covenant visibly? And how are they within the Covenant visibly, but
by virtue of their Parents faith outwardly professed? And what outward
profession of faith in the Parents, that refuse Christ for their only King?
that are ashamed, or afraid, to profess to be in covenant with Christ, as
their King? If therefore the Parents profess not* yea refuse thus to be in
visible, Covenant, can the children be said to be in visible Covenant, and so
to have a right to Baptism, the external seal of the Covenant? Brother, here
is obex, a bar put.

If you say, The child shall not bear the iniquity of the father.

Obj.
True; but the Parents keep themselves off from the covenant Ans.
by refusing Christ, in whom alone the believer has right to the Covenant; and
so the child is withal kept off. For it is not now under the Gospel, as it was
from Abraham to Christ, The covenant was made with Abraham and his seed, so as
by virtue hereof all the male Infants of believing Abraham were and ought to be
circumcised. But now under the Gospel, those only are accounted Abraham's seed,
who profess the faith of Abraham, which faith looked upon Christ, and
embraces whole Christ in all his offices, and profess the same outwardly,
Romans 10. 9, 10. So as the Covenant is entayled only to believers now, and so
to their children (as Act. 2. 39.) If then the Parents by refusing Christ as
their King, as the Jews did ( Luk 19. 14.) do hereby out themselves off from
the Covenant, they do therewith cut off their children too: and this not to be
recovered in the child, until either the Parent be restored, or the child
coming in time to believe, and to profess the faith of Christ, do hereby
claim his right to the Covenant, and so to Baptism, as being a Romans 4. 11. 16
child of Abraham. Let this suffice for the present, why we dare not baptize
the children of those Parents, that refuse to profess the faith of Christ, as
their only King, as well as their only Priest and Prophet. For Christ
divided, becomes no Christ to the divider. This is, according to the vulgar
Latin translation, (1 John 4. 3.) solvere Iesum, to dissolve Jesus, that is, to
receive him only in part, and not in whole. Which is the spirit of Antichrist.
Besides, willing disobedience to any good order in a Church, deprives a man of
the liberties of the Church: (for so he may not eat of the provender, that will
not undergo the yoke) Now this of a voluntary profession to walk with the
Saints of such a place, according to Christ, is a thing so just, as following
the example of the old Church, who were in particular Covenant with God. 2. In
the New, they professed their giving themselves to God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. 3. All
societies require some promise of their members. If it be said, we are members
of the universal Church by faith and repentance: we reply, 1. this faith must
be shown by a voluntary giving our selves to Christ visibly, and then to some
Church of his, if opportunity serve; for Christ will not have his people to be
wandering sheep, when they may have a fold; nor to be individua vaga, when they
may be reduced to order.

The ninth Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory lays a charge upon Independents, for refusing to admit to
the Lords Supper such as are not notoriously scandalous, nor grossly ignorant,
but profess repentance, etc. which you say, is a very uncharitable, arrogant,
yea unchristian practice, contrary to Christ's own example in admitting Judas to
the Lords Supper; Also to that of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. you calling it also a
transcendent strain of tyrannical usurpation over souls and consciences, and
Gods Ordinances, worse then our most domineering Lordly Prelates, etc. yea
Lording over Christ himself, and more then ever the Apostles did, but only by
their extraordinary calling, etc.

I answer in one word (omitting your copious aggravations, and sharp censures)
that we look further, then to a general profession and conversation, namely,
to their faith in Christ, that it be sound entire, and whole, and namely,
whether they hold him to be as the only Prophet and High Priest, so the only
Prince of his People, the only Lord, and Lawgiver to every man's conscience,
and over every Congregation or Church of his Saints. If they thus acknowledge
not Christ's kingly office, as well as his other offices, we do not, we dare
not receive them. And what have they to do with the seals, that refuse by
covenant to own Christ for their King? As for Judas, he received the sop, not
the supper; for, after the sop, he went out John 13. 30.
immediately, says John. So as it appears, the other Evangelists relate some
other passages by a hysteron proteron, as is not unusual in Scripture story.
And none of them says, that he received the Supper. And suppose ^e did: the
Churches Censure had not yet past upon him: only John by a secret sign knew
he was to be the traitor. For that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 28. that was a
true Church, though now disordered; and the Apostle refers the redressing of
their abuses to themselves. The case is otherwise here, so as all your
accumulated calumniations fall to ground. And concerning the Apostles
extraordinary calling, if we must expect the like calling, we must not in the
mean time admit of any, either to Baptism, or to the Lords Supper; neither
should there be any gathering of Churches at all; as some from hence do
gather. Besides, what shall the authority be, that Luther gathered the Churches
by, and those that followed him? and what lawful gathering then have the
Reformed Churches?

For your marginall note of Moses, David, Solomon, about settling Religion by
Gods own direction: herein you come home to that I said before, alleged
against your unlimited law. But in that you now restrain by their example, all
Church Government to the Civil Magistrates; you must make it out by holding
close to the rule, that is, To settle Religion by Gods own direction, as you
here confess, and not to elect, erect a form of Religion, and
Church Government, such as they shall conceive suitable, etc. as before you told
us. And Moses, David, Solomon, were all types of Christ, who put an end to all
such. And while you there exclude the Priests from having any thing to do in
Reforming, or advising: What will the Assembly say to you? But they may advise,
you will say. But the Priests might do nothing, but according to Gods prescript
law; no more then Moses, David, Solomon. And if the Priests (as you say) had no
ruling votes: then by this reckoning, what votes do you allow the Assembly-men,
in their mixed Committees with the members of Parliament, or in the Assembly it
self? Reconcile these I pray you.

The tenth Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory questions, or rather (as all the rest) concludes, that that
Text ( Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.) is not meant of any Ecclesiastical censure, as of
Excommunication, but only of the civil Court of Justice. Brother, if you did
speak hereas a The writings of B^za and Er^stus one against the other, are
extant.
Divine, and not merely as a lawyer, you would not have, against the judgment
of most learned Divines, ancient and modern, and not Papists, etc. so
interpreted this place. And what speak I of Divines? The Text it self is its
own clearest Interpreter. For it is immediately added (v. 18.) Verily I say unto
you, whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Which is
without controversy spoken of Church-censure, or of the power of the Keys in
exercising Church Discipline; as that ( Matthew. 16. 19) is spoken of doctrine,
as the learned Calvin well observes. So as this very context clears the
former to be meant of Church-censure, as it was among the Jews. You allege
on the contrary, that learned Lawyer whom we all honor for his learning. Good
brother, I could wish that all this zeal of yours against Independents, might
not arise from any jealousy, as if Church Censures should prejudicate or
trench upon your pleadings at the Bar of civil justice. Far be it, that we
should have our motion beyond our own Sphere. Content your self with your own
Orb, and we shall confine our selves to ours, I dare warrant you. Again, to
what purpose do you urge this interpretation of this Text against us? Do not
all the Presbyterians expound it so? And if this Text, which is made the great
pillar of Presbyterian excommunication, be taken off, you leave no more to a
Classis then we, scil. to consult and advise. And with this foot you have
dashed all the milk you gave them.

The eleventh Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory is to perswadeus, that in that Assembly, or Evangelicall
Synod (as you call it) Acts 15. the Apostles voted not as they were Apostles
infallibly guided by the holy Ghost, but rather as they were in their ordinary
capacity, as Elders and chief members of it. Whereupon (producing your six
reasons for it) you peremptorily conclude, that this is an undeniable
Scripture-authority for the lawfulness, use of Parliaments, Councels, Synods,
under the Gospel, upon all like necessary occasions; and for their power to
determine controversies of Religion, to make Canons in things necessary for the
Churches peace and concernment, maugre all evasions, exceptions (of
Independents) to elude it.

But let us examine your six reasons, why the Apostles sat not as Apostles,
but as ordinary Elders, etc. Where first, we lay this ground for the contrary,
scil. that they sat as Apostles, because not ordinary Elders, as Elders, can
say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us. But the Apostles, as Apostles,
might say so, because in any doctrinall point they had the promise of the
Spirit, to be led into all truth, as upon whom the Church was to be built,
Ephesians. 2. 20. Secondly, if they sat as ordinary Elders, then their decrees did
no further bind, then as they might appear to agree with Scripture; otherwise
Elders, as Elders, may bind the conscience, let the decree be never so wicked.
But to your reasons:

First, For else (say you) Paul and Barnabas being Apostles themselves, might
have decided that controversy at Antioch, without sending to Jerusalem. Answ.
1. By your favor, brother, Barnabas was not (to speak properly) an Apostle,
though an Apostolical man. 2. They argued with those Legalists at Antioch,
sufficiently to convince them; but they coming from Judea, and pretending the
use of circumcision, and Moses Law, to be still in force in the Church at
Jerusalem, and the controversy being between two great parties, the Christian
Jews, and Christian Gentiles; hereupon the Church at Antioch thought it
requisite, for the fuller satisfaction to all parties, to send Paul and
Barnabas to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. And 3. because Paul and
Barnabas are thus sent, does it follow, that they were not sufficient (yea Paul
alone, as an Apostle infallibly guided by the holy Ghost) to have decided the
question at Antioch? As no doubt sufficiently they did, though not so
satisfactorily to all. And 4. that they are thus by the Church at Antioch sent
to the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem: here is a good example for the use of
communion of Churches, as in doubtful cases to consult one with another.

2. Else (say you) the Church at Antioch would have sent to none, to resolve
their doubts, but to the Apostles only, and not to the Elders.

I answer: In that they sent to the Elders also, it shows the respect that one
Church should have to another. 2. Those Elders were men endowed with the gifts
of the holy Ghost. 3. Though they had not infallibility, as the Apostles had,
yet their assent to the determination, was a witnesse-bearing to the truth
thereof.

3. Else (say you) Paul and Barnabas would have put the question to the
Apostles only, not to the Elders and Church, as well as to them, verse. 4, 5, 6.

This is answered in the former.

4. Else the Apostles would not have called all the Elders and brethren to
consult, v. 6. when themselves might have done it alone.

I answer: 1. Though the Apostles might have done it alone, yet they would not,
but called together the Elders and Brethren, yea, and the whole Church at
Jerusalem (verse. 4, 22.) hereby to give a precedent to all Presbyters, or
Elders of Churches, that in cases of difference arising, they call the whole
Church together, for assistance and counsel therein. 2. In so doing, the
Apostles diminished nothing of that Judicial power and authority which Christ
left with them for deciding of controversies, being infallibly guided by the
holy Ghost, while they thought it not fit to do such things in a corner, which
concerned the whole Church.

5. Peter and James (say you) would not have argued the case so largely, and
proved it by Arguments and Scriptures, as they did, one after another, but have
peremptorily resolved it without dispute, had they sat and determined it by
their extraordinary infallible power.

I answer: This follows no more then the former. For the Arguments they used,
with the conclusion, were by the direction of the holy Ghost. And 2. The holy
Ghost is not so peremptory, but will have his truths examined by the
Scriptures, as Acts 17. 11. The Bereans are commended by the holy Ghost for
examining Paul's Sermon by the Scripture, though he were an Apostle, and spoke
by the holy Ghost. And 3. the Churches assent was taken in for a witness ex
abundanti.

6. The final resolution (say you) Letters and Canons of this Synod, had run
only in the Apostles names, had they proceeded only by their Apostolical
infallible authority, and not in the names of the Elders and brethren too.

I answer: There is as little reason in this, as in all the rest of your
reasons: for then by this reason sundry of Paul's Epistles, which were all
dictated by the holy Ghost, did not proceed from that infallibility of Spirit
alone wherewith the Apostle was guided, because we find others, not Apostles,
joined with him. As (1 Cor. 1. 1.) Paul, called to be an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, and Softhenes a brother, to the Church of God etc. And 2 Cor. 1. 1.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and Timothy a brother, to the Church, etc. And
Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, etc. and all the brethren that are with me, to the
Church* of Galatia, etc. So Phil. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. Paul, and
Sylvanus, and Timotheus, to the Church, etc. In all which places, though there
was but one Apostle, guided with infallibility of the holy Ghost to write the
Scriptures, yet many brethren are joined in the salutation of the Churches; and
yet Paul, as Apostle, did write those Epistles, and not simply as a brother, or
fellow servants with them of Jesus Christ. Neither are those brethren (so named)
accounted the Penmen of the Scripture, as Paul of right is. Thus you see,
brother, there was no necessity, that either the Apostles names should be put
alone, because they only were guided by the Spirits infallibility: or that the
names of the Elders and Brethren should not be put, without a necessary
conclusion deduced thence, that the Decree there was therefore binding, as
being the Decree of a Synod, and so exemplary for all Parliaments, Councels,
Synods, to make the like binding Decrees.

But (good brother) for all your punctual quotations of that Scripture, you
do not all this while tell us* (which is the main of all) that which we find
in the 28. verse of that chapter, IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST AND US, TO
LAY UPON YOU NO GREATER BVRTHEN, THEN THESE NECESSARY THINGS. Now, brother, we
challenge you to show us any Parliament, Council, Synod, ever since the
Apostles, that could or can say thus, IT SEEMED GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST AND US,
to determine controversies of religion, to make and impose Canons to bind all
men, etc. Show this to us, at this time, and we will obey. But if you cannot,
as you never can, never let any man press upon us that Scripture, that Synod,
which has no parallel in the whole world, and so is no precedent, pattern, for
any Council, Synod, Parliaments.

Let me conclude with a passage of the learned and famous Panstratie
Catholicae. Tom. 3. De liberate Christiana. lib. 15. c. 10. De prohibitis
Idolothytis, sa^guine, and suffocato. Illis aderat extra ordine^ spiritus
sanctus: adeo ut quae illi proponere^t, a Deo simpliciter manare^t. Atreliquis
Pastoribus adsistentia spiritus nulla extra ordinem: itaque ne eoru^ quido^
sanctiones eodem loco habitae cu^ Apostolorum sanctionibus. Precip aute^
discrime in obligatio ^ Conscientiae, quae se restem habet, Deu^ solum Judicem:
ideo u^habet aliquid imperatum a Deo, non potest no^ obstringi.
Chamierus, that grand Antagonist of Bellarmins. Bellarmine upon the same
Scripture you allege ( Act. 15.) (as also our late Prelates have usually done)
would deduce the same conclusion, that you do, for humane authority in binding
men's consciences. To which Chamierus thus answers: that this consequence
holds not: Quia non eadem sit authoritas Apostolorum, and reliquorum Ecclesiae
Pastorum: Because there is not the same authority of the Apostles, and of
other Pastors of the Church. For with those the Holy Ghost was extraordinarily
present: so as what they propounded, did simply proceed of God. But other
Pastors have no such extraordinary assistance of the Spirit: and therefore
their Decrees are not to be paralleld with the Apostles Decrees. Which is a
special difference in binding of the conscience, which has it self for
witness, and God for the only Judge: therefore, when it has any thing
commanded of God, it must needs stand bound. Where ( inter caetera) is to be
noted, That God is the only Judge and binder of the Conscience. The great
question in controversy at this day.

Obj. But you will here object, That although (as before you say of Priests) a
Council, or Synod, have not this authority to make and impose binding decrees,
yet a Parliament has; and you deduce it from this Synod, Act. 15.

Answ. Now truly, brother, by your favor, this does no way hold proportion,
that that which you call a Synod (as a pattern for binding Decrees) should not
qualify a Synod of Divines with the like power, and yet transmit it over to a
Parliament for binding authority over the consciences of a whole Nation: surely
that Apostolic Assembly, or Church meeting, was neither a Parliament, nor
Diet, nor Senate, nor any such thing, that you should build any such power of
Parliaments upon it, for the making of binding Decrees over the consciences of
men. Therefore, good brother, be not so peremptory, but take in your top-sail,
too high to bear up against so stiff a gale, both of Scripture and Reason. But
I come to your twelfth and last Interrogatory.

The twelfth Interrogatory.
This Interrogatory is concerning the lawful coercive power of Civil
Magistrates in suppressing Heresies, etc. Or, setters up of new forms of
Ecclesiastical Government, etc.

For answer hereunto, We do acknowledge and submit unto the lawful coercive
power of civil Magistrates, according to the Scripture, Romans 13. But brother,
however, you must distinguish between men's consciences and their practices. The
conscience simply considered in it self, is for God, the Lord of the
conscience, alone to judge, as before. But for a man's practices, (of which
alone, man can take cognizance of) if they be against any of Gods Commandments
of the first, or second Table; that appertains to the civil Magistrate to
punish, who is for this cause called, Custos utriusque Tabulae. The keeper of
both Tables: and therefore the Apostle says, ( Romans 13. 3, 4.) For Rulers are
not a terror to good WORKS, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of
the power? DO that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: for
he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou DO that which is
evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that DOES evil. So as we see
here, what is the object of Civil power, to wit; actions, good, or bad. Not
bare opinions, not thoughts, not conscience, but actions. And your self exempts
the preaching of the Gospel and truth of God, from being restrained by the
civil Magistrate. But now brother, the time has been, and somewhere is, and
will be, that the 2 These. 2.
truth of God has been withheld in unrighteousness, and by the civil
Magistrate punished with death, being condemned for heresy. And you see in
these days, great diversities of men's opinions and judgments: one judging
thus, another so; you think my way erroneous, and I may do as much for you. But
do you or I, DO that which is evil, in actually breaking of any of Gods
commandments, or any just laws of the land? then we lie open to course of
civil justice; but so long as we differ only in opinion, which of us shall be
punished first? or which of us is in the error? you write books, I write
against them; yet sub judice lis est, who shall be Judge? you? or I? surely
neither. Among other things, you would have the civil Magistrate to suppress,
restrain, imprison, confine, banish the setters up of new forms of
Ecclesiastical government without lawful authority. It may be you will
involve me in the number. But what if I prove that which you call a new form,
to be the old form: and the lawful authority of setting it up, to be of
Christ? Must I therefore undergo all these your terrible censures, because you
so judge? What if your judgment herein be altogether erroneous? What
punishment then is due to him that condemns the innocent? you may be a civil
Judge one day; remember then, brother, that if I come before you, you meddle
not with my conscience, nor with me for it. If I shall offend any of your just
laws, punish me and spare not. But if you should make a law like to that of
the Jews, that who so shall confess Christ to be the Son of God, and the only
Lawgiver, Lord, King, Governor over Consciences, Churches, and not man, not
Assemblies, not Councels, or Senates, though after much Fasting, Prayers,
Disputes, (as you say) I confess, I shall be apt to transgress that law; but
yet take you heed how you punish me for that trangression, with an Ense
recidendum, or I wot not what club-law. So ends your Book, and so my Answer.

Now brother, you have since published a third Book, partly in answer to your
first Answerer, and partly touching Mr Joh. Goodwin; I leave the parties
interessed to acquit themselves; Only your stating the Question in the
conclusion of the Book, I could not omit. You sta^^ it thus: Whether a whole
representative Church and State, has not as great, or greater Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction over the whole Realm and Churches, with all the members, then any
one Independent Minister or Congregation challenge over their members. Brother,
I answer, if you can prove your Jurisdiction good, we will easily grant it to
be greater. But if the Jurisdiction of the Churches you call Independent be
good, as having Christ for the founder and owner of it, as we have clearly
proved, then certainly, it will prove the greater: For, magna est veritas, and
praevalet: for Christ's kingdom shall stand up, when all opposite earthly
kingdoms, like earthen vessels, shall with his iron rod be dashed in pieces:
This for the Clause.

Another passage in the same Book, is touching my person: where you say, That
none of us three-brethren-Sufferers, suffered for opposing Bishops legal
authority, or any Ceremonies by act of Parliament established: Here brother,
give me leave to answer for my self: First, for all manner of Ceremonies of
humane ordinance, imposed upon the conscience in the worship of God, I openly,
for the space almost of a twelvemoneth, immediately before my troubles,
preached against them, every Lords day, out of Col. 2. from the 8th verse to
the end of the Chapter; so as when I was summoned into the High Commission
Court, the Articles read against me, were not only for my two Sermons, Nov.
5th, but also for those other Sermons against the Ceremonies: so as this might
challeng to be one ingredient in my censure in Star Chamber, and no less then
a pillory matter.

And concerning my opposing of Bishops themselves, not only their
extravagancies (for which I also was censured, and suffered) you may remember
one passage in that Book, For God and the King, affixed to the information;
Were there a law in England, as once among the Locrians, that who should come
to propound a new law, he^ should come with a rope about his neck; I would be
the first my self, to petition the Parliament, that the government of Bishops
might be abolished, and another set up more agreeable to the Scripture,
(although I confess, were I to make such a proposition now, I should ^^ much
alter my style, as the condition of this present time differs from that, I
should mount much higher.) And do you not think, brother, that this helped to
put the Hang-mans knife (though not the halter) so close to the very root of
mine ears, that it opened the wider sluices for the blood to stream out (with
yours my dear Fellow Sufferers) to fill the Whores cup, and make her drunk and
spue, and fall, and rise up no more? Although the more cautelous and self-wise,
or discreet any of us (but especially my self) then was, to avoid the fear of
men, or force of law, certainly now, brother, it abates so much the more of the
honor of that suffering; and the less honor, the more shame. But take we the
shame to our selves, and give we all the honor to whom it is due; and brother,
wherein we then came short, let us now make it up, by being zealous for our
Christ, in laboring to advance the throne of his kingly government in all our
souls, and over all the Churches of the Saints, and with those four and twenty
Elders, cast our selves and crowns before him that sits on the throne,
saying. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for
Rev. 4. 10.
evermore. Amen. And let this be our main contention, who shall most honor
Christ, and most love one another, Farewell.

FINIS.

