THE ANSWER TO Tom-Tell-Troth. THE Practice of PRINCES and the LAMENTATIONS of
the KIRK: Written By The Lord Baltismore, late Secretary of STATE.

London Printed 1642.

Most Gracious Prince.
I Know well what Reverence Subjects owe to their Sovereign, and am not
ignorant of the puissance and Majesty of a King of great Britain, believe, I
should not presume to write to so great a Monarch, if the Loyalty of a Subject,
the honor of Your virtues and some particular obligations of my own, did not
command me to neglect all other respects, and prefere Your safety, honor, and
bonum publicum, before any dangers or blame, I foresee may incur, and the
rather because I speak in your own care only, without publishing or imparting
to others that which I delivered unto Your Majesty, The cause is briefly thus.

Wandering abroad in the world, I was informed of certain secret conference in
Holland, and how to relieve the distressed estate of the Count Palatine, and I
have seen diverse discourses out of England, of the necessity to maintain the
Ancient authority of Parliaments, how to assure Religion from oppression, and
alteration, and how to reform the government there both in Church, and
Commonwealth, audacious arguments, and as insolently handled.

I mean not to trouble Your Highness with pedlors stuff, and so stale wares,
as Vox populi and votiva Angliae, but to inform You of some books (amongst many
others) T.T.Troth. The practice of Princes, and the lamentation of the Kirk;
which are the works of such Boutefeus, as are able to set the whole State on
fire, imbroyle the Realm and aliene the hearts of people from their Prince, for
these Maskers under the Visards of Religion, seek to undermine Loyalty, and
either to engage you abroad in foreign wars, or in danger Your person at home
in Civil; And yet I write not to confute these learned scriblers (more worthy
to be contemned then answered) but to advertis Your Highness of them, that by
an obsta principiis, you may upon such smoke prepare all things needful to
quench such a fire, when it shall flame, and first break out, which is may do
when you least look for it; For by nature these spirits, are fiery hot spurs,
and fitter for any thing, then that they most profess, Piety and Patience.

And that they may plainly appear in their own likeness, Your Highness may
be pleased to mark and consider how sawcily and presumptuously they contemn
Monarchs scorn and disgrace them, The Emperor Tom Tell-Troth calls a quiet
lump of Majesty; and in scorn of him, tells his Reader he cannot wrong a
Mouse without the Spaniard which I think the K. of Denmark. Will not believe,
he mocks the K. of France, and tells him he is not old enough to be wise, and
that he hearkneth to lying Prophets, and to be led by spirits of illusion. The
King of Spain he calls the Catholic usurper, and the great ingrosser of the
West Indies. And, which argues a spirit of Frenzy, he spares no King; for of
King Iam^s himself he delivers such a character as is both disloyal, and
most intolerable. And first touching his maintenance of Religion, he taxes
him m^st scandalousl^, that he is only head of the Church Dormant, there are so
many corruptions in it, that he has more pulled down the Church with his
proceedings, then raised it up by his writings and whereas he calls himself
defender of the Faith, His faithful Subjects (says he) have just cause to
question it, for the Papists were never better defended, as appears by the
Kings private instruction to Judges, and prohibition of Pursevants.

And for his inclination to peace (for which he was most commended) they wrest
it wholly to his dishonor, and profess they have too much cause to complain
of his unlimited peace, and suspect that his peaceable disposition has not
proceeded so much out of his Christian piety and justice, as out of mere
impotencie, and baseness of mind.

Besides touching his honor and reputation, he flouts him, for, he says, a
number of defects cover the glory of his Reign, and that the great stock of
Sovereign reputation, which our late Queen left us, is quite banished, and is
to be reckoned amongst other inventions we have lost through the injury of his
time, so as now great Britain is less in glory, strength, and riches, then
England was, whereby our adverse parties have the triumph of the time, and he^
alleges the reasons, because when Gundamore taught to juggle, who knew the
Kings secrets, before most of His Council, so as discontent runs with a
seditious voice over the kingdom.

And in contempt of his choice of a Treasurer, they allege that the Merchants
feared the Court would pull down the Exchange because one of their occupation
was made Treasurer, so a^ all things must be bought and sold.

But above all other scandalous defamations, the description they make of a
protestant King, Page 25.26, 27. is most transcendent and traitorous, let him
(says he) excel in mischief, let him act Nero, Phalaris, etc. he shall not
need to fe^re nor wear a private Coat, for he may have Lords temporal for
h^s ^unuches, spiritu^ for his mutes, and whom he will for his Incubus, and
kiss his Minions without shame.

Behold a Calvinist, in puris naturalibus; perfectly factious, and under the
Cloak of zeal, Carnifex, regum, peruse Mariana, and all the works of the
Jesuits, look as curiously into their acts and proceedings as they were
examined at Paris, and you shall not find I such paradoxes of mischief, and
such profane calumniations of Princes, which may parallel and match these,
yet I can overmatch them or equal them, for they murmr as much at Your
Majesty's own proceedings, neither does your Monarchy o^ mild temp^r
privilege or exempt you from their tongue-shot, and the poison of Aspes in
their lips. The Author of the Practice of Princes printed 1630. in England page
11. says that the people when King James died, seeing our King that now is,
making great preparations, and for ought we knew with great sincerity. Yet by
the practice of the Duke and his faction retaining all his fathers Counsel,
which for the most part were Hispaniolized, Frenchified, Romanized, or
Neutralized, and suffering some worse, both spiritual and temporal to be
added unto them, all those forces were soon brought to naught. Things are
grown to a great deal worse pass then before, and to the great grief of
goodness and good men, without Gods special mercy remedy less.

This is the picture and portraiture they make of your Government, and they
dare censure their Sovereign, and like madmen they also rave against your
Council page 13. what a miserable thing is it to see wicked Counselors get
such a hand over the King, that he is wholly ruled by them, neither dares he
favor a good man nor his cause further then they admit.

Thus they currishlie bark against Kings and Counsels, and spitt upon the
Crown like Friends of Democracies, of confusion and irregularitie: who, after
the example of their Master Bezas Resveille-matin, do here as maliciously
defame your Father, as he did there your Majesty's Grandmother.

Yet let us proceed, and dive in^o the bottom, and discover what they aim at;
it is certain they intend first to reform the State, and to suppress
Episcopal jurisdiction, and casheere so many places of Baronies in the upper
house, and yet these men pretend to be friends and Patrons of Parliaments and
order: But by the words of the Practice of Princes I will make this appear
page 17. Ministers, says he, are Christ's Ambassadors; and therefore ought to
have free liberty to speak in the word of the Lord, to Kings an^ Statesmen
(in good sort) for things appertaining to the furtherance of Christ's Kingdom:
and against such practices as hinder the same, and till they have that
liberty, Princes cannot say rightly that Christ has his Ambassadors or
Kingdom received in their Courts: which some undertake to prove cannot be till
the Hiera^chie and Dominion of the Lord Bishops (never by Christ ordained but
forbidden) be overthrown, as dangerous to Protestant Princes and Sta^es, and so
he stumbleth on a Malo in peius. For first they would overthrow the Bishops and
Counselors, so as page 18. he directly says: Out of all which he that will,
may see, that the losses, dishonours, and troubles that have fallen to this
Land, and indeed to our Religion, and brethren, in the Palatinate, Germany, and
France, have chiefly sprange from two fountains, First, a corrupt Council and
Clergy in England, then from a vain policy of suppressing such Preachers and
Parliament men as sought to discover the mischeife of treachery, I need not
explain their words, being plain enough, nor seek to discover their
intentions which the words reveal. And surely the Bishops were blinded if they
should expect any favor or good allowance if God should so punish this Realm
that your Majesty should dye without issue (which God forbid:) for the
Successor, these men desire, will deal with them as he did with the Luth^rans
at Prague, and according to the articles 1602. at Heidlebergh: Totus
Lutheranismus and eorumliberi de medio tollantur: Much more will he abolish
Rochets and their titles, for their Lands sake.

Notwithstanding this is not all, for though they seem to tax Bishops and
Counselors, yet they glance (so far as they dare) at your Majesty, and
though they shoot at them they aim at your perfidiouslie: For mark their
words and ponder them well, page 11. men that take Gods word for their guide,
sc. that all the servants of that Prince are wicked that hearken to lies, they
say that things can never go well with the Religion and State of England, till
the Council, which has been so Dukeyfied be in a manner wholly changed, and
these men therefore count them fools, who think not, if God should take away
the King issuelesse, and that the injured K. and Queen of Bohemia should come
to the Crown things must needs mend, which cannot except the Council were also
changed, and made examples to keep others from the like treachery.

So these men (that take Gods word for their guide) think if God take away the
King issuelesse, things must needs mend. Surely it is a speech untymelie and
disloyal, and uttered unseasonably, the Queen being with Child, and if not,
yet both of them being young and hopeful, that speech did not become a good
subject.

But could the State no otherwise mend except the King and Queen of Bohemia
should bear and wear the Crown of England It seems so by these false
Prophets: For the Counselors must be made examples, and punished for
treachery, and the present King dares not do any thing but what they like, and
therefore the Scottish Minister did of late speak in Knoxes tone, and Pereus,
That Princes may be deposed quando gravant conscientias subditorum: And so this
hot brayned Minister page 21. is become a Prophet, for he is persuaded (as he
says) that who so live but a few years shall see a greater rott of Nobility
and Prince-like Clergy then ever was seen in this Land; which he gathers
from the never failing word and truth of God (as his words import) So then it
seems, that great rott must be when the King dies issulesse (and so they
divine of your Majesty's death) and that is the day of the Lord they pray for.
They look for the rising of another Sun (which is treason to do) before this
be set which now illuminateth England; and God grant it may long and
gloriously shine there.

I think surely these men aliquid monstri alunt, for they trust too much to
faction and to a strong side, for as T.T.T. said, in Taverns ten healthes for
one are drank to you foreign Children more then to you, and many wear
Ribbands and favors as marks of their homage and loyalty to the Messiah they
look for. I seek not to prejudicate the Innocent, but to advise your Majesty
to use all due circumspection, and be well armed against all treacherous plotts
and projects: For no tone sounds so ill in Kings ears as aspirations And I
know well that in Queen Elizabeth's time, the Oath of association was publicly
tendered to all Subjects for a less dangerous cause, and against them that were
in prison and misery, who had no such Tutors and Schoolmasters as the
Hollanders are, Such quicksilver Ministers as the brood of the Palatinate, we
are not now troubled so much with Mar-Prelats as with Mar-Kings (which is an
accident unseparable from Calvinisme) which never got sure footing in any
Country, but desolation followed.

Your Majesty may be pleased to call to mind, and set before your Eyes how
miserably your Grandfather was made away of the disciples of Knox, and how your
Grandmother, who had as good right and footing in Scotland, as you have in
England, was deposed by the same spirits.

Remember also in what danger King Francis the second of France did stand by
the conspiracy of Amboys, and his brother Charles at Meaux by those
Calvinists, Praecones turbarum.

I speak nothing of Swedland, nor of the Count of East-Freizeland, whom not a
seditione, fere tota diditione pepulissent as Heisekenmus, a learned Lutheran
writes, and I will c^nclude all with the reasons of these Calamities and
tempests raised by the Consistorians, which Sebastian Castalio gives, l. de
praedestinat. (a man once nearely allied to Calvin in diverse opinions) who
makes a difference between the true God and the God of Calvin. He teaches us
that Calvin's God ingendreth Children without mercy, proud, insolent, and
bloody, and that it cannot be otherwise he shows causes; For that Calvin's
God is the Author of Sin, (not by permission only, but efficaciter) and he
predestined the greatest part of the world not only to damnation, but also to
the cause of damnation, and suggesteth to men wicked affections: Wherefore if
it be true that of malus corvus, mal^m ovum, of evil causes, evil effects, of
an evil spirit, evil motions proceed. I cannot marvayle of the tumults of
Bohemia, of the many battayles and rebellions in F^ance, and the horrible
treasons in Scotland, and I may well doubt, that the like (which has been in
other places) may fall out in England, knowing by whose doctrines they were all
guided and bred, by what furies they were inspired, and what God they served
and adored, who was the Author of sin, the badge of Calvinisme.

But to leave the persons and their errors, and come nearer to the matter, let
us enquire what remedies these zealous brethren prescribe to cure the wounds of
the State, and salve the Kings honor: You have two occasions (says
Tom-tell-troth) to have the honor of your Maiden Arms (for which the old
Martyrs would have suffered death) first to reestablish your own Children in
Germany, and next to preserve Gods Children in France. And there is no way to
vindicate your honor but by fighting with him that has Cozened you, and by
driving the Enemy out of their Country: For men hardly think you are their
father, for the lamentable estate you suffer them to runn into.

How violent and ignorant are these discontented Empericks, who appoint
remedies worse then the disease? For no wise man would counsel you to hazard
all by taking arms against the two greatest Monarchs in Christendom, against
whom you have no just quarrel of your own part, or for the Commonwealth. And
yet I know that Anno 1623. a pamphlet was published without the Authors name,
intitiled, Certain reasons why the King of England should give over all
treaties, and enter into war with Spain: and that for two causes: the one for
the prescription of the Palatin, which he calls the head of all these evils.
And the other for that the Spaniards possess by force the patrimony of the
Infants, and eject the Palatin and his wife out of the same (contrary to hopes
and promises made for their restitution) and therefore there is just cause why
the Father should vindicate the honor of his Son. So here are two motives to
persuade the King to break off all amity and further negotiation with Spain
only, and in post to proclaim war against them. The prescription of the
Palsgrave, and the invading, and detaining of his Estate. War and hostility are
the means prescribed for this restitution, and the final end of all is, to
break off all treaties, all intercourse and correspondencie with Spain

A Colerick course certainly, whereof King James approved not, and although
they seem to vilify and abuse his Judgment, yet his speech uttered in
Parliament was more solid and provident then the precipitation of these
projectors. For said he, in matters of this weight, I must first consider how
this course can agree with my conscience, my honor, and the justness of the
cause; And next, how I shall be enabled to perform the same: a brief speech,
sound, and methodicall: For, surely, if the title and Crown of Bohemia was
unlawfully usurped by the Palsgrave (which his wisest and greatest Friends
sought ever rather to excuse, then defend) then his prescription was well
grounded upon lex Talienis, aquum and bonum, and reason of State. And so they
would persuade you to undertake the patronage of a quarrel unjust and
dishonorable, which would lie as a heavy and sinful burden upon the
conscience of a pious and just Prince.

Therefore I take this to be the foundation of all these controversies, whether
the Palsgrave were lawfully and justly elected King of Bohemia: For if he were
not, you altogether loose, and not vindicate your honor to fight for him,
being not a King injured, but an injuror: For no war can be justifiable, but
that which is begun upon just and urgent occasions, wherein Justice, prudence,
honor and safety shall bear the standard of England. Neither were it
convenient that England, which has so long triumphed in her peace and
prosperity, should now thus rashly be drawn fatally to maintain the errors
of ambition, and a quarrel unnecessary for you, not properly pertaining to
England, nor to your Majesty, but by consequence and participation.

CHAP. 2. That Ferdinand was lawfully Elected King of Bohemia.
ANd although, I doubt not but that your Majesty has read some partial
breviat of the cause and state of this business, yet I will be bold to lay
open the truth of it briefly, without gloss or partiality, or respect to
either party, fearing neither, nor having any other end, but that your
Highness may not err with the Multitude by misinformation.

Ferdinand Son of Archduke Charles, and nephew to the Emperor, was elected
King of Bohemia An. 1617. by an Assembly of the States of Prague, upon the
Emperors summons; when Mathias declared that seeing his glass was almost run,
to leave the Kingdom settled in peace, and to prevent all Civil dissension, he
requested that after his decease, they would agree to accept of Ferdinand for
his successor (whom for his virtue and piety he had adopted his Son) provided
that during his life, without his special commission, Ferdinand should not
intrude himself into the government of his realm, and should also take his
oath to ratify and confirm the privileges granted to the Country.

Hereupon the 7. of June the three States of Bohemia gave this answer to the
Emperors proposition, That for his request, and for the fatherly affection
that he did ever bear to that kingdom, they consented and agreed to accept
Ferdinand for their King, and thereupon they assigned the 24. of Iulie for the
day of his Coronation at Prague, upon which day this decree was solemnly read,
and the States assembled being asked (according to Custom) by the chief
Burgrave, if any did dislike, or could show cause to contradict this Free
Election, they all freely and orderly with a general applause approved it, and
upon that so good warrant the Burgrave proclaimed Ferdinand King of Bohemia,
and offered unto him (as their Custom was) a certain contribution of his
inauguration. So here is an Election made, Frequenti Senatu, and plena curia,
the Emperors assent (who was King in Esse) a consent of the States in a
general assembly, and modo and forma according to Law and Custom, And
Ferdinand himself was present, and brought upon the stage to take the Oath
usually ministered to his predecessors, and to conclude the whole Country
acknowledged his regality by doing really the homage unto him, So as no defect
was in the proceeding, no Competitor, no bar or opposition to his claim,
neither was there any packing or partiality in the Election, and by this
solemnity he was created actually King, and albeit his government was not to
commence, until after the death of Mathias, yet the Royalty he had in Esse,
their Oaths at his Coronation, their homages, and their contribution was a
full confirmation of his title in presenti, (and the rather because the States
themselves did him all the honor appertaining to their King) so he was more
then an heir apparent, for they could not undo that which they had done, and
dispense with their Oaths, no more then Henry the second of England could
unKing Henry his Son (though he take Arms against him) because he was
created King by order and Authority.

Besides, after this Election, by the Emperors investiture, being possessed of
the Electorate of Bohemia, it stood as real livery and seisin of his right,
honor, and jurisdiction, which no man could avoid or defeat, and furthermore,
there is extant one Letter from the States, and two from the Directors
themselves, written in the life time of Mathias: which were sent to King
Ferdinand, wherein they all give him the title of King of Hungaria and Bohemia,
and call him their good Lord and Prince, and moreover they all promised to
provide him a Crown fit for their King and Lord, So soon as God should take
to his mercy the Emperor Mathias, Therefore if the State only had absolute
power to Elect their King: then was Ferdinand, orderly, generally, and freely
Elected: And if they had not such power, how had they power afterward to
create another? how could the power serve the turn for Frederick and be
defective for Ferdinand?

CHAP. 3. That the Crown of Bohemia is not only Elective.
But because Camerarius and Pl^ssen (the unhappy Advocats of an evil cause)
labor to defend a paradox, that the Kings of Bohemia are only Elective (which
if it were true does not prejudice Ferdinand whom the State have Elected:) and
the Palatines own Declaration printed 1619. Cur Regns Bohemia Regimen in se
suscepit why he usurped the title of King of Bohemia, alleges that
Ferdinand, leges regni fundamentales ever i^, and privil gia Provinciarum, quas
sibi subjugare voluit velut bared tarias, cum libera erant Electiones.

The which assertion was very frivolous, seeing Ferdinand holds Bohemia by
Election as well as by inheritance: for it is evident by all Laws, Customs,
records and histories of that Country, that since Bohemia was a Kingdom, the
Crown and Electorate have passed, not by Election only, but also by Inheritance
and succession, and all Antiquaries have derived and drawn from Vratist^vius
primus Anno 907. by eight descents the Inheritance of that Realm, succeeding
in one line and family, and therefore as we deny not a form of Election, So
cannot Cam^rarius deny the verity of succession.

Again when Vratislavins the second was created King by Henry the fourth
Emperor, the Dominion continued still in the same race and blood for many
descents, jure successionis and electionis: And when Phillip the Emperor
created Primislans Othocarus King of Bohemia and Crowned him at Mentz An. 1197.
(when for a time the title of a King had been suspended) The Crown and Scepter
continually remained as incorporated into that stock and family for many
years after. Moreover Carolus the fourth was both Emperor and King of
Bohemia, and from him and his issue the Crown descended to Vladislaus, since
whose time the kingdom has ever remained by succession in that family without
discontinuance o^ interruption, except when Podilradius a Hussite, by practice,
sedition and forcible entry usurped the Crown.

But to omit other reasons. Women and daughters have often inherited the
Crown; and is it not probable that they had it by Election only

But admit Bohemia ever heretofore had been Elective, yet are the States of
that Country restrained by Law never to Elect a stranger King, but when the^e
is none of the blood Royal left in remainder.

And that I prove by an authentical record, the Decree of Carolus the fourth,
wherein it is said, Electionem Regis Bohemia, in casu and eventu auntaxa quibus
do Geneal gia, progenia aut pros p^a regali Bohemia Masculus vel Femella
superstes legitimus nullus fuerit oriundus (quod Deus avertat) vel, er
quemcung, al um modum vacare contigerit dict^m Regnum, ad Praelatos Duces,
Principes, and Barons, Nobiles and Communitat^m dicti Regni and pertinentiarum
e, usdem, decernimus rite and legitime in perpetuum pertinere. So here is
granted a power of Election, but limited by a duntaxat, to make that free
Election, only when all the branches of the Tree are fallen, and none remains
of the Stock. And let no man object, that ancient Customs cannot be altered by
Imperial constitutions, for here the Emperor interprets the privileges of
Former Emperors, and declares in what sense they are given: Exponit, non
abrogat consuetudinem. Besides (70 Aur Bvllae the fundamental Law of the
Empire) it is enacted, that all the Electorships should descend by inheritance
(wherein Bohemia was comprehended) and that for want of heirs Bohemia should
not escheate to the Empire, as other Seignories of the Electors did, but that
the States of the kingdom should make choice of their King.

And because practice and Custom are the best Interpreters of Laws, I will
show an example.

Sigismond the Emperor (Grandfather of Carolus the fourth) being King of
Hungaria and Bohemia, called an Assembly of both States of both kingdoms at
Snoyma a town in Moravia, where he put in his Sons claim, and required
them, for the better settling of the Government, to accept and acknowledge for
his Successor Albert of Austria (who had married Elizabeth his only daughter,
and heir of both Realms) so to establish that by consent which was his right
by Law; and why they should do it he gave them this reason, because by the
marriage of Mary, the undoubted heir, he himself possessed Hungaria in her
right, and his Grandfather John inherited the Crown of Bohemia in his wives
right, both which are confrmed by the testimony of Dubravius l. 27. Histor.
Bohemia, and by Francisc. Resieres, c^m. 4.

Besides Dubravius l. 28. relates that P^tasco (Ambassador from the States of
Bohemia to Frederick the Emperor persuaded him, ut sumeret sibi regni
gubernicula and make himself King, in respect he was the principal of that
Stock, and root of the Tree of Austria, id quod ei licebat, said he, ex
antique sedere inter Bohemos and Austrios icto, de successione Regni, the which
pact was called Pactio Iglaviensis, made between Rodolphus primus, and
Primislaus, the sum whereof was this: Vt nullo relicto haere^e Regni
Bohemiae, ad Rodolphi posteritatem Regnum deferatur. So here is an argument
cited to authorize the same, which had been an Idle part, and a frivolous
argument if no other Prince should wear the Crown but one Elected by the
States only, without regard of his blood.

And although to dazell the eyes of men, some have objected, that Ferdinand the
first did solicit the States in his life time to Elect his Son Maximilian,
and Maximilian used the like mediation in the behalf of Rodolphus his Son,
which proves the States had power to choose their King.

I answer. The times were then troublesome, and the Country dangerously
infected, and so as it was probable that factions in Religion would breed
factions in the State: And therefore, seeing Abundans caut. la non nocet, to
prevent all sinister practices, they provided wisely to settle their Successor
in assurance and security with advice and consent of the kingdom: the which
they did in their life time by way of request, because the States of Bohemia
were not yet bound to settle the heirs: for haereditas non est viventis sed
defuncti: heirs are ever in expectation till their Parents dye, and when they
take possession they cease to be heirs and become owners.

Besides, it is no good argument, because the consent of the States were
demanded, therefore succession has no place: For all well governed kingdoms,
successive, have also a show and a form of Election. In England King Henry the
second requested the consent of the Parliament, that in his life time he might
see his Son crowned King, so did King Edward the third solicit for Rich. 2.
and when Rich. 3. was Elected King, the words of the act are, we do choose you
our Sovereign Lord and King, ex Rotul. Parl. 1. R. 3. therefore it is plain
that Election does not exclude succession, but succession guides the Election.

For in the same record this is expressly added; it is agreed by the three
estates that K. Rich. 3. is lawful King of England by inheritance, and due
election. So as inheritance and election are not two things incompatible,
especially in those kingdoms, where Custom has given a Royal prerogative to
the blood of a Family.

But yet I will make the matter clearer. Anno 1547. it was enacted in Bohemia
(as by the record appears) that according to the Edict of Carolus quartus,
and the order of Vladislaus, and to the literae reversales of Ferdinand 1. the
States should ever and only proceed, and no otherwise. And the States of
Bohemia cannot now claim any such Laws, Liberties, or Customs, to eject a
King out of the right line and family, wherein the Crown has been so long
invested, specially till the issue be extinct: For, by the words of the Law,
non aliter eis competeret libera Electio: and whereas they tell a tale of a
Custom in Bohemia to choose strangers, and the Sons of the King of Poland
(eminent for their virtue) they may as well tell a tale of Amadis de Gaul. And
for that which Aeneas Silvius reports of Carolus the seventh of France,
Sternbergius was the primus Motor of that to the King of France, to avoid a
mischief by an heretical intrudor, who desired that a Catholic Prince might
prevent George Podibradius an Hussite, who (as he did foresee) was like by
violence to usurp the Crown, as appears by Dubravius l. 30.

And although I confess that the Champions of this cause, artificially lay
their colors, yet can they not make black white, but as Iuglers only make it
seem so to others. For this my last argument is unanswerable.

The Princes Electors, when the States of Bohemia labored at Franckford that
they would not accept Ferdinand as an Elector, but suspend his voice, quod
nunquam plenarium adeptus est Imperium, they rejected them and their motions;
and made this answer to the Bohemians; That ex cap. 7. Au^. Bullae, only he who
was the lawful Successor of Mathias ought to be admitted to the Election as
King of Bohemia: And they so judged it, first because the States of Bohemia the
seventh of June 1617. Solemnly accepted Ferdinand for their King, and confirmed
their act by Oath: therefore no question ought to be made of his claim and
title. Secondly they alleged that Jurisdictio Electoralis nulli competit nisi
Regi Bohemiae jure haereditario, and nemo alius nisi Rex ad Electionem unquam
erat vocatus. Thirdly, they said King Ferdinand had lawfully received of the
Emperor Mathias his Investiture, the Office of Electorate, and the chief
Cup Bearer, and was put in possession thereof, and further they added, that
Maximilian the second ( Anno 1562.) was summoned by the name of King of
Bohemia, and Elector, to be at Franckford to choose the King of the Romans,
and this being in his Fathers life time he signed the Decree, (though he had no
other Election, Ceremony, or possession then Ferdinand had) and the like they
avouched of Rodolphus.

Therefore, seeing the Noblest Judges, (the College of Electors) have adjudged
this controversy, by reason, custom, presidents, and law, who will not rather
obey learned authority, then be misled by wrangling subtil^y.

A^ for Moravia Silesia, and Lusatia, (which Maximilian the second did hold ex
testamento patris) they were Seignories descended to K. Ferdinand the first by
inheritance, and though annexed to Bohemia, yet as properly appurtenant to the
King, and not to the kingdom of Bohemia.

Now, for as much as upon this Axis (vzt. the supposed nullity of Ferdinands
Election, and the invalidity of his Title in succession) all the motions and
commotions of Bohemia were carried: and seeing the weakness of that Axis is
apparent, that it cannot bear the burden laid upon it, they have more cause
to lament their error then to defend it.

CHAP. 4. For the title of the Palsgrave.
IT remains now to demurre upon the title of the Palatine, Quo titulo
ingressus est. Wherein I must first humbly, pray your Majesty that I may
speak the truth freely, and not abuse you or flatter them.

He only and barely, upon no other ti^le th^n a supposed election by Count
Thurn, some of the States, and the directors, by whom the Crown was offered
unto him, and he accepted it. Paenam pro munere poscit.

How can this action be justified? judge you, how can a second election and
contract prejudice a precontract solemnly made and satified with all
ceremonies? And which is no small disadvantage, the twentieth of March, Mathias
being dead, 1619. the 25. of August King Ferdinand was chosen Rex Romanorum and
Emperor: And shortly after a few factious subjects conspiring together made
the Count Palatine their King, whom they Crowned the fourth o^ November after:
whose Co^onation was no more than Raptus Helena, and his agents Proci alienae
sponsae.

Here is first to be considered what pretenses could be alleged to
dispossess Ferdinand, and divorce him and the Realm: secondly, who they were,
and by what authority ^he did elect Frederick.

The Count Palatine in his Declaration printed 1619. Cur Regni Bohemia Regimen
in se suscepit, alleges certain cavills, and unmateriall pretenses for the
same.

First, that Leges Regni fundamentales evertit, and privilegia provinciarum
quas sibi subjugare voluit, cum liberae erant electionis, his supposed
oppression of their liberties is a scarre-Crow, a show without substance, and
already confuted and rejected.

Therefore two other heinous crimes, and crying sins they charge him with,
for which he ought to forfeit his claim to the Crown. Tyranny and
depopulation. Tyranny in tormenting their consciences; Depopulations by
spoiling the Country, with hostility contrary to his oath.

For the first they aggravate it, Aucta in immensum religionis gravamina, and
for the second, Vi armorum hostiliter in eos saevitum, magna crudelitate, etc.

Therefore to excuse their insurrections, (that they might not be named
rebellion) he concludes, Quis miratur si, quod indesperatis morbis fieri
solet, extremus afflictae provinciae ad extrema remedia descenderunt.

These are fictions: for he can produce no greivance in the State which was not
bredd by their own impatience and abundance of distempered humors. They could
never produce any mandate from K. Ferdinand, or nominate any who were
persecuted upon that mandate, and the Law requires, in rebus prejudicij
plenis, plenas exigi probation^s: did ever Ferdinand deny tolleration of those
o^ the Confession of Auspurgh, or did he ever revoke, or disanull the grants of
Rodolphus or Mathias I beseech your Majesty hear an Emperor wrongfully
accused plead his own innocence, An 1620. Febr. 17. in his Ed^ctalis Cassatio.
Nos, says he, post omnium Reg^^ privilegi^rum confirmationem, quod
promis^rimus, infra quatuor hebdomadas ad manus supremi Burgravij missuros
pr^misimus. At subditi nostri, benevolam nostram oblationem ne responso dignati
sunt. Tamen dictae confirmationis diploma, juxtaten-remedicti R. Mathiae tot
verbis and clausulis ad Burgravium transmisimus, idemque etiam Baronibu,
Equitibu, and Civibus Pragae congregatis. But how did they welcome this fair
offer of peace and mercy. The Emperor affirms upon his honor, Non a cep
arunt diploma, inducias and armorum suspensati nem spreverunt, literas ejus*
epudi^runt: that is; They by contempt and defiance provoked him to use these
extremities, whereof they complain being vanquished.

But to make a closer fight the Argument which the Palatine uses for the
defense of the Bohemians will appear in the right shape of vanity, if I may
weigh it with English waights, and change the name; and if I may (to make the
Judges the better to apprehend) thus breiflie draw it into form.

The poor afflicted Catholics of England have their greivances daily
multiplied, their estates spoiled, their persons disgraced etc. Therefore being
driven to such extremities, they may justly and lawfully take Arms in
defense of their Religion and Liberty; how will the Judges like this reason?
Surely prefe^r me to Newgate worthily: and yet this is the substance of their
Argument, one John of Style is named for the Directors.

The antecedent of this Argument is comprehended in his own words; Aucta i^
immensum Religionis gravamina. Now if this reason be good to move compassion to
the Bohemian; so it may for the English. If you object, that the Laws of
England punish Catholics, and abolish the exercise of their Religion; so
likewise does the Law of the Empire and Bohemia condemn the Calvinists. If you
say, for the peace of the Realm, the King cannot tolerate Catholics,
experience shows the like for the Calvinises (whom the Empire accuses of
heresy, schism, and innovation) which last, cannot justly be imputed to the
Catholics.

And touching the consequent, it is the Palatines own conclusion viz: Quis
miratur, si quod in desperatis morbis fire solet, ad extrema quoque remedia
descenderant: So if the Catholics should follow the Palsgraves opinion and
advice, ind^speratis morbis; that is in violent persecution; they may lawfully
take Arms and defend themselves; but they are otherwise Catechized, and better
instructed in the School of true patience and humility, and practice,
doctrine, and conscience to draw in the Yoke of our Savior.

They object also* that the Emperors Council prohibited the exercise of their
Religion, and pulled down two Churches lately edified for that use; one in the
Town of Brunaw (where, in despite of the Abbott chief Lord of the Soil, they
presumed to erect a Temple) and the other at Clostergrap, belonging to the
Archbishop of Prague.

The Emperor Mathias, upon petition delivered unto him, An 1616. and having
heard the cause debated, Judicially decreed, that they should be demolished,
because the building of them was against Law, and the contempt of the chief
Lords unto whom both the jurisdiction and propriety of the Soil appertained
(as the Emperor signified to Thurn) and I doubt not but my Lord of Cant. would
have done the like, had any such attempt been made at Croydon by the
Catholics of Survey.

But what is this to Ferdinand? who can justly charge him with his
predecessors actions? Actio m^ritur^oum persona.

But Ferdinand showed too much severity against those reformers in Moravia.

Surely, he did nothing but by the direction of the Emperor, whom it was
requisite he should obey and assist (being chosen his ^uccessor) both to
support his Majesty's authority, and to ^acifie the troubles of those
Provinces, so as executing his Commission it was not his act but the Emperors.

But mark their iniquity; they set all the Realm on fire, and cry out against
them that seek to quench it, they gave the first blows, and when they are
beaten for it they complain they are oppressed, and hyperbolically exclaim,
in eos saevitum est tanta crudelitate.

Against King Mathias was their first insurrection, and after his death, the
Directors took Arms to bar Ferdinand out of the Realm, so as he had neither
time nor opportunity, or occasion to exercise such cruelty, whereby he should
deserve to forfeit his title to the Crown, or be condemned for breaking his
Oath to the States. And therefore the Count Palatines pretenses were
insufficient and goutie; and to say truly, Camerarius and his Camerado did but
ve^nish over the colors (slovenly hid) of those tumults of Bohemia, and did
build their Paradoxes upon weak and sandy grounds. And therefore I conclude
all with the Authority of learned Roclester. lib. de potestate Papa in
temporalibus, who fetts this down as certain as one of Euclides Elements, page
639. Non potest Apostolus Christianos eximere a subjectione de jure naturali
debita, aut Regem quemquam privare ^ure suo cum gratia non destruit naturam,
and cum Regnum in natura, Evangelium in gratia fundatur; sicut Evangelium non
dat Regnum, sic nec auferre potest: And therefore he exclaimeth: Tota haec
ratio seditiosa est, and proditoria: mul^^ udini fraena laxat, and Rebellioni
viam sterni^. And in the same opinion was Doctor Bilson in his book of
Obedience, and Doctor Marton.

Now touching the Directors, who were the principal persons and agents in this
Election, two things are to be considered.

First, the Original.

Secondly, what lawful authority, and whose Commission they had for their
warrant.

For their Original, it had a beginning in this manner, when the Emperor
Mathias languished at Vienna, by a long sickness, Count Fhurn took advantage
of the time, and conspiring with many of his Confederats, upon a sudden
surprised the Castle of Prague, the Emperors Armory, and the Court, and in a
rage they apprehended his Majesty's Lieutenants and Chief Officers of the
Realm, the President Slavata, Methansky Marshall of the kingdom, and Secretary
Fabricius, whom they cast headlong out of a window forty cubitts high from the
ground, who yet miraculouslie were preserved, and afterward they Hollandized
bravely, for they took the Scepter and Crown of Bohemia into their own hands:
and to make good their tumultuous proceedings, they leavied an Army, and took
upon them to create new Magistrates (whom they called Directors) to govern the
State, and to excuse themselves of these insolences, they writ their Letters
to King Mathias dated the 27. of March 1618 and allege a few poor reasons to
excuse and shadow their proceedings. First, that the President and the rest
were enemies to the State, and sought to disturb the peace of the Realm, and
also, whereas King Rodolphus granted them free exercise of their Religion
(which, say they, was confirmed by your Majesty) that these men purposed to
deprive us of the benefit of these your grants, and therefore, said they, we
were forced for our defense, to enter into league against them: so they
oppressed the Magistrates before they sensibly felt the smart of persecution,
and to prevent a thing only purposed (as they gave out) they really and
actually rebelled. But this was only a cunning shift: for they practiced to
draw the Provinces of Moravia, Silesia and Lusatia to join with them, and not
content to keep themselves within the limits of Bohemia, they did rise a degree
of mischief higher, and solicited the upper Austria (the Emperors own
inheritance, and no way subject to their Directorship) to runn the like
desperate course with them, as if their end and scope had been to set all the
Empire in combustion, and to have a King and a Religion of their own Edition.

Although these excesses of disorder were inexcusable to be offered to the
Emperor (whom in their own Letters they acknowledge to be a Deo sibi prastitum
Regem and Dominum, ac Magistratum clementissimum) yet King Mathias with great
mildness and clemency sought to pacify rather then to provoke their furies:
and therefore on the 6. of June 1618. he answered their Letters thus: That it
did not become Subjects to take Arms against his Lieutenants (though they had
offended before they did complain of their injuries received, and sought
redress by order of Justice: For he protested he never intended to abrogate or
suspend their privileges, or revoke his letters of tolleration, and therefore
they did him injury without better grounds to forge such slanders against his
Governor. And further he promised to compound all quarrels, and ease their
greivances by a moderate course of commission. Lastly seeing there appeared no
enemies in Bohemia to molest and persecute them, he advised them to dismiss
their Armies, and levy no more forces, and he assured them reciprocally he
would dismiss his Soldiers, cui causam (said he) dederat vestra conscriptio,
and for the better assurance he vouchsafed to write unto them again the 18. of
June, and a third time also to ratify what he had graciously promised. To all
which letters they never returned thanks nor answer, but like Salvages,
marched to Budvise and Comotonium where they compelled the Magistrates to revolt
from the Government of the Castle, and (which was a treason in the highest
degree) they took Carleistein, where the Kings Crown and treasure were kept,
they deposed the Burgrave, seized upon the Kings rents and revenues, and
converted all to their own use, which was an Apish imitation of the union of
Vtreche.

So here is Riott in the beginning, tumult in the proceedings, and treason in
all.

But now for the lawful authority of the Directors, whence had they their
lawful vocation and commission? they took upon them an absolute power, more
like Tribuni plebis, then Officers of the Crown, nay a more high power, to
degrade a new King, and at their own pleasures to create such Magistrates as
they liked, and to dispose at their pleasures the Crown and the kingdom: a
power unknown in any orderly State, greater then the Ephori and Hermostae of
the Lacedaemonians, or the Archontes of Athens, or Highstewards of England (who
notwithstanding were ordinary and lawful Magistrates, and established by
consent of the States) but these arrogate and usurp a power to degrade old
Kings, and create new (a transcendent prerogative which no wise State will
admit, nor trust any subjects with such unlimited power,) and if they be not
Magistrates, Idolum nihil est: and if they be Magistrates, I follow the Bishop of
Rochesters judgment; a superiore est potestas eorum, and ab eo solo destitui
possunt, a quo instituuntur; Answer me then Categoricallie: were they chosen by
the King or States general? or were they his Lieutenants, or Regents in his
absence, or Procuratores Regni? No such thing, no commission, no durante
beneplacito, no authority appears, no power from those that had power and
superiority to grant it.

Neither were they chosen by the Kings and States of the Country, but by
Assemblies of a faction, who contrary to order and Custom, presumed to usurp
Authority, and Domineere over the Country: The King is the head of the State,
the Clergy a part of the State yet neither was the King, nor the Archbishop of
Pragu, nor the Bishops of the Realm, the Chancellor, the President of the
Council, the Marshall, nor the principal Secretary, nor the Burgrave, nor
most of the Nobility present, either at the creation of their irregular
Officers, or at the Election of the Palsgrave: All this was done by Count
Thurn, and a few seditious persons, who had no power themselves to give such
power to others, and could have no supreme power, unless they would unking
Mathias: which no man could do by Law, or order: for it is a false Paradox,
that the States of any kingdom are above the Prince, and may bind his hands and
depose him. And no man can demonstrate, that the states and Directors of
Bohemia had ever power to depose one and Elect another Prince.

In Denmark and Poland (kingdoms meerelie Elective) yet the Kings Office is to
assemble the States, as the Emperor does at the Diett and the Danes also are
bound to choose the Son of the last King, as they confessed themselves in
their apology 1523. And therefore they did Elect Schioldus, Son of that
Monster, Lother King of Denmark.

Moreover, where a Prince is Sovereign, no Subject can be partaker of his
Soveraigntie, which is a quality not communicable, for it resideth in the
union of a body politic, and if it be divided (without the Princes consent)
it loses the Soveraigntie.

An. 42. Hen. 3. certain Officers were elected, and appointed to see the
performance of orders set down by the Parliament, and to correct the
transgressors thereof, and the Kings brethren, and the Barons did take their
Oaths to see the same observed, yet that act had no force till the King
consented.

1. Rich. 2. (as Ranulphus Higdensis testifies) constituti sunt ad
gubernationem Regis and Regni, duo Episcopi, duo Barons, duo Baronetti, duo
Baccalaurij milites cum uno Iurisconsulto. Yet was this done because of the
Kings minority, and under the name and authority of the King.

The Chief Justice of Aragon has a large command, and the States claim a
power, Nosque valemos tanto como vos, masque vos etc but this holds not to
underpropp the usurpation of the Directors and their Conventicles, for the
Chief Justice is an ancient and an ordinary Officer, established by Custom and
long continuance, and is allowed by the King, and is deposeable by him: as the
King gives the Office, so may he take it away from him, as he did from Didaco.

And seeing all subordinate Magistrates have their Authority, jure humano, and
non potestate sua sed aliena: And seeing these Directors of Bohemia were not
chosen nor admitted by the whole State, but (which was worse) usurped an
Authority inconsulto Rege, I may say of them truly whom these usurpers
elected, that which God himself said Osee 8. Ipsi Regnant, and non ex me,
Principes extiterunt, and non cognovi eos.

And therefore I will conclude, that this Election of the Count Palatine was
contrary to Law and reason, being made by Conspiratours (who usurped an
authority which they lawfully had not) and by private men and not by the
King, nor Officers of the Realm, nor the General States.

And I the rather hold this opinion; because King James, in his oration to the
Parliament 1620. used these words, very judiciallie, Kings and kingdoms were
before Parliaments, the Parliament was never called for the purpose to meddle
with complaints against the King, the Church, or State matters, but ad
consultandum de relus arduis, Nos and Regnum nostrum concernentibus; as the
writ will inform you. I was never the cause, nor guilty of the Election of my
Son by the Bohemians, neither would I be content that any other King should
dispute whether I am a lawful King or no, and to toss Crowns like
Tennis-balls.

Besides if the Count Palatine had been elected in any show of order, a maine
defect yet lies as a block in his way: For the Aur. Bulla cap. de confirmat.
Regis Bohemiae, sets down this clause, as an essential Axiom: volentes ut
quicunque in Regem Bohemorum Electus sit, accedat ad nos and successores
nostros (which Frederick did not) sua a nobis Regadia accepturus, (which he
likewise never did) and it must be done debito modo and solito, to show the
use, Custom and duty. And to take away all cavills, he binds it with a non
obstantibus legibus municipalibus, that the pretense of impostors, the name of
liberties, and the title of Vicarius Imperij might have no place for excuse.
And to prove the necessity of his investiture. Read Aur. Bullae exp. 2. and
Curia Nurimbergh art. 7. and 8. Si quis autem Principum Electorum, aliusve,
feudem a sacre tenens Imperio, supra and infrascriptus Imperiales
constitutiones adimplere noluerit, aut iis contraire praesumpserit, ex tunc
cateri Coelectores a suo ipsum deinceps consertio excludant; And surely the
Palsgrave had ill Council, and as weak a judgment, to seek to dispossess the
Emperor of his right and title, who was to give him the investiture of
Bohemia, and by disorder to seek a Crown also, by men who had no power to give
it: by which ambition came the ruin of that mighty Family, who aspiring to a
Crown it could not rightfullie challenge, lost that Crown which it had lawfully
long possessed.

CHAP. 5. Of the proscription of the Palsgrave.
NOw I come to the maine point which the Puritans call the head of all these
evils, the proscription of the Palsgrave; wherein we must examine whether it
were done de jure, or injuriouslie, and whether there be just cause why the
Father should vindicate the honor of his Son; the grounds of the
proscription were too solid. For after the Assembly at Franckford 1619. where,
by the plurality of voices, Ferdinand was Elected (the Palsgrave not
contradicting it) the Count Palatine took the Crown of Bohemia (as it were)
from the head of the Emperor, he joined with the Directors, begun this
unfortunate tragedy made himself head of the union (the most dangerous that
ever was contrived in Germany) consented to the invasion of the Lower Austria,
and at Retz the States being assembled 2. August. 1620. Fredericum Palatinum
Dominum and Protectorem elegerunt.

Besides he assisted all the malcontents of the State, and raised Armies for
his defense, as if he had not been fully satisfied with the Crown of Bohemia,
except he had likewise dispossessed him of the Empire, and forced him to fly
into Spain for succor, as it is evident by the Records of Cancellaria
Anhaltina.

Nay the same Count Palatine in his Letters to the Duke of Saxony, confesses
that he took upon him the Crown of Bohemia: First, that the kingdom might not
be longer restrained from the exercise of their Religion: Secondly, that they
might enjoy their privileges: Thirdly and chiefly, that the Election of the
King of the Romans might be in the power and choice of the Protestant
Electors: fair Colors on a false ground: zeal to Religion out of Charity is
made to break the peace of Europe, and to maintain the liberties of Bohemia,
he must needs violate the Laws and orders of the Empire, and to enlarge the
Dignity of the Secular Electors, he would tread upon all the Ecclesiastical.

But to say more plainly, he scorned to hold the stirrup, while the House of
Austria did mount and surmount him.

But to proceed; was their end only to relieve Bohemia? no surely: For they
solicited the revolt of Hungaria: they joined with Bethlem Gabor the Turks
vassal: and if you look well into the scope and intention of these
correspondents, you shall see a Medusaes Head.

For what was their project? by the Rolls of Cancellaria Anhaltina, the union
intended to give the Palsgrave for his share more then Bohemia, Alsatia, and a
part of Austria, and to enlarge his Dominions with the spoils of the
Bishopprick of Mentz and Spires, the rest of the Correspondents purposed to
share the fattest morsells of Germany amongst them. Onoltsback gaped for
Writzburgh. Barl^n thirsted after Brysack and to oppress the poor Count
Eberstein. Anhalt hoped to supply his prodigali^ies with Brambergh, and some
escheats in Bohemia* al of them resolved by fire and sword to extirpate pied a
pied, the Papalty. And Blessen i^ his letters to P. Anhalt 27. November 1619.
certifieth him, unitat in conventu Noric^ bellum decrevisse in catholicas.
Ecclesiast. invasio, page 67. Cancellariae was resolved upon, and the
deprecation also of Tryer, and the surprising also of that Prince Electors
country, and page 131. it was concluded ut adversae partis Provincia invadantur.

Besides, as if they went to cast the Empire in a pure mould, and refine the
government, they designed to swallow up the house of Austria, whereupon that
Atheist Beth^ehem Gabor assured the great Turk by his letters, that the
Palatine and Brand^nbergh would not endure nor suffer the advancement of
Ferdinand. And so did Anhalt write to Danau besides to weaken Austria, the
union agreed to assist Gabor to ravish the crown of Hungaria and possess it.

Moreover Anhalt councelled Danau by his letters 1619. to surprise a City which
should be worth thirty two millions.

I will be breife, and omit infinite impieti^s* never was there any plot so
profane and graceless as this one; sclt: to set open the gates of
christendom to the Turk, and suffer him to march into the heart of it.

I will draw the curtain and reveal the mystery of iniquity, to amaze their
favori^^s, and make themselves blush; for, undoubtedly to bring in the Turk to
subdue the Emperor, is all one as to fight by Mahomet to expel Christ, yet so
did Gabor certify the Turk, that all the Princes of the union, Sultan, et toti
nationi Mahom^tica cord et anim^, omn a officia fidelissimi praestabunt: and
that thortly Ferdinand should be forced to abandon Germany, and upon this
monster the Palsgrave so much relied, asby his letters to him July 13. 1623.
appears in their Chancerie, where he honors him with the name of Father
and Gossip, as if yet he hoped for a sunshine day by his intercession. And
that th^se things may not be denied (because they had not success) wherefore
did Count Thurne (the Author of those tumults) accompany Gabors ambassador to
the Turk? only to crave succor against the Emperor, and draw the Janisaries
into his Country, 1622. wherefore did the Palsgrave in his prosperity at Prague
receive a Chaous from the Turk, and after treaty with him dispatched an
Ambassador to the Port? and wherefore did he afterward by his letters dated
the twentieth three of July 1623. and directed to the confederate Provinces,
advise them to consider de augendo legationis Turciae spl^ndore? And wherefore
was John of Coelen sent to Constantinople by the union? Wherefore did Count
Hohenloe often threaten that the Turk should come in to vex their enemies?
whereupon did Gabor solicit the Grandvizier for aid to prosecute the wars
of Hungaria? Whereupon did the Turk write his letters to the Palsgrave, and to
the Prince of Orange, that he had given order for the aid they desired, and
exhorted them to take the field courageously against their enemies meaning the
house of Austria, etc.

They pretend that religion moved them to this, and esteem nothing for truth
but the word, and therefore let them hear sic dicit Dominus, cap. Esaias 30. vae
qui ambulatis, ut descendatis in Egyptum, et os meum interrogatis, sperantes
auxilium in fortitudine Phar^nis et habentes fiduciam in umbra Egypti. That is
as he says. cap. 31. peribunt qui spe in Deum^r licto, c^nfugiunt ad humanum
auxilium, what a blindness then was this to invite the Turk, for their
ambitious pretenses to march into the Empire, and suck the blood of Christians
that favored the house of Austria. And therefore, upon so great and imminent
dangers to the Church and State, the league was made by the catholic Princes
at Mulhowes in Turingia 1620, for their necessary defense, against which the
Palatine published an invective, and termed it a Council of blood.

But to omit all these, who can by law defend or warrant the raising of such an
army against the Emperor, in the Empire, as the Palatine had? or their
confederations with Yagendorffe, P. Aubalt, On lizba^h the Marquess of
Auspack, Durlack, Baden, and the Duke of Wittenbergh, besides the assistance of
Nurembergh, Frankfort, and many imperial towns? or the association with
Holland, Denmark, and the Duke of Bullion? or the large contributions which
Cogmandolo sets down to have been taxed upon each of them particularly
from the year, 1608. to 1619. against the Emperor.

What Orator then can excuse the Count Palatine, extenuate his offense, or
plead against his proscription? specially seeing (which arrogateth his
offense) that he still is content to usurp the ti^le of Bohemia, and not to
renounce it. Nay though the Duke of Baviere sent an herald to the Bohemians,
they despised his letters, the E^ector of Saxony dissuaded the States, exhorted
and admonished them but surdiscecinet, they would listen to no pacification.
The Emperor himself wrote his moniteriall letters unto them, but the
Palsgra^e too obstinately refused all, for a crown is an infectious and
tempting bait, and as men stung by scorpions which breed the infection, so
nothing pleased Ph^eton and his aspiring ambition, but to guide currum solis,
rather desirous to dye then live losser then a King.

Therefore the Emperor had just cause to proscribe him, and publish the Bann.

If you ask whether for the order of proceedings it were lawfully done, I
answer, that the cause is already judged where the offense was committed, for
in the Imperiall-diet at Ratisbone the Ambassadors of the Duke of Saxony; and
the M. of Brandenbergh (Electors) and Lewis Lantgrave of Hessen, made this
answer to the Emperors propositions, Anno 1624, that they condemned the
hostilities of Mansfield, and the proceedings of the Hollanders a Westphalia,
and so in their consciences that they condemned the practices and proceedings
of the Palsgrave, and they acknowledged that the Emperor had cause to publish
the Bann, because they would not give ear to the council of the Electors, nor
cease to assail the Emperor in his own territories, but still disturb the
peace of the Empire,

And the Ecclesiastical Electors joined with them, that all of them had
deserved the Bann, both for the causes aforesaid, and for prosecuting the
Emperors principal officers of Bohemia, and for soliciting the Turks (enemies
of Christ) to invade the west Empire, and put the whole State in danger and
confusion.

So here is the Decree and Judgment of the Electors themselves, Peers to the
Vicarius Imperij, and his Judges without appeal: And here is also a
concurrence of the whole Diett, although Charles the fifth proscribed great
John, Frederick and the Lantsgrave who never pleaded that in Bar, that they
were not justly condemned because not by their Peers.

But let the Law it self determine the question. First, for his Dignity, there
is no doubt to be made by the feudall constitutions, for by Aurea Bulla it is
forfeited, tit. 1. and 10. the which was made by Carolus the fourth Imper. ex
communi omnium at singulorum Electorum and multorum S. Imperij Romani
Principum, Comitum, Nobilium, ac fidelium concilio and consensu. And by
Farinaecius qu. 116. number. 72. and all Lawyers agree, that for rebellion they
loose all Feuda, old and new inheritance, and expacto, both Father and Son.

So Gigas l. 3. q. 4. Hernia Farinaccius de crimine laesae Ma^estatis q. 116,
number 80. Molina l. 4. c. 11. Socinus Iu. consil. 65. number 2. l. 3. Et in hoc
omnes convenire affirmant And Gail. l. 2. c. 13. number. 21. de pace publicae. And
H. Rosentall is confident in this opinion, that the Emperor cannot pardonne
the Sons, l. de Feud. c. 10. concl. 38. whereunto I cannot subscribe: But to
put Camerarius by Law to silence. And Gail. overthrows all their plots and
practices, l. 1. de pace publica cap. 5. in crimen laesae Majestatis incidit,
qui bellum in Imperio sine Caesaris licentia gerit, and movet. In what State
then stands he that warreth against Caesar himself, and that for his own
inheritance? And to put all out of Controversy, he yields this reason, Quia
usurpat sibi ea quae sunt solius Principis, nam movere bellum ad solum
Imperatorem pertinet. It is a mark of supremacy and an inseparable
prerogative to Kings. Is Vicarius Imperij here excepted? N: for the same man,
c. 1. l. 9. says conditio pa^is publicae omnes omnium ordinum status Imperij,
majorum and minorum gentium, cujuscunque dignitatis personas aeque obligat.
And, that you might not imagine the Laws of the Empire are made like
spider-webbs, only to catch Flies, and to be broken by great ones, he adds this
clause, licet sit contra potentiores promulgata. Nay further, here that great
Antiquarie, and a Protestant, Goldastus li. tit. 190. who cites this ancient
Law, Nemo inter Imperij fines, militum sollicitate, nisi de voluntate Ducis
istius circuli: Curetque side jussione statuum, nihil se contra Caesarem,
Principes subditos, and clientes Imperij moliturum.

But the Directors of Bohemia begann this war against the Emperor Mathias, and
the Palsgrave and they continued it against Ferdinand.

And the said Goldastus relates a decree made by the Emperor Ludovicus Pius,
against the King of the Romans and his Confederates, as guilty of a high
treason, for attempting against him and the State, for which cause the King was
judged to loose his head.

And the like Judgment was pronounced by Otho 1. against his Son Ludolphus
King of the Romans.

But I will conclude all with the Law of Lande-Freiden, made by Maximil^an the
first, Pacem publicam armata manu violantibus, poena proscriptionis, quam
Bannum Imperiale vocamus, irrogatur, sc^vi^ae necisque.

And so I leave this cause rather to be pitied, then disputed, if the
offenders had not been too long Advocats of their own offenses, and had not
sought rather to exasperate the victor, then to pacify him, till it was too
late.

CHAP. 6. Of King James his not taking Arms to vindicate the honor of his Son
proscribed.
HAving thus curiously examined the grounds and causes of the Proscription of
the Count Palatine, and how they stand in Law and conscience, without any
partiality, neither taking affection to the one part (whom I know not) nor to
the other (whom I pity) but as the truth of the cause leads me, I ask this
question: Why is King James accused for not taking arms to vindicate the
honor of his Son so proscribed? And why should the King of England give over
all treaties, and enter into war with Spain, if the Palatine be not restored;
being the King of Spain neither did, nor could proscribe him* but the
Emperor? For Spain (as your Majesty knows) has no command in the Empire,
nor title, nor Authority.

The Archduke Albert sent aid to King Ferdinand his nephew, with the consent
of Spain, to aid their Family, and to revenge so intolerable injuries to
the Emperor in a just cause: First the Count Bucquoy, and after Marquess
Spinola (great Commanders) marched thither, whereof the one with the Emperors
forces dispossessed and ejected the Palatine out of Bohemia, the other invaded
the Palatinate and took possession of it, An. 1620. and Verdugo and others his
successors did hold it, as well to weaken the Emperors competitor, to
discomfort their party, to force the Palatine to relinquish his title (for
arma tenenti omnia ^at qui ^ustanegat) as also to engage the same for a pawn,
to satisfy the charges of four just a wa^, and to pay the penalty of an
offense so odious.

And there is no reason why the King of Spain might not succor the Family
whereof he is the Root, seeing these lands were the proper possession of
Charles the Fifth, And by him freely given to the family.

Neither did Spain break the treaty with England, an. 1604. in any article,
by that support, and therefore they shall do well to set the saddle on the right
horse, and accuse the Emperor for proscribing the Pal^tine, and the imperial
diet for ratifiing the same, which no wise man will do. For it cannot be
honorable to justify an unjust and condemned action, or seek to take
vengeance on the execution of justice on offenders, decreed by the general
consent of the whole Empire. And it was wisely said of King James in his
oration to the Parliament Quis me constituit judicem inter vos?

He were very well ill advised that would persuade the King to fight for the
Church of Bohemia, and undertake to preserve Gods children in France, (as they
call them) by the sword. For, as that worthy Iohannis Roffensis said lib de
potestat. Papaec. 20. Quis tribunal, illud erexerit in terris, in quo Rex de
Rege, pa^ de pari judicet? Iudex alterius Regis nemo Rex^conditus est, et
rempublin rempublicam concitant. I know King James was defensor fidei; but in
his own circle and imm^^; intra quat nor maria: for Kings like plannets have
their proper spheres and bounds of authority, in which they move proprio motu,
and may not extend their prerogative of dignity into places where it has no
jurisdiction or influence, but by intercession and graces.

But Spain has abused us (they say) with hopes and promises given, and not
performs, for they keep yet the Palatinate: what do they inter upon this? to
trust no more your enemies, but give over all treaties with them.

We expect (says Tom. T. T.) to see an army raised as well as subsidies, and
that the King would really and royally engage himself in the right way.

Touching the first, the Spaniard can restore no more then he has, and for
that it is fit Don Carolo be heard, who is a man of integrity and plain
dealing, the Infanta has ever had a princely compassion of my Ladies grace,
the Countess Palatine: and all her Council can witness how really she did
mediate, that the town in the Palatinate belonging to her dowry, might by the
Spaniards be preserved for her, and not suffered to fall into huks^ers hands,
and though C. Gondamore has been much defamed in England for a juggler in
this case, yet I have heard by wise men, that he employed his friends,
conferred sincerely with men of action, and imploiment, and used al means he
could invent and contrive how to satisfy the King of England but ultra posse
non est esse. It is neither the fault nor the fallacy of Spain, and for the
restitution of the Palatinate, your Majesty well knows, and I think has
discovered that there is a knot in that business which only the Duke of
Bavaria can untie.

The Emperor cannot, except he would hazard to loose part of his own
inheritance, (the upper Austria) and what, if that cannot (during the Duke of
Baviers life) be yet effected; will you break of all treaties with Spain, for
a matter he cannot compass, nor prevail to effect? Will you make a
perpetual deadly feud with Spain, because he cannot yet therein fully
satisfy you? It is a cause neither charitable nor politic, for mark the
reason and project of this silly statesman. page 13 your children (says he)
perhaps may have committed a fault, and though you thought good to purge them,
yet to let them still drink of affliction, you may be thought justus sed
crudelis pater.

Well, how should the King help his children, and show his royal wisdom as
well as natural affection, and regard the kingdom, as well as his cradle? A
secret treasure (says he) lies hid in your peoples hearts, we will contribute
more to redeem the credit of our nation, then to regaine the Palatinate, men
and money are the engines of war, send forces that shall be able to make their
way thither.

Mark I humbly pray your Majesty, how ignorance roveth and loses it self,
and yet he says as much as any other can object. If you ask him, shall they
march into the Palatinate? No says he; there is great difficulty to get
thither, the Palatinate is ill seated for us to war in, being remote from the
sea, and surrounded with enemies, and the protestant league is beheaded (which
should have succored you) and therefore here solveth that you must not confirm
the action to the bare Palatinate; for so it will never have an end, but draw
it self into such a circle of troubles, as we may look twelve years hence to
see two such armies keep one another at a bay in the Palatinate, as now they
do in the low Countries.

So by this his Argument, to recover the Palatinate, you must not march
thither, For the reasons he wisely alleges, for that it is out of your way.
Is not this man in a labyrinth? for he wishes a thing whereof he has no
hope, something he would have done, but he knows not what, nor how, what
then? qua spe quo concilis, would he proceed? hear a counterfeit Hanniball
speak like a soldier: give the Hollanders your helping hand, and lend the
Palatine an army to dispose of as he shall see cause.

Consider well, first, that his plot is to relieve or revenge the Palatine, but
not to recover the Palatinate.

I hope your prudence and providence is such, as you will be assured how they
will employ this army. For, if the H^llanders must tutor him, they will assail
Flanders, or some parts of the Empire, or invade Spain, or the Indies, and
your Majesty shall bear the name of the great Nimrod, have all the blame and
malice of your neighbors, and yet the Pala^ine himself shall gain nothing by
these sharkers; who serve only their own turn by you both, and when you come
to the account and reckoning for the charges, you shall find neither honor,
comfort, profit, thankfulness, nor reputation by dealing with them.

Nay, Tom T. T. in all his book has but one wise sentence, and that touching
them; the Pedlers whom we our selves set up for use, are become our masters in
the East- Indies, and think themselves our f^llowes.

It is now given out in Holland, that your Majesty means not to make peace
with Spain, but to confirm the treaties made with the Hollanders at
Southampton before the last journey to Cales, which report I cannot believe,
for your wisdom may foresee many dangers and inconveniences by it, it is
neither for ^he benefit of your merchants, nor for the wealth of your Realm,
nor the peace of Europe, nor your own safe^ie. And I believe France will find
in the end occasions to cast them off, for the Gummarists and the Huganots draw
in one line, have sucked one nurse, and like no royalty.

Forget not your Amboyna, and the imperious and cruel usage of our merchants
in the East Indies.

Forget not how scornefully they used Sir William Morison (your Fathers
Admiral of the narrow seas) not without apparent contempt of your Majesty.

Forget not how they used your sea men, and Fishers in Gre^neland.

And call to remembrance how unthankfully they used Qu^ene Elizabeth (their
Patron and Protector) Anno 1594, when she sent Sir Thomas Bodley to demand
the money she had la^ed out for them.

And as if they hated Royalty and the King himself, they cause and suffer to
be printed Tom Tell-truth; and other malicious libells, and scandalous, to
defame Majesty, and bring it into contempt, and secretly publish them in
Brabant and Flanders.

Consider also how presumptuously they only use the fishing on your coasts
without license, and challenge it as a due to them, which the French never
durst do.

Besides you may discern clearly what insolency Armata semper militia ever
grows unto, and I can witness how falsely they dealt with the Earl of
Leicester and my Lord Willoughby, who was forced to write an Apology for
himself against them.

And as for your glorious Father, I protest, for all his favors to them,
(which were many and great) yet how shamefully they spoke of him both living
and dead, I cannot with modesty relate.

Nay they have dared to sheere the grass from under their feet, and laugh at
his council; and therefore they have planted so many low-country-men in
England to serve their turn, who robbed you, and transported all your gold
thither, that the States might make their benefit of it, which your
Star Chamber can well witness: and these men are yours externally, theirs in
heart and affection, neither has your Majesty cause to repose too much trust
in them, for their Astrologer Dr. Fink long since foretold them of a Star
rising out of the east, which I perceive they long to see come into England,
that they might adore him.

But to speak freely and loyally, it would be censured by foreign Princes,
as a great weakness in so wise a Prince to hazard your own safety, and the
welfare of the Kingdom and the lives of your dearest Subjects for a cause so
desperate.

And on the contrary part, to enter into amity and league with your ancient
confederates, with Spain, and all men of judgment, and impartial, hold it
most honorable and profitable.

Your leagues wi^h the house of Burgundy were ever wont to be tied with a su^e
knot and inviolable, even by Hen. 2. Rich. the 1. and Hen 3.

Edw. 1. bestowed upon Fland^rs and Brabant great pensions, as it appears by
the records of the Exchequer.

Edw. 3. loved no nation better, and so did they him.

So long as Hen. 6. preserved amitye with the Netherlands, he prospered, and
flourished.

Yea (say the enemies of peace) but now the case is altered, Burgundy was then
in mediocrity, now it is in extremes, for the King of Spain is grown too
great, too potent, and seeks to over shadow his neighbors, and terrify them
with his titles of greatness, as if Jupiter would ravish Europa.

These are vain thunderbolts of fancy: for, the benefits which the Realm
may reap by peace with Spain (being well settled) are of far more advantage
then can any way be expected by joining with Holland. For thereby you shall
again establish commerce and traffic, set all trades on work in the Realm,
enrich your merchants, advance your Staples, (which be your Majesty's Indies)
increase, or at least continue your customs, and so store and furnish your
Exchequer by peace, which the wars will continu^ally exhaust and draw dry.

Moreover by this peace, you may better hold Holland in awe, and a little
restrain their insolency, by a virtus unita, and I see there is need to do so;
if you will bridle their headin^sse, you must keep them between hope and fear,
neither make them despair of your aid, by entertaining their enemies, nor
give them cause to presume, by rej^cting the amity of Spain. And so holding
them in suspense, they will seek by all good offices to win you, for they know
that England only can curb them, and advance their enemy. And so a state
always living in Arms must be used, because they are more dangerous
neighbors then all others, and want neither will, nor means to offend, and by
necessity are forced to respect only themselves, and to use all extreme
shifts to uphold so broken and corrupt a state.

And for that argument of the greatness of Spain, I say it is therefore the
greater honor to England, to have so great a Prince to seek and embrace your
amity.

Philip the third 1604. sent the great Constable of Castile, with an olive
branch in his hand to seek peace, bury al offenses, and reconcile the two
Kingdoms with a perfect Amnestia, here you see their greatness is no obstacle
to amity, and the rather, because there never was till of late, between
England and Spain any national contention, nor any antipathy between the two
crowns: but now there is; true, but ab initio non fuit sic: and cursed be he
that would make variance continue perpetually between Kings and Realms.

But that your Highness may know how great and entire the love and amity long
continued between Spain, Portugal and England has been, the records show,
that Anno 36. Hen. 3. Alphonsus King of Castile made a league with England for
him and his successors solemnly contra omnes homines, which he constantly
observed. So as when the French solicited a tru^e between them, he denied
cessation of arms, and would hearken to no motions of a treaty, till King Edw.
2. did mediate for it, and the knot was so fast tied between these two
Realms, that Edw. 1. did marry Elenor the Kings sister, who proved a dear
and loving wife unto him, and plausible to the whole Realm, in respect of
which contract and marriage, King Alphonsus renounced and r^signed to King Edw.
all his right and title to Aquitaine.

And his love and amity still increased, for John Protector of Castile, Anno
18. Edw. 2. sent a thousand horse, and ten thousand foot to aid the King of
England against France, and so afterward 18. Edw 3. before he made his
challenge and invaded France, King Peter of Castile agreed with King Edw.
mutually the one to aid the other, and the same King made the like league with
Ferdinand King of Portugal.

But of all others John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by his actions, his
marriage, and his titles, did incorporate in a perfect union these two crowns,
as if nature had determined by an holy Sacrament inviolably to couple and link
together these three Kingdoms, and by an union of blood to confirm that amity
(for of him all the Kings of Spain and Portugal are descended.)

Whereupon, after the civil wars in Eng. were ended (K. H. 7. a politic
Prince) sought to match his Son Prince Arthur with the Lady Katherine of
Spain, that there might continue a perpetual succession of consanguinitie
between the two crowns, and therefore renewed the old league with Philip the
first of Austria. an. 1505. the which continued warmely and faithfully until
the schism and unkindnesse of Hen. 8. made some variance unfortunately
between them

But all this notwithstanding, they object that the like is not hereafter to be
expected of Spain, which by the union and access of Austria, Portugal, and
both the Indies cannot be contained in any circle, nor tied by any pact to hold
friendship with any Prince farther then he pleases.

These are the scar-crowes of Amsterdam, vain and untrue, for Maximillian the
Emperor after that great union, made a league with King Hen. 8. 1507. and held
so good correspondency with him, that at Turvey he did his Majesty the greatest
honor that ever was done to England, to take a hundred crowns a day to serve
under his standard, and he further promised King Henry to assist and aid him to
take possession of the crown of France.

Besides, Carolus 5. (on whom the greatness and glory of Spain and Austria
was most eminent and powerful) did be not come to visit King Henry in England?
did he not make the treaties of intercourse with him, Anno 1515. and 1520? did
he not confirm their amity by the treaty of Cambr^y, 1529? So as there was a
reciprocal and inviolable friendship between them, till the Kings divorce
from Queen Katherine, the disgrace of his Aunt, the schism of England, and
King Henry's confederation with the French King, did much alien the Emperors
heart from him: but it was no rooted hatred. For, notwithstanding all his
supereminent of titles and Kingdoms, Anno 1543 they embraced one another
friendship, and renewed it again, tractatu auctioris amicitiae.

And lastly, King Edw 6. being dead, the same Charles 5. (as if he had
foreseen how one of these crowns stood in need of the other) married his
legitimate son to Queen Mary; with such conditions as were most honorable and
profitable. And after her death nothing but a quarrel of Religion ambition,
and faction broke the bond, which prudently, and out of his temperate
disposition, King Philip 3. labored to tie a new, and bind with a faster
knot, if his Royal offer had been as wisely accepted, as by the Count of
Villa Mediana it was nobly tendered.

By all which appears their folly and vanity, that think there can be no
peace made with Spain, nor articles kept, nor faith nor fidelity observed.

But consider, who can oppose this peace with reason. The Hollanders will I
doubt not, and they have means and spies in your Court, I dare not say in your
Council, as others here confidently affirm that know it: but their quarrel
is de capite; for which they seek their own ends, not yours, and though some
of your puritan Subjects will dare to contradict it; yet let traffic be
heard, and consult with your merchants who can best tell where intercourse and
commerce is to be for their most advantage.

And I am sorry that so religious a King, and so magnanimous as the King of
France, for privatum odium, and singular commodum, I should lay any block in
the way of peace, yet your highness knows that France has their particular
exceptions and piques against Spain, which no way concern England, and
pretend what they will for your good, it is their own they seek, and keep
Spain low, and draw dry their finances, but you shall show to the world both
great policy and virtue to glorify your judgment, if you can keep them both
your friends, albeit, e duobus milibus utrum (...) tibi ut, your Majesty and
Council can best judge.

Therefore, I beseech your Majesty consider what inconveniences may happen to
England, if either you should be councelled to restore the Palatine, or
revenge his quarrel in despite of justice, whom the law and justice have cast
down. For, cui bonos? it can be no honor to defend a man's errors, who might
have said with Albinus, Arma ameus capio, let not a non putaram be laid to your
charge. The Realm has no such interest in the quarrel of Foreigners, but by
alliance, and I should pity that Councillors weakness, who should advise
your Highness to the contrary; for nothing is so near and dear to a King as
his Crown, and solus populi supreme lex est, it is not your case, but by
consequence and participation, and if you would attempt to restore or revenge
him by indirect courses, how are you provided to perform it? Vana est sine
viribus ira, and to break with Spain, and do the Palatine no good, is to
damnifie England, undo your merchants, and blemish the honor of your
judgment.

CHAP. 7. Reasons why the Count Palatine is not to be restored by Arms.
CAll therefore (most gracious Prince) true polici, experience, and virtue to
give you council, and consult whether that your attempt be honorable,
falsible, and for a King of England.

Cicero at Rome (the best school of civil government) being asked his opinion
in a case like to this, whether it were good for Lentulus and the
commonwealth, to undertake the charg to restore Ptolomy, and put him in
possession of his Kingdom, out of which he was ejected, he gave this advise,
li. 1. epist familia si exploratum tibi sit posse te illius regni potiri, non
esse constandum: si dubium, non esse conandum, and why? totius facti tui
judicium non tam ex concilio tuo, quam ex eventu homines esse facturos, si
cecidisset ut volimus et optamus omnes te and sapientur et fortiter, si aliquid
est offensum, eosdimillos te et cupide et temere fecisse dicturos: apply this
to your self and you cannot err, Ptolomy was a Prince deposed, and to be
restored by force of arms (who had cast his self into the protection of the
Romans) and yet the danger, hazard, and uncertainty of that action did
dissuade and discourage the whole state.

I will show another president to guide your judgment, nearer to your case.

Christian the second King of Denmark was deposed by his uncle Frederick, and
his own subjects, his wife Isabella sister to Charles the 5th. as the
Palatines wife is to your highness, and afterward he was betrayed by Canutus
Gulderstein (who promised him in Fredericks name security and capitulations)
but notwithstanding he was taken and imprisoned many years yet the Emperor
his brother maintained her and her children very nobly, but though his cause
was just, his title without question, his case lamentable, Halfnia, Malbogia,
and both Burgers and Paisants seeking his restoration, and his cause depending
in suite at Spires, where he was like to have judgment for him (as is manifest
by the acts and records there) Denmark contra Denmark in causa spolij, as
Melchior Geldastus testifies, yet for diverse causes the Emperor resolved not
to hazard himself and his people in a war so dangerous and unnecessary, and
for a man of forlorn hope, and especially he himself being engaged in other
occasions of more importance touching his honor, and safety, he neglected
this, which though it were a cross to his friends, yet for their good he was
not to neglect himself and his State.

But, if the practices of your predecessors may be thought best to guide you,
Queen Isabell, wife to King Edw. 2. flying to her brother the King of France
for succor against the Spencers (the Kings minions:) the French Kings Council
advised him to give her money, and leave her to solicit such friends as she
could procure, but in no sort to appear in the action, nor give commission to
levy men against the King of England, for so he should give cause to renew the
war, and set France in an uproare and danger, which were a thing incommodious
to himself, and inconvenient to the State: such was their wariness and
providence to prefer the place, safety, and prosperity of their Country, far
above the respect of particular persons, not regarding the Queen his sister,
so much as his crown and safety. And afterward when Sir John Heynault Lord
Braumont, undertook to restore her, both the heart of Heynault and his chief
officers opposed it, as an enterprise of more courage then wisdom, and
although good success made it seem good, yet it was not so of it self, but
by accident, for the Queen having strong party in England, (as now the
Palatine has in Germany) the Barons sent over the Archbishop of Canterbury to
assure her of their assistance and besides she carried over into England with
her solemn orientem, Prince Edw. the Kings son and heir.

It was lately objected to me, that the famous black Prince aided Don Pedro
King of Castile against his Subjects who rebelled, and wrongfully expelled him:
and therefore King Charles ought to do the like for the aid of his sister.

I deny that he ought, and I say also, that the consequence is not good, for
the Prince aided a lawful King against rebels, you shall aid a usurper
against a lawful King and an Emperor, so in the cause there is odds. Besides,
have you a black Prince (the mirror of all martial Princes) to be employed
in this expedition? Or have you in Spain or Ger. such a Rendezevous to let in
your Forces with facility, as he had in Aquitaine? And besides, you shall break
a treaty of peace solemnly sworn, which the Princes did not; I add also, that
valiant Cand^is dissuaded the Prince from undertaking the action: you ought
(says he) to be content with the state you have, and not to pull upon you the
malice of foreign Princes: but Prince Edwards own reason why he undertook it,
proves strongly that your highness ought not to undertake the like for the
Palsgrave: for his argument was as heroical as himself, that he would attempt
it for the right heir, who was dispossessed of his inheritance, by one who had
no right to it, the which was a matter of honor, and such as the Kings son
could not endure, because it was a bad president, and a wrong to the Royal
state of all Monarchies, whereupon King Edward 3, his father gave his consent
to the enterprise.

Now, if that argument were forcible to move him, then it is as strong to move
you not to assist the Palsgrave, either for his restoration or revenge, because
he dispossessed K. Ferdinand without any just title or claim, and only upon
quirks and cavills.

Queen Elizabeth showed more wisdom, and taught them a wiser lesson, rather
to have protected religion and the country, then to usurp the crown, and
though for the safety of her own estate she went too far) yet her colors were
well died, and had a good gloss, although in the end she repented, and sought
for peace ( Ann. 1588.) when it was too late.

Lay this consideration to your heart before you strike up the drum, and
learn by other men's harms to prevent your own.

When Queen Elizabeth began to aid the low-country-men, I know she had 700
co. l. in her Exchequer, but before the 4. year of her reign, she was forced
to sell her land, her people were taxed with subsidies, tenths, and
privy-seals, above two Millions and 800000. l. all which the realm lost, and
she gained nothing, no not sure and thankful friends.

I will use no ominous predictions, nor tell you the Astrologicall prophecy of
Litenbergius, who lived above 140. years before the battle of Prague.

I omit how that brave P. Sebastian King of Portugal ruined himself, and lost
his K. by iuvenile concilium, by assisting a weak competitor against a strong
adversary.

The world sees that Man field and Alberstate are buried in oblivion, and
without a tomb, and nothing prospers that is undertaken to a perverse end,
or without good ground of justice.

The magnanimous King of Denmark (albeit Tyeko Brabe had long before given him
fair warning, and a good caveat to look to himself) yet for his friends sake
he has dangerously run upon a rock, and hazarded his person, his estate, In
land, Holst, the lives of his Subjects, and his honor, by taking arms against
the Emperor. First, by assisting Halberstat, and after revengeing the
Palatine, I wonder that so great a Prince did not remember, that he and his
predecessors did hold Dith-Marsh in feodo of the Empire, ever since Frederick
the Emperor, and also the Duchy of Holsten (for the which solemnly by an
Ambassador Pogge Wisch, he did swear homage and fealty to the Emperor) and
yet, which was no small error, with his own hands he did in contempt, cast
into the conditions of peace offered unto him by the peaceable Emperor
Ferdinand, for which he may repent too late. But Paulus Nagel who promised
him, mountains in his Kallender, has deceived him as Doctor Fink did the
Hollanders, and surely he is felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. For it
is a safe Council that Polibius gave, non tantum praesentia spectare, sed et
futura prospicere, et quis exitus in de futurus sit. And as Niceas advised lib.
7. Thucid, temeritas superbiaque populorum injusta bella suscipientium, eos
funditus perdit. But Claud l. 11. annal. Taciti, gave his friends this rule to
rectify all your judgments in this desperate case: Princeps, quantumvis
graviter offensus, prius securitati suae, quam vindicte consulat. It is better
to digest patiently some wrongs, then stir to revenge them, and to keep your
own estate securely guarded, before you seek to damnifie another.

And to say truly, it is no policy in you to venture further in these actions
then were fit, and it were gross folly to hazard your own Crown to recover a
Coronet for another (in a time of so dangerous practices.) And it is necessary
to foresees whether the Palatine being by force put into possession of his
Country, the war may so be ended, and you may be sure to live in peace,
otherwise you shall enter into a laberinth, and be entangled in a perpetual
encumbrances (which your father did wisely foresee) and if only revenge must
end the quarrel, and satisfy you who then shall judge when the quarrel is
sufficiently taken.

To conclude, for the love and reverence I bear you, I will not presume the
council your highness, but to tell you the Council of the state of Corsica.
lib. 1. Thucid non est semper prudentiae velle cum alijs periclitari: sed ubi
extra teli factum et periculum tutus in aliorum discrimine, atque etiam post
victoriam esse potiris: But how much then more when there is doubt of the
victory? I will put your Majesty in mind of true judicious councillors: Turpe
est (said Hermotinus in Thucid) si quae respublica ut aliam ulciscatur
acceptamque injuriam vindic^t, ipsam majorem quam alias parat calamitatem
incidat. And how can you assure your state not to run this hazard? Let them not
abuse you, and press you with your honor, for quicquid ex aequitate et
justitia faciendum est licet sepe non ex dignitate reipub. fieri videatur, ut
bellum et calamitas imminens evitetur. Remember that the Par. of England
advised Rich. 2 to do homage for Callice and Guyen rather then to enter into
war. And the most glorious and fortunate Prince Edw. 3. told the Parliament,
anno 25. that to avoid the effusion of blood, he was content to disclaim all
the right and interest he had in the crown of France, quietly and peaceably to
enjoy his own chart. original. de renunciat in thesaur. If this King (so great
and victorious and fortified with an issue borne to inherit fame) was desirous
to embrace peace upon terms of inequality, and disadvantage, though it
concern both the prosperity of the Realm, and his own honor. Has your
Majesty reason to precipitate your self and your Kingdom into an unnecessary
war, to endanger the state, and prodigally spend your treasure; and that which
is dearer, the lives of your Subjects, for revenge of a quarrel ill begun, and
now in desperate terms? A wise Prince will measure his undertakings by his
power, and great attempts need the directions of great judgments. Forget not I
pray you that Hen. 3. was driven to pawn his robes, jewels, and gold of St.
Edwards Shrine, and Edward 3. morgaged the crown imperial to Sir John
W^senham, a merchant, invadavit magnam coronam Angliae, for money to supply him
(says record.) Therefore without urgent cause, be not by any giddy council
drawn hereafter to do injuries to your neighbors, or any more to invade Cales
or Retz. Hannibal invaded Jtaly, and thereupon came the lest of Carthage. King
John of France invaded Aquitaine, and was led captive to England If by
invadings, then first, the King of Spain, and the Emperor should invade you
(which God forbid) how can the ill Councillors that misled you, satisfy the
the Realm, and clear your honor? or how can they with conscience answer
posterity for so much blood of their progenitors shed by reason of their folly.

Therefore this is my humble supplication and suite to your Majesty, that your
self would be pleased to peruse and ponder these few lines, and to be
persuaded that nothing moves me to this scribbling presumption, but my own
fidelity, and the love of some of your servants here that pray for your
happiness. Protesting and taking God to witness that I write by no
instruction of Foreigners, not for no pension, nor obligation to any foreign
Prince whatsoever; but this Hanc animum concede mihi, ut caetera sunto.

FINIS.

