TWO TREATISES OF Mr. JEREMIAH BUROUGHS.

The first Of Earthly-mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1. What Earthly-mindedness
is. 2. The Evils of Earthly-mindedness. 3. Several Convincements of
Earthly-mindedness. 4. Several Reasons of Earthly-mindedness. 5. Considerations
to take off the heart from Earthly-mindedness. 6. Directions how to get our
hearts free from Earthly-mindedness.


The second Treatise. Of Conversing in Heaven, and Walking with God. Wherein is
showed, 1. How the Saints have their Conversation in Heaven. 2. How the Saints
Trade for Heaven. 3. Evidences of Heavenly Conversation. 4. That Heavenly
Conversation is, 1. Convincing. 2. Growing. 3. Brings much glory to God. 4.
Brings much glory to the Saints. 5. It will make suffering easy, 6. Brings
much joy. 7. It Is very safe. 5. Directions for Heavenly Conversation. 6. What
Walking with God is. 7. The Excellency of walking with God. 8. Evidences of our
walking with God. 9. Rules for our walking with God.


The Fourth Volumn published by Thomas Goodwyn. William Bridge. William
Greenhil. John Yates. Sydrach Simpson. Philip Nigh. William Adderley.


London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange, 1652.

TO the READER.
IT was the saying of a Servant of Christ, Every day a Christian spends on
Earth, is a day lost in heaven; sure he meant it of the Place, not the Company,
For what makes Heaven, but Union and Communion with God in Jesus Christ? Now
this being attainable in this life what hinders but a Christian may live in
heaven whilst he lives upon earth? Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Job. 13. And our Conversation is in Heaven (says
another Apostle) Phil. 3. 20. And I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, Gal. 2. 20. These were men on earth, subject to such infirmities as these
are, yet lived in Heaven; and there are yet in this declining, wanton,
Christ-denying age, a Generation upon earth thus living, whose lives and
graces, though hidden under a mean out side, under many reproaches and
infirmities, yet shine inwardly with the glory of Christ upon them, who though
they be in the world, yet follow the Lord with a Spirit differing from the
spirit of the world; and amongst these hidden ones of the Lord, this blessed
man (the preacher of these Sermons, of whom the world was not worthy) was such
a one, who whilst he was upon earth, lived in Heaven; and as thou may easily
perceive, the end and scope of these Sermons is, to wind up thy heart to the
like frame and posture; viz. To take it off from perishing vanities, and to set
it upon that which is the real and durable substance: We see upon what weak
shoulders the fair neck of all worldly pomp and glory now stands, and how the
Lord is winding up, and putting an end to the glories of the Kingdoms of men,
who have not contributed their strength and power to the advancing, but
contrariwise, to the pulling down and ecclypsing of the glory of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ: Besides what the World tells us, never had any age by the works
of providence, more examples laid before them of the worlds vanity, than in our
days; and therefore our hearts should s^t loose to all things that cannot
stretch themselves to eternity: The Apostles reason is full of weight, It
remains (says he) that both they that have wives, be as though they had none,
and they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they possessed not, and they
that use the world, as not abusing it; and this Exhortation he puts on by this
Argument, The time is short, or as the word is, The remainder of our season is
now folding up, as a sail or curtain into a narrow room: Time is short, and
life shorter, and the end of all things is at hand, and we have greater things
to mind, and to set our hearts upon. The Divinityy of this holy man's spirit
did much appear in this, that having much of the comfort that Earth could
afford him, he still looked upon all Creatures Contentments with the eyes of a
stranger, and on order to the raising up of his soul to a more holy, humble,
serviceable, self denying walking with God. For him that injoyes little or
nothing in the world, to speak much of the worlds vanity and emptynesse and of
taking the heart off that, the sweetness whereof he never possessed, is not so
much, as when a man is surrounded with the confluence of Creature Comforts,
then by a Divine spirit to tread upon the neck of these things, and to be
caught up into the third Heaven, bathing, solacing and satisfying it self with
sweet and higher enjoyments, with the more savory and cordial apprehensions it
has of Jesus Christ; this is somewhat like him that is made partaker of the
Divine Nature, and that lives above the world in the enjoyment of the world; so
that now Reader thou have these Sermons twice printed, once in the practice of
this holy man, and now again in these papers which we present to thee in this
preaching style (though we confess things might have been more contracted)
because we find this way more desired, more acceptable to his hearers, and if
we mistake not, more working upon the affections, and more profitable to the
greatest part of Christians. The Lord Jesus be with thy Spirit, and go along
with these and all other his precious labors, to the furtherance of the joy of
thy Faith, building thee up in the inner man, and directing thee in the way to
thine eternal rest.

Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh, William Bridge,
John Yates, William Adderley,


THou have here the names of all the Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, that are
published by us, Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh,
William Bridge, John Yates, William Adderley.

The first Volumn The rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. The second Volumn
Gospel Worship. The third Volumn Gospel Conversation. The fourth Volumn Two
Treatises, the one of Earthly-mindedness, the other of conversing in Heaven,
and walking with God.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH VOLUUMN.
Philip. 3. 19.
CHAP. I. TExt opened Page 2 Doctrine There is a great difference between a
wicked man and a godly man, The one minds the Earth: the other, his
Conversation is in Heaven 3
CHAP. II. Earthly-mindedness discovered in nine particulars 1 When men look
upon Earthly things as the greatest things. 5 2 When the choicest of their
thoughts are busied about earthly things* 6 3 When their hearts cleave to the
earth Page 8 4 When their hearts are filled with distracted cares about the
earth. 9 5 When the greatest endeavors of their lives are about things of the
earth 11 6 When they seek any earthly thing for its self and not in
subordination to some higher good 13 7 When they are earthly in spiritual
things 15 8 When they pass by great difficulties about earthly matters and they
seem little to them ibid 9 When they conceive of the most heavenly truth in an
earthly way Page 17
CHAP. III. Fourteen Evils of Earthlymindedness 1 It is Adultery 20 2 It is
Idolatry ibid Object. What Idolatry is there in it? Answ.
1 They depart from God 22 2 They choose rather to make the earth to be their
god, than the infinite First-Being of all things ibid
3 It is enmity against God 23 4 It is opposite and contrary to the work of
grace 24 1 Before Conversion 1 To the call of conversion 26 2 To the souls
answer to this call ibid 3 To the resigning up of the soul to God as the
chiefest good 26
2 After conversion to their work of grace 1 Grace brings a new light to the
soul ibid 2 Make him a new creature 27 3 Is of an elevating nature ibid 4 Is of
an enlarging nature ibid 5 Grace sanctifies the soul 28

5 It puts men upon great temptations Page 28 6 It is one of the greatest
bindrances to the profit of the Ministry 30 7 It causes many foolish lusts in
the heart 34 1 It causes them to follow after things that are vile ibid 2. It
makes them a servant to their servants ibid 3 A man might have more of it, and
not mind it so much as he does 35 4 You pay a great deal more for it than it is
worth 36 5 What he does he must needs undo again 38 6 They lose the comfort of
earthly things before they have them 39
8 It is the root of Apostasy 40 9 It does wonderfully dead the heart in the
prayer 42 10 It is just with God, their names should be written in the earth 43
11 They have the curse of the serpent upon them 44 12 It is a dishonor to God,
and a scandal to Religion 45 13 It does exceedingly hinder preparation for
death 47 14 It will drown thy soul in perdition 50
Preparation to Convincements. Men may be earthly-minded and yet not know they
are so Page 51 Five things may be wrought in an earthly-minded man 1 His
judgment may be convinced that there is a vanity in them 52 2 He may have some
kind of contentment in them ib. 3 They may speak great words about the vanity
of this world ibid 4 They may be free from getting any thing by deceit ibid 5
They may despise some earthly things ibid
Convincement 1 When a man rests upon earthly props for the good he does expect
54 Convincement 2 When men make most provision for the things of this world for
themselves and their children 55 Convincement 3 When a man can be content with
a slight assurance of heavenly things, but never thinks him sure enough for the
matters of the earth 56 Convincement 4 When he is contented with a little
sanctification, but in things of this world would s^ill have more and more Page
58 Convincement 5 When they are very wise in matters of the world, but very
weak in spiritual 59 Convincement 6 When their discourses are of the world 60
Convincement 7 When spiritual things must give way to earthliness 61
Convincement 8 When they care not how it is with the Church so it be well with
them in things of the world ibid Convincement 7 When the more spiritual a truth
is the less it takes with their hearts 63

CHAP. IV. Reasons of men's Earthlymindedness. 1 The things of the earth appear
real to them, but Heavenly things are but a notion 64 2 They look upon them as
the present necessary things ibid 3 These things are most suitable to men's
hearts 65 4 They have a very fair show to the flesh ib. 5 Men naturally know no
better things 66 6 There are earthly principles continually dropping into men
by conversing with other men of the earth ibid 7 The sensible experience they
have of their sweetness Page 67
CHAP. V. Considerations to take off the hearts of men from earthly-mindedness
Consideration 1 If thou could possess all the things of the earth there is
not so much good in them, as to countervail the evil of one sin 68
Consideration 2 The chiefest things of the earth have been and are the portion
of reprobates ibid Consideration 3. God has made man for higher things than
the things of the earth 69 Consideration 4. The soul of a man is of too high a
birth to have the strength of it spent about the things of the earth. 70
Consideration 5. All the things of the earth are uncertain 71 Consideration 6.
Consider what has become of such men in former ages 72 Consideration 7. How
short thy time is in this world Page 73 Consid. 8. A little will serve the turn
to carry us through this world 76 Consid. 9. There is no good to be had in them
further than God is pleased to let himself through them 77 Consid. 10 If you be
godly God promises to take care of you for the things of the earth ibid
Consid. 11. All that are professors of Religion should be dead to the world 79
CHAP. VI Exhortation to beware of earthlymindedness 81 CHAP. VII Directions to
get our hearts free from Earthly-mindednesse 1 Be watchful over your thoughts
86 2 Be humbled for sin ibid 3 Set the exampls of the Saints before you 86 4
Consider the great account we are to give for all earthly things ibid 5 Set the
Lord Jesus Christ before you 88

THE CONTENTS OF THE ENSUING TREATISE OF AN HEAVENLY-CONVESATION.
PHILIPPIANS, 3. 20.
CHAP. I HOw far the examples of godly men should prevail with us Page 91 1
More than other examples 93 1 More than the examples of rich men ibid 2 More
than the example of the multitude ibid 3 More than the examples of those nearly
related to us ibid
2 They should be enough to take off prejudices that come from accusations of
men ib. 3 They should make us enquire after those ways Page 94 4 We should not
oppose those ways 95 5 They should prepare us to let in any truth they profess
ibid 9 They should confirm us in the truth 96
CHAP. II. What is to be done when examples of godly men are contrary 1 It puts
us to a strict examination 97 2 which way has most earthly inducements 98
CHAP. III Rebuke to those that follow the example of the wicked, and reject
the example of the godly Page 98 CHAP. IV Two Doctrines 1 The Saints are
Citizens of Heaven 100 2 Their Conversation while they are in this world is in
Heaven ibid
CHAP. V How the Saints are Citizens of Heaven 102 1 Their names are enrolled
there 102 2 Christ their Head bath taken possession of Heaven in their names
ibid 3 When they actually believe they take up their freedom 103 4 They cannot
again be as slaves ibid 5 They have right to all the common stock and treasury
of heaven ibid 6 They have the same confirmation of their blessed estate that
the Angels have ibid 7 They have privilege of a free rtade to Heaven Page 104
8 They have for he present communion with the Angels ib. 9 They have the
protection of Heaven ib.
CHAP. VI How the Saints have their conversation in Heaven 106 1 The aim of
their hearts is heaven-wards 107 2 They are acted by Heavenly principles in
their ways 108 1 That God is all in all ib. 2 That God is the infinite First
being ib.
3 They have communion with the God of Heaven ib. 4 They live according to the
Laws of Heaven 110 5 Their soul is where it loves rather than where it lives
111 6 They deilght in the same things that are done in Heaven 114 1 The sight
of Gods face 115 2 The praising of God ib. 3 The keeping a perpetual Sabbath ib.
7 They are heavenly in earthly employments 115 8 They are heavenly when they
converse together 116 9 Their great trade upon earth is for heaven 217
CHAP. VII The Saints trading for Heaven opened. 1 They have skill in they
commodity they trade for Page 217 2 They have a stock to trade withal 218 3
They take the advantage of the Market for commodities ib. 4 There is much inter
course ib. 5 Their chief stock is where they trade 220 6 They are willing to
part with any thing here to receive advantage where they trade ib. 7 They trust
much 221
CHAP. VII Evidences of men's having their conversations in heaven Evidence 1.
They canvilifie all the things on earth 222 Evidence 2 They can be content and
live comfortably with little in this world ib. Evidence 3 They can suffer hard
things with joyful hearts 223 Evidence 4. Their hearts are filled with heavenly
riches 225 Evidence 5 They are willing to purchase the privileges of Heavne at
a dear rate ib. Evidence 6 They are sensible of the stoppages between heaven
and their souls Page 26 Evidence 7 Their willingness to die 227
CHAP. IX Reasons why the Saints have their Conversation in heaven ib. 1
Because their souls are from Heaven 228 2 By grace the soul has a Divine
Nature put into it 230 3 Their most choice things are in heaven 231 4 God
orders it so to wean their hearts from the world 233
CHAP. X. Use 1. To reprove such as have their conversations in hell 234 CHAP.
XI. Use 2. To reprove hypocrites 235 CHAP. XII. Use 3. Let us not find fault
with the strictness of Gods ways Page 237 CHAP. XIII. Use 4. To reprove such
as are godly and yet fail in this thing 238 CHAP. XIV. An Heavenly Conversation
is a convincing conversation 241 CHAP. XV. A Heavenly Conversation is growing
243 CHAP. XVI. A Heavenly Conversation brings much glory to God 244 CHAP. XVII.
A Heavenly Conversation brings much glory to the Saints 246 CHAP. XVIII. A
Heavenly Conversation will make sufferings easy 247 CHAP. XIX. A Heavenly
Conversation brings much joy 249 CHAP. XX. An Heavenly Conversation is very
safe 250 CHAP. XXI. An Heavenly Conversation gives abundant entrance into glory
ibid CHAP. XXII. Directions how to get a Heavenly Conversation Direct. 1. Be
persuaded that it is attainable Page 251 Direct. 2. Labor to keep a clear
conscience 252 Direct. 3. Watch opportunities for heavenly exercises ibid
Direct. 4 Rest not in formality 253 Direct. 5. Labor to beat down your bodies.
254 Direct. 6. Labor to be skilful in the Mystery of godliness, to draw
strength from Christ in every thing you do ibid Direct. 7. Exercise the grace
of faith much 256

THE CONTENTS Of the ensuing TREATISE OF WALKING with GOD.
GENESIS, 45. 24.
CHAP. I. TEXT opened Page 261 CHAP. II. Doctrine. It Is the Excellency of a
Christian to walk with God 265 CHAP. III. How the soul is brought to walk with
God 1 Every one by nature goes astray from God 268 2 The Lord manifests to
the soul the way of life ibid 3 The Lord makes peace between himself and a
sinner. 269 4 God renders himself lovely to the soul 270 5 God sends his Holy
Spirit to guide him 271 6 Christ takes the soul and brings it to God the Father
271
CHAP. IV What walking with God is. 1 It causes the soul to eye God 272 2 It
causes a man to carry himself as in Gods presence 273 3 He makes Gods will the
rule of his will Page 274 4 The soul has the same ends that God has 275 5 It
suits the soul to the administrations of God 276 6 To have a holy dependence
upon God 1 For Direction 277 2 For Protection 278 3 For Assistance ibid 4 For a
Blessing upon all it does ibid
7 It makes a man free and ready in the ways of God 279 8 It consists in
communion with God 280 9 It causes the soul to follow God more as he reveals
himself more 282
CHAP. V Excellencies of walking with God Excellency 1 It makes the ways of
God easy 286 Excellency 2 It is most honorable 287 Excellency 3 The soul has
blessed satisfaction in it 288 Excellency 4 It is a special part of the
Covenant of God on our parts 290 Excellency 5 There is a blessed safety in
walking with God 292 Excellency 6 Hence the soul enjoys sweet familiarity with
God 293 Excellency 7 To them God communicates his secrets 294 Excellency 8 They
find favor in Gods eyes for granting their petitions. 295 Excellency 9 There is
a glory put upon the soul 296 Excellency 10 Gods presence does mightily draw
forth every grace Page 297 Excellency 11 The presence of God shall never be
terrible to the soul, neither at death nor judgment 298 Excellency 12 It will
be blessedness in the end 299
CHAP. VII Uses of Exhortation Use 1 Bless God that he will be pleased to walk
thus with his poor creatures 300 Use 2 What strangers the world are to this
walking with God 301 Use 3 What vile hearts are ours that we are so backward to
walk with God 302 Use 4 Let us keep close to God in our walking wtih him 303
Use 5 If there be so much excellency in walking with God here, what will there
be in heaven 304
CHAP. VIII Evidence of our walking with God 306 Evidence 1 He depends not much
upon sense and reason in the course of his life 307 Evidence 2 He is the same
in private that he is in public 307 Evidence 3 He has a serious spirit 309
Evidence 4 They walk in newness of life 310 Evidence 5 When he has to do with
the creature he does quickly pass through the creature unto God 311 Evidence 6
He loves to be much retired from the world 312 Evidence 7 He is careful to make
even his accounts with God 315 Evidence 8 The more spiritual any Truth, or
Ordinance or any company is, the more the soul delights in it 314 Evidence 9 He
walk in all the Commandments of God 315 Evidence 10 See how the Scripture
describes it 1 It is a walk of humility 316 2 It is a walk of uprightness ibid
3 It is a walk in the fear of God 317 4 The comfort of the holy Ghost is joined
with it 318 5 It is a walk above 319 6 They endeavor to walk as Christ walked
ibid

CHAP. IX Rules of Direction for walking with God Rule 1 Be sure there be no
way of fin in thee 320 Rule 2 Labor to withdraw thy heart from earthly and
sensual things 321 Rule 3 Evermore take Christ with thee 322 Rule 4 Be careful
to beautify thy soul 323 Rule 5 Take heed of halting 325 Rule 6 Take heed of
formality in holy duties 326 Rule 7 Take heed of secres slidings away from the
Truths of God 327 Rule 8 Labor to keep such a tenderness of spirit as to be
sensible of the beginnings of declining 329 Rule 9 Labor to be spiritual in thy
solitary times 330 Rule 11 Go on with a resolution in holy duties though thou
see nothing come of them for the present 331 Rule 12 Make good interpretation
of all Gods dealings with thee 332
CHAP. X An objection of Gods hiding his face Answered 1 It is a good sign when
thou art sensible of his withdrawings 333 2 Examine whether thou have not some
times shut out God from thee ibid 3 It is better God withdraw than that we
withdraw 336 4 Gods withdrawing his comfort is not always the withdrawing his
presence ibid 5 If thou can not see Gods face, hearken to hear his voice 337
6 Keep thy self in a waiting frame for God 338

FINIS.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange, London.
A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone. Twelve
several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz. 1 The great
Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love to, and Care
of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 4
Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received by all
Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural Impossibilities. 6
Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all
Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in time of Gods
Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of Ordinances. 12
Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
Four several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY: Or a Translation of the Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen 's Method
of Physic. 2 A DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women. 3 GALEN's Art of
PHYSIC. 4 The ENGLISH PHYSICIAN; being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the
Vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most
Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for
threepence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1. The time of gathering
all Herbs both Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2. The way of drying and keeping
them and their Juyces 3. The way of making and keeping all manner of useful
Compounds, made of those Herbs. 4. The way of mixing the Medicines according to
Cause, and mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the
Lodestone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the
Evangelist St. Matthew, by Mr. Ward. Clows Surgery. Marks of Salvation.
Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance
of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.
Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and
Satan's Overthrow. Pious man's practice in Parliament Time. A Treatise of the
Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; Wherein is showed, 1. The Essence.
2. The Causes. 3. The Signs. 4. The Remedies of the Disease. Published in Latin
by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bale, and Dr. Regemorter. Mr. Symsons Sermon at
Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of
Hell. -- of Christ's Geneology. Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately
published; As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are grounded. 1 The
Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed, 1. What
Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies of it, 4.
The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, the Aggravations of it. 2
Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1. The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is
showed, 1. That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2. Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable
to what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those
Men that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The great
Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is joined,
A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on
Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters
of the Prohesie of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth
Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Chapters of Hosea.
A Treatise of Politic Power, wherein 7 Questions are Answered, 1. Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained; 2. Whether Kings and Governors have an
absolute Power over the People; 3. Whether Kings and Governors be subject to
the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Countries; 4. How far the People are to
obey their Governors; 5. Whether all the People have be their Governors; 6.
Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor;: 7. What Confidence is to be
given to Princes. The Compassionate Samaritan. Six Sermons, Preached by Dr.
Hill, collected into one Volumn. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. The Best and
Worst Magistrate, by Obadiah Sedgwick. The craft and cruelty of the churches
Adversaries, by Matthew Newcomin. A sacred Panygrick, by Steph. Martial,
Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's Soul. The Anatomist
Anatomized.
A TREATISE OF Earthly-mindedness.
CHAP. I. The Text Opened.
PHILIP. 3. latter part of the 19. verse. -- Who mind Earthly things.
THIS precious Scripture clearly holds forth the different disposition of
wicked and of godly men; especially of such wicked men, as set themselves
against the Gospel; for it relates to such as were professed enemies to the
Cross of Christ, that labored what they could to hinder the success of the
Ministry of Paul. You shall find if you look back a few verses, that this is
meant of those kind of men especially, for he tells us, that many walked so, as
they were enemies to the Cross of Christ: they were those that opposed the
preaching of Paul, and his Ministry: and he describes those men what they were
by diverse Characters, but I Will treat of none but this, Who mind Earthly things.

Who mind Earthly things; who savor, or relish Earthly (...)
things, so you may translate the word as well. It is a general word
comprehending the actions and operations, both of the understanding and will:
It is in Scripture applied to both, but most commonly to the Actions of the will
and affections; we are particular in Actions of the Will.

Earthly things] The things that are upon the Earth, (...)
whatsoever they be, the Beauty, the Glory, and Parentry of the Earth; the
Profits that are Earthly, the Pleasures and Honors of the world; who mind any
things inordinatly that are sublunary accommodations. But we carry and behave
our selves as free Denizens of the City of Heaven; for so the (...) muniiceps
coelorum nos gerimus. Steph. Beza, Piscat. ad verbu. nostra Civilis vita in
coelis est.
words in the Original are, if we should thus read them: Our City whereof we
are Citizens, and whereunto we have right, is Heaven.

But our Conversation, our City Converse, it is of things that are above the
earth: when the Apostle would have men to follow their example and not the
example of others, in the 17. verse, he uses this as an Argument, says he,
such and such men are enemies to the Cross of Christ, and they make their belly
their god, and they mind Earthly things: do not follow them, do not hearken
what they say to you, they come up and down from house to house, and whisper
this and that to you, and would take you off from the ways of God, God has
begun to enlighten you, and to stir your consciences, do not let the precious
affections of your souls run wast toward them, but be ye followers of us as we
are of Christ; for our Conversation is in Heaven with our Lord and Master,
there comes in the Argument in the 20. verse. So that being the only scope and
meaning of the words, take this Doctrinal Truth.

That this is the great difference between a wicked man and a Doct.
godly man; one minds Earthly things: and the other has his Conversation in
Heaven. I intend to handle both these in order.

One of these minds Earthly things: It is a parallel Scripture that we have in
the 8. to the Romans 5. verse, For they that are after the flesh, do mind the
things of the flesh. Do mind, there (...)
is the same word, only here the Participle, and there in the Verb, but the
meaning is the same, as they that are after the Earth, mind Earthly things: so
they that are after the flesh savours fleshly things: the first part of this
point, is the description of wicked men, that are enemies to the cross of
Christ, and to the ways of godliness, and they are men that mind Earthly
things, the more gross of them are described before, To have their bellies to
be their god, some of them are very sensual, druken, unclean, and altogether
given to satisfy the flesh in fleshly lusts: But there are others that do not
appear to be so brutish, yet they are men of earthly minds, savor only of
earthly things, and these are the men that are secret enemies to the cross of
Christ, yea, and will many times appear so to be, it will break out at length:
Such a man whose spirit has been earthly for a long time, will appear at
length to be an enemy to Christ's cross. Now in the handling of this point, I
will propound these Five things to treat of.

First. What it is to mind earthly things in a sinful way: or thus, When a man
may be said to be an Earthly-minded man, that we may know when a man is an
Earthly-minded man, what it is to mind Earthly things, that the Apostle here
describes a wicked man by. Without the opening of this, all that I shall say
afterward will be but to little purpose.

Secondly. The great evil that there is in minding of Earthly things: and I
shall discover to you a greater evil in it than you are aware of.

Thirdly. Lay down some Convincements whereby those men and women that (it may
be) think they are clear from this sin, yet may have it discovered unto their
consciences, that they are the men and women that do mind Earthly things.

Fourthly. I shall search into the Reason, Why it is that the hearts of men and
women are so much after Earthly things.

Fifthly. I shall labor to take off your hearts from Earthly things. These are
the Five things that are to be done in the first part of the point, Namely, the
Character of wicked men here laid down, Who mind Earthly things.

For the first. Who they are, that mind Earthly things. Certainly, they are not
all those that enjoy earthly things; all men that do make use of earthly
things, must not be condemned for minding earthly things. Paul himself in this
very Epistle, where he wrote to these Philippians, chap. 4. verse. 12. Though he
knew how to want, yet he knew how to abound: he could tell how to make use of
earthly things, yea, and he gives charge, That all those that are instructed
should make such as had instructed them partakers of all their goods. It may
be, they would have said, is not this, To mind Earthly things? To require those
that are instructed, to make those that did instruct them partakers of all
their goods: Paul does charge this. Yea, and Christ himself, even in that
Scripture where he does labor most to take the thoughts of men off from the
earth; as not to take any thought, what they should eat, or drink, yet says
he, Your heavenly Father knows that yea have need of these things in the 6. of
Matthew: and Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word communicate unto him
that teaches in all good things: and if there be any pretense against it, yet
says he, be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap. Thus therefore it is not here charged, as a note of an evil
man, to have earthly things, and does justly require what is due unto him, as
here Paul does; and the Galatians could not charge him, as breaking his own
Rule which he wrote to the Philppians; and therefore we must enquire out
somewhat else that is here means, by minding earthly things. When a man or woman
does mind earthly things in a sinful way, And for that there are these several
particulars considerable.

CHAP. II. Earthly-mindedness discovered in Nine particulars.
THE first is this, When a man looks upon earthly things as the greatest things
of all, when he has a high esteem of earthly things, as THE things: as thus,
Oh if I had such and such things as others have, Oh how happy should I be, how
happy are such and such men that do enjoy such earthly things at their will, in
their dwellings, their furniture, their comings in, Oh these are the brave
things, these are the delightful things, these are THE things wherein felicity
and happiness does consist. When men shall promise to themselves felicity in
any earthly things, then they mind earthly things. I remember golden mouthed
Chrysostom has a speech of a covetous man, That he looks upon his Money, and
he sees more beauty in his Money than in the very Sun it self that shines in
the Firmament: When men look upon the things of the earth as the most beautiful
things in their eyes: Certainly that man is in a distemper, when he puts such a
high esteem upon any earthly things, this esteem is not according to what God
and his Saints do put upon earthly things, God never puts any great eminency
on any earthly thing; he never made any earthly things to be any great Conduit,
or means of Conveyance of any great good from himsel unto his Creature; If you
would know what your heart, are, you may know it by this one sign as much as
any What do you account your excellency? according to what any man or woman
accounts their excellency to consist in, so are their hearts, their hearts are
suitable; in the 27. chap. of Genesis, 28. 39. verses. You shall find there
Isaac blessing of Jacob and Esau, he blesses them both: but now, what I would
observe is this, the difference in the placing of them, you shall observe, the
blessing of Jacob in the 28. verse, therefore God gives of the dew of Heaven,
and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of Corn and Wine, that 's Jacob's
blessing: Now look to Esau's blessing, for the blessing was suitable to their
disposition, and Jacob's father answered and said unto him, behold thy dwelling
shall be of the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of Heaven from above:
mark, Isaac blesses them both with the dew of Heaven and fatness of the earth;
but now, in Jacob's blessing the dew of Heaven is first, and the fatness of the
earth is in the second place; but in Esau's blessing the fatness of the earth
is first, and then the dew of Heaven: noting this, That a godly man indeed,
does stand in need of the things of the earth, as Christ says, your father
knows you stand in need of this things; I but the great thing in the first
place that a godly heart does mind, it ts, The dew of Heaven, and then in the
second place, The blessing of the erath; But now, a carnal heart does think it
has some need of the things of Heaven, it will acknowledge that: I but in the
first place it is the fatness of the earth they desire: and secondly the dew of
Heaven, So that that is the first thing: Earthly minded men look upon these
things as the high and chief things, and hence it is that the choice of the
thoughts of an earthly-minded man is carried out on worldly objects.

Secondly, When the Cream and choice of the thoughts of men and women are
busied about earthly things then they mind earthly things in a sinful manner:
You may know what your hearts are by your thoughts as much as any thing, the
thoughts are the immediate ebulitions or risings up of the heart (as I may so
call them) that is the bubbles that come from the heart immediately; a man
cannot know what is in his heart so much by words and actions, as by the
thoughts, because the thoughts immediately spring from the heart, as thus, I
can tell what the water is in such a fountain better from that that bubbles up
immediately from the fountainhead, than I can tell by the water that runs in
the stream a mile or two off, for there may many things intervene in the stream
a mile or two off that never came from the fountainhead, but that that
immediately bubbles from the fountainhead, that discovers of what nature the
fountain is: So the thoughts are as it were the first born of the heart, and
therefore the heart may be known what it is by the thoughts, Prove. 23. 7. says
the holy Ghost there, As he thinks in his heart, so is he; That which is here
spoken in a particular case may be applied in the general, As a man thinks in
his heart so is he, as his thoughts are so is he: So is the heart as the
thoughts of the mind are, Men may keep in words and actions out of by-respects,
I but if you could know what the heart is, and look into the haunts of it in
secret, that would discover to your selves what you are: as now, Many of your
servants, when they are in your presence before you or before others they may
out of diverse respects carry themselves fairly, but if you would find them out,
labor to know what they do when they are alone in their private haunts: So,
would you know your own hearts? do not so much look at them, and take a
scantling of them by how you behave your selves in words and actions before
others, but what they are in your private chambers, what they are in the inward
thoughts of the mind, there the heart comes to be discovered most; And by these
thoughts I do not mean every kind of injection, or suggestion, for sometimes
the Devil may cast in evil thoughts into the most holy; but I mean such
thoughts as are sweet to the soul, whereby the soul comes to suck out
sweetness, and contentment, for that is the minding earthly things, when you
find the strength of your thoughts to be upon the things of the earth: and they
are more suitable to your hearts than any other: It is not when through weakness
the mind may be wandering this way or that way, or through suggestions or
temptations; but now, when men or women are most themselves when alone and
free, then for to examine what are the most suitable thoughts to their hearts,
Can you say when you are alone, Oh the very thoughts of God are sweet to me,
immediate in his Law day and night, and suck out sweetness there as from an
honey comb? But an unclean wretch will suck out sweetness of his unclean
thoughts when he is alone; and so the earthly minded man will suck out the
sweetness of his earthly thoughts, and so the Ambitious man the sweetness of
his pride when he is alone, and these are the most contentful thoughts to him,
he can run along if it be two or three hours together and take delight and
pleasure in them: here is Earthly-mindedness.

The third thing is this, An Earthly-minded man, is one whose heart cleaves to
the earth: for so I told you the word was, not only to mind, but to savor the
things of the earth: his heart does cleave to the earth: The Psalmist in a far
differing case said, that his soul did cleave to the dust: but it is true of
many men in this case that I am speaking of, their very souls do cleave to the
dust, their spirits are mixed with the earth, and therefore they are drossie:
Though it may be they have some good common gifts, some good natural parts, and
some workings of the holy Ghost upon them, yet their spirits are drossie:
because they are mixed with the earth: discourse never so much to these men of
the vanity of the things of the earth, they will give you the hearing, but when
you have done all, their souls do cleave to the earth: and discourse never so
much to them of the excellency of heavenly things, they will hear you, but when
you have done all, their souls still cleaves to the earth: As a man whose soul
cleaves in love to a woman, (As it is said of Sampson, his soul did cleave to
Dalilab) talk what you will against that women, or of the excellency of any
other woman, yet his soul cleaves to that woman: so it is in an earthly minded
man, let what will be said against the things of the earth, or what can be said
for the setting forth of the excellency of the things of Heaven, yet his soul
cleaves to the earth: as the Serpents belly did to the dust of the ground.
That Is an earthly minded man.

Fourthly, An earthly minded man, it on, whose heart is filled with distracting
cares about the earth: what he shall eat and drink, and what he shall put on,
how he shall provide for himself and his family, and what shall become of him
at such a time, Though he be well now yet what may become of him afterward:
when the heart is filled with distracting cares about the things of the earth;
so far as the heart has these prevailing over it, so far such a man may be
judged to be earthly.

There are two things that do cause distrating cares about any business

The first is, An apprehension of some very great evil In case I should be
disappointed, I look upon my disappointment in such a thing as a most
intolerable evil to me, If I should be disappointed I know not what in the
world to do That Is the first

The second is, An uncertaintie in the means for the preventment of this
disappointment: when as I look upon disappointment as a very great evil, so
those means that should prevent and help me against disappointment I cannot
trust to: I look upon them as too weak to help me, notwithstanding al such
means I may yet be desappointed, this causes distracting thoughts; so, it is in
the things of the earth, an earthly minded man or woman has his thoughts filled
with distracting cares about the world. That is thus

First, They looking upon the things of the world as such great things, they
conceive if they should be disappointed they should be undone; they look upon
it as such a fearful unsufferable evil to be deprived of their estate and
outward comforts in this world.

Secondly, They don't look upon the means of provision for themselves and
families as having any certainty in it, which is a main thing to be
considered of: As for outward things in the world, they find by experience
there is uncertainty in them. And then for any promse that there is in
Scripture that God will provide for them and their families, alas that they
dare not trust to, that is a thing that of all means they think to be the
weakest, Lord have mercy upon them (say they) if they have nothing else to
trust to, but only a word in Scripture, they think themselves most miserable
and wretched. But now, it would be otherwise with the soul if it were not
earthly minded, it would not be at any great pause how things do fall out here
in the matters of the world, it is true, perhaps I may miscarry in such a
business, and my estate may be taken from me by the Caldeans or Sabeans as
Jobs was, but I shall not be undone, my happiness is not gone, I shall have
that that will comfort me when all that is gone; suppose the worst, yet this
will not undo me, Indeed a man that sends abroad in a venture all his whole
estate, he is very solicitous because if there be ill news about it he is
undone; but another man that has a great deal of riches, house, and Lands, and
a stock at home to maintain him and his family, If there comes such ill news, I
have a stock to live on he thinks, therefore he is not so much solicitous: So a
worldly man, all his stock is in the earth, there is his only portion, and if he
miscarries there he is undone; But a godly man, though he has the things of
the earth, yet he has something else, treasures in Heaven to rest upon besides
the earth, and therefore he is not so solicitous.

And then for the second, The uncertainty of means and help: if a godly man
looks upon outward causes, he sees all is uncertain, but he has a promise to
rest upon, I will never leave you nor forsake you: cast your care upon me for I
care for you; and this he looks upon as a certain means and help, whatsoever
falls out, here is a promise that he can build upon, and therefore this takes off
his solicitous cares: But an earthly minded man or woman whose heart is filled
with distracting cares, because he look upon himself as undone if he miscarries
here, and has nothing to rest upon for his provision in this world, more than
the creature.

Fifthly, An earthly minded man or woman, is one whose great business of his
heart and endeavors of his life are about the things of the earth: he makes it
his great business, and the strong endeavors of his spirit are exercised in
the things of the earth: He eagerly and greedily works with the strongest
intention about these things, his whole Soul, the whole man is laid out about
the world, it is the adequate object of his soul.

You will say, Other men they are busy in their callings as well as these that
you account earthly minded men, I but mark, they are busy about their callings
in obedience to God; and for outward things set aside their obedience to God,
then (I say) all the things that they busy themselves about in the world, were
it not under that consideration that they were obeying God in it they would not
be adequate objects for their souls. I mean by an adequate object, that that Is
sufficient to take up the whole strength of the soul to lay it out fully: I Will
give you this similitude to express my mind further, to show you what I mean by
an adequate object, You have a little child, he is playing at sports, now this
sport it has as much in it as there is in his spirit, there is a kind of
equality between his spirit and such a sport, there is benefit enough a child
conceives in such a sport as it is worth the laying out of all his strength and
might upon it: Now it may be, sometimes a man or woman will play with their
child, they will do as the child does to play with it, but this sport it is not
an addequat object, that is thus, a man or woman for the while would please
themselves with the child, but not so as if there were as much good in this as
would fill their souls, so as they would lay out all their mind and might upon
this thing as that is fully adequate to the desires of their soul; But sport is
fully adequat to the desires of the soul of the child, but though a man or
woman does sport so with the child, yet these things are not fully adequat to
the desires of a man or woman, and they have other matters in their heads than
these, and businesses of a higher nature: and so it is in those that are not
earthly minded, though they may be busied about the things of this world, yet
they use the world as if they used it not, the things of the world are not
objects adequat to their hearts, a spiritual heart reserves the chief strength
of it for higher things, I follow these things in the world but so, as I
reserve the chief strength for a more desirable good: As a man now, if he has
diverse friends to come to him, perhaps he has some of an ordinary rank, they
come first, he makes ordinary provision for them, but if he has any choice
things for entertainment he reserves them for some choice friends that are
coming to him: so a man that is not of the world though he may be busy in
earthly things, yet the choice of his heart he both reserve for things of a
higher nature. I remember Tertullian has a speech of the Christians how they
eat, and drank; when they supped, they eat and drank (says he) so as they
remembered they were to pray that night before they slept: So a gracious
spiritual heart follows his out ward business in the world, but so as he
remembers he is to converse with God that night before de sleeps, so that he
reserves the strength of his spirit for communion with God; but now the other
lays out all his strength as having nothing to do afterward: so that in this
an earthly, and a spiritual heart are quite contrary; The Apostle you know
would have godly men to use the world as if they used it not; so on the
contrary, an earthly-minded man uses spiritual things as if he used them not;
look how an earthly minded man's heart is in spiritual things, so a spiritual
mind is in earthly things: An earthly minded man will do some things that are
spiritual, he will come and hear the word, perhaps he will pray in his family,
and read a chapter, I but his heart is not much there, he does it as he did it
not, comes and hears as if he heard not, and prays as if he prayed not, he
makes it not his business to pray or hear; so a spiritual minded man he does
the things of the world but as if he did them not, I mean in comparison of his
being busy in spiritual things, there he does it with all his might; An
earthly minded man is like to Corab, Dathan, and Abiram, we read of them that
they were swallowed up of the earth: and so the truth is, the things of the
earth, Contentments, provision for themselves and families in earthly things,
does as it were open and swallow up the very hearts of earthly-minded men: and
that is the fifth thing for the description of earthly mindedness.

Sixthly, But suppose a man does not seem to be so strongly intent, to lay out
his whole strength and heart about earthly things, yet when any man or woman
shall seek any earthly thing for it self (observe it) and not in
subordination to some higher good, this is an earthly-minded man so for as this
prevails; in the 2 Cor. 4. 18. our Apostle Paul speaks there of the things
that are seen that are but temporal, While we look not at the things that are
seen, for the things that are seen are earthly and temporal: the word is (...)
as much as to say, while we do not look as our scope upon temporal and earthly
things that are seen, we do not make them our end, but we seek them in
subordination, there is somewhat else that we look at higher in all these
things, as for instance, a man that is godly, he follows his business as other
men do, but what is it that he would have? It Is this, I show my obedience to
God, and I would provide those things that may be helpful to me to serve God in
my generation; that is my end, I can appeal to God in this, that even in the
following my business and all outward things, it is that I might follow God in
the use of means for the providing of such things as may enable me to serve him
the more in my generation: this is my scope in what I do. But now on the other
side, an earthly-minded man makes his scope this, he will follow his business
and look about the business of his calling that he might gain, he would get
that he might get, he would have more that he might have more, and that he and
his children might be somebodie in the world, and it may be that he might have
enough to have his will, and lusts, therefore he follows his business very
intent, merely that he may get to satisfy the flesh, yea, indeed all the good
things that he does he brings them in subordination to earthly things. You may
take it thus, a spiritual man does not seek earthly things for himself, but an
earthly man does; or thus more fully, (you may make it a distinct head if you
will,) An earthly man is earthly in all he does do, both in earthly and
spiritual things, and a spiritual minded man is spiritual in all he does, both
in spiritual and in earthly things; an earthly man when he is in earthly things
he is altogether earthly, he looks not at obedience to God in what he does, as
thus, I Will follow my calling because God has required it, but an earthly man
thinks, I Will follow it because I see gain come in by it, this is earth;
though the things be lawful, and it is your duty to follow your calling, but to
follow it merely for gain, this is earthly: but because it is your duty and the
place God has set you in, that is spiritualness in earthly things: An earthly
man is earthly in earthly things, and he is more earthly in spiritual things:
when he performs spiritual duties he has an earthly end in it, either to get
esteem from men, or to cover some evil, or merely for form and fashion, he does
it in an earthly way, and it may be at the most that that he does do, it is but
merely for his own quiet, and to satisfy his own conscience, he is earthly in
spiritual things. But now, a spiritual man, is spiritual in earthly things. one
of a spiritual mind, is more heavenly and spiritual when he is about his
calling though the meanest, as hedging, and ditching, or when he is pulling his
ropes and lines, or using his Ax or hammer, he is more spiritual I say then,
than an earthly man is, when he is praying, or hearing, or receiving
Sacraments; certainly it is so, and it will be found to be so at the great day
of Judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: that is the sixth
thing, when a man seeks earthly things for himself.

And that that we may add as a seventh is, That he is earthly in spiritual
things. I grant that the best of the Saints may have some earthlinesse in
spirtual things; but I speak of the predominancie, it is that that does rule in
the heart, so that in the performance of spiritual things, his very ends are
but earthly, and the frame of his heart is but earthly in spiritual
performances.

The eight thing wherein we may find an earthly minded man is this, That he
passes through many and great difficulties in matters of the earth, and they
are very little to him; and though he has a great deal of toil for the matters
of the earth, yet he is never weary with it, because he is in his proper
element; and therefore let there be what difficulties there will be, which to
another man would be very great, he makes of them as nothing, and though there
be much toil and labor yet he is not weary, why? because he is in his own
element: The fish is not weary with swimming, but a man is quickly weary, I but
the fish is in it is element and a man is not; so, I beseech you observe this,
when a man's spirit is in this kind of temper, let him but be busied about
earthly things, wherein earthly advantage comes in, no difficulties will hinder
him, no wind or weather, he will rise in cold mornings and go abroad, do any
thing in the world. Oh! what difficulties will men endure In storms at Sea, and
hazards there, and troubles at land many ways for things of the earth, and sit
up late, and rise early, and toil themselves, and complain of no weariness nor
no difficulties But now, let them come but to spiritual things, to
soul-businesses that concern God and their spiritual estates, every little
difficulty puts them aside and discourages them, every molehill is a mountain
in their way, I would do so and so indeed, but it is so hard, and it is tedious
to rise in a morning, especially in cold winters morning; it is very hard and
difficult to read and pray and so he is complaining of the difficulty of these
things: And to watch over the heart, it is a mighty difficulty: to an earthly
man any spiritual thing is difficult, and the difficulties does discourage him,
and in spiritual things, Oh how weary are they! as they in the 1. of Micha, 13.
they cried out, What a weariness is it: But in the business of the world they
can follow it, from morning to night they are never tired, they can work (as we
say sometimes of men) like a horse and yet never out of breath: Oh I would but
desire you try your hearts once, but to endeavor to spend one Sabbath exctly,
and see what a weariness that would be to you, resolve but one Sabbath to rise
early in the morning, and to have your thoughts spiritual and heavenly as much
as you can, and then get up and pray alone in your closet, then read, and
hear, and meditate, and mark what you hear; and when you go home think of it,
and confer about it, and when you come again attend upon the word, and so spend
the whole day in hearing, reading, meditating, and conference about good
things, Calling your family to account, and praying again, and see how tiresom
this will be unto your hearts if they be carnal. But now a spiritual heart will
call the Sabbath a delight unto it: And the Sabbath unto such an one is no
other than that type and fore runner of that eternal day of rest it shall enjoy
in the kingdom of heaven: one that is spiritual accounts the Sabbath to be a
day of rest, but an earthly man is quickly tired in spiritual things, he will
give over his work and not go through it: we read in the 4. of Nehe. 6. verse
Nehemiah having spoken of the great difficulties that they met withal in their
work, and yet (says he) the work went on, for they bad a mind to it. So, look
how a man's mind is, so he will be able to go through his work; If a man be an
earthly-minded man, such a man will go through stich with his work, If he take
up business for the world he will go through with it, for he has a mind to
it, he is a man of an earthly mind; But let him take in hand a spiritual work,
and he will lay it aside before it be half done, he will seldom bring to
perfection any spiritual work, why? because he has no mind to it, whereas were
the heart spiritual, and there were any spiritual work undertaken, such a one
would go through with it till all was finished.

Another note about the description of an earthly-minded man, is this: An
earthly-minded man, is one that does conceive of the most heavenly Truths that
are revealed in the Word in an earthly way, according to his mind, his genious,
and disposition of his own heart: And I verily think this is in a special
manner meant in this place, for the Apostle is speaking of those that did
oppose him in his Ministry, and that were enemies to the Cross of Christ: Now
(says he) These mind earthly things, their minds are of an earthly temper,
and therefore no marvel (as if he should say) though they do not savor those
Heavenly and Spiritual Truths that we bring to them, for their minds being
earthly, they only apprehend those things after an earthly manner: As now, what
was the great Truth that the Apostle did bring to the Philippians? It was the
way of reconciling the world to God, of making our peace with God, and of our
Justification through Jesus Christ. Now there is no point of Religion more
Spiritual, Heavenly, and Divine, than the Doctrine of Reconciliation, and of
Justification by Jesus Christ. So that, one that is of an earthly disposition,
though he may be convinced of a necessity of pardon of sin, and peace with God,
yet he apprehends the making of his peace with God, and obtaining pardon of his
sin, but in an earthly manner, he has carnal thoughts and apprehensions about
his peace with God, and about obtaining pardon of sin, he thinks it is the same
way that one man obtains peace with another when he is fallen out, and of
getting pardon from another man that he has offended, he conceives it in an
earthly way, he looks upon his making peace with God, by some thing that he
himself must perform; but for the point of Free justification by the grace of
God in Christ, it is too Divine, Spiritual and Heavenly for an earthly-minded
man to apprehend in the Spiritualnesse of it; an earthly-minded man, his
apprehensions of God are but in a carnal, earthly way; as the Prophet speaks in
the 1 of Isa. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib: Even after
that manner does an earthly-minded man know God; as an Ox his owner, and the
Ass his masters crib: as thus, the ox knows his owner because he brings him
fodder daily, so an earthly-minded man has no other apprehensions of God but
this, he thinks God gives him good things in this world, God makes his corn to
grow, or Prospers his voyage. An earthly-minded man may rise so high to have
apprehensions of God as bringing good things unto him here on earth: But one
that is spiritual and heavenly does apprehend God as God, does not look upon
God merely as good in respect of the benefit he receives from God here, but he
looks upon God as he is in himself, he sees the face of God: as there is a great
deal of difference between a man that knows another man, and a beast that knows
a man, The ox knows his owner, the ox knows the man that brings hay or
provender to him, but a man knows a man in another way, knows what the nature
of a man is, knows what it is to be a rational creature, so one that is
spiritual, knows what God is in himself, he sees the face of God, and
understands what God is in another way than others do: the difference between
the knowledge of God that a spiritual soul has, one that is pure in heart, and
the knowledge of God that an earthly heart has, is just so much difference as
comes to this, As the ox knows the man that drives him to fat pastures, so does
an earthly man know God that gives him good things: but a spiritual heart knows
God as one man knows another, not in his full excellency, I mean not so, but
there is such a kind of difference in some degree, between the apprehensions of
God in a spiritual heart, and the apprehensions of God in an earthly heart: And
so we might mention in many other Spiritual and Divine Truths, that an earthly
mind does apprehend but in an earthly way; consider of Heaven its self, how
does an earthly mind apprehend that? he apprehends that he shall be delivered
from pain, and shall have some kind of glory, but knows not what it is,
conceives it according to the way of the earth, some pompous, glotious thing,
that he shall live in pleasures and not in pain; and so apprehends all the
glory of Heaven but in sensuality; whereas a spiritual heart looks at Heaven in
another kind of notion, he looks upon the enjoyment of Communion with God and
Jesus Christ in Heaven, and living of the life of God in Heaven; that is a thing
that an earthly heart has no skill at all in, neither does such an heart so
much as savor it. Thus I have in these several particulars discovered what an
earthly-minded man is, Oh that you would lay your hands upon your hearts, and
every one consider how far these things do reach you. But I have besides these,
diverse other convincements, to convince the consciences of men and women that
yet there is much earthlinesse in them: but of them we shall treat of in their
order afterward.

The Second head to consider is this. The great evil that there is in
earthly-mindedness, They mind earthly things. Is that any such great matter
(you will say) indeed we cannot imagine the transcendency of the evil that
there is in this, We think there is a great deal of evil in swearing, whoring,
drinking, and such kind of scandalous sins, and indeed there is, But to have an
earthly mind we do not think this to be so exceeding evil; yet you will find
that the Scripture does speak most dreadful things against this, and if God
please to set them home upon your hearts, I hope there is much glory may come
to God by it, and much good unto you in particular.

CHAP. III. Fourteen Evils of Earthly-mindedness.
The First EVIL.
F^^^^ The Scripture calls it, Adultery: it is spiritual Adultery, in Jude, 4.
verse. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the
world is enmity with God. They were Adulterers and Adulteresses in respect of
their love to the world: you that would abhor the thought of a temptation to
Adultery, yet you may commit spiritual Adultery, a man or a woman may be an
Adulterer or an Adulteress before the Lord, though they never commit the act
of uncleanness with another, yet if their hearts be toward another, they be
guilty of uncleanness: for Christ says, whosoever does but look after a woman
to lust after her in his heart, he has committed adultery already; that is,
has sinned against that command that forbids adultery: Is it so, that if a man
do but let his heart go after another woman more than his wife, and a wife
after another man more than her husband, this is adultery before the Lord. So
if our hearts be after any things more than the Lord Jesus Christ, that we
profess our selves married to and he to be our husband; this is adultery in
Scripture phrase.

The Second EVIL.
Yea further, A worldly or an earthly-mind in Scripture phrase, is called
Idolatry; in Ephesians. 5. 5. speaking of diverse sins that should not be so much as
named among them as it became Saints, he has Covetousness among the rest, and
he ads this; And Covetousness which is Idolatry. Now what is
Earthly-mindednesse, but Covetousness, which is Idolaitry? A man, or woman is
an Idolater that is of an Earthly mind: Now Idolatry which is a worshipping of
stocks and stones, you all account to be a great sin; but do you, and al others
take heed of another Idolatry that may be as bad that is, To have your hearts
to make the god of this world to be your God, the cursed Mammon of
unrighteousness, to make the things of the earth to be your Christ, to fall
down and worship the golden-Calfe of the world. It Is certain, that that thing a
man's heart is most taken with, and set upon, that is his God: and therefore here
in this verse out of which my Text is, it is said, They made earthly things
(their bellies) their God: The Voluptuous, and Drunkard makes their Belly their
God; and the Unclean person, makes his Strumpet to be his goddess and
worshppeth that; whatsoever thy heart is most upon, that is thy God: therefore,
that you must know to be the meaning of the Commandment, Thou shall have no
other Gods before me: That is, thou shall give me the strength of thy soul, and
nothing else: So, I am a God to my Creature when I have its strength exercised
about me, to lift up me as the highest good; but if there be any thing else
that thy soul is set upon as thy highest good, that is thy God, and it is worse
than bowing the knee, thou bowest thy soul to that thing: now the meaner any
thing is that we make a God of to our selves, the more vile is the Idolatry: as
when the Egyptians worshipped diverse sorts of gods, they were accounted the most
vile Idolaters; whereas other Heathens worshipped more excellent things, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars; the Egyptians worshipped Dogs, Cats, Onions, and vile
things; and therefore their Idolatry was vile. So, the viler any thing is that
a man or woman sets their hearts upon, the more vile is their Idolatry; as for
a man that should set his heart upon unclean lusts, now to make that to be a
god, the satisfying of those lusts, that is abominable, and to make any earthly
thing to be a god to us, that is most vile; for of all the things of the works
of creation that God has made, the Earth is the meanest, it is the basest and
lowest thing, and has the least beauty in it in it is self, and it is the most
dull and meanest element of all; and to make earthly things to be a God to you,
this is most vile.

Object. You will say for this Idolatry, What is there in it?

Answ. There is Two particulars to open the Evil of Idolatry, or
Earthly-mindednesse.

First. The Evil of your Idolatry, it is in this. You do depart from God; in
letting out of your hearts to these things, you do (as it were) go off from
God, and renounce the protection of God, the goodness and mercy of God, you
leave it all by this: In the 4. chap. of Hofea, 12. verse. They are said, To go
a whoring from under their God. It Is a notable phrase; that is, by going to
Idols they did go off from the protection of God; whereas, while they were
worshipping the true God, they then were under the protection of God; but when
they went to Idols, they went from under their God, from under his protection:
So when thou set thy heart upon God, and liftest up the infinite First
being of all things as the chief good to thy soul, thou art under the influence
of this Grace and Mercy: but when thou do depart from him, and make other
things to be thy Cheef good, thou go from under his protection, and from his
good and mercy.

Secondly: God is slighted and contemned in this, When thou choosest rather to
make the earth to be thy God than the infinite blessed first-being of all
things; As a man that does despise his wife, and it were abominable sin, if he
should choose to go to a Queen though the most beautifullest woman in the
world, and forsake his wife; but to leave a Queen, or Empress that were the
beautifullest woman upon the earth, and to have the heart cleave to a base
dunghil-raker, were not this a great contempt to the Queen that were so
beautiful? Yet so it is when thou do forsake the blessed eternal God as thy
chief good, and choosest the things of the earth: for the truth is, the earth
is the fink of all the creatures of Gods making, and for thee to leave the most
blessed and Eternal One, and to make that thy god it must needs be a very vile
and abominable thing; and therefore the Prophet Jeremiah in speaking of this
Idolatry, he calls the Heavens and the Earth to be amazed at it. Jeremiah, 2.
12. Be astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be horrible afraid, be ye very
desolate says the Lord, Why? what is the matter? For my people have committed
two evils, They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them
out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water. So it is here; thou
forsakest the fountain of living waters, the blessed God, and thy heart cleaves
to the dust, and seek thy contentment and happiness in cisterns that can
hold no water; let the Heavens be astonished at this horrible wickedness.

The Third EVIL.
Thirdly, Earthly-mindedness it is enmity against God. Thou would be loath to
be found an enemy against God; certainly it is a truth, and it will be found
another day, That an earthly-minded man, or woman is an enemy to God: yea the
Scripture makes it to be enmity in the very Abstract, James, 4. 4. Know ye not
that the love of the world is enmity to God? Observe this, for there is very
much in it, if God would be pleased to make us to lay it to heart, you will
find it by experience, that earthly-mindednesse does make men to be enemies to
that that is spiritually good, therefore well might the Holy Ghost say, it is
enmity to God, for whatsoever is enmity to any thing that is spiritually good,
it is enmity to God; so much as my heart, or any of your hearts are against any
thing that is spiritual, so much mine or any of your hearts are enemies to God.
Now here in the very Text, these earthly-minded men are made enemies to the
Cross of Christ: that is, enemies to the spiritual preaching of Christ, and
holding forth Christ: Indeed, If they would have mixed Christ and Circumcision
together, then they would have been content with it; but now this spiritual way
of preaching Christ, and being justified by faith alone, and Christian Religion
in the purity of it, was that that was not suitable to their carnal hearts, and
therefore they were enemies to it. Oh! earthly-mindednesse does make us enemies
to spiritual things; where have you greater enemies unto the things of God,
unto spiritual things, unto the Ministry of the word (as we had occasion to
hint) and to the work of Gods grace upon the hearts of men and women, no
greater enemies unto these things than earthly minded men, men that savor the
things of the earth, that can go up and down and care not if they can but load
themselves with thick clay, grow rich in the world and fare deliciously every
day with Dives, make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof,
there is an antipathy in their spirits against Jesus Christ and al goodness.

The Fourth EVIL.
Then Fourthly; There is scarce any disposition more opposite, more contrary to
the work of grace, to the work of godliness in a man's own heart than
earthly-mindednesse, it is so exceeding cross to the nature of grace, that it
may as well put men or women to be at a stand, and put them upon examination
whether there be any grace or no in their hearts if earthly-mindednesse
prevail, as almost any other thing; if God should suffer your corruptions to
prevail over you, so as you should break forth into some outward notorious
sins, then it may be you would begin to think, can this stand with grace? and
how can that stand with such workings as I have had before? have not I cause to
fear that I am but an Hypocrite, a rotten professor? But now, this
earthly-mindednesse has as much opposition to the nature of grace, and the
power of godliness in the heart as almost any sin that you can name. It is so
quite contrary to the very beginning of the work of grace, not contrary to the
degrees only, but to the very beginning. The main work of God at the very first,
in working grace in the soul, is to disingage the soul from the creature, it is
to take it off from the Earth, and from all creatures here below: for naturally
it is true, That as we are of the earth, so we are earthly, and have our spirits
engaged to the things of this earth; but then comes the work of grace upon the
soul, and takes it off, and discharges the heart from the earth: and therefore
you find that Christ lays in this as the first lesson, That he that will be my
Disciple, must deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me: as if he
should say, never think of being a Christian except you will deny your selves.
Self: what is that? all natural contentment, natural-self, and sinful-self, to
be emptied wholly of your selves, and creature comforts, and contentments, and
take up my Cross, to be willing to suffer any thing in regard of earthly
comforts, to be willing to lay down all at my feet, and to give up your
interest in all, and to take up my Cross; this is the very first beginning of
Christ's bringing Disciples to himself. Then (says the soul) let me have my sin
pardoned, and farewell earth, it is Heaven, Holiness, renewing of the Image of
God, communion, and union with God, and living to the eternal praise of his
Name in Christ that my heart is upon; I say, this in the beginning of Gods
working the heart to himself. The work of Grace when it is first wrought, it
has the name of Vocation: Calling, what is it for a man to be called? give
diligence to make your calling and election sure: To be called, is this, and
whereas before thou were altogether digging and dolving in the earth, and
seeking for thy happiness in the world, now it pleases God to make thee to hear
a voice behind thee, calling thee, and telling thee, O poor soul, thy happiness
is not here, there are other things in which thy chief good consists, thou art
made for higher and better things than these, God has nobler thoughts about
mankind than merely to let him have a few contentments here in the earth, Oh
soul! come away and look after higher things; here is the first work of grace:
and the soul answers unto this call of God and says, Lord, I come, and so
gives up it is self to God to dispose of it, and this is in the beginning of the
work of Grace: Now, how contrary is earthly-mindednesse to the work of God in
bringing grace into the heart? Conceive it in these three things.

1. The very work of conversion, it is set out in Scripture by Gods calling the
soul out of the world, Whom he has predestined; him he has called. When God
effectually begins to work upon the heart of a sinner, he does cause a voice to
be heard in the soul, Oh soul, thou have been busying thy self about many
things, but there is one thing necesseary, Oh come out of that way of thine
that thou art in, thou can never be happy else, thou will be undone in it;
the Lord calls the soul out of the world; and that (I say) is the very work of
conversion, the souls answearing to Gods call: Now for one still to be earthly,
and to have a heart cleaving to these things, surely such a one is not as yet
effectually called out of the world.

2. And then from thence follows, upon the souls answer to this call; the Lord
difingages the heart from all creaturecomforts, and teaches, the first lesson
to deny himself, and to take up Christ's Cross: now what is more opposite to
self-denial and the taking up of the Cross of Christ than earthly-mindednesse?
the text says here, They are enemies to the Cross of Christ.

And then a third thing in conversion it is, The resigning up of the soul to
God as the chief good; the soul upon the call of God, it learns the lesson of
Self-denial, and taking up the Cross, and so being disingaged from the
creature, now it resigns up it self to God as an infinite soul satisfying good
for ever: now you cannot but in the naming of this see how opposite
earthly-mindednesse is to it.

And then for the work of grace upon the heart, after the heart is converted
and turned to God.

First, Grace brings a new light into the soul: A Spiritual and Divine light is
set up in the soul upon the conversion of a sinner to God; but now, the earth
you know, it is the dark part of the world, and earthly mindedness it causes
darkness to be upon the spirit, as the interposition of the earth between us
and the Sun, it does hinder the sight of the Sun from us; And so the
interposition that there is of earthlinesse in the soul of man between God and
it, does hinder the sight of God from the soul; there is a Divine light set up
in the soul, and when as God works grace that does discover things of a higher
and more excellent and glorious nature, than those things were that before the
heart did so much cleave unto.

In the second place: the Scirpture sets forth the work of grace by the New
creature. In the soul all things are made new, old things are Past, he that is
in Crhist is a new creature: Now earthly-mindednesse is opposite to the new
creation in the soul, it is the old man that is of the earth, the first man is
of the earth earthly; and so it is apparent that thou art still only in the
stock of the first man, of the earth earthly who art an earthly-minded man. But
the second man is, the Lord from Heaven: But now, thou that art an
earthly-minded man or woman art yet but a child of Adam, of the first man, and
so art of the earth earthly, this is opposite to grace, grace works a new
creation in the soul.

3. And grace is of an Elevating nature, raises the heart above its self, and
above the creature, yea, above the world, in some respect above Angels
themselves, above Principalities and Powers, above all created things, grace is
of a raising nature; but an earthly-minded man sinks down to low and base
things.

And grace (fourthly) is of an Enlarging nature; it enlarges the heart, so that
it cannot be satisfied with any earthly thing, though God should give the whole
world to a heart that has grace, this would not satisfy that heart, why?
because it is so Enlarged by the work of grace, the work of grace it is the
Divine nature, the Image of God in the soul, and therefore works the soul like
to God: and it is said of God in the 40. of Isa. that all the nations of the
earth are to him, but as the drop of the bucket, and as the small dust in the
balance. Now grace makes the soul to be like God, to accout all the things of
the earth to be as the drop of a bucket, and the dust of the balance, to be
nothing, less than nothing.

5. And then, Grace sanctifies the soul: Now what is it to sanctify, but to
take off from all common uses, and to dedicate to God as the highest act of all
things? And therefore, the Greek word that is for Holy, it is taken from a
participle Premitive, and a word that signifies the Earth, as much (...) ab
(...) pri. and (...) terra, extra terram, sine terra. Beda.
as to say, Not Earthly, and a holy one in the Greek language is not an earthly
one, according to the usual etimology given of it. Now Grace it makes the soul
holy, it sanctifies the soul, it sets apart the soul for God, and dedicates and
consecrates the soul to God: and therefore you see that it is opposite to the
work of God in bringing Grace into the soul, and to the work of grace, and the
power of godliness in the soul of man: This is the great Evil of Earthly
mindedness.

The Fifth Evil.
But Fifthly: For the discovery of the great Evil that there is in
Earthly-mindedness: It puts men upon very great Temptations; and for that we
need no other Scripture than that in the 1 of Tim. 6. 9. says the Apostle
there, But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare. Mark,
that is, Those that have set their hearts so much upon the things of the earth,
as they are resolved they must have them whatsoever comes of it: Observe the
phrase; They that will be rich, they apprehend a necessity of the things of the
earth, they do not only wish and desire, Oh! that we had riches, and had these
things of the earth, but they resolve they must have them upon any terms: Well,
If the heart go on in obedience to God in the duties of its calling, and if God
send in riches and an estate, it does thankfully accept it from God; these do
not meet with such temptations and a snare as the Apostle here speaks of; but
when the heart is set upon it, that it needs must have an estate whatsoever
comes on it; now they that will be so, they (says the Apostle) fall into
temptations and a snare. There Is dangerous temptations in following after the
things of the earth, and there is a snare in them that you do not think of, for
you think only of the bravery of the things of the earth, how sumptuously you
should live, and how fine you should be, in your house, and clothes, and what
table you may keep, you only think of these things that may give the flesh
contentment; but you do not think of the temptation, and the snare that is in
them; and those whose hearts are set upon these things, they fall into the
snare, nay, temptation; those that are earthly-minded, have great temptations,
to shift up and down, to strain their consciences for the things of the earth;
for so it is, that while we live in this world God has made the things of the
earth to be as thorns, and so they are compared in Scripture, and it is hard for
one to meddle with thorns without pricking his fingers; they are as briars, and
its hard for the sheep to get among them but she will lose some of her wool: and
so it is hard for the heart to be busy about the things of the earth, but it
will be pricked and lose some of its fleece, in will fall into temptation and a
snare, and be caught: Oh! how many men and women that have enlightened
consciences, and they think sometimes that they would not for all the world do
any thing against their consciences, though they might gain all the glory and
riches under Heaven: Well, but yet their hearts being earthly, when it comes to
some particular, how ready are they? at least, to strain conscience, and not to
attend to the voice of conscience, and are willing that conscience should have
its mouth stopped for the time: Indeed, If their consciences did plainly tell
them, that this thing is absolutely sin against God, perhaps they would not do
it, but that were not the snare, for it is no snare when I see the danger before
me, here is a deep pit, and if I step a step further I fall into it, this is no
snare. But now, there are some that are not caught so, by a pit that is open;
but the Devil does lay upon the pit (it may) some green grass, so that they
shall not perceive, or very hardly perceive the danger; thus such as have
earthly hearts they fall into a snare and temptation, they are put upon
straining of conscience, and wringing it as much as may be, and many shifts
that they are put too, Oh! a man when once he is got into an earthly business
he knows not how in the world to bear it if he be crossed in it, It may be I have
gone thus far, and I have very great hopes that I shall succeed in it, only
there is one stop, now for him to think that for this one stop I am like to
lose all, Oh it goes to his heart: Oh but now, if you would but strain
conscience a little you may get over it presently; an earthly-man will strain
hard but he will get over it; whereas now, were the heart taken off from the
earth, though such a man had gone on never so far in a business, if there comes
a stop in a matter of conscience, yea, if it were but a doubt that such a thing
were sin; it is enough to stop him, a mere doubt lest he should sin would be
enough for to make him say, let the business fall if it will, there may be a
snare in this, and I see some cause to doubt: now if the heart were spiritual
it would be taken off; but an earthly mind will go through very many dreadful
things and does not much trouble himself, and so does ensnare himself
exceedingly, that he may get an estate, or preserve it when once he has got
it: That Is the fifth thing.

The Sixth Evil.
The Sixth thing wherein the danger of earthly-mindednes consists is this: That
it is one of the greatest hindrances in the world to profiting by the Ministry
of the Word. Oh! many of you cannot but be convinced in your consciences that
you have not profited by the Word, and sometimes you will complain of the want
of profiting under the means, Oh that you had but hearts to look into the cause
of it, from whence it is that you profit so little: It will appear to come from
your earthly-mindedness, you bring a heart full of the world, full of dross
with you, no marvel though you do not see those spiritual and heavenly things
that are in the Word, when as there is so much dross in your eyes; you know
travellors in the summer time, traveling in the midst of dust and in company,
they have not that freedom of their eyes to see things as at another time: Oh!
many men com to the word with their thik clay, and a great deal of filth that
does clam up their very eyes, and dead their hearts in the hearing of the Word;
you know what Christ said to Martha, when Mary was sitting at Christ's feet, and
hearing his word, but Martha was cumbred with many things; so it is many times
with those that come to hear the Word, though they are in the presence of
Christ, and have the sound of the Word in their ears, yet their hearts are
cumbred about many things, there is a great noise in their hearts, they are
busied in the world even while they are hearing of the Word, as you find it in
the 33. of Ezekiel. 31. ver. there is an notable description, I fear it may be of
many of you: And they come unto thee (says the Lord to the Prophet) as the
people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words;
but they will not do them, for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their Covetousness: They sit before thee as my people, and they
hear thy words, (mark) and they show much love with their mouth; they will
commend the Sermon; it may be they will say, He is an excellent Preacher, it is
a very good Sermon that we heard this day; they will show love with their mouth;
but yet their hearts go after their covetousness for all that; they heard a
man speak fine things, and brought excellent expressions for to set forth his
matter that he had in hand; but yet their hearts are after the things of the
earth, and after their Covetousness, they had carnal, earthly, drossie hearts,
and hence it was, that there was no good came unto them by the Ministry of the
Word: And that famous place which we have for this, which shows it clearly in
the 13. of Matt. 22. ver. you know the several sorts of ground that had the
seed of the Word sown into them, but there was but one of them that was good
and faithful, and among others there was the thorny ground; He also that
received seed among the thorns, is he that hears the word, and the care of
this world, and the deceitfulness of riches choaks the Word and it becomes
unfruitful. I beseech you observe it, these that our Savior speaks of here in
this parable that get no benefit by the Word are not men that live lewdly, your
drunkards, swearers and whoremasters, but those that have earthly hearts; it is
said, the deceitfulness of riches; the things of the earth do not hinder in an
open way, for thousands of men that have earthly hearts, they do not know that
they have earthly hearts, no, it is the deceitfulness of riches, and it choaks
the Word, it may be just when they are in hearing of the Word it does affect
them, Oh they think it is sweet, and they will remember it, but the
deceitfulness of riches, and the cares of this world choaks the word, when
they come, they have businesses about the world, and their houses, and gardens,
and comings in, and full tables, and all the delights that they have in the
world, comes and possesses the heart that the word is choakt, it cannot get
down into the soul to sink in there, and so to prevail in the soul to bring
forth fruit, Oh the word is choakt; Oh many of you come here three times on the
Lords day, and have precious seed sown all those times, and yet, Oh! how it is
choakt through the cares of this world, and through the deceitfulness of the
things of this world! You bring with you, and keep with you, and carry along
with you earthly minds, and hence it is that the Word prevails not with your
hearts: Oh! what do you loose through this earthlinesse? you lose the fruit of
the Word that should save your souls; a spiritual heart having received some
one truth into it, afterward blesses God for it, and would not for ten
thousand worlds but he had had that truth preached unto his heart at such a
time, Oh he has cause to bless God for such a morning, for such a day that he
has had such a goodly pearl of great price presented to him, and taking root
in his heart, (I say) it is more than if God had given them thousands of worlds
to possess. But now, many of you, having your thoughts and hearts about some
petty thing of this world, all those blessed Truths, that you hear from time to
time, that the very Angels desire to pry into, they are all choked and come to
be unfruitful. What was the reason when the young man came to Christ, to know
what he should do to the Eternal life that he got no good? the Text says, That
he had great possessions. A man (no question) may be a rich man, and yet a
godly man, a holy man: but when the heart is in the estate, mixed with the
earth, Oh! this it was that hindered the young man from embracing of Jesus
Christ even when he came to him. Young men for the most part are rather guilty
of fleshlinesse, than seeking after the riches of the world; yet sometimes it
has been the bain of some young men, at their first setting up; they were very
forward when they were servants, Oh! how precious was the Word unto them, but
when they were got into the world, and found the sweetness of it coming in, Oh
then the Word has been choked to them; and they have lost the savor they had
in the Word, they have lost the relish of the Word, it is not now sweet to them
as formerly it has been, Oh many examples there has been this way: That Is the
great evil of Earthly-mindednesse, that it does hinder the great benefit of the
Word, and there is much evil in this; If you had hearts to receive what is
delivered your hearts would tremble at the thought of this, Oh Lord, what shall
I be hindered from profiting by this word? it is the great blessing of God to the
world, it is that that must save my soul, there is more worth in it than ten
thousand worlds, whatsoever should hinder my profiting by thy Word I had need
take heed of it; take heed of earthly-mindednesse, many of your consciences
cannot but tell you this, sometimes any business will keep an earthly-minded
man from coming to the Word, and when he does come there is earth in his heart
and ears that keeps him from attending upon the Word: and when thy thoughts are
about earthly things in the hearing of a Sermon, it may be there is some truth
passes by thy soul that might have saved thee eternally, and thou have lost
that opportunity which perhaps thou shall never have again.

The Seventh Evil, opened in Six Particulars.
Further, In the seventh place, Earthly-mindedness, it causes many foolish
lusts in the heart, that is a great evil; and for that you have the same
Scripture that was before, for the temptations and snare, 1 Timothy 6. 9. But they
that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts: lusts that are very foolish and simple.

1. As for instance; It causes men to follow after things that are very vile
and mean, it causes men to bestow the strength of their immortal souls about
things that have no worth at all in them: that is a foolish lust, to bestow the
strength of an immortal soul about vanities: If you should see men that are of
excellent parts for to spend their time about trifles and toys, as about
catching of flies, and following of feathers, you would say, surely they begin
to be besotted: so for the soul of man, that is capable of such excellency as
it is, of communion with God, with the Father, Son and holy Ghost, for such a
soul to have the strength of it spent about such poor trifling things that
cannot profit in the evil day, Oh this is a foolish lust.

Secondly, Foolish lusts, for earthly-mindedness, causes thee to be a servant
to thy servants: you would account that man a fool that should be a servant to
his servants: So God has made the things of the earth to be a servant to thee,
and yet thou will come and put thy neck under thy servants yoke, and art a
servant to thy servant: yea, were it not a great deal of folly for a man to
expect all his honor and respect to come from his servant rather than from any
excellency in himself; as thus, Suppose a man were traveling, and indeed there
is respect given to him, but it is for his servants sake rather than his own; If
he should come to know this, this he would account a great dishonor to himself:
But an earthly heart (I say) puts himself into such a condition, as indeed he
makes it to be his greatest honor to have honor from his estate and riches:
So that men do not respect rich men for any worth that there is in themselves,
or for any excellency of their own, but only for their riches, as much as to
say, a man is not respected for himself but for his servant. Take some men that
have had estates, but now they are deprived of them, and are become as poor as
any Almes-men or Beggars amongst us; who does regard them then? But now, let a
man have grace and holiness, if he were turned out of all and made as poor as
Job, yet he were one that the Angels of Heaven would look upon with honor, and
would glory in attending upon him; this is the difference between the carnal
earthly heart, and the spiritual heart. It Is a foolish lust to make himself to
be a servant to his servant.

3. It brings into foolish lusts, For a man might have as much (it may be) more
of the earth if he did not mind it so much as he does. Now for a man to mind
the earth and to endanger himself in the minding of it, when as he might have
it as well without so much minding, surely, this is a foolish thing: For a man
to bestow a great deal of labor about a thing when as he might have it with
less labor, he is a fool surely. Certainly if you be such as belongs to God,
especially you may rather expect God to bless you if you kept your hearts more
spiritual, you might expect that God would grant to you more of the good things
of this world if you were less earthly-minded than you are, and it is your
earthlymindednesse that makes God cut you short of these things; I am verily
persuaded there are many men that have ill success in their earthly affairs,
and it is a fruit of Gods displeasure upon them because their hearts are so much
upon worldly businesses, did you go on in your employment in obedience to God,
and commit it to God for success, you might be crowned with more success than
you have been: now what a foolish thing is this?

4. Yea further: It Is a great deal of folly, for any of you to go and buy a
thing and to pay a greater price for it than it is worth: If you send a servant
to buy you commodities, and when he comes home you ask him what it cost, and he
tells you it cost such a price which is ten times more than it is worth, you
will say, Thus it is to send a fool to Market: so an earthly - minded man
manifests himself to God, and his Angels and all the Saints to be a fool, for
why? thou bestowest that upon this world, that is a thousand times more worth
than the things of the world, for thou bestowest that upon the world that might
bring thee to heaven; I may say to an earthly-minded man, those thoughts, and
cares, and affections, and endeavors that thou do spend upon the things of
the world, If they had been spent about the things of God might have saved thy
soul to all eternity, thou might have got Christ and Heaven, and Eternity,
the Lord would have gone along with thee; and thou may come hereafter to see
it at the great day when all things shall be opened before men and Angels: had
I but spent those thoughts and cares, and endeavors, about understanding the
ways and things of God and eternal life, my soul might have bin saved for
ever: Not that our works will do it, but that God would have gone along together
with you in such ways as those are; now for you to spend thoughts and cares
about that that perhaps you shall not have, for many men and women spend their
souls about the things of the world and never have them, this is a sad thing;
Oh! will not this be folly? will not you curse your selves hereafter for your
folly? Oh that I should spend my self and be spent about that that I have not
got neither, and I must be damned for that, whereas had I spent time about
things that concerned my soul and eternal life it would have been more like
that I should have gotten those things; for God does not fail men so in
spiritual things as he does in earthly things, a man may be as diligent as it is
possible for any man to be in business of the earth, and yet he may miscarry;
but give me any man or woman that ever was diligent in seeking the things of
God and eternal life that ever did miscarry; I verily believe at the day of
Judgment there will not be one man found, that shall be able to say, Lord, I
did improve what talents thou did give me to the uttermost to save my soul,
but Lord, because I was not able to do any more, without thy grace, thou did
deny thy grace to me, and therefore now I must be damned: I believe there will
not be any soul that will be able to say so; but in the matters of the world
men do say so, that they have done what they could, and labored and toiled,
and yet for all that they miscarry. Oh what a foolish thing is this then, for
thee to toil and labor about that which is so uncertain: for were it not a
foolish thing for a man to bestow all his estate about buying of pibble stones,
and that that will afford him no kind of benefit at all: This folly is in the
heart of man: I Will but put this care to you, If two of you should go to the
Indies, where precious stones are, and one should purchase a lading of precious
stones and other rich commodities, and the other that carried as much money
with him, he lays out all his money about baubles and trifles, and they both
come home laden, Both went out with the same stock, both come home laden, and
one comes home with precious stones that makes him rich, and his posterity to
be great men; the other brings home nothing but a company of pibble stones
which makes him scorned and jeered at by all his Neighbors; Oh! how would he
be ready to tear his flesh for his folly in this kind: This will be the
difference between men and women at the day of Judgment, for the truth is, what
is this world but a sea-fare? we are here sailing in this world, and here we
have the market of pearls, or else of that has no worth at all in it: when you
live in the times of the Gospel I say there is a market for pearls, for those
things that may enrich you to all eternity; now there is one man, he bestows the
strength of his thoughts and heart about those things that he shall be blessing
of God in the highest heavens to all eternity for, and the other man bestows
his thoughts and heart but upon the things of the earth, and lades himself with
thick clay (as the Scripture phrase is;) and now at the day of Judgment when it
shall appear, here is a man or woman that shall be to all eternity blessed, that
shall join with Angels and Saints in the highest heavens to magnify the free
grace of God in Christ: and here is another had that he bestowed but his
thoughts, and heart about the same things he might have been so blessed for
ever, but he minding the things of the earth is a cursed fool, and is the scorn
and contempt of men and Angels to all eternity; earthlymindednesse brings men
into foolish lusts (the Scipture speaks:) Oh! though men of earthly minds think
themselves the only blessed men, I applaud my self at home, let men talk what
they will; but the holy Ghost says, that those Iusts that are caused by
earthly-mindednesse are foolish lusts.

Fifthly, That Is folly for a man to do that that he must undo again. Now
especially those earthly-minded men that have this earthlinesse so to prevail
with them as to get any thing of the earth by false ways; they must certainly
undo all they have done: you have got so much of the earth in some cunning
cheating way, and you bless your selves that you have found out such a mystery
of iniquity; this is a foolish lust: Foolish, Why? it must be done again,
either you must be eternally damned, or else you must restore as Zacheus did if
you be able, though it be to the impoverishing of your selves, yet it must out
again, all the sorrow and repentance that can be will not be sufficient, thou
can not be pardoned upon all thy sorrow and repentance if thou do not
restore if thou be able, what thou have ill gotten; I do not know that there
was ever any Minister of the Gospel upon the face of the earth but held this,
that it was of absolute necessity to salvation to restore, and this one reason
cannot but satisfy any man's conscience, That a man cannot truly repent of a
sin, and yet wilfully to continue in it. Now except you do restore, you do
wilfully continue in it; for why? you do not only wrong the man the first hour,
but so long as you keep any thing that is his you do wrong him: and if you be
able to restore and do not, because you are loath to part with so much money, or
so many goods, you do wilfully continue in the sin: now, no man or woman can
truly repent of a sin and yet wilfully persist in that sin: what a foolish lust
is this, for a man or woman to go and get the things of this world in such a
way as he must undo all again though it be to his shame; Oh! consider what a
folly it is. You deceitful servants, that spend away that upon your lusts, that
you cheat and cosen your master of; afterward when you come to set up for your
selves, you must restore what you have purloind, and it may be a great part of
your estate must be repaid in way of restitution, it must be done, there is no
gainsaying of it; and therefore what a foolish lust it is, to be set upon the
things of the earth so as to get them in an earthly way.

6. And then foolish, (observe this one note) By Earthlymindednesse, they do
lose the comfort of earthly things before they have them. I make it out thus, A
man or woman that has carking thoughts about the things of the earth, and it
may be by their inordinate thoughts, and cares, and affections after some
earthly things, they contract much guiltiness upon their own spirits, yet
after this perhaps God does give them that earthly thing; now when they have
got it, if they have any light in their consciences, their convinced
consciences will then reflect thus upon them, I have got this indeed, Oh! but
have I it with the blessing of God? I have it in my costody, but I got it
dearly, it cost me such thoughts and cares, and affections before I had it, and
now I have it, I cannot say it comes out of Gods love, I rather fear that God
has given it me in his wrath because I got it in such a way; now all the
comfort is gone and lost, whereas had it come in the way of God, and had thou
given up thy self to God, and then providence had brought such a comfort to
thee, thou might have enjoyed much of God in it, and blessed God for it, the
Lord has blessed me in my trading, Oh! I have it from the Love of God. But
now, when thy heart was earthly before it came, when it does come thou have no
comfort in it, the comfort of all is lost before it comes, thou have spent so
much upon it; as if a man has got a thing, and after he has gotten it, he
thinks thus, What has this cost me; it has cost me a great deal more than
it is worth; now the comfort of it is vanished.

The Eighth Evil.
Earthly-mindednesse, It is the root of Apostasy. I Will give you but one
Scripture, and compare it with another: 2 Timothy 4 10. there is a notable Text,
that shows how earthly-mindednesse breeds Apostasy; it is the example of Demas,
For Demas (says the Apostle) has forsaken me: what is the matter? having loved
this present world. It was that that made Demas to be an Apostate; why? what
was Demas before? compare this Scripture with that you have in the Epistle to
the Colossians, and you shall see what he was before this time: he was a forward
Disciple of Paul; and the Apostle had some good esteem of him, in the last to
the Colossians, 14. verse. mark there in that Epistle, where Paul was directed
by the holy Ghost, Luke the beloved Physician and Demas greet you: Paul does
rank Demas here among the famous Professors of Religion; the Apostle, writing
to the Colossians, says, Demas greets you among the rest. When we send to our
friends and say, Such a one commends him to you, we use not to name them except
they be entire friends. So it appears, and I find that Interpreters severally
do think it was the same Demas, and the word gives us some ground for this! for
in Timothy you find, that he names Luke there too: It seems that Demas and Luke
were two great Assossiates: and Paul mentions them together; when Demas had
forsaken him, yet Luke rode with him, and when Paul sends them greeting of Luke
that was the beloved Physician, he sends the greeting of Demas too: But now,
one was truly godly, and whatsoever sufferings Paul met withal, one cleaved to
him, and would not forsake him: But when Paul begins to suffer, and Demas
thought, that there is no thriving for me, if I should follow this persecuted
Apostle; Demas now would have no more of Paul, he thanks him for his company
and fairly departs from him: He has forsaken me: and what is the root of it? He
had embraced this present world. And that is another note, that though he was a
forward Proffessor, yet the heart of Paul was not so much for him, for says
he, Luke the Beloved Physician and Demas great you; He does not say, the
Beloved Demas; it is true, Demas was a forward Proffessor, and did seem to wear
a cloak of Religion; yet Paul was directed by the Holy Ghost only to speak of
him as a Proffessor; but in that the Holy Ghost directs him to speek of two
together that were two companions, and gives one an Epethite, Beloved, and the
other only his name. By this we may gather, that those that have discerning
spirits, may show some kind of sign in those that are earthly, at least to
darken their esteem of them, and to make them somewhat jealous of them: as now,
there is two men, and both very forward, and two companions together; yet those
that are godly, old Disciples can savor one more than the other; Indeed they
are both Proffessors, and both have excellant parts and gifts, and yet there is
more spiritualness, and greater experiences in one than in the other, so it
appears there was in Luke rather than in Demas, and indeed, your earthly-minded
men, afterward prove to be Apostates, usually before their grand Apostasy do
manifest some deadness and waywardness of spirit to that that is good. yea,
their spirits before discover themselves to be earthly spirits, they smell of
the earth. As a man before he dies, his breath will smell very earthly; you
will say: Oh! such a one cannot live, his breath is so earthly; so it is with
those that are very great proffessors of Religion; that those that have
intimate acquaintance with them before they do Apostatise they smell their
breath to be earthly in their duties, in their conferences: Oh take heed of
earthly-mindedness, least it be the root of Apostasy; This may be written upon
many an Apostates grave, This was an earthly minded man or woman in the midest
of their profession. And hence it is that they fell off from the truth in times
of danger, when they were brought to the trial, they were base back sliders
from God and his truth.

The Ninth Evil.
Earthly-mindednesse does wonderfully dead the heart in prayer. It sinks the
spirits of men, and straightens them in spiritual duties; yea, and indeed, does
defile every duty of Religion; in the 119. Psalm. 37. ver. David (you shall
find) paryes there to God, That he will turn away his eyes from beholding
vanity, and that he would quicken him in his law. Certainly by the vanity that
he speaks of there, he means the things of the world, and by his eyes he
understands the eyes of his mind, chiefly the working of the thoughts of his
heart after earthly things; for if you will cast your eyes but to the 36.
verse, faith he there, Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness; Oh Lord, let not my heart be inclined to covetousness:
afterward, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, to the end that my heart
may not be inclined to covetousness; Lord, let not my thoughts be busied about
such vain things, but quicken me in thy Law: as if he should say, Lord, while
my mind is turned to vanity, or my heart to covetousness, after the things of
this earth, I always find my spirit dull and heavy in any holy duties, I have
no quickness at all in my inward man when I come in thy presence, and by
experience I find this to be the cause that my heart is so drossie, because my
thoughts and mind are set upon earthly things that are but vanity, therefore,
Lord let not mine heart be inclined to covetousness nor mine eyes looking after
vanity, but turn away mine eyes from these things and quicken me in thy Law: If
you would have your hearts quickened in Gods Law, in the Duties that God sets
you about, take heed of your eyes that they look not after vanity, and your
hearts that they follow not after covetousness; for an earthly spirit will be
a dead spirit, as the element of earth it is the sluggishest, and deadest
element of all; so earthlinesse in the heart makes the heart sluggish and dead,
and listlesse to any holy and spiritual duty: I appeal to your consciences in
this, when you have let out your hearts after the things of this earth, and
been exercised in the world, in abundance of businesses, when you have come to
enjoy communion with God, Oh! how dead have you found your hearts! a drossie
heart must needs be a dead and a straight heart in heavenly exercises: you
complain many times of your vain thoughts in performance of holy duties, you
cry out of dead spirits then, but there lies the cause, you have given your
hearts up so much to the things of the earth at other times, and hence when you
should come to have converse with God your hearts are so dead and dull and
straight as they are, look at this to be the ground of it; this is the great
root of all, it lies here in your earthly-mindednesse, Oh! how many prayers
have been quite spoiled with an earthly heart! whereas, such as have had
spiritual hearts, have enjoyed blessed communion with God at the Throne of his
Grace, and have been sweetly refreshed as a Giant with wine; the while thou
have gone with a dead heart, and continued so there, and came away with as dead
an heart, without any quickness and life, and this is that that comes by, thy
earthly-mindednesse, which is such a remora and pulback to duties.

The Tenth Evil.
10. Earthly-mindednesse, is so great an evil wheresoever it prevails, as it
were just with God that thy name who art so earthly-minded should be written in
the earth. I say, those that are earthly-minded and have this sin prevailing
upon their hearts, and are not sensible of it, they have cause to fear least
God should write their names in the dust: yea, lest God has already written
their names in the earth; in the 17. of Jerem. 13. we read of such an
expression, Oh Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed, and they they that depart from thee shall be written in the earth:
because they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living waters. And it is
apparent that he speaks of earthly spirits here, for in the 11. verse he says,
As the Partridg sits on eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets
riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his
end shall be a fool: and then he goes on and describes the excellency of God
and his Sanctuary, A glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of
our Sanctuary, etc. As if he should say, There are a company of foolish vain
men that seek after nothing but getting riches and the things of the earth; But
a glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of our Sanctuary: Oh
Lord we see an excellency in thee and in thine Ordinances, and thy Sanctuary,
Oh Lord the hope of Israel in whom there is such excellency, is there any that
do forsake thee who have so much excellency in thee, who art the hope of
Israel, Oh Lord, just it were that their names should be written in the earth,
that they should never come to partake of those good things that there are in
thee, the excellent things that there are in thine Ordinances, and in thy
Gospel, but Lord, let their names be written in the earth: an earthly spirit (I
say) may fear least the name of it be written in the earth, lest God write
concerning such a man or such a woman, earth shall be their portion, and their
mouths shall be filled with earth one day, and that is all the good that they
shall have from the Almighty: Oh those who have known God and the things of
eternal life they cannot but apprehend this to be a sad and a grievous evil,
for their names to be written in the earth.

The Eleventh Evil.
An Earthly-minded man has the curse of the Serpent upon him: What was that?
Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat. Thou have the curse of
the Serpent, thou grove-lest upon the earth (as it were) upon thy belly, thy
soul cleaves to the ground in a sinful way, and dust thou feedest upon: While
the Saints are feeding upon Jesus Christ, upon the very flesh and blood of
Christ; when they are refreshing themselves with the hidden Mannah, Angels
bread, corn from Heaven; thou art satiating thy self with the earth, that is thy
food, and that is the very curse of the Serpent; it is a sign of a serpentine
brood of the old Serpent, to be grovelling upon the earth and to feed upon it.

The Twelfth Evil.
Earthly-mindedness is a dishonor to God, and a scandal to Religion. What!
shall thou profess an interest in Christ? and are there no higher things to be
had in God than such base things as thy heart is upon? What! do thou hold
forth the everlasting Gospel in thy hand to others; and do openly profess a
nearness to God more than others; and is there no difference between the
workings of thy heart and the workings of others after the things of this
world? Oh! how does this darken the excellency of Grace! if there be any grace
at all: it very much clouds it; as the mixing of earth and drossie stuff with
pure mettle, it takes away the excellency of the pure mettle; so the mixing of
earth with the profession of Religion, blemisheth the beauty and splendour of
the profession of Religion: Thou will never be the man or woman that is like to
convince any by thy Conversation: thou art never likely to be a means to draw
any to the love of the ways of godliness, because there is so much darkness
and earthlinesse in thy Conversation: Oh will they say, Indeed, he or she makes
a great blaze in the world, and talks much of Religion, and of Ordinances, and
such things, but as worldly as any, and grovelling in the earth as much as any;
people that are standers by will think that profession is but a mere verbal
thing, or a mock-shew, when as they see as much earthlinesse in your
conversation as in the conversation of those that are without: you do bring an
ill report on the things of God, as the Spies did on the Land of Canaan.
Whereas every professor of Religion should endeavor to put a luster upon
Religion, and to make the ways of God to be beautiful, amiable, and glorious
in the eyes of all that do behold them: But now, to give a lie to your
Gospel-profession by your Earthlyconversation, is a very great scandal to the
Name of Christ that is upon you and to his Gospel that you seem to stand up
for. Oh! there is a great evil in this, and a very ill report comes upon the
ways of Religion by this means; many that have had little religion in them,
yet have some kind of generousness of spirit, so that they scorn such base
sordednesse as some sorts of Professors are given unto. Oh! for shame let not
those that have only common gifts of nature, and education outstrip you, that
seem to be the followers of Christ; away with that base, muddy, earthly,
saving, pinching disposition, it becomes none but Judas that carried the bag
and betrayed his Lord and Master for Eighteen shillings and four pence. Let me
argue with you, you that have to deal with any friends or neighbors, that you
yet are afraid have not the power of godliness in them as you desire, but yet
you see they have much ingenuity, and generousnesse, and publickness of spirit
in them for public good; take heed of scandalizing such men, for certainly
such men if they could be brought to the love of Religion, to the power and
strictness thereof, had they the work of the holy Ghost upon their hearts to
humble them for sin, and to show them the excellency of Jesus Christ, they
would be glorious Instruments in the Church of God and Commonwealth, and
therefore it is a very great evil to scandalize such men as these; no, you
should labor to walk so as they might see a beauty and excellency in the ways
of Religion by your Conversation; Oh! better, a thousand times better that you
be cut short of these things in the world, than that you should scandalize the
ways of God, and the profession of the Name and Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The Thirteenth Evil.
Earthly-mindednesse, it does exceedingly hinder preparation for death, and it
is like to make death to be very grievous and terrible to them when it comes
(that are like the rich fool in the Gospel) In the 21. of Luke, the 34. verse,
(this I have from the Scripture) Take heed to your selves (Christ here speaks
to his Disciples) lest at any time your hedrts be overcharged with surfitting
and drunkenness and cares of this life; (he puts them together) It Is very
strange you will say that Christ should speak this to his Disciples, to
forewarn them of this, we do not think that they were drunkards so as to follow
after Taverns and Ale houses, or to reel in the streets; but by this
drunkenness he means any excess in the use of the creatures in meat or drink,
and professors of Religion may be subject to that, to give up themselves too
much to sensual delights and excess in the use of the creature, but besides
that, though many there are that would abhor glutteny and drunkenness, yet the
cares of this life takes up their hearts; therefore says Christ, Take heed to
your selves lest at any time your hearts he over charged with the cares of this
life: why? what evil would the over-charging of the heart which the cares of
this life bring? mark, (says the text) And so that day come upon you unawares,
for as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell upon the face of the
whole earth, watch ye therefore and pray always etc. I may apply this to
death: though the Scripture be speaking of Christ's coming; now in the time of
death Christ comes particularly, there is a particular day of Judgment at the
day of death; it may likewise be applied to the time of any affliction, and
then it may be enlarged thus, and so then the evil of earthly-mindednesse
appears in this, that it does hinder the preparation of the soul for
afflictions. Oh! earthly-mindednesse will make thine affliction to be grievous
and heavy to thee: an affliction is a very grievous thing to an earthly
spirit; if God comes to take away any comforts of this world, now because thy
heart cleaves so close to them there must be a rending of them from thee, and
that will put thee to pain; a man that has his garments loose, he can easily
put them off when he goes to bed at night, but if a man has a sore upon his
body, and his inward garments shall cleave to the sore, If he pulls them off
then it puts him to a great deal of pain, Oh then he cries out of his pain!
Truly, this earthly-mindednesse comes from distemper of spirit, and the things
of the earth they cleave to the hearts of men and women that are earthly, as
the inward garment should cleave to a sore on a man's body; and now when
afflictions or death comes to take the things of the earth from them, or them
from the things of the earth, Oh it is painful to them, it is grievous to them
and for one that has an earthly spirit, a hundred to one if he has any light
of conscience left in him, but his conscience will trouble him in time of
sickness and then tell him how he has spent his time and strength of his
spirit about the things of of the earth, whereas they should have bin spent
about more excellent things, and when he comes to die then his spirit will be
troubled, I am now to leave all these things that I have spent my care and
thoughts upon and let out my heart about, and what good is it to me now that I
shall leave so much more than my neighbor does, what great content is this to
me when I am upon my sick and death bed? what comfort can I have in all the
good things I have enjoyed? yes, (it may be) through the earthlinesse of my
spirit, I have enjoyed but little of them, but I have had carking thoughts
about them; But now, death is like to be to me as a Strainer, that strains out
the good and leaves the dross and the dirt behind it. And so all the good of
the things of this world is gone, But the guiltiness that I have contracted
upon my spirit with my immoderate care and affections that I have let out upon
the world that now is upon my spirit, Oh! death has been very grievous to
worldly spirits. I remember there is one that lived in a place not far from the
place that I have formerly lived in, a covetous, earthly spirit, when he was to
die, calls for his Money, and falls a swearing, Must I leave you now? (speaking
to his Bags, and hugging of them) What! must I leave you now? An earthly man
that had spent his spirits and strength upon these things, and indeed let out
his heart to them as his portion, and then he sees that he must be stripped from
all, must bid an eternal fare-wel to all, no more houses, nor lands, nor
comming-in, nor money: Oh! death is grievous to such a one. Now, what should be
the life of a Christian, but a continual preparation for death? Many of the
Heathens said of Philosophy, that it was but a preparation for death. A special
excellency of Christianity consists in this, that it is a Preparative for
death; and therefore you should let out your hearts to the things of this world
so, as to be continually thinking of death, that when God calls you to depart
from these things, that you may do it with ease, with as much ease as a man
when he is going to bed casts off his clothes that are loose about him; for so
the grave is as a bed to the Saints where they fall asleep when they die, and
so they may lay down all things and go to their sleep with ease and peace. A
man or woman that can have their consciences tell them, I have been diligent in
my calling, but God knows through faithfulness to him, rather than l^^e to the
world; and I have kept my heart close to God, and faithful to him, I can bid
the world now farewell, as the world has done with me, so I have done with it;
so long as my time was to work for God, God continued those things that this
frail nature of mine had need of, and now my work is done, farewell the the
comforts of this world, I expect other kind of comforts that I am now going to:
So, such a one that is spiritual may die with comfort; but those that have
their hearts overcharged with the cares of this life, they will have the day of
Christ come upon them unawares.

The Fourteenth Evil
Earthly-mindednesse, is that that will bring destruction at last, it will
drown thy soul in perdition; there is those two texts for it; the first is here
in this very Scripture wherein my Text is, says the Apostle here (speaking of
men who mind earthly things.) Whose end is destruction. They are both joined
together, earthly-mindednesse will bring destruction at last: And the forenamed
place that for other purposes we have had, in 1 Timothy 6. 9. where the Apostle
speaks of bringing them into snares, and foolish lusts: says he, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. Some that are washing themselves in the
Thams, go a little way at first, and then venture a little surther and further,
and at length they are over head and ears, and there they are drown,d and
cannot recover themselves: So it will be with your hearts if you look not to
them; you think you may venture so far to the things of this world, why? Are
they not good, and in themselves lawful? I get not my estate by wrong, cheating
and cousning, and so by degrees your hearts are stolen away from God, and taken
with these earthly things, and ye get deeper and deeper into the world, til at
length you are plunged over head and ears before you are aware, and you cannot
recover your selves; that man or woman that will give their hearts to the
things of this world, and think that they will go no further, but thus and thus
far, a hundred to one but when once these things have taken up their hearts
they get more and more advantage till they be even drowned in destruction and
perdition: A man or woman may be undone by earthlinesse, and be damned and
perish eternally as well as by adultery, or drunkenesse, murder, or by any
notorious sin, many that are great Professors of Religion, it is very like that
this will be the sin by which they will perish to oll eternity, The
earthlinesse of their minds. Do not please your selves in this, that because
you keep from those gross and notorious sins that others live in therefore you
hope to be saved, your earthlinesse may damn you as well as any thing else: As
upon dunghils you cast not only filthy carrion, and such nastie stuff, but your
dust, that is swept out of your houses, I may compare Hell which is the place
where God casts those damned out of his presence, it is (as it were) the common
dunghill upon which filthy creatures are cast; now upon that dunghill there are
not only carions, and filthy blasphemers, and whoremasters, and thieves, those
are as it were the dead dogs carrion: but likewise there will be dust cast upon
that dunghill, and scrapings that are from your houses will be cast upon the
dunghill of Hell from the presence of God; and therefore satisfy not your
selves in this, that you do not live in such filthy abominable lusts as others
do, but if you have foul earthie hearts you may be cast upon the dunghill as
well as those that have lived most notoriously wicked; and therefore take heed
of earthly-mindednesse.

You will say, By all these particulars that you have discovered to us, there
is a great deal of evil and danger in earthly mindedness. Well, the Lord keep
us from earthly-mindednesse: But you will say, We hope that we are not those
earthly-minded men that are here spoken to though we do follow our businesses
and callings: we must mind what God sets us about, But we hope we are not of
these earthly-minded men that are spoken of here in this Scripture.

Now besides what we spoke too in the opening what it was, that might show as
in a glass the hearts of men and women: I shall enlarge my Meditations on this
subject, by opening some few Convincements, further to convince men and women
that there is a great deal of earthly-mindednesse in them.

And for preparation I will lay down this.

First. That a man or woman may be earthly minded, and yet little think of it
themselves, not know that they are so: Yea, and it may be even perisheternally
through their earthly-mindednesse, and not know of it themselves.

Six things may be wrought in a man, and yet Earthly minded.
1. A man may have his judgment convinced that there is a vanity in all things
in this world, and yet be an earthly-minded man for all this: many think they
are not earthly-minded, why? Because they are convinced that all these things
are vanity; come and speak to them about the things of this world, and they
will acknowledge there is a vanity in all these things, that they are vanity of
vanities, al is vanity.

2. A man may have some kind of contentment in his estate, and yet have an
earthly mind; at the 33. of Genesis 9. verse, Esau that was one of the earth, yet
he said he had enough, yet certainly one of an earthly spirit, and his portion
was in the earth: how many of you come so far as Esau did? to say for your
estates, you have enough: Oh it is a shame for those that are professors of
Religion, and would seem to be of the seed of Jacob, and yet they can never say
they have enough, when as an Esau can say, he has enough: I have enough my
brother.

3 Men and women may speak very great words about the vanity of all the things
of this world: When you come to discourse, you may (I say) discourse much about
them, and yet have a very earthly spirit.

4. A man may be free from getting any thing of this world by false ways, by
deceit, by injustice, etc. and yet be earthly for all that.

5. Through some predominate lust some other way, A man may seem to despise
some earthly thing: As many men that have a lust of Ambition, will seem to
despise money; that has a lust to show themselves to be generous; and those
that have a lust of sensuality will seem to despise the things of the world?
many a man through one lust will seem as if he would hate the other, though
the truth is, he does not hate it as a sin, but for the practice of it his
heart is against it, not (I say) from the dislike of it as a sin against God,
but because it is opposite to some other lust that he has; as your Prodigals,
your Young Spendthrifts, they will speak against covetousness as if they hated
that sin, whereas the truth is, no wicked man hates any sin any further than
one sin crosses another, so much he may hate it but not as a sin, in the 13. of
Isa. 17. Behold (says the text) I will stir up the Medes against them, which
shall not regard silver, and as for gold they shall not delight in it: the
Medes they were Heathen wicked people that had no grace in them at all, and yet
(the text says) they shall not regard silver, and for gold they shall not
delight in it; some men they think it i^ through the work of grace, and because
they find that they are above that base covetousness that they see in other
men, they do not regard silver and gold, and to be getting all for themselves,
and they despise those men that are of such a base covetous way, and upon that
they think their condition good because they think they are got above that
lust; but ye see it is no other than that a Mede may get, a Heathen may
disregard silver and gold, but how? it is because his spirit is upon another
lust, that is the ground of it: can thou say this, (consider what I am now
upon) you that seem to scorn Covetousness and hate such base sordidnesse as
you see in some men: can you say, it comes from hence, The Lord has made me to
see the excellent things of the Gospel, the treasures of grace that are
fountain'd up in Jesus Christ: the Lord has made me to know what communion
with himself in Jesus Christ does mean, and since that time I bless God my
heart has been above all these earthly things, and that is the ground that
makes me look upon all these earthly things as vanity, because the Lord has
discovered unto me those excellent and glorious things that are infinitely above
these earthly things: I, that is somewhat indeed, if you can be above
earthlinesse upon this ground, that is a good argument: therefore examine upon
what ground it is that your spirit is against such things, whether it be upon
the sight and experience of better things, then it is right: but certainly men
and women may go far in seeming to be above earthly things in respect of the
sin of covetousness and yet still have earthly mind; wherefore to give you
convicements, besides things that have been hinted.

As how a man does value himself and value others, is it not because that
others, or your selves have much of the things of the earth? can you value a
poor man that is godly above the richest man that is wicked? and so, can you
value your selves for the least work of grace upon your hearts to make you more
excellent tha^ the greatest co^mingsin of your estates? (but these things we
have hinted)

And then, where lies the chief Joy and chief Sorrow of men's hearts? what is
that that does most trouble your hearts? is it the loss of the light of the
face of God, or the loss of an estate, the loss of a voyage, or the
commission of a sin? So, what is your chief Joy, your profitting by the word, or
gaining by your bargains? you have come to the word, and there sometimes God
has revealed some truth to you, and you have profited; can you go away
rejoicing because God has made you to know his Law, the Lord has darted some
truth into my soul this morning, Oh! I go away rejoicing, and having my heart
filled with more joy than ever I have had upon any bargain wherein I have got
never so much of the world: These be two convincements we hinted not before.

Nine CONVINCEMENTS of Earthly-mindedness.
1. Conv. For the further Convincement of an Earthly-minded man, seriously
consider this: When a man shall rest upon earthly props, upon worldly helps for
the good that he does expect; If he can have those things, then his heart seems
to be upon the wing, very pleasant; but there is nothing else can revive his
heart, it is not a promise that can keep his spirit. Now that that a man or
woman most trusts unto, that certainly they make to be their God: for that
properly belongs to God to put our trust in Him; then we make God to be our
God, when we roll our selves upon Him. Now to trust in earthly things though it
be but for the comforts of your life, you will say, I cannot trust in earthly
things to bring me to God; nay, but to trust in them for the comforts of your
life, while you are herein this world; that is an Argument of an earthly spirit:
for the truth is, the comfort of a man's life consists not in any earthly thing
he does enjoy.

Object. You will say, Do not these comfort our lives?

Answ. Yes, so far as God is pleased to let out Himself through them, but if
thy heart does rest upon these for comfort, and does not look higher than these
for comfort, even for thy outward support: certainly thou have an earthly
heart. And so, when thou art about any business, thou have some earthly means
to further thee.

Obj. You will say, God would have us take all outward means to help us.

Ans. I, but not to trust in any thing; If riches increase, set not your hearts
upon them: so, if friends increase, set not your hearts upon them, but trust in
the living God, let it be the living God that you rest on even for all outward
things in this world.

2. Conv. A Second Convincement, is this: When men make most provision for the
things of this world, both for themselves and for their children. Are not these
your thoughts? I do not know what I may want hereafter, and I see many that
have lived finely when they have been young, yet afterward they have lived
very miserably, and therefore I must make provision for aftertimes. Thus for
the earth.

But now, Do you reason thus for the things of Heaven? do not I see many that
have made a great blaze of Religion, and yet afterward they have come to
nothing, they have gone out in a snuff as men that God has forsaken, and they
have died in horror of Conscience; and therefore let me lay up provision now
against an evil time, that I may not miscarrie in the matters of my soul so as
others have done; this were a sign your minds were not earthly. And for your
children, God has sent you children, and Oh! how you toil and labor, and
your thoughts run in the night, and as soon as you awake in the morning, about
what you shall get for their portions, and for an estate for them: Now I appeal
to your conscience before God (the searcher of all hearts) Have your cares been
to provide in a suitable way for their souls, for their spiritual and eternal
estates? No question but it is lawful for parents to provide in a Providential
way for their children, and they that do not are worse than Infidels; but what
is your chief provision for? are your thoughts more solicitous to provide
portions for them, than that they should have instruction in the fear of God,
an interest in Christ, than that they should have grace wrought in their
hearts? You are loath to die before you can bring your estate so clear as you
may leave it to your children:! Oh are you not loath die before such time as you
see some work of grace wrought in the hearts of your children? Oh! these would
your thoughts be if you were spiritual: Oh! could I discern but some seeds of
grace sown before I was disolved I could rejoice abundantly. As it is repeated
of Austen's Mother, that the great thing that she desired to live for, was to
see her son Converted; and God did grant her desire, and then she found her
self willing to die. There Is nothing will make the spiritual heart of a father
or mother more willing to depart from this world, than to find grace wrought in
their children; Oh! that I may see before I die my child left under the promise
in Covenant with God: I, this were somwhat-like indeed: But those whose cares
and thoughts are most for these earthly things, in providing for themselves
and children, that is a Convincement that their hearts are earthly.

3. Conv. A Third Convincement which is very notable (and I beseech you all to
lay this to heart and consider seriously of it) for this evil of
earthly-mindedness is a very secret and close sin, therefore I am the larger in
this point: the convincement is this.

That man that can be content with a slight assurance in the matters of Heaven,
but for the matters of earth he never thinks himself sure enough, but is very
careful to make all things so infallable as there can be no way that he can be
decived in, but he may surely build upon what he has in the things of this
earth. This is an argument of an earthly mind, Come to men that are earthly,
and discourse with them concerning matters that concern their souls, What
assurance have you that you are gone beyond any formal professor, that you are
better than the stony or thorny grounds that we read of in Scripture? What
evidence have you that the saving work of grace is wrought in you? that you
have shot the gulf? that you are translated out of the kingdom of darkness
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ? and that your sins are pardoned, and your
souls justified? that you are at peace with God? what evidences have you of
peace made between God and your souls: This answer would be given: I hope I am
converted, I trust in Gods mercy, sure I have grace, I shall be saved, God is
merciful. But what evidences can you show? They know not scarce what belongs to
that, nay, you shall have many of them, because they know not what assurance
means, therefore they, will think no body can be assured; we may hope well but
we cannot come to be assured of it: No, a heart that is truly gracious and
godly would be loath that should be true for a thousand worlds, they would not
lose their parts in the blessing of that, if God would make them Kings or
Queens of the earth. But thou have an earthly drossie heart, and do not
much look after assurance for matters of thy soul and eternal estate, thou will
venture those matters and put them upon a peradventure; but when it comes to
the matters of the earth there thou will make all sure, and go from this Lawyer
to another Lawyer to ask council, and to see whether the things are good, and
will inrole them; and if there can be any thing done to make more sure (if it
be any great sum upon which your estates lies) you will do it. I appeal to you,
If you could but hear of any of your neighbors what they had done to make such
a thing more certain than you have done; you would scarce be at rest till you
had done so as they have done: is it so in matters of your eternal estate? do
not you hear of many Saints of God that walk comfortably in the midst of all
afflictions upon the assurance of Gods love? you shall have some will be able
to say, I, and it is this Scripture I build upon, and through Gods mercy such
and such has the work of God been upon my soul in revealing himself to me, and
such a promise I have sucked abundance of honey from. But now generally, come
to people upon their sick beds, all that they say is this, They hope in Gods
mercy. But for the ground of their hope, for showing how God has been pleased
to bring their hearts and the word together, and what real effects there has
been upon their spirits by the word, that they can show nothing of: thou have
not therefore got that assurance for thy soul and eternal estate as others have
got, and yet thou can go on quietly, Oh! it concerns thee that art so busy
in making all sure for thy outward estate, to spend more thoughts and care in
the matters of thy soul and eternal estate than ever thou have done, here is an
earthly-minded man that can be contented with slight assurance for the matters
of his soul, and satisfied with no kind of assurance in the matters of the
world, but would fain make those things more and more sure continually.

4. Conv. Further, An earthly-minded man may be convinced of his earthlinesse
in this, He is content with a little degree of Sanctification, but for the
matters of the world, still he would fain have more and more. He looks at those
that are the most eminent that are in his rank, and he would fain get up as
high as they in the things of this life, but in matters of Religion he looks at
the lowest Christians, and is content to be as low as they; take an
earthly-minded man that is of such a trade, if there be any of his profession
or calling that had as little to begin as he, and thrive better, he would fain
get up as high as he, and is troubled that he is not so rich as he is; thus it
is in the world. But now, take them in matters of God, there is such men that
began since you began, and had as little means for the good of their souls as
you have had, they are thriven and got beyond you abundantly in the matters of
God, and does this trouble you? and are your thoughts solicitous about this?
Oh! that I could attain to that degree of grace as such a one has got, such an
one has a spiritual mind, and full of the joy of the holy Ghost, and full of
faith, he is able to depend upon God in the want of all outward comforts, and
certainly injoyes much communion with God; but I am far beneath such and such:
do these thoughts trouble you? it is ordinary for earthly spirits, if they look
but at any one that makes profession of Religion that is low in his profession,
I did as such a one does; and I have as much as they have, and that satisfies
them, they look upon the meanest Christans, and are satisfied that they are
like them; but for the matters of the world they look upon the highest, and are
not satified except they come and attain to what they attain to: and that is a
fourth evidence.

5. Conv. Then a Fifth is this, Earthly-minded men are very wise in matters of
the world, but in matters that are spiritual there they are very weak and
Simple. You shall have many men, (which I have wondered at sometimes to see)
that in matters concerning Religion there they are very ignorant, if they do
but speak in points of saving knowledge they speak like children, so that one
would wonder where their understandings were; now turn such men to the matters
of the world, Oh! how wise are they in their generation, Oh! how subtle, and
crafty are they, they can see an objecton there and know how to answer it, they
can discern any thing that will let them in their profit, many miles off, and
can prevent whereas others cannot; but now in those things that hinder their
souls, they cannot foresee things there, they are wise in their generation, and
they have memories for the matters of the world, they can understand things,
and remember things, and they can meditate there, but put them to meditate on a
point of Religion, they are presently at a stand: Let me appeal to you, do not
your consciences tell you, that in the matter, of the world when you are
walking from hence to London, you can run in your thoughts upon one business
all the way that you walk, you can plot this, and contrive the other way, and
foresee this and the other objection, and answer it thus in your own thoughts;
but I do but put this to you, when you walk over the fields, settle but upon
one meditation concerning Christ, and see whether you are able to draw out that
meditation the while you walk over one field, whereas you can spin out an
earthly meditation if it were diverse miles; when you awake in the night season
presently your thoughts are upon the things of the world, and you can draw them
out, and work there understandingly; but now in the things of God, Oh! how
barren, and simple, and weak are you there! there is scarce any one can
overreach you in the things of the world, but in the matters of Religion you
are over-reach't presently, every slight temptation overcomes you there.

6. Conv. And besides, you may know it by the discourse and words of men; 1.
John, 4. 5. They are of the world; therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them: Their breath is earthly, Oh! it is an ill sign that (you use
to say of your friends sometimes) when you come to their bed side, Oh! I am
afraid they will die their breath smells so earthly, it is a simptom of the death
of the body: So your hearts do smell so earthly, and it were somewhat tolerable
if it were on other days when your callings requires it to discourse of
business, but even that time that God has set apart for himself, you are
sometimes discoursing in your own thoughts concerning the businesses of the
world when you are praying, and hearing: whereas the communication and
discourses of men should relish of what they have heard out of the world, not
presently to go and talk about some earthly exchange occurrances, and so loose
all, Oh! it is this that has lost many precious truths, it may be when you have
been hearing, God has darted in some beam of Gospel Light into your souls, and
you have lost is before you have got home, and so have come to loose the
impression of the truth that you have heard, Oh! what a seemly thing were it in
those that come to hear the word when they depart that there should be no
discourse but tending that way? Oh! how often are you in company and never
leave any thing to refresh one another spirits, or to further one another in
the way to eternal life; though God gives you allowance to speak about your
business, yet still if you be spiritual and heavenly, he would have you to have
something about heaven or eternal life before you do depart.

7. Conv A. further Convincement is this, When Spiritual things must give way
to Earthlyness upon every little business: Prayer must pay for it, if I have
any business, I will take it out of the time of Paayer, or converse in the
Word the less, or hear the less; when as I say, that earthly things are so
high as spiritual things must give way, Heaven must stand by (as ir were) til
Earth be served; this is an evil sign of an earthly spirit: whereas were the
spirit Heavenly, the very first thing that thou would do when thou awakest in
the morning, or arisest, should be to season thy heart with something that were
spiritual: in Psalm 139. 17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me O God!
how great is the sum of them? If I count them, they are more in number than the
sand: when I awake I am still with thee. Oh! that were an argument of a
spiritual mind, that upon the awaking presently to be with God: When I awake I
am still with thee. But now, I appeal to you, Who are you withal when you
awake? Can you say, Lord, when I awake I am still with thee, I find an
inclination in my spirit to be upon the matters of Heaven, and when I am up, I
had rather my worldly business should give way than spiritual duties.

8. Conv. When a man or woman cares not much how it is with the Church, with
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, so it be well with them in the matters of the
world: when as there are things stirring abroad in the world (for we live in
stirring times wherein God is shaking the Heavens and the Earth:) now he does
not much enquire how things are in respect of the Privileges of the Saints,
the Ark of the Church, so his Cabin be safe. Truly, there need no oeher thing
but the examning of your hearts, how they have been these last years of Jacobs
trubles. We find Eli in the time of war he sat trembling because of the Ark of
God; he did not sit trembling because, that if the Philistims did prevail he
should be put out of his place, and his estate taken away; no, but because of
the Ark of God; that was an argument of the spiritualnesse of Eli's mind. And
so it may be an argument of very great comfort to you in these dangerous times;
If our consciences tell us this, that God that knows all things, knows that
the great thing my heart was solicitous about in these evil days, it was,
What shall become of thy great Name: Lord, what shall become of Religion: what
shall become of thy Gospel: Lord these were the things that took up my heart,
not so much what should become of my estate and outward accommodations and
relations in this world: Oh! examine your hearts in this, Whether the care of
your spirts be more for the furtherance of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ or for
the furtherance of your Estates? but for that man or woman that is most
solicitous about business that concerns their outward estates, and do not much
care how Religion goes, how the way of the Kingdom of Christ is maintai'd, God
at this time does speak to that soul; Thou art an Earthly-minded man or woman,
and therefore take heed lest what has been spoken concerning the great evil
that there is in earthly-mindednesse, lest it befalls thee, and especially the
last of all, Whose end is destruction, who art drowned in perdition; lest
hereafter this be the thing that thou shall lie crying out of, and cursing thy
self for, Oh! I had a base and earthly heart, and sought the things of the
earth, and made my portion there, and in the mean time the blessed God has
been forsaken; and I have lost my Portion in the Holy Land, for I had my
portion in Egypt among the Egyptians accoding as I did choose to my self.

9. Conv. That the more spiritual any truth is that is revealed, the less does
it take with his heart: Some truths of Religion perhaps he is moved with, but
these are as by-words to him, he minds them not at at all. The more spiritual
an Ordinance is that is delivered, the less is his spirit moved with it; if
indeed he comes to the Word and there be mingled some earthly natural
excellency, (for so I may call it) as natural parts, wisdom, wit, and
eloquence, and learning, that he is moved withal, it may be some fine story is
more pleasing to him, than the goodly pearls of truth that are revealed in the
word; as now, such truths as these, The enjoyment of communion with God, the
longing after Jesus Christ's coming; the living by faith upon a bare promise,
the excellency that there is in suffering for Jesus Christ: These truths now
are spiritual, The mortifying of the inward lusts, Self-denial, These things
are little savored by an earthly-minded man; tell him of the privileges of the
Saints, the mysteries of the Gospel, any thing that is spiritual it is but as a
notion to him; As it is with men that are upon the earth, they look up to Heaven
and see the things of Heaven but little; why is it that the Stars seem so small
to us here, but because we are upon the earth, the earth seems a vast body to
us, but the Stars seem but little to us though they are far bigger than the
earth: were we in Heaven, then the heavenly bodies would seem vast to us, and
the earthly bodies would scarce be discerned by us; were men's hearts heavenly,
all the things of the earth would seem little to them; but because they are
earthly, therefore the things of heaven, and spiritual mysteries are very small
in their eyes.

CHAP. IV. Seven Reasons of men's Earthly-mindedness.
I Shall now proceed unto the Reasons of the Point, Why is it that men's hearts
are so much set upon the earth, to mind earthly things. I give you briefly
these Reasons for it.

First, The things of the earth appear real to them, but spiritual and heavenly
things be but a notion: Now that that has reality in it, takes with the heart
most; though men are deceived in this, for the Scripture speaks of spiritual
things as the only real things, and earthly things as that that has no being
at all; in Prove. 23. 15. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not,
(speaking of the riches of the world) it has no reality at all in it. But in
the 8. Prove. 20. 21. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the
paths of Judgment: That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; to
inherit that which is, that which has a being, othert hings they are not, the
honors of the earth are but a fantasy and vain show; you have read of Bernice
and Agrippa, They Acts, 23. 25. (...)
came with much Pomp, with great Fancy, so the original is: but to an earthly
man these earthly things are real things, and therefore he minds them: and
wisdom is a lie unto a fool.

Secondly, These things they look upon as the present necessary things, though
the Scripture tells us, but of one thing that is necessiary, but yet they think
that these are present now, they may have need of heavenly things hereafter:
They may have need of reconciliation with God, pardon of sin, peace of
conscience, and such things, they may have need of them, that is, when they
depart out of this life. Oh! the infinite folly of most hearts to think, that
there is no present necessity of spiritual and heavenly things, whereas indeed,
our life consists in them for the present, This is eternal life: we may come
here in this world to enjoy eternal life; but the generality of people they
look upon all spiritual things only as our good for the future, when we go from
hence and are seen no more.

Thirdly, These things are most suitable to men's hearts. It Is no wonder that
they mind earthly things; They are of the earth, and from the earth, they have
nothing but the terrae fillii.
first Adam in them; now the first man was from the earth earthly. The truth
is, the happiness of man's estate even in innocence in the morning of the day of
his creation in comparison of the things that are now revealed by the Gospel,
was but earthly: take man when he was in Paradise, that Paradise was but
earthly: but then take man in his fallen and corrupt estate then he must needs
be earthly, and every thing closes with that that is suitable to it: comfort, it
does not come so much from the goodness of a thing but from the sutablness of
the object with the faculty. Now the things of the earth, they are suitable to
men that are of the earth, and therefore they mind them: the heart will
abundantly run out upon that which is suitable to it.

Fourthly, These things of the earth have a very fair show in the flesh, they
have a kind of goodly appearance in the eye of sense, yea, and in the eye of
that reason that is now corrupted by sin; we have a most elegant expression of
these earthly things, and earthly minded men having their hearts set upon these
things, it is in the 6. to the Gal. 12. verse, As many as desire to make a fair
show in the flesh says the Scripture, the words are to signify when a man
looks smug and neat, as you shall have some men dress themselves curiously,
and having handsome bodies they look so trim, fine, handsome, and very brave to
the eye of all that do behold them. So says he, these men that are the false
teachers, they desire to make a fair show in the flesh, that is, they look upon
the things of the flesh as those things that are very brave to the eye, and
they love to have all things so complete about them, that they may look smug,
and carry themselves with such beauty before the world; Oh! this is their
happiness, this they take content in, they seem to have fine estates, and to
have brave clothing, and all curious things about them, this looks so brave in
the eyes of the world, and therefore it is that their hearts are upon them,
they are here enemies to the Cross of Christ, they think suffering for Christ,
poverty, disgrace looks but untowardly. But now, those that desire to make a
fair show in the flesh, that would have their countenances well washed, fair,
and beautiful wheresoever they come, and be as sombody in the world, these do
thus and thus, these forsake the truths of God, and seek to provide for
themselves in the things of the flesh.

Fifthly, Men naturally never knew better things than the things of the earth:
and therefore no marvel though they mind earthly things so much: Children that
are born in a dungeon and never knew any better place, they can play up and
down in the dungeon: So it is with men that never knew what the things of
heaven and eternal life meant, they can mind earthly things better than those:
but when once the Lord opens the eyes of their understandings to see into the
reality, excellency, and glory of spiritual things, they then wonder at their
former blindness in minding such poor, low, mean foolish rattles, as the things
of the earth are.

Sixthly, There are earthly principles continually dropped into men by converse
with other men that are men of the earth: 49. Psalm. 11. and 13. Their inward
thoughts is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling
place to all generations, they call their lands after their own names. Their
hearts are set upon these things, then in the 13. verse, This their way is
their folly, yet their posterity approve their sayings. They are applauded by
men, they see that every body do applaud them in these ways, and when they
converse one with another, they do converse about the things of the earth, and
the common example of men, they see every body following the things of the
earth, and are greedy after these toys, and that likewise does incline their
minds to the things of the earth.

Lastly, The sensible experience they have had of the sweetness that there is
in the things of the earth: This is that that takes off their minds from
spiritual things, and makes them to mind the things of the earth.

But though these be the reasons why men do thus mind the things of the earth,
and an earthly-minded man blesses himself in his way, and thinks he has good
reason for what he does, and thinks all men fools that do not grovel in the
ground like a mole with himself, and looks upon the matter of Religion but as
mere words and talk, let them do what they will, I find contentment here: yet
certainly at length it will prove folly, this their way, as the holy Ghost
says in the 49 Psalm. This their way it is but their folly, and in the end the
wise men of the earth, those that have sought the things of the earth, and
bless themselves in their way, they will prove to be the greatest fools, the
holy Ghost accounts them so: In the 17. of Jere. 11. verse, As the Partridge
sits on eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
fool. He applauds himself for the present in what he has got, but at the end
he shall be a fool.

CHAP. V.
NOW the main thing that is still behind in the Point, It is therefore to
endeavor to take off the minds of men and women from the things of this earth,
that so by it I may make preparation to the next Point, which is of infinite
concernment, The Conversations in Heaven. But because their conversations
cannot be in Heaven till their minds be taken off from the earth, till the
disease of Earthly-mindednesse be cured; therefore we must now propound those
things that may help to take off the minds of men from the earth.

Eleven Considerations to take off men's hearts from Earthlymindedness.
First, Consider this, That all the things of the earth that thy mind and heart
is upon, if thou could possess them all as thine own, yet there is not so
much good in them as to countervail the evil of the least sin, not of the least
sin of thought; thy heart is mudling upon the things of the earth, and think
that thou should be blessed if thou badst thus and thus as others have. Let me
tell thee, if thou have but one sinful thought, there is more evil in that than
there is good in all that ever thou shall get all the days of thy life in the
world; and if this be so, that there is more evil in the least fin than there
is good in all the things of the earth, it concerns thee rather to have thy
mind how to avoid sin, or how to get the evil of sin to be removed, and how to
get thy sin to be mortified, that concerns thee more than the minding and
plodding about the things of the earth: that is one consideration.

A Second Consideration.
A second is this that may take off the hearts of men from the things of the
earth, That the chief things that are in the earth yea, name what terrene
excellency possibly a man may be crowned with under Heaven, has been the
portion of Reprobates heretofore, and is to this day, and shall be the portion
of multitudes whom God hates, and has set apart to glorify his infinite
Justice upon eternally. Shall thy mind and heart be set upon such things as are
the portion of Reprobates? will a Reprobates portion content thee? will it
serve thee? art thou satisfied with dogs meat? If it will not content thee, why
is it that thy mind is so much upon the things of the earth? It may be thou
that art poor and mean in the world; thy mind is upon some little matter: thou
can never expect to have any great things in the world, and yet thou mindest
them as if that there were thy portion, and thy happiness, some small pittance
to furnish thy house, to provide for thy self and thy poor family; Oh friend!
if it were possible for thee to get the Empire of the whole world under thy
foot, yet thou should get no more than has been the portion of such as God
has hated; and if so be that Kingdoms and Empires have been the portion of
Reprobates, why do thou mind things that are lower abundantly, and let the
strength of thine heart flow out upon such things as these are?

A Third Consideration.
A third consideration is this, Surely God has made man for higher things than
the things of this earth. Oh! if thou had but thy thoughts often working this
way, Wherefore do I think in my conscience has God made the children of men,
for what end? why has he sent them hither into the world? Of all the creatures
that God has here upon the earth, he has none capable to know him the
infinite First being of all things but only the children of men, and God has
given them such a nature as is capable of some converse with him, surely then
there be other things that God made man for than to have meat, and drink, and
clothes, and here to live a while only to enjoy creatures. Do not we read
often, That Jesus Christ was God and Man, took man's nature upon him, and died
for man? Surely there must be some other manner of things that are the fruit of
the purchase of the blood of Christ than the things of the earth; Oh my
brethren! had you but this settled upon you, that certainly God has great,
glorious, high, and wonderful thoughts about mankind, this would be a mighty
means to take off your hearts from the things of this earth, when thou have thy
heart grovelling here: Oh but are these the things that God made man for? had
not God higher thoughts in making of the children of men? do not I find in the
word that when man was made there was a kind of Divine consultation with the
Trinity, Come, let Us make man according to our own Image? God had other
thoughts of man than of other things. And if man were made for nothing else but
merely to dig in the earth, Certainly, the thoughts of God about man have been
but very low and mean (as I may so speak with holy reverence) for these are but
low and mean things here that men enjoy in the earth.

The Fourth Consideration.
As God has higher thoughts concerning man; so the dignity of man's Nature, the
rational soul of man is of too high a birth for to have the strength of it
spent about the things of the earth. God breathed into man his soul: It Is (I
may say) a kind of a Divine spark, the soul of man it is of the same nature
with Angels, a spirit as Angels are: the thoughts of the minds, the Faculties
and Powers of the soul are more precious things than to be powered out as water
upon the ground. If a man have a Golden Mill, he would not use it only to grind
dirt, straws, and rotten sticks in. The mind of man, the thinking faculty is
too high to be exercised in the things of this earth; the mind of man it is of
a most excellent capacious Nature: it is fit to converse, not only with Angels,
but with the eternal God Himself, with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to
bestow the strength of such a faculty that God has put into the soul of man
upon such dirtie, drossie, low, base, mean things, as earthlyminded men and
women do bestow it upon, this must needs be a great evil. Know, the dignity of
your Nature, the excellency of your Mind, the Soul of man it is of a
transcendent being. Put all the world into the Balance, with it it is nothing.
Therefore you know what Christ says, What shall it profit a man, to gain the
whole world, and lose his soul? The soul of the meanest gally-slave is more
precious than Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all the host of them: Let
me add then, all the Silver and Golden mines under ground; and all the
unsearchable Riches of the great and wide Sea, yea put all these together; and
the Soul of the most contemptible beggar that cries for a crust of bread at thy
door, is unexpressibly more worth than all these: Now, if man's soul be of such
an highborn Nature, if God has put such a Spirit which is a spark of Heaven
into the bosom, for man of him to employ it in no other use and service, but
merely to be an earth-worm to creep in and upon the ground: this must needs be
a very great evil.

The fifth Consideration.
The fifth Consideration is, The Uncertainty of all these things, Uncertain
Riches. How may any Causuality come and take away from thee all the things of
the earth that thy mind is upon? God sends but a little too much heat into the
body, and puts thee into a feavour, and where is thy delight then? thy body
being either too much heated, or too much coold, what is become of all thy
comfort here in this earth? Thou go abroad, and art dangerously wounded by
an enemy, what refreshing then do thou receive from all these things? Let me
tell thee, thou art in the midst of a thousand thosand Casualities here, every
moment ready to take away all the Comforts of the earth; and usually at that
time (observe it) when the minds of men and women are most fixed upon the
earth, that is the time that God has to strike them in those things, they be
then nearest to be deprived of the Comforts of the earth, when their thoughts
and minds be most set upon them. As you know it was with the Rich man in the
Gospel, when he was blessing himself, and crying to his soul, Soul Soul, take
thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; even that night (the text
says) this message came so him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken
away from thee, and then, whose shall al these things be? And at that time that
Nebuchadnezzer was blessing himself in the palace that he had built for His
Honor, then there comes a message to him from Heaven, so that he was presently
outed of all his Court-vanities to graze among the beasts of the field. So you
may find it in your own experience, that God has many times then most crossed
you in the things of the earth, when your minds and hearts have been most glued
to them: and it may be in mercy, yea, it is a greater mercy to be crossed of these
things at such a time, than to prosper in the midst of them; for it may be a
good argument that God intends good to a soul, to cross him at that time when
he is most earthly. Oh! many that have been godly indeed, but yet have bin
earthly minded, and have found God coming at such a time and crossing them in
some earthly Contentment have seen cause to bless God for thus dealing with
them. Whither was I going? I was going altogether to the earth, and minding
such things, my heart was set upon them, and God came in in a seasonable time,
to show me the vanity of my heart, and of those things that my mind was busied
about; Oh it was a happy cross that I had at such a season, there was much of
Christ that did hang upon it. And that is the fifth Consideration.

The sixth Consideration.
Do but consider what is become of those that have been earthly heretofore, that
enjoyed the greatest accomodations of the earth, what is become of those men in
former ages of the world, that lived here, and vapour'd so much in their
generation, who but they at Court and in City, and had all the earth according
to their desires? what is become of Agrippa and Bernice with all their pagentry
greatness? now they have acted their parts and are gone off the common stage of
the world, all their vanity is buried with them in one grave. What difference
is there between the poor and rich when they die? they go all the same way;
only they were for a little time, and flourished in the things of the earth,
and now are gone, but have left a great deal of guiltiness behind them; look
but to their example, and what is become of theme? and consider thy case must be
as their's within a while, the wheel is turning round, which will bring thee as
low as them, so that thou ere long must be numbered amongst the dead. Oh! it is a
mighty means to take off our hearts from the things of this earth.

The Seventh Consideration.
Consider further, How short thy time is that thou have here in this world.
That Is the argument of the Apostle, because the time is short, therefore let us
use the world as if we used it not, therefore let our hearts be taken off from
these things; we have but a little time, and a great deal of work, we have in
this short winter day of life to provide for eternity, now considering the
great weight of the work that does depend upon us here in this world, it may be
a mighty reason for us to bid adue to all the things of this world; indeed if
we had time enough for our work, and were sure of our time then we might spend
it about trifles. If a man comes into the City to do business, of great weight
and consequence, and has but a little time to spend about it, he never minds
any thing he sees in the City, never minds any body that comes by him, or any
shows in shops, what braverie there is there, but goes up and down the streets
minding only his own business. Oh! so it should be with us my brethren;
consider the great work we have to do, and the little time that we have to
effect that work in, there depends upon our little short uncertain inch of time
matters of more consequence than ten thousand thousand worlds are worth and if
we miscarry in this little time of our lives, we are lost and undone for ever,
better we had never been born, or had been made toads or serpents, or the
vilest beasts whatsoever, than reasonable creatures. Oh! have you so much time
for the spending the very spirits of your souls upon the things of this earth,
can you spare so many hours? Certainly if God did but make known to you what
eternity means, if the Lord did but cause the fear of eternity to fall upon
you, you would not mispend so much time as you do; many times though you
complain for want of time for spiritual things, Oh how much time do you spend
in letting out your thoughts and affections upon the things of the earth, more
than you need?

The Eighth Consideration.
Consider therefore in the next place, That a little will serve the turn to
carry us through this world. We are here but in our Pilgrimage, or in our
voyage; now a little will serve the turn here for the carrying of us through
this world: men will not take more in a journey than may help them. If a man
that is to go a journey should get a whole bundle of staves and lay them upon his
shoulder, and you should ask him the reason why he carries that bundle, why
says he, I am going a great journey, and I know not what need I may have of
staves to help me; it is true, to carry a staff in a man's hand will help him;
thus Jacob was helped by his staff over Jordan; but to carry a bundle upon his
shoulder will hinder him: Now a little will serve your turn, if you have but
meat and drink, food and raiment (says the Apostle) be content; and the
servants of God in former time, past through this world with a very little, and
many of them the less they had, the more peace and comfort they had in God,
and they were the more fit to die. I remember Ecolampagius when he was to die
being very poor, professed that he would not have been richer than he was, for
he saw what a hindrance it was, and so he could pass out of the world with more
ease and quiet a great deal; Certainly a little will serve the turn here: we
say, Nature is content with a little; and if there were Grace it would be
content with less; and therefore let not our minds be upon the things of the
earth: we have not so much need of the things of the earth as we think for.

The Ninth Consideration
And then further, consider though upon our minding the things of the earth we
should enjoy never so much; Yet there is no comfort, no good to be had in them
any further than God will be pleased to let himself through them; they are but
as channels to convey the blessing and goodness of God to us: Man lives not by
bread, nor meat only, you are deceived to think that if you had such and such
things you should certainly have a comfortable life, I say you may be deceived
in this, for it is God in these that does comfort the heart, there is a notable
Scripture for this in the 62. Psalm. where the holy Ghost says at the 10.
verse, Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery, if riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them, do not mind them, why? in the 11.
verse, God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, That power belongs unto
God, if riches increase, set not thy heart upon them; let not your hearts and
minds be upon riches, or any thing in this earth: why? God has spoken once,
twice have I heard, that is, again and again: God has spoken effectually to me
that all power to do any good belongs unto him, it is not in riches, there is
no power there for making of thee happy, but all belongs to him. This I confess
is a spiritual meditation that earthly minded men will have but little skill
in, yet where earthly-mindedness prevails in any one of the Saints, this may do
him good, whereas the truth is, it is not in the creature, or creature comforts
can do me good, if I had a thousand times more than I have, I might be
miserable in the earth, and have as little comfort as those that have least,
and therefore let me set my affections upon things above, and not on things on
the earth.

The Tenth Consideration.
Moreover lay this to heart, If you be godly God promises to take care for you
for the things of this earth, and to that end that he might ease you of the
burden of your care, cast your care upon God for he cares for you, and take no
thought for these things, for your heavenly Father knows you have need of them,
your heavenly Father takes care, See how he clothes the lillies, and are not
you much better than they? Now children they do not much mind the things of the
earth to provide for themselves, because they know they have their father to
provide for them; a child that has his father and friends to make provision
for him, it very much eases him; but indeed those that are left fatherless,
and friendlesse, they seem to have some excuse; I had need take care of my self
for. I have no body to provide for me: I but the Saints cannot say so, they
have a father to provide for them, and all the earth is the Lords as well as
heaven, and the fullness of them both; now the earth being the Lords as well as
heaven, the earth being thy fathers, why should thy care be so much upon the
things of the earth? Let thy care be to do thy duty to thy father, to walk as a
child, but let it not be for the things of the earth, thou do as much as
disavow the care of thy father for thee; and can thou believe that God shall
give his Son to thee and not give thee all things else? has not godliness the
promises of this life as well as of that to come? Oh! thou unworthy child that
professest an interest in such a father, or unworthy Christian that professest
an interest in such promises, and hop'st that God has done such things for
thee as he has done, and yet have thy heart in the things of this earth, as if
the Lord had settled thee only here, and put thee to shift for thy self here
from door to door: no certainly, the care of God is over his people in the
things of the earth, as truly as it is over them in regard of spiritual and
eternal things. Some men can think, at least they trust that they do trust God
for their souls, but cannot for their bodies so well; but surely faith will
teach thee to trust God for thy body as well as thy soul, for God has care of
both, and both were redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and has told thee,
that he that fears the Lord shall never want any thing that is good for him: Now
these considerations may mightily prevail to take off the hearts of men from
the things of this earth.

The Eleventh Consideration.
The last that I shall name is this, That all that are Professors of Religion,
they are dead to the world, or should be so: nay, if you be truly Religious you
are so, by profession you do profess your selves to be dead unto the world.
The Scripture makes this argument to take off men's hearts from the things of
this world, in the 3. Colos. 2, 3. Set your affections on things above, not on
things on the earth: why? for you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God. Ye are dead, the Apostle writes to the Colossians, and yet he tells them
that they were dead; the Sripture speaks much of the death of the Saints: As
it is said of women that lived in pleasures in Timothy, that they were dead
while they lived: so it may be said of Christians that they are dead while they
live, dead to the world, I am crucified to the world (says the Apostle) and we
are dead with Christ, I find that some interpret that Scripture in the 1. Cor.
15. 29. Else what shall they do that are baptized for the dead? they interpret
it thus, That all those that came in, which were Heathens and converted to
Christianity and were baptized, they were baptized for dead men; that is, by
their baptizm; now there was a profession that they did profess themselves
from that time for ever as dead men to the world, baptized for the dead; you
have it in some of your books over the dead, but the word is, for, and so it is
translated in this last translation, For dead men: your baptizm is administered
unto you as a sign of your profession, to be as dead men unto the world, so I
find some carry it. This is the profession of Christians to be as dead men to
the world; Oh do not dishonor your profession of Religion, for indeed there is
a greater evil (as we said) for professors of Religion to be earthly minded
than for any others, and yet how many are guilty of this? It Is an observation
of Luther, when God rivealed himself to Abraham and told him, that he would
multiply his seed; he made use of two similitudes, one was this, That he would
make his seed as the stars of Heaven, and at another time God says, that he
would make his seed as the sand upon the sea shore; Now says Luther, by these
two expressions there is signified two sorts of Abraham's seed, there are some
that are as the stars of Heaven, that are heavenly minded; There are others
that are as the sand of the Sea: that is, There are some profess themselves to
be of Abraham's seed but are of earthly spirits: Oh now, my brethren, we should
labor to have such minds and hearts so as we should appear to be the seed of
Abraham, as the stars of heaven, to be of the number of those that are as the
stars of heaven, that is, through heavenly-mindednesse. But that we shall come
to when we come to speak of the conversation of Christians, how it ought to be
in heaven.

But now, if any one should say, May we not mind earthly things and heavenly
things too?

Know there is a great mistake here, you cannot serve two masters, God and
Mamon; and it is very observable that text of Scripture, in the 3. of Colos. 2.
verse, mark the opposition, Set your affections on things above, not on things
on the earth: they are there opposed one to another: Set your affections or
minds, for so I think it is the same word with that in my text, who mind
earthly things. A man cannot look up to heaven and down to the earth both at
the same time, there is an opposition between these two, between the
earthly-mindedness that has been opened to you, and minding of heavenly things.

I but you will say, For these things while we are upon the earth we have need
of them, how can we do otherways but mind them? When we come to heaven, there
we shall have dispositions suitable to heaven, but sure not till then?

To that I answer, Though Christians do live upon the earth, yet they are not
of the earth, there is a great deal of difference between one that is of the
earth, and another that lives upon the earth: Christ says concerning himself,
that he was not of the earth, it is true, though he did live a while upon the
earth, yet he was not of it: In the 3. of John 31. He that comes from above,
is above all, he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the earth:
now Christ while he spoke these words he was upon the earth; but He was not of
the Earth: And so it is with Christians, they are upon the Earth, but they are
not of the Earth, they are a people redeemed from the earth, therefore that is
not enough: it is true, these things are things that we need, therefore we must
not mind them, for so in the 6. of Mat. where Christ speaks against taking
thought what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or what we shall put on.
Says he, Your Heavenly Father knows you have need of these things; you have
some need, I but you have need of other things, and greater need of other
things than of these things, what need is there for thee to live upon the earth
but in order to providing for eternity, and of living to the honor of Christ
and the praise of his Gospel? I say thou have no need of any thing on the earth
but in subordination to higher things; there is no need thou should live,
but for some other end, and therefore let not that be any such argument to
plead for earthliness, as indeed an earthly spirit is very witty in pleading
for its self.

I shall close this Point with some Exhortation to you, and Directions about
this Point of Earthly-mindedness.

CHAP. VII. EXHORTATION.
OH! considering what has been delivered, I beseech you lay it seriously to
heart, especially you that are young beginners in the way of Religion, lest it
proves with you as it does with many that are digging of Veins of gold and
silver under ground; that while they are digging in those mines for riches, the
earth many times falls upon them and buries them, so that they never come up out
of the mine again: and so it is with many that are beginning in the way of
Religion, that are digging in the mines of Salvation, for unsearchable riches,
for that that is abundantly better than gold and silver; now while you are thus
seeking for grace and godliness, Oh take heed that you be not covered with the
earth while you are digging in the world, but keep wide open some place to
Heaven, or otherwise if you dig too deep there will come up damps, if the earth
falls not upon you, yet I say, there will be damps rise from the earth that may
choke you, if there be not a wide space open that you may let the air that
comes from heaven in to you. Those that are digging into Mines they are very
careful to leave the place open for fresh air to come in; and so, though thou
may follow thy calling, and do the work that God sets thee here for as
others do, be as diligent in thy calling as any, yet still keep a passage open
to Heaven, that there may be fresh gales of grace come into thy soul, if at any
time thou be got into the world, if thou spendest one day and have not some
spiritual air from Heaven, take heed, there is a damp coming up that will choke
thee. Oh! that Christians would consider of this while they are here below! I
remember I have read of Austin in his Comment upon the 72. Psalm the 19. verse.
says the text, They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his
enemies shall lick the dust: He in a witty way applied it to earthlie-minded
men, says he, If you do so lick the dust, by this you will come to be
accounted one of the enemies of God. It Is true, the scope of the place is
different, but take heed that in this metaphorical sense that you do not lick
the dust and so come to be accounted an enemy to God. You that would be
accounted as friends and seek reconciliation with God, Oh do not lick the dust,
to be always here as Moles upon the earth, they say Moles, though they be
blind, yet if they be without the earth then their eyes are opened, and then
they shake and tremble: and so though the earth may close the eyes of men here
for a while, yet certainly there will be a day when their eyes shall be opened,
to see how they have gul'd and deceived themselves. And now it is worse too in
the time of the Gospel to be earthly-minded than at other times, it was not
such an evil thing to be an earthly minded man in the time of the Law, when all
the promises of God were carried in a kind of earthly way. Though I do not say
that all promises that were made to them under the Law were mere earthly, but
they were carried in an earthly way; therefore you shall find when God promises
his people in the time of the Law what great mercies they shall have, it is by
earthly expressions, as of gold and silver and such kind of things, and their
promises for Heaven it went under the expression of living in the Land of
Canaan as being a type of Heaven, now though they were taken with earthly
things when God revealed himself to them in an earthly manner; yet now in the
time of the Gospel, lift up your hearts for your calling is from above, now
there are Heavenly things revealed, he that is from above is come amongst us,
and the Heavens are broken open, and the glory of it does shine upon the
Churches in a far more brighter manner than it did before. And therefore
Gospellight does aggravate the sin of earthly-mindednesse, and therefore now
above all times should the hearts of men and women be disingaged from the
things of the earth.

CHAP. VII. Five Directions how to get our hearts freed from Earthlymindedness.
FIrst, To that end be watchful over your thoughts, do not take liberty to let
your hearts run too far in the things of the earth, what time you have for
meditation let it be as much as can be reserved for spiritual things; most men
and women think they may take liberty in their thoughts; why the thing in its
self is not unlawful, I but your thoughts will steal upon you and affect your
hearts very much: therefore watch narrowly over your thoughts, keep them within
Scripture bounds.

The Second Direction
Be much humbled for sin, That will take off the heart much from
earthly-mindedness. Your earthly-minded men, who have earthly and drossie
hearts, they have not known what the weight and burden of sin has meant, let
God but lay the weight and burden of sin upon the soul, it will take off the
soul from earthly things quickly; Oh! those men that have gone on in the world
in a secure condition, and never knew what trouble of conscience meant for sin,
they grow seer'd in those earthly Contentments; but now those men that have had
but the weight of sin lie upon them, know what it is to have to deal with an
infinite God, in the bearing of the burden of the wrath of an incensed Deity,
such know, that they have other things to look after than the things of the
earth: If God did but humble your hearts, the humiliation of your spirits would
quicken you, and take off the dullness and deadness of your spirits, and stir
you up to look after other things than the things of this life.

The Third Direction.
Further, Set the example of the Saints before you, that have been the most
precious servants of God, in former times; how they accounted themselves as
Pilgrims and strangers here in the earth: read at your leisure that Scripture
in the 11 of the Heb. at the 13. verse, These all died in faith, not having
received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on
the earth: and mark therefore how it follows in the 37. verse, They were
stoned, they were sawn asunder were tempted, were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheeps-skins and goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented. Who were these? They were they of whom the world was no tworthy,
They wandered in deserts, and in Mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth:
and yet such precious Saints of God as the world was not worthy of. Now when we
set before us how joyfully these servants of the most high went through all
their wilderness condition, this should make us ashamed of our
earthly-mindedness, and would be a mighty help to us.

The Fourth Direction.
And then if we consider the great account that we are to give for all earthly
things; you only look upon the comfort of them, but consider the account you
must give for them: this would be a means to take off the heart from
earthly-mindednesse: And consider, what if you were now to die, and to go the
way of all flesh, what good would it be to me to remember what contentments and
pleasures I had in the earth?

The fifth Direction.
But above all, the setting Jesus Christ before you, and the meditating of the
death of Jesus Christ: (I say) that is the great thing that will take off the
heart from the things of the earth: The looking upon Christ Crucified; how he
that was the Lord of Heaven and Earth, yet what a low condition he put Himself
into, merely for the redeeming of us! The conversing much with the death of
Jesus Christ deads the heart much to the world. In the 3. to the Philippians we
have a notable text for that, in the example of Paul, he accounted all things
as dung and dross for Jesus Christ: at the 8. verse, I account all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I
have suffered the liss of all things, and do count them but DVNG that I may win
Christ. And then in the 19. verse, That I may know Him, and the power of his
Resnrrection, and the fellowship of His Sufferings being made conformable unto
his Death. Paul desired to be so conformable to the very Death of Christ, that
he accounted all things in the world but as dung and dross in comparison of
that; Paul had the death of Christ before his eyes, and meditated much on the
death of Christ, and that meditation had a great impression upon his spirit,
that made him account all these things as dross, as dogs meat in comparison,
and that he might have fellowship with the death of Christ, Perhaps some of you
may think of the glory of Christ in Heaven, and that may for the present make
you less worldly; but let me entreat you to meditate on the death of Christ,
and know that there is an excellency in Conformity even to the death of
Christ, such an Excellency that may take off your hearts from the things of the
world. It Is said of the King of France, that he asking one once about an
Eclypse, says he, I have so much business in the earth, that I take little
notice of the things of Heaven.

Oh my Brethren! for the close of all, I beseech you let not this be said
concerning any of you, that you have such and such worldly employments, that
you cannot enquire after Jesus Christ. Plead not that you have such great
business, that you have so much to do in this earth that you take little
notice of the things of Heaven; no, surely, the Saints of God have their
business in Heaven, (as we shall see God willing hereafter:) Their City
Business, their Trading, their Aims, their Bent, it is higher than the things
of this earth. There are things that a man may let out his thoughts and
affections too as much as he will: This shows the vanity of the things af this
world, that a man had need be very wary how much he minds them, he cannot enjoy
the comforts of this earth without some fear: but now, when he comes to
converse with Heaven, there he may let out himself to the uttermost; that shows
the excellency of these things. And you that are but poor and mean in the
things of this earth, be not discomforted, because there is a charg from God
that men should not mind these things; surely there is no great matter in them,
as God charges that we should not mind them: Oh the excellency it lies in
things above which are heavenly and spiritual, where the Saints have their
conversation. But of this more at large in this following Treatise of Heavenly
Conversation.

FINIS.
AN HEAVENLY Conversation.
PHILIPPIANS, 3. 20. For our Conversation is in Heaven.
CHAP. I. Of Examples of Godly men, and how far they should prevail with us:
Opened in Six Particulars.
SOme read this Particle [For] [But:] But our Conversation is in Heaven. Our
Conversation is not as theirs: Certainly the Apostle does intend this, to make
a distinction from, or a difference between the Saints ways, and the ways of
those that were Enemies to the Cross of Christ: They mind Earthly things: But
our Conversation is in Heaven: But because of the particle, [For] our
Conversation; therefore I think that it has reference unto the 17 verse, for
the 18. and 19. verses are in a parenthesis, and therefore if you would know
the scope of the Apostle in it, and what this has relation to; (for) it is in
the 17. verse, Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk
so as you have us for an ensample; for our Conversation is in Heaven, to it is
to follow: he made a little degression when he said, Make us your example; then
he speaks of others, but many there are that walk thus and thus, and are
enemies to the cross of Christ, Whose belly is their god, whose glory is their
shame, whose end is destruction, who mind earthly things; But our (or, for our)
Conversation is in Heaven. As if he should say, Take heed of following of those
whose belly is their god, who mind earthly things, for their end is
destruction; but rather follow those whose Conversation is in Heaven, for their
end is, salvation: that is the scope of the words. Now then from the scope and
the coherance of them, follow us for an example, For our Conversation is in
Heaven; so they are to be joined together: from whence (first) before we come
to speak of this Heavenly Conversation that the Apostle mentions, we have this
point, That the Examples of men whose Conversations are heavenly, are to be
followed. Follow us as an example, for our Conversation is in Heaven. They are
guided by the spirit of God, and the end of their Conversation is good, and
therefore it is safe to be followed. In Prove. 2. 20. there the Wise man speaks
of an argument, Why we should embrace wisdom, because that would teach you to
walk in the way of good men, and to keep the paths of the Righteous. We should
observe the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous. It Is true,
that the examples of the best men, though never so holy, are not a sufficient
rule for any action, If a man or woman does any thing, though it be never so
good, merely upon the example of another man, yet this that they do will prove
sin to them: I say, though the thing be good and thou do it upon the example
of other good men, yet if that be al thy rule, the action will be sin to thee;
for that is the rule of Christ to us, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Now no
example can be a ground sufficient for faith; therefore, example alone is not a
good rule. Yea, and sometimes we know that Satan himself may transform himself
into an Angel of light: and may for the prevailing of some evil make a great
show of some holiness: and so, many gross Hypocrites for a time have had much
seeming holiness in their lives: and therefore it must be taken for a certain
truth that the examples of men never so holy are not a sufficient rule. But yet
thus far examples of men that are holy should prevail with us.

First, They should prevail with us more than other examples, than examples of
the most learned men; let men be never so great Rabbis, the example of one
holy man whose Conversation is in Heaven, should be more to us than the example
of many Scholars. For many men that are learned may be very corrupt, they may
go against their own consciences; as certainly many do.

1. It should prevail against the example of great rich men, who have goods
laid up for many years: you should rather follow the example of those that
appear to be holy, than the example of the richest and greatest in the places
where you live.

2. It should be more than the example of the Multitude, Joel, 3. 14. you have
a notable Scripture there against following of Multitudes of men, you may see
there that multitudes go to destruction; Multitudes, multitudes in the valley
of decision.

3. It should be more than the example of those that are merely related unto
us: as children should rather look at the example of godly men and women though
they be strangers, than of Father or Mother, or Uncle or Aunt, or the nearest
kindred, though their examples be not rules for our faith, yet they should be
more than the examples of any others.

Secondly, Though they should not be rules or grounds of faith, yet they should
be enough to take off prejudices that come from accusations of men. If men will
accuse the ways of godliness, and if there be any prejudices taken up against
the paths of Sion without ground, the example of godly men should be enough to
make us stand out against them; it may be you hear many crying out bitterly
against such a way of Worship, and many false aspersions are cast upon it,
because it is not a National way of Worship, for few there be that follow it.
Now do but observe what manner of persons do worship God in that way which some
call Heresy, are they not of holy and blameless Conversations according to the
Gospel, the strictest Puritans? Now though you must not do as they do merely
from their example, yet their example should have a great deal of power and
influence upon you to take off prejudices, and answer accusations, and to calm
and sweeten your angry and bitter spirits.

Thirdly, Examples though not sufficient ground and rule for faith, yet they
should be enough to make us to enquire after those ways, and to examine and
try, whether they have any footing in the Word, because the followers of them,
are very upright and circumspect in their way. Let me at least enquire after
these ways, let me examine them by the light of the Gospel, surely there is
some probability that these ways are the very paths of Sion, and lead to the
gate of Heaven, because the Professors of them are such friends of Jesus
Christ; It Is likely that these men should know the mind of God that do converse
with God most, that lie in his bosom, as the beloved Disciple in Christ's: Is it
not more likely that a man that is a familier friend, and converses daily with
such an one that this man should know his secrets, his will rather than a
stranger? so all men in the world are strangers to God, but only the Saints:
they converse with God, they are the men of his Counsel, and his heart, and
therefore of all men in the world it is most likely that they should have all
the Wills of God revealed unto them: All Learning and Natural wisdom cannot show
the mind of God so much as converse with God, and an holy humble familiarity
with him; God loves to open his bosom to his hidden ones, to reveal his mind to
them; and therefore when we see men that are godly whose Conversation is in
Heaven, that they walked in such and such ways, it should make us to think it
is like there is, more good in these ways than I am aware of at the present,
it is like that such men as God smiles upon, that they should know the mind of
God more than other men: therefore though I will not presently conclude it is
the mind of God, and do it merely because they do it, yet I Will examine and
search whether it be not the mind of God or no according to the Scriptures.

Fourthly, The example of godly men should prevail thus far, to make us to take
heed that we do not oppose those ways except we have very clear ground to the
contrary: then we may oppose them as Paul opposed Peter, and resisted him to
the face, because he did not go in a right way: let men be never so holy and
godly, yet they may be opposed in their way; If upon any examination you see
clearly this is not the way of God, I find it to be otherwise, not others think
it is not the way of God, and such and such are of a contrary mind; No, but I
have been examining it by the Word of God, and laying the rule to my
conscience, and my conscience to that, and I find it to be disagreeing to the
mind of God, then ye may speak or write against it, but do it not otherwise. If
ye see men holy, men whose Conversations be in Heaven, don't oppose it because
men do, be sure your ground be good, and you be clear in it if you do oppose
it, otherwise you may be in danger of fighting against God when you oppose
them: therefore make so much use of the example of godly, holy men, as not to
oppose the way but upon clear Scripture-evidence to the contrary.

Fifthly, The example of godly men should prevail thus far with us, As to
prepare us to let in any truth that they do profess and practice. When we come
to examine what is in the ways of God, and Heaven, in our examination, come
with prepared hearts to let in the Truths God shall reveal unto us, the rather
because we see such holy and godly men have embraced those truths before us;
when precious Gospel Truths are delivered to us by the hands of the servants of
Jesus Christ, then those very Truths in our eye are like apples of gold in
pictures of silver, as beautiful as golden fruit in silver dishes.

Sixthly, The example of godly men should prevail thus far, as after we have
examined, and found their way to be according to the Truth indeed, then their
example should confirm us in the Truth: should help to settle us more in the
Truth, should comfort and encourage us in such and such holy courses; because
we find not only that we are convinced of it, and we see it to be the way of
God, and have experience of it, but others see it and they are convinced of it,
others that are so godly they find much communion with God in it; now this
should mightily strengthen and further us in that we go on in the same way that
the Saints of God go on in: And indeed, it should be a very great grief to any
godly man, that he should differ from other godly men, though it cannot be but
that we should differ sometimes, because we are imperfect here, yea, and
sometimes a weak Christian knows that which a strong Christian may be ignorant
of, (I say) it falls out so sometimes, that God in some things reveals himself
to those that are weak and hides himself from those that are strong; so that
here in this world it cannot otherwise be expected for the present, till the
time that the New Jerusalem shall be let down from God out of Heaven, and then
the Saints will be all of one mind and walk all in one way, but till then there
cannot be expected but that there should be different ways of the Saints; but
yet I say it should be a very great heart-trouble to godly men to see that they
are necessitated to go in different ways from other godly men: and on the
other side a great encouragment and strengthening when the Saints go on in one
way together with their faces toward heaven.

CHAP. II. What Is to be done when Examples of Godly men are contrary?
IF you say, What should we do when we have contrary examples, and both sides
godly men; ye very godly men whose Conversation is in Heaven, some go one way,
and others as godly as they go another way? what shall people do then, when
they see that either way holy men go in?

Ans. To that I answer only these two things.

First, God by this means puts you to more strict examination of things, and
does teach you by this, that every Christian though never so weak, yet should
have a bottom and ground for their faith, and practice out of the Word
themselves, and never did God teach this lesson more strongly than now he does,
that we should all of us, not satisfy our selves in any point of Religion, nor
in any practice of Religion, but what we can our selves find and feel footing
for out of the Word. In former times Christians were very much led by examples,
and a few examplary godly professors would carry all the well affected in those
places with them, all that did pretend toward godliness would be very loath to
go in a different way to some eminent godly men, but though perhaps their
affections were good, and God may accept of their good affections, yet
certainly they were not so grounded and established in the truth as God would
have them; but now the Lord seems to go another way with his people, and puts
every one, the weakest, the meanest servant, to search and to find out the
truth themselves, and to have the knowledge of it themselves, and we hope the
time is at hand for the fulfilling of that promise, That all the people shall
be taught of God, shall be taught to understand themselves what are the reasons
and grounds of the practice of Religion, and those tenants and opinions which
they hold, and when people come to understand the grounds themselves, they have
a great deal more strength, and they will come to be established more than
formerly they have been, this good will come of it.

Secondly, When you see examples on both sides go contrary one unto the other,
and both godly, yet examine but this, Which way has most earthly inducements,
for that way that has most earthly inducements to draw or bias the heart, that
way lies under the most suspision; for men that are godly, yet they are but
godly in part, and though they may be as godly as other men in some other
things, yet there may be a temptation, the temptation for Earthly contentment
if it lies more one way than the other, you are to be more wary of one than the
other. But that we may pass this point, because it is but from the coherance,
by way of use but in a word or two.

CHAP. I Rebuke of those that follow the example of the wicked, and reject the
example of the godly.
IF the example of men whose Conversation is in Heaven is to be followed, hence
then are to be rebuked those that rather follow the example of wicked and
ungodly ones, if they be great, or learned, or the example of the multitude,
will rather follow the example of any than the example of those whose
Conversation is in Heaven: thou do thus and thus, and yet say, Do not others
do so? but who are they that do so? can you say in your consciences, that you
think that they that do so have their Conversations in Heaven, you will do as
they do? If there be any example that you will follow, they should be such that
you can take it upon your consciences, that these are the men who have their
Conversations above; you will do as others do, in drinking; swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, and in all manner of profaneness; have these their
Conversations in Heaven? Certainly you that do so, you follow the example of
those who have their Conversations in hell. But it may be you have some
neighbors live by you whose Conversations are blameless, yea, they are
Heavenly, and when you are in your good moods, your consciences witness to
them, and you could wish that you might die the death of the righteous; are
there not some that live in the same families, streets, or towns where you
live, that though sometimes your hearts are against them, you oppose them, and
scorn them, and speak against them, yet when you are in any good temper, or
afraid of death, then you could wish that you were as they are, and might die
their death; now will you not follow their example, but rather the example of
others, whose examples are in such things as are suitable to your vile, sinful,
and base lusts? We know that these examples of holy men shall rise up in
judgment against you another day, the Lord will condemn you from their example,
and say, Did not such and such live in the family and place where you lived,
and did not you behold their holy and gracious Conversation, and shall the
example of such and such vile wretches be followed rather than the example of
my Saints? (I say) this will stop your mouths and aggravate your condemnation
in the great Audit-day: Some there are, that are so far from following the
example of those whose Conversations are in Heaven, as they rage and fret
against them, and do what they can to darken the glory of their holy lives,
and if they can but have any misreport of them they will follow it what
possibly they can to the end that they might eclipse the holiness of their
lives, that so they may stop their own consciences, whereas were there not
something to darken the luster and beauty of the lives of the Saints,
certainly men's hearts would condemn them for walking in contrary ways unto
them, and therefore for relief of their consciences that they may not condemn
them for walking in ways contrary to them they do what they can to spew upon
their glory, and are glad if they can hear any ill report of them; and will
follow them to their uttermost, and all because their corrupt hearts are
against the holiness of their lives and Conversations.

And then lastly, Let those that profess Religion labor to walk so as their
examples may be convincing others: Is there such a power in holy examples to
prevail with men? you that profess Religion, make this an argument to work upon
your hearts, that your Conversation may be more in Heaven, that so your example
may do the more good in the place where you live: you that profess Religion and
yet have earthly spirits, and live scandalouslie, and vilie, Oh know! you live
to do as much mischief almost as a man can do in this world, no greater
mischief than for one to profess Religion, and yet for his Conversation to be
wicked and ungodly, and so to give the Lie to his profession. But for that we
spoke to heretofore, when we treated upon that Scripture, Only let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel.

CHAP. IV. Two Doctrines observed from the Text.
THus we proceed to the principal Doctrinal Truths, For our Conversation is in
Heaven. Our City Conversation, our Citizen-like behavior, or City Burges
estate, for so the word signifies, our carriage like free denizens it is in
Heaven: now from thence you have, First,

That the Saints are the Citizens of Heaven.

Secondly, That their behavior and Conversation even while they are in this
world it is in Heaven.

For the first (but briefly to make way to the second) The Saints of God, they
are the Citizens of Heaven, they are all free Denizens, Burgesses of Heaven. In
the 2. Ephesians. 19. there you may see how God has gathered all the Saints
together to be fellow-Citizens of Heaven: Now therefore ye are no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the
household of God. They have an Heavenly City here in the Church: the Church it
is a Heaven to the Saints, and as a type of that Heaven that they shall come
into to live for ever both with the Saints and Angels hereafter. And in the 11.
Heb. 10. it is spoken of Abraham, He sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob the heirs with
him of the same Promise, for he looked for a City which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God. It seems then that all the Cities in the world in
comparison of this City have no foundations; Abraham looked for a City that
has foundations, and whose builder and maker is God: The builders and makers
of these Cities are men, the founders of the most famous Cities in this world
have been men, and many times wicked and ungodlie men are the builders of
them: The first City that we read of was built by Cain. The builders and
makers I say of these Cities are men, laboring men: But Abraham looked for a
City that had foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And in the 12. Heb.
22. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem: mark, and to an innumerable company of Angels; so that you
are to have them your fellow Citizens, The Heavenly Jerusalem, that is here in
the Church: which is in comparison of Jerusalem that was in Canaan called the
Heavenly Jerusalem, so that they are Citizens of Heaven even as they are
Members of the Church: the Saints of God here in the Church are said to dwell
in Heaven, but in that their City there are an innumerable company of Angels
also, that plainly notes that it has reference unto the glorious Heaven of the
Saints that they are the Citizens of; the Saints are the Citizens of Heaven,
there they dwell: in the 13. of the Revelation, 6 and 8. verses, (this would
serve for proof of this thing and so for the other point that remains, That
their Conversation it is in Heaven) And he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
Heaven. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them. Now these were not in Heaven, that is, in their bodies they were not in
Heaven for the present; But they are said to dwell in Heaven because they are
of the Church here, and they are free Denizens of Heaven too, of the Heaven of
the Saints that they shall live in hereafter in a more glorious way; They are
Now Citizens of it; and they may be said to dwell in Heaven, as we shall see
afterward in the opening of their Conversations being in Heaven.

CHAP. V. How the Saints are Citizens of Heaven, opened in Nine Particulars.
NOW the Saints are Citizens of Heaven, For, First, Their names are all inrold
in Heaven, They are written in Heaven, in the 10. Luke 20. Rejoice in this,
That your names are written in Heaven. In Heaven is the Books of life where all
the Names of the Saints are written. Philip. 4. 3. Whose names (says he) are
written in the Books of life.

Secondly, The Saints are the Citizens of Heaven, for they have Christ their
Head gone before to take possession of Heaven in their names, therefore they
have a right to Heaven. As a man may be a Citizen, although he should travel in
another Country, yet his name being inrol'd there, and he having possession
there, he may be said to be a Citizen though he be in a strange land for the
present in his body: So the Saints have their names inrold in Heaven, they have
Jesus Christ their head that is gone before in their names to take possession
for them, and to provide Mantions for them; as in the 14. John.

Thirdly, When ever they do actually believe, they do take up their freedom;
Their names were there Inrold from all eternity: and so Christ at his ascension
went and took possession: but when they believe actually, they do as it were
take up their freedom in that City. There Is many men that are born free, yet
there is a time when they take it up: and so others that have served for their
freedom, yet it may be a long time before they be made free: and so the Saints
when they do actually believe they come to take up their freedom in the City
of Heaven, and are made Free Burgesses of Heaven.

And hence (in the fourth place) They come no more to be as slaves; they are
not bondslaves as before, they are delivered from bondage being made free of
Heaven. As if so be that foreigners, or such as are slaves should come to be
Infranchized, then they have the same freedom as others have, and are admitted
to the like City-priviledges, and they are no more to be accounted as slaves:
so those that are by nature bondslaves to sin and Satan, yea, and such as are
under the bondage of the Law, yet when they come to believe, they are
infranchized in Heaven, and are delivered from the bondage of the Law, Sin, and
Satan, they are said to be freemen of the City of Heaven.

Fifthly, All the Saints have right to all the common stock, Treasury, and
riches of Heaven; whatsoever privileges belong to the Charter of Heaven, the
Saints have right and title to them all. As in great Cities there is a Common
stock and Treasury that is for public occasions, and every Citizen has some
interest in it; so the Saints (I say) have interest in all the Common-stock and
Treasury and all the riches that there are in Heaven.

Sixthly, The Saints are the Citizens of Heaven, they have for the present the
same confirmation of their happy estate that the Angels and those blessed souls
have that are rasident in Heaven: (I say) they have this privilege now by being
Citizens of Heaven, that though their bodies be not in the highest Heavens, yet
they have their happiness confirmed as sure as the Angels in Heaven have, and
as any blessed souls in Abraham: bosom, look how they are confirmed in a happy
estate so as they cannot be made miserable, so is every Believer, though he
lives in this world, he has this privilege in being a Citizen of Heaven, that
he is confirmed in a happy estate, that all the powers in hell and in the
world can never make this soul to be miserable, and this is a mighty privilege
of being a Citizen of Heaven, he is more privileged than Adam in Paradise, for
Adam he was not confirmed and stablished when he was made in the state of
innocence, but every Believer is confirmed and stablished as the Angels in
Heaven are.

Seventhly, They have this privilege, By being Citizens, they have privilege of
free-trade to Heaven. You know, that Freemen in the City have privilege of
Trade more than Foreigners have; Foreigners are fain to pay Custom and
double taxes more than the Free-Citizens. So the Saints, they have the
privilege of Free-trade in Heaven, for any thing that does concern them; they
have a Freeintercourse with Heaven which others have not.

Eighthly, They have now for the present Communion with the Angels of Heaven:
there is Communion and Commerce between the Saints here and the Angels upon
this ground, because they are fellow Citizens; and in that place of the Hebrews
before quoted, We are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to the innumerable
company of Angels: There is a great deal of intercourse between the Saints and
Angels here upon earth, the Angels look upon them as their fellow Citizens, and
are ministering spirits for the good of the Elect, and they do very great
services for the Churchmen here in this world upon this ground, because they
look upon them as their fellow Citizens.

Ninthly, They have the protection of Heaven, being the Citizens of Heaven: I
say, they have Heavens protection. As one that is a Citizen, he has the
protection of the Law of the City, and of the power of the City to defend
him; hence we read of Paul, that because he was a Roman it was dangerous to
meddle with him, as in the 22. of Acts 25. verse, as they bound him with
thongs, Paul said unto the Centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to
scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned? As if he should say, Take heed
what you do, I am free of the City of Rome: And mark, (says the Scripture)
when the Centurion heard that, he went and told the chief Captain, saying, Take
heed what thou do, for this man is a Roman, he has the protection of the
City. Thus the Saints are Citizens of Heaven, They are not Romans, but of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and when any are about to wrong one of them, they had need
take heed what they do for he is a Citizen of Heaven, the King of Heaven is his
King to protect him; and he sits and laughs at the enemies of the Church: And
the very Angels themselves they are their guard, to guard all these Citizens,
and to protect them, and this is the comfortable estate of all the people of
God, that they are the Citizens of Heaven. Our City Converse. All this I note
out of the signification of the word in the original, and without the
understanding of the propriety of the language, and the word, we should not
have the understanding of this truth.

Wheresore my brethren it being thus, it should teach all the people of God to
walk as becomes Citizens, not to be rude in their behavior; it is a dishonor to
Citizens to be rude in their behavior, it is enough for Country people that
never had any education to be rude; but certainly the Saints of God, they have
the education of Heaven (this may be added for a tenth Particular) They have
the holy Ghost to be their Instructor, to bring them up in holy and good
manners that is suitable to Heaven, this the Saints have; and manifest it in
your Conversations, be not rude in your way, prize your privilege of being a
Citizen of Heaven; it is that that cost Jesus Christ dear to purchase this
infranchizement and liberty for you: we read in the 22. of the Acts of the
Captain when he heard that Paul was a Roman, in the 27. verse: their chief
Captain came and said to him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yea. And the
chief Captain answered, with a great sum obtained I this Freedom. And Paul
answered, I was freeborn. They were wont to give great sums to purchase
freedoms of the City. Oh! this City that here we are speaking of, has such
privileges as is beyond any in the world: And no man or woman can come to be
free of this City but it is by a great purchase: No man can say as Paul did
here, that he was born free; no, but if he came to be free of Heaven it was
with a great purchase, it was with the purchase of the blood of Jesus Christ
that was more worth than all the world. And if the Son makes you free, then you
shall be free indeed, and therefore prize this as a great mercy; while you
live here in this world, account it as a great mercy that you are a Citizen of
Heaven, account your happiness to consist there, it is more than to have House
and Lands here; for a man to have a freedom of some City, it is more than to
have House and Land in the Wilderness: What though the Lord does order things
so as while thou live in the wilderness of this world thou have no habitation
of thine own, yet certainly the Lord has made thee free of Heaven, it was
purchased for thee by the blood of Jesus Christ: Now by that price that it cost
thou may conclude that there is some great matter in it, that thou art a
free Denizen of Heaven.

CHAP. VI. How the Saints have their Conversation in Heaven, Opened in Nine
Particulars.
BUt now, our Conversation should be answerable; and now we come more fully up
to the scope of the Apostle; But our Conversation is in Heaven.

The Conversations of the Saints that are free Citizens of Heaven ought to be
answerable; though their Co-habitations be in this world, yet their
Conversation it should be in Heaven; in the 7. of Dan. 10. 18. there you read
of the excellent estate of the Saints, But the Saints of the most High shall
take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever: That that is translated
here, The Saints of the most High, it is not only meant of the Most High God,
but the Saints of the high Places, so it is translated by some, for the Saints
are the Saints of high places in regard of their interest in Heaven, and in
regard of their Conversations suitable to the place, in the 2. Ephe. 6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. The Saints are set in Heavenly places, Heavenly dignity, Heavenly
privileges, Heavenly prerogatives, yea, and they themselves may be said to be
in Heavenly places though their bodies be upon the earth, their souls are in
Heavenly places, their Conversation is in Heaven, They are the Saints of the
High God, and they are set in high places.

You will say, What is this Conversation that is in Heaven that is here spoken
of. I shall open it in these particulars.

The first is, The aim and scope of their hearts, it is Heavenward that the
Saints look at, as their aim and scope is Heaven, they look upon themselves in
this world as pilgrims and strangers, Heaven's their home, and their eye is
there, their end, their scope, whatsoever they do it is for Heaven some way or
other to fit them for Heaven, and to lay in for Heaven against they shall come
and live there, their Conversation therefore is in Heaven: All that they do,
eating, drinking, going about their business, yet I say their aim it is Heaven.
I remember it is reported of Anaragorus a Philosopher, that being asked
wherefore he lived, he said, he was born to contemplate the Heavens, he made it
the end of his life for which he was born to contemplate Heaven; Being a
Philosopher and having understanding in the motions of the Heavens, he took
such delight in it, that he accounted it the end for which he was born. So the
Saints look at Heaven as their Center that they aim at, that is their scope: we
(says the Apostle) do not look at things that are seen, but at things that are
not seen, nothing in the Earth is our scope, but Heaven is our scope, and so
their Conversations may be said to be in Heaven in that respect.

Secondly, Their Conversations are in Heaven, for they are acted by Heavenly
principles in all their ways.

Heavenly principles you will say, What are they?

This is a Heavenly Principle, That God is all in all: that is a Principle that
the Saints are guided by, in Heaven they look upon God to be all in all unto
them, so do the Saints here, in what they do, in what they are, in what they
enjoy, they act upon this Principle, that it is God that is all in all,
whatsoever I see in the creature, yet it is God that is all in all to me, I act
by virtue of this Principle.

That God the infinite First-being, is infinitely worthy of all love for
himself, that is a Heavenly Principle: the Saints that are in Heaven, they look
upon the infinite excellency and glory of God, they look upon him as the
First-Being of all things, having all excellency, and glory enough to
satisfy all creatures for ever, and look upon him as infinitely worthy of all
love and service for himself; know this is a heavenly Principle: So the Saints
their conversation is in Heaven, they are acted by heavenly principles; I look
upon such and such things in the world whereby I may go in credit, increase, or
comfort, this is an earthly principle: But when my heart is so upon God, that
it looks upon him as infinitely excellent and worthy of all love, service, fear,
honor, and worship for himself alone, whatsoever becomes of the creature God is
worthy of all for that infinite excellency in himself; this is a heavenly
principle: and for one to be acted in his life by such a principle as this is,
this is to be acted by heavenly principles, not by such low, and base
principles as the men of the world are, but by heavenly principles.

Thirdly, Their Conversations are in Heaven. For here though they live in the
world, they have communion with the God of Heaven that is above in the whole
course of their lives. In the 1. Epistle by John 1. chap. you have diverse
excellent expressions about our communion with God. In the 3. verse, That which
we have seen and heard declare we unto you, That ye also may have fellowship
with us, and truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. And then in another Scripture we read of the Communion of the holy
Ghost, Thereis Communion with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Now what makes
Heaven but God? we say, where the King is there is the Court, where God is
there is Heaven, let God be where he will. There is some controversy among
some, where the Saints shall be after the Resurrection; some think it shall be
still here, and yet with all the glory that the Scripture speaks of. Now it is
no great matter where it be, so it be where God is, those that have Communion
with God, they are in Heaven, their Conversation is in Heaven: now it is that
that is the life of the Saints, their Communion with God; thy life it is to
have communion with the Creature, that is for thee to close with the contents
of the Creature, and the faculty that is in man to taste any thing, or to have
any delight in any thing in this world, when there is a suitable object to the
faculty, that is his Communion with the Creature; As now a Drunkard, there is a
kind of Communion that he has merely with lude company, and with the creature
to please his sense for a while, there is all the communion that he has: But
what a different Conversation is this, for one merely to please his sense in
meat and drink a little while, and another to have communion with Father, Son,
and holy Ghost? The Saints here in this world have not an Imaginary but a Real
Communion with the Father Son and holy Ghost.

Communion, you will say, what is that?

By Communion with God we mean this, The acting of the soul upon God, and the
receiving in the influence of the goodness and love and mercy of God into the
soul: When there is a mutual acting of the soul upon God and God upon the soul
again; as when friends have Communion one with another, that is, that one acts
for the Comfort of the other, there is a mutual embracing and opening of hearts
one upon another for the satisfying of the Spirits one of another: So communion
with God is the mutual actings of the soul upon God, and God upon the soul
again: The Saints they see the face of God, and God delights in the face of the
Saints: And they let out their hearts to God, and God lets out his heart to
them. We cannot express this to strangers, a stranger shall not meddle with
this joy, this is a mystery, a riddle to the carnal world. Do but you consider
this, that what Communion you have with your lude company, to sit, and eat, and
drink, and play, and tell stories all day long, this you think is a brave life;
but now, that the communion of the Saints is raised higher, and the comfort of
the Saints is not in such poor, low, base things as thine is, the Saints have
comfort in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in an infinite higher way, and
in that respect their Conversations are said to be in Heaven: And especially
when they are with God in his Ordinances they cannot be content except they
have Communion with God there, it is notenough for them to call upon the Name of
God, to kneel down and to use some humble broken hearted expressions; Oh but,
what communion have I with God and Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost in my duties
at this time! I come to the Word and other Ordinances, Oh! but what communion
have I with God in them? I cannot be satisfied except I taste and see how good
the Lord is; I cannot go abroad about my business but with a heavy heart
except I hear some thing from Heaven this morning; all the comfort of their
lives do depend upon this, in having communion with Father Son and holy Ghost.

Fourthly, Their Conversation may be said to be in Heaven, Because they do live
according to the Laws of Heaven: They do not here in this world live according
to the Laws of men, and the lusts of men, but they look for their direction
from Heaven, What rule is there from Heaven to guide me? There must be some
word from the God of Heaven to order and guide them in their ways, or else
they cannot tell how to suit with them; Indeed while they live in the Cities of
the world they must obey the Laws of men, but still it is in order to the Laws
of Heaven, the main thing that they submit to, is the Statute Laws of Jesus
Christ the great Law giver; because there is a Law of Heaven that does require
them for to obey the Laws of men that are according to those Laws of Heaven,
therefore they do obey them; but the Laws of Heaven are those that the Saints
look after for their direction in all their ways, such and such a thing I have
a mind to, but will the Law of Heaven justify me in this? have I any word from
Jesus Christ to guide me in such a way? I dare not do otherwise than according
to the Will and Scepter of Christ, they must be my rule in all my ways:
whereas before thy lust was thy rule, and thy own ends thy rule; and the common
course of the world thy rule; but now the Laws of Heaven are thy rule; and
therefore their Conversations are in Heaven because they are guided by the Laws
of Heaven: Heaven is their aim, They are acted by heavenly Principles, They
converse with the God of heaven, And then fourthly, They live according to the
Laws of heaven.

Fifthly, Their thoughts and hearts are set upon heaven, as he says, The soul
is where it loves rather than where it lives; where the heart is there is the
soul, there the man may be said to be. Now the Saints have their hearts in
heaven, their thoughts in heaven, their meditations in heaven, working there,
When I awake I am always with thee (says David.) And Oh how sweet are the
thoughts of heaven unto the Saints! While thou art mudling in the world, and
plodding for thy self in the things of this world, If God should come to thee
and say, Where art thou? as he said to Adam; yea sometimes while thou art at
prayer and hearing the Word, Where are thy thoughts, and about what? even as we
say in the proverb, are running about a Wool-gathering.

But now come to one whose Conversation is in Heaven, he keeps his thoughts and
meditations there continually, meditating on the glorious things that are
reserved in Heaven. As I remember I have read of that holy man, Mr. Ward that
being in the midst of a dinner, and people wondering what he was a musing
about, he presently breaks out, For ever, for ever, for ever, for almost half a
quarter of an hour he could not be stilled, but he cries, for ever, for ever,
for ever. So far as any man or woman has their Conversation in Heaven their
thoughts are there, thinking Oh eternity, eternity, to be for ever in Heaven,
to live for ever with Christ and God, and Oh the Crown of glory that is there!
when will that blessed day come when I shall come to enjoy those good things
that are there? his thoughts will be there, and he is longing to be there, his
love and desires and affections will be working there. It Is said of the people
of Israel, Acts, 7. 39. That their hearts turned back again to Egypt; they
never returned in their bodies to Egypt, but their hearts were there, they
would fain have the Onions and Fleshpots that were in Egypt, their hearts were
there. So it may be said of many, that though they come and hear the Word, yet
their hearts are in their shops, their hearts are after their covetousness; but
it is contrary with the Saints, Though they live here in this world, yet their
hearts are in Heaven: As I remember it is written of Queen Mary, that she said,
If they ripped her open they should find Callis in her heart; And so it may be
said of Saints, whose Conversations are in Heaven; I speak not of all
Professors of Religion, for it is said of bodies, (when Paul speaks of the
resurrection) there are bodies Celestial, and bodies Terrestial, so I may say,
There are Professors Celestial, and Professors Terrestial, but as for such
whose Conversations are in Heaven, who walk with God, and live here the lives
of Heaven upon Earth, If they were ripped up, you should find Heaven in their
hearts; un-rip many men's hearts, and there is nothing but the earth,
uncleanness, and baseness; suppose God should come this moment, and rip up all
your hearts, and disclose them to all the men of the world, what a deal of
filthy stuff would be found in many of your hearts? but for such whose
Conversations are in Heaven, they would be ready to have God unrip their hearts
when he pleases, Lord, try, Lord, search me, Lord, examine and see what is in
my heart; I Will but put this now to you as in the Name of God, and let
conscience answer, What do you think would be found in your hearts if they
should be unrip'd now? and if your consciences tell you, Oh Lord! if my heart
should be ripped up now, there would be a filthy deal of ugly and abominable
stuff there, surely I have not had my Conversation in Heaven, my heart has
been sinking even down to low, and base things: but now, for those whom this
text concerns, it will be an exceeding comfort to them; and I hope that there
are diverse of you that may be able to say, if the Lord should at this present
rip our hearts and show them to all the world, I hope the world should see that
Heaven is stamped upon our hearts. We account it sad weather when we cannot see
the Heavens for many days, when we cannot see Heaven many times for a week
together; and we account it an ill dwelling where men dwell in narrow lanes in
the City, so that they can scarce see the Heavens except they go abroad in the
fields. My brethren, surely it is a sad time with a gracious heart when any one
day passes without converse with Heaven, without the sight of Heaven, and
meditations of Heaven, and having their hearts there. Thus it should be with
Christians whose Conversations are in Heaven, they should never love such
dwellings wherein they cannot see the beams of the Sun; It Is a most comfortable
thing for to see the light, a man that dwells in some dark house, it is very
comfortable for him to walk out into the open air, and to behold the Heavens;
Oh my brethren! our souls dwell in dark houses every one of us; for our bodies
are to our souls like a dark and low celler, but the Lord gives us liberty to
go abroad, to be conversing with the things of Heaven that he has revealed in
his Word and in his Ordinances: And as many Citizens that live in dark rooms
and keep a long time close to their work, yet at such times as they call days of
Recreation, they walk abroad in the Fields and take the fresh air, and oh how
delightsom is it to them! The same should be to a gracious heart that has a
great many businesses (indeed) in the world, I but on the Lords day, Oh that he
may now enjoy God in his Ordinances more than before; his thoughts are upon
those ways wherein he may come to have more of Heaven, Oh! that I may come to
converse more with God than at other times! And upon that the Sabbaths are the
joy of his soul, his delight, he longs after the Sabbath, he thirsts after
Ordinances, for indeed his heart is in them, for he finds there is more of
Heaven in them than in other things; and in that regard the Saints having their
thoughts and hearts in Heaven, thus he proves to have his Conversation to be in
Heaven. Moses never came to Canaan, and yet God gave Moses a sight of it,
carried him up to mount Nebo. Heavenly meditations are as it were mount Nebo,
whereby when the heart is raised a little upon the mount, it is able to see
Heaven, and behold the glorious things there. The Scripture speaks of Lucifer,
that he had his nest among the stars: A Saint has as it were his nest, his
dwelling among the stars, yea, above the stars in the highest Heavens. As it is
with wicked men, that when they seem to draw nigh to God, yet their hearts are
far from him; then they are in their shops, they are among their ships when
they seem to be worshipping of God: So when the Saints seem in regard of their
bodies to be far from God, yet their hearts are in Heaven in the mean time.

Sixthly, For the opening of a Heavenly Conversation, it consists in this, When
in the course of men's lives they do converse and delight in the same things
that are done in Heaven, they make their happiness the same happiness that is
in Heaven, and make their exercise to be the same exercise that is in Heaven:
As for instance, What is there in Heaven? There is the fight of the face of
God; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And the Angels,
Always behold the face of God. So the Saints may be said to have their
Conversations in Heaven because their exercise here while they live, it is in
the beholding the face of God, in standing before God seeing his face; the
greatest delight and contentment of their souls, it is, that they can see
somewhat of God,

What Is to be done further? The Work of Heaven, it is in the Praisings and
Blessings of God. What do the Saints and Angels of Heaven, but continually
bless, and magnify, and praise the Name of that God whom they see to be so
infinitely worthy of all praise, and honor from his creatures? Then is a man's
Conversation in Heaven when as he does the same things, when he joins with
Angels and Saints in doing of the same work, of magnifying and blessing and
praising God.

What Is done in Heaven, but the keeping of a perpetual Sabbath? Then are our
conversations in Heaven, when we delight in Gods Sabbath, yea and indeed to
keep a constant Sabbath unto God, though busied about earthly things, yet still
we keep a Sabbath to God, in resting from sin, and being spiritually employed.
And that is a Sixth thing.

Seventhly, Then our Conversation is in Heaven, When in Earthly employments,
yet we are Heavenly: when we use earthly things after a heavenly manner; it is
not the place that God looks at so much, where his Saints are, But what they
do: Though while we live in the earth we use earthly things, yet when we can
use them in an heavenly manner, then our Conversation may be in heaven though
we upon earth.

As thus first, When in the use of earthly things, we do quickly pass through
earthly things to God, we make use of them, but we do not stick in them; we
make them the means to pass through to God, and get quickly through: a carnal
heart sticks in the things of the earth, mingles with the earth; but a
spiritual, and heavenly heart makes earthly things but as Conduit^ for
conveyance of him to heaven, we here carry about with us the flesh, and because
we have so much earth, we have need of these earthly things, I but they are
means of conveyance to Spiritual and Heavenly things.

And then, When we use Earthly things as Heavenly, that is, we take a rise of
earthly things to meditate of Heaven; upon the enjoyment of any thing in this
earth we raise up our thoughts to the things of Heaven; when we see the light,
to remember then the glorious light of Heaven, and of the inheritance of the
Saints which are in light; when we cast any sweetness in the creature, If
these things be so sweet, Oh what is heaven and God then that is the Fountain
of all good things! Thus to make all earthly things to be but as heavenly rises
to us, That Is a heavenly Conversation, that in the use of earthly things does
quickly pass through to God, and that makes spiritual and heavenly rises of
earthly things.

Eighthly, Then is our Conversation Heavenly when the Saints in their Converse
together are Heavenly: when the Saints in their converse do look upon
themselves as the Citizens of Heaven, and converse as it beseems those of such
a Country. When as Country men are abroad in foreign parts and they meet
together, and there be conferring about the state of their country in their own
language, and above their friends, and what things there are there among them,
they will say one to another, (as English men) me thinks we are in England now;
our converse is as if: we were in England. So when the Saints in their
meetings, they do not meet to jangle, and wrangle, but they meet to converse of
Heaven, and to confer about their Country, and every one telling news of
Heaven, there is none of the Saints that walk close with God, but when they meet
together may tell one another some tidings of Salvation from above. When
Country men meet together in any place commonly the first question is, What
news is there from our Country, from England; So the Saints when they meet
together if they be of Heavenly Conversations, They will be talking somewhat of
Heaven before they go: what news of our Country? what news from Heaven? though
they may have leave to refresh themselves being poor earthly creatures here,
with something of the earth, yet they will have some talk of Heaven before they
part one with another: This is a Heavenly Conversation when the Communion of
the Saints of Heaven is in Heavenly things.

The ninth and last thing wherein the Conversation of the Saints in Heaven is,
is this, That their great trade while they are upon the earth it is for Heaven:
Though they be not in their bodies there, yet their trading is there, and
that is the special thing that seems to be noted in the very word in the text;
now their chief trade it is in Heaven, the Saints (...).
that have Heavenly Conversations they do not trade for trifles as other men
do, but they trade for great things, for high things, in the 3. of Collos.
says the Apostle there, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are
above where Christ sits at the right hand of God: set your affections on
things above and not on things on the earth. They seek the things of God, even
those things where Christ sits at the right hand of God, set your affections
on things above and not on things on the earth; they seek after these things,
they merchandise for those goodly Pearls.

CHAP. VII. The Saints Trading for Heaven, opened in Seven Particulars.
NOW in the Saints Trading for Heaven there are these several things
considerable.

First, As in trading you know it is requisite in those that are tradesmen to
any Country, that they should have skill in the Commodity that they trade
for; so the Saints they have skill in Heavenly things; there is many poor
Christians who have little skill in the matters of the world, speak to them
about them they understand but little, but speak to them about Heaven, and you
may quickly perceive that they have skill in heavenly Commodities, they have a
skill from God, they are Wise Merchants.

Secondly, A Tradesman, he must have a stock to trade withal: Now the Saints
they have a stock to trade withal for heaven, they have grace in their hearts,
grace in the heart is a stock for a trade. If you leave your Children no lands,
yet if you leave them a good trade and a stock, you think you leave them a
plentiful portion. Now the Saints though they have but little in the world, yet
they have skill in the Commodities of heaven, they have a good trade and a good
stock too, they have a stock of grace that shall never be lost, how ever they
perhaps may not have those In comes that they do desire sometimes, yet they
shall never lose their stock, their portion, and it should be their care to
improve their stock for heaven, and indeed then they have their Conversation in
heaven, when they improve and lay out all their stock that way about heavenly
Commodities.

And then a third thing in trading is, To take advantage of the Market for
Commodities: Great bargains may be had sometimes that cannot be had at another;
so the trade of a Christian for Heaven it is in the observing his advantages
that he has for heavenly things, and those that have their Conversations in
heaven they are very wise and understanding this way; they are able to know
their times and seasons; other men that have not skill in the matters of heaven
they do not know their times and seasons, and therefore they neglecting their
markets, it may be upon their sick and death bed then they begin to think of
heaven, and then, Oh that they might but know that their souls might go to
Heaven when they go from their bodies! I but thou art unskilful in heavenly
Commodities, thou did not know thy time, thou should have had thy
Conversation in Heaven in the time of thy life, and so have observed what
advantages God gave thee for trading for heaven; Oh that we were but all wise
this way, to make it appear that our Conversations are in Heaven in this
respect, namely, That we are wise to observe our advantages, Oh! the advantages
that God has given us all at one time or at another for Heaven, there is not
any one of you but God has given you much advantage for Heaven had you but
taken it, If you will reflect upon your own hearts, the course of your lives in
former times, your consciences may tell you, Oh sometimes what fair advantages
had I for Heaven! How did the Spirit of God begin to stir in me? What truths
were there darted into me at such a season! What motions flowing in had I at
such a time? Oh how happy had I been if I had taken such an advantage for
Heaven, I had even been in Heaven already: Now those who do converse with
Heaven, they watch at those advantages, they come not to hear the Word but they
watch for the time to have God stirring in their hearts, and they follow that
advantage, they watch for the time of the softening of their spirits, and the
enlivening of their souls, and they follow hard those advantages, and so trade
for Heaven, and grow rich in Heavenly Commodities.

Fourthly, Where there is a trade from one Country to another, there is much
intercourse. A man that trades to such a Town or Country, there is much
intercourse between that man and those that live there: so a Christians trading
for Heaven is in this, there is very much intercourse between Heaven and his
soul, every day he sends up to Heaven, and every day he has something from
Heaven sent down to his soul! Oh do but examine what intercourse there has
been between Heaven and you: how is it with many of you? even as if there were
no Heaven at all? Men that are no tradesmen to the Indies, it is as if there
were no such place at all to them. So it is with many that lives even in the
bosom of the Church, there is very little intercourse between Heaven and them;
but a trader for Heaven has much intercourse with heaven.

Fifthly, A man that trades to any place, if he trade for great matters he has
the chief of his stock where he trades; though he be not present in his body,
yet the chief of his estate is there: If a man be a Spanish or a Turkish
Merchant and trade thither, the chief of his estate lies there, in Spain or
Turkey more than here. So it is with one that trades for Heaven, the chief part
of his estate lies there, he accounts his riches to lie in Heaven; indeed he
has somewhat to live upon here in this world for a while, but there is his
riches, he looks at Heaven as the place where his greatest treasure lies.

Sixthly, A man that trades, is willing to part with something where he is,
that he may receive advantage in the place where he trades: So it is with the
Saints that trade for Heaven, they are willing to part with much that they
might receive afterward in Heaven: they are willing (I say) to part with any
thing here in this world, to the end that they may receive it when they come
home. A man that is abroad, and is going to his own Country, and there he is
trading for Commodities, he is very willing to part with all his money where he
is for receiving Commodities in his trade; or those that give their moneys
here that so they may receive commodities in another place where they are
trading: A carnal heart that does not know the certainty nor excellency of the
Commodities of Heaven, they are willing to part with nothing, but will keep
all, they think with themselves, what we have here we are sure of, but that
that they talk of Heaven we do not know what it is, it may prove to be but an
imagination, therefore we will keep what we have and be sure of that: Oh! thou
art no trader for heaven, if thou were thou would be willing to part with any
thing here, that so thou might receive commodities there, thou would be
content to live poorly, and meanly in this world so be it that thou might
have thy riches when thou come into thy mansion of glory.

Seventhly, Tradesmen that trade for great matters, they must trust much, they
cannot expect to have present pay in great sums. It Is true, men that trade for
little matters, that trade by retale, they usually take in their pence and two
pence as their commodities goes forth; but it is not so with Merchants that
trade for great things in whol-sale: So it is in traders for Heaven, they trust
much; and indeed, the grace of Faith it is the great grace that helps in the
trading for Heaven, they have a little earnest for the present. You that are
traders, and go to the Exchange and sell bargains for many thousands, you have
not perhaps above twelve pence or a crown for the present, it may be only a
promise, but you expect the great sums afterward. So those that are traders
for Heaven, they have some earnest, they be contented with a little for the
present, the first fruits of the Spirit, or a bare promise from Christ, this is
that that binds the whole bargain, and they expect to have the full pay
hereafter when they come to Heaven. It is a happy thing when God gives men and
women hearts to be willing to trust God for eternity, and if they have but a
little comfort and grace now, yet to look at that as an earnest penny of all the
glory that Jesus Christ has purchased by his blood, and that God has promised
in his Word, thou art not fit to be a tradesman for Heaven that can not
trust, that can not be content that great bargains should be bound with a
little earnest. But that is the soul that trades in Heaven, that can be content
to wait for the fulfilling of promises, and to take what they have from God for
the present though it be but a very little, as an earnest to bind all those
glorious things that God has promised in his Word. Here you see a trader for
Heaven in these Seven things. Now put all these things that you have heard
together with these; and you may see what it is to have our Conversations in
Heaven.

CHAP. VIII. Seven Evidences of men's having their Conversation in Heaven.
NOW then, there are some Evidences of Christians having their Conversation in
Heaven. As we showed you some Evidences of an Earthly Conversation, so likewise
of a Heavenly Conversation: that is, some demonstrations plainly to show, That
the Conversations of Christians are in Heaven.

In the first place, It Is plain certainly, there are Christians that have their
Conversations in Heaven; First, because there are Christians that can vilify
all the things of this earth: surely except they had their Conversations higher
than the earth they could not so vilify the things of the earth. It Is an
evidence of the height of Heaven, that a man is lifted up very high, that shall
look upon the very Globe of the earth as a very punctum, as a little thing: so
an evidence that the hearts of the Saints are on high when they can look on the
things of the earth as small; it is true, we that are upon the earth look upon
the stars as small, and the earth as great; but if we were in Heaven we would
look upon the stars as great and the earth as small, as Paul did, accounted all
things but as dung and dross, dogs meat, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Jesus Christ: and Luther, that accounted the whole Turkish Empire but a Crumb
that the great Master of the Family casts to his dog: surely here is an argument
that the Saints have their Conversations in Heaven that can look upon the
things of the earth as so mean, and so little, as indeed they are.

A second Evidence is this, That they can be content with so little in this
world, and can live such comfortable lives in the enjoyment of so little;
perhaps you cannot tell how to have comfortable lives except you have so much
coming in by the year, and so much provision: but now, one that is heavenly, a
godly man or woman, can tell how to live a joyful and happy life in the want
of the things of this world; though they have but little, though but bread and
water, though but mean habitations, mean clothes, though but of mean esteem in
the world, yet can go through the world with a joyful heart, blessing God all
his days, nothing but admiring, praising, and magnifying God for his rich
mercy; and blessing himself in God, and accounting his portion to be a goodly
portion, and his lot to be fallen into a fair ground. I verily believe that
there are very many poor, mean people in this world, yet their houses are more
filled with blessings of God in one day, than many Rich, Great, Noble men have
their houses in twenty or forty years: now this argues that they have their
Conversations in Heaven, that though they want comfort never so much in this
world, yet they can live comfortable lives; surely it is something that does
rejoice them, when they can so rejoice in the want of these outward things,
when their joy depend^ (...) upon the things of this world; men that have
earthly hearts, if they lose but their outward comforts, they cry our, Oh we
are undone! And you may see mighty alteractions in their very countenances,
they have nothing to joy their hearts when they lose the things of the world:
but it is no^ so with the Saints, whatsoever crosses they meet withal here in
this world, yet still they rejoice in Christ, blessing God, the course of their
lives is nothing elle but a continual magnifying, and praising God for his
mercy and goodness to them; surely they have their Conversations in Heaven.

Thirdly, Not only can live joyfullie in the want of many comforts, but they
can suffer the loss of all, yea, suffer hard things, suffer afflictions, suffer
torments and tortures with joyful hearts, read but that 11. of the Heb. at
your leisure, 13, 14 verses, They confessed that they were strangers, and
pilgrims on the earth, for they that see such things, declare plainly that they
seek a Country (this Scripture is to be annexed to the second evidence) Mark,
They that seek such things declare plainly that they seek a Country, surely
there is something else that they seek after when they set so light by the
things of this world, For the Saints are not fools, but there is some reason
for what they do, surely there is something in it, for they have the same nature
as you have, and they have need of comfort as well as you, and had they not
some other comfort besides outward comforts, they could not live so comfortably
in the want of outward comforts, but they that are content with a little, as
pilgrims and strangers: they declare plainly that they seek a Country; that is
the second Evidence.

And then, For the suffering of tortures and pains for the sake of Christ. This
is another Evidence: and so you have in the 10. Heb. 32. But call to
remembrance the former days in which after ye were illuminated ye endured a
great fight of afflictions, partly, whilst ye were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of them that
were so used, and then in the 34. verse, And took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, Why? knowing in your selves that ye have in Heaven a better and enduring
substance: This made them take joyfully the spoiling of their goods. What? when
their goods were spoiled, did they take that joyfully? what were they mad men
to rejoice at the plundering of their estates? No, it was no madness, It was
because they knew in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance, and that made them be willing to wander about in sheeps
skins, and goats skins, in leather clothes, as in the latter end of the 11. of
Heb. read but from the 36. verse to the end: this argued their Conversations
to be in Heaven. If you read in the story of the Martyrs, you shall find
very often when they came to the stake, still their thoughts were in Heaven,
and their hearts there, and encouraging one another what they should have in
Heaven, and of the glory that they should have there, that being willing to
suffer such hard things for Christ, and that being able to undergo all with so
much joy, is an evidence, that there have been Christians in the world that
have had their Conversations in Heaven.

A Fourth Evidence of Christians having their Conversations in Heaven is this,
That their hearts are so filled with Heavenly riches. It is an Argument of a
man that trades much unto such a place, when he has his Warehouse stored with
the Commodities of such a Country: As now, though no man should tell me which
way his trading lies, that such a man were a Spanish or Turkish Merchant; yet
if I come into his Warehouse, and find that constantly his Warehouse is filled
with those Commodities, I may conclude, that certainly this man is a Spanish
or Turkish Merchant: he has the Commodities of the Country continually in
his warehouse. So, the Saints have much of the riches of Heaven in their hearts
continually, they have much grace, much holiness, much of the Image of God,
much spiritual life there is there in a Christian, and you may see in his
Conversation he does manifest (I say) much of the Excellency of Heaven, much
of the Glory of Heaven shines in his face; surely his Conversation is in
Heaven who has so much of the riches of Heaven in his heart: The heart of the
wicked (says the holy Ghost) is little worth: Look into the heart of a wicked
man, or woman what is there: thy heart that should be thy storehouse, what is
it filled withal? it is filled with dirt, and dross, and filth, and
uncleanness, the hearts of wicked men are stored with those things: but now,
look into the hearts of the Saints, they are filled with God, with Christ, with
the holy Ghost, with Grace, that shows that they have traded much in Heaven;
in a constant way you shall find their hearts filled with grace, and manifesting
much in their lives, and therefore, surely their Conversation is in Heaven.

A fifth Evidence is this, That they are willing to purchase the Privileges of
Heaven at so dear a rate; namely, The Ordinances that are part of the
Privileges of the Kingdom of Heaven. Now the Ordinances that are the means
whereby they come to enjoy so much of Heaven, they are willing to purchase them
at a dear rate, Oh how ever I live, yet let me live where I may enjoy the
Ordinances of God, the wels of Salvation, my life cannot be comfortable in the
enjoyment of all things in this world if I should be deprived of the breasts of
consolation; surely they that are willing to purchase Heavenly Commodities at
so dear a rate as the Saints will do, this does evidentlie declare their
Conversations to be in Heaven.

Sixtlie, When they are so sensible of the stoppages between heaven and their
own souls. If there should be a general stoppage of ships that are in France,
Turkey, or Spain, your Countriemen are not sensible at all of it; but your
Merchants I Will warrant you would be sensible enough of it, and when they come
together upon the Exchange, al their converse would be of it. So it is with
those that have their conversations in Heaven; and here is a great difference
between those and those that are earthly minded; tell those that are earthly
of any stoppage in the Intercourse between them and Heaven, and they know not
what you mean, they think you are fools and mad: but the Saints they are
sensible of it, oh it is a sore and sad evil to them, I mean, when at any time
God hides his face from them, when at any time they go into the presence of
God and can hear nothing from him, can receive no Letters from Heaven (as I may
so say.) If the Post does not come from such a Country, the Merchants are
troubled at it. So when the Saints send up their prayers to Heaven by which
they trade thither and can hear nothing from God again; and when they cannot
feel those influences from Heaven let into their souls as heretofore sometimes
they have done, Oh! they bewail this as a great evil that is upon them above
any evil in the world, that influences of Heaven are stopped, and that God seems
to be a stranger unto them, Oh these things they complain of one to another,
and they make their moans when they feel the stoppages of Heaven; this plainly
declares, that they are Traders for Heaven, and that their Conversations are
there.

The last Evidence of a Saints having his Conversation in Heaven is; His
willingness to die, to depart this world: The going out of this world with so
much comfort, joy, peace, and triumph as many of the Saints have done; as we
might give you the expressions of many of the Saints when they were ready to
die, rejoicing at the hope of Eternal life, at their going out of the world;
surely had they not conversed in Heaven while they lived here, their souls
would not have been so willing to have departed out of their bodies. A man that
has nothing to do in another Country, it may be shall be there as a dead man,
he goes but with little joy thither: But now, a man that has had trading to
another Country, and he has great riches, and so thriven there, that
whatsoever he seems to be here, yet there he is a great man: Oh! how
comfortably does that man go to the Country! how glad is he when he takes ship
and sees a fair gale, and prosperous wind to carry him to that Country! And so
it is with the Saints who have their Conversations in Heaven, because they have
so much riches there, when they come to die they die with joy, and bless God
for that day as the most blessed day that they have seen; for they are going
now to the Country that they have been trading to all their days, and where
their riches lies. These are the Evidences and Demonstrations that the Saints
have their Conversations in Heaven.

CHAP. IX. Four Reasons why the Saints have their Conversations in Heaven.
But now, If you demand the reason, why it is that the Saints have their
Conversations in Heaven?

To that I answer briefly thus.

The first Reason.
Because their souls that are their better part, they are from Heaven. You
know, that when God made Man, He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.
The Soul of man, it is as it were, the breath of God: God did not say of Man's
Soul as of other creatures, Let it be made, let there be a soul in man's body.
No, but when he had formed the body, he breathed the soul into him. It was to
note, that the soul of man had a more Heavenly, and Divine original, than any
of the other creatures that are here in this world; and because the original it
is so Divine, and Heavenly, therefore it is, that when the soul is (as it were)
its self, is set at liberty, it would be at its original: Indeed, though man's
soul be of a Divine, and Heavenly Nature, yea through the fall of man, so it
is, that the soul of man is even almost turned to be flesh, and so mingled with
unclean drossie things as if it had no such Divine and Heavenly original? and
therefore a natural man is called flesh, That that is born of the flesh, is
flesh; as if he had no soul at all: for I say, the soul of man through his
fall, the Nature of it seemed to be changed, it is at least depressed down to
such vile things, as if it never had such a Divine and Heavenly original. But
now, when God works grace in the soul, the soul of man begins to return to its
self, and to know its self, and begins to return to its own nature that it had
in its first creation: and as soon as ever the soul begins to know its self, it
looks then presently at all these things that are here below as vile things in
comparison, as contemptable; for indeed, all these things in this world are
infinitely beneath the soul of a man: [Infinitly] that is, in comparison, we may
even call it an infinite distance between man's soul and all these things that
are here below in the world; the soul of man is near unto God himself, and
therefore when as the soul return unto its self, it would be some where else
than where it is, and would converse with those things that are suitable to its
original. As it is with a man that has a noble birth, suppose a Prince is got
into another Country, and there being a child, is used like a slave, set to
rake channels, and such mean employment; now all the while that he is there and
not know his original, he minds nothing but to get his victuals, and do his
work that he is set about; but if once he come to know from whence he was,
namely, born the Heir unto such a great Prince, or Emperor that lives in so
much glory in such a Country; then he that lived like a slave, his thoughts,
and mind, and longings are, to be in the Country where his birth was so high,
Oh that he might be but there, he should be happy then; and it does him good to
hear any man speak of that Country. Truly, so it is with the souls of men, they
are the birth (as I may so speak) of the high God, of the great King of Heaven
and Earth, being breathed so into the nostrils of man. Now through man's fall
the soul comes to be a slave to the Devil, and is set about drudggery to
provide for the flesh: but now, when God is pleased to convert the soul, the
Lord comes then to declare to a man or woman, Oh man, woman! thou art born from
on high, thy soul is (as it were) a sparkle of the Divinity (as I may so say)
thy Father by creation, nay, not only by creation as he is the Creator of all
Creatures, is God, but by a more special work of his, by a more special work (I
say) than in the first creation of other things; thy soul is from God, and of a
Divine Nature, and is therefore capable of Communion with Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; Certainly, thou never had such a Divine and Excellent being given the
merely that thou should delight in the flesh, and be servicable to thy body,
in eating, and drinking here a while; Oh! consider of thy Country whence thou
came at first; here is one work of grace, to know the Excellency of our souls,
and from whence they came: surely, if grace do this, it must needs turn the
heart of one that is converted to God, to have his Conversation to be in
Heaven. That Is the first Reason.

The Second Reason.
But not only so, because the soul had a Heavenly original, and therefore will
not be content with a portion here in this world, But secondly, When grace
comes there, the soul has a Divine Nature put into it beyond the excellency
that it had in its first Creation: I say, there is a Divine Nature higher than
is mere natural excellency; in the 2 Peter. 1. 3. According (says he) as his
Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto life and
godliness, and whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature. Certainly the
Apostle did not here mean, merely what Adam had in innocence, I never read that
that is called the Divine Nature; though it is true, there is a renewing of the
Image of God in man when he is converted; I but there is somewhat more in the
soul of man than repairing of this; the holy Ghost coming and dwelling in the
soul in a higher way than it dwelt in the soul of Adam at the first; indeed
before it was a creature, but such a creature as only had reference to God, as
God was the Creator, and man was the creature; but now it has reference to God
as being made one with the Second Person in Trinity, and so one with the
Father: and therefore of a higher Nature than man was in the state of
innocence. And you know what is said of Adam in Paradise, He was of the earth
earthly, he was of the earth in comparison of the second Adam, (take Adam in
innocence in comparison of the second Adam, he was but of the earth earthly)
and so his posterity though Adam had stood should have been but of the earth
earthly, and their portion its like should have bin but in a happiness in this
world: we never read in Scripture of a Heavenly condition Adam had been in
though he had stood; but the second Adam is from Heaven Heavenly. And the
posterity of the second Adam that is, those that are by Regeneration made the
children of the everlasting Father, that are made the posterity of Jesus Christ
by faith are from Heaven Heavenly; therefore their souls are endued with a
Divine Nature, with such high principles of grace as it must needs carry up
their souls to Heaven: If a lump of earth should be so changed as to have a
spirit and a life put into it, and to be made of such an Airial nature as any
of the birds are, this lump of earth would fly in the air presently. It is so
in the work of conversion, All men and women are earthly, and therefore they
fink down to the earth, and the earth is their proper center; but when once
they come to be converted, there is a spirit put into them whereby they come to
mount up aloft: It is not more natural for the Earth to fall down low, than it
is for the fire and air to ascend up high, because every creature does move
toward the Center of it, heavy things fall down because below is the proper
place of them; light things rise up, because their proper place is to be above:
and so, the Conversations of the Saints must needs be in Heaven, because
there is their Center, there is that that is suitable to the Divine Nature that is
put into them.

The Third Reason.
Their Conversations must needs be in Heaven, Because those things that are the
most choice things unto them are in Heaven. I should have named a great many
particulars here to show what are the choice things that concern the Saints,
and how they are all in Heaven.

Their Father, God, is in Heaven: Our Father which art in Heaven. Jesus Christ
he is in Heaven; Seek the things above where Jesus Christ is sitting at the
right hand of the Father. Jesus Christ that is their Head in Heaven. Their
Husband is in Heaven. Their Elder Brother is in heaven. Their King is in
heaven. Their Treasure is in heaven. Their Inheritance in heaven. Their Hope is
in heaven. Their Mantion-house in heaven. Their chief Friends are in heaven.
Their Substance is in heaven. Their Reward is in heaven. Their wages are in
heaven. All these things being in heaven, no marvail though their Conversations
are in heaven. And they are going to Heaven; now being that they are going that
way, traveling toward heaven, they must needs be there in their hearts,
heaven is the place that they shall come to ere long, they shall be there, and
they know that here in this world they are to be but a while, but for ever to
be there, We shall be caught up into the clouds and be for ever with him: Yea,
their Conversations must needs be in Heaven, for they have much of heaven
already, there is much of heaven in the Saints, the Kingdom of Heaven it is
within them, the Scripture says: They having so much of Heaven for the
present, it must needs be that their Conversation^ are there, and so that
Scripture in the 10. Heb. 34. Knowing in your selves that ye have in Heaven a
better and enduring substance. You may read it thus, Knowing you have Heaven:
a better enduring substance in your selves; so that the words [knowing in your
selves] has not only reference to what they know by hearsay, though this be a
true note, that they may know heaven by hearsay; they hear Ministers speak of
Heaven, and read it in the Word of God, but they know it in themselves, they
know it by what God has revealed in their own hearts, yea, though t^^^^ were
no books that ever they should see more, though they be not book-learn'd, and
though they cannot read a letter in the book, though they should hear no more
Sermons, yet by what is revealed in themselves, They know in themselves that
they have a more better and enduring substance: That Is a truth. But the words
may be more proper to the original, read thus: Kowing, that you have Heaven in
your selves, a Better and Enduring substance: Eternal life is begun already in
the hearts of the Saints, there is Heaven already in the Saints; and therefore
no marvel though their Conversations be in Heaven.

The Fourth Reason.
God has so ordered things in this world on purpose, that he might wean the
hearts of the Saints from the world. The Lord loves to have the hearts of his
Saints to be in Heaven where he has treasured up such glorious things for
them, and because that the Saints while they are here in the world, and have so
much of the world in them, they would feign be living here in the world;
therefore God does so order things that they shall meet with little content in
this world, that they may be weary of it, and be wearied from it: and indeed,
here is the reason why Gods people have met with such crosses in the world, why
the Lord has kept his Saints so low and mean in the world: It may be you are
ready to draw ill conclusions from thence, and to think, I am afraid God does
not love me that he keeps me so low and mean, and I meet with such crosses, and
others do not. Oh! gather not such ill conclusions as these are; It is, because
he would gather your hearts to Heaven, and wean you from the world, that you
might long to be with him in Heaven, for you are absent from him here in this
world, and the Lord would have the full stream of your affections to run after
those things that you shall have with him in Heaven. This use you are to make of
those afflictions you meet withal, and those crosses that befall you in this
world, And thus we have gone through the Doctrinal point, of the Saints having
their Conversations in Heaven.

CHAP. X.
WE have treated long upon that point of An Heavenly Conversation, and have
opened to you, what that Heavenly Conversation is, wherein it consists in many
particulars: But now we shall proceed to the Application of al. Though as I have
gone along, I have endeavored not only to speak to your heads, but your
hearts, and to quicken what I have said, so as might quicken your hearts: yet
from the consideration of all, there are diverse Uses that may be profitable
unto you.

The First Use.
The first is this, If the Saints live such a Heavenly Conversation as has
been opened to you, Oh how far are they from being Saints, from being godly,
Who are so far from having their Conversations in Heaven, as they have their
Conversations in Hell. There are a generation of men that profess themselves to
be Christians, and say, that they hope to go to Heaven; and yet if you behold
their Conversation, it is no other than the Conversation of hell: Certainly,
it is not what men say, but how they live that will cast them another day: he
that is of Heaven, or for Heaven, his Conversation is in Heaven: and he that is
for hell, his Conversation is hellish: now that is a Conversation in hell that
is like to what is done in hell, what is there in hell, but blaspheming and
cursing? What is there in hell, but hatred and malice? what is there in hell,
but raging and filthiness? These things are the Conversations of many men who
are even devils incarnate. In many families there is the Name of God blasphemed,
there is cursing, and railing, and malice, and wrath, and pride, so that though
they be here in this world, yet they manifest to what place they do belong. So
that as the Saints have their Conversations in Heaven, when they die they go to
their own place, that is to heaven where their Conversations were: so on the
contrary, the wicked having their Conversations in hell, when they die they go
to their own place: as it was said of Judas, He went to his own place: So a
wicked man dying, having his Conversation in hell while he lived, (I say) when
he dies he goes to his own place, that is his own proper place, he took content
and delight in those things that were done there, and so when he dies, there he
shall go. As the tree falls so it lies. As thy Conversation is, and the bent of
thy heart is there, so it must lie to all eternity.

CHAP. XI.
The Second Use.
THis Point likewise, rebukes Hypocrites, as wicked profane ones that have
their Conversations in hell: so there is another kind of men that are unsound
professors, Hypocrites, and they have their Conversations between Heaven and
Earth: It Is not in Heaven nor in Hell, nor altogether upon the Earth, but
between Earth, and Heaven, and Hell. Sometimes they seem to be a loft, above;
sometimes very forward and zealous in the profession of Religion, sometimes
much enlarged in Duties, at other times again they are as base earthly spirits
as any, yea, sometimes, there is much of Hell in their hearts, and in their
ways, they profess themselves the seed of Abraham, but they are not as the
stars of heaven, but as Meteors that are between Heaven and Earth: we call them
blazing stars; but they are not so bright as the stars, nor are they of such a
heavenly nature as the stars, they are but made of a few unclean vapors that
come out of the earth, which being got up near the heavens, do make a show as
if they were some star in heaven, but you find a great deal of difference
between the stars and them in this, for within a little while they fall, and
vanish, and come to nothing; and so it is with many hypocrites, they by the
Word are raised up a little for the present, and seem to be above the stars,
and they have a glittering show as if they had something heavenly in them, even
like the stars of heaven, they seem to be got above others: your blazing star,
a child would think it a great deal bigger than one of the stars that is an
hundred times bigger than that is; so it is with many hypocrites, they have a
greater show of Religion than many that have truth of Godliness, and that are
truly gracious, they look upon them as wondering at the excellent parts that
they have, excellent abilities, it may be, they will discourse sometimes in an
excellent manner about heavenly things; you shall find some that have no
soundness at all, yet will have very excellent discourse, they speak the very
language of Canaan, but it is in such company where they may gain respect by
it, but still are but as meteors that hang between heaven and earth: whereas
the truth is, while they seem to be so high above others, and so heavenly, yet
their hearts are grovelling upon the earth: many times while they have most
excellent expressions in prayer, yet God sees their hearts basely cleaving to
some earthly thing, there is some base earthly contentment that their hearts
are upon, while they seem to be so heavenly, much like to the Kite that flies
on high as if it were an Eagle, but the eye of it while it is above in the air
is fixed upon some carrion, upon some prey that it has upon the earth, and as
soon as ever it sees a fit opportunity to seize upon the prey, it comes down to
seize upon it, and that is the place the Kite would be at, that is the place he
does most delight in, to be upon his prey: And so an hypocrite, though he rises
high in some actions, yet the truth is, his eye is upon some earthly prey, and
when he sees his opportunity, thither he goes and finks down to those things,
and that is his most proper place, there he takes most delight and content in
his Conversation, though his actions may seem to be Heavenly, and therefore he
will fall down and never attain to the highest Heavens that the Saints shall go
to, but to hell at the last.

CHAP. XII.
The Third Use.
THE Third Use is this, The Saints Conversation is in Heaven. Hence then for
shame, let us not find fault with strictness in the ways of God, let not man
speak against the ways of God, as being too strict, and what need we be so
Circumspect, and so precise, and so pure? what need we labor to do so much?
what! can thou attain to a more strict and holy Conversation than a Heavenly
Conversation? It is a very carnal expression that some have, Why? we cannot be
Saints? we are not Saints; yes, the holy Ghost calls all believers, all that
have the very least degree of true grace, he call them Saints. When we come to
Heaven, then we shall live better, but while we are in this world we cannot.
Ye^, while you are in this world your Conversation is to be in Heaven; surely
men either are not acquainted with the Word, or they shut their eyes and will
not see and consider what the Word says about a strict Conversation: Sometimes
you find in Scripture, that we are commanded, to be perfect, as our Heavenly
Father is perfect; It Is a strange speech, and yet it is the speech of Christ
himself. And we must walk as Christ walked, and he that has this hope,
purifieth himself as he is pure; and then our Conversation is in Heaven. Put
these together, Perfect as our Heavenly father is perfect; Walk as Christ
walked; Purge our selves as he is pure. Our Conversation is in Heaven: what do
all these things tend to? Surely it tends to a great deal of strictness and
holiness of life. And these things show that the work of a Christian here in
this world is a busy work, that a Christian-life it is not an idle, dull,
heavy, or sluggish life; you that are Christians, you had need quicken up your
selves, you had need awaken those drousie spirits of yours, if this be required
of you, that you should be perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Walk as
Christ walked, Purify your selves as he is pure, Holy as he is holy, and to
have your Conversations in Heaven, surely, there need be a great deal of
quickness and life in the hearts of Christians; and you are not to content your
selves in a mere possession, and doing some little matter in the way of
Religion, or being somewhat better than others, you are to aim at heaven, look
up there, and make that to be your pattern.

CHAP. XIII.
The Fourth Use.
AND that rebukes even such as are truly godly, many that yet do fail exceeding
much in this thing: Oh! their Conversations are too low, are too earthly; If
they would examine their hearts strictly they cannot say, that their
Conversations are in heaven, I am a stranger upon earth, says David. But many
may say, that they are strangers in heaven. Whereas earth should be the place
of our pilgrimage, and heaven our home; but it is quite otherways, heaven is
rather the place where most professors are strangers, and earth is the place of
their habitation, they cast up a thought now and then to heaven, as now and
then men will cast up their eyes and look upon heaven, but where is your heart?
where is the great workings of your spirits? It Is a speech of the Lord, says
he, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool: Spiritual things they are
to be looked upon as the good things, as the Throne of God, and those earthly
things only as the things of Gods footstool: but now, How many are there that
have Earth their throne and Heaven their footstool! that is, Heavenly things
are made subordinate to earthly things; Oh! this should not be in any of those
that profess themselves to be Christians, none of the Saints should satisfy
themselves in any life but this, to be able to say, I bless God, my
Conversation is in Heaven, though God let me live upon the earth, yet my
conversation is in Heaven. What an unworthy thing it is for one that does
profess to have his portion and his inheritance in Heaven, yet to have the
heart so mingled here with the earth; In Gen 45. 20. says Joseph in sending
for his father, Regard not your stuff, for the good of all the land of Egypt
is yours. Regard not the stuff, do not let it grieve you to forsake your stuff,
leave all your lumber behind you, for all the good things of Egypt are yours.
Oh what a shameful thing is it, that Christians should regard their stuff so
much as they do, that hope to have the good things, not of Egypt, but of Heaven
its self to be theirs! Surely if we have seen the things of Heaven, one would
think that all the things of the earth should be darkened in our eyes: 2 Cor.
3. 10. That which was glorious (says the text) had no glory in comparison of
the greater glory. That Scripture I confess, is spoken in comparing of the Law
and the Gospel, there was a glory in the delivering of the Law, but that had no
glory in comparison of the greater glory, that is, in comparison of the Gospel;
for in the Gospel we behold as in a glass with open face the glory of God, and
are changed into the same image, as from glory to glory: But we may apply it
thus; As the things of the earth that were glorious before in your eyes, yet in
comparison of the greater glory, should not at all be glorious; though before
conversion these things were glorious, and grant it, that there is some kind of
glory upon the things of this world, that they are gilded and varnish't over,
but in comparison of the greater glory they are not glorious at all, though
they that never saw any thing else as glorious but the things of the world, yet
thou that have seen the greater glory should not account these things
glorious: Oh therefore Christians, lift up your hearts to Henven, and let your
Conversations be in Heaven: Though God has so ordered it, that you must live
here a while and must be content, for indeed to some Christians that have their
Conversations in Heaven, it is a great part of their self-denial, and of their
subjection to God, to be willing to live upon the earth, and to stay from
Heaven till Gods time come; This is a riddle and a mystery to many, that it
should be a part of our Salvation, Obedience, yea, of Self-denial, though they
had Crowns of Glory, though they were Kings and Princes here in this world, to
be willing to stay here. We might come to attain this, if our Conversations
were in Heaven, and our hearts there. As we read of Daniel, though God so
ordered it, that he could not live at Jerusalem where the Temple was, yet he
would open his window toward Jerusalem, he would ever be looking that way. And
so, though God has so ordered it, that we cannot come yet to live in this
Heavenly Jerusalem bodily, and in that full way as hereafter we expect to do,
yet we should open our window, our eyes, and the doors of our hearts should be
open toward Heaven. I remember I have read of Edward the First King of
England, that had a mighty mind to go to Jerusalem, but because he could not
go, for death prevented him, he gave charge to his Son to carry his heart
thither. And so it should be with us, we should endeavor to have our hearts
there, and to have as much of Heaven as we can though we cannot be there our
selves in nature: Every creature has put into it by the God of nature an
instinct to move to its proper place; as now, because the proper place of fire
is above, there is an instinct of nature in fire to ascend to its proper place.
And the proper place of earth is below, and therefore it will fall down to the
Center! a heavy thing that has much earth in it, though it breaks its self to
pieces yet it will fall down toward its Center: and so it will be with a
Christian, though he break himself to pieces, whatsoever he suffers, yet he
has an instinct to carry him to his proper place; fire because its proper
place is above, if it be kept down by violence, what a mighty power there is in
fire to make way for its self that it may get up, that is the very reason of the
mighty force that there is in Guns, because there is fire in the powder that is
kept in, when the powder is once fired, because the fire would get up above,
therefore it breaks with violence, and if it cannot have vent to get out, it
breaks any thing in the world for it must out, that it may get up to it is own
place; and so it should be with a Christian, there should be a strong
impetiousness to get up to his own place; that would be an evidence indeed that
Heaven is thy proper place: Oh Christians lift up your hearts, and let your
Conversations be in Heaven.

CHAP. XIV. An Heavenly Conversation is a convincing Conversation.
I Shall not need to come again and tell you, what Heavenly Conversation is, it
has been opened at large to you; but for the setting an edg upon this
Exhortation:

First, Know, That a Heavenly Conversation will be a very convincing
Conversation; then you will convince men that you have somewhat more than they
have when they see you live Heavenly; for the men of the world they know the
things of the world, are the things that their hearts are upon, and that which
they mind; but now, when they see those that profess Religion mingle
themselves with the earth as they do, then they will think that they are acted
by the same principles that themselves are; but now, Heavenly Conversations
will convince them, when they behold them walking above in the whole course of
their lives, when they see an evenness and proportion in their course; take
them at all times, and in all businesses, they carry themselves as men of
another world: As a man that is a stranger to a place, may for a while act it
so, as he may seem to be one that is a native in the place, but one that is
born in the place, will go nigh to find him out in one thing or other: and so,
it is very hard for men to carry themselves so if they have not true grace,
though they appear sometimes to be very Heavenly, yet one that is a true
Citizen of Heaven will discern them at one time or other if they have not
grace; yea, the truth is, carnal men will discover themselves that they are born
of the earth, and are of their Country, his speech betrais him, he is a
Giliadite: But when Christians shall in their constant way have their
Conversations in Heaven, then their Co^versations are very convincing; There
are the Rays of Heaven about them, they have the luster of Heaven shining
wheresoever they go, and in all company, surely such a man seems to be in
Heaven continually; So it will force it from the very Consciences of men to
say, Certainly these are the Citizens of Heaven; if there be any Denizens of
the new Jerusalem while they live upon the earth, these they are. I remember
it is said of that Martyr Dr. Tailor, That he did rejoice that he ever came into
the prison to be in company with that Angel of God Mr. Bradford, Mr. Bradford's
Conversation, it was Angel-like, like an Angel of Heaven, and did convince
almost every where, where he went: Oh! it is of great use that Christians should
live convincing Conversations. You know what Dives said to Abraham, That he
would have one sent to warn his brethren, that they might not come to that
place: says Abraham, They have Moses and the Prophets: Oh but says Dives, If
one rise from the dead, they would hear him. I may say thus, If God should send
one from Heaven to live among men, and to preach to them, surely they would
regard him. Would it not be a great benefit to the world if God should send
some one Saint from Heaven, or Angel to converse in a bodily way among us?
Truly, Christians should live so, as if they came from Heaven every day, as if
they had been in Heaven and conversing with God. When they go to perform duty
in a morning, and get alone between God and their souls, they should never
leave striving till they get their hearts so in Heaven, and get themselves upon
the Mount, so as when they come down to their family their very faces may
shine, so that you may see by their Conversations, that certainly they have
been with God upon the Mount this day.

Now I appeal to you in this, Do you live so, as that your family, and your
neighbors may see that you have bin this morning in Heaven? Every morning we
should have some converse with Heaven, which if we had, our Conversations would
be convincing all the day long, and very profitable it would be to the world;
Christians that live Heavenly Conversations they are (I say) of very great use
in the places where they live. As I remember it is said concerning Christ, When
he ascended up to Heaven, he gave gifts to men. And if we could oftener ascend
up to Heaven, we should be more able to be beneficial to the world.

CHAP. XV. An Heavenly Conversation is growing.
AN Heavenly Conversation is, a growing Conversation. Oh! they grow mightily,
they do thrive in grace exceeding much in a very little time, they grow to
attain to a very great measure of Communion with God the Father, and with Jesus
Christ, and every day they grow more and more spiritual, having so much of
heaven within them: It Is true, when they come into Heaven, they shall be
perfect: But now, the fetching from Heaven is that that makes them grow, it
must be the influence from Heaven that must cause the grouth of Saints; As now,
suppose that the ground upon which flowers and herbs grow, be never so fertile
in its self, and the herbs or plants be never so well rooted in the earth, yet
if there be not an influence of heaven upon them they will not grow much, nay
not at all, but quickly wither: So it is with Christians, let them have never
so much means of growing below, never so many Ordinances, yet if they have not
rich dews from above they will not grow, or if there be any growth, yet either
they will bear no fruit, or else it will be very shrifled and sour fruit. You
know, that fruit that has the most of the beams of the Sun that comes from
heaven upon it, that fruit grows riper and sweeter than other fruit; fruit that
grows in the shade, that has the influence of Heaven kept off from it, it is
sour fruit. And the reason that the Saints have so little fruit, and that it
is so sour, it is because that they have not more influences from heaven, they
do not stand in the open Sun, their souls are not presented daily before God,
and have the warm beams of the Sun of Righteousness shining from Heaven upon
them; but there is something between Heaven and their souls: but a Conversation
in Heaven, as it would be a Convincing Conversation, so it would be a Growing
Conversation.

CHAP. XVI. An Heavenly Conversation brings much glory to God.
ANd then, It would be a Conversation glorifying God much. Oh! the Glory that
God would have from a Conversation in Heaven! Let your light so shine before
men, that others beholding your good works, may glorify your Father which is
in Heaven. Then indeed the Image of the God of Heaven is held forth when men's
Conversations are heavenly, the Lord takes much delight to have his glory to be
dispensed abroad by his Saints, to have some reflection upon the world: As in a
glass, though beams of the Sun do not shine upon a wall, yet by a glass you
may take the beams of the Sun and cast the reflection of them upon a wall: so
those beams of the glory of God that shine in Heaven, the Saints by their
Heavenly Conversation may (as it were by a glass) take them and reflect them
upon the world, and upon the faces of men: the hearts of the Saints should be
as a glass taking the beams of the glory of God and casting them up and down
where they are, and so your Heavenly Father should come to be glorified by you.
Let every Christian think thus, My Conversation is thus and thus; but what
glory do I bring to God by my Conversation? do others glorify God by beholding
the luster of the holiness of God in me? do they see cause to bless God that
they see so much of the glory of God in me? Certainly, there is more of the
glory of God shines in the gracious, holy, spiritual Conversation of a
Christian, than shines in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, than in Heaven, and Earth:
I mean, for the works of Creation and Providence that are in Heaven and Earth;
the creatures that God has made, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and here in this
world, the Seas, the Earth, the Plants, and the like, though they have much of
the glory of God, yet a Heavenly Conversation declares more of the glory of God
than all these. You know what the Psalmest says, The Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the Firmament show his handy work. It may be spoken more fully of
Heavenly Conversations, the Heavenly Conversations of the Saints, declare the
glory of God; and those that shine in the Firmament of the Church are stars,
(for the Church is the firmament, and the Saints be there as stars) and they
declare the Handy work of God. Now though its true, As in Heaven there is one
star differs from another star in glory: and so in Christians, every one cannot
attain to so much glory as another, yet every one is a star, the meanest
Christian that lives, the weakest Believer that is, yet should be as a star in
the firmament, though he cannot shine so gloriously as the Sun, or as other
stars, yet there should be never a Believer, never a godly man or woman in the
Church but should shine as a star in the firmament, but should be as the Gospel
is, even a mirror wherein we might behold the glory of God, in whom we may
behold the glory of God even (as it were) with open face: An Heavenly
Conversation is a Conversation glorifying God.

CHAP. XVII. An Heavenly Conversation brings much glory to the Sanits.
AN Heavenly Conversation, it is a Conversation that will bring much glory to
your selves: Though it is true, that the Saints should aim at the glory of God
most, yet there will come glory to themselves whether they will or no if their
Conversations be in Heaven: it is impossible but that in the conscience of men
they should be honored walking in a Heavenly Conversation: There Is an excellent
Scripture, that shows, that in our glorifying of God, we glorify our selves
also: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12. the Aplostle he prays for them, Wherefore also
(says he) we pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy of this
Calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power: To what end? That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ. He prays for the Thessalonians, That they might walk so,
that they might have so much of the grace of God in them, that the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ might be glorified in them. Oh! this is that that all the
Saints should desire, and endeavor after, That the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ should be glorified in them; and ye in him says he: Labor you, that
Christ may be glorified in your lives, and you shall be glorified in him. We
should desire that Christ may have glory in our glory, and then we shall have
glory in Christ's glory: this is a sweet and blessed life, when as the Saints
have such hearts, as they can say, Lord, let me have no glory, but that thou
may have glory in. Then says God, Is it so? Do thou desire no further
glory in this world, but that I may have glory in? then I will have no glory in
this world, but what thou shall have glory in: Christ will make us partakers of
his glory, as well as we shall make him partaker of our glory. Oh! An Heavenly
Conversation that glorifies God, will glorify the Saints too.

CHAP. XVIII. An Heavenly Conversation will make Suffering easy.
HEavenly Conversation, it will make all sufferings to be very easy, it will
be nothing to suffer any thing you meet withal in this world, if your
Conversations be in Heaven: All revilings, and reproaches, and wrongs, they
will be nothing, if you get but a Heavenly Conversation, you will contemn all
these things that the men of the world think to be such great matters: Men that
have conversed in Heaven, never will be much offended for any sufferings: 2
Cor. 4. 17. For our light afflictions which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: While we look not at the
things which are seen, but at things which are not seen; for the things which
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. All but
light afflictions, Why? for our eye is above all these things. And it is a
notable passage that in the Gospel, if you examine the place of Christ's
transfiguration upon the mount, there Christ showed his glory unto some
Disciples, that he carried with him; and this is that that I would note from
it, do but observe in the story who were the Disciples that Christ carried with
him to see his glory, they were, Peter, James, and John; now afterward if you
compare that story with the story of Christ being in his Agony, which was
presently after; where his soul was heavy unto death, when he was to be
betrayed, and to be crucified the next day, and fell grovelling upon the earth,
and sweat clodders of blood through the anguish that was upon his spirit, and
cried out, Oh Lord! If it be possible let this cup pass from me. Here Is a great
deal of difference between Christ in his Agony, and upon the mount in his
Transfiguration; and observe, that Christ would have none of his Disciples see
him in his Agony, but Peter, James, and John, only those three that saw him in
his transfiguration upon the mount in his glory.

The note from hence is, That those that can converse much with Christ in
glory, can converse with Christ in Heaven, can see Heaven, they may be
permitted to see Christ in his Agony and it will do them no hurt. But now, for
the other Disciples that did not see Christ in his Glory, if they had seen
Christ in his Agony, it might have offended them, Is this our Lord and Master
that is in such a fearful Agony at this time? Oh! it would have offended them;
but now, the other that saw him glorified, it offended them not; Well, though
he be in an agony now, yet we know him to be a glorious Savior, and we will
believe and trust in him still. So, if we can converse with God in glory upon
the mount, what ever agony we see Christ in afterward we shall be able to bear
it: when Stephen had the stones rattling about his ears, yet when he saw the
Heavens opened it was nothing to him then, he fell asleep, he rejoiced in the
expectation of Heaven. And if you read in the Book of Martyrs, ever when they
came to their sufferings you may see how they did rejoice, when they did think
of Heaven, and remember eternal life. Says one woman to her child that was
going to be burnt, when as the people thought she would have rung her hands,
and made great lamentations to have seen her child stepping into the flames,
she said nothing but this, Remember eternal life my son. Oh! conversing with
Heaven makes all sufferings in the world nothing.

CHAP. XIX. Heavenly Conversation brings much joy.
THen, Oh the sweetness and comfort that there will be while the soul is
conversing in Heaven! Oh the joy and the peace that will come to the Soul in
the certain evdience that the soul is partaker in the Death, Resurrection, and
Intercession of Jesus Christ! (I say) those whose Conversations are in Heaven,
by this they come to have certain evidence to their souls, that they have their
portion in the Death, in the Resurrection, in the Ascension, in the
Intercession of Jesus Christ, and this will afford comfort enough. That
Scripture in the 3. Colos. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above where Christ sits on the right hand of God; set your
affection on things above, not on things on the earth: for ye are dead and your
life is bid with Christ in God. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. Here Is an evidence that you are risen
with Christ, that you are dead to the world, and have interest in his
Ascension, and are partakers of his Resurrection, and have part in his
Intercession. Those that have their Conversations in Heaven now, they may know
certainly that they are risen from death to life, that when Christ ascended, he
went to Heaven to take possession for them, yea, that they are in Heaven where
Christ is: He has set us in Heavenly places together with Christ Jesus: For he
is there as a common head: That they are ascended with Christ already, and that
Christ is there as an Advocate making Intercession for them to the Father,
these will be the consolations of those that have their Conversation in Heaven.

CHAP. XX. An Heavenly Conversation is very safe.
ANd then, A Conversation in Heaven, is a very safe Conversation, you will be
free from snares and temptations. As an Eearthly Conversation subjects unto
temptations; so a Heavenly Conversation will free us from temptations. When is
the bird in danger of the Lime-twig or Net but when she comes to pick below
upon the ground? but if she could but keep her self above always, she were
free then from the Snare and Net: It Is Chrysostoms similitude, Keep above, and
then ye be free from the snare of the fowler. It Is a safe Conversation.

CHAP. XXI. An Heavenly Conversation gives abundant entrance into Glory.
AND then, It will cause an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. When
they come to die, Oh how joyfully will they die! what abundant entrance will be
made into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? For when
they die they shall but change their place, they shall not change their
company: they shall but go to their Fathers house to be partakers of those
mansions Christ before has prepared.

Oh my brethren! labor to have your Conversations in Heaven, and know, that
this is not a matter only that concerns eminent Christians, but all Christians;
and see how the Apostle charges this upon the Thessalonians, 1. Epistle 2. 11.
As you know how we exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of you, (as a
Father does his children) that you would walk worthy of God who has called you
unto his Kingdom and Glory. That is, That you would walk in a Conversation
answerable to the glorious Kingdom of God that you are called to, according to
your high calling, we should walk worthy of it: We are charged so to do: and as
it is said concerning Christ in the Gospel by Saint John, he spoke concerning
himself, But the Son of man which is in Heaven. So it should be said of every
child of God, such a one that is in Heaven, not only such a one that shall go
to Heaven, but that is in Heaven for the present.

CHAP. XXII. Seven Rules, or Directions, how to get Heavenly Conversation.
BUt you will say, How should we do to get this our Conversasation to be in
Heaven? it is an excellent Conversation indeed, Oh that we might attain unto it!

The First Rule.
First, Take this Rule, Be persuaded that it is attainable. Let Christians
conclude thus with themselves, it is possible for me to live a life of Heaven
while I am upon the earth: There is a Heaven to be got, it will mightily stir
up the spirit of a Christian if he do believe this. I may live in Heaven here,
with God, and Christ, and his Angels, and Saints; there are some that have
attained to this; and how have they attained to it? not by their own strength,
they were men subject to the same infirmities that you are, even Paul himself
that had his Conversation in Heaven, was subject to many infirmition But
through the strength of Christ he can do all things, he was nothing in himself;
read but the 7. of the Romans, Paul says there of himself, that he was even
sold under sin, and when he would do good, evil was present with him: and he
was led captive, and he found a Law in his members rebelling against the law of
his mind, and he had many corruptions and was feign to have a prick in the
flesh, a messenger of Satan to humble him: and he spoke of this Heavenly
Conversation, not only that he had it himself, but writing to the Philippians
they attained to it; they were a Church that were very spiritual, but were but
poor and mean in respect of some others, and they had not those eminent gifts
that the Corinthians had, and yet the Philippians had their Conversations in
Heaven: therefore it is a thing that is attainable.

The Second Rule.
Secondly, If you would get your Conversations in Heaven, Labor to keep a clear
conscience, keep a Heaven in your conseience. Those men that do fully and
defile their consciences, they lose their intercourse with Heaven, and indeed,
the presence of the God of Heaven is tedious to them, they be loath to go into
his presence when once they have defiled consciences, If there be a Hell in a
man's conscience, there will not be a Heaven in his Conversation., but let men
and women labor to keep conscience clean, and a Heaven there, and then there
will be a Heaven in their Conversations.

The Third Rule.
Watch opportunicies for Heavenly exercises, though you have much business in
the world, watch time. You that are servants, you should not indeed neglect
your Masters business, for you may serve God in the work of your Master, but
yet you must watch opportunities; get alone, and if you cannot have any long
time let it be so much the frequenter, watch all opportunities for Heavenly
exercises, for meditation, for prayer, for reading, for conversing with God:
Oh! we might get many opportunities to get our souls in Heaven if we would but
watch; and those that are diligent to watch opportonities for Heavenly
exercises, and prize opportunities for them, they are the men and women that
will come to attain to a Heavenly Conversation, that do not' make it as a light
matter whether they have converse with God or no in holy duties: Christians
that would have their Conversations in Heaven, they must look upon their
opportunities for Heavenly exercises, they eye them, as that wherein much of
the joy and comfort of their lives consists.

The Fourth Rule.
Forget not this in the next place, (I speak now to Christians that would feign
have their Conversations in Heaven) I say to you, Take heed and be careful that
you rest not in formallity; watch to get opportunities, but be not formal in
duties in them. Oh! this will mightily darken your Conversations, it will make
them very earthly, there will be no beauty at all in them if you come to rest
in formallity in holy performances: There Is many Christians that we hope may
have some good at the bottom, yet growing to a form in Religion they never
honor their profession, they have little comfort to their own souls, they go on
in a dead hearted condition, they know not what it is to have communion with
God, Oh beware of that; that we are all by nature subject too; those that have
enlightenings of conscience, they dare not but take opportunities for Heavenly
duties; but then comes in the temptation of the Devil, and the corruption of
our own hearts; when I have done my task, then it is over, I have prayed, I but
you have been in Heaven that while? what converse with God have you had there?
Oh take heed of formallity! it will exceedingly hinder your Conversation. But
now, a Christian though of never such weak parts, can but chatter to God, and
speak a few broken words and half sentences, yet if he does not rest in
formallity he may have much converse with God, whereas others that have
excellent parts, yet resting in the work done, never knows what the meaning is
of having a Conversation in Heaven.

The Fifth Rule.
Labor to beat down your Bodies, That is, take heed of making provision for the
flesh, beware of sensual lusts; how came Paul to have his Conversation in
Heaven? says he, I 1 Cor. 9. 27. (...) Castigo corpus meum. vulg. Comundo
corpus meum. Levidum reddo corpus. Agust. Est metophorasumpta a pugilibus and
suctantibus, qui pugnis and verberibus se mutuo obtundunt. Chem. Jans. Aret.
Pareus. Piscat.
beat down my body; The word is, Black and blue; club'd it down; as if he
should say, This body of mine would draw my heart aside from spiritual things,
and make me earthly and sensual, I will keep down my body, I will not give that
satisfaction to the flesh, and body so as to strengthen any temptation that
should draw my heart off from Spiritual, and Heavenly things: no, but I beat
down my body says he. There Is no Christian that is Heavenly but he must be
very careful and watchful over his senses while he lives here, to beat down his
body, and so he may come to have his Conversation in Heaven.

The Sixth Rule.
Labor to be skilful in the mystery of godliness, to draw strength from Jesus
Christ in every thing you do. For my Brethren, Christ he is Jacob's Ladder.
When Jacob lay asleep he saw a ladder on which the Angels did descend and
ascend up to Heaven. Now this Jacob's Ladder is no other but Jesus Christ to
Christians, and that must be set up to Heaven; if you would go to Heaven, and
converse with Heaven, it must be by Jesus Christ, you must be instructed in the
mystery of the Gospel in conversing with God through a Mediator; there is such
an infinite distance between God and us, that except we have Christ the
Mediator we can never come to God, nor God come to us; it is only Christ the
Mediator that is the Ladder: We need not say Who shall go up to Heaven to fetch
Christ down? No, we may have Christ in our hearts, and set up him, and so we
may go up to Heaven by his Mediation. When as a Christian comes to live in this
manner; what I do expect from God, I expect to draw it through a Mediator, and
all the services that I tender up to God I tender them up through the hand and
heart of Christ: Now those that are acquainted with this have much converse
with Heaven: By Jesus Christ the Mediator I may come up there and present my
self there, though no unclean thing may come there, for God looks upon the
Saints through him as righteous, being clothed with his righteousness, they
may come to their Father with boldness, having their Elder brothers garments
upon them, they may come and kneel before the Throne of grace, come into Heaven
as into the Presence Chamber and kneel every morning for their Fathers
blessing; it is by him what we have access unto the Father: Oh! acquaint thy
self with the Mystery of godliness in drawing all from Christ; and tendering
all to God through Christ: By this Heaven comes down to thee, and by this thou
climest up to Heaven, this is the Jacob's Ladder. But those men that only look
upon God in a natural way, that is thus, Indeed all good things must come from
God; and so they go to prayer, Lord we beseech thee bless us this day, for all
good things come from thee. And they serve God, their consciences tell them
they must worship, and serve God while they live here: but it is but in a dull
natural way: let me leave it in your hearts, All good comes from God through a
Mediator, through Jesus Christ the second Person in Trinity, God-Man, and all
my services are tendered up to God through him; there is this Mediator God-Man
that unites God and me together, and so by him I have acceptance both for my
person and all my actions, and by him I come to have other manner of blessings
than comes from God merely as Creator, God in bounty bestows upon the creature
many good things, but when we come to deal with God in Christ we come to have
Heavenly blessings, blessings beyond the power of nature, yea beyond all those
blessings that nature can be any conveyance of, beyond the blessings that the
conduits of the creature are able to hold forth, they have the blessing from
God imediately, imediately I mean in respect of the creature, it is by the
mediation of Christ, they enjoy God in Christ, and so come to enjoy God in a
Heavenly, Supernatural way: Oh this is the way to have our Conversations in
Heaven; and those Christians that are much acquainted with the Gospel of
Christ, they come to live far more Heavenly Conversations than others that go
on in a dull, heavy, and natural kind of way in serving of God: But being not
acquainted with this mystery, their hearts lie low upon the earth, and know
not what it is to have their Conversations in Heaven.

The Seventh Rule.
And so the next Rule with which I must close all is this, Exercise much the
grace of faith: There is no way to get above the Creature, and above Nature,
but by exercising the grace of Faith. Many Christians think they must exercise
love to God, and exercise sorrow for sin; the grace of Repentance, mourning for
sin, that is good, thou should do that, and thou should exercise patience;
but the great grace that is to be employed if thou would attain a Heavenly
life, it is, The exercise of Faith: and make conscience to put forth that grace
much, for it is by that that we do converse with God through Christ. Though
Christ be the ladder, yet it is faith that carries us up this ladder, and brings
us down again, it is faith that makes the things of Heaven real to the soul,
Heb. 11. 1. It Is faith that is an evidence of things not seen, and the
substance of things hoped for, by faith these things come to be made real and
substantial things, and as present things, faith it is that gives a great
excellency to all the things of Heaven its self, and therefore live much by
faith, and walk by faith, and not by sense, and then shall thou be above the
world and live in Heaven; and as the fruit of thy faith wait for the appearing
of Jesus Christ. Our Conversation is in Heawen (says the Apostle) from whence
also we look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ etc. Where a man's
Conversation is, there his expectations may be; and where the expectations are,
there a man's Conversation is; now our Converstaion is in Heaven from whence
also we look for Jesus Christ; as if he should say, It Is not a motion, do not
you think that when we speak of Conversing in Heaven that we please our own
fancies; Oh no, says he, we by faith look upon Heaven as the most real thing
in the world, for we expect the Lord Jesus Christ ere long to appear in glory
bodily, and we shall see him with these eyes, and shall change our vile bodies
and make them like his glorious body, we by faith looking upon such glorious
things to be so real, and so at hand, and we waiting for these things it is this
that makes our Conversation to be in Heaven: our hearts and all are there,
because that we expect that these things will be made good to us quickly, Oh
Christians do but exercise your faith in this, in Jesus Christ, and put forth
this fruit of faith in waiting for the appearing of Jesus Christ when he shall
come and appear in his glory, this will help to make your Conversations to be
in Heaven; Oh what a blessed time will that be when Jesus Christ shall come
from the Heavens, and appear to those that have been waiting for him! it was a
blessed thing to have Christ here personally and to live with him when he was
upon the earth though it were in the state of his humiliation, Oh when he shall
come in his glory, how blessed will that be! and when he shall change our vile
bodies that they may be like unto his glorious body, Oh this will keep the
heart in expectation of Christ, for then that vile body of thine that is now a
body of sin and death, matter of diseases, a body of weakness, and a lump of
clay, now it shall be made like the glorious body of Jesus Christ to shine more
glorious than the Sun in the firmament; this will be when Jesus Christ shall
come with all his Angels in his glory; and this is observable, when all the
glory of the creature shall be darkened with the glory of God and Jesus Christ,
yet then the bodies of the Saints shall shine gloriously before the face of God
and Jesus Christ, surely they shall be more glorious than the glory of the Sun,
for that you know will be darkened at the coming of Jesus Christ; The great
glory of the Father, and Jeus Christ, and the Angels shall darken the glory of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but the glory of the bodies of the Saints shall be so
great, as all the glory of God, and Jesus Christ, and the Angels shall not
darken their glory, but it shall appear with a very great luster: now if the
glory of God, and the Angels should darken it, then to what purpose is it that
their bodies shall be like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ? but certainly
it shall not darken their glory: If a candle could be raised to have so much
luster and beauty as if you should put it into the midest of the Sun, yet it
would shine in the midst of it, it would be a strange kind of light you would
say: It shall be so with the bodies of the Saints, that though they are put
into the midst of the glory of God, and his Son, yet their very bodies shall
shine in beauty and luster there: Now did we believe this, and wait for it
every day, how would it change us! I have a diseased and a lumpish body, and my
body hinders me in every duty of worship, and service, wandering and vain
thoughts lodge in me now; I but I Will wait for that time when Christ shall come
in all his glory, and make my body to be like unto his glorious body, to make
it to be able to look upon the face of God, and to be able to be exercised in
holy duties to all eternity without any weariness, and without any
intermission: so shall the bodies of the Saints be raised to that power, that
their bodies shall be so strong, that their souls shall be exercised about the
highest things possible for a creature to be exercised with without weariness;
wait for this: I have many things here that trouble my mind, and spirit, and
hinders me in my converse with Heaven, but within a while the time shall come
that I shall be delivered from all troubles here, when Christ shall appear with
his mighty Angels to be admired of his Saints, and when he shall come and take
the Saints to judge the world, and shall set all the Saints upon Thrones to judge
the world: the expectation of this time will raise the heart very much to be in
Heaven.

But then especially, when I consider the glory that shall be upon my soul, let
me think thus, if this body of mine that is a lump of flesh shall be by the
almighty power of God whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself,
raised to that height of glory, to be more glorious than the Sun in the
Firmament; then, what height of glory shall my soul be raised too! but then,
take not only my soul, but my grace, the Divine Nature that is in my soul, what
shall that be raised too? The plants are capable to be raised to a higher
excellency than stones; and the Rational creature to a higher excellency than a
Sensitive creature; and the Sensitive higher than the Vegetative, and the
Supernatural creature to a higher excellency than the Natural: Then raise your
thoughts thus; My body shall be raised so high, what shall my soul be then? and
what shall my graces that are in my soul be? Oh! wait for this, it is but for a
little while before I shall be with God for him to be all in all to my soul
enjoying full communion with him; (I say) exercise faith, and wait for it, look
for it every day, consider it is nearer and nearer, your salvation is nearer
than when at first you believed, God has a little work for you here, but as
soon as this is done this shall be my condition, I shall see my Savior, my soul
shall presently be with him and enjoy full communion with him in glory, and my
body within a while shall be raised and shall live for ever with him: shall be
where he is, and shall enjoy all that he has purchased by his blood, as much
glory as the blood of Christ is worth am I capable of; the text says, It shall
be a weight of glory: I am not here fitted to bear a weight of glory, if the
glory of Heaven should shine in upon me so much as it might, it would swallow
me up presently. We read in the 7. of Dan. upon the glory of God appearing to
him, says he, I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days. If God should open
the Heavens, and dart in some light from Heaven into us so as he might, alas we
should faint presently and be sick and die, No man can see God and live; no man
here can enjoy that that God has prepared for his Saints in Heaven and live;
therefore let us be content for a while to be as we are, and exercise thy faith
and hope in what shall be; Thou shall be able to bear that weight of glory, and
be able to stand before the face of God continually to enjoy those things that
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to
conceive: nay, though a man has a spiritual eye, and a spiritual ear, and a
spiritual heart enlarged to supernatural things, yet they are things not only
beyond the eye of sense, but the eye of reason; nay, the eye of faith has not
seen them fully, nor ear has ever heard of, neither can enter into a gracious
heart to convince what it is; but those Clusters that we have of this land of
Canaan do show that mere is a glorious rest for his people. Now by the exercise
of your faith and hope work these things upon your souls every day, it would be
a mighty help to make your Conversation to be in Heaven; where should my heart
and thoughts, where should my life and conversation be, but where I expect such
things as these are to be revealed very soon in the Day of Jesus Christ, in his
appointed time, which is at hand.

FINIS.
OF WALKING WITH GOD
GENESIS, 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
CHAP. I. TEXT OPENED
IN this Chapter we have the Geneologie from Adam to Noah: and it is observable,
That God passes all along and says, Adam he lived so long and begat sons; and
so afterward they lived and begat sons and daughters and then died. He only
mentions them briefly, till he comes to Enoch, and there God seems to make a
stop: He does not only tell you how long he lived, and begat sons and
daughters, and died; but he adds, Enoch walked with God. The holy Ghost
spends three verses upon Enoch, He tells you how long he lived and begat
Methuselah, and Enoch walked with God. And in the 23. verse there he speaks of
him again; and in the 24. verse. Enoch walked with God again. As if the Lord
should say, Oh my servant Enoch I must not pass by him, he was an eminent holy
man in his generation, I must not pass by him without some especial testimony:
as if God should say, Oh he was the delight of my Soul, he walked with me:
Enoch walked with God.

Enoch he was a Prophet in his time, he conversed much with God, and God
revealed much of his mind to him. We find in the Epistle of Jude 14. there the
holy Ghost mentions him again, Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
these, saying, etc. Enoch prophesied, he was a Prophet: Where do we find
Enoch's prophecy in all the Book of God? we have the Prophecy of Isaiah, and
Jeremiah, and other Prophets; but where the Prophecy of Enoch? Here the holy
Ghost says, That Enoch prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, etc. Now for the prophecy that is here mentioned by
the holy Ghost, in this Epistle of Jude, we have it not set down in words
fully, but yet we have somewhat set down even in a verse or two before my Text,
of Enoch's prophecy, and that is in the very name of his son Methuselah, there
is that very prophecy of Enoch that the holy Ghost speaks of in the Epistle of
Jude, in the name (I say) of his son Methuselah, for Methuselah signifies thus
much, he dies, and then the sending out, that is the flood, he dies and then
comes the flood, that is the signification of the name Methuselah: So that Enoch
prophesied many hundred years before the floods coming; and that prophecy
seemed to go further, for Gods dealing with people in those times, were but as
a type of his dealing with men in aftertimes. That the Lord would send forth a
flood against all wicked and ungodly men in due time to destroy them, he dies,
and then the sending forth of the flood, for the flood did come in the very
last year of Methuselah, and that is observable that this Methuselah he lived
longer than ever any man lived since the world began, All the days of
Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty nine years, and then he died. Now this
may be one reason of the lengthening out of his life, that he might fulfill the
prophecy of Enoch, for Enoch prophesied that the flood should come when he
died, now because God had work to bring about, and to defer the flood for a
while after, therefore Methuselah must live so long.

God does lengthen out, or shorten men's lives according to the work he has to
do, according to the use he has to make of them. But thus much for Enoch: The
person who it was.

ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD.
Now this phrase of walking with God, sometimes it signifies some special
ministration before the Lord, as in the 1 Samuel 2. 30, 35. Wherefore the Lord
God of Israel says, I said indeed, That thy house, and the house of thy father
should walk before me for ever. And then in the 35. I will raise me up a
faithful Priest that shall do according to that which is in my heart, and in
my mind and I will build him a sure house, and he shall WALK before mine
anointed for ever: That is, for a special and holy ministration, so it is taken
sometimes.

But here we are to understand it more largely, (though it is true, Enoch was a
Prophet and he might be said to walk with God in regard of the special
ministration of his Prophetical Office that he had;) for walking with God, in
ways of righteousness and holiness: so walking with God, as it is said of Noah,
that was his great grandchild, in the 6. of Genesis 9. These are the generations
of Noah, Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation, and Noah walked
with God. This his great-grand-child (no question hearing of his fathers
walking with God was a great argument for to move him to the like, and his
walking with God is discribed to be in being righteous, and in being perfect
with God. The 70. in their translation turns this that you have in your books
walk with God, by the word, he pleased God. And that is observable that the holy
Ghost in mentioning Enoch in the new Testament, does follow the translation of
the Septuagent in the 11. of the Heb. there you shall find that Enoch is
mentioned among the Catalogue of the Believers there: By faith Enoch was
translated that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had
translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he
pleased God. That word that you have here in Genesis rendered, he walked with
God: in the Hebrews it is that he had this testimony, That he pleased God: and
indeed it comes to one, he walked in the ways that God was pleased and
delighted in.

He pleased God.] The Calde translates it, he walked in the fear of God; and so
some Interpreters quoting the Jerusalemie Thargum, he served or labored in the
truth before the Lord: and that is one thing further in the explication that
it is said, he walked with God after he begat Methuselab. Some now think that
Enoch was a wicked man before the time that he begat Methuselah, in that sixty
and five years there is no mention of his walking with God, but Enoch lived
sixty five years and begat Methuselah, and he walked with God after he begat
Methuselah: but that is no sufficient ground to conclude, because it is said
after: that he did not before; it might rather be to note the constancy of his
walking with God, that he continued in the constant course of his life in his
walking with God. I shall need to speak no further of the explication of this
first part of Enoch's walking with God. The point of Doctrine from it is this.

CHAP. II. The Doctrines raised from the Text, and the Treatise divided into
several parts.
THat it is the great excellency and commendations of a godly man, to walk with
God: Or, That it is the highest testimony that can be given of a man that walks
with God. Walking with God is a high excellency, and whoever has this
testimony has the highest testimony that can be given unto a man in this
world, that he walks with God. And therefore that is observable, that God
mentions him twice, as if he loved to mention his poor creatures walking with
him: at the 22. verse; And Enoch walked with God. And then in the 24. verse,
And Enoch walked with God. Oh! as if God should say, This is that that is the
delight of my soul indeed. Yea, and that is observable in the testimony of Noah,
in Genesis 6. 9. perhaps in the reading of it you may not observe that that I shall
observe unto you now, Noah (says he) was a just man, and perfect in his
generations, and Noah walked with God. He does not say thus, Noah was a just
man and walked with God: But mark, he repeats Noah twice, Noah was a just man
and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God: as if he should say,
This is the blessed man that lived in a wicked generation, and though that
generation was sinful and wicked, yet he kept close with God; Noah was just and
perfect, and Noah walked with God; Oh I take delight in this Noah: Consider my
servant Noah, Noah was thus, and Noah walked with God. There Is a great Emphasis
in doubling of his name, and there can be no reason given of it, for the sense
would be perfect without it: as if he should say, Noah was a just man and
perfect in his generation, and walked with God; But for the putting of a
special incomium upon Noah, Oh! Noah was a just man and perfect in his
generations, and Noah walked with God. Oh! it is the excellency of a man to walk
with God, and for God himself to own a man and to say, that he walks with him:
Men may live in a practice of the duties of Religion, Eternal duties, and go
very far that way, and yet be strangers unto God, never know what it is to walk
with God; they may have by-waies of their own in which their hearts do walk; as
the Stars that have a motion turn about by the Primum Mobile, the first mover,
one way, but they have a secret motion the other way themselves: and so, though
many in their external profession seem to be moved one way, but secretly their
hearts move another way, they do not walk with God all that while, they did
pray, and read, and hear, and come to Sermons and make great profession, so as
men might think they walked with God, but it was not so. As it is with a ship,
you may be bound to such a Port, and the ship and the sails blow that way, and
yet when the ship goes east, a man may walk up and down in the ship westward:
so in profession, a man seems to be carried eastward, yet his private walks
may be another way, to his own ends, to his own designs; but here is the honor
of a man when God himself shall own him, as if God should say concerning Enoch,
I who am a God that am the Seer and Searcher of all men's hearts, and I observe
the ways of my servant Enoch, and I see him not only in the outward profession
of godliness, but in the secret of his soul he walks with me, he has no
bye-walks at all, but he keeps himself close with me and walks with me
continually; Enoch walked with God.

This phrase, Walking with God, we have expressed in Scripture in diverse other
phrases that are to the same purpose: as walking before God, Genesis 24. 40 The
Lord before whom I walk, says Abraham; and so God bad Abraham, Walk before me
and be upright. And so in the 116. Psalm. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the
Land of the Living. Remember how I have walked before thee, it is said of
Hezekiah. And sometimes the same thing is expressed by walking after the Lord;
in the 13. of Deuteronomy. 4. Ye shall walk after the Lord. As a child walking after
his father, though he walks step after step, yet he may be said to walk with
him. And sometimes by walking in the Name of the Lord, Micah, 4. 5. We will
walk in the Name of the Lord our God. And then fourthly, by walking in the
spirit of God, Gal. 5. 16. and here, walking with God.

Walking Before God.

Walking After God.

Walking in the Name of God.

Walking in the Spirit of God. Or,

Walking with God. They all come to the same purpose.

But for the opening of the point there are these Four things that I intend in
the handling of it.

First, What it is to walk with God, or to discribe the work of God in bringing
the soul to walk with him, and the way of the soul in walking with God.

Secondly, To show you the excellency that there is in this walking with God:
what a blessed thing it is for a Christian to walk with God.

Thirdly, Give you some evidences of a man's walking with God.

Fourthly, To give unto you some Rules how you may come to walk with God, to
have your lives so as you may have this testimony even from God himself, that
you do walk with him. These are the Four things.

For the First, The description of walking with God, the work of God in
bringing the soul to walk with him, and the way of the soul in walking with God.

CHAP. III. How the Soul is brought to Walk with God, Discovered in Six
Particulars.
FIrst, Every one by nature goes astray from God, in the 58. Psalm. 3. it is
said of all the wicked, that they are estranged from the womb, they go astray
as soon as they are born, speaking lies. That Is one of the first things wherein
wickedness appears in children, but it is from the very womb that they go
astray, before they can speak: it is natural for the wicked to go astray from
God as soon as they have any being. The way wherein men naturally do walk, it
is the way of death, it is the way of their own hearts, of their own counsels,
it is the common course of the world, it is the walk of the flesh. But now, the
work of God in bringing the soul to walk with him, it is, First, To cause the
soul to make a stop in the way that men naturally walk in; Those that the Lord
has left for a while in the way of nature, that walk in the way of death, the
Lord is pleased to come to them by some mighty work of his to make a stop, by
considering, where am I? what is my way; whither am I going? is the way that I
am in like to the way that befeems an Immortal soul? Is the way like to end
well that I am walking in? It causes the soul to make a stop in it, and begin
to think where it is, whither it is going, and so usually causes some fear,
fearing it is in a way like to miscarry, so that it dare not proceed further in
that way that it has been walking in all this while, though never so pleasant
a way, though never so suitable to the flesh, the Lord forbid that I should go
on in that way that I have walked in. There Is a stop caused.

Secondly, The Lord manifests to the soul the way of life, what the way of life
is. This stop of the soul is just like to that we read of Saul, that when he
was posting on in the way of death, there did shine a light round about him,
and caused him to stop so that he could go no further. But then (I say) the
Lord manifests to the soul what the way of life is. In the 30. of Isa. 21. And
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying, This is the way, walk ye in
it. Oh! how many are there that can tell this by experience, that they have
been walking in the ways of death, of eternal misery, and blessed themselves in
those ways? But there was a blessed time wherein God caused them to hear a
voice as it were behind them saying, This is the way, walk-in it; you are out
of the way, but here is the way of life, if you would not perish eternally,
here is the way, walk in this way; It is a secret voice that the Lord causes to
be heard in the soul, but yet a powerful voice: perhaps you have come to the
Word, and have heard what the way of life is: but yet that never has given a
turn to your hearts: but when God would have the soul to come in to walk with
him, he causes the soul (besides the outward voice of the Word) to hear a voice
behind in secret, and yet powerfully, saying, Oh! this is the way; Oh thou poor
soul that are wandering from the way of life, and art going on in the way of
eternal death, Come in, come in, here is another way, This is the way, walk in
it: And so the Lord gives a mighty turn to the soul by that secret voice.

Thirdly, The Lord makes peace between himself and a sinner; He does reveal the
doctrine of Reconciliation. For a sinner at first when he comes to have his
eyes enlightened, when he comes to know himself and to know God; Certainly God
at first cannot but appear terrible to a sinner that has walked in the ways
of death formerly, and though I see my way to be dangerous, and I see another
way to be good, Oh but God is terrible to me, and how can two walk together
that are not at peace? In Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together except they be
agreed? says the text, Oh there is naturally an enmity between Man and God,
every man in the world is naturally an enemy to God; and can there be two
walking together unless they be agreed? Oh! you that are going on in the ways
of enmity with God, surely you are strangers to this way of walking with God,
can you walk with God before you are agreed? no soul can have this testimony
given of it, that he has walked with God, but such a soul as is reconciled to
him; God does manifest that in some measure to the soul before it is able thus
to walk with him, as here Enoch did, and certainly Enoch came to walk with God
by this, for the holy Ghost in the forenamed place of the 11. of the Heb.
says, It was by faith that he did it, and without faith it is impossible to
please God, that is as much as, without faith it is impossible to walk with God.
The holy Ghost means the same thing, when the Apostle says, that he did walk
by faith, and without faith it is impossible to please God, therefore there must
be a work of faith to bring the soul to be reconciled, and that there may be an
agreement between the soul and God before it can walk with him. That Is the
third thing.

Fourthly, Though there be peace made so that God does not appear as an enemy
against the soul, yet there may be some strangness after peace made. There was
peace made between David and Absalom, David was passified toward him, yet he
would not see his face for a while, he would have been gone from his presence,
there should not be that converse with him in that familier way as a child with
the father for a while: So though there be peace made, yet there is required a
further work of God for the souls walking with him, that is, That God should
render himself in loveliness, and fullness of mercy, and sweetness, and
delightfulness unto the soul, that there may be a familiarity between the soul
and God; It Is one thing for me to know God is not as an enemy to me, that he
does not intend wrath and misery against me, and another thing for the soul to
apprehend the sweet delightful countenance of God, and the imbracements in the
arms of his mercy, and those condescentions of God, that he is willing to come
and deal with us as a friend with his friend in a familiar way: Therefore
that is a fourth work, the Lord is pleased to manifest himself to the soul in
the sweetness of his love, and his delight; Not only thou art that soul that
shall not be damned, that shall eternally be saved; but thou art the soul that
my soul delights in, thou art one that I take as my friend, and that I love to
deal with in all sweetness, and to bring into a familiarity with my self. This
is that that is manifested to the soul for the bringing of it to this walking
with God that here the holy Ghost speaks of concerning Enoch.

Fifthly, The Lord is pleased to send his holy Spirit to guide the soul To
himself, and to guide it in walking With himself: In the 8. Romans it is said, All
that are the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God. As a father when he
walks with the child he gives him his hand and leads along the child with
himself: when any comes to be a child of God, God puts forth his hand and leads
him, and so they walk together. As have you not seen sometimes a father and
child walking in the garden, the father puts forth his finger and the child
takes hold of it and so walks along with him: even so the Lord puts forth his
Spirit into a gracious soul, and God and the soul thus walks together being led
by the Spirit of God; in the 35. Isa. 8, 9. there you may see what the Lord
speaks of the way of the redeemed ones. And an high way shall be there, and a
way, and it shall be called the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass
over it, but it shall be for those; the wayfaring men though fools, shall not
err therein: Though they be very weak and fools, yet they shall not err
therein. And no Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon: it shall not be found there, but the redeemed shall walk there, that is
the privilege of the redeemed ones. Now this way of walking up unto the Land of
Canaan from their captivity, it is typical, to typifie the walk of the soul with
the Lord.

Sixthly, For the souls walking with God, there is this further done by God,
Christ the Son of God he takes the soul and brings it unto God the Father, as
the Spirit leads, so Jesus Christ.

The Lord Jesus Christ he brings the soul unto the Father to render God and the
soul familier together: In Ephesians. 2. 18. Through him we have an acccess by one
Spirit unto the Father: We have an access through him, we have a manuduction,
He brings us unto the Father, we have access through Jesus Christ. As if a
Prince should take a Traitor that is reconciled to his Father, having his
pardon, and his Father being passified toward him, the Prince comes and takes
him by the hand, and says, Come, I Will bring you unto my Father, and I will
walk along with you unto my Father: So it is, None that ever has been a sinner
can walk with God, but Christ must walk together with him; Christ walks along
with him, and so God is ever more rendered sweet, aimable, and lovely; why?
Because Christ has him by the hand (as I may so say) God the Father has him
in one hand, and Christ has him by the other hand, and so the soul walks in
this blessed walk, between the hands of God the Father and the Son; and the
holy Ghost leads and guides him too.

CHAP. IV. Walking with God what it is, Opened in Nine Particulars.
BUt now, The way of the soul in this walk with God: When the soul is thus
brought to God, and by this means enabled to walk with him, Then what is the way
of the soul in walking thus with God?

Walking with God causes the soul to eye God.
In the first place, Now the soul being come thus to God, in all the ways of
God it ey's God, and sets God before it. Enoch walked with God: that is, Enoch
in the ways of his life set God before him, and did eye God in his ways;
First beholding the infinite beauty there is in God. Secondly, God being the
fountain of al good to the soul. Thirdly, the soul apprehending God infinitely
worthy of all honor. These three things causes the eye to be upon God
continually: The Lord has infinite excellency and beauty in him. The Lord is
the fountain of all good to me: The Lord is infinitely worthy of all honor and
service; and a soul walking with God eyes God thus continually. In the 26.
Psalm. 3. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy
truth: Oh Lord! I see thee aimable, lovely, and gracious, and the fountain of
all good, and Lord, I have walked in thy truth, setting God before me; so in
Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me that I might not fall. A
soul that walks with God scarce ey's any thing but God, when it enjoyes the
creature yet the eye is upon God; as the little child walking with the father
looks up to the father; every soul that walks with God has his eye upon him,
for there is no such lovely drawing object to the soul as God himself is;
whereas wicked men they do not find God to be such a lovely object, sees no
such excellency in him, and therefore they rather turn their eyes away from him,
they look another way, Psalm. 86. 14. They do not set God before them; men that
walk according to the lusts of their own hearts in their wicked sinful ways,
the Lord is not in all their thoughts, as in the 10. Psalm. That Is the first
thing in the way of the souls walking with God, he eyes God, and sees God
before him.

Walking with God causes a man to carry himself as in Gods Presence.
Secondly, The soul behaves its self as in Gods Presence. I see my self in Gods
presence, and my eye is upon God, Oh let me then look to my self, that the
carriage of my soul be as beseems one who is in the presence of so holy, so
great, so glorious and blessed a God as the Lord is, in the 2 Cor. 2. 17. As of
God in the sight of God speak we in Christ, says the Apostle; when we come to
do any thing, we do it as of God, in the sight of God, knowing that we are
always before God. Augustine, speaking concerning Noah's walking with God, he
has this expression, Noah walked with God, that is, he had God always present
before his eyes, walking so holily, and so reverenced God: This is to walk in
the fear of God, when the soul upon the apprehention of Gods presence shall
labor to compose its self as beseeming the presence before whom it is, and this
indeed is the walk that you shall find the Saints of God in all day long, would
you know where to find a Saint? you may know his walk, you shall all the day
long find him walking in the fear of the Lord, Preverbs 23. 17. says the text
there, Let not thy heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the Lord all
the day long. He does not say, do thou fear the Lord all the day long, but be
thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Oh the walk of a Christian
should be so from morning to night, to walk in the fear of the Lord; and
nothing in this world should put him out of this walk, no temptations should
call him out of it, but in the fear of the Lord all the day long: This is the
walk of a Christian, when he labors to behave himself as beseems the presence
of God.

Walking with God is, when we make Gods Will the Rule of our will.
Thirdly, The soul may be said to walk with God, When the way of it is the same
way that God himself goes, the soul does that that God does: What Is the way of
God, but the way of holiness and righteousness? when the soul makes the Will of
God to be the rule of it, I will not be acted by my own will, I will not be
acted by any thing but by the Will of God: what is it that God wills? I will
the same thing, then the soul walks that way God walks, when it does suit its
self with God, sets the Lord as an example before it, as the Scripture says,
Be ye holy as your Heavenly Father is holy; I see the holy and the righteous
ways of God, and I labor as a deer child to follow him, and to go in the very
same steps that God does, how does God carry businesses? I will labor to carry
things so as God does, that my life shall hold forth a resemblance of God
himself; this is to walk with God, to do as God does, to imitate God; that is a
third thing in a souls walking with God.

Walking with God is, when a Soul has the same Ends that God has.
The Fourth is this, Not only to do the same thing, to make the will of God to
be the rule of it, But to have the same ends that God has: What Is the end that
God has in all his ways? Surely it is, that his blessed Name may be
magnified, that his glory may be set forth; I Will drive on the same design, that
shall be the great design of my life, it is that that my soul shall aim at as
the highest end of all things, and all things shall be subordinate to this end
even, The glory and honor of God, it is that that God aims at, and therefore
that which I Will aim at, thus the soul goes along with God; as now, A man may be
said to go along with another man when they do both drive on the same designs:
Oh! this is a blessed thing indeed. We shall speak to that hereafter: but the
very opening what it is shows much of the excellency of it; and I beseech you
as you go along, examine your own hearts, see whether by the very mentioning of
these things you be not strangers to God; examine by the workings of God in
bringing your souls to walk with him, or otherwise by the way of the soul, in
eying God, in behaving its self as in the presence of God, in making the Will
of God to be its rule, and in driving on the design that God does.

Walking with God, is the observing the administrations of God and suting the
soul to them.
Fifthly, It is the observing of the several administrations of God, and the
suting of the soul to the several administrations of God in the world: I open
that thus, God sometimes seems to work in one way, sometimes in another way;
now the soul that walks with God observes which are the several ways and
administrations of God in the world, and let me (says the soul) labor to suit
my heart with them: that is thus, sometimes the Lord is in a way of judgments,
in the world, heavy and dreadful afflictions: yea, sometimes against his own
Saints, and People: then let me suit my heart according to this, Oh Lord! we
will wait upon thee in the ways of thy judgments, says the Church in Isa. Are
we under Gods way of judgments, in a way of afflictions? Lord, we will suit our
selves to honor thee there according to that way, we will labor to exercise
those graces that are suitable to these administrations of thine. And Lord, art
thou in a way of mercy? we will suit our selves accordingly, and labor to draw
forth and exercise our graces that are suitable to those ways of thine. And art
thou in a way of affliction in my family, or in a way of mercy? Lord, I will
labor to exercise those graces that are suitable to those ways of thine. This
is to walk with God. As when we walk with a man, if he turn this way, then I
set my self to go with him, and if he turns another way, then I suit my self to
go with him that way, so though the ways of God be never so vario^us, yet the
soul that walks with God is suitable to those ways of God; Oh this is a great
Art, a great Mystery to suit a man's self to these several administrations of
God in the world. You shall have some that if God go in a way of mercy, Oh
there they can bless, and praise God, and they think that this is to walk with
God; but if God turns his back upon thee and takes away thy choisestearthly
comfort (it may be) thy dearest yoke fellow and so comes in a way of
affictions, how can thou suit with Gods ways then? When God was in a way of
mercy, then my exercise was in joy, and thanksgiving, and speaking good of his
Name; but now the Lord is in a way of afflictions, now I exercise faith on God,
now I exercise patience, now I exercise Christian wisdom, to know what good I
can get out of this hand of God, that what courses soever God takes, yet still
a Christian has several graces to exercise in several conditions, and that not
only while God is in a smooth path the soul can exercise Joy, and Thanksgiving,
and speaking good of his Name: But let God go into a rugged path of very great
afflictions, yet the soul does suit it is self unto God according to his several
administrations; this is to walk with God.

Walking with God, is, To have a Holy Dependence upon God. Opened in Four
Particulars.
Sixthly, Walking with God, it is, To have a holy dependence upon God in all
his ways. For one to live in a holy dependence upon God for these Four things.

First, In a holy dependence upon God for Direction; First. For Direction
Oh lead me in the way of thy truth. When a Christian looks up to God and
depends upon him in the constant course of his life, depends upon him for
direction, Oh Lord! teach me thy way, Lord, lead me in the way of everlasting
life, Lord, send forth thy light and thy truth to guide me; Thou shall be my
guide even unto death, when the soul dare not go one step further, then it sees
God going before it, and therefore it says, Lord, lead me, guide me: I beseech
you examine as you go along, can you say, that in the course of your lives this
you find; That you walk in a holy dependence upon God for guidance and
direction in every step? whatsoever you meddle with, yet your walk is thus in a
holy dependence upon God for direction in your bufiness, and according as the
business is, of less or greater conscequence the heart works more after God
for guidance and direction for that business. But now, the men of the world
they are afraid that God should lead them into hard paths, into ttoublesom
ways, and therefore they are shy of Gods Guidance; this is the way of wicked
hearts, (I say) they are shy of the guidance and direction of God; but a
gracious heart says, let God lead me, and let the way be what it will. The
wicked are guided by their own thoughts, by their own counsels, by the examples
of other men, what is most suitable to their own ends, but the way of the Saints
is this, Lord, guide me.

Secondly, Their holy dependence upon God it is for protection to protect them
in what they do. Lord, I am in the way that Secondly. For Protection
thou have guided me into, I may meet with much trouble and affliction, but
Lord do thou protect me, do thou defend me in this way of thine. As the child
walking with the father, if he hears any noise that does scare him, he looks up
to the father, and depends upon his father to be protected: So when a child of
God shall in all his ways walk in a holy dependence upon God for protection,
this is to walk with God.

Thirdly, The soul depends upon God for assistance in any thing that it
undertakes. Lord, this is the work that thou Thirdly. For Assistance.
call me to, Oh let me have strength from thy self in this work, I can do
nothing without thee Lord, and let me have assistance from thee. Whereas the
wicked they make flesh their arm, and therefore there is a curse pronounced
against them, in Jer. 17. 5. verse, they are strangers to any such work as
this, of dependence upon God for assistance! Now and then at a spurt, they will
say, that God must help them and they can do nothing without God: I but to have
a holy, gracious frame of spirit to walk in a holy dependence upon God for
assistance in every business, this is far from the wicked and ungodly.

Fourthly, The soul walks in a holy dependence upon God for Fourthly. For a
blessing upon all it does.
a blessing upon all it does. Walk before me and be upright, I am thine
exceeding great reward. As if God should say to Abraham, Walk in dependence
upon me, I am thy reward, though thou have little encouragment in the world,
yet look up to me for thy reward: so when the soul turns from men, and the
world, and minds not so much what encouragement it has from the world, but
looks up to God, Lord, I depend upon thee for a blessing, and how ever things
seem to go, yet Lord, I look up to thee for the bringing all to a good issue;
here is now a soul walking with God.

Walking with God makes a man free and ready in the ways of God.
Seventhly, One that walks with God, in all his ways of Holiness and Obedience
his heart is free in him, he comes off readily to every good work, he is not
hall'd and pulled to God, but he walks with him. There Is a great deal of
differenet between one that is dragged after another, (as if you should drag a
prisoner that has no mind to go that way) and another that walks up and down
with delight and pleasure with you: It Is not enough to walk with God, for to be
in the way that God would have you to be, or to do the things that God would
have you to do, except your hearts do come off freely in the ways of
obidience, except there be a cheerfulness in the ways of obedience, except you
choose the ways of holiness as the ways that are most suitable to you, this is
the walking with God. In the 119. Psalm. 45. I will walk at liberty, (says
David) for I seek thy precepts. It Is a notable Scripture. The men of the world
they think that there is no walking at liberty but for them to satisfy their
defires to the uttermost, to walk after their lusts which is the Scripture
phrase: No but says David, my liberty is this, I seek thy precepts. A carnal
heart thinks it is the greatest bondage in the world for to seek the precepts
of God, and to conform to Gods precepts, that I must walk according to rule,
that is a bondage: No, I Will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. It Is an
excellent argument of grace in the heart, to account the precepts of God to be
the greatest liberty to the soul: When I am in the ways of sin, I am in the
ways of bondage, I am a slave to Satan; but when I seek thy precepts, I am at
liberty. As a man when he is walking up and down in the fields, he is at
liberty. So when the soul is walking with God it is at liberty, but when the
soul is walking without God it is in a dungeon, a prison; but (I say) when it
walks with God it is at liberty, it comes off freely in all the ways of
obedience.

Walking with God consists in Communion with God.
Eighthly, Walking with God consists in the Converse and Communion that the
soul has with him in holy duties: There are the special walks of the soul with
God, and of God, with the soul in the duties of holy Worship. In the 18. of
Levit. 4. says the Lord there, Ye shall do my Judgments, and keep mine
Ordinances, to WALK therein, I am the Lord your God. You must Walk in Gods
Ordinances, the Ordinances of God they are the Walks of a gracious soul, and
there the soul meets with God, in the 26. of Levit. 11, 12. It Is a notable
Scripture to show that in Gods Ordinances there the soul meets with God. And I
will set my tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you, that is,
shall delight in you, And I will WALK among you, and will be your God, and ye
shall be my people. I will set my Tabernacle amongst you: What Is that? That is,
mine Ordinances, you shall enjoy mine Ordinances, you shall have the duties of
my Worship, and I will Walk among you: then God walks among us when we enjoy
his Ordinances. So that you see in the 18. of Levit. there God says, You shall
walk in mine Ordinances, the Ordinances are the godly man's walk: then in the
26. of Levit. the Ordinances are Gods walk; so that we see they walk the same
way, and there God and a gracious heart meet together. The Churches enjoying
Ordinances are the Candlesticks that we read of in the 1 of Revel. 13. In the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks was one like unto the son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the feet, and gird about the paps with a golden
girdle: The Lord Jesus Christ is in the midst of the Candlesticks; that is, in
the midst of the Churches, where there are the Ordinances of God, there he is,
and if you would walk with him you must find him there; in the 68. Psalm. 24.
there likewise you may see what the way of a gracious heart is in walking with
God, They have seen thy goings O God, even the going of my God, my King,
(where?) in the Sanctuary. If you would walk with another you must know where
his goings are, observe where he uses to walk, and be going there. They have
seen thy going O God, even the goings of my God, my King, in the Sanctuary;
there is the goings of God, if you would meet with God and walk with him, it
must be in the Sanctuary, it must be in his Ordinances. In the 7. of Cant. 5.
verse, it is said, That the King (speaking of Christ) is held in the galleries;
now what is that but in the Ordinances? that is as it were the galleries of the
great King of Heaven and Earth. And you know Princes and great men, they have
their sumptuous galleries wherein they use to walk, and only chief favorites
are permitted and suffered to be there to walk up and down: The King is HELD in
his galleries: that is, when Jesus Christ is in Communion with his Saints in
his Ordinances, in the duties of Worship: Oh it is the most pleasant galleries
to walk in that he has, it is as pleasant a gallery as he has in Heaven it is
self, Oh! he loves to be there, The King is Held there. Oh! many a sweet and
comfortable turn has a gracious heart in these galleries, that is, in the
Ordinances and Duties of Worship in walking with Jesus Christ.

When the soul is exercised in the Ordinances, it has converse with Christ, it
hearkens what Christ says, and Christ hearkens what such a soul says, I will
hearken what he will say, and the soul knows the voice of Christ, 5. Cant. 2.
It is the voice of my beloved, says the Spouse. Oh it knows what the voice of
Christ is when they walk together in Ordinances: Christ speaks to the soul, and
the soul knows his voice, and the soul speaks again to Jesus Christ, there is a
blessed converse between them, Christ lets himself into the heart, and the
heart opens its self to Christ, Oh! the Communion that a gracious heart has
with Jesus Christ in Ordinances it is unspeakable! Only those that are
acquainted with it understand what the meaning of conversing with God there
means; It is with many even as it was with Adam, that when God came to walk in
the garden, we read that he was hid in the bush: The Ordinances and Duties of
Worship are as Paradise, as Eden; and God comes many times to walk with us, and
would feign have communion and converse with us, yet Oh! how many times are
many of his servants hid in the bush; they have walked loosly, and contracted
some guiltiness upon their spirits, and so the presence of God is terrible to
them, and the more the voice of God, and the presence of God is in an
Ordinance, the more they are afraid because of some guiltiness: they are
entangled in the bush when as they should be conversing with God, Oh the
difference that there is between some Christians and others in the exercising
themselves in the Duties of Worship! There are some that when they are
worshipping of God, Oh what sweet and blessed terms have they with God, and
Communion between God and their souls! and others, though (it may be) they have
some good in them, yet they are entangled in the briars of the world, and
though God be in the midst of his Ordinances, yet they have no converse, no
communion with him at all.

Walking with God causes the soul to follow God more as be reveals himself
more.
The Ninth Particular is this: The soul that walks with God, as God reveals
himself unto it still more and more, so it follows God more and more, and still
seeks to glorify God more and more, that is walking: There is a progress in
the ways of godliness where there is a walking. The soul when first it is led
by the hand of Jesus Christ to God, and comes and walks with him, Oh it is sweet
and comfortable, but still as God reveals himself more and more to the soul, so
the soul still grows up in godliness more and more, and still is more holy,
and more gracious, and honors God more in the Conversation of it than formerly
it has done, it gets nearer and nearer to Heaven every day; this is to walk
with God. There Is a notable Scripture in the 63. Psalm. 8. David says there, My
soul follows hard after thee, O Lord, thy right hand upholdeth me. As a poor
child that is walking with the father, it may be he is weak, and cannot go so
fast as it does desire, but the father puts forth his hand and takes hold of
him and so upholds and strengthens the child, and it follows hard after the
father: so it is here: Oh Lord thy right hand upholds me: If it did not uphold
me, I could not walk, but thy right hand upholds me, and then my soul follows
hard after thee, and so increases in godliness more and more: I will praise
thee more and more says David in another place speaking of the honor that he
disir'd to give to God in his way, he professed he would still ad to the praise
of God, and praise him more and more.

These are the principal things wherein walking with God consists.

Now to all these take in that consideration that we have mentioned all along,
and that makes it up, That all these are in a constant course of a man's life,
This walking with God.

Some other men that know not what it is to walk with God, perhaps they may
come and walk a step or two in Gods ways, but they quickly turn out again, and
they find them tedious and irksom to them: But the heart that walks with God
does all this that I have named.

That is, Eyes God in all his ways. Behaves its self as in the presence of
God. Walks in the same way God does. Observes Gods designs. And so likewise the
rest, and all this in the constant course of his life.

It Is true, Through the violence of some temptation there may chance to be a
step astray, or there may be perhaps some fall in the way; but still the heart
is Godward, and still is toward God, it gets up again, and walks again in the
way, it does not merely go a step into the way of God as some carnal men do; it
may be sometimes when Gods hand is upon them, or upon the hearing of some
Sermon, then their hearts are a little touched, and they seem to be a little
froward; but take the constant course of their lives, and it is in the way of
sin; But the constant course of the ways of the Saints, are in the ways of
God. As now, a Swine may go through a fair meadow, I but that is not the place
that it does so much regard, but it would be in the mire and dirt, and there it
wallows. So it is with many wicked men, they will come and hear, and pray, and
do some good duties, this is a Swine in a meadow; but when they come to those
ways that may satisfy the lusts of the flesh, there they wallow, that is their
proper place, and therefore far from walking with God. A beggar will perhaps
follow a man a little way so long as he has hopes of getting any thing by him:
but if the man goes still away from him, he turns aside to another way, he will
go no further along with him: so it is with many men, even many professors they
would seem to follow God perhaps for comfort, and for something that they would
have from him; but if they cannot find presently what they would have from God,
then they turn aside: whereas (I beseech you observe this) the difference
between a friends walking with another out of delight of Communion with him,
and a beggar that only goes along with another man begging for an alms; The man
that goes along begging for the alms he does not regard the company of this man
any further than he may have hopes of an alms from him, if he cannot have what
he would have, or if he have once what he would have, he turns aside from the
man: But a friend that is walking with his friend, that that satisfies him is,
the company of his friend, and the converse that he has with him while he is
walking, and so he goes on in a constant way, and walks to the end of the place
where his friend is to go, and is sorry that the walk is so short, and still
desires to converse with his friend: So I say, this is the difference for all
the world in Professors, there are some that have some touch of conscience, and
they see there is no way for them if they have not mercy from God but they must
perish, and perhaps they will be seeking of God, and following of God, and
crying to God for mercy: but if they have not comfort according as they expect
they turn away from him, and seek for comfort other ways: But a gracious heart
that is indeed turned to God, it does not only seek to God for mercy for its
self that it might be delivered from misery, but it sees an excellency in God,
and finds sweetness in Converse and Communion with God, and loves the presence
of God, and this is the ground of the constancy of his heart in the ways of
holiness, Because it loves so much of the presence of God, and Communion with
God, it is for God himself that the soul is in those ways, and such a one will
hold out in the ways of God. Indeed one that merely serves God in a servile
way, and seeks himself only in seeking of God, such a one (I say) will be ready
to turn aside; but where the soul walks with God out of a sense of Communion,
Sweetness, and Good that there is in Communion with God, such a one goes on in
a constant way to the end and is not tired in the ways of God as others are.
You know, If you be walking from place to place, if you have good company with
you, you are not weary, you account the journey nothing, why? because you have
good company, and especially if you have good discourse all along too; so it is
with Christians, Oh the ways of God come to be very easy to them upon this
ground, and so they hold out.

CHAP. V. Twelve several Excellencies of walking with God, Opened.
THe next thing is, The Excellency that there is in walking with God.

The first Excellency.
And this may be in the first place: The walking with God. Oh there is an
Excellency in it: If it were only this, That it makes the ways of God easy:
All the ways of God, how easy are they to the soul that knows what this
means, [Of walking with God] That has God in his company continually, Oh the
easiness that there is in the ways of God! it is that that is worth a world,
and it is a very grievous and sad condition that men and women are in who have
convinced consciences, and dare not wilfully go out of Gods ways, but are
always drooping and find them grievous and tedious to them: But it is because
they have not communion with God in them: they are in them merely, upon
necessity because they ought to be in them. But the Saints find the ways of
God more easy to them, for they have always good company with then. When I
awake, I am always with thee, says David. The very nights are pleasant unto
them: when he awakes still he is with God. There Is many men and women cannot
lie alone; those that cannot sleep when they awake, if they have no company
with them the nights are tedious; but if they cannot sleep, and yet when they
awake they have some with them the nights are not so tedious to them: When I
awake I am ever with thee says David concerning God. That Is the first thing,
for the Excellency of this walking with God.

The second Excellency.
But Secondly, This walking with God, it is, most honorable. Oh it is an
honorable thing to walk with God. Attendance upon Kings and Princes we know is
honorable; The Maids of Honor that do but attend upon a Queen, it is a great
honor; the attendance upon a King, yea upon Noble Men: But now, not only
attendance, but free converse with Princes, that is more than mere attendance;
to walk with an Emperor as a friend up and down in his Galleries, in his
Gardens, in his Orchyard. So it is with the Saints, Abraham is called Gods
friend. You are not my servants, but my friends, says Christ. God admits the
soul to come as a friend and to have converse with him, Oh! this is honorable.
They were accounted blessed that were in the presence of Solomon, that were but
his servants to wait at his Table; much more to sit at his Table, to see the
order of Solomon's Table: Then to be always with God, and walking with him,
what a blessed and honorable thing is this! It is the honor of Angels
themselves, that they do but see the face of God, the Angels that are in Heaven
do behold the face of God; what honor is it then for Christians to be always
walking with God? Honor! it is that that is the great honor and happiness of the
Church when she shall be in her glory. Mark how Christ does express himself,
in Revel. 3. 4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled
their garments, What Is promised to them? and they shall walk with me in white;
for they are worthy. There shall be a glory put upon them, and they shall walk
with me, for they are worthy. The walking with Christ, that is the greatest
honor that Christ could promise unto them. And so in the 14. of the Revelation.
it is said of those that stood upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, having harps in
their hands, and singing of a new song; in the 4 verse, These are they which
were not defiled with women, for they are virgins; these are they which follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes; these were redeemed from among men; being the
first fruit unto God and to the Lamb. They follow the lamb whithersoever he
goes: This is the honor that is put upon them: Oh the walking with God it is
most honorable.

The third Excellency.
Thirdly, The Excellency of walking with God consists in this, In the blessed
satisfaction that the soul must needs have in walking with him: to walk with
life its self, with glory, with happiness, and that in a constant way, this
must needs satisfy the soul, must I say bring inconceivable satisfaction and
peace unto the soul thus walking with Him. You know what Philip said, Let us
see the Father, and it suffices us: What, would it suffice Philip to see God?
Oh then! not only to see him, but to walk and be continually with him. People
will run many times but to have the fight of a great man, but to be admitted
into the same room and to walk with him; this is more, in the 33. of Exodus 14.
And he said, my presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest: God
promised to Moses that his presence should be with him, and then when the
presence of God is with the soul, Oh the rest that the soul has by the
presence of God! Oh the lettings out of joy that there must needs be to the
heart that walks with God! in the 38. Psalm. 8. 9. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the
rivers of thy pleasures; for with thee is the fonntain of life: In thy light
shall we see light. Certainly where God walks there is a glorious light round
about, that such a soul never walks in darkness, the light of God shines about
it; as we read of those that walked with Christ to Emaus, the text says,
Their hearts burned within them. Certainly the hearts of the Saints walking
with God must needs be filled with those influences from God that must make their
hearts glow within them while they are walking with him: in Psalm. 89. 15, 16.
you have a notable Scripture there about the satisfaction of the soul in
walking with God, Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound: they
shall walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance, In thy Name shall they
rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted. Those that
walk with God they walk in the light of Gods Countenance, and in Gods Name shall
they rejoice all the day, and in his righteousness shall they be exalted. Oh! a
blessed thing it is to walk with God. The speech of that noble Marquis
Galiatius that was of great birth in Italy, and forsaking all his honors and
friends and coming to Geneve, he had this expression, says he, upon a time
feeling his sweet converse with God, Cursed (says he) be that man that
accounts all the gold and silver in the world worth one days enjoyment of
Communion with Jesus Christ. He had left a great deal of gold and silver, the
Pope himself was a near kinsman to him, and great possessions and kindred he
had, and left it all to come to Geneve, to profess the truth there, and he
found all recompensed in Communion with Christ, and his heart was so full with
it, that he even cursed those that should account all the gold and silver in
the world worth the enjoyment of one hours communion with Christ: Oh an hours
walking with Christ is more than all the world. I appeal to those souls that
have been acquainted with this, whether would you have lost such an hour that
you have been conversing with God for all the world? what would you take for
the enjoyment of such an hour as that is? Oh not thousand thousands of worlds a
gracious heart would not take for some hours that it has in enjoyment of
communion with God in walking with him; Oh there is infinite sweetness in
walking with God. There Is a great deal of good to be had in walking with the
Saints, as sometimes I have told you of Dr. Tailor that was the Martyr, when he
came to prison he rejoiced that ever he was put in prison there to meet with
that Angel of God John Bradford: Now if it be comfortable to have communion
with the Saints though in prison, Oh how sweet is it to have communion with God
in walking with him! I remember I have read of a King, that once beholding
Plato walking up and down with other Philosophers, he cries out thus; Oh life!
this is life and true happiness; yonder is true happiness: he did not look upon
his Kingdom as affording a life to him, and as affording that happiness as he
did believe Plato and the Philosophers had conversing one with another about
Phylosphie; as if he should say, it is not the Kings of the earth that live the
happy lives, but these Philosophers that walk and converse thus one with
another. Oh then what life and happiness it is for the soul to walk up and down
with God, and to converse with God himself! what though thou walk in the
velly of Bacha, yea what though thou walk in the shadow of death in respect
of outward afflictions, yet walking with God is that that will shine upon thee,
and will sweeten thy heart even when thou art walking in the valley of Bacha,
and in the shadow of death. In the 7. of the Revel. see whither Jesus Christ
leads the soul in walking with Him, The Lamb which is in the midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters,
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Thus when thou walk with
Jesus Christ, he leads thee to the living fountains of waters that comfort
thee; the comforts that thou had in the world were but as dirty puddles; but
those comforts that thou have in Christ when thou walk with him, they are
the fountain of living waters. That Is the third thing wherein the excellency of
walking with God consists, The abundance of soul-satisfaction that the heart
has in God.

The fourth Excellency.
The fourth Excellency that there is in walking with God is this, It Is a
special part of the covenant on our part that God does make with us, upon which
the very blessing of the covenant does in grreat part depend: as that Scripture
in the 17. of Genesis does clearly show, where God is coming to make a covenant
with Abraham, and to be a God to him and to his seed; what is that God requires
of Abraham now? Walk before me and be upright; Then I am God alsufficient, and
I enter into covenant with you, to be a God to you, and a God to your seed,
Walk before me and be upright. As if that were all the thing that God looked
at, that you should walk with him and be upright: [then] you shall have the
blessing of the Covenant. Oh this is a great excellency, that it is a special
part of the Covenant that God makes with his people on their part: and then on
his part, he will be a God unto them. What was it that God required, in the 6.
of Micah, 6, 7. verses, there you may see how God prizes walking with him, that
it is the great thing that God does look at, whereas there were some that said,
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burns offerings? with Calves of a year old? will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of
Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for
the sin of my soul? What shall I do to please God? Mark in the 8. verse, He
has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to WALK humbly with thy God? As if he
should say, This is the great thing, to walk with thy God; not only to exercise
some particular grace of thy Justice, and Mercy, but in general, to walk with
thy God; Never tell me of any thing that you would do for me, but in the
constant course of thy life, walk humbly with thy God. This therefore was the
comfort of Hezekiah when he had the message of death come to him, in the 38. of
Isa. Remember O Lord (says he) how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart; he turned his face to the wall, and (the text says) he
wept (it was for joy:) as if he should say, Lord, it is true, there has been
many infirmities in me; but Lord, I have walked before thee in truth, and with
a perfect heart; as if he should say, I may boldly challenge, and I do come now
Lord to challenge the good of the Covenant, that thou would remember me
according to the riches of thy mercy, for Lord I have walked with thee: as if
he should say, Lord, was not that the thing that thou did require of my
father Abraham? why Lord, I have walked before thee, and I have been upright in
some measure; therefore Lord, be a God alsufficient to me, Lord, remember thy
Covenant, be a God to me, be All in All to me because of this. Oh my brethren!
Is not this worth ten thousand thousand worlds, That the soul may be able to
appeal to God that it has done that which is a special thing that is required
in the Covenant on our parts; and so upon it may have the assurance of Gods
performing the Covenant on his part.

The Fifth Excellency.
And then the fifth thing is, There is a blessed safety in walking with God. As
in the 23. Psalm. 4. there see the Prophet David that was a man much exercised
in walking with God, says he, Yea though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy
staff does comfort me: I am walking with thee, and though I be walking in the
shadow of death, I Will therefore fear no evil. Now is it not a blessed thing to
be in safety always with God? And in the 138. Psalm. 7. says David, Though I
walk in the midst of trouble thou will revive me; thou shall stretch forth
thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies: and thy right hand shall save me.
No matter what the trouble be so God be with the soul; he that walks uprightly
walks surely, in the 10. of the Proverbs, 9. Whereas it is said of the wicked
that they walk upon a snare continually: in the 18. of Job, 8. The wicked walk
upon a snare: The ways of wickedness that you walk in, they may seem to be
pleasant and comfortable to you, but certainly you are upon a snare, and you
may be caught and undone for ever, though perhaps thou have escaped all this
while, yet thou art in continual dangers, Every step (I say) thou go on in
the ways of sin, thou art upon a snare, and in danger to be caught to thy
eternal destruction; But he that walks uprightly, he walks surely, and this is
a great excellency, for a man to walk surely, I know I am in my way for I am
with God: A child does not fear what way soever it goes in, if he can but see
his father. Now the soul may know surely, I am in the right way, I am with God;
and I am safe what ever danger comes, for I am walking with God.

The Sixth Excellency.
The sixth Excellency that there is in walking with God is this, From hence the
soul comes to enjoy a holy boldness and a holy familiarity with God. It may be
when the soul comes first to God, the presence of the great God strikes some
fear, there is some dread of the Majesty of God; But when the soul has used to
converse with him, there is a holy familiarity that the soul has with God, and
a holy boldness, it can have free liberty to say any thing to him now; and this
is the reason that some now that never knew what the spirit of prayer meant,
and what the liberty of the soul in opening its self to God meant before, yet
when they have come to be acquainted with the ways of God; Oh what liberty
have they then in their spirits to open their hearts to God, yea, they can open
their hearts to God as one friend to another. I remember it is said of Luther,
that when ever he was praying, he could speak to God as to his friend. In Job,
22. 21. Acqusint now thy self with Him, and be at peace. The soul comes to have
an acquaintance with God, Oh what a phrase is here! What, acquaint our selves
with God, that God should be our acquaintance! I, God is willing to be the
acqaintance of the poorest Christian in the world, Poor men and women, and
Servants, and others that perhaps some rich men that is by them will scorn their
acquaintance, but they account them rather (as it is spoken of some vile people)
fit to be set with the dogs of the flock, yea, perhaps though they be poor
godly people, yet they think it too much debasing themselves to have any kind
of acquaintance with them: Well, but the infinite God though he is so high that
he humbles himself to behold the very things that are done in Heaven, yet this
God thinks not much to be one of thy acquaintance, to be of the acquaintance of
any one that has any godliness in them; when we see a great man, a man of
parts and honor come to some poor man and shake him by the hand, we will say,
Look what an humble man is this, that will be so familiar with the meanest of
all. Oh! now acquaint thy self with God, This is the blessedness of walking
with God; the soul comes to have a familiar converse with God, and a holy
boldness.

The seventh Excellency.
The seventh benefit or Excellency that there is in walking with God is this,
The Communication of Gods secrets. He that walks with God shall come to know
the mind of God. It Is impossible for a man to take delight in walking with
another but he must discover secrets from him; there is never any true
friendship where there is a closeness of spirit. But where there is true
friendship they will take one another and walk together, and open their hearts
each to other: this is comfortable walking indeed. Thus it is in walking with
God, this is the blessing of it, such souls they have the secrets of God
discovered to them, they come to know much of the mind of God; though they are
weak in their natural parts, yet (I say) they come to know much of Gods mind
because they are with God. We read in the 13. of Proverbs, 20. verse. says the
holy Ghost there, He that walks with wise men shall be wise. Then what shall
he be that walks with God? Surely if there be wisdom to be learned from our
walking with wise men, then there is wisdom to be learned in walking with God:
It Is from hence that men that are weak in parts they come to have such
excellent knowledge in the great mysteries of the Gospel, and you wonder at it:
you see such a mean servant that a while ago could understand nothing at all;
yet now comes to understand the great mysteries of the Gospel, and that be yond
many great Scholars: How comes this to pass? he walks with the God of wisdom,
and the God of wisdom does delight to let out himself to him, and to open his
heart to him, they come to know the counsels of God because they walk with him;
those Christians that keep close to God in a holy conversation walking with
him, certainly they come to know more of the mind of God than others do; others
that walk loosly they know little of the great mysteries of the Gospel, they
may talk something of them, but certainly they have not a spiritual insight
into the Great mysteries of the Gospel so as those have that walk with God.

The eighth Excellency.
The eighth benefit of walking with God it is, That such find favor in Gods
eyes for granting their petitions; for to hear them in their prayers. In the
37. Psalm. 4. ver. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desire of thine heart; walk with God, and enjoy converse and communion with
him, so as to delight thy self with him, and he will give thee thy hearts
desire, thou shall have what thou would have. As now, if a man have a
petition to give to any great man, If he can but observe him in his walks, then
he thinks that surely when he may have such an opportunity, now to present it
as he hopes to have audiance, and acceptance of the petition. I remember I have
read of one that offered to give a great sum of money that he might have but
liberty to whisper any thing in the Kings ear every day, why? because thereby
he thought that he should have a great many people come to him to desire his
help for to prefer their petitions, and if he might have but that liberty he
should get enough that way. Now the soul that has the liberty of walking with
God, what a privilege has he? and what opportunities to present petitions to
God? and the Lord delights in hearing of them. If a King will admit a man to
walk with him, surely such a man whatsoever he presents it is like to speed. Now
my brethren, upon this ground it is thus: you shall see a great deal of
difference in a formal professor's prayer, and the prayer of a godly man that
walks with God; the difference in the prayers of these two is thus: I Will set it
out by this similitude. You have your beggars, and they pray for an alms, but
they stand at the door; but if you a have special friend, an acquaintance that
shall come to desire a favor from you, the door is opened for him, you carry
him into the Parlour, and there he opens his mind to you, he has a great deal
of privilege more than the other: Both come to ask a favor from you, but one
stands at the door, and the other is let into the Parlour and walks up and down
there, and there opens his mind to you. Just for all the world is there this
difference between the prayers of formal professors, and the prayers of those
that walk with God; Those that make but a mere profession of Religion, they
will pray as others do, but they are like beggars at the door, they see not
Gods face all the while, they knock it may be, but the door is not opened for
them to come in: But a gracious heart that walks with God, does not only stand
knocking at the door, but it is opened and he comes into the Presence Chamber,
and there says God, What is thy request O thou soul? As if a friend should
hear another that is his dear friend stand knocking at the door, he presently
opens the door and carries him into the best room that he has, and there
says, Tell me what it is that you would have, I am not able to deny you; and
this is the privilege of those that are gracious and holy, that walk with God:
they have much privilege in prayer, much benefit that way, and freedom with
God, and assurance of Gods granting of their petitions.

The ninth Excellency.
In the ninth place, There Is this Excellency in the souls walking with God,
There must needs be a glory put upon the soul. As it was with Moses, he went up
and was but with God forty days upon the mount, and when he came down, his
face did shine that the people were not able to behold it: God appeared in a
visible manner to him; But spiritually it is true now, the soul that is
conversing with God forty days, yea, in the constant course of his life, has
a beauty, a luster, a glory put upon it, and such a luster and glory that those
that have enlightened consciences and yet are guilty they are scarce able to
bear the fight of them: As I appeal to you, when you have given liberty to some
way of sin, and you have come into the presence of those that have been godly
and walked very close with God, has it not struck a terror to you? for there
is a glory and beauty upon those souls that do walk close with God, they do
shine in the midst of a crooked and perverce generation. What Is the glory of
Heaven but the reflection of Gods presence upon Heaven that makes it so
glorious? And in its measure a gracious heart that walks close with God has
the glory of Heaven upon it.

The Tenth Excellency.
Tenthly, Gods presence does mightily act every grace, does draw forth every
grace: (and that I lay down as another distinct head in the excellency of
walking with God) I say, it draws forth every grace, the graces of the Spirit
of God are always kept in action: as now, fire will draw fire. The Lord being
of infinite holiness, when the hear is holy it being in the presence of God
walking with him, (I say) all holiness must needs be drawn forth, and must be
acted; and this will put a mighty beauty upon men, while they have not only
grace in their hearts but it is acted. And this is a great blessing to have our
graces acted, drawn forth, and enlarged, and this is the benefit of walking
with God.

The Eleventh Excellency.
And besides, The presence of God, and familiarity of the soul in walking with
him, will make the presence of God neither at death or judgment shall ever be
terrible to it. Those that now walk with God and have much converse with him,
(I say) when they come to die, Gods presence shall not be terrible to them; yea
when Jesus Christ shall come in flaming fire to revenge himself upon those that
know him not, the presence of Christ shall not be terrible to them: Why? Because
they walked with Christ all the days of their lives: In the 11. of Hosea, 10.
verse. They shall walk after the Lord: he shall roar like a Lion. Mark how these
two are joined together: wicked and ungodly men they shall tremble at the
roaring of a Lion: but for the Saints it shall not be terrible to them: And how
much is it worth, that when God shall appear in death, and at judgment here and
hereafter, the terror of God shall be taken away? My brethren, God appears at
death, and at the times of Judgment ordinarily in another manner than he does
in the time of prosperity; you see no terror in Gods presence now; but beware
of it when death is approaching: wicked men when they lie upon their
deathbeds, how terrible is the presence of God to them then! but those that
walk with God shall not find it so: when they come to die, then God appears to
them; Now am I going to stand before the great God, to have my eternal estate
determined one way or other: But what God is this? He is great indeed; but he
is my friend, I have had converse with him all the days of my life: And so,
when I must come to Judgment here comes Jesus Christ with his thousands of
Angels in glory, but it is Christ that I have conversed with all the days of
my life, this Christ has been my friend before whom I am. This will be the
comfort in walking with God.

The twelfth Excellency.
And then, The end of the walk, that makes it belssed indeed. Oh! how blessed
will that make it! It Is a blessed thing to walk with God now; but when you come
to the End of this walk you shall find it blessed indeed. If a man did come to
enjoy God at last, though it was through never so many difficulties, yet he had
cause to bless God. If one were going to possess a Kingdom, though his way
were never such a difficult way and hard, yet the end of his way would make it
comfortable, because it is to go and take a Kingdom: But now, you that are
walking with God, you have comfort in your walk, but the end of your walk, oh
that will be glorious indeed! it is to possess a Kingdom, it is to have the
crown of glory set upon your heads; your communion that you have with God here,
it is but as the forerunner of that glorious Communion that you shall enjoy
with him together with the Saints and Angels to all eternity.

And thus we have given you the heads at least of the Excellency that there is
in, Walking with God. No marvel though the holy Ghost sets such a commendations
upon Enoch, Above al things, That he walked with God, seeing there is so much
good in it. I confess I had thought not to have left this Head without
applying of it, and warming it upon your hearts, that you might walk so with
God that you might not lose the comfort, and blessing, and sweet Excellency
that you have had opened to you in walking with God; only let me say thus much,
Be in love with it; Know, there is no such good in any other path, the Devil
does but gul you, and your own hearts; and the world does but deceive you, if
it promise any good in any other way that will counter vail this: Oh no, the
walking with God it is the good of a Christian, it is his happiness, his glory,
his commendations; Oh that this may be recorded of you as it was of Enoch! And
Enoch walked with God.

CHAP. VII. Five Uses of Exhortation, in walking with God.
Now we proceed. Some Use I shall make of this (briefly) before I go to the
third head, about Evidences of walking with God.

The First Use.
First, Bless God that he will be pleased to walk thus with his poor creatures;
bless the Lord for his goodness to us: Happy are the Angels that stand before
the Lord: How happy are we then that may have this free converse with God!
What, we that were not only strangers but enemies to God a while since, now to
walk with him. Oh! a blessed thing it is: Let God be magnified for this his
goodness to us, even He that humbles Himself to behold the things that are
done in Heaven, do but look upon the things that are done in Heaven, Psalm.
113. and yet he will condescend fo far to His poor creatures even here on
earth, as to walk with them; were we indeed wholly freed from sin it were
somewhat; but while we are not only so mean in our selves, but so sinful, and
yet that God will so walk with us, this we have cause to bless God for if we
should see his face hereafter, though we should never see him in this world;
but that God should not only grant unto us this, That we should hereafter,
after a wearisome and tedious pilgrimage here in this world come to see His
face, but that we should have so much converse with Him here, Oh magnified and
blessed be the Name of God for this.

The second Use.
Secondly, What strangers are the most part of the world to this that I am
speaking of. That which I am speaking of it is a riddle to most men in the
world, This walking with God is but an empty sound to most men, yea, for the
greatest part of the world they walk (as the Scripture speaks) after their own
counsels, you shall find diverse notable expressions in Scripture of the walk of
sinners, of wicked men.

They walk according to their own counsels. They walk after the flesh. They
walk after their lusts. They walk after the course of this world. They walk in
the vanity of their minds. They walk contrary unto God. They walk according to
men.

Yea, That Is observable unto this, That the holy Ghost condemns, not only
walking according to the course of the world, and as men, But to walk in the
way of Kings is condemned in Scripture: In 2 Chronicles. 28. 2. If to follow the
course of any men one would think it might be most commendable the following of
the King: but here is a charge against Ahaz that he walked in the ways of the
Kings of Israel: and the 2 Kings, 17. 8. They walked in the Statutes of the
Heathen: here is to walk as Kings walk, and then to walk in the Laws of Kings,
God would not have any men walk in them any further than they are according to
his own Statutes. Not to say, it is according to Law, and I must walk according
to Law: No, this is charged to walk according to the practice of Kings, or
their Laws being evil. And there is another Scripiure in the I Kings, 15. 26. He
did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of his father, and
in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. There Is to walk in the way of great
men, and that is condemned. Secondly, to walk in the way of the Laws of the
places where we live. Thirdly, to walk according to our fathers, that is
condemned. And then lastly, to walk according to the common course of the
world, that is condemned; and yet this is the walk of sinners. And further The
Scripture says, That wicked men they walk in darkness: and they walk after
their own imaginations, and in the vanity of their minds, they walk in lies,
and their hearts walk after the sight of their own eyes, and they walk after
their covetousness: We might mention near twenty such kind of expressions in
Scripture, and these are the walks of sinners: But the ways of the Saints,
they are to walk with God, but those that walk in the way of sinners, that is,
in the vanity of their minds according to the fight of their own eyes, after
their covetousness, and after the flesh, and their lusts, and lasiviousness,
and vanity, and such kind of expression as we have in Scripture, Certainly they
shall have the end of their walk to be no other but destruction and eternal
misery.

The Third Use.
Thirdly, What vile hearts are ours that are so backward to walk with God,
seeing God is pleased to admit of his Saints to walk with him! even those that
are godly are to be rebuked from hence that they should be so backward to come
in to walk with God: It is our glory, That is that that would make our lives
comfortable, it would make this wilderness of ours to be a paradise, it would
make our Gardens to be Edens, it would make our Houses to be Churches, and make
the Church to be a Heaven unto us, and yet we are backward unto this. Oh that
we would but consider of this when we are in our walk and there have vain
thoughts: As ordinarily men that are walking in their pleasant Gardens, or it
may be pleasant Rooms, Oh the vanity and folly of their thoughts! I may speak
to you, who do you walk withal all this while; when you are a walking in your
Galleries, or Parlours, or Gardens, or alone in the fields, who are you
parlying withal? who are you conversing withal? are not you walking many times
with the Devil, and making provision for the flesh? you should be walking with
God: what are you the Saints of God? does God offer himself to walk and
converse with you, and will you walk with the flesh, and converse with the
Devil? and be rouling of sin and wickedness up and down in your thoughts? Oh
what a vile and sinful thing is this! The Lord humble you for your sinful
walks, humble you that are Saints, you sometimes have had some walks with God,
why is it that you walk no more close with God? you complain sometimes of your
great business in the world, and occasions to converse with the world that you
have no time for your Communion with God; and yet when you are off from the
world, and when you have time alone wherein you might converse with God, and
when you have walks to the City and from the City again, what Communion might
you have with God! But Oh! how backward are our hearts even unto this that is
our happiness, and our glory! That Is a third Use by way of reproof even to the
Saints, which is raised from the consideration of the excellency that there is
in our walking with God.

The Fourth Use.
Fourthly, By way of exhortation, Oh let us keep close to God in our walking
with him. We read of Peter, that he saw Christ walking upon the water, and he
would leap to him to walk with him there: though it were in afflictions to walk
with Christ it should be comfortable to us. We read of Idolators, that they
would have their children p^sse through the fire to get to their Idols; Oh let
us be willing to pass through any difficulties to get to God, the Lord is
willing we should communicate our selves to him, and he is willing to
communicate himself to us, the Lord would communicate word for word, promise
for promise, embrace for embrace, if we would speak to him he would speak to
us, if we would let out our hearts to him, he would let out his heart to us, if
we would promise to him, he would promise to us. The Lord does often call us to
walk with him; As sometimes familiar friends will call one another, Come, let
us walk out together, and those that are very familiar and loving: though they
may have some business yet they will lay it aside, seeing their deer friends
calls them to walk, they take so much delight in it: many times God our deer
friend calls us, Come, let us walk out together. When God at any time does dart
in a Heavenly thought into your minds, he does (as it were) call you to walk
with him there, and would have you follow that thought, The following that
Heavenly thought that is darted into your minds, that is the answering of Gods
call to walk with him. Consider of this one note, Oh do not refuse this, you do
not know how your lives may be comforted this way, and your hearts may be
strengthened.

The Fifth Use.
And then the last thing that I shall name by way of Use is this, If there be
so much Excellency in our walking with God here, what will there be in Heaven
then! If our converse with him in this world be so sweet, Oh how sweet shall
our converse with him in Heaven be! when we shall walk with him in white: when
we shall have our garments glorious indeed, and our souls fit to converse with
God. Now the truth is, we are very unfit to converse with the Lord, because of
our blindness and darkness, we do not know God. As now, let an ignorant man
come to converse with a learned man, he gets but very little good, for he is
not able to put a question to him, nor able to understand what the man says,
especially if he speaks any depth of learning to him. So, many that are very
weak when they are in discourse with those that are strong and godly, they are
not able to make that use for their discourse as others can, and it is a great
excellency for one to be able to improve his converse with some men that have
abilities and strength, to be able (I say) to improve their Converse it is a
great excellency. Alas! we are not able to improve our converse with God here:
but in Heaven we shall be able to improve our converse with God, We shall know
as we are known, we shall understand God, if God does but communicate himself
we shall be fit to receive all the beams of his glory that he shall be pleased
to let out, Oh! that will be an excellent thing indeed when we shall be always
walking with God, and conversing with him continually. Says Bernard, in the
gracious visitations of the Spirit of God to his soul, How sweet if it were not
so little! but then it shall be constant, we shall then follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and walk with him in white according as he speaks. Now
the Church cries out and says, Oh draw us, and we will run ofter thee. The
Spirit of God had need to draw us here; but then we shall have no such need of
drawing, but we shall of our selves, from the inclination of our own hearts, be
always walking and conversing with God, we shall have nothing else to do but
to walk continually with the Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to
fear thy Name: Psalm. 86. 11. It Is an excellent Scripture, I will walk in thy
Truth says the Prophet, Oh unite my heart to the fear of thy Name. As if he
should say, I find much sweetness and good in walking in thy Truth here, Oh
Lord unite my heart to the fear of thy Name, Lord keep me always here, it is
good being here, as Peter said when Christ was transfigured in his glory: So,
when the soul is walking with God, it says, it is good being here: Well, when
thou come to Heaven thou shall always be with the Lord as the Scripture
speaks, and therefore from the excellency that thou find here, learn to long
after Heaven, where thou shall be continually with the Lord; and take only this
one note for the setting out of the excellency of Heaven, and I confess only
such as have had much sweetness in walking with God here, will understand what
I mean by this; As suppose that all those sweet manifestations of God to thy
soul here, and all the dartings in of the Spirit of God, all those soul
ravishing joys that thou have had, suppose they were put all together, that
thou had them all over again at this instant, what a comfortable time would
it be! At such a time may some soul (that knows what the meaning of this point
is) say, Oh the sweet communion I had with God! I would give a world to have it
again: Well, thou had it once, but it was quickly gone, and thou have had it
a second and a third time, yea, many times when I have been with God I have had
wonderful, and gracious lettings out of God to my soul, Oh that I had them
again! Well, suppose thou had now in this one quarter of an hour all the
comfort and joy that ever thou had in all thy life put all the times
together, what a comfortable quarter of an hour would this be! Now in Heaven to
all eternity thou shall have that in a kind infinitely more than that for
milions of years, even for ever. Oh! what will Heaven be! If I should set out
Heaven to a carnal man I must tell him of Crowns of glory, And there he shall
see glorious sights, he shall be freed from all kind of sorrows, and there he
shall have a Kingdom: But if I would set out Heaven to a Saint, I must tell him
this, He shall have communion with God, and all those soul-ravishing comforts
that he has had in the presence of God in this world, he shall have them all
together, and infinitely more than them, Oh this is that that will make their
souls long after Heaven, and set prize upon it.

CHAP. VIII. Ten Several Evidences of a man's Walking with God.
BUt having set out unto you the excellency of walking with God, you will say,
Who is it that does walk with Him? I shall further set out to you the Evidences
of those men and women that do walk with God.

The first Evidence.
One that walks with God, Is one that depends not much upon sense or reason in
the course of his life: I say, one that is above the ways of Sense and Reason
in his course, he has received a principle to go higher. Most men in the world
they walk according to sense; and therefore the Scripture says, They walk
according to the pleasure of their eyes. But now, one that walks with God, his
walk lies beyond Sense, and above Reason; though things of Sense seem to go
this way or that way, quite cross to him, yea, though Reason seem to go quite
cross to him, yet still his heart is not in a hurry, but he has that that can
quiet his heart though Sense and Reason seem to be contrary: 2 Cor. 5. 7. there
you shall see the walk of a godly man, For we walk by faith and not by sight,
says the Apostle; beyond our sight, either beyond our sight of sense, or the
sight of Reason; we walk by faith. But now, this is a great point, a Christian
walking by faith, and therefore I intend to speak to that by its self from this
very text, (God willing) in another Treatise.

The second Evidence.
One that walks with God, you shall find him in private the same that he is in
public; what ever holiness does appear in such a one before others, in his
walking in the world, if you trace him and follow him in his private course you
shall find him the same man as you do in publik: why? because he has not to
deal with man so much, he has to deal with God in all his ways, when he has
any thing to do before others, he walks with God, and when he is alone he is
the same man still. In the 101. Psalm. see what David says there concerning his
walk in private in his family, I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way
(says he) Oh when will thou come unto me! I will walk within my house with a
perfect heart. As if he should say, I will not walk when I am abroad only, with
a perfect heart, but I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. There are
many people that when they are abroad in the world they seem to be very strict
in their way, but follow such men to their houses and there you shall see a
great deal of difference. You will find many times as much difference between
the course of men when they are abroad and in their houses, as you find in
their clothes; you shall have many men and women when they go abroad they will
be very neat, and though they have but little means, yet they will lay it upon
their backs so that they may be fine abroad; but come to them in their families
and they care not what clothes they wear there: It is just so in regard of
their lives, their lives have as much difference as their clothes: When they
are abroad then they put a good face on things and seem to be very fair in
their conversations, and speak good things, but at home there they are froward
and perverse, and perhaps in their passions, will swear, there they are
profane, and ungodly, and vent their corruptions in a most ungodly manner;
do thou walk with God? If thou had to deal with God thou would be the
same in thy family that thou art abroad, that thy wife, children, and servants
in thy family might give as good a testimony of thee as when thou art abroad
with others: Yea, and if ye could retire with them into their very closets you
should find them the same there in any duties of Religion. You shall have many
when they come abroad and join with others, Oh how enlarged are they! yet dead
and dull when they are at home either in family or closet, yea their own
consciences tells them so. Those that walk with God will be as spiritual in the
one as in the other; it may be when they are with others, because they are to
be the mouth of others they will sure themselves according to those they pray
with; yet when they are alone and in their families their hearts are as
spiritual and as holy in their duties as when they are with others: why?
because they have to deal with God in all: and that is another Evidence of one
that walks with God, that he is the same in private as he is in public.

The third Evidence.
A man that walks with God has a serious spirit: walking with God will compose
the spirits of men and women, will take off that looseness and vanity of spirit:
Therefore walking in the vanity of the mind, that is quite cross to walking
with God; as in the 4. of the Ephe. 17. there it is spoken of wicked men, it is
said that they walk in the vanity of their minds: All wicked men they walk in
the vanity of their minds; then all those that walk with God walk in the
seriousness of their minds: It must needs be that they must have a seriousness
of spirit in all their ways, for it is with God that they have to deal withal,
they take not that liberty to run this way or that way as others do. If
servants be walking one with another they can take liberty to go out of their
way and talk with this or the other body as they please: But if a servant walk
with his Master or Mistress, he must not take that liberty but must go as they
go. So, many that walk only with the creature, they take liberty to run up and
down as they please; but those that walk with God, they must have composed
spirits, and walk seriously, and though they may walk seriously, yet
cheerfully; I beseech you consider of this: For that Christian knows not the
way of Christian-rejoycing that does not know how to mix it with seriousness;
yea, Senecha that was a Heathen could say, Joy, it is a serious thing; there is
a kind of seriousness in true joy, for the joy of a Christian is not frothy, it
is a composed joy: As thus now, It Is serious:

First, A Christian in his joy he is able to command himself, he can let out
his joy so far and yet at a beck he can command himself to the most spiritual
duty in the world from his joy, he does not profusely let out his heart so as
he cannot call it in again. Certainly, thou do not joy as a Christian if thou
can not take off thy heart from creature joys, God gives thee liberty to be
merry, but so, as to have it under thy command, as thou shall be able to call
thy heart off from it to the most serious duty in the world.

Secondly, He cannot only command himself to holy duties in the midst of his
joy, but he finds himself the fitter for holy duties by it: now this is a
serious joy if it be no other than I can command my self off from it, and that
that fits me for that which is holy: Christians had need take heed of
frothinesse, slightness, and vanity, for certainly the walking with God cannot
but make them serious, and those that are slight and vain, surely they do not
converse with God, for God is such a serious object that it is impossible but it
must work a seriousness in the spirits of men.

The Fourth Evidence.
Those that walk with God, they walk in newness of life: For this is not our
walk naturally, our walking with God is that that comes upon a mighty
converting that God gives to our spirits: our walk naturally it is with our
lusts, and with the Devil, and in the way to Hell; but one that walks with God
walks in newness of life: as the Scripture speaks in the 6. Romans 4. He walk
according to the Rule of the new Creature. In the 6. Gal. 16. And as many as
walk according to this Rule, peace be on them and mercy. You will say, What
Rule does the Apostle mean here? I confess ordinarily you have it applied to
this, The walk according to the Scriptures: I grant it, that is a truth, That
the Word of God should be the Rule of our walk, and of our lives, and those
that walk according to that Rule shall have peace. But I do not think that to
be the meaning of this text, but the scope is to be taken from the words of the
former verse, for says he in the 15. verse, In Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. And as
many as walk according to this rule, (that is, According to the rule of the new
Creature; not standing so much upon external things, either Circumcision or
Uncircumcision, not standing so much upon outward duties, though in their kind
they must be stood upon; But the main thing that is to be stood upon, it is,
The walk of the new Creature; and those that walk according to the rule of the
new Creature, those that act the new Creature in their walk) peace be unto
them. And that is the fourth thing in the Evidences of a Walker with God; He
walks in newness of life, and so according to the rule of the new Creature.

The Fifth Evidence.
When he has to deal with the Creature be does quickly pass through the
Creature unto God. Any one (I say) that is acquainted with this mystery of
godliness in walking with God, though while he is in this world, he has to
deal as other men have, with the creatures, yet he will not stick in the
creatures, but soon passes from the creatures to God: As thus, he receives
sweetness from the creatures as well as others, but when he has received, or
is in receiving the sweetness of the creatures, his heart is upon God, Oh the
sweetness there is in God! Is the creature so sweet? how sweet is God then?
When he is in company with friends, is it so sweet to have society with men:
how sweet is it to have society with God then? And when he has comforts in a
wife; Oh what comfort is there in the comforts of my Husband Jesus Christ! And
when he has comfort in a sweet habitation; Oh what comfort is there in God our
habitation! he is not musling in the world, in the creature, but he relies upon
God in all that he does enjoy: Now those that when they have any thing in the
Creature there they stick; these are not acquainted with this way of walking
with God.

The sixth Evidence.
A man that walks with God, he loves to be much retired from the world. It Is
true, he must follow his occasions in the world, he does that in obedience unto
God, but except he may have his retired times he knows not how to live, it is
true, when he is in his calling he walks with God there, he carries his heart
Heavenly: There Is a great deal of difference for one to walk with a friend in
company with others, and when they are alone, though it is true, that while the
Saints of God live in the world they must converse with the men of the world,
and they have somewhat of God there: but though they have somewhat of God
there, yet that is not so much as when God and their souls are alone, this is
that that is exceeding sweet and comfortable to them, therefore they have their
retired times of meditation; and retired times of prayer; as we read of Isaac,
he went out into the field to meditate, or to pray, for so meditation and
prayer is taken sometimes in Scripture for all one: I Will power forth my
meditations to thee, sath David: that was his prayer: So, because they should
be both joined together, Isaac went out into the field to meditate. Those that
walk with God if they live in a house and have no retired rooms, they go abroad
and have some time or other to be retired by themselves; where-as you have
other men, they know not how to spend any retired times, when they are alone
their minds wander this way or that way, and they gaze after every feather that
flies, and it is a prison for them to be alone, and they wonder that men and
women will shut up themselves alone, surely it is but their melanchollinesse. Oh
poor wretch, thou know not what walks they have, they are not alone all this
time, they would be loath to give their retired times for all the times of thy
Jollity and Bravery; Thou think if thou be abroad in company, and there
art feasting, and having good cheer, and music, and talking, and laughing that
this is a brave life, they would be loath to change their retired times for the
times of thy greatest Jolity with thy companions: One that walks with God he
loves some retired times as well as to be busy in the business of the world.

The seventh Evidence.
One that walks with God, he is careful to make even his accounts with God, he
does keep his accounts with God even. This is a special thing in walking with
God, when they lie down to consider, Are my accounts even with God? is there
nothing amiss between God and my soul? what has been this day between God and
my soul? For how can two walk together except they be agreed as the Prophet
says: Therefore they are very careful to keep their agreement with God. Indeed
Jesus Christ the great Reconciler has first reconciled their souls to God and
so they come to walk with him: but then afterward in the course of their lives
they must keep up their agreement with God, and not to run in areriges with,
and so to be ensnared in the world, and ensnared in the corruptions of their
own hearts, as that men and women will be, if they be not careful to keep their
accounts with God even daily, They will ensnare their souls in the world and in
the lusts of their own hearts till God and their souls come to be strangers,
yea, til they be afraid almost to think of God; Here Is the reason that many
people are loath to come to prayer, loath to come to duties of communion with
God, why? because they have not kept their accounts even with God, but have run
in areriges with God, and their hearts are entangled in the world, and in their
lusts, and now the presence of God comes to be terrible to them; Oh poor wretch
that thou art, what thou that art a Christian and yet in such a case that the
presence of God should be grievous to thee! Oh thy condition is sad indeed!
whereas thou should be glad when thou think of God, I was glad when they
said, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord: But one that keeps not his
accounts with God even, his retired times are grievous to him, Indeed he dares
not but have retired times, I but it is grievous to him, why? because he has
not kept his accounts even with God; But the soul that keeps even with God, Oh
that soul rejoices in those times when it is to go to God, or does but think
of God. That Is a special thing in a man or woman's walking with God, they keep
their accounts even: And I beseech you observe it, As it is an Evidence, so it
may be given as a Rule to help you to walk with God, Oh be careful of keeping
your accounts daily: Though this point that I am treating upon, is perhaps
little understood by many, yet if so be that God would by his Spirit work your
hearts to this, to keep your accounts even with God, you would know more of the
meaning of this point.

The eighth Evidence.
That the more spiritual any Truth is, or any Ordinance is, or any Company is,
the more does the soul delight in it: One that is used to God, and converses
with God, when such a one meets with a Truth that has much of God in it, Oh
how it closes with that Truth! when it meets with an Ordinance that has much
of God in it, when it meets with Company that has much of God in it, how does
this soul delight in it! This is suitable to the heart that converses much with
God, says the soul, I have had sweet walks with God, now me thinks I come into
such a Company, I see the very Image of God in these, and Oh how sweet and
delightsom are these to me! and so for Truths, and Ordinances, the more
spiritual they are the more such a one does delight in them: whereas a carnal
heart that walks according to the flesh, in the way of the world, if there be
some Truths that have some kind of humanity in them, as now, some sollid
discourse that shows strength of reason, or strength of judgment in a Sermon,
he will take delight in that, if there be any Wit, Rhetoric, Eloquence he
takes delight in that; but for spiritual truths there is no such delight in them
except they be clothed with some humane excellency. But now, those that are
spiritual, the more spiritual any thing is, the more delight they take in it:
As for Ordinances, they are but dry meat to those that are carnal except there
be something external; bring the Ordinances in the plain simplicity of the
Gospel to them, where there is only communion of Saints, sitting about a Table,
and eating a piece of bread, and drinking a little wine, they see no excellency
there: But a gracious heart, the less of man he sees in an Ordinance, and the
more of God, the more he closes with them, and takes delight in them: here is
one now that walks with God.

The Ninth Evidence.
A man that walks with God, is one that walks in all the Commandments of God.
Endeavors to walk in them before him, and blameless before men: in the 1. of
Luke, the 6. it is said of Zacharias, and Elizabeth, They were both righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord,
blameless: here is a walking with God, not only to walk in some one thing, but
in all Commandments, and Ordinances of God, and not only so, but blameless
before men too; though it is true, the chief work that he has, it is, in
converse with God, yet he is careful so as to be blameless before men, because
it concerns much the honor of God that he should be blameless before men:
Zacharias and Elizabeth they were walkers with God, and their lives are
described so that they were conscionable in all the Commands of God, and walked
blameless before men. Now as we go along, apply it, Can you say, Lord, Thou
that know al things, know, that there is no command of thine, nor no
Ordinance of thine, but my soul closes with, and I desire to spend my life in
them, and to walk blamelesly before men? There Is a great many that speak much
of walking before God, and of the Ordinances of God, and yet come to them
before men, and they are careless and negligent: (do but hearken to what the
Lord speaks this day to thee) Certainly thou never knew what it was to walk
with God except thou do walk blamelesly before men too.

The Tenth Evidence, Opened in five Particulars.
See but how the Scripture describes the walk of the Saints with God; there are
some four or five particulars that I shall infist upon, wherein I shall open some
Scriptures, describing the Saints walk with God.

As first, Their walk it is a walk of Humility, a way very humble. The heart
that walks with God must needs be very humble in the presence of God; you know
the place in the 6. of Micah, He has shown thee, O man, what he would have
thee to do, To walk humbly with thy God: that is more than the offering of
thousands of Lambs, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil, To walk humbly with thy God:
A proud man or woman never knows what it is to walk with God. But the walking
with God causes much humility, there is no such thing in the world to humble the
heart of a man as to have converse with God, do you see a man proud and
haughty, and high in his carriage, surely you may conclude this man has little
converse with God: says Job, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,
but now have mine eyes seen thee: what then? I abhor my self in dust and ashes.

Secondly, Another thing that the Scripture speaks of the walk of a Christian
with God, it is, Vprightness; Walk before me, and he upright. I might give you
twenty Scriptures for that, how uprightness is the walk of a Christian with
God: I Will give you only one about this, and that is in the 3 Epist. of John, 3.
verse, there it is expressed in the new Testament, by walking in the truth: and
so sometimes in the Old, the walking in Vprightness, and walking in the Truth,
is somewhat the same: I rejoiced greatly (says the Apostle) when the Brethren
came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the
truth: So that this surely has reference unto walking according to the truth
of the Gospel in the truth and sincerity of our hearts: They testified of the
truth that is in thee: That is, The Word of the Gospel that did prevail in thy
heart, and prevailing in thy heart thou did walk-in the strength and power of
that Truth, and according to the truth; here is a walking with God. And no
marvel though the soul of this man was in so good a condition as indeed it was;
for you find in the 2. verse of this Epistle a very strange expression of John
concerning this Gaius: what does he say of him? I wish (says he) above al
things, that then may prosper and be in health even as thy soul prospers.
It seems this Gaius had but a poor, weak, sickly body: but a very good soul he
was; and says John, I wish that thou may prosper even as thy soul
prospers. Oh! that thou had but as good a body as a soul! It Is a very
strange speech. It were a curse to many of you I am afraid. But John could say
concerning Gaius, Oh that this man Gaius had as good a body as he has a soul!
And how came he to have his soul to prosper? He walked in the truth, and
according to the truth; and all that he did was in the truth and sincerity of
his heart, hence his soul came to prosper: and those that have but very weak
parts, yet if they walk in the truth, their souls will prosper.

The Third thing is, Walking in the fear of God. And indeed, these two are very
near a kin one to another, so you have it in the 5. of Nehe. 9. verse, Also I
said it is not good that ye do, Ought ye not to WALK in the fear of our God?
and he gives an argument there, Because of the reproach of the Heathen. So may
I say to all Christians, that would profess themselves Christians and godly;
ought not ye to walk in the fear of our God? whatsoever other men do, they do
thus and thus, and seek to follow their own ends and ways, but ought not YE to
walk in the fear of our God? that is the walk of a Christian, the fear of God it
is continually upon him. And observe, we read in the 9. of the Acts, of the
walk of the Christians in the Primitive times upon which they came so to grow
up in the ways of godliness as they did, at the 31. verse, the text says,
Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Gallilee, and Samaira, and
were edified; (and what then?) They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the holy Ghost, and so came to be multiplied. It Is an excellent
Scripture; would you be built up in godliness? let the fear of God be upon you,
and if you walk in the fear of God, you will walk in the joy of the holy Ghost.

Obj. You will say, Fear, that may hinder our Joy.

Ans. No, But the way to have true joy in the holy Ghost it is, To walk in the
fear of God, and though you have a company of vain and wanton spirits, that are
nothing but for Jolity and Mirth, they cannot admit of any kind of seriousness
(that we spoke to before:) But certainly their Jolity it is but frothy and
carnal, but those have the best Joy in their hearts that walk most in the fear
of God: When I see a Christian have the fear of God upon him, and that in the
whole course of his life, then he will have much of the comfort of the holy
Ghost.

Fourthly, The comfort of the holy Ghost it is joined with the fear of God: and
if you see any that talk never so much of the joy that they have; it is but a
frothy carnal joy except the fear of God be upon them; Oh it will be a means to
convince others of the excellency of the wales of God, when they shall see
Christians walk in the fear of God; thus says the text, they were multiplied;
there were many that were convinced by it and did join with them, because they
did see such a beauty and excellency in their way, walking in the fear of God
and in the joy of the holy Ghost: and this was at a time when they had much
rest; many people it may be when they are in danger, then they will seem to walk
in the fear of God: but mark, this was in a time when this people was freed
from their danger, then they walked in the fear of the Lord; and in the joy of
the holy Ghost, that was increased in them: And this is the walk of the Saints
in their walking with God.

Two or three things more I shall mention. As now,

The walk that they walk, it is above: The way of the Saints it is on high, it is
a walk above the world, they keep themselves on high aloft in a spiritual way:
it is true, their hearts are humble before God, and yet they are on high too;
though they look not upon themselves as worthy of the least crumb of bread, yet
they look upon themselves again as too good to be vassals to the world, or to
their lusts; and they look upon themselves as being set by God in too a high
condition to be satisfied with all the world to be their portion; their hearts
are lifted up on high to converse with the most High God, and so they come to
be delivered from the snares of death that are below.

Yea and also, They endeavor to walk as Christ walked: as in the 1 Epist. of
John, 2. 6. They walk as Christ himself walked, those that walk with God. Who
did ever walk with God so as Christ did? who had ever that fellowship with the
Father and the Son so as Christ had? The Saints they labor to walk so as Christ
walked, to look upon Christ as the pattern of their lives. And so as Christ was
anointed with the oil of joy and gladness above his fellows; so they come to
have some of the ointment run down upon them, they come to have somewhat of
that communion that Jesus Christ had with the Father, Christ had much communion
with the Father in the constant course of his life: Now the Saints laboring to
walk as Christ walked, so they come to have Communion with God. The Lord bring
you into this walk, and keep you in such a blessed walk as this is.

Now for the Rules of Direction in this our walking with God, that is to be our
subject in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Twelve Rules of Direction for walking with God.
WHat Rules should be observed for a Christian's walking with God? You will say
to me, You have showed to us, That it is a most blessed thing to walk with God,
and we are convinced of it: But what Rules may there be given for it?

The First Rule.
Be sure of this, That there be no way of sin in thee. Take heed of giving way
to any sin, especially known sin, though it be a little one, though it should
be but a sin of omision, the giving way to any known sin, will make the
presence of God terrible, and make all thy duties empty; will estrang God from
thy soul: there is more evil in it than thou art aware of, thou can have no
Communion with God while thou art in any way of sin, especially if it be
against Light, The least sin that is that a Christian gives way unto, is like a
thorn in a man's foot, but a great sin, and a sin against knowledge is like a
great gash in a man's foot; now if a man has but a thorn in his foot he cannot
walk well, it will make him halt; if a man has but a little gravel got into
his shoo he will not be able to walk along, he may walk a step or two, but not
very long. Now small sins are like gravil in the shoo, or like a thorn got into
the foot; but if thou fallest into a great sin, a sin against light, against
conscience, Oh that is like a great gash that one may cut with a hatchet or an
ax; if a man has cut a great gash in his foot he will hardly be able to walk
with comfort: Even so it is when thou fallest into any great sin, thou had
need then go to the Chyriurgeon, thou had need then have salve applied to
thee to heal thy soul, or otherwise it will hinder thee in thy walk with God.

The second Rule, or Direction.
Secondly, Labor to abstract thy heart from earthly and sensual things as much
as thou can that thou may be spiritual: A drossie, earthly, sensual heart
is unfit to have communion with God, God he is a Spirit, and thou must be
Spiritual in thy converse with him, take heed of mingling thy heart with
creature comforts, thou may make use of them, but in a spiritual way, do not
defile thy heart with them, let not thy heart close with them as adequat
objects of thy desires, or of thy love, take heed of being entangled, of being
ensnared with any creature comforts; a man cannot walk if he has got into a
snare, when men fetter themselves in the world, and entangle themselves with
abundance of businesses, and creature contentments, it does mightily hinder
their freedom in walking with God, when men's hearts sink down to the creature
they cannot walk with God, for God is above, he is on high, and the way of the
wise is on high, and we must keep our selves on high: If so be that Christians
have sometimes some good affections, their hearts are a little stirred up to
things that are good; but at other times their hearts sink down to the world,
and to sensual, and earthly contentments, they cannot walk freely with God,
they can but hault at the best; as a man that has one leg shorter than the
other, he cannot walk evenly, but he haults as he goes; so when our affections
are up and down, sometimes they are stirred up to Heaven, and sometimes down to
the world again, yea, perhaps at the same time when we have some truths heave
us upward, and yet a drossie spirit to sink us downward, this will be but
haulting, our affections must go even, must not be for Heaven and Earth
together, except it be in subordination one to the other, and so while we are
on the earth we are in Heaven if we keep our hearts in a subordination to
spiritual things when we are busied about earthly; Then is a man's heart
spiritual, and separated from the earth when he knows how to have comfort in
God alone, when he knows how to make up the want of all creaturecomforts in God
himself, that is a spiritual heart. Now you will say, we must not be ensnared in
the things of the earth: when is a man's heart spiritual? It Is then Spiritual
when it knows how to satisfy its self in God alone, and to make up the want in
all creature comforts in God himself, and no Christian can walk with God except
he attains to that pitch, to know how to make up all in God, and use all in
order unto God.

The third Rule, or Direction.
Thirdly, If thou would walk with God, evermore take Christ with thee God and
the Soul cannot walk together but with Christ; Christ, God and Man, that
Mediator, by that I mean this, in all thy converse with God have an eye to
Christ, look unto God the infinite glorious First. Being of all things, but
through Christ the Mediator, or otherwise God will not be rendered amiable, and
sweet, and lovely to thee, then is God rendered sweet and amiable, and lovely
to the soul, even as a friend that the soul can have familiarity withal when as
he is looked upon through Jesus Christ: do thou act all by Christ by the
strength of Christ, and tender up all thy services to God through Christ, those
that are not acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel in Christ, surely they
know but little of this walk with God.

Quest. You will say, Enoch did not know much of Christ.
Answ. Oh yes! Certainly, though it was so long before Christ came, yet his eye
was upon Christ: for in the 11. of the Heb 5. verse, the Apostle says, That it
was by faith that he walked with him; it was all by faith. Now Christ is the
object of faith, and so his eye certainly was upon Christ: It was through
faith, and I will give you one Scripture that will show the use of eying of
Christ in walking with God, in the 25. of Exodus, 21. verse, Thou shall put the
Meroy-Seat above upon the Arc, and in the Ark thou shall put the Testimony
that I shall give thee, and there will I meet with thee, and I will commune
with thee. That is, There at the Mercy-Seat. They were come to the Ark to look
up to the Mercy-Seat, and there says God, will I meet with thee, and there will
I commune with thee. Now what is the Mercy-Seat but Jesus Chaist? we must look
upon God in Christ, and so God is rendered amiable, sweet, glorious, and lovely
unto us in his Son, there does God meet with his Saints, and there he communes
with them; Indeed while we look upon God as he is in himself he is a consuming
fire, and we cannot epxect to commune with God there, and therefore those that
look upon God merely in a legal way, look upon him as one that does exact and
require such and such services and duties of them, and merely considering God
as a Judge; if they perform not such and such duties they do not meet and
commune with God; But such as look up to the Mercy-Seat, look up to Christ by
faith, when they have to deal with God in Christ, Oh these meet with God, these
commune with God, Oh there is much sweet communion between God and their souls,
they walk with God, because God through Christ comes to be rendered gracious,
lovely, sweet, amiable, and familier to them.

The fourth Rule, or Direction.
Be careful to beautify thy soul; or more generally thus, (First:) Have a
great care of thy spirit, look to thy spirit rather than to thy outward actions
in thy walking with God; God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth. One that would walk with God had need be very careful of his spirit,
keep thy heart with all diligence, for it is with thy soul that God converses:
Indeed it is the proper spheer of a Christian to be busy about his heart, to be
busy in the inward man, there is the spheer of a Christian: It Is not so much
about the outward man, if the hear be kept in a right frame, the outward man
will be brought over of its own accord; But be careful of thy spirit, (that is)
of the thoughts of thy mind; Take heed of admitting of any uncleanness in thy
very thoughts, for the soul converses with God in thoughts as well as we
converse with men in words; how do you commune and converse with men but by
speech? therefore does God give speech to men that they may converse one with
another, what speech is unto men, that the thoughts are unto God; we converse
much with God by our thoughts, make conscience of thoughts, labor to cleanse
thy thoughts, and likewise the affections of thy heart, and the stirrings of
thy heart, for God and thy soul does converse together, in the workings and
stirrings of thy heart look to thy spirit; and labor to beautify thy soul with
that that may make thee aimable and lovely in the eyes of God, and then the
Lord will delight to converse with thee, and walk with thee. If you were called
out to walk with a man that were your superior, with some Chief in your parish,
Gentleman, or Knight, or Noble man, If such a one should call you to walk with
him, you would labor then so far as you were able to adorn your selves with
such clothes as were suitable unto the company of such a one: you that profess
your selves Christians, God does call you every day to walk with him, and if
you would expect to have communion with God, and that God should take delight
in you, you must labor to beautify your souls, to dress you with those things
that may make you aimable in the eyes of God, and not to come dirtily and
filthy into the presence of God. Now that that makes the soul aimable in the
eyes of God it is, Holiness, for that is the very Image of God, and God
delights to walk with one where he can see his own Image, the more resplendent
the Image of God is in the soul the more does the Lord delight to walk with
such a soul; labor for the behavior of thy soul to be suitable unto God; When I
walk with one that is my superior I must have such a demenour as is suitable to
his presence, and as it was said before, To walk with God was to walk in the
fear of God. And that is the fourth thing, Take heed to thy spirit, beautify
thy soul in that that may make thee aimable and lovely in Gods eyes, and carry
thy self so as is suitable to the presence of God; I shall only give you one
Scripture about the beautifying of the soul, in the 45. Psalm, where it is
spoken of the Church and of the Saints being brought into the presence of God,
in the 13. verse, The Kings daughter, (that is, the Church) is all glorious
within. (Many make great shows of Religion without, but the Kings daughter is
all glorious within,) her clothing is of wrought gold: there is her ornaments:
mark what follows in the 14. verse, She shall be brought unto the King in
raiment of needle work: (She shall be brought to the King, to Jesus Christ,
with garments of needle work) by that is meant, the several graces of the
Spirit of God that puts a beauty upon the soul: as there is a variety in
needlework that causes a beauty upon the work, and so she shall be brought to
the King. So you must have that that may make you aimable and lovely in the
eyes of the King.

The Fifth Rule, or Direction.
Take heed of halting. When you walk with him you must not halt between two but
give up your self fully to God, you must give up your selves wholly to him in
walking with him; not to have a distracted heart, or a divied heart between
two: Why halt ye between two opinions (says the Prophet?) If God be God,
worship him; if Baal, worship him. So, when the heart is not divided up and
down, and is resolved in the way of God, that is the thing that I mean here;
that is, If I cannot be happy here, I am content to be miserable here; when the
soul is so resolved and does not halt in Gods way, when the soul knows that
here is the way that there is happiness to be had in, and whatsoever seems to
the contrary to flesh and blood, yet I know that in these ways there is
happiness to be had, there is enough to bless my soul for ever, and therefore
whatsoever becoms of me, I am resolved upon these ways; this is one that is
fit to walk with God, he will not halt, but will treat strait steps in the
ways of God: and that the Apostle requires of us in Heb. 12. 13. Make straight
paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way. Make
straight paths, go on in a straight way, not having the heart longing after
something else: There are some that have some convictions of conscience, that
have their hearts inclinable to the ways of God, and are going on in some of
the ways of God, yet they have longings of spirit after something else: but
when the heart indeed walks with God, it gives up its self wholly to him, and
is resolved in these ways: you have had some good thoughts; but if your hearts
be divided between God and the world, you will turn to be Apostats in time,
that which is lame will be turned out of the way, the ways of God will be
tedious to you when you do not give up your selves wholly to them; and this is
the reason of the Apostafie that there is in the world, they seem to go on in
Gods ways, but they go on but lamely because they do not give up themselves
wholly to the ways of God.

The sixth Rule, or Direction.
If you would walk with God, Take heed of formality in all holy duties; be
laborious in holy duties, take pains with your hearts in them, labor for the
power of godliness in holy duties, you must strive to get up to God in them: It
were well if when we perform holy duties we did but keep close to the Duty its
self, few go so far: But it is one thing to keep close to the Duty, and another
thing to keep close to God in the Duty; we must labor not only to mind what we
are about, but to keep close to God in the Duty, to find God in all duties that
we perform, and in the use of all ordinances to take pains to find God there,
and not to satisfy and quiet our hearts except we find God in the duties that
we do perform; we have a notable Scripture for this, in Exodus 20. 24. In all
places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
That is, where ever there is any Ordinance, or any holy Duty to be performed,
there is a recording of Gods Name. And says he, I will come unto thee, and
there I will bless thee. If you would walk with God, you must go where God is,
and be in those places where God uses to come: now the walk where God uses to
walk it is, in his Ordinances, in his Worship, therefore you must be very
spiritual in worship, and sanctify the Name of God there; (according to that
that we have treated upon at large) you must take pains there, stir up your
Gospel worship
hearts and all that is within you to walk with God there, and not be satisfied
except you have something of God there. It Is a notable speech of Bernard, I
never go from thee without thee: when ever I come to any holy duty and leave
it, I never leave it but I have thee with it: we must not be satisfied except
we meet with God in holy duties.

The Seventh Rule, or Direction.
Take heed of secret declinings, or slidings away from the paths of God into
any by paths. For those that profess their desires to walk with God they will
not in an open way forsake God, and his ways; but if you be not very watchful
over your hearts, you will have them secretly decline away from the ways of
God, from those paths wherein you have had heretofore communion with God, Oh
take heed of turning out of the paths of God, of any allurements from the
flesh, of any temptations, and especially such temptations as are suitable to
your corruptions, they will be alluring you to lead you aside out of the ways
of God, and seem to promise ways of contentment to the flesh; Oh take heed of
any such thing, take heed of being allured through the deceitfulness of the
flesh, as the Apostle speaks in the 2 Epist. of Peter, 2. 18. (there he speaks
of some false teachers) When they speak great swelling words of vanity, they
allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error. There were some that were escaped
from the ways o error, from sinful ungodly ways, and really escaped that is,
in their kind, they were not hypocrites, that is, to make show of one thing and
do another, but what they did they did according to the light of their
consciences, but yet it was not through the sanctifying saving work of God but
through the strength of a natural conscience; and so they were allured through
the lusts of the flesh, and through wantonness, by those that taught false
Doctrine, but they together with their false Doctrine came to that that was
suitable to the flesh. I beseech you observe it, some that have been walking
with God and then met with these that come with fair shows with that which is
false, (and you may know it in this that it gives liberty to the flesh) they
think here is a fine, even, and smooth way that I may have content to the flesh
in; observe it, there is no such way to allure such as have by the power of the
Word escaped from the ways of sin in a great measure, no such way (I say) to
allure them as to come and show them how they may make a profession of
godliness and yet have liberty to the flesh too: Oh the Lord deliver young
beginners from the wantons of our age! the wantons that are in our generation
that do allure them through the lusts of the flesh, and promise liberty to
them, for so the text says, While they promise them liberty they themselves
are the servants of corruption: THEMSELVES: Mark, those that promise them
liberty, and bring such Doctrine of liberty to you, they Themselves are in the
mean time the servants of corruption: Oh take heed of declining to the ways of
the flesh after thou have seemed to begin in the spirit; what have thou to do
in the way of Asher and in the ways of Egypt? Oh thou that heretofore did
seem to converse with God, and to walk with him, what iniquity have thou found
with me says God? So what evil have thou found in the ways of God? Do you
find them too difficult for you, Oh it is through the baseness of thy heart,
because thy heart is not changed and made suitable to that that is spiritual and
holy, Oh that the Lord would be pleased to cause his Angel to meet with some
that are declining from his good and blessed ways! as we read in the book of
Genesis, That the Angel met Hager when she was flying from Abraham's family,
from the Church of God, and says he, Hager Sarah's Maid, from whence came
thou? do thou come from Abraham's family? art thou going from thence? and
where do thou think to find so much good as in Abraham's family, where the
presence of God is? So, Oh that God would meet with such as are declining from
the good ways of God, Oh thou soul whither art thou going? thou that have had
the Word working upon thy heart and thou were seemed to be turned into the good
ways of God, whither art thou going? are these the ways that are like the
former ways that thou have seemed to walk in? Oh what will be the end of these
ways that now thou art in? Indeed they do give contentment unto the flesh more
than former ways, but do thou think that the end of them will be peace? Oh
that there were such a messenger from God to meet thee in those ways that thou
art walking in, that thou may say as the Church does in the 2. of Hosea, 7.
verse, I will return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than
it is now: I was wont to have more peace, comfort, and sweetness in conversing
with God in holy duties than now I find, I will return to those ways of God;
howsoever many loose professors seem to make a scorn of them and deride them,
but Lord I am sure I found more sweetness in them then, than now; well I will
return to them and labor to walk in them.

The Eighth Rule, or Direction.
Or if thou be declined, Labor to keep a tenderness of spirit, so a^ to be
sensible of the beginnings of declining. It Is true, we have a great deal of
corruption while we remain here in this world, and our hearts are drawn quickly
from the ways of God, I but if we could keep a spirit sensible of the
beginnings of declining, we might yet keep our walk with God: That so soon as
we are got but one step from God, if we did but begin to bethink our selves;
where are we? what are we doing? Oh this would cause us to return, and not to
go so far off from God. For a man to go far from God is very dangerous, for
then he begins to have many thoughts of despair, and so many times he grows
even desperate in his course, and gives up himself to excess even to satisfy
the lusts of the flesh with greediness: There are some men that are convinced
in their consciences that they are out of the way, and though they be convinced
of it yet still they go further and further off from God.

Why (you will say?) is that possible?

Yes, Because having once made profession of Religion, and departing from God,
now the Devil follows him with dispairing thoughts, he thinks now God will not
receive him and accept of him upon his returning to him, and therefore he is
resolved that he will satisfy himself to the full; and I verily belee^^ this
is the great reason why many Apostates turn so notoriously wicked as they do:
when you see a man that has been forward in Religion, and afterward not only
fall off, but you shall find him to be a drunkard, a whoremaster, a scorner,
you may almost conclude that this is the very ground of it, that though his
conscience be convinced that he is out of the way, yet he is in a desperate
manner set to have his pleasure, because he thinks God has forsaken him, and
he has: forsaken God, and his lusts he will have, and poor creature that is all
that he has to satisfy himself withal; Oh take heed of getting far from God:
hearken to this you that are far from righteousness as the Scripture speaks: Oh
it is a terrible thing to be gone far from God, labor to keep thy heart watchful
of the beginnings of declining, and be tender and sensible of them.

The Ninth Rule, or Direction
Labor to be spiritual in thy solitary times. If you would walk with God, prize
much your solitary times, and labor to be spiritual in them; do not lose those
times when you are alone, when there is none but God and your selves together.
And especially you that have much business in the world; alas what little use
do you for the most part make of your solitary times! when you are alone you
know not what to do; but a man that would walk with God he had need be careful
to be very spiritual there, now I am separated from the world, now I have to
deal with God and mine own soul, Oh! let me improve this, and get advantage by
this, Oh! let me not be quiet till I get some converse with God: Those
Christians that are spiritual in their solitary times they will be very
spiritual when they come into company. As Moses, when he was alone with God
upon the mount and came down unto the people his face did shine so as they were
not able to bear it: Certainly, those that are alone with God, and are
spiritual, they will shine in holy conversation when they come down from the
mount, when they come to converse with others.

The Tenth Rule, or Direction.
Let Gods presence be more to thee than all the world; account it more
engagement to thy soul, that thou art with God that thou have Gods presence
with thee, than though thou had the eye of all the world upon thee: It would
mightily compose the spirits of men and women if they had an awful reverence of
the presence of God, and did account it more than all the world besides, and
therefore to do nothing in Gods presence but what thou would do in the sight
of all the world; or what thou may do so as thy conscience may not accuse
thee for sin in it. Oh look upon the presence of God as more than all the world
unto thee.

The Eleventh Rule, or Direction.
Go on with a resolution in the performance of holy duties though thou see
nothing come of them for the present. Though I have not what comfort I would,
yet I am doing what duty I am commanded, I am yet in Gods way; and that should
satisfy every gracious heart, that though I have not what encouragements I
would, yet that I am in Gods way, and let me keep in that way of God.

The Twelfth Rule, or Direction.
Make good interpretations of all Gods ways and dealings with thee. This is a
mighty help to us to keep on in the way of God, and to walk with him. If God
comes in a way of affliction, make good interpretation of the affliction, do
not presently conclude, that God appears like an enemy to thee, that will
discourage thee in the ways of God; but look upon God as intending good unto
thee in every thing; and that will help thee to keep close to him, and to walk
close with him in every condition: If God seems to go out of the way of
prosperity, and to come in the way of affliction, make good interpretations of
it: do not therefore think that God is therefore leaving of thee and forsaking
thee, but exercise faith in this, and believe that God may intend as much good
to thee in that way as in any way whatsoever, and I ground this rule upon that
text in the 12. Heb. In the former part of the chapter the Apostle speaks of
Gods chastening of his people, My Son despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives: and in the 7. verse, If
ye endure chastening then God deals with you as with sons: for what son is he
whom the father chasieneth not? but if ye be without chastisements whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. So still he goes on in the
point of chastisement, in the 9, 10, 11. verses he speaks of nothing but of
chastisements, now then in the 12. verse he draws a conclusion from thence,
having laid this as a ground, that we are to look upon God as a father in his
chastisements, Wherefore then lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees, and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned
out of the way. As if he should say, when as you apprehend God in a way of
wrath against you, and not in a way of love, your knees will be feeble and you
will not be able to go on with that cheerfulness, and to walk with God in that
hard way that he seems to call you too: But looking upon your selves as sons,
and God intending good unto you, that by chastisements you may be made
partakers of his holiness; now says he, lift up your hands that hang down, and
those feeble knees, those feeble knees that were so weak whereby you were
difinabled to walk with God: Those feeble knees will be strengthened if you
make good interpretation of the ways of God, and believe that the Lord intends
good unto you. And as in other chastisements, so among the rest the
chastisements of spiritual discertions; when God not only comes with outward
afflictions upon you, but when the Lord shall come against you, even himself
with spiritual discertions, and afflictions, even afflicting your souls you
must make good interpretations of them.

You will say, That Is hardest to walk with God; Indeed we may walk with God,
and keep on in communion with him notwithstanding outward afflictions, but when
the Lord seems to withdraw himself, and when there is both outward and inward
too, that is hard: For outward afflictions, I will give you one notable
Scripture for a child of God, following hard after God though God seem to
withdraw himself from the soul, in the 63. Psalm. where by the title of the
Psalm you shall find that David was in the wilderness of Judah, and that was
when Saul did persecute him for his life: Saul persecuted David and followed
him, and David was fain to sculk up and down in the wilderness of Judah from
place to place, and yet mark, O God, thou art my God, (for all that) early will
I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and
thirsty land, where no water is: And then in the 8. verse, My soul follows
hard after thee; though Lord thou seem to withdraw thy self from me in
regard of these outward administrations, yet my soul follows hard after thee
(says David) notwithstanding. If times of affliction, when God seems to
withdraw himself by his afflictions, yet our souls should follow hard after
God: Does God seem to go from us as if he would not walk with us? Oh run after
him: As a poor child if the mother seems to go away from it, and gets over a
style before it, the child cries and runs after: So it was with David, when the
Lord did seem by those administrations of his to be going away from him, says
he, My soul follows hard after him. And this is an excellent frame of spirit,
that the more the Lord seems to be gone from a Christian, the more hard does
the soul follow after God, nothing can satisfy such a one but God himself; and
therefore he says, Lord, my soul thirsts after Thee in a dry land, he does
not say after water, but after Thee. So in any affliction, if thou can say
this, Lord, it is not so much the deliverance from an affliction that my soul
thirsts after, but Oh Lord! thou know my soul thirsts after thee, and may
the affliction be but made up in thy self it is sufficient, I never find my
soul following more earnestly after thee than now in the time of my affliction.

CHAP. X. An Objection concerning Gods hiding of his face, Answered in six
Particulars.
IF it be a spiritual discertion, if the Lord seems to withdraw himself from
the spirits of his servants, What Rules should be given there, for one yet to
walk with God in the time of Spiritual discertion?

I have diverse things to speak to those that God has seemed to withdraw
himself from.

Object. You will say, You have told us of the excellency of walking with God,
and we account it the happiness of our lives to walk with him; Oh but God will
not walk with me, but withdraws himself from my soul so that I cannot see him,
and hides himself from me.

Now I have diverse things to say to thee:

In the first place, Be of good comfort; It Is a good sign, that God has made
thee know what it is to walk with him, that can be sensible of his
withdrawings; there is a generation of people in the world that go on in a
slight kind of way in the profession of Religion, and they know not what it is
to be sensible of any of Gods withdrawings from them, you never hear them
complain of any such thing, they know not what it means; therefore (I say) it is
a good sign that thou know what it is to walk with God because thou art
sensible of any of Gods withdrawings from thee.

Secondly, Examine whether thou have not sometimes shut out God from thee, when
God has offered himself to walk with thee. Has not God sometimes tendered
himself, and even taken thee by the hand to walk with thee, and thou have not
bin at leisure then, thy mind has been about somewhat else? Oh! therefore be
humbled before him for all thy unworthy dealings with him, and for all thy
declynings from him; Know, God calls thee to this, There has been many
wanderings of thy spirit from God, Oh that thou could but say in respect of
thy spiritual wanderings, as the Prophet David says in respect of his
wanderings, in Psalm 56. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy
bottle, are they not in thy book? Oh that thou could but say so! Lord, there
has been many wanderings of my spirit, but Lord, put my tears into thy bottle;
suitable to my wanderings so are my tears, Oh! it grieves me to the soul that
ever I have grieved thy Spirit; when thy spirit has even taken me by the hand
to walk with thee I have withdrawn my self, and upon that thy Spirit has been
grieved; Oh it grieves my soul! Oh Lord, thou have taken notice of my
wanderings, take notice of my tears that are suitable.

Thirdly, It is better that God withdraw, than that we withdraw. I beseech you
observe it: If God withdraws from you it is your affliction: but if you
withdraw from God, it is your sin; and sin is worse than affliction, better
bear any affliction, yea spiritual afflictions than commit sin; and that you
should labor to be sensible of: you that complain of God's withdrawing from
you, and that God will not walk with you; Be you more sensible of your own
withdrawings as a greater evil to you than Gods? It Is true, Gods withdrawing
from me it is a sore affliction above all that ever befell me in this world;
but my withdrawing from him it is a greater burden to me. And it may be if God
did not withdraw from thee, thou would withdraw from him: And many times God
does withdraw from his people to prevent his peoples withdrawing from him. As
many times the mother will withdraw her self from the child that the child may
not be wandering from her. And this may be the very end why God withdraws, he
sees thy heart begins to be loose, wanton, slight, and vain, and therefore it
is that he hides himself, that thou may be awakened and sensible of the
danger that thou art in by withdrawing thy self from God; that so thou may
cleave to him the more fully, and that thy soul may follow more after him, that
thou may lift up thy heart and cry more earnestly after God. But now, if God
be withdrawn, and the soul be not so sensible as to cry after him, or if it
should leave off crying; then such a one is in a dangerous condion indeed. As
if a poor child had lost the father or mother and were crying after them; at
length comes some beggar with an apple or plumb and steals away the child, and
then the child is quiet for the present; Oh take heed of that, depart not from
the Lord, keep crying after him in all his withdrawings.

Fourthly, Gods withdrawing of comfort is not always the withdrawing of his
presence: Thou may mistake, thou think that God is withdrawn, why?
because he has withdarwn comfort; there may be a great mistake in this: God (I
say) may withdraw comfort, and not withdraw his presence, take this for a
certain rule and make much use of it, when comforts are gone: Do not say when
comforts are gone, therefore the presence of God is gone, there may be as full
and as gracious a presence of God when comforts are gone as ever there was: he
may be present with his graces and support; as in Psalm. 63. 8. My soul
follows hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me; though thou seem to
be gone. So, God may be present to uphold thee, and to strengthen thee, and to
exercise thy faith in him, and that may be as acceptable to God: The exercise
of faith in the want of comfort may have as much of God in it as all the
comfort that ever thou had in all thy life; and therefore do not say, that
Gods presence is gone because comforts are gone: The beams of the Sun in the
winter time is not so effectual as the influence of the Sun when it is in a
cloud in the summer time: Is the presence of the Sun gone in the summer because
there is a cloud between the sun and you? It may be a child will think, Oh the
Sun is gone out of the firmament because there is a cloud: I but I know there is
the Sun still, for there is the influence of the Sun, there is some heat in the
day, and there is some light whereby I may see to do my work, though I have not
that luster as before; Now when the Sun shines in winter it shines bright but
there is not that influence of the sun upon the earth as makes the plants grow:
So, sometimes the beams of Gods presence may be clouded to a Christian by
reason of outward afflictions, and yet there may be more of Gods presence than
at another time, when it shall shine in the beauty of it in the comfotrs of a
Christian for so I compare the shining of the Comforts of a Christian to the
shining of the Sun in the winter, that sometimes have no influence to sanctify
the heart, As in winter times the Sun has not that influence to fructify the
ground, but at other times though the Sun be clouded yet it has influence to
make the ground fruitful; so though God may not shine upon thee in regard of
outward comforts, yet he may shine in upon thy soul and make thee to increase
and grow in goodness more than ever before.

Fifthly, If thou can not see Gods face, yet hearken and see if thou can
not hear his voice, and follow that. Do thou come to the Word and there hear
his voice? Is not God pleased to speak to thy soul out of his Word? Thou go
perhaps into thy closet and can not see his face there as thou were wont to
do, yet bless him that thou can hear his voice, and follow his voice though
it be in the dark. As now, if a child be going with the father and it be lost,
yet if the child cries, and the father or mother speaks, that quiets the child
very much; so it is with the children of God, when they cannot see Gods face,
yet they may hear Gods voice: They cannot have those comforts from God as
sometimes they have had; those sweet manifestations of the love of God shed
abroad into their hearts; but when they come to the Word, they cannot but say
that they hear their fathers voice; Perhaps the word is not a comforting word
to thee as hereto fore, I but is it not a directing word, an instructing word,
an inlightening word? Oh this now should support thee for the present.

Sixthly, All that I will say further is this, Keep thy self in a waiting frame
for God: Do not determine that because the Lord is gone he will ever be gone;
Oh no, but keep still in the ways of God waiting for him, resolve, that though
God leaves thee, yet thou will not leave the path in which God was heretofore:
I am sure that God was once here, Oh then keep the path wherein thou were wont
to meet with God, for thou shall meet with him again: It Is better to keep the
path, the ordinary highway of God, for you are more like to meet with God
there than if you should go out of the way: I Will give you a Scripture or two
for that and so conclude. The first is in Psalm. 101. 2. I will behave my self
wisely in a perfect way, Oh when, will thou come unto me! That which I quote
this for is this, the resolution of David to behave himself wisely in a perfect
way, together with his panting after the presence of God, Oh when will thou
come unto me! as if he should say, Lord, Thou art absent from me now, but Lord,
I will not go out of the way wherein I was wont to find thee, Oh when will thou
come! I will not determine that I shall never see thee in this way as
heretofore I have done, no, but I hope I shall afterward meet thee. And so in
the 119. Psalm, 8. verse, I will keep thy Statutes; what then? Oh forsake me
not utterly. It seems that the Lord for the present to David's apprehension had
forsaken him: but what was David's resolution? God has forsaken me and I Will
forsake him? Oh no, But I Will keep thy Statutes, and Oh! leave me not utterly.
So keep on in the ways of God still, go on in his way and wait for the
presence of God until he come; and conclude this, Surely, he will come. Be not
like to children, that because they see the Sun going down, therefore they
conclude that the Sun is gone, and will never come again. Though God seems to
withdraw the light of his face from thee, do not conclude and determine, well,
I shall never have those comforts from God, in communion with God, in walking
with God, as once I was wont to have; do not say so, but go on, and keep in the
ways of God, wait upon him and look up toward him, and so thou may come to
have as much Communion, Sweetness, and Joy in God as ever thou had in all thy
life. And now know, that God calls for the work of faith in such times as these
are, now God calls thee to walk by faith and not by sense.

FINIS.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICAL TABLE Of all the chief Matters handled in the Fourth
VOLUMN.
A
ADultery, see Earthly-mindedness Account The Saints are careful to make even
their accounts with God Page 313 Aim The aim of the Saints is heavenward 107
Angel The Saints have the same confirmation of their happiness as the Angels
have Page 104 Apostacy What the root of apostacy is. 40 Astray By Nature men
go astray from the ways of God 268
B
Benefit What the benefit of grace is 36 See Conscience Believing By believing
men take up their freedom of Heaven Page 103 Blessing, see Jacob
C
Care Whence distracted cares arise 9 What our care should be 78
Calling How godly men are busy in their callings 16 Calling, see Wicked
Citizen The Saints are Citizens of heaven, and how 100 We should walk as
becomes Citizens of Heaven 105 See Privilege
Communion What the word Communion signifies 109 Communion with God what it is
110
Communion see Saints Content see Little Conversation Heavenly Conversations
are to be followed 92 How far heavenly Conversations are to be followed 93 How
the Saints Conversation is in Heaven 106 Reasons why the Saints Conversations
are in Heaven 227 Heavenly Conversation is a convincing Conversation 240
Heavenly Conversation is attainable Page 251
Conversation see Faith, Hell, Evidence, Godly, Growing, Glory, Suffering,
Directions Converse What the Converse of the Saints is 116 Contrariety see
Examples Comfort The Saints have comfort in little of this world 223 Comfort
see Losses Confirmation see Angels Covenant What the Covenant on our parts is
Conscience The benefits of a clear conscience 215 Covetousness see Idolatry
Creature How the Saints deal with the Creature 310 All the Creatures bring
glory to God 245
Curse On whom the curse of the serpent is 44
D
Danger see Example Death What is that hinders preparation for death 47 Devil
The Devil casts thoughts into the heart of man Page 7 Delight Wherein the
delight of the Saints lies 115 Delight see Sabbath Depend For what Godly men
depend upon God 277 Difference, see Godly, Jacob. Direction Directions how to
get a heavenly Conversation 251 A godly soul depends upon God for directions
277 Directions how to walk with God 320
Destruction Earthly mindedness brings destruction 50 Distracted see Cares
Doctrine see Reconciliation Drossie How a drossie heart is known 57
E
Earth The Earth swallows up earthly men 13 Earth, look higher. Earthly things
When men mind earthly things in a sinful manner 6 Earthly things carry a fair
show Page 65 Earthly things are many times the portion of reprobates 68
Earthly man When an Earthly man is in his element 10 Earthly-minded A man may
be Earthly-minded and not know it 51 What shall become of earthlyminded men 72
Earthlimindedness What Earthly-mindedness is 5 Earthly-mindedness is adultery
20 Earthly-mindedness is Idolatry 21 See Enmity Earthly-mindedness deads the
heart to prayer 42 Earthly-mindedness is a scandal to Religion 45 How
earthly-mindedness may be known 54 Reasons of Earthly-mindedness 64
Earthly-mindedness brings guilt upon the spirit 18 The effects of
earthly-mindedness another day 50
Earthly, see Heavenly, vilify, Conversation, Element, Spiritual, Godliness,
Temptations, Snares, Ministry, Lusts, Death, Destruction, Vanity, Humility
Inducements Egyptians What Idolatrous worship the Egyptians had Page 21 End
What it is that causes a blessed End 299 Who they are that have the same ends
God has 275
Enoch Enoch's Prophecy 262 Evidence Evidences of men's conversations being in
heaven 222 Evidences of walking with God 306 See Walking Example Examples of
godly men should be followed and how far 92 Examples of godly men should make
us enquire after the ways of godliness 94 Examples of godly men should confirm
us in the truth 96 What we should do when examples of godly men are contrary 97
See Examination Danger in following the examples of wicked men 100
Examination Contrary examples should put us upon examination 98 Esau see Jacob
Excellency The excellency of walking with God Page 267 Excellency see Walking
Eye The souls of the godly eye God 272

F
Faith The heavenly conversation of others is not the rule of our faith 93
Faith must be exercised 259
Familarity Whence our familarity with God arises 293 Folly The folly of
earthly-mindedness 38 Formality Formality must not be rested on 253 Formality
must be taken heed of 326

G
Genius Wicked men fancy heavenly things according to their own genius 17 God
God takes care of men, concerning earthly things 78 Heavenly conversation
brings glory to God 244 See Walking What a man trusts to, he makes his God Page
54
Godly Difference between wicked and godly men 3 Godly men's Conversations
should not be earthly 238 Godly men carry themselves as in Gods presence 274
Godly, see Calling Godliness Earthly-mindedness is contrary to the work of
godliness and how 26 See ways, my stery. Glory Heavenly Conversation brings
glory to the Saints 246 What the glory of the soul is. 239
Grace What the work of grace is 27 Grace, see Benefit: presence. Growing
Heavenly Conversation is growing 240
H
Halting The Saints must take heed of halting 325 Heaven, see Saints,
Profession, Conversation, Aim. Heavenly The Saints are Heavenly in Earthly
imploymonts Page 115 The Saints have great skill in Heavenly matters 218
See Genius, Conversations Hell The Conversations of wicked men are in Hell 99
Heart The heart is best known by the thoughts 7 The heart of a wicked man is
upon the things of the earth. 16 The vileness if men's hearts discovered 302
Heart, see drossie. Higher God made man for higher things than the things of
the earth 96 Hypocrites Hypocrites rebuked 135 Honor, see walking Humility
Humility takes the heart off from earthly mindedness. 86
I
Jacob Difference between Jacob's blessing and Esau's 6 Idolater Idolaters
depart from God 22 Idolatry Covetousness is Idolatry Page 20 See
Earthly-mindedness Vileness Ill, see Success Ignorant see Religion Employment
see Heavenly Inducement Earthty Inducements oppose godliness 98 Intercourse The
Saints have much intercourse to heaven 218 Joy What the joy of a Saint is See
World 54
L
Law The Saints are guided by the Laws of God 110 Little The Saints are
contented with little in this world. 222 Loss The Saints have comfort in all
their losses 224 Lust Earthly-mindedness brings in foolish lusts and how 34
M
Man Wherefore God made man 69 See Nature Mind Who they are that know the mind
of God Page 94 Ministry How earthly-mindedness hinders the Ministry 30 Mystery
The mystery of godliness ought to be studied 254
N
Nature What man is by nature 268
P
Petitions What men they are that shall have their petitions granted 295
Pilgrim We are pilgrims here upon earth 76 Prayer see Earthly-mindedness
Preparation see Death Presence Gods presence draws forth grace 298 See God
Principles see Saints Privilege What the privileges of a Citizen of heaven
are 106 How the privileges of a Citizen of Heaven are procured 107
Promise Wicked men do not trust to a promise Page 15 Protection The Saints
have the protection of heaven 104
R
Reconciliation How a wicked man conceives of the Doctrine of Reconciliation 17
Religion How Religion is scandalized 45 Why men are ignorant in Religion 59
Reprobates Reprobates have their portion in this life 68 Riches The Saints
have right to the Richcs and common stock of heaven 103 Riches see Uncertainty
S
Saints The Saints names are enrolled in heaven 102 The Saints are no longer
slaves 103 The Saints' are guided by heavenly principles 108 The Saints have
communion with God 109 The Saints trust God with much Page 220 The Saints are
sensible of the stoppage between them and heaven 226
Sabbath To whom the Sabbath is a delight, and to whom it is a weariness 16
The Saints keep a a perpetual Sabbath 115
Saints see Citizens, Riches, Angels, Perfection, Laws, Delight, Heavenly,
Sabbath, Trading, Intercourse Little, Comfort Losses Safty Wherein the safty of
a Saint lies 292 Scandal, see Religion Self What self is 25 Secrets what manner
of men they are that know Gods secrets 294 Seriousness What seriousness of
spirit is 309 Serpent, see Curse Sinful, see Earthly Shortness What the
shortness of our time here should lead us to 73 Snare Earthly-mindedness brings
men into snares 29 Soul Of what value the soul of man is Page 70 The soul of
man is from heaven 229 The soul of man ought to be beautified 324
Soul see Glory, Walk Spiritual A wciked man is earthly in spiritual things, a
godly man is spiritual in earthly 11 Strictness We ought not to find fault with
strictness in Gods ways 231 Stranger The world are strangers to walking with
God 300 Success The reason of ill success 35 Suffering Heavenly Conversation
makes suffering easy 249
T
Temptation Earthly-mindedness puts men upon great temptations 28 Thoughts What
the thoughts of the Saints are 111 Which way the thoughts of the Sainis tend 112
See Devil, Heart Trade What the Saints trade for heaven is Page 213 The Saints
have free trade to heaven 104
Trust, see God Trusted Worldly things are not tobe trusted too 55
U
Vanity All earthly things are vanity 53 Vilify The Saints vilify the things
of the earth 222 Uncertainty The uncertainty of riches 71 Vileness The vileness
of Idolatry 21 Vocation What vocation is 25
W
Ways The ways of godliness should not be opposed 95 See Strictness Walk How
the soul is brought to walk with God 268 He that walks with God depends not
much upon reason 307 He that walks with God is the same in private that he is
in public 308 He that walks with God walks in his Commandments Page 310 What
it is to walk with God 267
Walking What walking with God is 272 Wherein walking with God consists 280
Several excellencies of walking with God 286 The honor of walking with God 288
Particular evidences of walking with God Page 316
See Strangers, Excellency. Weariness, see Sabbath. Wicked Why wicked men are
busy in their callings 16 See Godly, Genius, Example, Hell. Work, see
Godliness, Grace. Worldly Wherein worldly joy consists 54 See Trust,
Strangers.
A TABLE of those SCRIPTURES which are occasionally Cleared and briefly
Illustrated In the Fourth VOLUMN.
The first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to
the Page of the Book.

Chap. Verse Page Genesis. 6 9 263 27 28 6 27 29 6 33 9 52 45 20 239 Exodus. 23
14 288 25 21 323 Leviticus 4 18 280 26 11 280 26 12 280 2 Kings 17 8 301 2
Chronicles 28 2 301 Nehemiah 5 9 317 Job 18 8 292 22 21 293 Psalms. 16 3 277 16
6 277 23 4 292 37 4 295 45 13 325 45 14 325 49 11 66 49 13 66 62 10 77 62 11 77
63 8 283 583 3 277 72 9 268 86 11 305 89 15 289 89 16 289 119 37 42 119 45 279
138 7 292 139 17 61 Proverbs 2 20 92 13 20 294 23 7 7 23 17 274 Canticles 5 2
281 7 5 281 Isaiah 13 17 53 30 21 269 35 8 271 53 9 271 Jeremiah 2 12 23 17 13
44 Ezekiel 33 31 31 Daniel 7 10 107 7 18 107 Hosea 2 7 329 4 11 22 11 10 298
Micah 6 6 291 6 7 291 6 8 291 Luke 1 6 315 21 34 47 John 3 31 81 Acts 6 31 318
7 29 113 22 25 101 22 27 106 23 25 64 Romans 8 5 3 1 Corinthians 9 27 25 15 29
79 2 Corinthians 3 10 239 4 17 247 4 18 13 5 7 307 Galatians 6 12 65 6 26 310
Ephesians 2 6 107 2 11 251 2 18 272 2 19 130 4 17 309 5 5 20 Philippians 3 8 8
3 19 8 Colossians 3 1 249 3 2 79 3 3 79 2 Thessalonians 1 11 246 1 12 246 1
Timothy 6 9 28 6 9 34 6 9 50 2 Timothy 4 10 40 Hebrews 10 32 224 10 34 232 11 1
256 11 5 322 11 10 101 11 13 87 11 37 87 12 13 327 12 22 101 James 4 4 23 2
Peter 1 3 230 2 18 327 1 John 1 4 109 2 6 319 4 5 60 3 John 0 4 316 Jude 0 14
20 0 4 262 Revelation 3 4 287 13 6 102 13 8 102 14 4 287

FINIS.

