THE Necessity and Reward OF A Willing Mind.

A SERMON Preached at EXON before An Assembly of Ministers Of the Counties of
Devon and Somerset, April 16. 1693.

By JOHN BUSH.

LONDON, Printed for Mich. Hyde Bookseller in Exon. 1693.

To my Brethren the Ministers of the Counties of Devon and Somerset, allowed by
Act of Parliament, and others that read this Discourse.
Reverend Brethren,
THough in the ensuing discourse I treat of the necessity of a Willing Mind to
the acceptable performance of our Duty, I must confess I was not (if I could
have handsomely avoided it) very willing to Preach to such an Assembly, much
less to Print the Discourse: I have done both at your request, because I took
it as a Command which I could not but Obey; and yet knowing how unfit I was to
do either, I thought that an excuse for my Unwillingness, notwithstanding which
I resolved to give a due submission to your Judgment; without that I should
declined both the one and the other: the true Reason why I chose to speak to
this subject, was because I found in my self a great defect of this
disposition, and I considered it might be so with other Ministers as well as my
self, and in stirring up you to the Willing and Cheerful Performance of your
Duty, I hoped to warm my self by the same Fire which I was to make for others:
if in what I have done, I may but serve as the small Wood to kindle the Fire,
it is as much as I designed. I am afraid we are not enough thankful to God and
the Government for the peaceable exercise of our Ministry, which is not given
us upon a design (as formerly) by a Prince that did what he did in this matter
to exalt his own prerogative, aad to trample upon the laws in order to bring in
Popery, but by a Prince that has adventured to show kindness to an afflicted
depressed party, in the Face of those that seem to envy us this kindness, as
much as ever the Patriarchs did their Father Jacobs to their Brother Joseph.
Surely all things considered our Liberty to attend our Duty in Peace and
Quietness is one of the greatest Instances of a Divine project baffling the
Counsels of Men, that has happened in our days in this Nation; for hereby that
is given by Law, which some Men never Intended to suffer, much less to
Establish; behold in this the Wisdom of God that has so circumstantiated our
Liberty, that now it seems to be interwoven with the Interest of the
Government, so that who ever declares himself an Enemy to the former, will
hardly be thought a hearty Friend to the latter. And We shall never express a
grateful sense of this Mercy of God to us without a more cheerful performance
of our Duty, in submission to our present Circumstances; Discouragements will
never excuse us in the worst of times, much less now, whilst we have what the
Apostles never lived to see; for they only had the future reward, but we with
that the allowance of the Law, and by that means a freedom from trouble, a
mercy which whilst we wanted we valued more than now we seem to do.

The Discourse as it is Printed varieth not from what was delivered, at least
from what I designed to deliver: I have added nothing to, nor omitted any
material passage that I found in my Notes. The Lord give us all more of the
Apostles Willing Mind, that we may have the same Reward.

So Prays Your unworthy Brother in the Ministry. John Bush.
Middleney, May 13th. 1693.
1 Corinthians 9.17. For if I do this willingly, I have a Reward: but if
against my will, a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me.


THE Defense that the Apostle makes for himself throughout the Epistle, and
particularly in this Chapter, argues that there were some persons (if not
Ministers) in the Church of Corinth, that did question his Apostolical Power,
besides the reflection that they made upon his gifts, and practice; but the
uncertainty as to matter of fact, wherein the accusation lay, makes some
places in this Chapter, and throughout the whole Epistle the more difficult to
be understood; it is probable that part of the accusation lay in this, that the
Apostle labored with his hands as a secular person, and did not live as a
person devoted to the Ministry, which ordinarily requires a man's whole time
and thoughts; and consequently that being a poor Mechanic, he disparaged his
Office for the present, and must at last be maintained by the Charity of the
Churches; and that in pressing them to such a liberal Contribution for the
Saints at Jerusalem, he designed to have a share of it to his own use: Baxter
in locum.
something of this nature was laid to his charge, besides the reflection that
they made upon his gifts, as being one that could make a shift to write, but
not readily to expose his own thoughts; for so I understand the meaning of
those words, his bodily presence is weak. As to the first of these, his
Apostolical Power, he asserts it in the first Verse of this Chapter; Am I not
an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seen the Lord Jesus? Showing, that though
he had not conversed with our Savior whilst on Earth, (which was the ground of
the Objection, and seems to have some weight in it: For when the Apostles would
supply the room of Judas, to make up the number twelve, according to the number
of the twelve Tribes, they chose one that had companied with them, Acts 1.21,
22.) yet notwithstanding this, he was as much an Apostle as they, and that he
had seen Christ in the way to Damascus, when he received his Commission to be
an Apostle, and that he was free, i. e. not obliged to one Person or Church
more than to another upon a civil account, so as to bestow his pains upon them
for naught; and that the Corinthians had less cause than other men to question
his Apostleship; for their Conversion was the Seal of his Office, viz. If I be
not Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you.

But the great case upon which the Apostle insists for his Justification is
about Maintenance, which the Apostle did not only not Receive, but Refuse; and
yet lest his Refusal should be drawn into a president for the time to come, to
the prejudice of a Settled Ministry, he takes the matter into consideration,
showing, and that from the equitable part of the Law of Moses, (which though a
Law to Israel does not oblige us Christians, yet from the equity of that Law he
proves) that ordinarily it is the duty of the People to maintain them that
Preach to them: As they that ministered about the Temple and Altar, Levites and
Priests, did live of the Temple and Altar; so they that Preach the Gospel have
a Right to live of the Gospel; v. 13, 14. And yet because that which in the
general may be lawful, may not at all times, and to some particular persons be
expedient, for this reason the Apostle declined the taking of Maintenance from
the Church of Corinth; v. 15. I have used none of these things, neither have I
written these things, that it should be so done unto me; for it were better for
me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void; meaning that the
success of his Ministry which he calls his glory, was dearer to him than his
Right to a Maintenance. And yet the Apostle would not be mistaken, as if
because he was free from all men by Preaching Gratis, that therefore he thought
himself at liberty to Preach, or not to Preach the Gospel; no; necessity is
laid upon me; Woe is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel; v. 16. Now the Apostle
having considered the necessity of his duty, does in these words consider that
disposition of mind that is necessary to the acceptance of his Duty, showing,
that it is not the bare performance, but the willing performance that God would
reward. If I do this willingly, etc.

So that there is an Antithesis in the words, though both parts of it are not
expressly mentioned; and in this Antithesis there is a twofold Supposition, and
a twofold Inference.

1. From the willing and cheerful performance of his duty, the Apostle infers
the certainty of his Reward; he does not say, I shall have, but I have a Reward.

He speaks de presenti, not that he expected the Reward here, but because of
its certainty, in which case we use to say, Sure pay is as good as ready Money.

2. From the unwilling performance of his duty he infers (but it is by
Implication) the Loss of the Reward, adding, that notwithstanding his unwilling
mind, if such a frame should return upon him, he would check it with the sense
of his duty; A dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me; as if he had
said, I must Preach the Gospel, it is committed to me; were I not therefore
better do it willingly, and be rewarded, than with an unwilling mind, and so
lose or lessen the future Reward? It Is true as some observed the word (...)
that is translated, willingly, signifies Injussus, to which the word, of my own
accord, better answers; and yet I do not think that the Apostle did reckon that
in so doing, Preaching without a Maintenance gratis, he did more than his duty
was, absolutely considered. This the Papists would have to be the sense of the
place, telling us that this, and some other Scriptures establishes their
Doctrine of Divine Counsels, which we are at liberty to refuse or observe; for
they make neither duty nor sin: And yet if we observe them, we do
supererrogate, and attain a state of Perfection highly meritorious: Now I do
not see how this place favors them in the least; for if the unwilling mind be
a loss of the Reward, then it must needs follow that the Apostle did no more
than his duty (all things considered) was to do: For the scope of the Apostle's
Discourse seems to amount but to this, that though Ministers in the general
have a Right to Maintenance, as much as ever the Priests and Levites had to
live by the Temple and Altar upon Tithes and Offerings (I say as much, though
not in the same manner, the Apostle does not prove it from the Letter of the
Law, but from the equitable part of the Law, and therefore does not prove the
same sort of Maintenance) yet (notwithstanding this, that 'twas in the general
his Right) for some particular Reasons it was his duty not to insist upon his
own Right; for (as one observes in another case) there is a great difference
between an Universal Law, and a Man's Personal Obligations for some other Law,
not opposing, but explaining that Universal Law, as is very evident in the case
before us. In the general it is the duty of the People to maintain them that
Preach to them; for ordinarily if the People do not perform their duty, the
Minister cannot perform his; and yet notwithstanding this, a particular Minister
may fall under a Personal Obligation not to expect this from the People, either
when the People cannot do it, or when the Minister needs it not; but above all,
when the taking of Maintenance is apparently an hinderance of the success of
his Ministry, which was the Apostle's case. Now in doing this no man
supererrogates, or does more than his duty. I shall not determine absolutely
that what was the Apostle's practice is any Minister's duty at present, but am
of Opinion, that to say the Apostle did more than his duty, is to favor the
Popish Doctrine of Counsels, and to say, that though it was the Apostle's duty
to do this, it cannot be ours, is to prescribe to Almighty God what our
Circumstances shall be, of which no Man is Master: And it is easy to prove,
that notwithstanding the Universal Law of God which determines our duty in the
general, our Personal Obligations do arise from our Personal Circumstances:
This therefore is the Apostle's Argument; he does not determine directly any
other Man's duty, but for himself he could not see how he could lawfully do
otherwise, to stop the mouths of his Adversaries, to promote the success of his
Ministry, and to obtain the future Reward; in relation to which he considers in
the next verse, What then is my Reward? that is, what is the way to obtain the
Reward? viz. making the Gospel of Christ without charge.

But if against my will, a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me; the
Translators have put in a word which they thought to be the sense of the
Apostle, which is not in the Greek; for it is only thus, (...), with an
Accusative Case, I have received a Stewardship; or a Dispensation is committed
to me: And you must not imagine that this Trust is committed to him, upon the
condition of his unwilling mind; no, but rather the conditional has the force
of an Exceptive, which is not unusual with the Apostle; Romans 8.10. And if
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; i. e. though Christ be in
you; so here, If against my will, though against my will; that is, I am still
under a necessity of doing my duty, willing or unwilling I may lose my own
Reward, but not destroy the Obligation to my duty.

It is the former part of the words that I shall limit the Discourse unto, in
which I shall not so much consider the Apostle's Circumstances, as the
disposition of mind which he makes so necessary to his acceptance, under this
Proposition:

Doct. That a willing mind in the performance of our duty, is highly necessary
to our Acceptance and Reward. Or thus; Whoever would receive the Reward of well
doing, had need to do it with a willing mind.

I am speaking to Ministers, but I would discourse of that which concerns
others as well as them, and shall show you,

1. What that disposition of mind is, which the Apostle makes so necessary to
well doing, that all may know whether they have this willing mind.

2. Show its Necessity in the general to all Men.

3. That Ministers above others should have it.

4. Draw some practical Inferences from the Proposition, in relation to us all
as Christians, but especially as Ministers.

1. This willing mind seems to consist of two things.

1. A fixing of the Will that it may stick to its duty. 2. The cheerfulness of
the mind in its performance.
First, The Will must be fixed; without this nothing is done willingly. The
great Controversy of late has been, who does determine the Will, God by the
Irresistible Operation of his Grace, or Man by making those Operations to be
effectual? In which Controversy, whilst some have given to Man more power than
in truth is in him; others have gone into another extreme; those that go in the
former extreme, though otherwise very Learned Men, do so rarely mention the
Supernatural Operations of the Holy Spirit, which are as necessary to deliver
the Soul from the bonds of Sin, as to Release the Body from the power of the
Grave at the last day; that as one says of the Socinians, it is hard to call
them Heretics, for they scarce deserve to be called Christians; so of these
Men it is hard to say that they Preach another Gospel; for they seldom Preach
any Gospel; and yet some have erred on the other hand, as if God's Grace had so
superseded Man's duty, that there were nothing for us to do, but to look when
God will do it, that we may sit still and do nothing. The truth lies between
these two extremes, which will the sooner appear if you consider, that they
only are willing whom God does make willing; and yet every Man that is truly
willing, his heart does stir him up to his own duty, and his own spirit does
make him willing.

1. They only are willing whom God does make willing; for it is his work to
subdue the will, a work that needs and becomes a God to do; the work is the
greatest manifestation of a Divine Power; Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be a
willing people in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness; from the
womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy youth. The words seem to relate
to those early and numerous Conversions which are recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles, where you find thousands at one Sermon converted to Christianity,
which times are therefore called the womb of the morning, and the dew of
Christ's youth; because, as he that goes forth in the morning is then
strongest for his Labor, and the Young Man has most agility of body to run
the Race: So the Grace of God in the first publishing of it should go forth
with that power as is in the young for his Race, as is in a strong Man for his
Labor. Hence it is that they that think they have made themselves willing, do
but deceive themselves, when by the Grace of God they were not made so; for the
Will of Man is conquered by none but God; Men may attempt it, to bend it to
God's Will, as you would bend a crooked Stick; it will return to its own
crookedness. And therefore Moses that knew what a great work it is to fix the
heart to its duty, tells the People, that though they had seen more of God's
Power than ever any Nation before them, or perhaps more than ever any Nation
shall see whilst the World continues, if God would do this, they would see
more of a Divine Power than as yet they had seen; Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Ye have
seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt unto Pharaoh,
and his Servants, and to all his Land, the great temptations which thine eyes
have seen, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive the greatness
of the work; and the successlesness of outward means shows it to be God's work,
and therefore to argue against this from some difficulties that occur in
stating the Controversies, as to the manner of the operation of the Holy Spirit
upon our Wills; that because Man has a self-determining Principle, and is
Master of his own actions, which cannot be denied; yet to argue from hence, that
this cannot agree with the Irresistible Operations of God's Grace, is to pretend
a tenderness to Human Nature, that we may not wrong that, and in the mean time
wrong God, as if we were to be more tender of Man's Honor than of God's
Honor: Why should it not suffice us what so many have said in this matter,
that the turning of the Will is done by Moral Persuasion as Man is a Rational
Creature, made for Moral Government; but the Efficacy of God's Grace lies in
the immediate Operations of God's Spirit upon Man's Will, which is subdued in a
way of power, as Man is a wicked Creature, and yet so subdued, that no Man is
forced against his Will, but made willing; and yet that which makes him so, is
not the cooperation of his own Will with God's Spirit, but the Conquest of the
Spirit over the Will, which being effectual, Man shall not be able to Resist
it; and if he could, he would not, he is so drawn by Love, as well as subdued
by Power. Now to scorn all this, which in effect so many have done, by saying,
How can this be, and Man act as a self-determining Creature, Master of his own
Actions? is to pretend that we can refine upon every thing that is done in the
World; when in the mean time if we descend into the manner of things, we can
give account of nothing; for though we do all know that we can will, and choose,
and refuse, and think, and love, and hate, yet enquire how this is done, how
the Soul, that is a Spirit, does operate upon the Body, to move and stir it,
and how one thought does beget another, and who can give an account of all
this? Why then should we pretend to know how far the Spirit of God can operate
upon our Souls to incline us to good, and not destroy that determining
Principle which is in all Men? and therefore it will more become us to believe
that which the Scripture is so positive in, though we cannot give an account how
it is.

And, as I hinted before, there is not only need of God's Grace to determine
the Will to its duty, but to keep it there: For we are apt to go off from our
own Resolutions and Purposes, and to lose the present Impression of God's
Grace; the willing mind will of it self become unwilling; and therefore God
having tried us in Adam, does not trust us in the Second Covenant to our
selves; and we have need to consider this, that we may not depend upon the
first determination of our own Wills; we are mutable, fickle, and unconstant
Creatures; our hearts are deceitful, not only in this, that they are not really
willing when they seem so, but are soon changed from willing to be unwilling;
and the true Reason why Men do not live more suitable to their own Resolutions,
is not because they were never willing but because men do change their minds
from willing to unwilling, for which reason it is that God desclaimes his being
like Man, that he should lie or Repent; Men will promise what they never Intend
to perform: this is lying with a witness; but besides that, they that scorn to
do this do Repent, that is change their minds, God is not such an one, we will
serve the Lord, said the People, but you cannot serve the Lord said Joshua, not
that absolutely they could not, but because he saw in them a kind of rashness to
promise and resolve, but they did not enough consider that to do what they
promised there was more need of Gods Grace than as yet they were sensible of,
and without this they could not serve the Lord and it is generally the mistake
of good men to think that they shall be able to do what they are willing to do,
Peter found it so, David, whose heart was made willing, prays that it might be
kept so. 1 Chronicles. 29.^8. Who am I, and what is this People? that we should be
able to offer so willingly, keep this Lord for ever in the Imaginations of the
thoughts of the hearts of this people, and establish their hearts to thee; that
is, thou have made us willing, Lord keep us so, the first grace to determine
the will may be given, and that grace not given which is needful to
performance. He works to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Paul found it so, to
will is present with me, but how to perform I find not.

2. And yet he only is willing whose heart does stir him up, and whose Spirit
does make him willing, as it is said of the Children of Israel Exodus 35.21, 29.
and they came every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whose Spirit
made him willing, verse 29. the Children of Israel brought a willing offering
to the Lord, every Man and Woman whose heart made them willing; it is the want
of this that God complains of Isa. 64.7. none stirs up himself, and the
Apostle Paul would have Timothy stir up the gift in him, not only the
Ministerial, but the Sanctifying gift of Gods Grace, for though the Grace of
God be not made effectual by our own cooperation with it, neither is it
effectual without our own Concurrence, and therefore it is that we are directed
to our duty toward Gods Grace, and that not only when we have it, but that we
may obtain it; not only to keep our selves awake when God has awakned, but to
awake out of sleep that Christ may give us Life, Ephesians. 5.14. for it is the heart,
the will in man that is the Fountain of all the good or evil that is in man,
and under Gods Grace the first mover: out of the heart proceeds Murder,
Fornication and Adultery, and a good Man out of the good treasure of the heart
brings forth good things; as we are never subdued to Gods Grace till the will
be subdued, so the will is never subdued, till it stirs us up to our duty.
Prove. 2.10. when Wisdom enters into thy heart and knowledge is pleasant to
thy Soul, then the work succeeds, and never till then, for (as Mr. Fenner
says) sincerity lies in the Will. So that as he that would kindle the fire
must put the Fuel together, and then Blow to it; So God working upon us as
Rational Creatures, does expect that we do what we may; toward our turning to
Him; and this stirring up our Selves that our hearts may make us Willing, holds
as to the first Grace by which the Will is determined, and as to that
Subsequent grace, by which it is kept to its duty; and in both Respects is
Opposed,

1. To Outward Judgments, and Foreign motives, which many a man is Influenced
by, whose heart does not make him willing; and when it is so, the thing done,
though otherwise Good and Praiseworthy, has no acceptance with God: for it is
not done willingly, that is sincerely: Jehu in his access to the Throne of his
master Ahab, pretended Zeal to the Lord God of Israel, and in that pretended
zeal pulled down the Altar and Images of Baal, and destroyed his Masters house,
and yet says God (though Jehu did what he was commanded) I will avenge the
blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. The blood of that Woman as Bad as she
was, was too good to be spilt upon so low an end as Jehu purposed to himself;
for it seems it was not Gods Glory, but his own security or Revenge, or both:
the like may be said as to custom or example, the latter of which, though we
may Lawfully make a good use of, yet when it is that only or Chiefly that
prompts us to our Duty, It will never please God, and generally He is made
Willing by foreign motives, the Praise or fear or the example of men that he
may not seem singular, any thing else that is short of Gods Glory, take away
that, and He goes no farther, as when you take away the weight that made the
Clock go, it stops.

2. And It must be in opposition to the workings of Conscience enlightened, but
not Renewed: for we may have a sense of our Duty when we have no Inclination to
its performance. I don't say but it is better to do what is good and to forbear
what is Evil, though it be only the sense of our Duty, without a Willing mind,
prompting us to it, and yet it is evident enough that this is a sort of
Religion, which none should rest in: conscience when Enlightened but not
Sanctified, may put Men upon doing something in Religion, which is far enough
from what the Apostle calls Obeying from the heart; take a wicked Man at some
Particular times, when he is under the Influences of Fear upon a Sick bed, and
how free does he seem to be from that rancor and prejudice that before appeared
in him? Now he is for an Holy Life, Resolved on a sudden, now he is for Prayers
and perhaps those Prayers which before he scoffed at! What a change does this
seem to be? but yet this Work is but the Operation of an enlightened awakned
conscience, melted, humbled under the sense of Gods Wrath; but yet as the metal
when in the Fire was soft, when out of the Fire grows as hard or harder than
before so do they that are only under the operation of fear, In their
affliction they will seek me early, than they will cry, arise and save us. Jer.
2.26. it is Fear chiefly that works upon Conscience when enlightened only, but
not Renewed and Sanctified.

And therefore it is that when what they feared seems upon their Recovery to be
at a distance from them, they fear it as little as before; for fear is not
lasting; he whose Conscience only does stir him up to his Duty, will seek an
advantage one time or other to be at liberty from his fears: for he is as a man
in Prison that cannot go and do as he would, but an heart made Willing by the
Grace of God, and making us Willing is enlarged to its Duty; were there more of
this disposition of mind in us, there would be less need of the Restraints or
Constraints of Conscience, it is to be observed in the Children of Israel at the
first setting up of the Tabernacle, their own hearts stirring them up, they did
so forward the work that Moses made a Proclamation throughout the Camp, let no
Man make any more work for the Tabernacle, and so the People were restrained.
Exodus 36.6, 7. For want of this there is no need in any Public work to
restrain men from over doing; It were well if by any means men would be
constrained to their Duty.

2. This willing mind consists in a cheerful performance of our Duty; he that
can live under a sense of his Duty, and can attain to a Resolvedness to stick
to its Performance, and in the performance can find in himself a chearfullness
of mind, has attained a good measure of that diposition of Spirit, which the
Apostle makes so necessary to our acceptance and Reward: for where the Will is
subdued, it does carry with it the subordinate affections and so where the Will
is, Love is, and where Love is, delight will be The great Promise of God is to
write his Laws upon our hearts, now this writing the Law in the heart
signifies an act of Grace upon the Will toward Gods Law, rather than upon the
understanding to know it: for the misery of man lies not so much in an
Ignorance of Gods Will, as in an enmity to it; now when God takes away this
enmity, and puts a new byas into our Souls Love and delight will not only
constrain us to Obedience, but will make it more or less Easy and Delightful:
Most things are to us as we stand affected to them, and therefore that is a
delight to one, that to another is a burden; but now God in order to Reduce us
to our Duty, does give us disposition suitable to it, and therefore when this
Will of God meets with a disposition suitable to it, it is this makes obedience
Easy, and us cheerful in it, thy Law is in my heart, I delight to do thy Will
O God. Psalm. 40.8. So that he that cannot delight himself in the Almighty, nor
in his Duty, is never like to persist in it, Psalm. 37.4. I do not extend this
so far as to exclude all those from the Grace of God, that have not the
Swavitys of Religion, those sensitive Joys and Affections which are rather the
Evidences of the full assurance of understanding, than of Grace in its lower
degrees, but I speak it in this sense, that what we do in obedience to Gods
Will must not be a burden to us: for what is a burden though for a time we may
bear it, one time or other we shall lay it down, at least we must be so far
Reconciled to our Duty, that we had rather do it, than Neglect: for what we Do
grudgingly, and had rather do otherwise though for some reasons we do it, it is
in the sight of God as if we did it not.

2. The necessity of this disposition will appear if you consider two things.

1. No good in an Ordinary way will be done without it, to do is more than to
Will in some respect. Romans 7.18. The Apostle found it so, the Apostle does not
absolutely deny a Power Imparted to him for the doing Good; for I believe he
speaks of himself, as renewed by the Grace of God, but he compares doing and
Willing, and tells us he found it easier to Will than to perform; now if where
the Willing mind is, a Power to do may be wanting, It will be much more so,
where the Willing Mind is not, I know where the Willing Mind, which is first in
order of nature, is vouchsafed the Tower to Perform shall be given in some
measure, yet It must needs be that where that which is first in order of Nature
and not obtained, that which depends upon it cannot be expected, for as in
going up the Ladder you must begin at the lowest range, so in order to
acceptable Obedience, we must begin at the Willing Mind; the reason why the
Stony ground brought not forth any thing to perfection, was this it had no
depth of Earth to cherish the Seed, so is all Obedience without an heart made
Willing; either it will not be at all, or it Will wither, as the Grass upon the
house top, wherewith the Mower fills not his hands

2. This Willing Mind does so forward men to that which tends to Gods Glory,
and the Good of others, that this may convince us of its necessity; thus then
the person pleads not excuses, lays aside his delays, is exalted above
Discouragments, and ordinarily we may expect assisting Grace to perform, when
by the grace of God we are Inclined to our Duty.

1. We are apt to excuse our selves out of our Duty, and the general excuse of
wicked Men is, they Cannot; but the True Reason is our want of a Will: if men
were really willing (as Mr. Fenner observes) they would do what they can, but
when men can do something, at least frame their doings that they may turn to
the Lord, consider, that they may Repent, hear, that they may consider and
attend the word of God, and the places of his Worship, where they may hear
their Duty and know their danger, it is evident that men can do this; what
should hinder them? Now when men can do this and yet will not, and then pretend
excuses, how Justly may God Condemn such persons? an heart made Willing lays
aside excuses, there is no Lion in that Man's way; pleading excuses argues, that
there is at the present a contest within as to our Duty, whither we shall or
no, and so far as we Cleave to our excuses, so far we take part with Sin,
against Conscience and Conviction, for the design of Conviction is to put us
forward, but the design of excuses is to draw us out of the hands of Mercy. An
heart made willing, as far as it is really willing, lays aside its excuses.
Peter had an Excuse, in appearance a good one, we have toiled all Night, and
taken nothing, nevertheless at thy word I will cast in the Net.

2. This Willing Mind will not be put off with delays, it is said, that he that
believes will not make haste, but it is meant of the thing Promised and
Expected, in relation to which he that Believes will wait, and not precipitate
the Counsel of God, nor the accomplishment of the Promise either before its
time, or in an unlawful manner; but in Relation to our Duty, the sooner,
generaly the better; for we may set about it too late, but seldom or never too
soon. So that he that is really Willing to turn to God, does determine to do it
presently, deferring to hereafter is the fruit of an unwilling Mind. Pro. 3.27,
28. Withhold not good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the Power of
thy hands to do it, Say not to thy Neighbor go and come again, and to Morrow I
will give, when thou have it by thee. The Wise Man considered that delaying is
not safe, for we may either loose the Opportunity of doing, or, which is worse,
the Will to perform, the present Impression as well as the present opportunity
may be gone by delaying without a good cause, we make no Conscience of the
Command that relates to the Time, and to Morrow we may make no Conscience of
that part of the Command that relates to the thing it self. The Apostle whom
God at an Instant Inclined to his Duty, did immediately set about it, Gal.
^.15, 16, 17 But when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers Womb,
and called me by his grace to reveal his Son in me, that I might Preach him
among the eathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and Blood. And
therefore it must needs be a general mistake in the World for men to pretend
that they are not only Convinced that it is their Duty to lead a new Life, but
Willing, and yet this must not be till hereafter.

And yet think it shall be well enough, especially if it should happen that
they live to that hereafter; it is true in some cases and as to some particular
dutys, It may consist with a willing mind to defer them, when the present time
is not convenient, or when the time to come may prove more advantageous; but as
to the amendment of a Man's life, to pretend to be willing, but not for the
present, as in it self it is not a real willingness, so in some respect it is a
resolution to the contrary of what we pretend to, and therefore how can such a
purpose be pleasing to God? consider that besides the danger that you run, and
the presumption that you manifest, that the grace and Mercy of God, nay, God
himself shall be at your beck, when you shall be at leisure to return to him
you do at present resolve that as yet you will not as if you had not enough
provoked the Almighty as if the time past of your Life did not suffice you to
have wrought wickedness, but you will continue to do so longer; you do in
effect declare that you ought to live otherwise, than you have done, that you
must do otherwise, and be other manner of persons, and yet though you have
wronged God already, and wearied the Almighty, and though if you die in your
Sins without repentance you expect damnation; and though you have no assurance
that God will give you longer time, as to be sure you have not yet, you will
venture upon it, you will run the hazard of being damned, under a pretense that
you will do your Duty hereafter, when you have spent your time in Sin, and can
do God no Service; when you can Sin no longer, you will cease to do Evil, and
when you can do nothing, then you will learn to do well; when the day is at an
end, you will go forth to your Labor, and when the Sun is setting then you
will set forth for your Journey; can this delaying consist with a willing mind;

3. As for discouragements, this disposition of mind will help us to overcome
them. In the best of times well doing will meet with if not direct opposition
at least discouragements, for whilst the World continues, the Seed of the
Serpent which sprung up in Cain will be, The World will be ungrateful,
malicious and opposite to what is good; even Morality has had its Persecutors,
much more shall all they that will live Godly in Christ Jesus; the greatest
Innocence, the strictest life, the most public Spirit, the utmost caution
shall never be able at all times and in all places, to protect the Servants of
God from the tongues or hands and hatred, of the wicked, who rather than they
will lose the opportunity of doing mischief, will turn Christians, that under
the pretense of the Christian name they may wreak their Malice upon them, that
differ not from them, but in those things wherein they themselves differ from
what they pretend to; these men will show a Reverence to the deceased Apostles
and Disciples of our Savior, that they may mischief the living ones, Nay
sometimes persecute them for that very thing, for which the Apostles and
Disciples of our Lord are reverenced among Christians; Just so the Jews did
build and adorn the Sepulchers of the Prophets whom their fathers slew, and did
to the Disciples what their fathers did to the Prophets; Now this disposition
of mind will help us against these discouragements, for it is our unresolvedness
that makes the discouragements that lie in our way, more and greater than they
are.

4. Where this is, we may expect Gods assisting Grace to help us to do what by
his Grace we are Inclined to, for though willing and doing are not equally
easy, yet if we humbly go to God under the sense of our Duty, and do not lean
too much to our own Resolutions, God will not be wanting to us, his Grace shall
be sufficient for us, Philip. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing that he
that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ; it is true, God keeps this grace in his own hands, but yet the giving of
the first grace does give us cause to depend upon him for this also, which we
shall be sure to obtain, if we do not forfeit it by our neglects. I say again,
where this willing Mind is in truth, It will cause that we shall not be Barren
nor Unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the Kingdom of God
does not consist in Word but in Power, nor in wishing and willing, but in doing
and performing.

3. Having shown in the general the necessity of this disposition of Mind, I
would more particularly consider it as it is necessary to Ministers, to whom
whilst I am speaking I would not be thought to pretend to speak what they cannot
tell me, as well as I do them, but only to put them in Remembrance of what they
all know.

1. Therefore we all know and therefore should consider that the bare Art of
Preuching, as a task expected at our hands every Lord's Day, can never please
God, but the Mind with which this and every other part of our Duty is
performed. God is a great God, and a good Master, and therefore a little forced
service without our Wills, or against our Will, done because we dare not for
shame do otherwise, can this be Accepted and Rewarded? it is said in the general
there must be a Willing Mind, and then God accepts men according to what they
have and can do, and not according to what we have not, and therefore cannot
do, 2 Cor. 8.12. This must be first in all men, and first in us Ministers above
other men; Our work is so great in turning Men from Darkness to Light, and from
the power of Satan to God, that no Man is sufficient for it, and yet
notwithstanding our insufficiency for the work, and our lame defective
Performance of our Duty, God's declared readiness to accept our endeavors and
to Pardon our defects, should at least convince us of the necessity of this
disposition, that by it we may cheerfully perform our Duty, whilst we have
Liberty and Opportunity; for if we get this, It will quicken us to our Duty, It
will assist us in it, It will make us Patient in waiting for the success, which
if it do not answer our endeavors and desires, yet the want of success shall
never deprive us of the acceptance of God, who in rewarding Ministers does
chiefly look to this disposition; by this means we shall be pressed in Spirit
to our Duty and by doing our Duty, we shall Increase this disposition of mind;
then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord. Alas! to see the world
about us lying in wickedness, and yet hating to be Reformed, and hating those
that would tell them they have need to Reform. And to see the world sitting in
Darkness, and yet avoiding the Light, should not this convince us that we have
need to get a disposition of Mind, that may stir us up to do something to amend
all this? how little will be done by us without this disposition, seeing so
little is done with it?

2. Besides, The nature of our Employment and business, which is to Preach Good
Will toward Men, the love of God in giving his Son to dye for us, the love of
Christ in giving his life for us, does require a frame of mind suitable to the
errand that we bring. If we were to open the Prophets Roll in which was nothing
but Lamentation and Woe, we were the more excusable, if we did hang back and
say, send by the hands of him whom thou will send; If we had received that
message from God to you, that God delivered to the Child Samuel, a message that
might make the Peoples ears to tingle, and their hearts to tremble, we might
perhaps lie down again in our sloth as afraid to deliver it; but this is the
message that we bring, that God against whom man has Sinned, from whom we have
all departed in Adam, has given man, Fallen, Sinful Man, Eternal life, and
this life is in his Son; surely such an Employment, to be Messengers of such
tidings, whatever reception it may meet with from wicked, and unreasonable Men,
does require in us Ministers a disposition of mind suitable to it.

3. The Ministerial work is attended with a peculiar Reward; there is a Reward
peculiar to a Disciple, and a Reward peculiar to Ministers; if I should tell
you how sure and certain the Reward is, you might say so it is to all other men,
for all Offices of love and Charity, even the Least, so that he that gives a
Cup of cold water to a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple, shall Receive a
Disciples reward; but yet though Ministers have no more certainty of a reward
than other Men have, yet they have the certainty of a greater reward, and
therefore It is set out by the shining of the Sun in the Firmament.

Now surely such a reward does require a cheerful willing Resolute performance
of our Duty, and the rather because it is not conditioned upon our success in
Converting, but our diligence in the performing our Duty; for supposing that
any Minister should not Convert one Soul (I believe few that are faithful are
so unhappy in their labors) yet if it should prove so, there is that which may
relieve that Minister, We are (says the Apostle) in them that perish a sweet
savor to God. God that knows all Men's hearts does see 'twas what such
Ministers did desire and endeavor, and God accepts them not according to the
success, but their desires and endeavors, to which this disposition is so
highly useful.

4. The Practical Inferences are.

1. This shows the Reason of our backwardness to our Duty, who is there that
has not his excuses for his neglects? but the plain truth is all our excuses
and delays do proceed from our unwillingness; the Jews upon their recovery out
of the Captivity, could not deny but 'twas fit that the Temple should be built,
but 'twas no fit time to set about it, It went hard with them, they were newly
come out of the Captivity, they were poor, they had many Enemies, and yet
though they could not finish the Temple, they had their Ceiled Houses: now an
heart made willing can overlook and despise greater discouragements than we
can pretend unto.

2. It Is not only our Duty to do Well, but to look to the Principle from which
every act of Obedience flows. The Apostle speaks of some Men, that to every
good Work they are Reprobates, having neither a Will to, nor a skill in the
performance of them, Titus, 1.16. and because we are so averse to all that is
good, we must be New made, Created in Christ Jesus to good works, and by this
you may see where our chief care should be, even to that which God chiefly
requires, and first begins at: thou art troubled at thy performances, I don't
utterly dislike that trouble, but thou had need to look at something beyond
that; thy Nature, that, that be changed, thy Will, that, that be subdued, that
thereby thou be made meet for thy Masters use and Service, and prepared to
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. to have the fuel is not enough till you have
fire to kindle it; without the renewing, disposing Grace of God, we may be
considerate in our words and actions, and do many things outwardly good and
useful, and yet all this while be destitute of that which is so seldom
mentioned in some Men's Writings, and so often in the Gospel, viz. Grace without
which men may have a Resemblance of the Life Spiritual, as the Plant has of
the life Sensitive; many a man may have the likeness of the life of God in him,
and yet remain in the corrupt state of Nature. So that we should not only take
care to do well, but labor for a Mind framed to our Duty.

3. Have a care of being stirred up to your Duty by such Inducements as are
short of this willing Mind, See we to this, that we be stirred up from
something within us, and that it be not any thing less than an heart prompting
us to our Duty; that only is well done that is done to the Glory of God; and
not upon a design, let the design be what it will, if it be not to please God,
and to be accepted of him, It will leave us short of the future reward; for
though it has the appearance of an act of Religion, God Esteems it not so:
have ye fasted unto me? to fast for stuff, to pray to be seen of Men, to give
Alms to be applauded, may go a great way in the sight of Men, who ought to the
praise action without Enquiring into the heart, but it has no other reward
than what is here; but he that is prompted to his Duty from his own heart, has
a Testimony in himself, in which he may rejoice. 2 Cor. 1.12.

4. And Lastly, let us all get this Willing Mind, this disposing principle,
that what we do may be accepted and Rewarded: under this head I shall speak in
the general to all, and Particularly to my brethren in the Ministry.

1. All of us have need to Pray and to be Instant with God for this disposition
of Mind: For

First by this means our Duty will be the more easy; it is true Christ has a
Yoke, and a Burden, but there is nothing that tends more to make it easy to us,
Motives.
than the disposedness of our Wills and Hearts unto it.

2. The Will being the chief executive faculty, where that is there the delight
of the Soul follows, and what a desirable disposition will this be when our
Duty becomes our Delight, that as nature has provided a delight in doing those
things that tend to its preservation, such as is the Saline humor in the
Palate, adjoining it self with our Meat and Drink, so when Grace does furnish us
with a disposition Co natural to our Duty, that it shall be our Meat and Drink
to do Gods Will; How desirable is such a temper? get me this, and we shall
find by experience that the ways of Wisdom are ways of Pleasantness.

3. Hereby our Obedience will be more steady and even, and we more constant and
steadfast in it, Ephraim is said to be as a Bullock that was not accustomed to
the Yoke, not used to work: now such a Bullock is sore with his labor, and
unskilful in it, It makes bawks; it is in and out; the main and principal
reason of our uneven walking, is either the want of a will fixed and determined
to its Duty, or not carried forth with delight in its performance.

2. Directions.

1. First, Beg this disposition by Prayer, every good and perfect gift comes
from above, this especially: if we can do it our selves, Incline and fix our
Wills to our Duty, our sin is the greater if we do not; but if we cannot do it
of our selves (as to be sure we cannot) our sin is the greater, that we are not
more earnest and Incessant with God to help us. Prayers for the first
converting Grace, are not altogether unacceptable to God; let us have Grace
(says the Apostle) that is, let us seek it that we may have it, let us Pray
that we may obtain it; and indeed if the natural man could be supposed
seriously and heartily to desire this Grace, we could not (without wronging of
God) suppose that he would deny him; they that have not higher and stronger
arguments, may plead from such as they have, their relation to God as the work
of his hands, their rational and natural Powers, thy hands have made me (says
the Psamist) give me understandng; beg also the continuing and Increase of this
first disposing Grace, that he that has made the Willing would keep so, and
make the more Willing.

2. Keep your hearts under a sense of your Duty; for though the sense of Duty may
be urged upon us by an enlightened conscience, which will leave us short of a
willing Mind, yet it is good to feel something in our selves pleading Gods
right, urging upon us the necessity of our obedience; the Apostle did so, if
against my Will a dispensation is committed to me: I must do my Duty, Willing
or Unwilling it ought to be done; though I lose the reward, God will not lose
his Right.

3. Do what you can to make your selves Willing, and do what you can to keep
your Selves so, even in conversion we must not expect that because God can,
that therefore he should do all, though all that Man; does in his conversion,
does not make, nor is the reason why Grace is effectual in this rather than in
that Man, this does not supersede Man's Duty toward God's Grace; no, but every
one should do his own part, we can attend the means and we can consider and
Remember, and though all that do this do not turn to God, yet it is the way to
it, the Psalmist thought and turned and it is said all the ends of the Earth
shall Remember and turn to the Lord Psalm. 22.27. and God blames them that they
would not frame their doings to turn to the Lord. they would do nothing to
promote it Hos. 5.4.

4. Consider what Encouragements you have from a good God, and from a Gracious
Covenant, wherein sincere endeavors are accepted and involuntary weaknesses
are pardoned to them that do their best, though it be infinitely short of what
is due, Mal. 3.17. I will spare them as a Man that spares his only Son that
serves him.

2. And lastly, as to my brethren the Ministers, all that I have now to say is
to my self and you those that would know the reason of our coming together at
this time, It is this that I have been all this while speaking to, viz. To Stir
up one another to the Dutys of our calling, and to promote the necessary work
of our Ministry. I do not pretend to dictate to Ministers what is their Duty,
but yet I consider that that Minister that needs not to be directed what to do,
may yet be content to be encouraged, may need it, and will de thankful for it.
Even St. Paul himself when the brethren from Rome came to meet him at Appij
forum and the three Taverns, he thanked God, and took courage. If I could so
far serve my Brethren it is what I aim at.

And truly (whatever our Circumstances are) we may do well to consider the
Apostles for our Encouragement, that we may have this Willing Mind; now the
Apostle through the perverseness of some Men esteemed it his Duty not only to
Preach to the Corinthians, but to do it for nothing. And yet It was not because
the Apostle was richer than other men, no, for being an Apostle, and having
such a charge upon him, he would not have labored with his own hands for a
livelihood, if there had not been a necessity lying upon him to do both, to
Work and yet to Preach; now thanks be to God our Circumstances are not the
same, and for that reason it is rarely the Duty of a Minister to do as the
Apostle did, who yet shows the greatest satisfaction in his condition, and a
full Resolution to stick to his Duty, a necessity is laid upon me, and yet he
would not be without a Willing Mind under that necessity. And therefore let our
Circumstances be what they will, if we can get this disposition of Mind, and
keep it, we shall have cause to bless God that has not only put us into the
Ministry, but into our present Circumstances, and we have reason to be so
disposed to our duty and circumstances, not only from the presence of Christ
with us, as being workers together with him, but also from that great change
that Almighty God has made in our Circumstances, which although they are not
such as perhaps some could desire, yet they are not such as formerly they were,
when the Civil Magistrate pinched so hard upon us, as being Instigated
doubtless) by such Men as should rather have Rejoiced that Christ was Preached,
than have stirred up adversaries against Us. But now it is otherwise, and let us
bless God for it, and it being otherwise, let us endeavor to forget what is
past, and together with them do our part to Raise up the Tabernacle of God, and
to bring back the People from that Debauchery and Profaneness, which has
Spread it self among them, and to Establish them against Atheism and Popery. If
any of our Brethren have done any thing toward the casting us out as unfit
builders; if they have done more than became them as Ministers or Christians,
in adding to our affliction, let us endeavor to forget it, and Watch over our
own Spirits, that the Remembrance of what is past do not Imbitter our own
Spirits toward them, as theirs seemed to be toward us, good Men in their
heats do not enough consider what manner of Spirit they are of. Though they
(some of them) esteemed us the Pests of the Nation, unfit not only to Preach,
but to live, let us consider it was but some of them; for as to many of them,
we ought to Rejoice that the same Christ, the same Gospel is Preached to the
People that attend their Ministry, as is Preached by us to the People that
attend Ours, and whilst the Contention is whose way is best, who do Preach most
suitably to the design of the Gospel, let us Remember that that Minister does
most answer the design of the Gospel, who does most Preach Love and Charity;
and truly that Ministers Charity is not very large, that limits the Catholic
Church to his own party, to Men of his own Mind and way, nor on the other side
do I esteem that Ministers Charity, to be very large, that can see Idolatry in
every thing that is not expressly commanded in the Worship of God, as if every
fault that we commit in worshipping God were of one sort and kind, and that the
most Detestable, and Abominable, for so is Idolatry.

Consider we what a Mercy it is to have Liberty to do our Duty in Peace and
quietness, all of us can 't travel to find places to Preach in, all are not
Fitted to endure noise and clamor, but all of us if we can get this Willing
Mind, that was in the Apostle, may find time and place to do some good to the
People. Discontent at our own condition generally springs from the
reflections that we make upon the condition of those that are above us; now if
such thoughts should arise, they that can Conform have the advantage over us,
and perhaps many of them do less, if their way be by Establishment and ours
only by Allowance; let us consider, we have more than the Apostles and
Disciples of our Savior lived to see, for they were never free from
Persecution, any longer than their Persecutors were wearied with their own
Persecutions, or diverted by other intervening occasions, or Restrained by Gods
Providence some other way; nay, we have as much Liberty as we are Capable of at
Present.

And if they that Conform live in greater plenty, let us watch against Repining
thoughts at that, and see to it, that whilst they (some of them) Melt away in
the midst of their Plenty, we don't Pine away under our Discouragements.

As to what is past it is to be considered that the hard usage which some
Ministers met with, was not so much (if at all) from them that are now esteemed
the leading Men of the Church of England; Whether they did in this their Duty
that they did no more, I cannot say; but they did declare their dislike of
those Severities, and were allways Men of Moderation, and do now declare their
readiness to abate somethings that the Law requires of us to the more Public
exercise of our Ministry in the Parish Churches; but these Severities were set
on Foot by Men that called themselves the Church of England, and yet designed
an accommodation with the Church of Rome; and therefore it is no marvel if on
that score they had so little respect to dissenting Ministers, or taking them
to be a Party, that might be crash'd by Severity, rather than made Pliable to
such a design: Dr. Heylin that does not only confess but Justify such a design,
gives a full account of this matter. But now to allay all heats, we may do well
to consider that we have to do with such Men that had rather abate of what is
Established, than add to it, that have owned the Reformation to be Imperfect,
that would not have us go backward toward Rome to please the Papists, but
Forward; now who knows what such a temper may produce? In the mean time let
us with all chearfullness attend our calling, and perform our Duty, and this
will carry us against our Discouragements: discouragements there will be not
only from them that are against us, but from them that are with us and for us.

But this disposition of mind will help us to weather them out and persist in
our Duty, and to do what we may, and whilst we may, I say whilst we may; for I
am persuaded that that Door of Liberty to do our Duty in quietness and Peace,
which Divine Providence has now of late opened shall not be shut again but by
our own negligence or the Peoples unprofitableness.

There are two things that Ministers above other Men should fear, viz. the loss
of the opportunity for doing their Duty, and the loss of that disposition of
Mind, that is necessary to its acceptable performance; as for the former, the
opportunity of doing our Duty, and the quiet exercise of our Ministry, it is
God that gave it, nay wrench'd it out of the hands of those men that never
Intended it, and without his leave none shall shut this Door; as to the latter
a disposition of Mind toward the performance of our Duty, the preservation of
this is more especially our concern, and to see that we do not neglect Gods
gift in us. God has been pleased of late years espcially to enlarge our
opportunities, and we shall have no need to fear the loss of those whilst we
diligently attend our Duty; and God to prevent our fears, that they may not
distract us in our Duty, has as it were secured our Liberty not only by a Law,
but by twisting it with the Interest of the Nation; So that those very Men or
Men of the Same Mind, that before argued for Severity, and for a restraint,
from the Interest of the Nation, do begin to argue for Liberty, for Moderation
from the same Topic; I do not say that the argument was well applied, or that
it was ever, or ever will be the real Interest of the Nation, or of any other
Nation to be Severe toward all that differ from the Established way: God in
giving Nations Christian Princes; does not give those Princes for this Reason,
because they are Christians, a Power to do Evil; no; by being Christians they
have an advantage to do the more Good, but they have never the more Power to
persecute or do Evil; but if wise Men do sometimes argue for Severity and
Restraint, and in a little time after against Severity from the Interest of the
Nation, then it follows that either the Interest of Nations may Vary, and so
Indeed it may, or else Wise Men do change their Minds and are not allways wise;
and therefore neither by the one or the other have we any great security, and
it being so there is nothing that we can with more safety trust to under God,
than the diligent performance of our Duty, that will secure our Liberty if any
thing shall do it; for if we Willingly diligently and painfully Preach as we
are able, and as we have an Opportunity and a call, and yet should happen to be
restrained as before, than it will appear that God took it from us; but it is to
be hoped that God will not, for ordinarily he does not punish as a Sovereign,
but as a Just Judge provoked by our Sins. The way therefore to preserve our
Liberty is to do our Duty.

Besides the losing the opportunity, we should fear to lose the Disposition of
Mind to perform our Duty; this by Neligence will be lost or abated, as tools
not used will Rust, and Instruments of Music laid aside will grow out of Tune,
but if we persist in our Duty, that will dispose us to it, and by this means
our work will be the more easy and delightful to us; and this is the way to
profit the People and to be Successful in our labors, for the more we stand
affected to our Duty, the more we shall be in earnest with the People, without
which the Ministry seldom succeeds; and then when we can discern that some Good
is done, that will again put Life into us; a Willing Mind in the Minister is
most likely to beget a Willing Mind in the People, and by this means the one
will mutually assist the other: However, if success do not attend (as alas! it
does not in some places) yet there is that which may relieve us in that case;
our reward is with the Lord, to whom, whatever the Issue be, we shall be a
sweet savor, this is our last relief, the eying the Reward, the Ministerial
Reward; which if we believe and consider, will help us to be Steadfast and
unmovable, and to abound in the Work of the Lord, whilst we know that (though
as to men it may be much Fruitless, yet) it shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.
ERATA.
PAge 1. line ult. for Expose read Express. p. 4, l. 30. for For, r. From. p.
8. l. 9. after stick add but. p. 12. l. 16. after He, add that. l. 18. after
singular add or. p. 13, l. 7. for When r. which. p. 14. l. 25, for Swavitys, r.
Suavitys. l. 32. after Neglect, add is. p. 15. l. 17. for And. r. is.


