ENGLANDS BONDAGE AND Hope of Deliverance. A SERMON Preached before the
Honorable House of PARLIAMENT, at St. Margarets in Westminster.

BY Mr. HENRY BURTON, late Rector of St. Mathewes Friday-street, in LONDON,
June 20. 1641.

Psalm 53.7, 8. Oh that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion.

When God brings back the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad.

LONDON: Printed Anno Domini 1641.

Mr. BURTONS SERMON Preached before the Parliament, June 20. 1641.
OH how my Soul is ravished, as not to begin the opening of my mouth without
blessing of God, who has not only binn pleased as this very month 4 years
ago, to call me to preach in another kind of Pulpit, not far from this place;
but has also called me now to speak unto you at this time, in this place, even
as it follows, and is written in Psalm. 53.7, 8. which I beseech you give
attention unto, the words of the Text are these.

Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion, Oh that the Lord would
deliver his people out of Captivity, Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall
be glad.

The last Verse of this Psalm is a Prayer for a Prophecy, and in the maine it
is already fulfilled, for it points at Christ, the great Savior, and by him
salvation is already come, and that salvation whereof Jacob reioyces, and
Israel is glad, how seasonable therefore will it be for us at this time to
speak of this Prophecy, being for the main I say, already fulfilled; but
though for the maine* yet not for the whole. The work of Salvation is
accomplished by Christ, in respect of his death, the merits and efficacy of it,
but there remains still a great part of it; as unfulfilled to the Church of
God, in the several ages of it, by way of application of the Prophecy; Gods
people have bin subject to Captivity, to bondage in this world, as you shall
see hereafter, and therefore it is not in ^ai^e that now I should speak of
these words, Oh that the salvation were come unto Israel, etc.

Here in this Psalm are observed generally these two parts.

The first is that which is contained in the former verses, wherein is set
forth unto us the nature, of the Enemies of the Church of God: for in the very
front of it, stands the great whor that hardens hearts. They do not know God,
and then it is in the Verses following, that they were full of foul and wicked
conditions and qualities, as you may read all along the Psalm; they were
corrupt, abominable* no good at all in them; God hunts them out and finds them
so* they were backsliding, they were altogether filthy, they have no knowledge
of God, they eat up Gods people as bread, they call not upon God, they incampe
against him; but he dismounts them, and confounds them.

And then secondly follows the sequel of this, what it behooves the people of
God to do in this case: encompassed about, and encamped against by so many
enemies, even as David here, Oh that the Salvation were come out of Sion: so
that I may compare this Psalm to Rebecca'es womb, that had two Nations in it,
here be the Nations of the wicked Esau, and of righteous Jacob, when the Lord
shall bring back the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall rejoice, etc.

In which words observe these two Branches.

First the condition of Gods people under affliction, under persecution, under
captivity, and bondage; O that the salvation, that is, O that deliverance, of
the children of Israel from Captivity, were come out of Sion.

The second is, the condition of Gods people, delivered out of Captivity, and
saved by the Lord, and that is, they rejoice and are glad.

For the manner of the speech here in the former part, that I shall insist upon
at this time, if the time will give me leave to follow it, which I will
contract as much as may be.

Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. The Hebrew phrase is,
who shall give salvation out of Sion; it is a usual phrase in scripture, who
shall give, that is, Vtinam, I would to God, oh that God would give salvation
out of Sion, I shall not need here to open the words much: Salvation, it is
deliverance, Deliverance here from Captivity, and Bondage: Sion it was the
place of GODS habitation: Of old the Arc was a tipe of Gods presence, a type
of Christ, and it was a type of Heaven, our eyes are lifted up toward Heaven,
from whence comes our help: Israel the people of God, the people of God that
prevailed with him, that prevailed with God, as the Scripture tells us.

To come briefly to the point of observation from these words; they do import
unto us an ardent affection, which broke forth from that holy man David, in
wishing the good of the people of God, Oh that the Salvation of Israel were
come out of Sion.

It is a very patheticall expression, I say of a heart full of fervency, and
zeal, and ardent love of the people of God, and from hence this point will
arise for our instruction.

That it behooves all the People of God to be thus affected, as David was, to
have their heart possessed with an ardent affection, and compassion toward the
Church of God, and especially when it lies under Captivity and Bondage,
Affliction and Persecution in the world.

This was indeed admirable in David, to see (...) an affection in a King, and a
Prince, such a great man as he was; we see at his bringing back the Ark, he
was not disheartened by his wives mocking him, but answered again, if this be
too be vile I will yet be more vile; this he did in bringing the Arc unto
Mount Sion, see Psalm. 16, 2. My goods, or my goodness extends not unto thee
O Lord, but to thy Saints that are on earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight. All David's delight, it was in the Saints on Earth, upon the
Church of God, yea David was so ravished with the love of Gods people, that he
desired no other happiness then that, that he should enjoy in the people of
God, Psalm* 106.4. Remember me O Lord says he with the loving kindness of thy
people: he desired no other favor of God, but that which he dealt to his
people: and so visit me with thy Salvation: to what end would David have a part
in Salvation, that I may see thy peoples salvation, and that I may rejoice in
thy inheritance, here was the utmost and highest degree of David's desire, that
he might be pertaker of the happiness of Gods people, that he might rejoice
in their good. And so Moses was so taken with the love of Gods people, that he
forgot himself, and S. Paul, Romans 9.12. I could wish* says he, that I were
Anathema from Christ, for my Brethrens sake, and so the Prophet Esaias, 59.1. For
Sions sake I will not hold my tongue. and for Ierusalems sake I will not be
silent, until the Righteousness thereof break forth like a morning Lamp:
And beloved, this is indeed the natural affection of the people of God; it is
natural and proper unto every child of God, thus to be affected, and ravished
with the Church of God: as above all things in the world to wish the good and
welfare of it, when it lies under the waves and billows of Affliction, as the
Apostle says, we must weep with them that weep, rejoice with them that
rejoice, to be of like affection: and surely beloved we have many motives and
reasons to induce us, and incite us to the love of the Church of God, we have
besides, the example of the Saints.

First the example of God himself, the Father, who from everlasting has so
loved the Church, that he did from everlasting, choose it for his own,
Predestined them to salvation, gave Christ for them, gave him up to death for
them, as the Scripture says, He so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son; that all that believed on him should not perish, but have Life
everlasting, he would not have any of his perish, but all saved, though it
cost him the death of his own son, such was his Bowels of Mercy and
compassion toward them.

Secondly of the Love of Jesus Christ, the son of God, though he was sent of
the Father, yet it was his own good will that he gave his life for the Church,
shed his blood for it, when he put our human nature upon him, that he might
learn to have compassion on our infirmities, and out of that compassion save
us, yea there was so much of that Philanthropos, love of man in Christ, that
he wept over the Jews, because of the hardness of their hearts, because they
would not give ear to his word, nor believe in him, he wept for the
destruction coming upon them.

Again in the third place, a third reason may be taken from the consideration
of the Church of God why we should love her, and be well affected to her, when
we behold the Church clothed with the righteousness of Christ, shining out in
those many battles of Heaven, and if we consider our relation to the Church
of God, in relation to Christ himself, being his members, his spouse, his
sister, and every way so beautiful, even so as Christ himself is ravished
with her love, as ye may read Cant. 4. And so in her Innocence, it is Christ
in her self, it is none of her own, but by Christ, the Church of God is made
so innocent, that she is without spot or wrinckle, so noble, so excellent, and
so glorious, and so highly in favor with God, and with Christ* now to see her
lie under bondage and captivity, that she that is freed by Christ, should be a
Captive or a slave, who can but be affected therewith. We do compassionate
those that are great men, especially the high borne, that are in bondage, we
pity the very Lamb that is among Wolves, the Dove among dogs, and the Lilly
that is crushed with Thorns, more then all these is the Church of God, a poor
Lamb, an innocent Dove, a spotless Lilly, when therefore she is in this case,
it should move us to compassion.

Again, another reason is taken from our selves, we all desire to be of this
Church of God, to be in the very midst of this Assembly of the Church, then
beloved we must be of the same mind and affection with the Church of God, of
the same spirit, to weep for it when occasion serves, and herin stands our
happiness, when we affect the Church of God. Psalm. 122 Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, that is the Church of God, they shall prosper that love her, see how
the spirit turns to those that love her, pray for the Peace of Jerusalem,
peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces: and surely
beloved, if the voice of every Christian should thus resolve with it self, I
desire to enjoy no liberty, no mercy of God my self, which I do not enjoy in
common with the Church of God* this is that makes every blessing to be indeed
a blessing, when we do enjoy it, not alone with our selves in particular, but
with the Church, and when such a Land has bin in Captivity, as here in my
Text, when they are restored to their land, and to their liberty, and see the
Land rejoice with them also, what a great Mercy is this of God, and what
abundant matter of Joy does it afford unto those that are thus well affected,
that's the fourth reason.

A fifth motive why we must love the Church of God may be taken from the
consideration of the captivity and bondage which here my Text has relation to.
The Psalmist does rejoice at the deliverance of the Church of God, because they
were in captivity.

Captivity; It takes away a man's heart and whatsoever is good in him, we see
what it has done in other Countries, in Turkey, and many other places, where
men lie under Captivity, what slaves are they, and in what miserable cases are
they; Again, if we consider Captivity in the kinds of it, either of the body
or of the soul, or of the conscience, It is a miserable thing, in any of these
to be in bondage, indeed we are all by nature borne slaves under the bondage of
Sin and Satan, but from this. Christ has delivered his people, there is also a
bondage of conscience even many times of those people that are the children of
Christ, and that is under the servitude of humane inventions, if it be a
bondage of the body, it may have a dependancie upon the bondage of the
conscience, when the godly do refuse to subscribe to men's devises in the
worship of God, then they are sent to Captivity of their bodies or else when
men do suffer their goods to be lost for it, either of these kinds of bondage
are the worst kinds in the world, how many thousands of christians, since
England has fallen out with God have bin devowred by these lions, as it is in
the Chronicles, when the Children of Israel set up their Idols, then Gods sent
lions amongst them, to devowr them* and destroy them; when England began to set
up humane devises to corrupt the worship, and service of God, God sent lions
amongst us, (but thanks be to God) at this time they are objects of our pity;
and compassion; and it has pleased God to move this honorable assembly to
take into their hearts the miserable condition of those that were thus
captivated, even so when we see Gods Church in Captivity, it should make us be
affected with it, it should make our Bowels earne over them, with a desire of
their freedom.

And then again in respect of the deliverance, it is glorious and honorable,
as in all times when God delivers his people, he does it with honor; so when
God delivered his children out of Egypt, it was with honor in the face of all
the World: and so Christ's delivering us from sin, and from Satan, how glorious
was it, even when he hung on the Cross, he did on that Cross by his death
triumph over the Devil, and over his Kingdom, by the pouring out of his
blood, he did work a glorious deliverance, and as a glorious deliverance to the
deliverer, so to the delivered* of slaves men were made the servants of God, of
bond men, adopted to be his children.

Well, in the next place, another reason may be taken from the great
punishment, which God inflicts upon those, who are not only the oppressors, of
his people, but the detainers of them that exercise violence over them, we see
this in the Egyptians, they not only kept the children of Israel in bondage,
but when God sent a message to them to deliver his people, they put more
Captivity upon them, they raised their tale of brick well, but you see how God
deals with them, he sends frogs to cover Egypt, and they came into the Kings
Chambers, and when they were gone away, they filled the Land with stink, and so
GOD sent grasse-hoppers to devour their fruits, and he smote their
firstborn, and yet they would not be satisfied to suffer the people to
depart, but when the Israelites were gone, they repented of it, and God
overthrowes them in the red sea: if you look for more Examples then these,
perhaps you shall find them nearer hand, nearer home, I am sure we may say
there are more Egypts then one, for we read, Revel. 11. That the two witnesses
lay dead in the City, which is spiritually called Egypt, and Sodom, so that
there is a spiritual Egypt, as well as a natural Egypt; now perhaps we may
find this very Egypt, where ever we find the oppressors of Gods people, where
Gods witnesses and people are persecuted, or holden in contempt, certainly
that is a spiritual Egypt: and beloved is this land free? may we not find a
spiritual Egypt amongst us, Frogs, who are they but Jesuits, Priests, and
Friars, these spread over the Land, never the like, as in these last days:
when the frogs were gone, then came locusts and Grasse-hoppers, these crept
into the Kings Chambers, in Cities, into all places, spared none, and what say
we of catterpillars, who came in Armies into our land, Irish* Catterpillars,
and English Catterpillars, that h^ve devoured the fruits of the Land, and the
strength thereof: but we must thank the Worthies of our Kingdom for
scattering these. And what say we then to the darkness that was upon Egypt?
is not the like in England? surely a wonderful, and a palpable darkness, when
they cannot see at noone day, when they were given over to that hardness of
heart, and that also in oppressing of GODS People, that to this day they cannot
see themselves. So that after so many thousand years, we may find some
Egyptians, that far exceed Pharaoh in hardness of heart, for he did confess
his sin, and did deprecate God to pardon it, but our Egyptians can find no
fault with themselves.

Again, what say we to the primogeniti of the firstborn in Egypt; after the
firstborn of Egypt were slain, the Children of Israel were delivered, David
calls them the Chief of Egypt. I speak of the chiefest of these Incendiaries,
do we not see them smitten off, in the late Vote against them, and for the
destroying of them; Certainly primogeniti being taken away, we may well hope
for a glorious deliverance, upon the Church of God. The Children of God have
not yet deliverance, but they shall have it. I will not pursue these men to the
red Sea, but surely if they do not repent, God has a Sea, a Sea of
destruction to swallow them up.

Thus we see in respect of the punishment God does send on the wicked, that do
detain his people in bondage, we ought to be well affected to the Church of
God, and especially when he calls his people to do justice, and to deliver his
people, for when the Egyptians make a violent detaining of Gods people, what
can be expected but Plague upon Plague, upon the Egyptians?

But now to speak a word of the last reason, and that is the consideration of
the means that is here committed unto us, by which it pleases God still to
deliver his people, and that is by Prayer: oh that some would deliver the
people of God, who shall give salvation unto Israel? here you see was nothing
but a bare wish, yet out of a sound heart, compassionate of the Captivity of
GODS People; who shall give deliverance unto GODS People; This is the time
wherein God does begin to deliver his People, when Gods people begin to cry,
and to seek, then he begins to hear, In the 2 of Exodus, the Lord tells Moses
they sighed for their burdens, and in the third chapter says, I have heard
the cries of the People, and their sighings, here was the first instance that
God was pleased to take, to send Moses to deliver his people, when their
brickes were doubled, then Moses was, I say, sent to deliver them, so then here
is the 7th reason that God is moved to compassionate his people with a Prayer,
or a cry: when nothing else will deliver us, prayers and tears will. But
again, when the children of Israel were in Bondage, God sent them another
cause of deliverance, when they were brought to the lowest ebb, to the
greatest misery, as you see, Deuteronomy. 23.3. There the Lord says of his people,
that when they shall be brought low, when all their strength was gone, and
there is no hope to prevail, then he will deliver them.

2. On the other side, when the enemies of God are advanced to the height, and
to the pitch of all their pride, and all their cruelty, then this is a time
that does fore-run their destruction, so God served the Amorites, when their
sins were full, they gave way to the people of God to take possession of their
lands, and so you may read, Esaias 10.10. where the Lord speaks, upbraiding of
Assyria, for oppressing his people, thus he does argue the case with them, and
thereupon their destruction comes, and so when the Babylonian lifted up
himself above the Throne of God, as high as the star called Lucifer, trampled
upon the people of God, and spoiled the Nations: thereupon the Lord threatens
the destruction of the Nation, even of that whole Kingdom, and so Ier. 57 My
blood be upon the inhabitants of Caldea, shall Israel say, I will deliver them
says God, take vengeance for them, and dry up their Sea.

Thus we see as on the one side, the extremity of Gods people, even a sigh to
God, moves him to compassion, so on the other side, the height of pride does
bring upon them destruction.

But some may say, we see that though there were but a few of them that were
principal agents in Egypt, yet God brought the ruin on the whole Land, may he
not do the like on this?

God forbid that a faction should bring a Nation to ruin, and here is our
comfort yet, that in all the evils this land has laid under, and under which
especially Gods people have groaned a long time, yet the whole land, and the
body of it now assembled, have labored to suppress them, and labored for a
reformation; so this is that does exceedingly comfort us, and secure us; that
however that damnable faction of Egypt has binne extreme cruel and proud, and
passed beyond the bounds and limits of humanity, yet God will spare the Land,
and the evils will fall on themselves, that's our comfort I say.

But here is another thing to be considered, and that is a further degree of
satisfaction; for we must not think this enough, Ah I do wish or desire,
like him in the Comedy, that lay stretching on the grass, in harvest time,
wishing that were to work in Harvest, but this cry is full of efficacy, full
of Vigor, It puts it self forth by all means to seek for deliverance; for
when God sends deliverance of his people from bondage and Captivity, This wish
of theirs stays not at a Petition, but it puts forth all the Virtue of it, to
put in execution and practice, all those means God has offered for the
deliverance of it. So that when God does send deliverance to the Children of
Israel, they must use the means; and so we may truly say of Gods people here
in England, as soon as they grew sensible of their bondage, when they saw that
things were at the worst, they never left sighing, till it fell out, they had
obtained that, which was their desire; I say Gods people here they did not
cease; who would think that all these things should come about by the efficacy
of the prayers of Gods people, he that heard the sighs of the people in Eggpt,
he has done the like in England, for never such a stock of prayers was sent
to God, as has been within these few years and this has procured a blessed
answer from Heaven; and indeed this is it which still goes on with you, most
noble Senators there is a great stock of prayers going on for you; these
prayers of GODS people will not fail, go forward still, they will always go
along with you, and whereas formerly many mouths were stopped, many shut up,
and even as dead men, the Parliament has opened their mouths, they begin to
open the mouths of them that were dumb, to speak for the setting forward of
the word of God. It has opened the prisons; and in deed as it was in the
building of the second Temple at Jerusalem, after the Captivity of Babylon, it
was carried up by the Prophesies of Haggi, and of Zachariah, so I may say, and
that truly, the now reformation of the Temple, of the Church of GOD and of the
deliverance of it from Bondage, and from the Babilonian Captivity, it is
mounted up by the Prayers of the People of God, and by the prophesying of his
faithful servants, notwithstanding (...) (malignity, and enmity of the Enemies
of it, that have lab^^^ed to hinder the building of the Temple. And as they
were forced to have their Swords in one hand, and their Trowell in the other.
Even so we have seen in our days (that we may see the Parallel between the
reedifying of the Temple, and the Church here in England, as it was then in
Jerusalem.

But blessed be God, though the Swords has bin tied to the sides of our
people, and though they carried weapons in their hands, yet there were no (...)
cut, nor blood spilt; God is mercifully disposed, to keep us in d^^order, and
rank in this Reformation. So then beloved, J have spoken as briefly* as I
could of this point, and of the opening of it, and of the enforcing of it,
along to stir us up to get this affection, this love to Gods Church, not only
to cry for it, and to pray for it; but also to stir us up to improve all the
means, which God has put into the hands of his people for doing the work.

But now some may say, Are we yet in bondage, Obj.
is the Church of God under Captivity.

Surely there are many thousands, (...) cannot be brought to believe this
text, It (...) (...) imagined that we were under Captivity; and therefore they
are ready to say, with the Jews, surely we were never in bondage to any man,
and therefore, what need we say, as here in the text, Oh that Salvation of
Israel were come out of Sion.

I answer, it is true indeed, Answ.
a man may be in bondage and yet not sensible of it, but in that case he is
like a sick man not sensible of his disease, being in a most desperate case,
whereas when that he that is sick, comes to be sensible of his (...) the
Physician will give hope of recovery.

And therefore in the first place, we are to enter into examination with our
selves, and to consider whether (...) be not under bondage, or no, and for this
in brief, that I may end with the time, let us consider whether we were under
bondage, and what bondage we were under, (if under any) J told you of several
kinds of Bondage, of some of them I shall not speak. Now then if I should
speak of the bondage that lies upon your estates* every one would confess it,
if it be of the bondage of the body, this has a special interest in the
outward estate against oppression, or in respect of Conscience, when we would
hold them out against Innovations of (...) in the matters of humane devises,
and if I should speak of the bondage we all lie under, in respect of sin,
but from that God will deliver his people, and indeed this is a general
bondage that lies upon the whole Land* upon all men in general, and although
it be in it is own nature, the most grievous, the most miserable, and the most
desperate and damnable, yet most men are not sensible of it, few consider it,
they go on in this spiritual bondage, living in sin, and living in lust, as
if they were under no bondage at all, when in the mean time they are the
Captives of Satan, who leads them in a string, who (...) them in a chain,
whosoever lives in any sin he is in the Devils bondage, of this few are free*
but I will here speak of another bondage, which I think will be required to
speak of at this time, and upon this occasion, and that is the bondage of
conscience, which may be called an Ecclesiastical bondage, a tyranny to the
Conscience, an Antichristian Babilonian, Egyptian bondage, which you will all
take in a spiritual sense, and I may say of this bondage, it has been more
EpidemiEpidemicall then that of Sin, for there are many that are delivered
from the bondage of sin, yet still lie under the bondage of humane ordinances
in the worship of God, so that we shall do well to consider, how we may get
deliverance out of this bondage. So that to show what is this bondage of the
Conscience, and wherein it does stand, or what are the signs of it, that Gods
people lie under this bondage in this Land, J will give instance thereof in
four particulars. The first, is the bondage of Conscience (...) point of
Liturgy, devised by men, and imposed upon the Consciences of the Godly. The
second, is the Bondage of the Conscience under Ceremonies. The third, is the
Bondage of Conscience under Discipline, and the fourth, is the Bondage of the
Conscience under Government.

First, for the bondage of the Conscience under Liturgy, Beloved if you turn
to Coloss. 2.20. you shall find that the spirit of God does by St. Paul, blast
all these services, at one breath, invented by men, and imposed of necessity
upon the Conscience in using those prayers which the service of God (...)
Apostle calls all such, Will-worshippers, as you may see Coloss. 2.23. I would
have you turn to the Chapter and study it well, speaking there of the
ordinances of men, which things says he, have indeed a show of wisdom in
Will Worship and humility, etc.

Though the pretended humility in all these Innovations of men* pretend to be
loving and humble, yet all this worship is a will worship devised by man, and
so becomes a snare to Gods people, and (...) again, this is that our Savior
Christ expressly condemns, (...). 15.9. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of men, it is a vain worship; Also, Esaias
29. These people draw near to me with their lips and with their mouths they
honor me, but their heart is far removed from me; What is the reason of
that? What Is the ground of all this; their fear toward me is taught by the
precepts of men. Here is the very reason and ground why the service devised by
men is abominable before God, and is nothing but mere Hypocrisy, when men
draw near him with their lip^* and their hearts are far from him; Many men
would teach how to serve God, and prescribe rules for the service of God, and
so to impose this yoke upon Gods people, they would sit in Gods Chair, and do
in this as if the Servant should teach his Master, what to do. God did not do
it, nor Christ did not do it, but Man will do it; By which it may appear
that it is Hypocrisy, and a vain worship; This is one bondage under which the
Land has suffered, and for which we have cause to cry with the Prophet, Oh
that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sy^n, oh that there were a
deliverance of Go^^ people, from this bondage.

The second is bondage under Ceremonies, they be also branded, Coll. 2.8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
Tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; And
so afterward touch not, taste not, handle not, the new devises of men, set up
in the service of God, it spoils men, when they do bind them to humane
Ordinances, it is a leading of them captive, wherefore in the 10. ver. he
shows, it is the vacuating of Christ; (...) you allied to Christ, how comes it
that you are subject to humane Ceremonies, that you live under humane
Ordinances; this shows you have no part in Christ, so long as you are subject
to humane Ordinances: For Christ's death has abolished all Ordinances of the
Law; which were of Gods ordaining, much more the Ordinances of men in the
worship of God; To set up these things, and to let the conscience lie under
bondage, this is a great Captivity; Christ's death has made void all these;
This is another bondage, and we cry concerning this, Oh that the Salvation of
Israel were come out of Sion, when God turns the Captivity of his people from
this, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

The third is a Bondage under Discipline, here the Discipline is brought under
one man, one man has the Discipline of the whole Church. The Archbishop in his
Province. The Bishop in his Diocese. This is condemned flatly and expressly
in the Scripture, That the power of Discipline it is not lest to one man, but
indeed to the whole Congregation, Math. 18.17. First, see it in Christ, if thy
Brother offend thee* first admonish him thy self in private, if none of this
will do tell it the Church, that is the Congregation. The Apostle makes it
plain, 1 Cor. 2.6. Here is the infliction of punishment, he was put out of the
Congregation for incest; Here was a punishment inflicted, by many; who are
they? The whole Congregation; for the Congregation had a vote in this
business, of executing of censure upon such an offender; So we may see this is
meant of the Church, 1 Cor. 1. To the Church which is at Corinth, that is, the
Congregation; you see it more plainly, 1 Cor. 5.4. In the name of the lord
Jesus Christ when you come together, you that is the Congregation. So then the
Discipline that is executed by the will of one man sitting in the Court and
admitting of whom he will, and shutting out whom he will, receiving whom he
will, and rejecting whom he will, absolving whom he will, and excommunicating
whom he will, sending to Heaven whom he will, and to Hell whom he will, is
not warranted by Scripture, Diothrepes who was one of the first Practitioners
in this kind, of this Sect; was thrust out of the Church of God, for taking on
him such an Office.

Jn the last place, the fourth bondage under which the Land has suffered, is
the Bondage of the Hierarchy, that is the fall of the spiritual Government,
and beloved it cannot be better paralelled, then to the Hierarchy of
Antichrist, It is a limb of him; he exalts himself above all that is called
God, in all matters of Religion, he must govern the conscience, nay they must
learn men in their Faith, Psalm. 149. where it is there, Praise God for the
Conquest he has given the Church over her Enemies, they will have it, Praise
God for the power he has given the Church over the consciences of men; what a^
high presumption is this, that any man should put in such an expression into
the holy Bible; yea we find, that the Articles of our Religion has bin some of
them altered, as in the 20. Article, where (meaning the Prelates) the Church say
they, has authority to ordain rites and Ceremonies, and has authority in
matters of Faith. They would get that which Christ never left to them, and
never any before Antichrist, such as love the pre-eminence; Diotrephes he was
he that loved the Prehemi^^^^ie, that is, he loved the Prelacy, in St. John's
time, and under St. John's nose; and thus we see another bondage under which the
people of this Land has suffered, and when we are delivered from this, Jacob
shall rejoice, and Jsraell shall be glad.

But since the Reformation, we could not be freed from this bondage, and
delivered, now we may cry, Salvation is come to Jsraell, whereof Jacob
rejoices.

Beloved, J must crave pardon, J speak the word of God, and therefore you must
pardon me, if J use those terms which are fitting to express it.

Well, now we have taken a short view of the several branches, as it were, of
the linkes of the chain, wherein we were held in bondage.

Now, in a word that J may conclude, turning my self to the worthies of our
Israel, let me desire your patience in a word for confirmation, who must do
it; what must be done for the freeing of the Gospel of God, first who, who but
those whom God has called, who but the noble house of Parliament, and those
that have interest in this great businesses; they must do it, who but they:
and therefore we must pray that God would put it into your hea^^s, most noble
Senators: That God would inflame your hearts with the love of the Church, with
the love of Christ, and of his Kingdom, and zeal of his glory, and that no
one man may usurp, and sit upon the Throne of Christ, and that you would free
the people of God, from this bondage, wherein they have been so long holden.

Secondly, what we must do; (...) knock off the Bolts and Shackels of the
godly. Set them (...) liberty, and cast off those Shackels, wherein the people
of God has been so holden; and when this is done, (may some say) shall we
take away the Government; What! shall we have no Government: Surely, most
Noble Senators, give me leave to present unto you a notable example, worthy of
all your imitations, even from this very Jsland of ours; It is recorded in
Stories, that this Island was the first Province, that ever received the faith
of Christ, an honor to England, and God grant that we may walk worthy of his
honor; and maintain it, and vindicate it; Now in Hollinshed you shall find,
that when the Faith of Christ was first received in this Province, it was
preached by Joseph of Arimathea; But now what ordering was there of the Church
here in England? Hereupon King Lucius taking Counsel for this, did not as
Jeroboam, set up his own devises; but he sent to the Bishop of Rome, for to
desire him to send him a pattern or model of such Government, which he
thought fit to be set up in the Church of God; The Bishop of Rome sent him
this answer; as appears by the Letter at large: You have received the Gospel
of Christ, you have set up the Gospel of Christ, go to the word of Christ,
for Christ has left the two Volumes of the Scripture, the Old and the New
Testament, out of which you, and your Counsel may take a Rule, not only for
the Government of the Church, but of your whole lives, This was the brief
sum of his answer, to that King Lucius and thereby we may see, that at that
time, the Church of Rome was in her Infancy, for even the Bishop of Rome did
acknowledge the word of God, the Scripture, to contain a Rule for all things
done in the Church of God, for Government and Discipline, and what ever else in
the service of God.

So then beloved, we may stand upon good reason, who is this Lawgiver of the
Church of God, who is the Lawgiver under the New Testament, is it not he that
is the Lawgiver under the Old, what did Christ there, did he not set up a
form of Government, and service as he pleased, that he might make the
Oeconomie of that Mosaicall service agreeable to those times. He has now
abolished all those Rites of the Old Testament; This Christ did so exactly,
that there was not so much as the Pin of the Tabernacle left for us. So then
for the pattern of Christ in the New Testament left for us, we must go by
that which Christ has set up in his word, and what is the sum of it, the
very sum of the service of God, is that which Christ says in the 4. Job. The
time was that you worshipped in Jerusalem, and in this Mountain; but the time
shall come that they that worship God, shall worship him in Spirit, and in
Truth; Christ has tied the Church to no Ceremony, to show, that all our
service and worship of God, it must be in Spirit and Truth, it must not be in
shadows and types, in imitation of the Jews in their Leviticall services, but
it must be in spirit and truth: But here some will say, and J remember that one
has in a written Book called the Relation of a conference, between him and
Fisher? The Bishop of Canterbury I mean) pleading for Ceremonies, if there be
to few says he; they will leave the Service of God naked; Naked, why beloved
are we to dispute or discern the service of God, which Christ has left
without any command from him, It Is true beloved, it is naked, and it is in Spirit
and truth when it is naked, and when it is in its own naked truth, Adam and
Euah were never more glorious then in their naked innocence, when they put on
fig-leaues to cover them, it was only a badge of their shame, so it is in this
respect. The Church of God is the spouse of Christ, the spouse of Christ must
not put on a Babilonish garment, lest she be taken for a whore, it is a shame
for a spouse, to be in a whores garment; she must be ruled by her husband; and
therefore we must not go about to paint the service of God with our colors,
nor with the color of our devotion; ye fairest face by nature if painted, the
beauty will be quickly eaten out, the painting, decking, adorning, and
coloring ye complexion of the service of God, with man's devises; it disfigures
the fair, and beautiful face of Gods service, and makes it seem like a hag
in the eyes of God, and indeed there is nothing did destroy religion more then
when men began to set up service of God, of their own devising; Thus did the
Popes from time to time from age to age, bring in that mass of Superstition
and Idolatrous service; So that it is rather the service of man, or rather the
service of the devil, now you must know beloved, that Jesus Christ, thtt is
our Lawgiver, that is our Prophet, he knew what was to be done in matters of
worship, who is the only King over our Consciences* as well as our high Priest
to sacrifice for us, and to make atonement for us, we must hearken unto him,
for he has done all exactly, he harh been as exact a Lawgiver in the new
Testament as in the old, will you ask then what service he has left, he has
taught us to pray in the Church of God, to preach the word of God, he has
taught us to expound the Scripture to old men and young, and for to spend their
time in the Church of God, he taught Ministers, not only to Preach, but also
to pray; we must give our selves to prayer, and the word, that is prayer, and
Preaching.

But some will say, Obj.
has he left no other discipline in the Church, no form of Prayer, nor
Litturgy, where shall we get Ministers to supply all the parishes in England,
men that are able to pray and able to Preach.

It Is true, we are in a miserable condition, Ans.
many of our good Ministers have been sent away, and many scandalous Ministers
put in their places: The Universities have been corrupted exceedingly, and
Schools corrupted, bad men put in, and good men put out; therefore what is to
be done in this case; why the Lord strenghten this Parliament; the Lord
strenghten them to work a Reformation; which though it cannot be done
suddenly, for the Universities must first be purged, schools of learning
purged, good governors set up, that there may be a nursery of good Ministers,
that so in the end the Church of God may be furnished with able Ministers able
to pray, and able to Preach; and in the mean time what is to be done. Surely
if there be a toleration of the book of Common Prayer which is a weakening to
the people, dulling their Spirits, wearying the Minister, making him unable to
go on in his Preaching, exhausting of their Spirits, etc. yet bind it not upon
those Ministers, that are able to pray, and able to Preach.

To conclude all in one word, with this earnest desire and Petition unto you,
the worthies of our Parliament, that for the better setting up of the Religion
of Jesus Christ, and the true worship of God, you would separate the unclean
from the clean, by casting out those things that are offensive; That you would
cleanse Churches of all their abominations, not only of what has been set up
of late, but also of former times; As all Images, and Crucifixes: and also
Organs, let them be silent, brought in by Antichrist in imitation of the Jewish
Organs, shall Organs be blowing in the Temple, when the Spirit should be taken
up in the service of God; give me leave to use my own President when I was in
prison, I found more comfort, in singing one Psalm with my single voice, then
ever I did in all those Psalms upon my Jnstrument formerly: J say the Spirit
of God had the heart of it; which is taken away by mingling it with any
Instrument: and certainly Christ left no Music unto the word of God, only
that of the heart, and to sing Psalms? So Paul and Silas in the prison, they
sung a Psalm which brake open the Prison doors. So our Savior himself left
the same example in singing of Psalms; wherein the Spirit of man is taken up,
and not distracted by the senses of the body. And beloved J beseech you give me
leave to exhort you, that there may be no Monuments of Superstition, and
Jdolatry, that are set up in our times, that have bin the objects of Jdolatry,
that is all crosses in highways, and I beseech you that for an example you
would begin with the golden Jdoll in Cheap Side, that has been an occasion for
many Papists to commit spiritual Fornication; J remember in a former
Parliament, there was a Committee sent to view the Cross, with a purpose to
take it down, I beseech you do the like, and cast down all those
abominations, that there may be nothing left as an abomination to the Land in
the Lords sight: you are the worthies, and you must do it.

J draw to an end, and desire to put you in mind, though J know you are not
forgetful of that noble Protestation, that you have made for your selves, the
Protestation is against all Popery, and Popish Innovations, Popish Jnnovations,
what are they, not only those that have crept in of later times, by the
presumption of busybodies; but those that have bin in the Church of God, ever
since the Apostles, whatsoever any man has set up in the Church of GOD since
the Apostles, that are in the sight of God, Idolatrous, and against ye
Scripture; that is Popish Innovations. J beseech you when you clear the
Currents of Gods service, set up Christ in his Throne, give him the honor of
being our King; let us live under his subjection; That we may rejoice in the
truth of God, and Beloved, your Protestation is not made as thorns under a
pot, to give a crack and away, or like a Be without a sting; or a Leaden
dagger in a golden sheath, having a show, and yet is nothing; let not the order
for banishing of Jesuits and for the disarming of the Papists, pass without
execution; pray God ^here are ^ot more come in since, I beseech you that ^ll
these may incite you, to put in execution those good Laws, and good Orders of
this Parliament; and that which was protested against all Popery, and Popish
Innovations; not to defend any form of worship or service, or government, as
in the Declaration, so then as you may not defend them, (God forbid) so you
would cast them out, in general, J beceech you make one law for all? That if
any Minister shall do any thing in the Church of God, which he is not able to
prove out of the Scripture; if he preach otherwise, If he use any manner of
Ceremony, administer the Sacrament, which he cannot prove, make a law, that
they may be punished; there are a great many Ministers, that are not resolved
what to do, they would keep their Ceremonies still, and they will wait for
what the Parliament will do, you may set up what Religion you please they will
be of your religion still. There are many Ministers that are of this mind; that
have related the same before you, and as one says, The Bishops they are all
for the Pope, and the Ceremonies; but beloved I hope we shall have good Laws
made* for the punishing of all abuses, and to break off all the yokes from the
necks of Gods people; labor to throw all offensive things out of the Church of
GOD.

Thus have I done, pray you pardon me if J have Transgressed.

In the mean time let us call to God for a Blessing, on that which has been
spoken, etc.

FINIS.

