Imprimatur.

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

Feb. 4. 1691/2.

A TREATISE OF Church Government: Occasioned by some LETTERS Lately Printed
concerning the same SUBJECT.

BY ROBERT BURSCOUGH, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AN Observing Italian has given us an Account of a Transaction, which is not so
well known amongst us, as many others of the like Nature. He acquaints us, that
in an Assembly of Catholics, as he calls them, which were brought together by
the Late Earl of Bristol, a Consultation was held concerning the fittest Means
of propagating their Religion in this Kingdom: and they agreed, that one of the
most proper Methods they could make use of for that purpose, was, to testify a
mighty Zeal, and to make a great show of Friendship, for the Non-conformists.
Whereupon, he tells us, They represented them as Men of Trade, whose Sufferings
would be prejudicial to the Nation. They pretended to commiserate their
Condition, and declaimed perpetually against Persecution. And there were two
things, he says, which they proposed to themselves in this Conduct.

Il primo di mantenere le Set contra la Chiesa d' Inghilterra, sperando con
questo mezo di destrugerla piu tosto, rispetto all tante animosita intestine,
che senza dubbio haurebbono aperte piu facilmente le Port al Papismo: il
secondo che sotto questo pretesto di toleratione de Settari, non potessero le
Leggi haver campo libero all' esecuttione, in quello che riguarda la Religione,
e cosi fosse piu facile a loro Preti d' avanzar la Religione Romana.
The first, was to maintain the Sectaries against the Church of England; hoping
they might sooner destroy it by Intestine Divisions, and so more easily open a
Gate to Popery. The second was, Under a pretense of tolerating these Sectaries,
to stop the Execution of the Laws about Religion, that their Priests might meet
with less opposition in advancing the Religion of the Church of Rome.

In pursuance of this Design, as my Author also informs us, They prevailed with
King Charles the Second to issue out his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience;
which was recalled by the interposition of the Parliament: But the Project,
which was then so happily blafted by the Parliament, revived to amazement in
the following Reign, and the Nation had the pain to see a Jesuit made a Privy
Counselor and Prime Minister of State, and the Protestant Dissenters very deep
in his Interests, and warm under his Influence; To see these Dissenters so
liberally offering up their Incense to the Court, which was then laboring to
inslave us to the Pope; and the Court answering their Devotion with many
Favors. For so it was, as every Body knows: And when this Alliance was
confirmed between them, hardly a Week passed over our heads, which did not
bring us fresh Intelligence of their mutual Endearments.

What I have said of the Dissenters, must not be understood of the whole Body
of them without exception: For to do them Right, some of them were afflicted at
the shameful Confederacy in which their Brethren were engaged: But neither in
Number, nor in Zeal and Diligence did they equal those that beheld our Church
in distress, with such Eyes, as the Children of Edom looked on Jerusalem, in
the day of her Adversity, when they cried to the Babylonians, Raze it, raze it
to the foundation.

But it pleased God to disappoint their Devices, so that their hands could not
perform their Enterprise: And one might then have thought, that the Reflection
on their Actions, should have been such a Mortification to them, as would have
disposed them to an Accommodation and Union with those, from whom they had made
an Unreasonable Separation; and who were so willing to forget their former
Miscarriages, and to receive them with all imaginable Tenderness. But they, on
the contrary, have since appeared more averse from the Way of Peace than ever.
And it is Observable, that the Kindness of the Papists, put them into a strange
fit of Complaisance, and was the Cause, that either they employed their Pens in
the service of the Church of Rome, or not against it: But the Obligations which
they have received from the Conformists, instead of abating, have inflamed
their Rage, and given them Encouragement to write abundance of Books, such as
they are, against the Church of England. And this may show, how dissatisfied
they remain in their present Circumstances, and that as long as we live with
them, and not under them, we are like to hear of their Complaints.

When my Adversary, who is of their number, and gave occasion to this
Discourse, saw Their Politics, and his Own defeated, I had hopes that he would
leave me to the Retirement I affected, and give me no farther trouble with his
Disputes about Church Government. I was in expectation, that he would either
study to be quiet, or that I should meet with him amongst some late Apologists.
But when I least suspected it, he appears in Print on the Offensive side, and
rudely attacking a whole Community, he would persuade his Readers Not. of
Church Government, p. 46, 47.
, that a Separate National Jurisdiction, such as he supposes that of our
Ecclesiastical Rulers to be, cannot but weaken the Jurisdiction of Kings and
other States, and is neither more nor less, but the very same thing that
heretofore was found so burdensome under the Papacy, and that made the best and
wisest and greatest of our Kings so uneasy. So that he lays it down, he says,
as a Maxim, that nothing can be of greater danger to any Government, than a
National Hierarchy, that does not depend upon it, or is not in the Measures and
Interests of it. Fresh Experience has learned us this. In which words, his
design is to cast an Odium on the Conforming Clergy, and to suggest, that they
have been hurtful unto Kings, and usurpt a Jurisdiction that is inconsistent
with the Safety, and the Rights of Sovereignty. But if this cannot be proved
against them, either from the Nature of their Jurisdiction it self, or from
their National Union, or Matter of Fact, on which he grounds the Charge, he
must be content to bear the Infamy of a false Accuser.

By the Jurisdiction of the Clergy, which is first to be considered, either he
understands, that which is Spiritual, and such as the Pastors of the Church
received from Christ; and to say that this has no Limits, and is pernicious to
the State, is not only to injure the Truth, but to cast a Reproach upon our
Lord himself: Or else he means their Temporal Authority, with which they have
been legally vested by Sovereign Princes, and then he knows that he has falsely
called it Independent, Unboundable and Uncontrollable P. 46.
: he knows it is false, that this is neither more nor less, but the very same
Supreme and Absolute Power which the Popes claimed and usurpt, and by which
they made our Kings so Uneasy: And I leave him to answer the Convictions of
his own Conscience, for the wrong he has done the Reformation by so odious a
Reflection.

Another thing on which he grounds his Censure of the Clergy, is their National
Union; and he argues, that This, together with the Independence which he
ascribes to them, must needs render them very dangerous, as putting them into a
condition of being made a powerful Faction, and easy to be practiced upon; and
inabling the Heads of the Faction to convey Malignity to all their
Subordinates, and these to the People P. 47.
. And thus, when the abolishing of the Episcopal Government with all its
dependences, Root and Branch, was in agitation, Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes objected
See his Speech A. D. 1640. in Nalson's Collect. Vol. 1. p. 758.
against the Bishops, That by their Power over other Ministers, who had an
influence upon the People, they might mould them both according to their own
wills; and having put out our eyes, says he, as the Philistines did Sampson 's,
they may afterward make us grind, and reduce us to what slavery they please. A
dreadful thing indeed, had there been any foundation for the apprehension of
it. But if such Fantomes as may at any time be raised by Art or the Strength of
Imagination, and have nothing in them of Substance or Reality, be sufficient to
disquiet us, we are like to enjoy but little rest. And to come nearer to the
purpose; If a mere possibility of doing hurt, be so dangerous and formidable to
Princes, This would be enough to create in them frightful Idea's of their
Guards and their Armies, and of all that are about them, and render them at
last, like Pashur, a Terror to themselves.

He could not but see, that a mere Capacity in the Clergy of conveying
Malignity, was not sufficient to make them Enemies to the State; and he
pretends, that they have been actually guilty of a most notorious defection
from their Duty to the Civil Magistrate, and that it has been found by
Experience, not only that there never was, but that there never can be in the
World, a thing more dangerous to any Government, than the National Hierarchy.
An Accusation that sounds very harsh, and runs high, not against a few single
persons only, but a considerable Society. But he has not told us, in what
Instance they were liable to it, or when it was they became so criminal.

It is certain, that in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, they could not deserve so
hateful a Character. For Jealous as She was of her Glory, She could not find,
that it was eclipsed by them. But She did perceive, how necessary it was, to
check and repress the Attempts against them, and was sensible, as Mr. Camden
acquaints us Regina haud ignara suam Authoritatem per Episcoporum latera in hoc
negotio peti, etc. Camd. Hist. Eliz. A. D. 1591.
that her own Authority was struck at through the sides of the Bishops. As this
Admirable Princess penetrated into the Secrets of Foreign Courts, so She
perfectly understood the Interests of her own Kingdoms: And if any would know,
what She thought of some fiery Zealots of those Times, who spent their Heats in
opposing Episcopacy and the Liturgy, it may be seen in Sergeant Puckering's
Speech, recorded by Sr. William Dugdale View of the Troubles in England, p. 13.
, for it is made by Her Command.

Her Successor King James could never discover, that nothing could be more
dangerous to him, than the National Hierarchy. He always believed, that
Episcopacy was of Divine Institution: and as he found it established here, to
his great satisfaction; so he never saw cause to repent of his defense of it,
and the Privileges annexed to it. How well he approved the Constitution of the
Church of England, may appear from hence, that in his Speech in the
Star Chamber he affirmed, June 20. A. D. 1616.
That of any Church that ever he read or knew of, present or past, he thought
in his Conscience, This was the most pure, and nearest the Primitive and
Apostolical Church in Doctrine and Discipline, and the sureliest founded on the
Word of God of any Church in Christendom.

At the same time he complained of the Contempt that was cast on a Church so
Reformed, and the Governors thereof; and looking on it as a sign of Impending
Judgments, he says, God will not bless us and our Laws, if we do not reverence
and obey Gods Law, which cannot be, except the Interpreters of it be respected
and reverenced. Such a regard He had for them, from a Principle of Religion;
and their Fidelity to Him was answerable to it; and contributed not a little to
the Safety of his Person, the Support of the Throne, and the Welfare of the
Nation. But as for the many Dangers to which he was exposed, they arose from
other Quarters. They either proceeded from the Conspiracies of Papists, whose
Principles he examined and confuted See K. J 's. Works, p. 382. Land. 1616.
, that neither the Subversion of States, nor the Murders of Kings, should have
free passage in the World, for want of timely Advertisement; or from the
Practices of another sort of persons, whom he calls Ibid. p. 160.
the very Pests in the Church and Commonwealth; and by whom, as he declares to
all Christian Monarchs, Free Princes and States, he was persecuted, not from
his Birth only, but four Months before his Birth.

In the Reign of King Charles the First, the Clergy were not wanting in their
demonstrations of Loyalty, as we all know, and they felt. Yet I grant, that
some had discoursed before his Majesty, that Episcopacy, as claimed and
exercised within this Realm, was not a little derogatory to the Regal
Authority, as well in the Point of Supremacy, as Prerogative; in the one, by
claiming the Function as by a Divine Right; in the other, by exercising the
Jurisdiction in their own Names: But on that occasion, He told Dr. Sanderson,
that he did not believe, the Church Government, as by Law established, was in
either of the aforesaid respects, or any other way prejudicial to his Crown.
Nevertheless he required that Learned Man, from whom I borrowed this Relation,
to draw up an Answer to those two Objections, for the satisfaction of others;
which he did accordingly: And I shall only crave leave, to transcribe from him
the following words, which he uses near the Conclusion of his Treatise
Episcopacy not Prejudicial to the Regal Power, p. 99.
, By this time, says he, I doubt not, all that are not wilfully blind, do see
and understand by sad experience, that it had been far better both with King
and Kingdom, than now it is, or is like to be in haste, if the Enemies of
Episcopacy had meant no worse to the King and his Crown, than the Bishops and
those that favored them did.

I shall not further exercise your patience, in going about to prove, that the
Clergy were faithful to the Crown in the Reign of King Charles the Second. You
may well enough remember what King James the Second acknowledged Speech in
Parliament, May 22. 1685.
, that the Church of England had been eminently Loyal in the defense of his
Father, and support of his Brother in the worst of Times. But that our
Churchmen have since revolted from their Principles, which were then said to
be for Monarchy, I do not understand. Nor was our Author willing in plain terms
to inform us, when it was that they became such Examples of Malignity, lest the
Calumny might easily be detected. Yet, Obscure as he is, he has left us a Key
to his meaning: for he intimates, that they have been found to be dangerous by
fresh experience, when they were not in the Measures and Interests of the
Government, respecting doubtless the late Times, before the great Revolution.
And so the Secret comes out, which was at the bottom, and raised his
Indignation.

In the Opinion you see of this Gentleman, the Clergy were Then so very
dangerous, when with so much Courage they threw themselves in the Breach that
was made by the Dispensing Power, and were asserting and laboring to preserve
our Laws and Liberties, which others were offering up in Sacrifice: They were
then conveying their Malignity to the People, when in their Books and Sermons,
they defended the Cause of the Reformation with so much Success, that Popery
lay Gasping before them in great Agonies, notwithstanding the Cordials that
were administered to it by other hands. And Then indeed the King was uneasy,
because his Endeavors, to establish his Religion, did not make the Impressions
he desired: And the Jesuits and their Associats were uneasy, because their
Measures were broken, and their expectation of extirpating the Northern Heresy
defeated: And such of the Dissenters, as had been assisting and pushing them on
in works of darkness, were uneasy at the Reproach they had brought upon
themselves by their ill Conduct. But in the rest of the Nation there appeared a
general satisfaction, to see Truth prevailing by lawful Methods, against the
Errors of the Church of Rome, when they were covered with a powerful Protection.

One may wonder, what it is that induced our Author to lead our thoughts to the
Transactions of those Times; since it would be more for his Reputation, could
he bury them in Oblivion, or cover them with a Veil of Darkness. But it seems,
he cannot dissemble how much he was affected with the Management of Affairs,
when himself was in the Interests and Measures of the Government, and when in a
Pamphlet Entitled, Prudential Reasons for repealing the Penal Laws against all
Recusants, etc. Penned by a Protestant Person of Quality, he declared to the
World, that King James the Second had a clearer prospect of his own and the
Kingdoms Interest, than any of his Royal Predecessors ever had, and pursued it
with that Conduct and Vigor, which did correspond with the Miracles that
preserved the Crown for him, and him for the Crown, and for a Glory greater
than that of wearing Crowns, to wit, to be the Restorer of Religion to Liberty
and Freedom of Exercise. And with such exquisite and servile Flattery, was that
Unfortunate Prince encouraged in the Large Steps he made to his Ruin.

That I have imputed to my Adversary the Harangue which I have quoted from the
Prudential Reasons, you will not think strange, when I have told you, that
sometime since I received several Controversial Letters, written by the hand of
a Nonconformist Preacher, who subscribed them in his own Name, and professed
and persuaded his Easy Followers, that they were his own: But he could not
deny, when the Charge was laid before him, that they were composed by the
Protestant Person of Quality, as he is pleased to call himself, who has lately
published some part of them, to which this Treatise contains an Answer. But how
his Amanuensis resents this usage, or contented he is to be stripped of his
borrowed Plumes, and left naked to the Pity or Derision of Spectators, as they
are variously affected, I pretend not to discover. Some may think he has had
very hard measure, and that he had much better never have enjoyed the Glory of
his Masters labors, than be deprived of it in such a manner; but that I leave
to be adjusted between themselves. And I had not said thus much of their
Combination, but out of great Compassion to a deluded People, that I may let
them see, if they do not wilfully shut their eyes on what it is they grounded
their insolent boasting; by what Impostures they have been abused, and by what
Arts they have been engaged and encouraged in their Schism.

Here it may be fit to take notice, that since our Author appeared in open
light, his Style differs much from what it was before: For many Pages of his
Manuscript Papers, which I have by me, are filled with bitter Invectives
against me, and other Conformists; but it is in some measure true, what he now
says, that his Printed Letters are refined from Personal Reflections. He
thought, it seems, that Scurrility was suitable enough to the part he acted,
when he sustained the person of another, and was ashamed of it, when he laid
aside his disguise. Yet since he shows no Repentance for his former
Provocations, nor forbears to strike at the whole Body of the Conforming
Clergy, some may object, that I have handled him with an excess of Tenderness.
But I wish no greater defects may be found in this Discourse, than that I have
erred on the side of Lenity, and I shall not be much concerned at this
Exception. Nevertheless my Adversary may be assured, that such a Conduct as his
must needs have awakened the observation of many, and I cannot promise, that
others will spare him, as I have done; or that he may not receive such
Correction from a severer Hand, as he is not Stoic enough to bear.

For my part, I could have been content, if he had refined away none of his
Personal Reflections. I was willing enough that the World should have seen with
what an impotent Fury I have been assaulted by him, and I should have been glad
to have been eased of the Fatigue of writing and giving a new Turn to the
Answers I had sent him. But for his own sake, I congratulate to him any
Tendency toward a Calmness of Thought, and still retain for him the Regard
that is due to an Intelligent Person, of a sharp Wit, great Reading and
indefatigable Industry.

I could say more to his advantage, but that I am afraid to indulge an Humor
in him that is too predominant; and what that is, you may perceive from the
Admonition he gave me in his Letter of Feb. 9. That he and I are never like to
answer one another expectation, so long as he looks for strength and closeness
in my Discourses, or I think, to find weakness or looseness in his. Which shows,
that he is a Man of a peculiar Temper, and distinguished by such an Air of
Assurance as is not common. Not but that another might have treated me with as
much Contempt; but he was the Man of the World, that thought, nothing could
come from him that is weak or loose. Finding him in this condition, I thought
it not unfit to give him such Touches, as might make him sensible, that he is a
Mortal Wight and of Humane Race: and having convinced him by the method I
proposed, that he was not Infallible; he now confesses some of his mistakes.
Yet there are some Remains of his former distemper still hanging on him. For
says he to his Noble Friends Ep. Ded.
, I present you in these following Letters the true Idea (as I take it) of
Church Government, which could it be received by all others with the same
degree of Candor, I assure my self it shall by you, would be of Infinite
Advantage to end these fatal Controversies that for many Ages have perplexed,
and in this last, almost destroyed the Church.

I have not the honor to be acquainted with those Gentlemen, to whom he
dedicates his Book: But if I am not mistaken in their Character, they are of
more Judgment, than to believe, that, if others were as Candid as themselves,
this Idea, which he so much magnifies, would be of Infinite Advantage. They
will rather perceive, that it would not otherwise put an end to the Fatal
Controversies that have perplexed the Church, than Poison would cure Diseases,
that is, by the death of the Patients. For it is evident, that the design of it,
is to abrogate the Authority which Christ bestowed on his Ecclesiastical
Officers; and consequently our Author, instead of Intitling his Book, The
Nature of Church Government Freely Discussed, might more fitly have called it,
A Treatise of Church-Anarchy or Church-Confusion.

I know not whether the Applause of his Performances be continued to him in his
own Person, which he first received by Proxy, from the neighboring Dissenters.
But sure I am that he contradicts the avowed Principles of their Party, and the
sense of their Writers. He contends, that the Pastors of the Church have no
Authority, but what they derive from the State. He makes Church Government a
mere Prudential Thing and Alterable in the Form of it, according to the various
Forms of the Civil Government, and argues, that it ought to take its Model from
the appointment of the Civil Magistrate: Whereas their other Writers tell us,
That a Spiritual Extraction of a Legitimate Ecclesiastical Power cannot be made
from a Secular Root See Goodwin. Theom. p. 48, etc.
; That the Introduction of Humane Authority into the Rule of the Church of
Christ in any kind, destroys the Nature of it Owen. True Nature of the
Gospel Church, p. 30.
; That there is but one Form of Government laid down in the Word, and that
Unchangeable Answer to 32. Quest.
, and that to think, Church Government must be framed according to the
Commonwealth, or Civil Government, is as if one should fashion his House
according to his Hangings Cartwright. Reply to Whitgift, p. 181.
. But that his Friends may not resent the matter too highly, when they find how
they have been imposed on by him, I can assure them, that in contradicting
their Authors, he uses them no worse, than he does himself. For having formerly
concluded from 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. that it was the duty of Christians, to preserve
the same Government in the Churches after the Apostles days, that was appointed
and practiced in them; he now comes to prove, that, let the Government in those
days be what it will, it is but a Prudential and Ambulatory Thing, and liable
to Changes according to the difference of Times and Occasions. And that his
Friends may not for the future expect to find him any more fixed or steady, he
professes in his Epistle Dedicatory, that he has nothing of fondness in him
for any Opinions.

He has as little fondness in him for the Authority of the Apostles, as he
has for his own Opinions. For however he takes Diocesan Prelacy to be a
Degeneracy or Defection from an Apostolical Constitution, yet he boasts of his
Vindication of it, upon Prudential grounds Let. MS.
: He represents Episcopacy as a Corruption, and yet he supposes, that it is of
Divine Right, when it is by Law established See his Epistle Dedicatory.
. The truth is, he has confusedly jumbl'd together the Notions of the
Dissenters, and the Principles of Hobbes and Erastus; and with this odd kind of
mixture, he thinks himself sufficiently qualified to heal the Breaches of
Christendom.

Before him, one Peter Cornelius Van Zurick-zee set up for a Reconciler
General; and his Project for Union was See his Way to Peace.
, that in every City, and in every County, there should be appointed a General
Meeting Place, in which the Christians of all Persuasions should be required to
assemble together, that they might hear the Scriptures read, and afterward
talk about them, and give their Interpretations of them according to their
various Sentiments. Of this Device he had such a conceit, that leaving his
Family and Native Country P. 1.
, he crossed the Seas, that he might reveal it in England; expecting that here
it would receive a kind entertainment, and from hence break forth as a Light
into all other Countries and Nations P. 6.
. But whether this Man, or the Free Discusser has furnished us with a better
Plan of an Universal Peace; or whether Prudential Reason has been more happy,
than a Freak of Enthusiasm, in proposing a Method of Union, or Scheme of
Ecclesiastical Polity, I leave you to determine.

In the mean time, I am of opinion, that the way of governing Churches, which
is agreeable to the will of God, was not to be invented or first discovered
fifteen or sixteen hundred years after the Birth of our Savior. I suppose a
thing of such use must needs have been known to the Primitive Christians: And
they generally believed, 1. That our Savior Christ, who was the Founder of
Church Government, bestowed on his Officers such Authority, as qualified them
for the Administration of it. 2. That this Government was Episcopal from the
beginning.

On these two things I have chiefly insisted in this Discourse, but far more
copiously on the last, against which, I met with the greatest opposition: By
which opposition, I do not only mean, That which has been made by my
Adversary; for I have considerd the utmost that I could find objected on That
side. And upon the whole I am satisfied, that it requires no great Abilities to
defend Episcopacy; and that it proceeds from the Goodness of the Cause, that
the more Learned the Opposers of it are, the more ready have they been to let
fall such things as may serve for the Vindication of it, and answer their own
Objections. This was the Case of Blondel and Salmasius, but more particularly
of the last, who has so many things that favor my Hypothesis, that of all
Modern Authors none has been more useful to me, than Walo Messalinus.

But all the assistance I have received from him, has been only to confirm the
Notions which I had before grounded on the Holy Scriptures, and the Testimony
of the Ancients: from which I have proved, That Episcopacy was of Divine
Institution; and that mere Presbyters were generally subordinate to Superior
Pastors in the Apostles days, and afterward in the best and purest Ages: And
if so, there can be no doubt concerning the succeeding Times, or of the Truth
of what was affirmed by the Lord Falkland in a warm Speech which he made
against some of the Bishops A. D. 1640. See Nals. Collect. Vol. 1. p. 771.
, that the Order of the Bishops has always remained in the Churches from
Christ to Calvin.

What I have said on this subject, fastens an Imputation of Novelty on the
Dissenters, but I cannot help it; and they have no reason to be offended at it.
For their own Friends, the Elders and Messengers of the Congregational
Churches, who met at the Savoy October. 12. A. D. 1658.
, confess See the Preface before their Declaration, etc.
, that it is true in respect of the public and open profession, either of
Presbytery or Independency, this Nation has been a stranger to each way, it is
possible, ever since it has been Christian. And I will adventure to add, that
the Nation may be well enough without them both, so long as it shall be
Christian; it being now too late to try Experiments of new Models, and to
establish such Forms of Government, as in the best Ages, were never heard of in
the World.

When I had inquired into the Original of Church Government, and showed, that
as it came out of the hands of Christ and his Apostles, and remained in the
Primitive Times, it was, in the Nature of it, Spiritual; and in Form,
Episcopal; I had thoughts to discourse particularly of the Exercise of it in
the Administration of Discipline, and the Ordination of Ministers; as also of
the Extent of a Bishops Authority over many Congregations; and of the Power of
the Church in a Christian State; and then to make some Remarks on that Mystery
of Iniquity that has been working amongst Bigoted Papists, and others, in
opposition to Episcopacy: But being interrupted by many Avocations, and not
being willing to swell this Volume into too great a Bulk, I have reserved those
things, with some others, that may incidentally be considered, for a second
Part of this Treatise.

I doubt not, but some will be ready to say, that it had been much better to
have let the whole Work alone: For Now, they think, it is not a Time for
Controversies: I should think so too, and would our Adversaries be of the same
mind, and not drag us into the Press by their Importunity. But it may seem a
little Unreasonable, that a Truce should be maintained only on one side: And I
cannot imagine, that it is a time for us to lie open to Acts of Hostility, and
not a time to guard our selves from them; or that it is a time to cast reproach
on an Apostolical Constitution of Government, and not a time to defend it. I
rather think, that it is High time to appear in vindication of it; and that we
cannot be unconcerned Spectators of the Diligence, with which others endeavor
to promote the Interest of their several Parties, unless we will declare to the
World, that we are not influenced by any due sense of Religion.

Indeed, if we are only in the Communion of the Church by Law established, at
certain seasons, and with design to destroy it, or to serve a Turn against it,
Then it is not strange, if we cannot endure to hear any thing in defense of it.
But what is most astonishing, is, that persons should be found bearing the Name
of Christian, and carrying on the works of Darkness and Treachery, of Avarice
and Ambition, in the most Solemn Acts of Worship, and the most Sacred Rites of
our Holy Religion. Yet is the number of them considerable; and because it may
not be fit to pass by them without notice, I shall here produce some part of
the Charge against them, as it is recited and addressed to them by a Late
Writer.

There are some things, says he Vox Clamantis, sect. 6.
, that I will but lightly touch, though others of contrary sentiment will lay
on load. One is, at which I am not a little abashed, that though you, according
to your declared Principles and Ordinary Practice, are Nonconformists and
Dissenters; yet upon occasion, and to get into Place and Office of Honor or
Profit, you will and can take any manner of Tests that have of late been
imposed; also that you can, on such occasions, take the Sacrament according to
the Form and Way of the Church of England, though you never did before, nor
perhaps will ever do the same again, except on the like occasion; and although
the making and forming of these Tests, and the taking of the Sacrament, were
intended, and done on purpose to keep you, and such as you, out of Office; yet
by these ways they have not been able to exclude you; and they think, that
nothing, though never so contrary to your Principles, can be devised and made
to keep you out, or to hold you in; but that you will break all Bounds, and
leap over all Hedges; so that they are at a loss what to do with you, etc.

My Author who relates this to them as an Objection of their Adversaries, is
himself a Dissenter; yet protests P. 50.
that he knows not how to answer it in their behalf with truth and honesty. He
confesses, that they make use of the same Artifices, as the Jesuits do in such
cases: and he knows nothing, he tells them P. 53.
, that will more render them in the eyes of all, as men of flexible and
profligate Consciences. He also laments their Hypocrisy, and breaks out into
this Exclamation P. 50.
, O! the horrible scandal that comes from hence, etc. But I suppose, the
Example of these men has nothing in it, that may prevail with us to abandon
the Vindication of a good Cause; their Practices being such, as, if we have any
thing of Sincerity, we cannot think on without Pain and Detestation.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 15. read averse. p. 6. l. 17. r. to bind and ab. p. 11. l. 6.
marg. r. 18. p. 13. l. 29. r. the intention of the person. p. 39. l. 10. marg.
r. c. 4. p. 44. l. 8. r. such, have. p. 49. l. 11. after High Priest, add, And
yet he could not have been constituted High Priest. p. 54. l. 4. marg. r.
Successores reliquit. p. 54. l. 11. marg. r. (...). p. 63. l. 13. r. of all
Churches. l. 17. r. presided. p. 73. l. 8. r. munere annos. p. 80. l. 27. r.
continuance. l. 28. dele might. p. 88. l. 2, 3. marg. r. Apostoli. p. 102. l.
26. r. and as. l. 28. r. more than. p. 118. l. 1. r. of an. p. 143. l. 6. r.
were written. p. 162. l. 26. (s) this note should have been placed after City
l. 24. and another added here to refer to the words of Clemens. p. 170. l. 17.
marg. r. c. 4. p. 179. l. 5. marg. r. Ep. 54. p. 200. l. 2. marg. r. lib. 9. c.
5. p. 208. l. 14. marg. r. c. 32. p. 218. l. 7. marg. r. obnitente. p. 260. l.
12. r. is mop't.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. JEsus Christ the Founder of Church Government. The Apostles the first
Officers that he constituted. To them he gave no Temporal Authority, yet did
communicate to them that which is Spiritual. p. 1 Chap. 2. The Apostles stood
related amongst themselves as Equals, but to other Ecclesiastical Officers,
particularly to the Seventy Disciples, and to Presbyters, as Superiors, they
were Bishops both in Title and Authority, p. 25 Chap. 3. If the Apostles were
Bishops, Episcopacy is of a Divine Original. The Objection against this, that
the Apostles were Extraordinary Officers, considered, p. 34 Chap. 4. S. James
was an Apostle, and yet he was Bishop of Jerusalem, and constantly resided
there, p. 60 Chap. 5. The Apostolate differs not in substance from the Office
of a Bishop. It was designed for continuance, p. 78 Chap. 6. The Title and
Office of Apostles were communicated to many besides the Twelve, p. 90 Chap. 7.
Apostolical Authority was communicated to Timothy: who was Bishop of Ephesus.
p. 104 Chap. 8. Apostolical Authority was communicated to Titus, who was Bishop
of Crete, p. 132 Chap. 9. Apostolical Authority was communicated to the Angels
mentioned Revel. 1.20. who were Bishops of the Asiatick Churches, p. 144 Chap.
10. Objections against Episcopacy, taken from the Writings of the first
Century, considered, p. 164 Chap. 11. After the Apostles Decease the Churches
were governed by single Persons, who were distinguished by the Name of Bishops.
p. 172 Chap. 12. The Bishops were Successors of the Apostles. p. 178 Chap. 13.
The Bishops after the example of the Apostles stood related amongst themselves
as Equals, but to other Ecclesiastical Officers as Superiors. p. 190 Chap. 14.
After the Apostles days there was no space of time, nor any Country where
Christianity prevailed, without Episcopacy, p. 207 Chap. 15. Objections against
Episcopacy taken from the Writings of the Fathers, and some Later Authors
examined, p. 215 Chap. 16. Prelacy is no degeneracy from an Apostolical
Constitution. The Pastors of the Church that came next after the Apostles did
not conspire to deprave any Form of Government which was of Divine appointment,
p. 236 Chap. 17. Episcopacy cannot be thought a degeneracy from an Apostolical
Constitution, if the Testimony of the Fathers may be admitted: Their Testimony
vindicated, p. 250 Chap. 18. The Testimony of the Fathers is necessary for the
ascertaining to us the Canon of the Holy Scripture: It is as Cogent for the
Divine Original of Episcopacy, p. 264
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's
Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, London, 1692.
AN Enquiry after Happiness, in several Parts; by the Author of Practical
Christianity, Vol. 1. Of the Possibility of Obtaining Happiness: The Second
Edition, Corrected and Enlarged, in Octavo, 1692. Price 3 s. 6. d.

-- Of the True Notion of Humane Life: or a Second Part of the Enquiry after
Happiness, in Octavo, 1690. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation: In Two Parts, viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables, Animals, (Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and Insects) more particularly, in the Body of the Earth, its
Figure, Motion and Consistency, and in the Admirable Structure of the Bodies of
Man and other Animals; as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray, Fellow of
the Royal Society. The Second Edition, very much Enlarged, Printed in Octavo,
Price 3 s.

Miscellaneous Discourses concerning the Dissolution and Changes of the World;
wherein the Primitive Chaos and Creation, the General Deluge, Fountains, Formed
Stones, Sea-Shells found in the Earth, Subterraneous Trees, Mountains,
Earthquakes, Vulcano's, the Universal Conflagration, and Future State, are
largly Discussed and Examined: By John Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society, in
Octavo, 1692. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Roman Emperor, concerning
himself: Treating of a Natural Man's Happiness: Wherein it consists, and of
the Means to attain unto it. Translated out of the Original Greek, with Notes:
By Meric Casaubon, D. D. The Fifth Edition: to which is added, The Life of
Antoninus, with some Select Remarks upon the whole by Monsieur and Madam
Dacier, never before in English, in Octavo, 1692. Price 5 s.

A TREATISE OF Church Government, Addressed to the AUTHOR of the LETTERS
Concerning the same Subject.
CHAP. I. Jesus Christ the Founder of Church Government. The Apostles the first
Officers that he constituted. To them he gave no Temporal Authority, yet did
communicate to them that which is Spiritual.
SIR,
SINCE you have been pleased to declare to the World, what expectation you had,
that I would give you a Scheme of my thoughts concerning Church Government,
your Readers have occasion enough to enquire, how you could meet with
disappointment, when you had the Papers before you, wherein I had largely
handled that Subject; and whilst you pretend to have drawn the things from
thence, which you endeavor to confute, and not from your own Invention. The
truth is, this Address would have been unnecessary, had you fully related my
sense of the matters in debate between us, as you found it expressed in my
private Letters: But the representations you have made of it are so very
defective, that I think my self obliged to communicate to public view the
Principles on which I proceeded, with a Vindication of them. And I begin with
what is evident enough, That our Savior Christ, who is Head of the Church, was
the Founder of Ecclesiastical Government, and consequently it proceeded from a
Divine Institution.

The Original of this Government being known, we may the more easily gain a
true Idea of its Nature: for that may best be discerned, when we consider it in
the greatest Purity, as it came out of the hands of our Lord, and was exercised
by his Apostles, who were the first Ministers that he ordained. And upon
enquiry we shall find, That, to qualify them for the administration of it, he
gave them no Temporal Jurisdiction, and yet did communicate to them Spiritual
Authority: That amongst themselves they stood related as Equals, but to other
Ecclesiastical Officers, as Superiors. And on these things all that I have to
say of Church Government will depend.

An easy Enquiry will inform us, that our Savior gave his Apostles no
Temporal Jurisdiction. For it is plain, that he did not send them to exercise
any such Dominion as was possessed by the Kings of the Earth, or the Lords of
the Gentiles. Nor did he any where disingage them from Subjection to the Civil
Magistrate. He gave them Commission to combat nothing but Ignorance and Vice;
and when he called them to resist unto blood, it was that of themselves, and
not of other men. And according to the Instructions they received, they taught
and practiced Submission to Secular Princes, not only for Wrath but Conscience
sake; and in all their Conduct nothing appeared, that might give any just
occasion of Jealousy to the State, or create Disturbance to the Empire.

Our Savior said indeed, that when he was lifted up from the Earth, he would
draw all men unto him John 12.32.
. But these words, signifying what death he should die, Ver. 33.
are far enough from the sense which Jacobus de Terano puts upon them: For that
wretched Paraphrast introduces our Lord speaking after this manner, I will
recover all the Empires and Kingdoms of the World, and take them from Caesar and
from Kings and Princes, by my Soldiers the Apostles. With such prodigious
flattery, says Marquardus Freherus, Marq. Freher. in Append. ad Dissert. de
Numism. Census.
from whom I borrowed that Observation, the Books of Augustinus de Ancona and
other Papal Parasites are stuffed; and with such Ornaments are the Decretal
Epistles embellished. To these he might have added the Annals of Baronius, who,
Vid. Sciop. Ep. ad Fulgent. Edit. a Colomesio inter Observat. Sacr. p. 6, etc.
amongst other things that occur in them of like nature, grounds the Doctrine
of deposing Princes on that expression, Arise Peter, kill and eat. And
accordingly that Doctrine prevailed by killing and devouring. It made its
impressions with Blood and Violence; but not without the assistance of much
Art, as may partly appear by this discourse of the Cardinal Prosper
Sanctacrucius with the French Ambassador Paul de Foix in the presence of
Thuanus Vid. Thuan. de vit. sua. l. 1.
: You compel me, Sir, said the Cardinal, in your favor, to reveal a Mystery
that has been concealed with a profound veneration, which is, that this Court
uses an exquisite Severity when there is occasion, and it may be done without
danger: and when any man of great Quality submits to it, the Cause is prolonged
with abundance of delays till the fame thereof, and the terror of our name be
spread over the World. This Severity is so long successful, as it is tamely
born, either through weakness or religious fear: but if a Prince be held by
neither, with caution and great dissimulation we depart from this Rigor. This
was an ingenuous Confession, and it shows in what wretched condition they have
been, who most of all dreaded the Thunder of the Vatican.

That the Popes and their Creatures have infringed the Prerogatives of Princes,
is evident beyond exception. And that others, who have seemed very adverse from
them, have notwithstanding in this imitated their Example, appears also from
many instances, and will not be denied, I suppose, by you, who have read
Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland, and have no fondness for the
Presbyterian Discipline. But whoever they are that take such measures, and
invade and grasp into their hands the Rights of the Magistrate, whether they
pretend to it in order to things Spiritual, or for the advancement of the
Scepter of Christ, they make the Gospel a Carnal thing, and do infinite
dishonor to Christianity by their Usurpations.

This may be sufficient to let you see, that the sentiments I have of
Ecclesiastical Government entrench not on the Temporal: and that, when you tell
me, The sword knows no other edge, but what the Magistrate gives it, it makes
nothing against me, who am of opinion, that the Church has no Secular Power,
but what is derived from Secular Princes, and what may be limited or extended
by them.

Nevertheless I affirm in the next place, that our Savior communicated some
Power to his Church; and particularly, that he conferred on his Apostles such
Authority as Secular Princes could not bestow. For he gave them Compare Matthew.
16.19. with John 20.23.
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: He gave them Commission to absolve
offenders, and an assurance that their Sentence should be ratified. Whose
soever sins, said he, ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained.

After his Ascension, they acted as his Representatives, and by the Power they
received from him, they constituted other Officers to be Governors of
Churches; and to them they conveyed some Authority. For Authority is implied in
the Titles (...).
that are attributed to them in the Scripture, and in different degrees it
belongs to all Ecclesiastical Rulers. Obey them that have the Rule over you,
says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, Heb. 13.17. And Clemens Romanus Clem. Romans Ep. ad
Corinth. c. 57. p. 121. Ed. Oxon. 1677.
admonishes those who had laid the foundation of the Schism at Corinth, To be
subject to their Presbyters, to be contrite and penitent for their former
miscarriages, to lay aside their arrogant speeches, and to learn submission;
since it were better, as he tells them, that they should be little in the Fold
of Christ, than to swell with pride, and fall from their hopes in him.

The Authority that has been assigned to the Apostles and other Pastors of the
Church, is commonly called Spiritual, and not unfitly; for it is exercised in
Spiritual matters, and relates to the affairs of another World. It does not
touch or hurt the Body, or Life, or Estate of an Offender, but by accident. It
may be assisted by the Coercive Power of the Magistrate, but that is not
essential to it. The administration of it is sometimes rendered more easy by
the favor of Princes, and sometimes more difficult by their opposition; but it
is the same in it self under those various circumstances. It has its proper
effects in the times of Persecution, as well as in those that are serene and
calm; and it must be granted, that Obedience is always due to it under the pain
of God's displeasure; unless one will say, that his Precepts may be broken
without danger, or that Ecclesiastical Government is one of the most precarious
useless things in the World.

Before I dismiss this Subject, it may be fit to take notice of the Attempts
against Ecclesiastical Authority that have been made by a late Writer T. H.
, who is supposed by some to be, what he thought himself, a man of
Demonstration. You are no Stranger to his Opinions, amongst which this is one,
that Christ himself had not, nor has in this World any Regal or Governing
Power Lev. c. 42.
. Our Savior was sent, says he, to persuade the Jews to return to, and to
invite the Gentiles to receive the Kingdom of the Father, but not to reign in
Majesty, no not as his Fathers Lieutenant, till the day of Judgment. And from
hence he gathers, that no obedience to his Officers can be required.

For this purpose he produces these words of Christ, My Kingdom is not of this
world: John 18.36.
But he certainly mistakes their sense, as the Manichees did before him: and
the Answer may be applied to him, which was given to them by Theophylact v.
Theophylact. Comment. in Evangel. Ed. Romans p. 558.
, who observes, that it is said indeed, My Kingdom is not of this World, and
again, it is not from hence. But it is not said, My Kingdom is not in this
World, or it is not here. The Kingdom of Christ is not from the earth as its
Cause, nor is it earthly in its Nature. Yet is the Earth part of his Empire,
and he turns about the affairs of it at his pleasure. In his state of
humiliation, he had power on Earth to forgive sins Matthew. 9.6.
. And then it was that he said to his Disciples, Ye call me Master and Lord,
and ye say well, for so I am John 13.13.
. After his Resurrection he declared, that all power was given to him in heaven
and in earth Mat. 28.18.
. And so far is it from being true, that he reigns not till the day of
judgment, that the Apostle says expressly, He must reign till he has put all
his enemies under his feet 1 Cor. 15.25.
.

If our Savior had all Power, he might delegate some part of it to his
Apostles; and that he did so, appears from what has been said; and it may be
confirmed from the Promise which he made to them, that they should sit on
twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Mat. 19.28.
. This place, I know, has been made use of to prove, that no Ministers of
Christ have any ruling power, till he comes to judgment Loviath. c. 42.
. But one that attentively considers, that the Jurisdiction which is
represented by sitting on Thrones, commences not with his coming in Glory, but
with his entering into it, or being See John 7.39. and 12.16. 1 Pet. 1.21.
in it, may find reason to think, he designed to intimate to his Apostles, in
such terms as they could then receive it, that when he was departed from them,
and sat down at the Right Hand of the Father, they should act as the supreme
visible Governors of the Church, which is the Mystical Israel.

Another Objection which the Author of the Leviathan Lev. c. 42. p. 373.
brings against Ecclesiastical Authority, is taken from our Savior's
forbidding his followers, to be called Masters Mat. 23.10.
: But that proves too much or nothing; for in what sense they might not assume
the Title of Masters, in that it may not be attributed to any man upon Earth,
but belongs to Christ. The want of it therefore would abrogate all Humane
Authority, or none at all. The like may be said of his Argument, which he
grounds on these words of S. Paul, Not that we have Dominion over your faith 2
Cor. 1.24.
: for, no man in the World has any such Dominion, as implies a right to coin
new Articles of Religion, or to impose things to be believed, as the Doctrine
of God, which he has no where revealed. This is what was disclaimed by the
Great Justinian (...). ((...)) etc. Justin. Cod. lib. 1: tit. 1. leg. 6.
, and ought to be so by all other Princes. Since therefore there is a want of
that Dominion equally in all men, if such a defect were inconsistent with
Authority, it would destroy that of the Civil Magistrate, or render it a mere
Usurpation.

But the Objector assigns to Supreme Magistrates such Authority, that by it, he
says, All sorts of Doctrine are to be approved or rejected T. H. Lev. c. 38. p.
241.
: and according to him, those Magistrates must be obeyed, though they command
their Subjects to profess an Assent to the Alcoran, or to condemn the Gospel of
Christ, or to worship Idols. And for this he pleads from the Example of Naaman
the Syrian Leviath. c. 42. p. 271.
who bowed himself in the House of Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.17.
when his Master leaned upon his hand: But how impertinently he makes use of
that Instance, others have demonstrated: and I shall only note, that it is not
strange, that a person who shows such an enmity to Religion and to Christianity
in particular, should tell us, Leviath. c. 39. p. 248.
That Temporal and Spiritual Government, are but two words brought into the
World, to make men see double, and mistake their lawful Sovereign.

Whosoever reads and believes the Scripture cannot but approve what he derides;
so manifest it is from thence, that a Government distinct from the Temporal was
established by our Lord himself. The Apostles were constituted by him the first
Rulers of his Church, but without any Commission from the Civil Magistrate.
They laid their Commands We command you, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. See also, v. 4, 12.
1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
on the Christian Converts, and expected an obedience to their Orders: And we
must believe they had Power to do this from Christ, notwithstanding this man so
confidently denies It is manifest, that Christ has not left to his Ministers
in this World, unless they be also indu'd with Civil Authority, any Authority
to command other men. T. H. Lev. c. 42. p. 271.
, that he left them any such Authority. They asserted the Right he gave them to
preach, notwithstanding the Prohibitions and Menaces of the Officers of State
Act. 4.19. and 5.29.
; and this was so reasonable, that they appealed to their enemies to be Judges
of it. Without asking leave of any Secular Powers, they planted Churches: they
formed Societies under their proper Rulers, and did not teach them to see
double, when they required them to honor and obey those that presided over
them in the Lord 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.17.
.

Such Spiritual Governors remained after the Decease of the Apostles, when
they were so far from receiving their Office, or any support and assistance in
the discharge of it, from Temporal Princes, that they were hated and persecuted
by them. Yet they proceeded in their work, and kept up their Discipline. And it
is certain, that before the Empire was Christian, the Church was governed by
its proper Officers, as a Society distinct from the State, and independent on
it; yet were not the Christians then in danger of mistaking their lawful
Sovereign.

You must excuse me, Sir, that I have been so long detained by the Exceptions
of an Author of no good fame. It is from him that you have taken some of your
Principles, and you are not neglected, when they are considered as I find them
in the Original. You follow the Leviathan exactly, where you tell me, that the
Apostleship itself was not a Magistracy, but a Ministry Letter of Aug. 10.
. For your meaning is not, that the Apostles had no Secular Power, about which
there was no dispute; but as it is manifest from your own words, that they had
no Authority at all, unless it was to preach the Gospel: and for this you quote
2 Cor. 4.5. Where S. Paul says, We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. But if this be for your
purpose, and prove what you design by it, then was the Office of the Apostles,
which has been so much magnified, a servile thing: Then were they put under the
Dominion, and left to the Disposal of their own Converts, and made subject to
the Churches which they had planted, or, which is all one, the Chief Pastors
were obliged to be governed by their Flocks. And this comes of stretching a
Metaphor beyond the person that used it.

You might have observed that the Apostles were not properly the Ministers of
the Churches, but of Christ, and employed by him for the good of Mankind: and
this no more derogates from their Power, than it does from the Dignity of the
Blessed Angels, that they are Ministering Spirits Heb. 1.14.
, not of men indeed, but for them that shall be heirs of salvation. You might
also have considered what S. Paul declares, that he was so a servant unto all
men, 1 Cor. 9.19.
as to remain free; and consequently, that he could not otherwise be their
Servant, but in a Figure. And this which he used was very suitable to the
condition of a person, who was so abundant in his labors, and complied so much
with men of different tempers; not out of weakness indeed, or want of ability,
but out of zeal and an ardent desire of the happiness both of Jews and Gentiles.

Another reason for which S. Paul represented himself under this Figure, is,
that as Servants then received no wages for their work, so he reaped no
temporal profit from his industry in communicating things that are Spiritual 2
Cor. 11.7. 1 Cor. 9.18, 19.
. Yet this proceeded from his Choice, and not from the necessary Obligation of
his Office. Nor did it signify want of Power in him, 1 Cor. 9.6, 12. 2 Thessalonians.
3.9.
but a voluntary departing from his own Right. He declared that the Labourer is
worthy of his reward 1 Timothy 5.18.
: that the Lord has so ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel 1 Cor. 9.14.
, and that himself as well as others might justly have expected his maintenance
from the Contributions of those whom he had instructed, if he would have
insisted on it. But had he been literally their servant, especially such a
servant as those times afforded Vid. Pignor. de Serve. p. 7, etc. Ed. Amst. 1674.
, his acting amongst them as a Judge or Governor 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.
, his passing Sentence of Condemnation on a Criminal, and the Order he sends
that his Decree should be put in Execution, his declaring also that he was in
readiness to revenge all disobedience 2 Cor. 10.6.
, must remain unaccountable. The mention he makes of his power to use sharpness
2 Cor. 13.10.
, if his directions were not observed, and his challenging obedience 2 Cor. 2.9.
from them to whom he owed obedience, could not but be very surprising; and his
threatening that he would come with his Rod 1 Cor. 4.21.
, if they did not prevent it by their Reformation, and that then he would not
spare 2 Cor. 13.2
, must needs have appeared very strange language to his good Masters the
Corinthians.

Another Argument, by which you pursue the design of the Leviathan in opposing
Ecclesiastical Authority, is taken from the inconsistence, you conceive, it
has with the Civil Government, if it be not derived from it. You conclude,
there can be no Jurisdiction at all, unless it be in the Magistrate, or
proceeds from him; because, as you tell me P. 35.
, in one Kingdom there can be but one spring or fountain of it. But if this be
at all pertinent, and by Jurisdiction you do not only mean that which is
Secular, your Objection makes as much against the Ruling Power of the Apostles,
as of other Spiritual Pastors. Yet is this some of that stuff which you so
highly extol, and I suppose, that in your Epistle Dedicatory you had it
particularly in your eye, where you say, that were your Idea of
Church Government received by all others with the same degree of candor, as,
you assure your self, it shall by your Noble Friends, it would be of infinite
advantage to end those fatal controversies that for many Ages have perplexed,
and in this last almost destroyed, the Church.

What your Noble Friends think of your performance, I cannot tell. For my own
part, I am not surpised to find you ascribing Infinite Advantage to the
Exploits of your own Pen; nor convinced, but that if your Principles about
Ecclesiastical Polity were generally embraced, they might be of more pernicious
consequence than the Collection, which, as Lactantius Lactant. p. 452. Ed. Oxon.
informs us, Vlpian made of the impious Rescripts of Princes, that he might
show, what punishments should be inflicted on those who professed themselves
Worshippers of God.

The Justice of this Charge will be manifest from hence, that the Church cannot
subsist without Government, nor Government without Authority: If therefore, as
you contend, there be no Ecclesiastical Government or Authority, but what
proceeds from the Magistrate, this would put it into the power of a Julian, to
destroy the Church, by dissolving that Government, and abrogating that
Authority. And to this he might be the more inclined, did he believe that the
Hierarchy could not be tolerated with safety to himself, or were so dangerous a
thing as you have represented it.

Had the Apostles, you say P. 19.
, owned any pretensions of a design to erect a National (much more an
Universal) Hierarchy or Form of External Government in the Church, or had they
done any thing to occasion a just suspicion of such a Design, it would have
much obstructed the true design and end of their Mission, which was the
planting and spreading Christianity. For then Magistrates and Rulers in their
own defense, and for the preservation of their own inherent Prerogatives and
Rights, must have always opposed it. That is, they would have been obliged to
restrain the Apostles, or oppose their Attempts, if they acted by other
Principles, or advanced other Notions than you have embraced. And this may a
little discover the tendency of your Letters of Church Government.

There can be no question amongst those that believe the Gospel, but that our
Savior might have established an Universal Hierarchy. Nor can there be any
doubt, but if he enjoined his Apostles to erect an external form of
Church Government, it had been their duty to obey his Command. And what must
then the Kings and Rulers of the Earth have done? If you have stated the Case
right, they might lawfully have taken counsel together against the Lord, and
against his Anointed. They might and ought to have resisted his Design and
Constitution: or in your words, They must in their own defense, and for the
preservation of their own inherent Prerogatives, have always opposed it. A
passage which one would think you should hardly reflect on, without something
of Confusion.

It will deserve the severer Censure, if it be true, that such a Hierarchy as
you condemn, was indeed erected, and that by the appointment of Christ himself.
And this I take to be certain: For the Apostles, to whom he committed the
Government of all the Church Militant, were not invisible Rulers; nor were the
people under their charge invisible Subjects. They admitted not persons into
the Christian Society by any secret Rite, but by Baptism. Nor did they expel
them from it by any hidden practice, but in a public manner. The Faithful were
united to them, and other Pastors ordained by them, as also amongst themselves,
not only in Love or Charity, as they were to all Mankind; but in that mutual
relation which they had as visible Members of the same Body: and as such, they
were obliged to meet and communicate in the Assemblies that were held for the
putting up of solemn Prayers and Praises to Heaven for the Celebration of the
Eucharist, and other external Acts of Worship. And whosoever had Right to
Communion in one of those Assemblies, he had so in all; provided his demand of
it was no way irregular. And whosoever was expelled for his Offenses from one
particular Church, he was virtually excluded from the Communion of all other
Churches. He could not rescind the Sentence against himself, by shifting of
places. Nor could he be kept bound and loosed on Earth, unless he might have
been absolved and condemned in Heaven at the same time.

After the Apostles days an universal and external Form of Church Government
was kept up, and appeared in great vigor, notwithstanding the disturbance it
received from without. You your self confess, that the Notion of Catholic
Unity then obtained which was not understood, you say P. 30, 31.
, to be internal and spiritual: but to consist in something external, relating
unto Order and Discipline; as being an Unity that was to be maintained by
Communicatory and other Letters, and by Orders, and (that) was intended to
support the Notion of but one Bishopric in the Church, and that every Bishop
participated of that one Bishopric in solidum. A Notion that was of great use
to make the Discipline and Power the more pointed: for if but one Church, then
to be cast out of any part of the Church, was indeed to be ejected out of the
whole; and if but one Bishopric to be participated by all the Bishops, what
was done by one, was done by all. All did censure, if one did. The Expulsion
made by one Bishop out of any Church was in effect an Expulsion from all
Churches; and so a cutting off entirely from Christianity, and all Communion of
Saints. Yet useful as you think this Notion was, and early as it obtained, you
take it to be intolerable. The Authority which you acknowledge S. Cyprian
approved, and which was exercised by him and other excellent Men in his time,
was, in your judgment, fit to be extirpated by Magistrates and Rulers in their
own vindication. Because, as you tell me P. 19.
, the permission of such a Power over their Subjects, as would not only possess
an interest in their Consciences, but be strengthened, as a Secular Empire, by a
close connection of all the parts of it, and an exact dependence and
subordination, would render their own precarious.

How unfit this was to fall from the Pen of a Person that makes profession of
Christianity, your self may better be able to judge, if you suppose, that you
had stood before Decius or Dioclesian, to give your advice concerning the state
of Christians, and the manner how they were to be treated: For had you then
spoken your mind freely, as you have now expressed it, it would have been to
this effect, Amongst the Christians, O Emperor, there has generally obtained a
Form of External Government, which is very useful indeed to them, but to you as
dangerous: For it possesses an interest in the Consciences of your Subjects: it
is strengthened by a close Connection and an exact Dependence and Subordination
of its parts; and being so, it renders your own Power precarious. I therefore
think, that it is necessary for you to oppose it, if you will be safe upon the
Throne, and not weakly abandon the defense of your own inherent Prerogatives.

But to this the Christians might have replied, That what you had suggested,
was false and injurious. That no danger arrived to the Emperor from the Form or
Administration of that Government which obtained amongst them, or from the
Exercise of their Religion in their Assemblies, but much advantage rather to
himself and his Dominions. For example; By their Discipline Vid. Tertul.
Apolog. c. 39. p. 31. Ed. Paris. 1675.
, they did not usurp his Prerogatives, but put greater restraints upon Vice,
than he did by his Laws. By their solemn Prayers Origin. contra ^els. l. 8. p.
426, 427. Ed. Spencer. Tertul. Apolog. c. 30. p. 27. Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 4. p.
152. Ed. Ludg. Bat. 1651.
they endeavored, not to engage Heaven against him, but to draw down Blessings
on him; and by hearing the Doctrine of the Gospel Vid. Theophyl. ad Autolyc. l.
3. p. 233. Ed. Oxon. 1684. Just. Mart. Apolog. 2. p. 64.
, they were not instructed in the Arts of Sedition, but to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to pay Tribute and Custom, Fear and Honor to
whom they were due. By their Sacramental Engagements Vid. Plin. Ep. 97.
they did not carry on any wicked design, but bound themselves not to commit
any Thefts or Robberies, not to break their Faith or Promise, nor to conceal or
keep back a pledge. And they that so carefully avoided all Injustice, were far
enough from invading the Rights of Princes, and could not but be useful Members
of Humane Society.

It Is true the Heathen Emperors were sometimes under apprehensions of danger
from their Assemblies. But Plinius Secundus Vid. Plin. ibid. and Elmenhorst
Observat. in Arn^b. p. 151.
could discover nothing in them, that might give any just occasion to such
fears, or create disturbance to the Empire. Tertullian Haec coitio
Christianorum merito sane illicita, si illicitis par; merito damnanda, si non
dissimilis damnandis -- Hoc sumus congregati, quod and dispersi: hoc universi,
quod and singuli, neminem laedentes, neminem contristantes. Tertul. Apolog. c.
39. p. 32.
, who knew them better, speaks with great assurance of their Innocence, He
professes, that if they were not unlike the Seditious Societies or Factions,
which are unlawful, they ought both to be involved in the same condemnation.
But, says he, We are the same being assembled, as when we were dispersed. We
are the same all together, as when we are taken singly and apart, hurting no
man, grieving no man. The union of Persons so inoffensive, and so ready to
render to all their due, could not be pernicious to any; especially, not to the
Magistrate. The Government, which was established amongst them, could not be
inconsistent with that of the State; for however they were distinguished from
one another; yet were they both preserved together. The Authority of Spiritual
Rulers did subsist without Injury to the Secular Power, which flowed in another
Channel, and without help or assistance from it. And in this Condition was
Church Government in the Days of the Apostles, and afterward under the Reigns
of the Heathen persecuting Tyrants. The variation of Circumstances, which it
met with under the Influence of Christian Princes, comes not under my present
Enquiry; but it will be considered in the Second Part of this Treatise.

CHAP. II. The Apostles stood related amongst themselves as Equals, but to
other Ecclesiastical Officers, particularly to the Seventy Disciples, and to
Presbyters, as Superiors, they were Bishops both in Title and Authority.
I Have showed what Authority the Apostles had not, and what they had. I shall
in the next place consider, how they stood related amongst themselves, and to
other Ecclesiastical Officers. I shall digress from you in handling the former
of these; but it will not belong before I come to the last, in which our
present Controversy is chiefly concerned.

First, I observe, That the Apostles stood related amongst themselves as Equals
in their Office and Authority. They were all sent by our Lord, as he was by the
Father. They had all alike Power to pardon and retain sins. And nothing of
Jurisdiction can be mentioned, that was peculiar to one of them; and not common
to the rest.

Yet the Zealots of the Roman Communion ascribe to S. Peter a Sovereignty over
the rest, and for this they passionately contend, not caring what they say, if
they think it may advance the Glory of that Apostle. One may conjecture, what
is to be expected in this kind from their lesser Writers, when so great a Man
as Leo Allatius so much passes the bounds of Modesty. Peter on earth, says
Allatius Allat. de Eccles. Occident. and Orient. perpet. Consens. l. 1. c. 20.
Col. 295.
, is Christ in Dignity and Authority. What things soever therefore were under
the Administration of Christ, are subject also to Peter, who after him is truly
Christ: So that he has Authority over all the Churches in the World, over all
the Sheep and over all the Shepherds. He tells us in another place Lib. 1. c.
2. Col. 12.
, That as the Earth was divided amongst the Sons of Noah, so that Shem had
Asia, Cham had Africa, and Japhet Europe: thus was the Christian Commonwealth
divided by S. Peter into three Patriarchates, which were the Alexandrian, the
Antiochian, and the Roman. But as for the Roman, it has Dominion, he says, in
the other Patriarchates. So that the Pope is subject to none. He judges all
men, but is not judged by any. He gives Laws to others, but receives none. He
changes Laws at his pleasure. He creates Magistrates. He decrees what is to be
received as matter of faith, and, as he thinks fit, determines the weightier
affairs of the Church. Although he would, yet he cannot err; for a bar is put
upon falsehood, that it may have no access to him. He cannot be imposed on by
delusions, and although an Angel should declare otherwise, yet being fortified
by the Authority of Christ, it is impossible he should be changed. This is very
lofty! and the Author has furnished us in this Harangue with a notable train
of thoughts. He was Keeper of the Vatican Library to three Popes successively,
and he shows what sordid flattery he had at the service of his Masters.

It were easy to make large Collections of such Extravagancies; but I hasten
to more useful matter. I shall only produce an instance or two out of Xavier's
History of Christ: for since that Book is not very common, I may perhaps
gratify the Curiosity of some, by showing what sort of Gospel it is that he
communicated to the Indians.

This Missionary represents our Savior directing his followers, not to relate
to the Church the Sin of an offending Brother who remains unreformed after two
Admonitions: but to tell it to the Prince of the Church Principi Ecclesiae dic,
and si eum etiam non audit, etc. Xavier. Hist. Christ. Interpret. Lud. de Dieu,
p. 370.
meaning S. Peter, and after him the Pope). If he had done this no otherwise
than as a Commentator, he had deserved, says Ludovicus de Dieu Animadvers. in
locum.
, the Character of a bad Interpreter; But when, as an Historian, he puts such
words into the Mouth of Christ, he may be justly charged with Forgery, and
lying against his own Conscience. At the same rate, and in pursuance of the
same design, when he had truly set down these words of Christ, Simon, Simon,
Satan has desired to sift you as wheat; but I have prayed that thy faith fail
not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren; he informs us, that
for Illustration, our Savior adds Nunquam fides Petri, qui Successor primus
est, deficiet, and opus ejus confirmare alios est. Atque ita factum est, nam
usque ad hodiernum diem nulli Papae, qui derivatio ex vicario Petro est, in
fide defectus fuit. Xav. ubi supra, p. 446. Calipha (Pers.) quod nomen summi
Imperatoris est vel Pontificis, etc. Lud. de Dieu, in loc.
, The faith of Peter, who is the first Successor or Calif, shall never fail;
and it is his work to confirm others. And so it came to pass, says the Author,
not one Pope succeeding Peter has been defective in the faith. And thus he
comments on his own Vision, and would establish an impudent Fiction, by an
Assertion that is notoriously false. Yet he declares, that this History
excelled all other things that had been translated into the Persian Tongue in
the Reign of Acabar P. 10.
the Great Mogul, for whose instruction it was composed. This, says he, is the
Book that most deserves, that the King should be proud of it, and think it
worthy of an honorable acceptance. He therefore petitions him, that a Command
should be issued out for the reading of it in the Church, as being the root of
the Doctrine of Righteousness, the tranquillity of the Heart, and the medicine
of Spirit P. 13.
. These are glorious Titles, and we have partly seen, how consistent they are
with his performances.

Xavier might be the more hardy in a place where he was in no great danger of
having the Materials of his History examined. Others perceive they have reason
to be more cautious, and they proceed not by way of Narrative, but labor to
support the same Cause for which he was concerned, by Arguments. But these, we
may be sure, can have no great weight, since they are employed to prove, that
there was a certain kind of Government established amongst the Apostles, of
which, it is plain enough, themselves were ignorant. Doubtless when the Sons of
Zebedee made their Petition to our Savior by their Mother, that one of them*
might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom Mat.
20.21.
, they knew nothing of the Sovereignty of Peter, which yet is supposed to have
been promised before Mat. 16.18, 19.
, and S. Paul was afterward as great a Stranger to it, when, in so public a
manner, he withstood him to the face at Antioch Gal. 2.
.

I need not engage farther in this Controversy, since it has been so lately
and fully handled by others. And perhaps, Sir, you may think, that I have
already dwelt too long on a Subject, in which I have no Adversary, but the
Advocates of the Papacy. But their Doctrine being so inconsistent with that
Scheme of Thoughts which you have obliged me to publish, I was not willing to
pass by them without Ceremony. But now I return to you, and observe,

Secondly, That notwithstanding there was such an Equality amongst the
Apostles, yet there were other Ecclesiastical Officers inferior to them. Such,
I think, were the Seventy Disciples, whom our Lord constituted in the days of
his flesh. For since the Apostles and Seventy Disciples are thus represented
under different denominations: Since it is not doubted, but they were appointed
in accommodation to the twelve Princes of the Tribes, and the Seventy Elders in
the Mosaical Polity; since none of the Seventy could be of the Order of the
Twelve, without a new Election and Advancement, you need not think it strange,
that I conclude, as many have done before me, that they were of different
Ranks, and that in this state of things there was a disparity of Ministers.

But you tell me P. 1.
, that if the prejudices of my Education, or of my Circumstances, had not stuck
too fast to me, I might have discovered, that the Institution of the Seventy
Disciples, was only temporary. Yet if this Discovery will do you any service, I
cannot find that your self have made it. You say indeed, that the Seventy were
sent about a particular business to the House of Israel, and that their Office
ceased of course at their Return. But of this I find no grounds in the Holy
Scripture. I am sure, the Apostles Mat. 10.
and Seventy Disciples Luke 10.
were sent abroad and employed in like manner at different times: But the first
returned without any loss of their Function, and so might the last. And that
they did so, we have reason to think, unless they were degraded or depressed
into the Rank of private men, by some Act of their Master. But to me it seems
incredible, as it did also to Blondel Blondel. Apolog. Sect. 3. p. 118.
, that when the Harvest was like to increase, our Lord diminished the Number of
his Laborers: that he dismissed them when they were become acquainted with
their Work, which still was necessary; or that he gave them a discharge at that
time; when, for their Confirmation, he bestowed on them power over all the
power of the enemy, Luke 10.19. It Is true, the Scriptures mention them not
afterward by the Name of the Seventy; but if this proves, that their Office
was expired, one may also conclude from it, that they were all dead; for there
is as great a Silence about their Lives, as about their Ministry.

It may be useful to contemplate that Platform of Ecclesiastical Polity, which
those early times afford: yet I confess, they are something obscure, and that
you do not unfitly call them a Twilight between the Law and the Gospel. And
this might have restrained you from reflecting on me, as influenced by
prejudices or my circumstances, for not acknowledging that the Office of
Apostles, which was first conferred on the Twelve, as well as in your Opinion,
the Commission of the Seventy Disciples, was temporary, or expired at the
farthest after our Savior's Resurrection, when for this you produce no better
Argument, than what implies, that a former Grant must necessarily be cancelled,
when Additions are made to it. But about this, I have no need to dispute. We
come now to another state of things which is most clear, and in which we are
infinitely concerned. The wall of partition was broken down: And after our
Lord's Ascension, the multitude of Believers increasing first amongst the Jews,
and afterward amongst the Gentiles, the Apostles found it necessary to have
some Assistance in their Labors, and for that purpose ordained Presbyters and
Deacons, neither of which were their Equals, but subject to their Authority.

I will not contend, as you have done, that a Diocesan compared to an Apostle
is less in Authority than a Parish Priest P. 6.
, nor can I approve, what you take for granted, that the Apostles could
constitute no Officers, over whom they did not retain a Jurisdiction P. 4.
. But since you offer more than I can accept; you allow as much as I demand,
which is only this, that Presbyters were subordinate to the Apostles.

If there be now any doubt, whether the Title of Bishops may fitly be assigned
to the Apostles, whose Authority was Prelatical, that may easily be resolved
from hence, that when the Psalmist, in one of his Prophecies Psalm. 109.8.
, and S. Peter in the Application of it Act. 1.20.
, spoke of a Bishopric, they meant an Apostleship. His Bishopric, say they,
let another take; that is, let another be chosen in the room of Judas to bear
the Office of an Apostle, and accordingly the Apostles are said to have been
Bishops by S. Cyprian Meminisse autem Diaconi debent, quoniam Apostolos, id
est, Episcopos and Praepositos Dominus elegit* Cyprian. Ep. 3. p. 6.
, and by Hilarious Sardus Apostoli Episcopi sunt. Hilar. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4.
v. 11.
, and other Ancient Writers.

CHAP. III. If the Apostles were Bishops, Episcopacy is of a Divine Original.
The Objection against this, that the Apostles were Extraordinary Officers,
considered.
IF the Apostles were Bishops of the Church, and if they had Episcopal
Authority over Presbyters, Episcopacy is not a mere prudential thing, as you
suggest, or a defection from the first Rule of Ecclesiastical Government. It
was not the Invention of a Diotrephes, or a Creature of Ambition, but proceeded
from our Lord himself, and is of a Divine Extraction.

But however the Apostles were Bishops, you conclude, that they were not
Precedents for Government in succeeding times, because, as you tell me, they
were Extraordinary Officers. And in this Assertion you stand not single; for it
has been often urged by others, and readily received by Persons of different
Persuasions.

Nevertheless, I think, we ought not, without due examination, to admit a
pretense, which has been made use of to very bad purposes. The greatest Zealots
for the Papal Monarchy tell us, that S. Peter only conveyed his Power to his
Successors; but as for the rest of the Apostles, their Authority was
Extraordinary and died with them Omnibus persuasum video hanc potestatem in
Petro fuisse Ordinariam, quae transeat in Successores, in aliis vero Apostolis
fuisse Extraordinariam sive delegatam, quae morte illorum extincta fuerit.
Petr. de Marca in Opuse. p. 110.
. But this the Socinians affirm of them all Quod attinet ad Apostolos -- certum
est eos amplitis in Ecclesia Christi non inveniri. Et enim causa, ob quam illi
electi and missi and dati a Deo fuere, desiit: Ea vero fuit quod per eos Deus
doctrinam filii sui mundo primum annunciari and confirmari voluerit. Catechism.
Racov. Sect. 9. c. 2.
And the same reason for which they conclude, that an end was put to the
Apostolical Office, they employ also to cancel the use of Ministerial Mission
or Ordination. They grant indeed, that such Mission was requisite for the first
Preachers of the Gospel, but assert, that now it is become unnecessary, since
we are not to teach a new Doctrine with which the World is unacquainted, but to
explain the old one. But at this rate, they that are weary of any Ordinance of
Christ, which is of positive Institution, need but fasten on it the Name of
Extraordinary, and then it must be of no longer continuance.

I have therefore been desirous to know what Standard you have for
Extraordinaries. And on this occasion you have obliged me with an Act of pure
Generosity, for which I never asked. You send me to Cicero and Lipsius to show
what were the Extraordinary Honors, Power, Magistrates, among the Romans, which
I knew well enough before. But what I demand is, some plain and certain Rule by
which the things designed for continuance in the Christian Church may be
distinguished from those, that were shortly to expire. And such a Standard as
this, I have not been able to obtain from you. I must therefore be content to
state the matter, as well as I can, without it; and for that purpose I shall
here set down some things, wherein, I suppose, we are agreed.

1. We are agreed, that they are Extraordinary Officers, who are only raised on
some particular or special occasion or accident, to which their work is
limited. But then it must be granted, that whatsoever proves not that the Work
or Office of the Apostles was limited to their own time, or that they might
have no Successors, neither does it prove them to have been Extraordinary
Officers. This I take to be manifest enough, and what use I intend to make of
it, will shortly appear.

2. We are agreed, That Persons in Office may have Successors in some things,
who have none in others: particularly, they may have those for Successors in
their Ordinary Work, who are not so in some of their Privileges. We have great
reason for this, for otherwise no Succession of Ecclesiastical Officers could
have been preserved, and we must have remained, like the old Acephali Vid.
Nicephor. H. E. l. 18. c. 45.
, without Ministers and without Sacraments.

3. We are agreed, that the Apostles themselves had Successors in their
Ordinary work. But that we may rightly understand one another, and that nothing
may disturb so friendly an accommodation, I farther add, 1. That I take all
that to be their Ordinary work, which others also did perform by the Authority
they received from them, and which has been continued in the Church ever since
their days. 2. I call that their Extraordinary work, which was peculiar to
them. Accordingly you may reckon amongst Extraordinaries such Circumstances as
were appropriate to themselves or their actions: and whatsoever Privileges and
Qualifications they had, which were incommunicable, you may also set them down
in your Catalogue of Extraordinaries, for they were Personal, and died with
them.

4. We are agreed, that to teach and instruct the People in the Duties and
Principles of Religion, to administer the Sacraments, to constitute Guides, and
to exercise the Discipline and Government of the Church, was the Apostles
Ordinary work. This is what you your self assign unto them as such in the words
of Dr. Cave, which I cannot but approve: But you must put a strange
Interpretation on them, if they do not overthrow that for which you produced
them. For if, as you say well after that Excellent Author, it did belong to the
standing and perpetual part of the Apostles work, to exercise the Discipline
and Government of the Church: that must be either such a Discipline, or such a
Government as they did not exercise, or such as they did: If you say the first
of these, you suppose that to have been their Ordinary work, which was not
their work at all: If you say the last, then it will follow, that such
Government as they exercised, and which was Prelatical, ought to be continued
to the end of the World.

I might now justly neglect all your Arguments drawn from the number of the
Apostles, from their seeing Christ, and the Mission they received immediately
from him; from their being the Foundation of the Church, and the Power they had
to work Miracles; from the Extent of their Charge, and their unsettled
condition, by which you would prove, that they are Extraordinary Officers: for
you may furnish your self with a Reply to them, from the Articles of our
Agreement. But in hopes to give farther light to what has been said before, I
am content to attend your Motions, and you are like to find me liberal enough
in my Concessions.

I. I grant, that originally there were but twelve Apostles; and I doubt not,
but, as S. Barnabas intimates -- (...) Barnab. Ep. Sect. 6.
, they were so many in allusion to the twelve Tribes of Israel. But it does not
follow from hence, that the Office of the Apostles was limited to that Number
or to their Persons. On the contrary I shall prove in another place, that it
was actually communicated to others: yet I deny not, but the Name of the Twelve
was continued: for as it was assigned to the Apostles Joh. 20.24. 1 Cor. 15.5.
with regard to their first Institution, when Judas was fallen, and there
remained only Eleven; so it was also when many more were admitted into the
Sacred College Rev. 21.14.
. And thus says Peter du Moulin Moulin. Vat. l. 2. c. 14. p. 54.
. The Regions of Decapolis and Pentapolis kept up their Names, when some of
their old Cities were destroyed, or when new ones were built within their
Precincts: and Neapolis (which signifies a New City) is still so called
notwithstanding its great Antiquity.

II. I grant, That the first Apostles saw the Lord: but this was no part of
their Office: only it made them fit to be the first Witnesses of Christianity.
Because, says Paulinus Quia Apostoli in orbem terrarum mittendi forent ad
omnium gentium informationem, non auribus tantum sed and oculis praedicandam
fidem capere debebant, ut quod firmius didicissent constantius edocerent.
, they were to be sent into the World for the Information of all Nations, it
was requisite they should receive the Faith, they were to preach, not only with
their ears, but with their eyes, that what they had more firmly learned they
might more constantly teach. But we cannot infer from hence, that none might
succeed them in teaching and governing. Their Conversation with Christ in the
Flesh was a great Privilege, to which at this time none can justly pretend: But
what qualified them for the Mission, by which they were enabled to constitute
subordinate Officers, did not hinder them certainly from appointing others to
preside over them, as themselves had done.

III. I grant, That the Apostles had their Commission immediately from our
Savior. But notwithstanding this Privilege, others might as well succeed them
in the Authority, they had, to govern the Churches, as Princes might sit on the
Throne of David, who were not advanced to it in a manner so Extraordinary, by
the particular Appointment and express Declaration of the Almighty, as himself
had been. Noah and his Sons received Power, by an express Revelation Genesis 9.
, over the beasts of the earth, and over the fowl of the air, over every thing
that moved upon the earth, and over the fishes of the sea, and liberty to eat
of every living thing as of the green herb. Yet they transmitted that Power and
Liberty to their Posterity, who have not such an intercourse with Heaven, as
themselves had. Thus the first Apostles, who were sent immediately by Christ
himself, might convey their Authority to others, who had not that advantage.
And it is manifest, that their Office was actually delegated to Matthias, to
whom our Lord did not immediately speak the words of their Commission.

IV. I grant, That the Apostles were in some sense the Foundation on which the
Christian Church was built: for so we learn from S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. But this
does not demonstrate, that they were an Extraordinary part of the Building.
Some think they were said to be the Foundation, because they first published
the Gospel. So the Socinians Quod per eos Deus doctrinam filii sui mundo primum
annunciari and confirmari voluerit -- vocati fuere fundamentum Ecclesiae, etc.
Catechism. Racov. Sect. 9. c. 2.
interpret that Expression, and they infer from thence, as you have also done,
that the Apostles were Extraordinary Officers. But if, for that reason, they
were so in any thing, it was in teaching, and consequently, That was an
Extraordinary Part of their work, which, you say, was standing and perpetual.

Casaubon observes in one of his Exercitations on the Annals of Baronius
Casaub. Exercit. 15. ad Annal. Baron. Sect. 13.
, that when the word Rock is used Metaphorically in Scripture, it is with
allusion to some Properties of a Rock, and denotes Firmness and Stability, or
the like. And says this Learned Man Res sunt affines petra and fundamentum, and
pro eodem ponuntur: differunt nimirum non re, sed ratione tantum, etc. ibid.
a Rock and Foundation are put for the same thing, and differ not in Reality,
but in Notion only. This is what you will be obliged to confute, if you still
adhere to your Opinion: for in vain do you argue, that the Apostles must needs
have had Extraordinary Authority, because they had the honor to be a
Foundadation of the Catholic Church, if no Authority be signified by that
expression.

The Apostles were vested with Authority by their Commission, before they
planted Churches, and therefore did not derive it from that work: But if we
think, that because they formed those Societies, their Authority must needs
have been Extraordinary and Incommunicable, we may as well conclude, that
Romulus was no King, because at Rome he laid the Foundation of the Regal
Government, which work was not repeated by those that succeeded him in the
Throne. For my part, I know no necessity, that they who constitute Churches
should be of a distinct Order from those that afterward preside over them.
Frumentius Vid. Socrat. H. E. l. 1. c. 19.
was as much a Bishop, when he traveled from one place to another in India,
after his return thither, to plant Churches, as any that governed them in
succeeding times: and they that were ordained Bishops by the Apostles of those
that afterward should believe (...) Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor. c. 42.
, did not forfeit their Character, whatever that was, or acquire any
Extraordinary Authority, if they were employed to convert those that were
committed to their Charge.

But you tell me, that whilst the Founder of a College lives, it is the duty of
the founded on emergent difficulties, to have recourse to him, and take his
directions; but he dying, his Authority dies with him. And it may be so, and it
may be otherwise. You your self cannot be ignorant, I am sure, how usual it
has been for Founders to appoint Visitors of their Colleges, and how permanent
their Power has been in our Universities. So that this Argument, if one may
call it so, may easily be turned against you. But Founders, you say, as such,
as have no Successors. This is profound! and it signifies, that none came after
them to lay the very same Foundations, which they had finished before. If such
arguing as this silences all disputes, and puts an end to the fatal
Controversies, which you truly say, have almost destroyed the Church, it must
be when the contending Parties are become very weary of their strife, and are
mightily inclined to an Accommodation.

V. I grant, That the Apostles had Power to work Miracles, for the Confirmation
of their Mission and Doctrine. But this hinders not a Succession to them in
that Authority which is not miraculous, but may be continued in all Ages. There
was something Extraordinary in the manner of discharging the Apostolical
Office, but it does not follow from hence, that the Office itself was so, or
ought to be laid aside. Otherwise, for the same reason, we must lay aside
Baptism, Imposition of Hands, Praying and Preaching, because all these things
were attended with something Extraordinary and Miraculous. (...), says S.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. c. 4. p. 268. Ed. Savil.
. There was nothing that was merely humane or common in that Age of Wonders.

But Miracles are said to be the Signs of an Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.12. And from
hence you have inferred, that none can have a Title to the Authority of
Apostles, who cannot produce those Signs and Credentials. And this, I confess,
is very specious, but that is all, as may partly appear from what has been said
already, and will be more manifest, by comparing the words of S. Paul in the
place before mentioned, with those of our Savior Christ, Mark 16.17, 18. For
speaking there in general terms of such as in all parts of the World should be
drawn to the Christian Faith, These signs, says he, shall follow them that
believe: In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new
tongues: they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them: they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
Now if one should conclude, that whosoever cannot cast out Devils, speak with
Tongues, etc. have not the Signs that should follow those that believe, and
therefore are no Believers; this Consequence would be as good as the former.
But if it be absurd, the other is so too.

Against this your Exception is, That the Signs our Savior speaks of, did not
follow all, but only some that believed: That Miracles were not called the
Signs of Believers, but that they were such Marks and Characteristical Notes of
the Apostles, that by them S. Paul proved himself to be one of their Order. To
which I reply,

1. That you suppose a real difference between the Expression of Christ, and
that of the Apostle, whereas there is none. For I appeal to any Person that is
a competent Judge of the sense of words, whether, these signs shall follow or
attend a Believer, and these shall be the signs of a Believer, are not
Propositions of the same import. Certainly had S. Paul said, the Signs which
follow an Apostle have been wrought among you, he had said as much as we find
in his own words, the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you. If therefore
the Promise of Christ extends not to all the Faithful, but some may believe who
cannot show the Signs that once followed Believers; so may some have such
Authority over other Ecclesiastical Officers, as the first Apostles exercised,
who cannot perform those things which were the Signs of those Apostles.

2. If Miracles, as such, were a Note of the Apostolical Office, if they were
that peculiar or characteristical Mark, by which S. Paul was known and
demonstrated to be an Apostle; then all that had that Mark, that is, all that
wrought Miracles, were also Apostles; and consequently the number of the
Apostles must be vastly increased by the accession of many Christians, who did
bear no Office in the Church at all. Yet I deny not, but Miracles in connection
with something else, were Signs or Marks both of the Apostles and other
Christians. They were Signs of the Apostles, as they confirmed that Authority
they exercised, and which they declared they had received from Christ. They
were Signs of Believers, as attesting the Truth of what they professed. They
were the Signs of those that had the Power of Miracles, but not such Signs, as
exclude all others from their Order and Rank that have them not.

For Illustration of this, I further add, that something may be fit and
necessary for the first Institution of an Order, which is not so for the
Continuance of it. For example, the Seventy Elders mentioned, Number. 11. were
constituted Judges by the immediate Command of Heaven: and the Lord came down
in a cloud, and took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it to them,
and they prophesied, v. 25. This Spirit was no more Accidental to them, than
other Miraculous Gifts were to the Apostles; for it was made necessary by the
appointment of God, v. 16, 17. and it was such a Characteristical Mark of their
being chosen by him, that Eldad and Medad, who remained in the Camp, were
distinguished by it, and known to be of their number, v. 26. But it was only a
Mark of the first Elders. None that came after them were advanced to that
Dignity, and confirmed in it with such Solemnity. Yet the great Council, which
is said to have consisted of this Order of Men Vid. Sigon. de Rep. Heb. l. 6.
c. 7. Seldom. de Syn. Heb. l. 2. p. 77.
, remained till the last Desolation of the Jewish Nation Vid. Cun. de Rep. Heb.
lib. 1. c. 12.
.

The Advancement of Aaron to his Office was Extraordinary, and so were his
Circumstances; yet others succeeded him in that Office who were not admitted
into it, nor established in it in a manner so miraculous and stupendous, as
their Great Ancestor had been. They resided at Jerusalem, whereas he had
sojourned in the Wilderness. They had not their Garments made by inspired
Workmen, as his were: nor could they perform the mighty Acts, which he did: yet
were they as certainly Highpriests as he was, notwithstanding the want of his
Qualifications.

Formerly you thought, that if an Extraordinary Mission and Extraordinary Power
do not constitute Extraordinary Officers, then there never could be any such in
the Church of God. But upon better information, you cannot but acknowledge,
that Aaron had such a Mission and such Power, and yet was succeeded by some
that had neither. Only, you tell me, that these Extraordinary Qualifications of
Aaron were contingent, and that he had them, not as he was High Priest, but by
a particular and express Revelation; nor could his Authority, when he was
opposed by Corah and his company, have been preserved but by a Miracle Number. 16.
. Afterward he could not have been continued High Priest, had he not been
distinguished by the blossoming of his Rod: for that by the appointment of God,
became a necessary Mark, by which the Person might be known whom the Lord had
chosen to that Dignity Number. 17.5.
, and without which, none might have owned him under the Character he had born.
But this Miracle was a visible confirmation of his Election, and the wonderful
Rod was kept as a lasting Sign of it against the Rebels V. 10.
.

The Successors of Aaron as they were High Priests, gave Answers when they were
consulted in weighty affairs by Vrim and Thummim. But according to Josephus
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3. c. 8.
these Oracles ceased two hundred years before he wrote his Antiquities, which
is much later than the Period assigned to them by the generality of the Jewish
Rabbis Vid. Bernard. Not. in Joseph. Antiq. p. 208.
, yet it is early enough to show, that there were many Highpriests who had not
that LIGHT and PERFECTION which distinguished their Predecessors, and for which
they were so eminent and useful to their Nation.

The Deacons, at Jerusalem, where they were first appointed, were Originally
seven; and these might not have been chosen and constituted, had they not been
Men full of the Holy Ghost Acts 6.3.
. Stephen who was one of them, was full of Faith and Power, and did great
Wonders and Miracles Acts 6.8.
. And Philip also cast out unclean Spirits, and healed those that were taken
with Palsies, and those that were Lame Acts 8.7.
: So that Simon Magus, who saw the mighty Works which he did, was filled with
Wonder and Astonishment, like the Inchanters of Egypt, when they beheld the
Finger of God. But neither was it afterward always requisite, that there
should be just seven Deacons, however some religiously adhered to that number;
nor was it necessary, that they should always be adorned with Gifts that were
Extraordinary and Miraculous: for otherwise, when Miracles ceased their Office
must have ceased with them.

The Circumstances of the first Presbyters were also Extraordinary. They were
qualified for their Ordination with Extraordinary Gifts, and Directions were
given about it by Extraordinary Indications. They could pray with the Spirit,
and preach by Inspiration: They could speak Languages which they had never
learned, and perform other things as Miraculous. Yet when all those
Extraordinaries ceased, the Order and Mission of Presbyters did not so, but
still remained, and ought to remain to the end of the World.

From these Instances, it is manifest, that some things might be requisite for
the beginning of an Office, and for some that were vested with it; a repetition
of which, is not always necessary for its preservation; nor for all that are
advanced to it. However therefore, the Apostles had some Prerogatives, to which
none at this time have any just pretense, however it was very fit, that they
that were the first Planters of the Gospel should be able to recommend their
Doctrine, which was then new, to the World, with Miracles, which we may call
the Seals of that Commission which they received from Christ: yet the Authority
they had, as Supreme Visible Pastors of the Church, might descend to others,
who have no need of new Seals or Credentials for what may be sufficiently
confirmed by the same.

Let us now suppose, if you please, that the Apostles did more Miracles than
any others; or that the working of some, was peculiar to them; yet if Miracles,
as such, hinder not a Succession to them, the number and quality of their
Miracles cannot do it without some declaration, that they were intended for
that purpose. They may rather seem to concur with other things, in signifying
the pleasure of the Almighty to preserve that Office or Order which he so
highly approved, and which he had established in so wonderful a manner.

VI. I grant, that the Charge of the Apostles was of great extent: yet this
hinders not, but that they might have Successors in their Office or Authority.
They had a large Sphere of Action, when they were sent to disciple all Nations:
But then no Apostle had sole Commission to do this: Neither were the Apostles
wont to act as in a Common Council by Majority of Voices, but dispersed
themselves, that they might better propagate the Doctrine of Christ: They did
not all travel together into the same Country; but some went into Asia, some
into Scythia, and others into other Nations, says Didymus Neque enim omnes
Apostoli ad omnes Gentes pariter sunt profecti; sed quidam in Asiam, quidam in
Scythiam, and alii in alias dispersi sunt nationes, secundum dispensationem
illius quem secum habebant Spiritus Sancti. Didym. de Sp. Sanct. lib. 1.
, as they were directed by the Holy Spirit. The Armenian Historian in Galanus
Accepto Spiritu Sancto, universas mundi plagas, ductis sortibus, partiuntur.
Vid. Clem. Galan. Conciliat. part. 1. cap. 1. p. 4.
tells us, that having received the Holy Ghost, they divided the Countries by
Lot. But certain it is, that some of them were more especially engaged to plant
Christianity amongst the Gentiles, some amongst those of the Circumcision: Some
in this Nation, and some in that. No single Person had the whole work of
preaching the Gospel committed solely to him. For, as there ought to be no
Ecumenical Bishop, so there was no Ecumenical Apostle, who had Jurisdiction
over the rest. It is also manifest, that all the Bishops in the second and
other Centuries, had Power to govern all the Churches that were planted by all
the Apostles, and to propagate Christianity far and near, so that the Charge of
both in general, was of equal extent. And if the multitude of Pastors, as well
as of other Christians, increasing, particular Bishops were concluded within a
narrower compass than the Apostles had been, such Disproportion of Dioceses,
does not necessarily hinder the Title of Succession of one from another, as may
appear by the following Instances.

The Kings of Judah are mentioned in Scripture, as sitting on the Throne of
David Jerem. 13.13.17.25.22.2, 4.29.16.
, when ten Tribes paid them no Obedience: So that however they had not his
Dominions entire, it was enough to preserve their Succession to him in Royal
Authority, that they retained it in such parts of them as remained under their
subjection.

Eutropius says of Severus, that he left his Sons Bassianus and Geta his
Successors Filios suos Successores Bassianum and Getam. Eutrop. Hist. Roman.
Brev. lib. 8. c. 19.
. And Constantine, he tells us, left his three Sons his Successors Successores
filios tres reliquit. lib. 10. c. 9.
, none of which singly could have all the Dominions of their Father, in which
the other Brothers had their share. And not to mention other Examples, I find
in Plutarch's Life of Demetrius -- (...), etc. Vid. Plutarch. Vit. p. 890, 895,
896. Ed. Francosurt. 1599.
, the Great Men who divided amongst them the Empire of Alexander, twice styled
his Successors, and once the Successors by way of Eminence: yet no one of them
had either the personal Courage and Conduct, or all the Dominions of that
Mighty Conqueror.

Perhaps it will be said, that this is a mere Dispute about Words: for that is
the Reflection which a Learned Foreiner Dans le fonds ce n'est encore la qu'une
dispute de mots. Bibliotheque Universel. t. 9. p. 153.
was pleased to cast on it when it had been managed by an incomparable hand.
But when Salmasius Plures uni non succedunt. Salmas. Appar. p 125.
, whom others have followed, argues against the Succession to the Apostles,
from his own mistake of a Word, to give its true Interpretation, and to confute
that which is erroneous, is the best way, I think, to show the weakness of his
reasoning.

VII. I grant, That other Pastors of the Church are commonly under an
Obligation to a more constant Residence in some particular Places, than the
Apostles were; yet this hinders not the Bishops from succeeding the Apostles in
their Office or Authority. For,

1. It is not Essential to the Office of a Bishop, that he reside in a Place as
a Local Pastor of a particular Church: nor is it always necessary, as you
suggest, that he should be ordained to a certain People. They that with us are
advanced to the Episcopal Chair, are constituted Bishops in the Church of God:
But that they are limited to a certain Diocese, proceeds from such Rules of
Government, as are not always of necessary Obligation. The Council of Chalcedon
declared (...). Can. 6.
, that none should be ordained at large; yet this Rule, says Grotius Grotius de
Imper. Sum. Pot. c. 10. Sect. 2. p. 271.
, was not of Divine and Perpetual, but Positive Right, and it may admit of many
Exceptions. Before that Council S. Ep. 1. p. 7. Sect. 10. Ed. Paris. 1685.
Paulinus was ordained Absolutely, in Sacerdotiam tantum Domini, non in locum
Ecclesiae dedicatus, as himself speaks in an Epistle to Severus: And when S.
Jerome Vid. Hieron. ad Pammach. Ep. 61.
was made a Presbyter, he had no peculiar Church or Title assigned to him. And
to come nearer to the matter, Photius tells us (...). Phot. Bibl. Cod. 48. Col.
37.
, that Caius who flourished in the beginning of the Third Century, was
constituted Bishop of the Gentiles, that is, of the Heathen at large, that by
his Labors amongst them, he might draw them to the Christian Faith.

Indeed where Ecclesiastical Government is settled and Christianity flourishes,
however persecuted by the Civil Power, it is requisite for the most part, that
the Jurisdiction of Bishops should be confined within their proper and certain
bounds. Yet when their circumstances resemble those of the Apostles, and the
great work is to convert Infidels to the Christian faith, doubtless it is then
fit that they should make freer Excursions. And therefore the Great Council of
Constantinople Can. 2.
, that so strictly limited Bishops within their own Dioceses, excepted those
from their general Rule who lived among the Heathens, and gave them liberty to
attempt their Conversion, and that within the bounds of other Bishops, as
Balsamon and Zonaras explain the Canon Vid. Pandect. Canon. t. 1. p. 87, 88.
Ed. Oxon.
. And yet I cannot think that they to whom this Liberty was indulged were
Bishops of a distinct Species, when they only differed from others in a
particular Circumstance. Nor can I believe that they were Bishops at home and
something else abroad: or that they forfeited their Episcopal Character, when
they were making Converts or confirming them in a foreign Province.

It is farther observable that the Canons by which Ecclesiastical Officers were
restrained within certain Precincts, being made in Times of Peace, did not bind
in Cases of Necessity. On which account, Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople
determined Ep. Canonic. a Coteler. Edit. in Eccl. Graec. Monument. t. 3. p.
453, 454.
, that it was lawful to communicate with the Presbyters who were ordained at
Rome, and Naples, and in Lombardy, without the Acclamation, or a Title. And
this he confirms from the Examples of Athanasius and Eusebius, who, when
Arianism prevailed, conferred Orders out of their own Dioceses: A plain
Argument, that they had contracted no such Relation to a particular People, but
they remembered, they were Bishops of the Catholic Church; and thought they
might, on some occasions, exercise their Episcopal Power in any part of it,
without a breach of Catholic Communion.

To conclude: As the Office of Presbyters was the same, when they were
severally appropriated to distinct Congregations, as it was when they had the
Care or Government in common of many Congregations under the Presidence of the
Bishop Vid. Epiphan. Haeres. 69. n. 1. p. 727. Sozomen. H.E. l. 1. c. 15. p.
428. and Hen. Vales. not. in locum.
: So is the Office of Bishops the same, whether they are limited or not, within
certain Dioceses. And to serve the Necessities of the Church, some of them may
be the more strictly confined, and not suffered to pass their Line: and others
may be left to greater freedom in the exercise of their Function, without any
essential difference.

2. It was not essential to the Office of an Apostle, that he should constantly
be engaged in Travels. S. Paul who was so abundant in his Labors, remained two
years at Ephesus: and S. James resided much longer at Jerusalem, as I shall
show in the following Chapter. In the mean time, let me tell you, that all the
Arguments, by which you would prove, that the Apostles were Extraordinary
Officers, perform more than you would have them, or nothing at all. If they
prove any thing, it is, that the Apostles could have no Successors in Teaching
and Instructing the People; which yet you say, was a standing and perpetual
part of their Office. So that you must be content, I think, either to yield up
the Cause, or you will be concerned, as much as I, to answer your own
Objections.

CHAP. IV. S. James was an Apostle, and yet he was Bishop of Jerusalem, and
constantly resided there.
AMongst the Arguments by which some would prove, that the Apostles were
Extraordinary Officers, I find none more frequently produced, than that which
is taken from their unsettled condition. And this you urge, after the example of
others: but something you have in the management of it, that is peculiar, and
must be ascribed to to your own invention.

Sure I am, say you P. 49.
, Athanasius in his Comment upon the Epistle to the Romans, ad c. 2. v. 1.
affirms the Office of the Apostles to have been to go up and down and preach,
circumvagari ( as his Translator renders him) and Evangelium praedicare. But
excuse me, Sir, if I tell you, that sure I am, you never saw any such Comment
of Athanasius, nor any such Translator as you have mentioned; nor have they any
Being, but in your Imagination.

The use you make of the words you have cited, is almost as surprising as the
Quotation it self. In the judgment, say you, of this so celebrated a Father,
the Apostles (as such) were but Itinerant Preachers: as if you had a mind to
depress them now, as much as you exalted them before. I leave you to clear your
self as well as you can; and I come now to prove what I have already proposed,
that it was not essential to the Office of an Apostle, that he should be
constantly engaged in Travels. And this I think, is very clear, from the
example of S. James the Just.

I know that many Learned Men have denied, that this James was one of the
Twelve, which others notwithstanding of great Eminence have affirmed. But I
have no need to be interessed in that Controversy. I think it sufficient, that
he had both the Name and Authority of an Apostle Gal. 1.19.2.9.
. And I shall show, that he was Bishop of Jerusalem, and constantly resided
there. I join these things together, because of their Affinity. If I prove
either of them, it will be for my purpose; if both, the truth will be more
confirmed, and they will give mutual light to one another.

That S. James was Bishop of Jerusalem, appears from the Testimony of a whole
Cloud of Witnesses, amongst which, Clemens Alexandrinus and Hegesippus, are the
most commonly produced, and chiefly depended on by the Assertors of Episcopacy,
as being the most Ancient and best qualified to gain an assent to their
information.

S. Clemens flourished in the next Age after the Apostles, and as Blondel says
truly of him Vir sanctitate and omnimoda eruditione praestans. Blondel. Apolog.
Sect. 2 p. 36.
, he was eminent for Holiness, and all manner of Learning. But Divine Learning
was the highest in his esteem; to acquire which, he traveled into many
Countries; and, as himself acquaints us, he had Masters to instruct him, that
were of several Nations. One of them, he tells us, was of Coelosyria, and
another of Egypt Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
: the third he mentions, was an Assyrian, and the fourth a Hebrew. And these
having preserved the Doctrines and Institutions of the Apostles pure, which
they received from Peter and James, from John and Paul, as Children from their
Parents, communicated them to him and others in his time. We have therefore
reason to think, that he was not deceived nor designed to impose on Posterity,
when he left us this relation, for which I now make use of his Name Clem. Alex.
apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 2. c. 1.
; That although our Lord had preferred Peter, and James, and John, before the
rest of the Apostles, yet they did not contend about Honor, but chose James
the Just to be Bishop of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem was the principal Place, wherein our Savior himself exercised his
Office, and taught personally, when he was upon Earth. It was the Metropolis of
the Jews, who afforded Converts to the Christian Faith, before Salvation was
brought to the Idolatrous Gentiles. The Church of Jerusalem therefore was
justly styled by the Council of Constantinople Council. Constable. Ep. Synod. apud
Thedoret. H. E. l. 5. c. 9.
, the Mother of Churches: and it consisted of a vast number of Believers. And
these are things that may put such Marks of Dignity on the Person that presides
in it, that the Chief Apostles had reason to think, it would not have been a
diminution, but an honor rather, to any of them, to have been in his Station.

This may be sufficient to clear the Testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, as
recorded by Eusebius, to whom I referred you: and I am not concerned to enquire,
Whether the relation of it, which you produce from Theodorus Metochita and
others, and which, you say Really the Story, as Clement tells it (if Theodorus
Metochita and others represent him right) carries its own Confutation: for they
make him say, that James, by Divine Appointment, was ordained to be the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, to prevent any Emulation and Dispute, that Peter, John,
and the other James, might otherwise have had for that honor. p. 27.
carries with it, its own Confutation, be so absurd as you imagine: Yet I
cannot but observe, that when I offer, what you despair of opposing with
success, you think it enough to find out something else, which, in your
judgment carries with it its own Confutation. A Politic device, I confess, but
no great Argument of your Ingenuity.

Hegesippus flourished in the same Age with Clemens, but something more early:
and living so near the Apostles time, he made use of that advantage in his
Enquiries into the things that were done in them; amongst which, he acquaints
us, this was one Vid. Hegesip. apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 2. c. 23. and l. 4. c. 22.
and apud Hieron. in Catalog. Script. Eccles.
, That S. James took on him the Government of the Church of Jerusalem.

Hegesippus does not only relate this of him, but he gives us a copious Account
of his Life and Martyrdom: yet this, I confess, would signify but little, were
he, as Joseph Scaliger represents him Scalig. Animadvers. in Eusebius. Chron. p.
178, 179.
, a trifling and a fabulous Writer. But that he was unjustly censured by that
celebrated Critic, has been showed by Petavius and Valesius Petav. Animadvers.
ad Epiphan. Haeres. 78. n. 13. Vales. Annot. in Eusebius. H. E. l. 2. c. 23.
: and to what they have said, more might be added, for his Vindication: if it
would not occasion too large a Digression; or were it necessary to insist so
much on the Authority of one, for the Confirmation of a thing, which may be
sufficiently proved by the Suffrage of many others.

That S. James was Bishop, or had the Charge of the Church of Jerusalem, has
been generally believed by the Christians of different Nations and Languages.
The memory of it has been preserved by the Ethiopians in their Diptychs Vid.
Ludolf. Comment. ad Hist. Aethiop. p. 342.
: by the Coptites in their Fasti Ab eodem Ludolf. Edit. ibid. l. 3. n. 66.
; and by the Syrians in their Menology Vid. Combefis, Not. in Auct. t. 2. Col.
843, 844. An. 1648.
. It has been received and related as an undoubted truth by Hippolytus
Hippolyt de 12. Apost.
and Eusebius Eusebius. Chron. Can. p. 189. Ed. Scalig.
: by Cyril of Jerusalem Cyril. Catech. 4. and 14.
, and another Cyril of Scythopolis Cyril. Scythop. a Caugio citat. e Cod. M.S.
in Append. ad Gloss. Gr. Col. 83.
: by Epiphanius Epiphan. Haeres. 66. n. 19.
, and Chrysostom Chrysostom. t. 3. p. 498.
: by Augustine Aug. contr. Crescon. l. 2.
, and Fulgentius Fulgent. l. de Trinit. ad Foelicem Notar. c. 1.
: by Nicephorus Niceph. Chronograph. Ed. Scalig. in These. Temp. p. 311.
, and Photius Phot. Ep. 117. p. ^58.
: by Oecumenius Oecumen. Enar. in Act. Apost. p. 122.
, and Nilus Nil. Doxopat. Not. Patriarch. Ludg. Bat. Ed. inter Var. Sacr. p.
216.
: And it was also mentioned as a thing universally acknowledged by the Sixth
General Council Council. in Trullo Can. 32.
; and Blondel Blond. Apolog. p. 50.
himself confesses, that it was asserted by all the Fathers.

This Testimony in which they are so unanimous, will appear the more
considerable, if it agree exactly with the Circumstances of S. James, as they
are represented in the Holy Scripture: And that it does so, will be manifest,
by comparing it with several places of the New Testament wherein he is
mentioned. For instance, we read, that when Peter had escaped out of Prison, he
said to those that were surpised and astonished at his presence Act. 12.17.
Go and show these things to James and to the Brethren. In which words he
passes by all Ecclesiastical Officers, except James, without any particular
notice. And this I take to be an Indication, that however, there might be
others at Jerusalem that were subordinate to him, there remained none with him,
that were his Equals.

When Paul went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, other Disciples saw he none, but
James the Lord's Brother Galat. 1.19.
. And this is that James says S. Jerome Hic autem Jacobus Episcopus
Hierosolymorum primus fuit, etc. Hieron. in Galat. 1.19.
, who was the first Bishop of Jerusalem: a Person of great Sanctity, and of
such Reputation, that the People would press and throng, that they might touch
but the Skirt of his Garment. That Father also gives this reason why S. Paul
did not see other Apostles, it was he tells us Quod illi ad Evangelium
praedicandum toto fuerant orb dispersi. ibid.
, because they were dispersed abroad to preach the Gospel: but he resided where
his peculiar Charge was.

Fourteen years after this, or rather, as some think, after his Conversion, S.
Paul went up again to Jerusalem, and there he found James Gal. 2.1.9.
, and reckons him with Cephas and John, who seemed to be Pillars, and were
Chief Apostles; hereby paying respect, in the Opinion of Bid, to the Dignity
of his Chair Cujus cathedrae dignitatem etiam Paulus Apostolus in eo nominando
venerans ait, Jacobus, Cephas, and Johannes, etc. Bed. Prolog. super 7. Epist.
Canon. nuper Edit. a D. Cave in Hist. Lit. p. 475.
. And it is observable, that however Peter was one of the Number, yet to James
he gives the first place, because says Anselm Jacobus hoc loco ponitur ante
Petrum and Johannem propter primatum suum quem habebat in Jerusalem, ubi erat
Episcopus. Anselm. Explanat. Ep. Paul. fol. 128.
, at Jerusalem where he was Bishop, he had the Primacy.

But this you will not admit: for that preference, you say, might be only in
respect of his being the Lord's Brother P. 51.
. As if John was not also the Lord's Brother, who is mentioned after Peter, or
James had but lately contracted this relation. I think this variation in the
Order of Names from the usual Method, must suppose a Change in the Affairs of
the Apostles, and import something peculiar to S. James, which did not always
belong to him; but now gave him the pre-eminence in this place. What that was,
we have seen already: and Mr. Calvin saw it, and does not speak of it as a
thing improbable: for says he Quum hic quaestio sit de dignitate, mirum est
Jacobum Petro praeferri: fortassis id factum fuit, quod Jerosolymitanae
Ecclesiae erat Praefectus. Calvin. in Galat. 2.9.
, When the question is concerning dignity, it is wonderful that James should be
preferred before Peter: Perhaps it was, because he was Prefect of the Church of
Jerusalem. The good man would not speak more plainly out of tenderness to his
own Discipline.

At the Council of Jerusalem S. James makes a greater Figure than any of the
rest of the Apostles, and speaks with an Air of Authority, as President of the
Synod. He was Bishop of Jerusalem, says Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom. com. 4 p
795, 796.
and to him was the chief Place assigned. And from hence it was, that others
having given their sense of things in debate. S. James passes the final
Sentence; whereupon, says Hesychius (...), etc. Phot. Cod. 275. Col. 1525.
, How shall I celebrate the Servant and Brother of Christ, the Supreme
Governor of the New Jerusalem, the Prince of Priests, the Chief of the
Apostles, the most resplendent amongst the Lamps, and most illustrious amongst
the Stars! Peter preaches, but James decrees. His words are but few, but
comprehend the greatness of the question. My sentence is, says he, that we
trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned unto God. And thus,
says the Commentator on his Acts (...), etc. Commentar. Rer. Jacob. p. 524.
Edit. in Combefis Auctar. par. 1. A. D. 1673.
, he spoke the word, and it was done. His Suffrage passed into the form of a
Law, and was delivered to the Church.

Indeed, if S. James had usurpt a Jurisdiction over his Colleagues, this had
been criminal. But I have ascribed to him no other Pre-eminence, but what, we
may well suppose, was granted to him by the rest of the Apostles, that the
proceedings in the Assembly might be the more regular. It was agreeable to the
Nature of a Synod, not that he that presided in it, should determine the thing
in controversy by his sole Power, but with the consent of the other members of
it. This is what S. James did after the full hearing of the matter, and the
manner of his giving judgment My sentence is, etc. Act. 15.19. (...). Illud
(...) cum Emphasi proferendum. Vid. Jo. Pricaei Annot. in locum. (...).
Chrysostom. t. 4. p. 797. (...). Theophylact. in Act. Apost. p. 135.
and the deference that was paid to the Sentence he pronounced, are very
remarkable; for all did not only acquiesce in it, so that the Debate ended, but
his words were put into the Decree which became obligatory to the Churches.

I find several Persons of the Roman Communion, as much dissatisfied as your
self, with the place that has been assigned to S. James in this Council.
There, says Binius Surgens Petrus tanquam Apostolorum Supremus and Caput dixit
[in margin, primo loquitur]. Bin. Council. t. 1. p. 2.
, Peter rising up as the Head of the Apostles, speaks first. And says M. de
Marca Conventum Apostolorum and Presbyterorum cogit, de negotio controverso
relationem facit, primam sententiam dicit rem definiendo, ut s^lebat Imperator
in Senatu. Pet. de Marc. Opusc. p. 154.
, it is Peter that assembles the Council, in which he gives the first or chief
Sentence, by defining the matter, as the Emperor was wont to do in the Senate.
This sounds very great, but has nothing in it of truth. Binnius himself
affirms Vid. Bin. not. ad Synod. 3. Apost.
after Baronius, that the Apostles who were dispersed over the World, were
brought together by Divine Instinct or Revelation* and this he proves from the
second Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians. And we read Acts 15.7. that
there had been much disputing; not without words I presume; and then, and not
before, Peter rose up, and expressed his sense of the thing in question. Yet if
he had been the first Speaker, neither will it be granted, that this is
sufficient to establish the Prerogatives which some have assigned to him: nor
yet, that the account he gave to the Synod of the Success of his preaching to
the Gentiles, and the expostulation with which he concludes it, are any
Arguments of his Supremacy. Yes says Mr. Schelstrate Petri audita sententia
illico obmutuit universum Concilium, conquisitio cessavit. -- tacuit omnis
multitudo, subdit S. Lucas, idque in signum manifestissimum, quod Petri judicio
acquiescendum duxerit omne Concilium. Scheistrat. Antiq. Illustrat. p. 138.
, When he had spoken, the debate ceased. All were silent, and thereby gave a
very manifest sign, that they thought, they must all acquiesce in his
determination. That is, because it is said, that all the multitude kept silence,
and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, V. 12. therefore S. Peter was the
Supreme Judge of Controversies: and the other Apostles had nothing to do, but
to approve the Sentence of their Head. Certainly he had need to have a very
favorable Judge, to get this admitted for demonstration. But any thing
satisfies a willing mind: and some have been content on any grounds to
attribute to S. Peter what he never had, that they may derive from him what was
never in his possession.

But I return to S. James, who after the Council was ended continued in his
Diocese. For S. Paul in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, v.
12. takes notice of some Jews that came from him to Antioch. That is, says S.
Augustine Ab Jacobo, id est a Judaea, nam Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae Jacobus
praefuit. August. t. 4. p. 379. Edit. Paris. 1614.
, they came from Judea, for James governed the Church of Jerusalem.

Several years after this, S. Paul returned to Jerusalem, and there he found S.
James and his Presbyters together, Acts 21.18. And this James, as Chrysostom
tells us (...). Chrysostom. t. 4. p. 864.
, was that great and admirable man, who was Brother to our Lord, and Bishop of
Jerusalem.

The last time he is mentioned in the Scripture, is by S. Jude; but from him, I
confess, we can learn but little, that may give any light to our affair. For
however, in the Title prefixed to the Syriack Version of his Epistle published
by Dr. Pocock, he is styled the Brother of James the Bishop, he is only said to
be his Brother in the Text it self, v. 1. Yet from hence we may gather, that
Jude knew him to be a Person of that Figure in the Church, that the
consideration of his Relation to him, might gain Attention to his Doctrine and
Instruction. And I see no reason why he should not as well have called himself
the Brother of Simeon Matthew. 13.55.
, as of James, but that Simeon was not then in so eminent a Station.

How long it was that S. James governed the Church of Jerusalem, we cannot
learn from Scripture. But S. Jerome Triginta annos Hierosolymis rexit Ecclesiam.
Hieron. in Catalog.
says it was thirty years, and he is followed amongst others by an Ancient
Writer of Our Nation cited by Whelock Wheloc. in H. E. Bed. l. 5. c. 7.
in his Annotations on Bede's Ecclesiastical History: It was not much less
according to Eutychius Factus est Jacobus Episcopus. Hierosolymitanus quo
munere viginti octo functus est. Eutych. Annal. t. 1. Interpret. Pocock. p. 327.
to whom on other occasions you pay respect: For as he tells us, James
continued Bishop of Jerusalem twenty eight years; and with him agrees
Elmacinus, as I find him quoted by Abraham Ecchellensis Ab. Ecchel. Eutych.
Vindic. c. 13. p. 206.
. In these accounts there will be no real difference, if it be allowed, that in
the greater are reckoned two parts of years, as if they were entire, and that
both are omitted in the less.

During all his time, after our Lord's Ascension we have no relation of his
Travels; but so frequently do we find him mentioned in Scripture, as remaining
at Jerusalem, that Walo Messalinus thought Hierosolymis non abstitit nec
quoquam extra urbem pedem movit. Wall. Messal. p. 20.
, that he did not remove a foot from thence. It was perhaps by reason of his
constant Residence there, that the Jewish Rabbis Vid. Cl. Castle. Lexic.
Heptaglot. Col. 2869.
became acquainted with his Miracles, the memory of which they have preserved.
But certain it is, that Josephus Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 8. and apud Origin.
Comment. in Mat. p. 223. Edit. Huet. and lib. 1. Contr. Cells. p. 35.
speaks of him, as a Person that lived there under a very high Character. He
tells us, that all good men and careful Observers of the Law were highly
dissatisfied with the Proceedings of Ananus the High Priest against him. And he
imputes the Calamities of the Jews, and the destruction of their Temple, to
their killing this James the Just, who, as he says, was the Brother of Jesus,
who is called Christ. And from hence it appears, that Jerusalem was the Scene
of his Actions and of his Sufferings, that there he had flourished in great
Reputation, and there was condemned and persecuted to death by the fury of his
enemies.

But Josephus, you tell me, speaks not a word of his Dignity as a Prelate: as
if I or any body else had ever affirmed, that he did. It is sufficient, that
what he says of James, concurs with other things, to prove that he did not
travel about the World, or that he was not an Itinerant Preacher: and for this
cause I produced his Testimony.

If after all this, you say, he was no standing Officer, I desire to be
informed, what it is, that constitutes a standing Officer, or by what Marks he
may be known. If you say, he was engaged in frequent Journies to plant the
Gospel. I pray oblige me with the History of his Travels. If you say, that
however he was an Apostle, his Jurisdiction was but equal to that of
Presbyters, I must leave you to combat your self, who have ascribed to Apostles
a Superior Authority.

One Evasion you have yet remaining, which is, that granting S. James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, it was in that sense only, as he was Bishop of all the
Churches in the World; and for this you quote a passage of an Epistle, supposed
to have been written to him by Clement, whose Name it bears. But as the Words
of this Epistle are set down in the Basil Edition A. D. 1526. Jacobo -- and
omnibus Ecclesiis quae ubique sunt.
, the Author does not address himself to James, as governing all the Churches
in the World; but to him, as Bishop of Jerusalem, and to all Churches wherever
they are. Be it as it will: No great regard, I think, is to be paid to an
Impostor, who, amongst other Marks of Forgery, has this one, that is
notorious; He gives an account of the last words of Peter, and of his decease,
to James, who died before him the space of several years.

We have seen under what Character S. James remained at Jerusalem: and we may
conclude, that this Office was not Personal, but continued after his death, if
it be evident, that Simeon, or Simon, as he is sometimes called, was his
Successor. And this is what is affirmed by the Ancients generally; and the
notice of what they declare might be the better conveyed to them, because
Simeon lived to so great an Age, that his Martyrdom falls within the Compass of
the second Century. Eusebius Eusebius. Chronic.
and Abulpharagius Abulpharag. Dynast. 7.
assign it to the tenth year of Trajan, which was the one hundred and seventh
year of our Lord. But a Learned Man of our own Dodwel. Dissert. Cyprian. 11.
Sect. 20, 21.
ascribes it to the one hundred and sixteenth year of Christ, and for this he
produces some probable Reasons, which have met with good reception Vid. Anton.
Pagi Critic. in Annal. Baron. A D. 107. n. 4.
. Not long after that time Hegesippus was a Writer, and he testifies Hegesip.
apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 4. c. 22. p. 142. and Freculph. Chron. t. 2. l. 2. c. 11.
, amongst many others, that after the death of James, Simeon was constituted
Bishop of Jerusalem: A Truth, that in the Ages which afforded the best Judges
of it, met with an universal approbation.

This being clear; I know not what better Form of Government we can have, than
that which was established at Jerusalem in the first Christian Church that ever
was, and of which some of the Kindred of our Savior had the Administration. I
know not what more excellent Model can be contrived, if this gives no
satisfaction.

CHAP. V. The Apostolate differs not in substance from the Office of a Bishop.
It was designed for continuance.
I Have considered the Arguments by which you would demonstrate, that the
Apostles were Extraordinary Officers, and in examining the last of them which I
mentioned, I proceeded farther than was necessary, because I was willing to lay
some things together, that relate to the same subject. It was my business to
show, that a settled Residence in a Place, was consistent with the Office of an
Apostle; and this I have not only done, but also proved, that S. James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, and that Simeon was his Successor: and if so, this does
not only answer whatever you produce for your Opinion, but is a direct Argument
for Episcopacy. It also shows, that the Apostolate differs not in substance
from Episcopacy, and that it was designed for continuance. A Truth which I
shall confirm, 1. From the Nature of that Office or Authority, which was
conferred on the Apostles. 2. From the Necessity of the Continuance of some
things which depend on a Succession to them. 3. From the Promise which was
annexed to their Commission. 4. From the Actual Communication of their Office
to others, and the Preservation of it after their Decease.

1. This Office or Authority which was of Divine Institution, was never
abrogated by any Divine Precept: It was neither appropriated to the Apostles,
nor can Time render it useless or unfit: It is therefore such as ought to be
preserved in all Ages.

We may well think, that they who were conversant with Christ himself, and had
received their Commission immediately from him, have afforded us the best
Pattern of Government that ever was; and it seems very improbable, that our
Lord should show us in their example, the most excellent way of managing
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and put us under an obligation to reject it, without
telling us so: or, that such a disparity of Officers, as had his approbation,
but never was opposed by him, should now become Antichristian.

They say, that Empires are best preserved by such means as they were founded,
and if the Apostles thought a disparity of Officers necessary, when they were
employed in converting the Gentiles; I think it is still requisite for the
Government of them now that they are converted: for their Conversion, did
prepare them for more Instruction: it obliged them to an attendance at
Religious Assemblies: it made them subject to Discipline, who were not so
before. And when the Work increases, I think the Laborers ought not to be
diminished, nor their Ranks broken.

We may rather suppose, that when whole Kingdoms embraced the Christian Faith,
disorders would be increased. And when the first Apostles were departed, who
could convey Diseases and Death in their Censures; whenever that Miraculous
Power ceased, it was requisite that some should retain all the Authority they
had, which was communicable, that by the Dignity of their Office they might
keep up a Reverence of Discipline, and preserve the Peace and Unity of the
Church.

2. There is a Necessity of the Continuation of some things which might depend
on a Succession to the Apostles, and cannot be preserved without it. Amongst
them, I reckon the Administration of the Sacraments; and the reason of it will
be manifest, when I have examined, by what Right it is that you assign that
Administration to Presbyters, as a standing part of their Work. I therefore
demand in the first place, From whence it is that they have Right to Baptize?
If it be from any Declaration that is made to them in Scripture, let it be
showed; if from any Command, let it be produced: if from Example, I pray inform
me, where any of their Order did Baptize. I think upon enquiry it will be
found, that none in Scripture are said to Baptize, but such as you call
Extraordinary Officers: and if they were so, as many of their Actions as were
peculiar to them may not be drawn into precedent: It follows therefore from
your Principles, either that Baptism must be laid aside, or else the Laity may
confer it, and they that have taken it out of their hands, have done it in
their wrong, and that, ever since the days of the Apostles.

Concerning the Lord's Supper, you are like to be as much or more at a loss;
for you tell me, that these words, Do this in remembrance of me, were said to
the Apostles, not as they were Ministers, but as Communicants (you mean private
Christians.) And if so, I would demand, what grounds you have from Scripture,
for assigning to any Ecclesiastical Officers the Administration of this
Sacrament, or how, with Consistence to your own Principles, you can free them
from Usurpation.

The reason for which you think those words of Christ were not said to the
Apostles as Ministers, but as private Christians, is, that otherwise there is
no Canon of Communion for the Common People or Laity: at which, I suppose, some
of them, who talk much of Religion, would not be offended. But if there be
nothing else, on which their Right to the Communion is founded, without any
injury to them, this matter may be thus adjusted. The Apostles as receiving the
Communion might be the Representatives of the Faithful, and of Ministers only,
in receiving the Command of Christ, to do as he had showed them; that is, to
bless and give to others the Sacramental Elements of Bread and Wine. And such I
affirm they were; and such you must acknowledge them to have been, unless you
will say, that the Administration of the Eucharist by the Pastors of the Church
has no foundation in the Holy Scripture.

I see no way to avoid the difficulties with which you are entangled, unless it
be granted, that the Apostles received Commission to administer both the
Sacraments for not only themselves, but others also. And since a Right to that
Commission cannot be conveyed but by Ordination; and there can be no Power of
Ordination, unless it be derived from the Apostles: from hence I gather, that
in this, which was a principal part of their Authority, as well as in that of
conferring Baptism, and celebrating the Eucharist, they ought to have
Successors in all Ages.

3. When our Lord, before his Ascension, gave his Commission to the Apostles,
he left them an assurance of his Presence with them in these words, Lo I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. And from hence it
appears, that it is agreeable to our Savior's intention, that they should have
Successors: Jus Divin. Minist. Evangel. par. 1. p. 26, 27.
for as the Assembly of Divines say well, This promise cannot be confined to
their persons, who did not live to the end of the world, but reaches all Ages,
and strongly argues that the Office of the Ministry shall continue till the
second coming of Christ: And if so, let us see whether the words be capable of
such a Paraphrase as this; Hereafter there shall be another sort of Ministers,
far inferior to you, not only in personal Gifts or inward and miraculous
Qualifications, but in Authority; and these I will protect to the end of the
world; but you and your Function must shortly be extinct. Now this is such an
odd kind of Interpretation, as I can by no means approve. But since the Promise
was made immediately to the Apostles, one would think, that it had a more
especial regard to the preservation of their Order, if it was also meant of any
others.

Against this, your exception is, that by the End of the World, some understand
the Consummation of the Mosaical Seculum, and think they have good reason for
so doing, by comparing Matthew. 28.20. with 24.3, 14. But that expression is only
used in the former of those Verses of Matthew. 24. where the Disciples said to
our Savior, What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the End of the World?
And here they seem to understand such an End, as should be put to the World, at
our Lord's personal and glorious Appearance; and not that earlier Period of his
coming in a Figure only, to take vengeance on the Jewish Nation: for this could
hardly agree with the Idea they had of that state of things, about which they
made their enquiry. However it be, thrice Matthew. 13.39, 40, 49.
do we meet with this Phrase in the thirteenth Chapter of the same Evangelist,
and as often it signifies the Consummation of all things at the day of
Judgment: For then it is, that the Son will send forth his Angels to gather out
of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and cast
them in the furnace of fire. And then shall the Righteous shine forth as the
Sun in the Kingdom of their Father; that is, when he shall deliver up the
Kingdom to the Father; for then, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.24.
comes the end. But if it be said, that the Predictions I have mentioned from
Matthew. 13. import no more, than the Calamities that fell on the Jews, and the
refreshment that the Christians received above sixteen hundred years ago; after
this rate of expounding Scripture, one may evacuate the clearest Prophecies of
the future and glorious appearance of our Lord, to render to every one
according to his deeds.

The Exposition which you defend, is not free from other inconveniences: For it
supposes, that the continuance of Christ with his Apostles, must be
commensurate with the time of his long-sufferance toward his mortal enemies:
and then, however he had already freed them from the Mosaical Yoke, and
intended to disperse them into remote Regions, where they would be little
concerned with the Political Affairs and Government of Judea: yet wherever they
were, they could have no assurance of the presence of our Lord with them, any
longer than he preserved his Crucifiers, and so their hopes must live and dye
with his Murderers.

It Is true, all the Apostles did not live till Titus executed on the Jews a
most just Vengeance. But then I would demand of you, that limit the Advantage
of our Savior's Promise to the Persons of the Apostles, and understand by it,
that extraordinary Assistance he gave them in the discharge of their Office,
how he continued with them that were deceased: and whether their dust and
ashes, or their relics, performed the Work and Signs of Apostles till that
Period, which you call the end of the Mosaical Seculum? But some lived after
that time, and I would be informed, whether they were then abandoned by our
Lord? If so, what afflicting thoughts must it cost S. John, who lived above
thirty years after the destruction of Jerusalem, when his Master, that loved
him so well all that while, deserted him, or lest him without his usual
Consolation. But this inconvenience you think P. 51.
, may be avoided, by comparing Matthew. 28.20. with Matthew. 1.25. where we are
informed, that Joseph knew not Mary, till she had brought forth her first born
Son. For as the meaning is not, that he knew her afterward, so when our
Savior says, that he would be with his Apostles to the end of the Jewish
World, this signifies indeed, that he would be with them so long; but does not
imply, that he would be with them no longer. That is, you had fixed a Period of
Christ's Presence, but finding your self pressed with the consequence of it,
you declare, that there was no Period of it at all. And his declaring, that he
would be with them to the End of the World, was as if he had said, he would be
with them after the End of the World indefinitely.

I do not see how that instance from Matthew. 1.25. supports this Exposition. For
neither does this show how our Savior could be said to be with those that were
deceased before the end of the Jewish Polity: that is, how he assisted them in
the work of their Apostleship, when that work was over, and they were entered
into their rest: nor yet does it reach the Case of those that survived. For
however it is enough for us to know, that the Mother of our Lord remained a
Virgin till the time of his Birth; yet it was not enough for them to know, that
he would be with them till the Jews were destroyed. They had as much need of
Comfort and Encouragement from his gracious Promise afterward, as they had
before; yet of this they must have been deprived, had the End of the World,
beyond which that Promise was not extended, signified the Ruin of their Nation.

Upon the whole, these words of Grotius on Matthew. 28.20. seem highly rational.
From hence, says he Hinc manifestissime apparet voluisse Christum ut Apostolis
aliis, illi rursum aliis viris fidis, munus illud magisterii commendarent. Nam
eum promissio haec ad consummationem Seculi se extendat, Apostoli autem tam diu
victuri non essent, omnino hic Christu^ in Apostolorum persona censendus est
etiam Successores ejus muneris compellasse.
, it very manifestly appears, it was the mind of Christ, that the Apostles
should commit to others, and they again to other faithful persons, that Charge
of Government which was committed to them. For since this Promise extends it
self to the Consummation of the World, and the Apostles could not live so long;
Christ is plainly to be thought to have spoken to their Successors in that
Office. And this, Sir, is the Testimony of that Learned Man, who for the
reputation he has justly gained in the World of great knowledge, and exact
Criticism may signify something with you, to use your own words: and if he was
not much mistaken, this Text of Scripture, by which you would prove that the
Apostles were Extraordinary Officers, overthrows what you design by it, and
supposes that the Apostles ought to have Successors till the coming of our Lord
to Judgment.

4. The Office of the Apostles or the Authority they had over Presbyters was
committed to many in their days that were not of the Twelve, and it was
preserved after their decease. It was therefore designed for Continuance, and
ought to remain in all Ages. This Consequence I take for granted, and the
Assertions from whence it is drawn, I shall clear in their proper places. At
present I only observe, that if they are true, they will much confirm what went
before. For whatever extraordinary Qualifications and peculiar Privileges the
first Apostles had, it will be manifest, that the Authority they had as Supreme
Governors of the Church, was none of them. That could not be limited to them,
which was conveyed to others. What was communicated was certainly communicable.

CHAP. VI. The Title and Office of Apostles were communicated to many besides
the Twelve.
I Showed before, that however there were Originally but Twelve Apostles, yet
their Office might be conferred on others that were not of that number; and that
it actually was so, is evident from the examples of Paul and Barnabas, who were
Apostles Acts 14.14.
, and that not only in Title, but in Power also. For the first of these
declares, that he was nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles 2 Cor. 12.11.
. And if Barnabas had owed him any Subjection, when a Controversy happened
between them, it might easily have been ended by that Authority, which one of
them might have exercised, and the other ought to have obeyed: but they debated
the matter on equal terms, and neither of them gave place to the other. The
result was, when the Contention between them grew sharp, they departed asunder,
and took different courses Acts 15.39, 40.
. But at another time they agreed, and went together to Jerusalem: and then
James, and Peter, and John, who seemed to be Pillars, paid to both the regard
that was due to their Colleagues: Gal. 2.9.
They gave to both the right hand of fellowship, and both went to exercise
their Apostolical Office among the Heathen, as the other three did among those
of the Circumcision.

You think however, that Barnabas was an Apostle of an Inferior Order, and that
he had his Apostleship from the Church. For this you quote Acts 11.22. where,
you tell me, the Church is said to send forth Barnabas as their Apostle (...).
, and not barely to dismiss him. But you might as well have said, that when the
Brethren sent away Paul (...). Acts 17.14.
, they did not barely dismiss him, but made him an Apostle. And at the same
rate, you may carry on the work of Criticism farther, and declare, that when
the Magistrates sent Sergeants (...). Acts 16.35.
to free Paul and Silas; when Herod sent an Executioner to cut off the Head of
John the Baptist Mar. 6.27.
; when the Chief Priests and Scribes sent forth Spies that should feign
themselves just Men Luke 20.20.
, and when the Pharisees and Chief Priests sent Officers to take our Savior
John 7.32.
, all these that were sent, were transformed into so many Apostles.

That Barnabas was, as you imagine, subordinate to any other Apostles, is
altogether improbable. For S. Paul speaks of him, as a Person in the same
Station with himself, where he says, Have we not power to lead about a Sister,
a Wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas?
and I only and Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working? 1 Cor. 9.5, 6.
Which words suppose S. Barnabas to have been S. Paul's Colleague, and S. Paul
to have had equal Power with any of the most eminent Apostles, and both to have
been vested with all the Rights and Authority, that belonged to the
Apostleship; for otherwise those Expostulations would have been liable to great
exceptions.

Besides Paul and Barnabas, there were many others that were not of the Twelve,
and yet did bear the Title of Apostles: and of what account they were in the
Church, Theodoret informs us (...), etc. Theod. ^. 3. p. 473. Edit. Sirmond.
. He observes, that anciently the same persons were indifferently called
Presbyters and Bishops; and then such as are now called Bishops, were styled
Apostles, but afterward this Title was left to those that were properly
Apostles: and on others, who sometimes had it, the Name of Bishop was imposed.
To the same effect, is that passage, which is cited by Amalarius from the
Reputed Ambrose Quia Beatis Apostolis decedentibus, illi qui post illos
ordinati sunt ut praeessent Ecclesiis, illis primis exaequari non poterant,
neque miraculorum testimonium par ill^ habere, sed in multis aliis inferiores
illis esse videbantur, grave illis videbatur, Apostolorum sibi vindicare
nuncupationem. Diviserunt ergo nomina ipsa and Presbyteris nomen presbyterii
reliquerunt. Alii vero Episcopi sunt nominati, hique Ordinationis praediti
potestate, ita ut plenissime Praepositos se esse Ecclesiarum cognoscerent. Vid.
Amalar. de Eccl. Offic. l. 2. c. 13.
, wherein he shows, that they who were ordained to govern the Churches after
the Apostles (by which, says Salmasius, he means others besides the Twelve)
finding themselves not equal to their Predecessors in Miracles or other
Qualifications, would not challenge to themselves the Name of Apostles; but the
Titles of Bishops and Presbyters they thus divided. That of Presbyters they
left to others, and that of Bishops was appropriated to them, who had the Power
of Ordination: so that they presided over Churches in the fullest right.

This place is quoted several times by Salmasius Vid. Salmas. Apparat. p. 75.
and alibi.
, but how contrary it is to what he endeavors to establish, is very obvious:
for it plainly intimates, that there were always Prelates in the Christian
Church, only with this difference. The first of them excelled the rest in
Gifts, and were called Apostles: but their Successors finding how
disproportioned their Merit was to that Title, thought fit to decline it: and
then they began to be distinguished by the Name of Bishops. Yet both were of
the same Order, and governed with the same Authority.

This is not the only instance wherein Salmasius has done right to the Truth,
with disservice to his Cause. For in his Dissertation against Petavius Walo
Messal. c. 1.
, he proves, that there were many Secondary Apostles, as we call them for
distinction sake, which were the Disciples of the First: And these, he tells us
Apostolorum Discipuli Apostolica Auctoritate pari jure ac potestate ut illi
fecerant Ecclesias gubernabant. Ibid. c. 3. p. 244.

Tenebant Ecclesiam eodem jure ac more quo tenuerant eos Apostoli. Ibid. p. 248.


governed the Churches with equal Right and Power, and in the same manner as
the First had done. He also ascribes to them the same Place over Presbyters,
that Bishops had in succeeding times Hi locum eundem tenuere in Ecclesia supra
Presbyteros, quem postea Episcopi obtinuere. Ibid. c. 5. p. 50.
. So that, according to him, there were always Prelates since the days of
Christ, differing indeed from one another in Name and Circumstance in the first
Ages, but not in Authority.

Amongst the Prelates of the first Century. I think we may reckon the Apostles
of the Churches mentioned by S. Paul, 2. Cor. 8.23. For they are said to be the
Glory of Christ: which Character, I suppose, they did not beat, because they
were employed in going on Errands; but as they were the Representatives of
Christ, in governing such parts of his Kingdom, as were assigned to their
especial care. The ground of this Interpretation I take from 1 Cor. 11.7. where
we read, that Man is the Image and Glory of God: which words, in the judgment
of Theodoret (...). Theod. t. 3. p. 172.
, are not to be understood with respect either to the Body of the Man, or to
his Soul, but to the Dominion that he has from God over the Creatures. In the
same Verse we read, that the Woman is the Glory of the Man. The Wife is the
Glory of her Husband. She is, says Theodoret (...). Ibid.
, as it were the Image of that Image: and as such, she has Power over the rest
of the Family. Thus when these Apostles are said to be the Glory of Christ,
this implies something of Jurisdiction, which they received from him. And when
they are said to be the Apostles of the Churches, the meaning is not, that they
were their Messengers, but their Spiritual Pastors. They were their Spiritual
Rulers, and our Lord's Vicegerents, acting in his Name and by his Authority.

Agreeable to what has been said, is this Observation of S. Jerome Paulatim vero
tempore procedente and alii ab his, quos Dominus elegerat; ordinati sunt
Apostoli, sicut ille ad Philippenses sermo declarat, Necessarium autem
existimavi, Epaphroditum fratrem cooperatorem, and commilitonem meum vestrum
autem Apostolum, etc. mittere ad vos. Hieron. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 1.
, That in process of time, besides those whom the Lord had chosen, others were
ordained Apostles, as these words to the Philippians declare: I supposed it
necessary, says S. Paul, to send to you Epaphroditus my Brother and Companion
in labor, and Fellow-souldier, (...).
but your Apostle, Phil. 2, 25. But you wonder, that after S. Jerome, I should
cite this place for a Proof, that Epaphroditus was Bishop of Philippi, and at
first you could hardly believe, that I was in earnest: As if it were now such a
fault to follow S. Jerome, who, when you have occasion to press him into your
service, is as Learned and Pious a Father, as any the Churches ever owned.

S. Jerome is not singular in what he says of Epaphroditus: for Hilary tells us
Erat eo^um Apostolus ab Apostolo factus. Hill. Sard. Comment. in Ep. ad Philip.
c. 2. v. 25.
, he was by the Apostle made the Apostle of the Philippians: which in his
Language signifies, that he was their Bishop Vid. ejusdem Comment. in 1. Ep. ad
Corinth. c. 12. v. 28. and in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4. v. 11.
. And with him agrees Pacianus Et Episcopi Apostoli nominantur, sicut de
Epaphrodito Paulus disserit, etc. Pacian. Ep. 1.
and Theodoret Theod. t. 3. p. 323.
also, whose Notions about the Primitive Government of the Church are usually
very clear and coherent.

If you consult Writers of greatest fame amongst the Assertors of Presbyterian
Parity, you will find them granting, that Epaphroditus was something more than
a mere Messenger. Blondel Primi Ecclesiarum Curatores a Primariis Apostolis
adlecti Apostoli dicti sunt. Hinc Paulo Philip. 2.25. Philippensium Apostolus
Epaphroditus. Blond. Apolog. Sect. 2. p. 85. Vid. pl. p. 86, 87.
reckons him amongst the Chief Governors of Churches; and for this he quotes
Pacianus, Jerome, and Theodoret, as I have done; and if you can hardly believe
him to be in earnest, you may take the same exception against Walo Messalinus;
for says he Sic Philippensium Apostolus a Paulo vocatus est Epaphroditus, ut
ipse Paulus appellatus est Apostolus Gentium, and Petrus Apostolus
Circumcisionis. Wall. Messal. cap. 1. p. 60.
Epaphroditus was called the Apostle of the Philippians, as Paul was said to be
the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter the Apostle of the Circumcision. He
mentions the contrary Opinion, but then he adds Haec mihi verisimilis non
videtur, qui sciam, vocem (...) nunquam a Paulo nec ab aliis Apostolis and
Evangelistis usurpari, insi de Sancto Ministerio, c. 1. p. 57.
, To me it seems to have no appearance of truth, since I know that the word
Apostle, is never used by S. Paul, nor by any other Apostles and Evangelists,
but for a Sacred Ministry.

But this Observation of Walo, you say, will hold no water; for you take it,
that John 13.16. in which the word (...) is used in a common promiscuous sense,
and rendered so by our Translators, stands impregnable as a plain, direct, and
unavoidable instance against him. That is, you are now assured, that whereas
this Word is used about fourscore times in the New Testament, in one of them it
signifies any common Messenger. And if you could demonstrate this as
impregnably as you have asserted it with confidence, it would be no great
matter of triumph. Yet this is more than I can grant, you have performed. For
in the place you insist upon, our Savior speaks thus to his Disciples, He that
is sent, or an Apostle, is not greater than he that sent him. As if he had
said, Ye my Apostles, that I mean to settle Governors of the Church, are not
greater than I, from whom you have your Commission, and by whom you are
constituted. That is the Paraphrase of the Learned Dr. Hammond on those words
of our Lord; and as it is very agreeable to the Context, so it shows to what
little purpose you have employed this place of Scripture.

Nor have you any better success, but less show of reason, where you tell me,
that notwithstanding Epaphroditus is in Greek called an Apostle, yet it no more
follows from thence that he was a Bishop, than that Joseph the Mittendary, as
you call him, in Epiphanius, was on this account a Bishop: for you might as
well have urged, that for the same reason Letters Dimissory must have been
Bishops also, because they were sometime commonly styled Apostles Dimissoriae
Literae dicuntur quae vulgo Apostoli dicuntur. Digest. Lib. 50. Tit. 16. l. 106.
.

I think no man that reads the accounts of the Mittendary in Epiphanius, and of
Epaphroditus in the Epistle to the Philippians, can form the same Notions of
both; for it is manifest, that one was an Officer under a Jewish Patriarch, and
the other a Christian Minister of great eminence. The same general Title indeed
was common to both; but it was not so applied at the time, about which we are
in debate; nor by those Writers, from whose style and expressions, the thing in
controversy must be determined.

Jacobus Gothofredus Gothofred. Comment in Cod. Theodos. tom. 6. p. 230, 231*
, who searched in to the Original of the Jewish Apostles, of which Epiphanius
speaks, and was willing to carry it as high as possible, could not find them
mentioned by any Author before the fourth Century. None of the Penmen of the
New Testament, no Ecclesiastical Writer of the first Age calls any man an
Apostle, who was not a Pastor of the Christian Church, and of an Order Superior
to that of Presbyters. And consequently, he that was styled the Apostle of the
Philippians, was their Bishop. By which word I always understand a Prelate,
when I give no intimation of the contrary, or of leaving its signification
undetermined.

You think the Connection and Coherence carry it for your sense, and that
Epaphroditus was no more than a Mittendary, because S. Paul says of him, that
he ministered to his wants. But if Castellio has well expressed the sense of
these words (...). Muneris mei Vicarium. Castle.
, they will afford no such Inference as you have drawn from them; but signify,
that Epaphroditus was sent to supply the place of S. Paul at Philippi. And much
may be said for this Exposition: but it is I confess, out of the common road of
Interpreters. And to what you have objected; I farther answer; that
Epaphroditus may be said to minister to the wants of S. Paul, who received of
him the things of the Philippians Phil. 4.18.
, and yet it does not appear from Scripture, that they sent him; much less is
there any probability, that if he was sent by them Dicit simpliciter. (...),
mittere, inquam, non remittere. Wall. Messal. c. 2. p. 107.
, he was for that reason dignified with the highest Title that belonged to any
Officer in the Christian Church.

There is another reason for that Title, for S. Paul calls him his Brother My
Brother, Philip. 2.35.
, in such a manner, as he does no man who was not his Colleague. He also calls
him his Companion in labor, and his Fellow soldier: not for attending him
doubtless in carrying Contributions from place to place; but because he was
engaged with him in the same Spiritual Work of the Ministry.

I make no question, but it is he that is styled by S. Paul his Toke-fellow
Philip. 4.3.
. And the word so translated (...).
, in Nonnus (...). Nonn. Metaphras. c. 14.
, signifies an Equal. In the Glossary of Philoxenus, and in the Vulgar Latin,
it is rendered by Compar. And by Compar, says Reinesius Compar, pro socio
cujuscunque muneris and conditionis apud Plautum, Pseud. Act. 5. Sc. 3. v. 9.
ubi servus conservum appellat comparem suum; and Vulgatus Ep. ad Philip. 4. v.
3. Interpres (...) recte Compar germane, insinuans, collaboratorem and in eodem
officio socium compellari ab Apostolo: Is vero Epaphroditus erat, etc. Reins.
Syntag. Inscript. Antiq. p. 906.
, is meant a Fellow or Companion in any Office and Condition; and he shows,
that so it is used in Plautus. This Learned Man also gathers from Phil. 4.3.
compared with Chap. 2. v. 25. that the Apostle intimated, that Epaphroditus was
his Colleague or Partner in the same Function: and if so, he was not only in
Name, but in Reality an Apostle.

I am not ignorant, that in this Explication, I dissent from a Learned Author,
who thinks it sounds too harsh, that Persons should be called Apostles of those
from whom they had no Mission. But it should be considered, that the sense of
words, of such especially as are Terms of Art, often varies from their original
signification; so that we ought not to put such limits on their Interpretation,
as are not consistent with their use. And certain it is, that when Apostles are
mentioned under the relation they bear to any Church or People, they are said
to be the Apostles of those by whom they were not sent Vid. Wall. Messal. c. 1.
p. 58, 59, 60.
. They that are styled by Clemens Romanus (...). Clem. Ep. c. 44. p. 93.
the Apostles of us, are not such, as derived their Authority either from the
Romans, in whose Name he writes; or from the Corinthians, to whom he directs
his Epistle, but from Christ. The Apostle of the Gentiles Romans 11.13.
had not his Commission from them. The Apostles and Angels of the Churches,
which I take to be of the same Order, were not their Messengers, but their
principal Governors. So exactly does it agree with the Language of those Times,
that he that was the Bishop of the Philippians, should be called their Apostle.

It Is true, S. Paul salutes several Bishops at Philippi Phil. 1.1.
. But these in the Syriack Version, as Mr. Seldom tells us Seldom. de Synedr.
lib. 2. c. 7. p. 212.
, in the Arabic of Erpenius, are said to be Presbyters. And that they were no
more than Presbyters, we are agreed. Many of the Fathers, particularly Jerome
Hieron. t. 9. p. 197.
, Chrysostom Chrysostom. t. 4. p. 5.
, Theodoret Theod. t. 3. p. 323.
, and Oecumenius Oecumen. Comment. p. 655.
, had the same opinion of them; for which they give this reason, that of one
City, there might be no more than one Prelatical Bishop. And for such a Bishop,
we need not here be at a loss, having considered under what Character it was,
that Epaphroditus was sent to the Philippians.

CHAP. VII. Apostolical Authority was communicated to Timothy: who was Bishop
of Ephesus.
WE have seen that the Name and Office of Apostles was conferred on many that
were not of the Twelve. I come now to show, that there were others of the same
Order, or to whom the same Authority was conveyed, who are not mentioned in
Scripture under the denomination of Apostles. Such are Timothy and Titus, and
the Angels of the Asiatick Churches, to which more may be added; but on these I
chiefly insist.

That Apostolical or Episcopal Authority was communicated to Timothy may be
collected from hence, that he had full Power of Ordination. This appears from
the advice that was given him 1 Timothy 5.22.
, to lay hands suddenly on no man. That is, not to admit any into a Sacred
Function, without a due examination. For so I interpret the words with
Theodoret Theod. t. 3. p. 485.
, Photius Phot. Ep. 54. p. 109.
, and several others, both Ancient and Modern Writers. Some Learned Men, I
know, put another sense on them, and by laying on of hands, understand the
Absolution of Offenders from Ecclesiastical Censures: But I cannot find in
Scripture, that the Reconciliation of Penitents to the Peace of the Church was
performed by that Ceremony.

The Context leads us to the Exposition I have given: For in the precedent
Verses the Apostle treats of Spiritual Officers. He speaks of the double honor
or maintenance, which is due to those that rule well, and shows the reason of
it. He speaks of the Complaints against others that are criminal, and of the
public Reproof and Censure of them. And to prevent the Scandal that results
from the Miscarriages of such, he directs Timothy to lay hands suddenly on no
man: not to be too hasty in Ordaining of any, lest by his Precipitance, he
should admit unworthy Persons into the Ministry, and partake with them in their
sins. And from hence we may learn, what high trust was imposed in him. For in
the Church committed to his Care, the Admission of Persons into Ecclesiastical
Offices, was wholly committed to him, and he was the sole Judge of their
Qualifications.

There were many Presbyters where he resided, yet were they not joined in
Commission with him; and that they might not act as his Equals in the
Administration of the Government, is manifest from hence, that it is not said
by S. Paul to any of them, Against my Work-fellow whom I left amongst you,
receive not an Accusation; but it was said to him, Against an Elder receive not
an accusation, but before two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. Which words
plainly import the Office of a Judge. For, as Morin. de Ordinat. Par. 3. Exerc.
3. c. 3. p. 44.
Morinus observes, from hence we may gather, that three things belonged to
Timothy, in which the Office of a Judge amongst the Romans was contained. He
might grant an Action to those that petitioned for it, and prescribe the Form
of it: He might sit upon examination of Matters in debate, and hear them
pleaded; and he might determine them, by passing Sentence. Presbyters
therefore, as well as others, being liable to his Sentence were subject to his
Authority. And this the Apostle intimates, where he adjures him to be impartial
in his proceedings with them, and not to be warpt by his affections or respect
of persons, 1 Timothy 5.21.

We find not that any offending Presbyters were left in a condition to put in
Exceptions against his Authority; or that, if they were rebuked by him before
all, they might make the following Reply, We believe our Doctrine to be true,
or know our Actions just; but if not, we are not accountable to you for them:
for you, Sir, and we stand upon the same level: if therefore you would make us
subject to your Censures, you take too much upon you, and usurp a Power to
which you have no Right. Yet if some Modern Opinions had prevailed and were
well grounded, that Answer they might have given him, or they might have
appealed from him, to their own Colleagues in the Consistory, or to their own
private Congregations. But that no such thing could be done, is evident,
because it would have rendered the Apostles Instructions useless and impertinent.

He had not only Power to correct and punish Miscarriages: He was also obliged
to give suitable encouragement to the industrious. Let the Elders that rule
well, says the Apostle, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they
that labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. I know that the meaning of
these words has been mightily controverted by dissenting Parties, and that they
have been made a foundation by some for the establishment of such a sort of
Officers, as before the last Age were never heard of in the Christian World:
But though they yield no such Consequence as these men would draw from them,
yet in my opinion, they may give some light to the matters before us, and
afford us a Pattern of what was practiced in the Primitive times. For,

1. All Presbyters were not then usually employed in laboring in the Word and
Doctrine; as will be manifest to any that will but consult what Mr. Le Moyne
Observat. ad Ep. Polycarp. p. 35, 36.
has written on this Subject, and the Authorities mentioned by him. But there
was no reason to fear, that the people should want Instruction, when the
Bishop, who preached himself, had many Presbyters under him, and employed some
in teaching, some in administering the Sacraments, some in visiting the Sick,
and comforting the Weak and Afflicted, some in enquiring into Scandals, and
assisting in the Affairs of Government. And the Inconveniences that might
arise from Emulation, if every one had been Judge in his own Cause, were best
avoided by the Authority of the Bishop who assigned Work and Encouragement to
them suitable to their several Capacities.

2. In the Primitive Times the Bishop was entrusted with the Goods of the
Church Vid. Canon. Apost. 38. and 41. Cyprian. Ep. 5. p. 10. Edit. Oxon.
, and out of the Contributions that were made to him, he appointed subordinate
Officers to supply the Wants of private Christians. He was also obliged to make
provision out of the same for his Clergy. And for this, Timothy was a
Precedent, whose duty it was, to take care that the Labourer should have his
Reward, and that the Elders, who ruled well, should receive double honor, or a
double portion out of the Public Stock. They depended on him therefore for
their maintenance, as well as in the exercise of their Function.

But that the force of what I have argued from the Pre-eminence and Power of
Timothy, may the better appear, I am desirous, his Case may be compared with
the following Instance, in which we are alike disinteressed. Nicocles was
advised by Isocrates Vid. Isocrat. Nicocl. p. 38, 40, 44. Ed. Basil. 1587
to confer Honors on the most deserving, and to commit the management of
Affairs to Men of worth, as knowing, that the Miscarriages of those that were
in such a station, would be imputed to him. He was also advised to take
cognizance of Complaints, and to judge indifferently, according to the Merits
of the Cause between contending Parties. And this was enough to satisfy any
one that had never heard the Name of Nicocles, and knew nothing of his
Character, that he had the Administration of Government; and that the persons
about whom he received this counsel, were his Subjects. In like manner, when we
reflect on the direction that was given to Timothy concerning the Ordination of
Ministers, and the danger he incurred, if he did not observe it; when we also
consider how he was required to proceed, if an Action were brought before him
against a Presbyter, and what Care he was obliged to take of the Elders that
ruled well, we have reason to conclude, that they were not his Equals, but
under his Inspection and Authority.

That Timothy had Episcopal Authority, is manifest, I think, from what has been
said: and that he was Bishop of Ephesus, appears from hence, that there he
resided 1 Timothy 1.3.
, that he might exercise his Apostolical Power in such manner as we have seen,
and that he might charge some, who were persons doubtless that had Right to
preach the Gospel, to teach no other Doctrine. The Apostle intended not, as M.
Daille observes Exposition de la 1. Epitre a Timothee, p. 40.
, that he should act feebly with those that were so bold, as to corrupt a thing
so important: He does not say, that he should pray or exhort them, or that he
should remonstrate to them, or simply that he should conjure them, not to
depart from the truth. He uses a term that implies more vigor, and requires
him to denounce (...).
to them, that they teach no other Doctrine than the Apostles did. For to
denounce, is to act with Authority, in the Name, and instead of another, whose
Person one sustains, or whose Minister he is, and with a Menace of Punishment
to the disobedient. And from hence, says our Author D'ou paroit, que Timothee
avoit ete laisse dans l'Eglise d'Ephese avec Authorite de la gouverner and d'en
censurer and deposer meme les Predicateurs. p. 41.
it appears, that Timothy was left by S. Paul in the Church of Ephesus, with
Authority to govern it, and to censure and depose even Preachers themselves.
And if so, I think, we may safely conclude, that they were under his
Jurisdiction, notwithstanding any thing this Learned Man added for the service
of his Hypothesis.

What I have said of the Office of Timothy fully agrees with the Sentiments of
the Ancients. For by some of them, he is styled an Apostle Vid. Hieronym.
Chronic. A. D. 357. Theodoret. t. 3. p. 474. Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei, l. 1.
p. 10. and Ep. 9. p. 210. Ed. Baluz.
: by some a Bishop Vid. Ambros. sive Hilar. in 1. Tim. 3.8. Epiphan. Haeres.
75. n. 5. Chrysostom. t. 4. p. 5. Theophylact. in 1 Timothy 4.14.
, and both meant the same thing. Others speak more plainly, and say, that he
was Bishop of Ephesus Vid. Anonym. apud Phot. Cod. 254. Col. 1404. Eusebius. H. E.
l. 3. c. 4. p. 73. Pallad. Dialog. de vit. Chrysostom. p. 114. Ed. Bigot.
Oecumen. ili 1 Timothy 1.3.
: and of this Belief generally were the Fathers.

Nevertheless, against that which they so universally received, you produce
several Objections, and refer me for more to Mr. Prynne, whose Treatise
entitled The Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus Edit. 1661.
etc. came lately to my hands; and now I am able to tell you, that he is a very
promising Author. He pretends that he has refuted the Arguments for Episcopacy,
taken from the examples of Timothy and Titus, in an irrefragable manner Ep.
Ded. p. 28.
, and that he has shaken the rotten pillars, and undermined the sandy
foundations of the high towering Hierarchy, and left it without any divine prop,
to support it longer Ibid. p. 24.
. This work he dedicates to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, proposing
to them two things Ep. Ded. p. 2.
one of which he modestly leaves to their choice. 1. He challenges them to give
him a speedy, solid, satisfactory answer, which must be pretty difficult, if,
as he tells them, he had made it manifest, that their founding their Prelacy on
a Divine Right (on which grounds only they were willing to continue in their
station) was a mere absurd ridiculous fiction. 2. In defect of this, he
requires them to relinquish their places, and not any more to advance
themselves above their Fellow-Ministers Ibid.
. And for this demand, there might have been some reason, had he demonstrated
every thing of which he boasts so confidently, with as much certainty, as he
has from abundance of Quotations and Examples both foreign and domestic Ibid.
p. 13, 14, 5, etc.
, that Bishops may dye of the Plague, as well as other Folk, notwithstanding
their Rochets, Miters, Crofiers Ibid. p. 13.
, to the confusion of those arrogant Prelates that think otherwise. But I was
soon convinced that no great matter was to be expected from him: for, not far
from the beginning of his Treatise, he argues that Timothy was no Bishop,
because he was a Novice Unbishop. p. 6.
: so he supposes he must needs be, who was a young man P. 5.
. Yet afterward he expressly acknowledges, that he was a Bishop P. 25.
; but so, that other Bishops were his Equals. He had before told us, that this
same Novice was a Fellow-helper and Co-partner with S. Paul in the Apostleship
P. 2.
, and consequently, in the judgment of all men, if we may take his word for it,
of a degree superior to that of a Bishop. Nevertheless within a few Pages
after, he makes him inferior to Presbyters P. 6.
, because he was obliged to entreat them as Fathers, and to pay them double
honor, and not to receive it from them. And thus he snatches at any thing that
may free him from a present inconvenience, and at his pleasure Timothy must be
such a Novice as is unfit to bear the Office of a Bishop: at another time this
is a depressing of him, who was qualified for, and exalted to, a higher
Dignity. One while he must be superior, then inferior, and afterward equal to
the same Officers. And this discovers such a flaw in the judgment of the
Author, to say no worse of him, that I cannot but admire, that some persons of
greater sense seem to have the same good opinion of his Book, which himself
had; whereas it is a Rapsody of incoherent stuff, and for the most part very
trifling. Yet he hits on some things that may deserve our notice, and they
shall not be neglected.

The common refuge of Dissenters that are concerned for the Unbishoping of
Timothy (to speak in Mr. Prynne's Language) is, that he was an Extraordinary
Officer, and Evangelist. He is expressly so styled, says Mr. Prynne Unbishop. p.
2.
: He is in direct terms called an Evangelist, say the Assembly of Divines Jus
Divin. Minist. Angl. par. 2. p. 68.
, and that he was so, says Smectymnuus, is clear from the Letter of the Text
Sm^c. p. 48.
, 2 Timothy 4, 5. Yet neither in this place, nor in any other part of Scripture,
is that to be found which these men affirm with so much confidence.

It Is true, Timothy was admonished to do the work of an Evangelist, but this he
might, and yet be no Evangelist. Daniel did the work of the King (...). Dan.
8.27.
, and yet was no King. The Levites did the work of all Israel (...), etc. Numb.
8.19.
, yet were they not all Israel. And Timothy, who, as M. Prynne says truly, was
a Partner with S. Paul in the Apostleship He works the work of the Lord, as I
also do, 1 Cor. 16.10.
, which virtually contains in it all other Ecclesiastical Offices, might
perform the work of other Ministers, and not be of their Order, nor come under
their denomination.

This has been said upon a supposition, that he was required in this place to
do the work of an Evangelist properly so called, which I cannot grant. For an
Evangelist, according to Eusebius Vid. Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 37. p. 109. Edit.
Vales.
, was a person that preached the Gospel where it had not been received, or to
those who had not heard of it before. And in this sense Timothy could not be an
Evangelist to the Church of Ephesus, which he was obliged to instruct and
govern: and when he was so, it had flourished for many years See Acts 19.8, 9,
10. and 20.31. Qua est Ephesi Ecclesiae a Paulo quidem fundata. Iren. a^vers.
Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 234.
. I conclude therefore, that the word Evangelist in this Verse ought to be
taken in a larger sense, and then to do the work of an Evangelist, will
signify in general to preach the Word, as it is expressed, v. 2. And if this
Interpretation, which has been embraced by many Learned Men, be admitted, it
leaves no ground for the Exception that has been under consideration.

But Timothy and Titus, you say, were Co-founders of Churches with the Apostle
Paul, and from hence arose their Visitorial Power, which consequently was
peculiar and extraordinary. That is, you have assumed a liberty of bestowing on
persons what Titles you please, and then you draw from them such Inferences as
you think expedient. This you call Arch-work, whose strength, you say, lies in
the combination P. 45.
.

A Church as we have seen had been founded at Ephesus several years before the
Government of it was committed to Timothy, and how he could be a Co-founder, I
do not understand. I suppose, he neither laid the Old Foundation over again,
nor razed it, that he might lay another.

If you call him a Co-founder of that Church, only because by his preaching he
increased the number of Believers; the Presbyters that were before his coming,
were for the same reason Co-founders also: for doubtless they were employed in
the same work: But that they and others of the same Rank, by converting
Infidels, and adding them to the Church, started up into an higher Order, than
that of which they were before, is what, I think, was never yet heard of in the
Christian World.

Philip the Evangelist laid the Foundation of a Church at Samaria Acts 8.
; but by doing this, he gained no new Jurisdiction; he did not obtain by it the
Power of Imposition of Hands which the Apostles had: nor any Authority over
Presbyters, but remained a Deacon as he was before.

If Frumentius had not been ordained a Bishop, his planting Churches amongst
the Indians, or more properly the Ethiopians See the History of Ethiopia, by
Ludolphus. B. 3. c. 2.
could not have made him one. Nor did his diligence in that work render his
Office incommunicable: But the Authority, he had, to constitute and govern
Priests and Deacons, was conveyed to others after his death, and, as Ludolphus
will inform you Ibid. c. 7.
, he had Successors in Ethiopia to this very Age.

Let us now suppose, that Timothy had founded the Church of Ephesus, it does
not follow, as we have seen, that his Authority was Extraordinary. Yet in your
opinion he could not be a Bishop, unless his Office had related to a Church
already planted, for that you make the condition of Episcopal Charge. But how
groundless this Conceit is, may appear from what has been said, and
particularly, from that known Passage of Clemens Romanus Clem. Ep. p. 42.
, where he says expressly that the Apostles ordained some to be Bishops of those
that afterward should believe. What Bishops he speaks of, is not here the
Question. They were such as you approve, and they were constituted Bishops of
those, who, at that time, were Unbelievers. But that Bishops, who have
Commission to preach the Gospel, have Power to preach it to Believers only: or
if they preach it to Infidels, that for that purpose they should either forfeit
their former Office, or need another, is so absurd, that to mention it, is a
sufficient Confutation of it.

Another of the Objections, which you advance against the Episcopacy of
Timothy, is, that he is not styled a Bishop in Scripture P. 26.
. On this Mr. Prynne also insists, and calls it an infallible Argument P. 2.
. Yet what he pronounces so like an Oracle, signifies no more, than if one
should attempt to prove, that Presbyters neither are, nor ought to be called
Ministers; because in Scripture they are never mentioned under that Title: or
that Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, neither are, nor may be called
Sacraments; because that Name is not ascribed to them in any part of Scripture.
The truth is, if we must always use the words of Scripture, and no other, in
treating of Religious or Ecclesiastical Affairs, all Translations of it ought
to be rejected. It should be read to the People only in the Original, and
Sermons should be made to them in Greek and Hebrew, which I suppose would not
be much for their Edification.

You farther urge, that Timothy could not be Bishop of Ephesus, because the
stay he made there, was only upon the desire of the Apostle, and did not arise
from the duty of his place P. 26.
. But what if he first took on him the peculiar Charge of the Church of Ephesus
immediately after S. Paul besought him to remain there, could he not be a
Bishop of it, unless he was under an antecedent obligation to that Residence?
or if he did it before (which is improbable) might he not be exhorted to the
performance of a thing which was incumbent on him by his Office? The Apostle,
you know, beseeches the Romans to present their Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy
and acceptable unto God Romans 12.1.
. He beseeches the Corinthians to speak the same thing 1 Cor. 1.10.
. He beseeches the Thessalonians to walk worthy of God 1 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
, and Buodias and Syntiche to be of the same mind in the Lord Phil. 4.2.
. And from these instances it is manifest, that things may be duties on another
account, when he makes them the matter of his Exhortation.

You fancy however that Timothy could be no standing Officer at Ephesus,
because, as you tell me, his stay and business there are limited to the
Apostles return P. 26.
: for which you quote 1 Timothy 1.3. compared with Chap. 3. v. 14.15. Chap. 4. v.
13. And this gives me occasion to show,

1. That where S. Paul acquaints Timothy with his hopes to see him at Ephesus 1 Timothy 3.14, 15.
, he speaks as under some uncertainty, for being acted by the Holy Ghost, says
Theoophylact Theoph. in loc. citat.
, he knew not whither that would carry him. Theodoret Theod. in loc. dict.
observes, that however the Spirit revealed to the Divine Prophets and Apostles
whatever was expedient, yet did they not foresee all things. And it was as
consistent with the Dignity of S. Paul, not certainly to foresee, whether he
should visit Timothy or not, as to be doubtful concerning the time of his
coming, when he had this in his hopes. These things, says he, write I unto
thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: But if I tarry long, that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God. Some necessary
cause might detain him, besides his expectation (...). Theodoret. t. 3. p. 477.
: and it does not appear, that he took any Journey to Ephesus, after the
writing of this Epistle.

2. When he says, Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine 1 Timothy 4.13.
, This does not signify, that if he did come to Timothy, his attendance on
these things must then cease, or his work be at an end: But the Apostle might
think by such an admonition, to excite his diligence, when he was absent from
him: or else he might hereby intimate, that when he saw him, he would
communicate to him farther Instructions.

3. When the second Epistle was sent to Timothy, he was neither removed from
his Authority, nor the place where he resided, when the first was written See
Dr. Lightfoot 's Harmony of the N. T. An. 59.
. For in several passages of both Epistles, the same Rules of Discipline are
given him. He is advised in both to avoid the same Errors and Miscarriages, and
warned against the same persons. Hymeneus and Alexander are mentioned in both
under marks of Infamy 1 Timothy 1.19.20. 2 Timothy 2.17. and 4, 14.
; and this last, is that Alexander who was drawn out by the multitude when the
Tumult was at Ephesus. Acts 19.33. It Is likewise observable, that in the second
Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 4. v. 19. the Apostle salutes Prisca and Aquila, whom
he left formerly at Ephesus, Acts 18.19. He also salutes the household of
Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 4.19.
, who ministered unto him whilst he was at Ephesus, as Timothy knew very well,
2. Tim. 1.18.

Yet says Smectymnuus, to whom you refer me, Paul was so far from settling
Timothy at Ephesus, that he rather continually sent him up and down: for which
they quote 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Acts 18.5. and 19.22. and 20.4. You also tell me P.
26.
, that we find Timothy as an Itinerant Officer often going from place to place
upon occasion: and from hence you would infer, that he was not a Bishop. But
there is no sufficient ground for any such Consequence, as may appear if it be
considered,

1. That Presbyters and Deacons were sometimes engaged in Travels, and that
without any loss of their Character. Philip was appointed at Jerusalem to serve
tables Acts. 6.
; yet he did not relinquish his Office, but remained one of the Seven, when he
went down to Samaria Acts 8.5.
, and when he was at Caesarea C. 21.8.
. And I know nothing in Scripture, that confines Bishops perpetually within
their own Dioceses, or Limits their absence from them to a certain number of
Days or Miles. Ordinarily indeed, they are obliged to reside where their
peculiar Charge is: yet great occasions, and their care for the public good
may sometimes call them thence. And diligent as they ought to be to instruct
and govern that part of the Church which is assigned to them, they may not
forget the relation they bear to the whole. Primis Ecclesiae temporibus, says a
Learned Man Casaub. Excercit. 14. ad Annal. Baron. n. 4.
, omnes Episcopi praeter peculiarem curam propriae sibi Ecclesiae, in solidum
sibi commissam, ut loquitur Cyprianus, etiam universam, suo quodam modo
curabant. These are the words of Casaubon, and Alstedius Alsted. Supplem. l. 4.
c. 1.
was so affected with them, that he has transcribed them into his Supplement
of Chamier's Panstratia, and about two hundred lines more verbatim, all very
near together, without any mention of the Author, being willing, it seems, that
they should pass for his own.

2. The Journeys mentioned in the Smectymnuan Objection, were taken before
Timothy was requested to remain at Ephesus, as may be gathered from hence, that
S. Paul left him there, when he went into Macedonia 1 Timothy 1.3.
: But this could not be the first time of his going thither; for then Timothy
was a Companion of his Travels See Acts 16.9, 10.
, and it is probable that he had not been yet at Ephesus. Neither was it the
second time: for he had then sent Timothy before him into Macedonia Acts 19.22.
, where afterward they were both together See 2 Cor. 7.5. and 8.1. and 9.2.
and 1.1.
. Nor yet the third; for then to avoid the Conspiracy of the Jews, he returned
in great haste from Achaia to Macedonia See Acts 20.3, 4, 5.
; and departing thence, Timothy, who waited for him at Troas, attended on him
to Jerusalem. And from these reasons which I have briefly mentioned, but which
Bishop Pearson Opp. Posthum. Chronolog. Dissert. 1. c. 9. Sect. 5.
has fully illustrated and confirmed, we may conclude, that Timothy was not
desired by S. Paul to remain at Ephesus before this Apostle was brought to
Rome: nor till after he had written his Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians,
Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Philemon, and the Hebrews Vid. Annal
Paulin. p. 12, 13, 15, 20.
. What account therefore soever of the Travels of Timothy may be collected from
any of those Epistles, or the Acts of the Apostles, it is consistent enough
with his settled Residence in his Diocese, when the Church of Ephesus was
committed to his Administration.

I do not remember any other material Objection against what I have said
concerning this subject. So that I make no doubt still to affirm, that Timothy
was an Ordinary Pastor of the Church; and thus much in effect is acknowledged
by some Learned Presbyterians, who say he was the first Presbyter or President
of the Presbytery. And if they would allow such Presidents as have the full
Power of Ordination, which he had Presidents with Authority equal to his, and
which, as Cameron gathers from 1 Timothy 5.19 Timothei autoritas major suit quam
ut (...) ejus officium dici possit. Camer. 1. Tim. 4.14.
, was greater than was consistent with the Office of other Presbyters.
Presidents that are so for life, as Ludovicus Cappellus Primatus ille non fuit
annuus, vel menstruus, aut hebdomarius, ac per vices sed perpetuus, sive uti
loquuntur ad vitam, etc. These. Salmur. par. 3. p 322.
thinks, they originally were: Then, if they please, they may call them
Presidents still, and I shall not contend about the Name, if we are agreed
about the Thing.

But since you and many others have not made the Concessions I have mentioned,
I shall farther prove, that the Office of Timothy was such as I have described,
by the following Arguments.

1. If it had been intended that the Authority committed to Timothy and others
of his Rank should be temporary, either this may appear from the nature of the
thing, or it might have been expected that we should have had some notice of it
in the Scripture. For if we may take the liberty, without any grounds to fasten
on it the Title of Temporary or Extraordinary, we may by the same means soon
put an end to any Constitutions whatsover. But there is nothing in the nature
of this Authority, that may hinder its continuance: nothing in the Scripture
that declares it to be abrogated: We may conclude therefore, that as it is fit
to be continued, so it was designed to be so in all succeeding times.

2. We have no reason to believe, that S. Paul would alter his own
Constitutions without a cause; or that, without any necessity, he would put the
Government of a Church into a new Model, and divert the Course of Discipline
from that Channel in which it ought to run in all Ages. If therefore he sent
Timothy as an Extraordinary Commissioner to interpose in the Affairs of
Ephesus, we may suppose this to have been either, 1. Because there was some
Extraordinary Work, which none but Extraordinary Officers could perform: or, 2.
Because there were no Ministers at Ephesus, or such only as were unfit for
Government: But neither of these can well be imagined: Not the first, for the
Work was no other than what has or might have been performed by Bishops ever
since: Not the second, for there were Presbyters at Ephesus of eminent Gifts,
such as the Holy Ghost had made Overseers See Acts 20.28.
. It seems improbable then, that these were constituted Supreme Standing Rulers
of the Church, or that the Work for which they were so well qualified, was so
soon taken out of their hands. Particularly it seems improbable, either that
they had the Power of Ordination, or that it would have been transferred from
them to a Stranger, who came to visit them, but was not of their number, and
that without any ground or reason given, or any notice taken of them, as
concerned in the matter.

Flaminius did a thing acceptable to the Greeks, when he gave them permission
to live after their own Laws: But if he had afterward sent amongst them some
Governor with Power and Commission to overrule and control their Magistrates,
and to disturb that Polity which had been established by his Concession, by
such Changes and Turns of Affairs he would have introduced and encouraged great
Irregularities, and put his former Admirers upon upbraiding his Levity, or
questioning his Veracity. And let us now suppose, if you please, that such
Elders were constituted by S. Paul at Ephesus, as were enabled and obliged to
perform the highest Acts of Ecclesiastical Authority, as Supreme Ordinary
Pastors, and were designed also to be a Pattern for following Ages: Let us
farther suppose, that an Officer Extraordinary had afterward been left amongst
them with Commission from that Apostle to alter the measures they had taken,
and to suspend the exercise of a principal part of their Function, by taking it
wholly to himself, and that without any Miscarriage laid to their Charge; you
may easily perceive what Reflections this might have occasioned, and that such
Proceedings would have been so far from setting things in order, that, one has
reason to think, they would have put them into greater confusion.

3. If such eminent Presbyters as were at Ephesus, and a Church so flourishing
as that of Ephesus was, had a Governor put over them, this ought not to be
esteemed an extraordinary thing; for doubtless other Presbyters and Churches,
whose Exigences were greater, had so too. And if such a Subordination of
Officers was necessary when the Apostles were alive, I cannot imagine why an
end should afterward be put to it, when there was more occasion of it than
ever.

Some of the most Learned Opposers of Episcopacy, grant, that Timothy and
others of his Rank, governed Churches with the same Plenitude of Power, as
Bishops afterward did; who, as they say, were raised in the second Century for
the Cure of Schism. But if, in the common sense of Christians, Prelacy was
useful to that purpose, as it is supposed, this must have obliged them to
preserve it, when it had been introduced amongst them by such as were directed
by the Spirit of God: and it could be no great Argument of their Wisdom, if
they laid aside that which was of Divine Original, and were very shortly
afterward put upon contriving, how to restore it by a Humane Invention.

4. It seems very improbable, that the Apostle should write two Epistles to
Timothy, only to direct him in the temporary Administration of the Affairs of a
Place, where he was only to make a transient Visit. But if from the Examples we
have of Presbyters, and the Rules that are laid down for them in Scripture, we
may gather, that such ought to be continued: Then may we also conclude, from
the Example of Timothy, from the Authority he had, and the Rules that were
given to him for the exercise of it, and which are of perpetual use, that the
Office with which he was vested, ought to be preserved in the Church till the
end of the World.

5. As we learn from the Scripture, that Timothy resided at Ephesus, so it may
something confirm what I have said of his relation to that Place, if there he
ended his days. And this is what is testified by Sophronius Sophron. in Catalog.
, who tells us, that there he gloriously suffered Martyrdom: But more fully by
an Ancient Writer in Photius Phot. Cod. 254.
, who acquaints us, that he was put to death at the detestable Festival called
the Catagogium, which he would have abrogated.

6. After his death we find Onesimus in his Place, who is said to be Bishop of
Ephesus by Ignatius Ignat. Ep. ad Ephis. p. 17, 18.
his Co-temporary, and by whom he is represented as a Person of admirable
Charity, and a Worthy Pattern and great Blessing to his Flock. Polycrates was
another of his Successors Vid. Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c.22. and 24.
, and it were easy to reckon many more. If therefore your Standard of
Extraordinaries be true and of any use, it must be granted, that his Office was
not of their number, and that the Inferences you draw from his doing the work
of an Evangelist, and from your supposition of his being a Co-founder, are
groundless: for it is in vain to advance little Conjectures against plain Matter
of Fact.

CHAP. VIII. Apostolical Authority was communicated to Titus, who was Bishop of
Crete.
I Have said so much of Timothy, that the less need be added concerning Titus,
who had been trained up with him under the same Spiritual Father, and was
employed in the same manner. They were both S. Paul's Fellow Laborers and
Partners in the Apostolate Romans 16.21. 1 Cor. 16.1^. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. 2 Cor. 2.13.
and 8.23.
, and they were left under the same Character, and with the same Authority, the
one at Ephesus, and the other in Crete.

Titus was left in Crete, of which he was Bishop, say the Fathers: and one part
of his Episcopal Power appears from the Commission he had to ordain Elders
there in every City, Tit. 1.5.

But say you P. 46.
, the word there (...).
which is rendered Ordain, is the same that is used, Acts 6.3. in the matter of
the Deacons, who were appointed by the Apostles (not one of the Apostles, but
all) and chosen by the people. And one might well admire, that the same word
which is translated appointed in one place, should be rendered ordained in
another; but that Titus is said to ordain, and not to appoint only, that it
might look, as if it were a plain Text for sole Ordination. So that here is a
heavy Charge against the Translators; and perhaps never was any more
groundless. For I pray Sir, what did they mean, either by appointing or
ordaining, but constituting? And if all the Apostles constituted the Deacons
which were chosen by the People, will it follow from the signification of this
word, that Titus might not constitute Elders, unless they were chosen by the
People; or that he could not do it, unless he had Colleagues to assist him, or
was himself a multitude? When the Lord in the Gospel is said to set a Ruler
over his household (...), etc. Matthew. 24.45.
, must the interpretation of this expression be, that he did it not without a
previous Election in the Family, and with the concurrence of his equals? And
when we read, that Pharaoh made Joseph Governor over Egypt and all his house
(...), etc. Acts 7.10.
, must the meaning of this be, that Pharaoh and some Partners with him in the
The One did this, but not without the common consent of their Subjects? If these
things be absurd, you may at your leisure reflect on the Success of your
Criticism, and the Justice of your Censure.

We have seen what Right Titus had to constitute Elders: And if it be absurd to
imagine, that all his Care of them was to be employed in examining and
admitting them into Office, and none afterward; it will follow, that since the
Rules for their Conversation are directed unto him, he had over them an
Episcopal Authority. For as the Command that was given to the Master of a
Family, that his Children and Servants should keep the Sabbath, was an Argument
that they were under his Jurisdiction, which rendered him accountable for them:
So when the Precepts by which Presbyters ought to govern their Actions were
addressed to Titus, this signifies that he had Power to see them executed, and
Offenses against them prevented or punished. Another Argument of his Episcopal
Power, may be taken from hence, that he is required to rebuke the disobedient
and refractory with all Authority Tit. 2.15.
. That is, says Beza Cum omni imperio: id est, cum Auctoritate summa non
simpliciter monendi, vel exhortandi, vel suadendi, sed praecipiendi, tanquam
Dei Legatus. Bez. in locum.
, with the highest Authority, as an Ambassador of God: and to let no man
despise him: which last advice confirms Beza's Exposition of the former, and
shows, that if Titus would exercise the Authority he had, That was sufficient
to create a Reverence for him amongst all that were committed to his care. But
this I confess might seem very strange, had his Orders or his Proceedings
against Offenders been precarious, or some Notions about the Pastors of the
Church then prevailed, which of late have been entertained.

In the Imperial Law the following Precept is given to a Judge or President
Digest. l. 1. Tit. 19. l. 19.
, Observandum est jus reddenti, ut se contemni non patiatur. And it is suitable
enough to the condition of a Magistrate: But if it be said, Of what use could
it be, to instruct a person to let no man despise him, who had no coercive
force to vindicate himself from Contempt, if any were inclined to throw it on
him. To this I know no other answer can be given, than that the Authority of
Bishops, however it was only Spiritual, did in that Age strike such an awe upon
the Minds of Christians, that they were able to stop the Mouths of False
Teachers See 1 Timothy 1.3. Titus 1.11. Rev. 2.14, 15, 16.20. 1 Timothy 5.20.
without any external violence, or deprive them of their followers, if these
had any true sense of Piety. Their public reproof of Scandalous Offenders was
then very dreadful, and when they expelled them from the Church by their
Censures, this was justly esteemed a sad presage of their future judgment.

Such Censures, I suppose, were meant by the Apostle, where he instructs Titus
Tit. 3.10.
to reject a Heretic after the first and second admonition: On which words Dr.
Hammond has this Annotation, which is not vulgar, but in my opinion very
rational. The first and second admonition, says he, here refers to the method
prescribed by Christ in proceeding against Christian Offenders, Matthew* 18.15.
but in some circumstances differs from it. There is mention of a threefold
admonition; one by the injured person alone, a second by two or three taken
with him, the third by the Church: But here only a first and second admonition.
The cause of this difference, is to be taken from the quality of the person to
whom this Epistle is written, Titus a Bishop, whereas there the speech is
addressed to every private Christian that is injured by any. Here the first
admonition of the Bishop carries an Authority along with it, far above that of
the private person, and the two or three with him, and so may well supply the
place of both those; and then the second here will be parallel to the third
there; and so after that is despised or proved uneffectual, it is seasonable to
proceed to Censures, to excommunicate the contumacious. Thus 2 Cor. 13.2.
immediately after the second admonition delivered by S. Paul, he tells the
Offenders he will not spare, and v. 10. he tells them, that this admonition is,
that he may not proceed to excision or cutting off, which he there calls (...),
taking away, the word ordinarily used in the Canons for Excommunication.

The sum of what I have said of Titus, is, That he had Commission to
constitute Officers, and to govern with plenitude of Power, Presbyters as well
as others being under his Jurisdiction. He was required to inflict
Ecclesiastical Censures on the disobedient, and set things in order in many
Churches. His Office therefore or Power was Episcopal.

To prove this, I have not urged any thing from the Postscript of the Epistle
to Titus, and therefore I am not concerned at your exception against it, or to
enquire into its Authority. What is manifest from the Epistle it self, and
confirmed by the Testimony of the Fathers, is sufficient for my purpose, That
however there were many Churches in Crete, yet they were governed by a single
Person, as their Chief Pastor or Bishop.

What you object against his Episcopacy, from the multitude of Cities in Crete,
looks like one of the Efforts of Mr. Prynne, and is so confused, that I can
make no coherent sense of it. You suppose that every Church or Congregation
must have a Bishop: for which you give no other reason, but that some are
confident of it: and I confess, if matters between us had been to be determined
by confidence, you had often put me to a loss. Yet here I do not see what
service it can do you. For I would demand, whether the Bishop you assign to
every Congregation, was a mere Presbyter, or a Prelate? If you say the first,
what is it to the purpose, unless you could prove, that he was not subject to
another Pastor who had the Charge of many Congregations? If the last, what is
become of the Cause for which you contend?

If Titus, say you P. 45.
, was a Bishop over all the Churches in Crete, he was a Bishop of Bishops: that
is, of Prelatical Bishops, as your words import; and consequently, if they
express your thoughts, you must believe that at that time there were such
Bishops. And now methinks, our Controversy appears a little oddly: For the
Tables are turned, and you are got on the side of Prelacy. You contend, that
the Cretian Elders were Prelatical Bishops, when I cannot allow, that they were
more than Presbyters. I cannot be convinced, but that Titus being left in
Crete, was the only Bishop, in the modern sense of the word, of all the
Churches there. Nor do I see any reason, why this should be thought
inconsistent with an Episcopal Function. Theodoret had eight hundred Parishes
under his Care Vid. Theod. c. 3. p. 986, 987.
, yet this did not cause a Nullity in his Ordination. And however there were
many Cities in Scythia, yet anciently one Bishop had the Charge of them all
Vid. Sozomen. H. E. l. 6. c. 21. and l. 7. c. 19.
, without any loss of his Episcopal Office. Inconveniences indeed may arise
from such large extent of Dioceses; but this was not the case, when, as Rabanus
Maurus tells us Hi qui Ordinationis nunc habent potestatem (qui nunc nominantur
Episcopi) non unius Ecclesiae creabantur Episcopi, sed Provincias integras eo
tempore regebant, Apostolorum nomine nuncupati. Rab. Maur. in 1 Timothy 4.14.
, Bishops governed whole Provinces under the Name of Apostles; or when Titus
remained in Crete. For then it is certain, there were many Churches under his
Care and Administration; and by what Title soever he was distinguished, it is
not material, as to the Nature and Ends of Government.

But if he was Bishop of so many Churches, you would fain know, which was the
Church of the Cretians, where he resided. To which I can say nothing, but that
it seems probable he visited all the Churches of his Diocese, and resided
chiefly in the Metropolis. If this satisfies not your pang of longing, as I
have no ability, so I have no inclinati- to gratify it any farther. For could
I name with the greatest certainty the City where he commonly dwelt, you might
also enquire, what part of that City, or what Street he inhabited, and propose
many other Questions of the like importance, to which I am not prepared to give
any Reply.

It is sufficient, that he was a Pastor of many Churches, and had Authority
over their Presbyters and Deacons: For if this be true, it strikes at the Root
of the Presbyterian and Independent Opinions about Church Government: And I
know not what can be said in Vindication of them, unless it be, that he was an
Extraordinary Officer. This you insist on, and to prove it, you tell me he was
an Evangelist. But the Scripture says of him no such thing. From the Scripture
indeed we learn, that Philip was an Evangelist Act. 21*8.
, and yet he wanted Power, either to Confirm those that were Baptized, or to
Ordain Officers, by Imposition of Hands See Act. 8.
. But Titus could perform the last of these, which was the greater; and
consequently he was something more than an Evangelist, and could be no less
than an Apostle, or a Bishop.

But that he may be reckoned amongst the Pastors Extraordinary* you likewise
urge, That he was only left in Crete, as the Deputy or the Delegate of the
Apostle, and that but for a time till he should have established Churches in
every City, and Organized them with Elders, which having done, you say, it is
very probable that he returned again to S. Paul, to give an Account of that
Affair; and then, you think, his Commission expired. Not that you have read any
such thing of him in Scripture: But since he was obliged to act as the Apostle
had appointed, from hence, you collect, that his Deputation was but Temporary:
And you might as well have concluded, that since it was the Duty of Presbyters
and Deacons, to walk as the same Apostle appointed, or according to the Rules
he gave for their Conversation, their Offices also were Temporary, and designed
for no long continuance.

You think his Case differed from theirs in this, that he was employed in
frequent Travels; but in answer to that, I need only tell you, That his
Journeys to Jerusalem, to Macedonia, and to Corinth, were undertaken and
finished, before he was left in Crete Vid. Pearson. ubi supra, p. 77, 78, 79.
; That he died there, as we are informed by Paulinus Creta Titum sibi sumpsit,
Paulin. Poem. 27. p. 169.
and Sophronius (...). Sophron. in Catalog. Script. Eccles.
: and that the Government of the Church has been Episcopal in that Island ever
since his days.

When I had proceeded thus far, I had the satisfaction to peruse some Printed
Papers of an Eminent Person; wherein amongst other things, he treats of this
subject, and I was glad to find that I had not differed from the Sentiments of
so great a Man, which he has expressed in these words, We are not to suppose,
says he, that the Power of Titus extended not to a Jurisdiction over Elders,
when he had ordained them. For if any of those whom he had ordained, as
believing them qualified according to the Apostles Rules, should afterward
demean themselves otherwise; and be self-willed, froward, given to wine, can we
believe that Titus was not as well bound to correct them afterward, as to
examine them before? And what was this Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction,
but the very same which the Bishops have exercised ever since the Apostles
Times? But they, who go about to Unbishop Timothy and Titus; may as well
Unscripture the Epistles that were written to them; and make them only some
particular and occasional Writings, as they make Timothy and Titus, to have
been only some particular and occasional Officers. But the Christian Church,
preserving these Epistles, as of constant and perpetual Use, did thereby
suppose the same kind of Office to continue; for the sake whereof, those
excellent Epistles were written: And we have no greater Assurance that these
Epistles were by S. Paul, than we have, that there were Bishops to succeed the
Apostles in the Care and Government of the Churches.

CHAP. IX. Apostolical Authority was communicated to the Angels mentioned
Revel. 1.20. who were Bishops of the Asiatick Churches.
WHat Timothy was at Ephesus, and Titus in Crete, that were the Angels
mentioned Revel. 1.20. in their several Dioceses: They governed the seven
Churches of Asia with Apostolical or Episcopal Authority.

This is what you oppose, and one might therefore have expected from you
another Account of them, to which you would adhere; but you fix upon nothing, a
practice very common amongst many that are engaged with you in the same work,
who combine indeed in their attempts against the Truth, but without any steady
Principles, and in great confusion.

Amongst the rest, the Assembly of Divines tell us Jus Divin. Minist. Evang.
par. 2. p. 75.
, that these Titles of Angels are Mysterious and Metaphorical, and that it
cannot not be safe or solid to build on them the structure of Episcopacy. And
yet they are not of the mind of the old Alogians, who derided the Revelation of
S. John Epiphan. Haeres. 51. n. 32.
, saying, of what advantage is it, that he talks of seven Angels, and of seven
Trumpets? They affirm, that this Book is of singular use to Christians to the
end of the world Argument before their Annot. on the Revelations.
. They have also furnished us with Annotations on it, such as they are; and
particularly without any he sitation, they give their Interpretation of this
expression, which yet they would have us believe, is so Mysterious and Obscure.

As for their Argument, that Symbolical Theology is not Argumentative, it is no
farther to be admitted, than as it signifies, that Parables and Figures are not
to be stretched beyond the plain intention of any Author: But if no determinate
sense can be gathered from them, this would make a great part of the Holy
Scriptures useless to us, and leave us mightily in the dark concerning the
Institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which yet the Reformed
think, and that with good reason, they clearly apprehend. Yet after all, we do
not read of the Mystery of the Angels, but of the Seven Stars, of which the
Angels are the explication, and therefore must be supposed to be intelligible:
And indeed there seems to be no difficulty in this, but what has been created
by those that would amuse us with exceptions, that they may find some way to
escape.

You pretend not to have any certainty that the Title of these Angels was
Metaphorical. For what, say you P. 48.
, if by the Name of an Angel, an Angel properly so called should be understood?
Should this be so, then farewell to any ground for Diocesan Bishops in the
Directions of the Epistles to the Angels. And should it not be so, you are not
unprovided of other shifts: but if they succeed no better than this, the
Diocesans are safe enough. For to your Quaere it is easy to reply, that these
Angels of the Churches could not be Celestial Spirits, unless we may believe,
that one of those Spirits was fallen and summoned to repentance: that another of
them had a name to live, but was dead: and that a third was wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: which, I think, is sufficiently
absurd. But the Revelation, you tell me, goes much upon the Hypothesis and
Language of Daniel; and in Daniel we read of the Guardian Angels of Nations,
and in such a manner, that what refers to the Nations, or to their Governors,
is said of the Angels themselves. Which signifies nothing to the purpose,
unless you were able to show, that to charge the Blessed Angels with the sins
of men, and call them to Reformation of Life has a Congruity with the
Prophetic Scheme of Daniel, or with the nature of those holy Beings, who are
so constant and cheerful in their obedience to the Divine Will.

Walo Messalinus C. 4. p. 184.
and some others affirm, that these Angels were the Churches themselves: and to
comply with them, we must believe that the Angels of the Churches were the
Churches of the Churches Vid. usser. Armachan. Dissert. praefix. Polycarp. and
Ignat. Epist. c. 18.
which, I think, is no good sense. Grotius reflecting on their Exposition does
justly charge it with a manifest contradicting of the Holy Scripture Grot. de
Imp. Sum. Potest. C. 11. Sect. 6. p. 343.
, which declares that The Candlesticks are the Churches, and that the seven
Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches. But Whither, says he, may not men
be drawn by an itch of contradiction when they dare confound those things,
which the Spirit of God does so plainly distinguish? Yet I deny not that the
Instructions, which did immediately relate to the Angels were communicated by
the Spirit, not only to them, but to the Churches also: it being fit that both
should be made sensible how their Duty and Interest were combined; and
encourage one another in the performance of the things enjoined, and in
carrying on the work of Reformation with the greater vigor and application.

If these Angels were neither Celestial Spirits, nor the Churches of Asia
themselves; it cannot be imagined that they were any thing else but the Pastors
of those Churches. Yet this being supposed, some question has been made about
their number, which is omitted, says Smectymnuus, not without some mystery,
lest we should understand by Angel one Minister alone and not a company. This
you call a Critical nicety. But I take it to be a profane abuse of the Holy
Scripture under a pretense of discovering a Mystery. It Is said expressly in
Scripture that the seven Stars are the Angels: there were therefore just so
many Angels as there were Stars. The Churches also were seven, and every Church
had its distinct and peculiar Angel; and if any, notwithstanding this, deny
that the number of the Angels and Churches was equal, they seem not in a
capacity to be convinced of any thing by the clearest demonstration.

As for the conceit, that every Angel was a Company, it is inconsistent with
the Scripture; for the Angels are not called Constellations but seven Stars.
And says Suidas, (...). (...). Yet if these words sometimes happen to be used
promiscuously, we ought not however to depart from their genuine and usual
signification without necessity.

Such a necessity there is not here, for an Angel no more properly signifies a
College of Angels than a man signifies a Troop or a Corporation. Nor are the
descriptions of the several Angels applicable to a multitude, unless we will
suppose that all the Elders of the respective Societies deserved the same
particular reproof or commendation, which has not the least shadow of Truth.

We read indeed, that the strong Cattle before whom Jacob placed his Rods
generally brought forth the speckled or ringstraked, and this we impute to a
Miracle, and question not the thing, because it is related by Moses in the Book
of Genesis Genesis 30
. But what should make all the Presbyters of each of the seven Churches have
the same particular perfections or defects; the same ornaments of mind, or
stains and blemishes, I cannot imagine. I am sure no such thing is revealed in
Scripture, nor has it any probability.

Yet I deny not that amongst the things that are written to the Angels, there
are some instructions mingled, in which others are immediately concerned Rev.
2.10, 24.
, and to whom they are addressed. And from hence Smectymnuus and the Assembly
of Divines argue, that every Angel must be understood collectively. But they
might have considered that sometimes in the Holy Scripture, discourses begun
with one are diverted to many; and with many, to one; and that without any
artificial transition. For example, S. Paul in the fourth Chapter of his
Epistle to the Philippians, ver. 3. writes thus, I entreat thee Yoke fellow.
And he concludes his second Epistle to Timothy with these words; The Lord Jesus
Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you; And one might as well infer from
hence, that the Philippians were a single person, and Timothy a multitude, as
conclude from the like instance, that every Angel of the several Asiatick
Churches was a Presbytery.

We have seen, that these Angels were men, and not Celestial Spirits. We have
also seen, that they were seven individual Pastors, and not so many Collective
Bodies. I farther add that they were distinguished by their Eminence from all
other Ministers within their own Precincts, and that constantly, as Bishops of
their respective Churches.

1. These Angels were distinguished by their Eminence from all other Ministers
in their several Churches. This is granted by Beza Vid. Bez. Annot. in Apoc.
2.1.
and some other learned Presbyterians, and the thing is manifest. For if all
the Presbyters in these Churches had been Angels alike or without any
difference in Dignity or Order, doubtless they would have born the same Title,
and then to have directed an Epistle to any of them under the name of Angel,
would have been to as little purpose as to have dispatched away another Letter
with no other Inscription but this, To a Senator of Rome; in both which cases
no particular person would have thought himself concerned.

2. These Angels received not their Office with condition that they should
resign it before death, or shortly be degraded from it; but they constantly
retained their praeeminence. The Christians did not distinguish their Ordinary
Officers, as, some Antiquaries observe Vid. Octav. Falconer. Inscript. Athlet.
p. 39.40. Ez. Spanhem. de Praestant. Numism. p. 696, 697, 698. Henrici Noris
Cenotaph. Pisan. Dissert. 1. p. 72, 73. Johan. Harduin. Number. Antiq. Illustrat.
p. 84.400, 401.
, the Heathens did their Priests, into such as were Temporary and such as were
Perpetual or for Life; For none of them were Temporary, but they were all
obliged constantly to remain in their Station unless any of them were Deposed
for their Offenses, or advanced into a higher Order. The Dignity, therefore, or
Authority of these Angels was not limited to a certain number of days or years,
but was communicated to them with a design that it should be continued in their
persons. And that it was so may be gathered also from hence, that there were
Duties prescribed in the Epistles that were directed to them, which could not
be performed but in their constant exercise of the same Function.

This is different from the account which is given of them by Beza: for having
supposed they were no more than Presidents of the Presbyteries without
Authority over them, he goes on to suppose that the Office of Presidents was
Ambulatory, passing from one Presbyter to another in a circular motion. He
tragically complains that it became fixed: For from hence, he says Bez. in
Apocal. 2.1.
, The Oligarchical Tyranny the Top of which is the Antichristian Beast, had its
original, to the destruction, not of the Church only, but of the World. Here is
a heavy Charge, you see, at which however one need not be concerned, for the
load falls on a Chimera of his own; His Presidents, I mean, that had no Being
in or near the time he speaks of. Yet if they had any existence before their
late establishment, he produces nothing to prove, that they took their turns in
this manner he describes, but groundless Conjectures.

He was under such fear that Presidents or First Presbyters might grow up into
Bishops or Oligarchical Tyrants, that he would allow them no long continuance
in their Station. For it is probable, he thinks Hebdomadicam hanc (...) fuisse
probahile est. Bez. Vid. Sarav. de diverse. Minist. grad. p. 338.
, that their Administration expired every week. And since he would have it so,
he should have informed us, whether all that is said to have been done by the
Angels, which with him are First Presbyters, or all that is prescribed to them,
was or could be performed within the compass of a week: and if not, how it was
applicable to them, when they had shifted their places, and were not considered
under their former Title; Or rather, whether the Epistles were not addressed to
the Angels for the time being: and if so, how it came to pass, that the same
actions are ascribed to all that were successively placed in the same Chair. If
he had considered these things, he had never troubled the world with his absurd
conceit of Circular Presidents or weekly Moderators.

3. These Angels were Bishops of the Asiatick Churches. For if they were
distinguished from all other Ministers in their several Dioceses by their
Eminence and that Constantly: we have reason to think it was rather after the
manner of Prelates, who are acknowledged by the Adversaries of Episcopacy to
have governed the Church in the following and succeeding Ages, than as mere
Presidents, in Beza's sense, of which there are no examples within a thousand
years.

Mr. Prynne's attempt to Vnbishop them answers the rest of his performances. He
says, as many of his Brethren have also done, that Ordinary Presbyters are
Angels, and this he proves from Rev. 1. 20. P. 124.
the sense of which is the thing in question: and in his usual way of Rhetoric
he condemns the contrary Opinion as a Crazy conceit of a proud Episcopal brain
P. 128.
. He has advanced another assertion which is a little surprising, and in which
I presume You will hardly concur with him: He tells us, It Is evident beyond
contradiction that the Angels of God are all equal in Order, Power, Dignity,
Office, Degree, Ministry P. 133.
. And this, he says, is an unanswerable evidence of the equality of Ministers
by Divine institution. He also informs us, that Angels, being ministering
Spirits, have no need of Lordships, Manors or Possessions: and hence he takes
occasion to express his indignation against the Prelates for their Palaces,
Manors, Lordships, Possessions, Miters, Rochets, Vestments. His Book abounds
with such stuff as this, which moves one to pity rather than expose his
weakness. Yet it was fit some notice should be taken of it, for the sake of
those, that, to the prejudice of the truth, still have his person in admiration.

But I return to the Proposition from which he diverted me: and which I think
may be thus confirmed.

1. If these Pastors that are called Angels were only so styled, as they were
Presidents of the several Presbyteries, then were they the Angels of the
Presbyteries, but not of the Churches; which is directly contrary to what is
said of them in the Holy Scripture.

2. They are said to be the seven Stars in Our Lords Right Hand ver. 16. which
signifies that they had such Dignity and Power as were not ascribed to any
other Officers in their respective Churches: and if so, there is no question
but our Savior approved their Function, and would support those that were so
near him in the discharge of it.

3. They were called Angels in allusion to the practice of the Jews, who
attributed to their High Priest the Title of Angel. For of him, I suppose,
Solomon speaks, where he says, Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin,
neither say thou before the Angel it was an error. Eccl. 5.6. I cannot think
that Solomon here advised a person that had bound himself by a Vow, not to make
this speech before the Messiah or any Ministering Spirits (as some Interpreters
conceive) or not to attempt to delude with words any invisible Beings. It may
seem he was in no danger of that: But the Royal Preacher gives him caution that
he should not satisfy himself, if, by his excuses, he could impose on the High
Priest, who was obliged to take cognizance of his Vows Levit. 5.4, 5, 6.
, but to remember that God would be an Avenger of the falsehood, that was acted
before his Vicegerent, however it was covered with the greatest art.

That Exposition and what I infer from it, may be confirmed from the 42 d.
Chapter of Isaiah ver. 19. where we find this expostulation, Who is deaf as my
Messenger (...) Sym^. ach.
? But the the Original may well be rendered, who is deaf as my Angel? And this
doubtless was not an Angel of Light: nor can an inspired Prophet be thought so
stupid as the person was, against whom that complaint was made. His Character
is not so applicable to any as the High Priest, whose duty indeed it was to
understand the Will of God and instruct others: but at that time, it seems,
himself had great need of admonition, which yet he was in no readiness to
receive.

The like use of the word we meet with in Malac. 2.7. For I make no question,
but what the Prophet speaks there of the Priest, is to be understood of the
High Priest, or, that it is he who is styled the Angel (...). LXX.
of the Lord of Hosts, at whose mouth the people were required to seek the Law.
And it may seem that the High Priests were not only called Angels, whilst they
were enabled as the Messengers of the Almighty to reveal his mind by Vrim and
Thummim, but after the period to which the Cessation of these Oracles is
assigned by Josephus Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 3. c. 8.
himself. For Diodorus Siculus (...). Diod. Sic. apud Phot. Cod. 244. Col. 1153.
speaking of the Jews and their High Priest, says, They esteem him an Angel to
convey to them the commands of God.

And from what has been said, I collect, that there was an Analogy between the
Jewish High Priest, and every Angel of the Asiatick Churches; that both of them
were Governors in Chief, and had their subordinate Officers, and that the
Presbyters and Deacons were subject to the one as the Priests and Levites were
to the other.

But, say you P. 48.
, Should it be yielded that the Jews had any such practice to attribute the
Title of Angel to their High Priest, what could this amount to in our case,
since every Bishop is not a High Priest in the sense of the Jews? For in their
sense there could be but one, and then that one amongst the Christians must be
a Pope. And to the Pope you would do no small service, if you may be permitted
to make Inferences for him from this Analogy; for you stretch it as far as he
desires, and beyond what is consistent with Scripture and the common sense of
Christians in the best Ages; with both which it agrees, that there should be
one Bishop in a Diocese, resembling the High Priest within the bounds of his
Jurisdiction. Farther than this, the similitude may not be extended, unless it
be said, that as there is but one Catholic Church, which is the Mystical
Israel, so Mystically there is but one Bishop. For all the Bishops were
anciently esteemed as one; and what was done by one in the due exercise of his
Office, was esteemed the Act of the whole College. A Notion that supposes an
equality of all Bishops in their Office and Authority, and consequently is so
far from affording any advantage to the Popes, that it directly opposes their
pretenses, and has sometimes been used, to very good purpose, to prevent their
Usurpations and check their Ambition.

4. The Epistles directed to these Angels are such as suppose them to have had
Jurisdiction over all others, both Ministers and People, within their
respective Dioceses: And on this it is that I principally insist.

Our Lord, says Arethas Areth. in Apoc. 1.20. p. 661, 662.
does by the Angel treat with the Church, as if by the Master a person should
discourse of one that is under his Government: knowing that the Master is wont
to esteem those things as his own which are done by his Scholars, whether they
were worthy of honor or reproach. But he might have added, that a Master could
then only justly be charged with the irregularities of his Scholars, when he
had power, but did not exercise it, to prevent their miscarriages. And how much
this is the case here may partly appear from this concession of Blondel. The
actions of the Church, says that learned Man Iis (scilicet Presbytericrum
Praepositis) ceu (...) commissi gregis tam (...) quam pudenda ex aequo imputari
potuere, and a Domino ipso Ecclesiarum Asiaticarum Angelos Calestibus monitis
ad fidei constantiam armante imputata Sunt. Blond. Apolog. Prae^at. p. 6.
, whether they were glorious or infamous were imputed to the Angels as their
Exarchs or Chief Governors. They were therefore more than Moderators in a
Presbytery, and had full power to correct abuses. And this is what may be
illustrated from the following instance, which I have chosen out of several
that might be given.

The Angel of the Church of Pergamus is celebrated for his personal Virtues. He
dwelt where Satan's seat was, and yet he held fast the name of Christ, and
denied not the Faith in those days when Antipas the faithful Martyr was slain.
C. 2. v. 13. But some defect was imputed to him as a Governor, I have a few
things against thee, says the Lord, because thou have them there that hold the
doctrine of Balaam, etc. So thou have also them which hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate, ver. 14, 15. And from hence we may gather,
that it was in his power to suppress those pernicious Doctrines and Sects that
disturbed the Church, and for this purpose the concurrence of any Coordinate
Officers was not necessary. He could not allege, that he wanted Authority, or
that others controlled him in his proceedings against enormities: But as it was
laid to his charge alone, that he had not stopped the mouths of Gainsayers: so he
alone was warned to repent for this want of Discipline, lest the Lord should
come quickly and fight against him with the sword of his mouth, ver. 16. Since
therefore this Angel had full power of reforming Abuses, since the defect of
that Reformation is entirely imputed to him: Since there is not the least
appearance that he had any Colleagues joined in Commission with him, whose Votes
were necessary for the performance of what was expected from him: and since he
alone is represented as responsible for the miscarriages of the Christians at
Pergamus, it is manifest, that they were all under his Jurisdiction. He might
have Subordinate Officers, but he had no Equals.

If the Angels of the Churches had such power as I have ascribed to them, there
is no ground to suspect that they unjustly usurped it. For if it be a good
Argument that the Text it self of the Old Testament had not been corrupted by
the Scribes and Pharisees, when our Savior and his Apostles were upon Earth,
that neither of them laid it to the charge of those wicked men: we may conclude
from the Epistles directed to these Angels, that our Lord was not offended at
the Station which they had in the Churches, since he censures their faults and
makes that no part of them. But this is not all that may be said for it: He
plainly signifies his approbation of it, both in condemning their former
remisness, and in exciting them to greater vigor, in the exercise of their
Office.

This agrees exactly with the Historical Accounts that we have of the first
Age, and particularly with what Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. de Div. Salv.
p. 110.
relates of S. John; who, as he tells us, visited the Regions adjacent to
Ephesus, partly that he might form Churches, partly that he might add fit
persons to the Clergy, and partly that he might Ordain Bishops. And if there be
any doubt remaining, of what Quality they were; it may be resolved from hence,
that the Bishop of a City not far from Ephesus, is said to be a person placed
over All Smyrnam vocat hanc Urb^^ Auctor Chronici Alexandrini, Annotante
Valesio. (...). Supra omnis constitutus. Interpret. Wall. Messal. p. 229.
: which Character could belong to a Prelate only. And as it is probable that
this Prelate was the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, so it is manifest from the
Transaction which I have mentioned, that those of his Order were of Divine or
Apostolical Appointment.

CHAP. X. Objections against Episcopacy, taken from the Writings of the first
Century, considered.
I Have showed that the Churches of Jerusalem and Philippi, of Ephesus and
Crete, the Churches of Smyrna and Pergamus, Thyatira and Sardis, Philadelphia
and Laodicea, were governed by Bishops in the first Century: And one need but
read the second and third Book of Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History, or S.
Jerome's Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, to find that Bishops then presided
in the Churches of Antioch and Rome, of Alexandria and Athens; and to be
informed, who they were. This may give us reason to think, that all the
Churches in the World were at that time under an Episcopal Administration;
especially if it appear, that they were so in the following Age: But before I
come to make enquiry into that, it may be requisite to remove out of the way
some Objections that relate to the Apostles days.

1. You argue from Acts 20.17, 28. Titus 1.5, 7. that mere Presbyters were
Bishops. And this I am ready to grant: But then it must be acknowledged, that
the Presbyters mentioned in those places, were subordinate to other Pastors,
and consequently, a continuance of their Office supposes a continuance of such
Superiors as they had, to the end of the World.

Their Superiors were S. Paul and Titus, and if there be any question, whether
the Name of Bishops may be ascribed to them, it may be determined from what has
been said already. For if it belongs to the Apostles, as I have proved from the
words of S. Peter, and some passages of the Ancients, it may fitly be applied,
not only to the Twelve, but to all their Colleagues. But Episcopacy, you tell
me P. 3.
, is a word of ample signification; for it is not only to be met with in Homer,
Plutarch, Cicero, but it is applied to God by Basil, and to the Elders by
Peter: nothing therefore is deducible from it, as to the special nature of any
Office, except by way of Analogy. And what then? Did I ever affirm, that it had
but one sense in all the Books where it occurs, whether they are Sacred or
Profane? Did I ever assert, that none but Apostles were called Bishops, and
deduce from that Title an account of the special Nature of their Office? If you
can impute to me neither of these things, you must be content to fight with
your own shadow: And I shall think it enough, that the instances I have
produced, perform what I designed by them. They show, that in affirming, the
Apostles were Bishops, and particularly, that S. James was a Bishop, whatever
exceptions some have taken against it, we speak the Language of the Scripture
and the Fathers: They also show, that if mere Presbyters were Bishops, others
had the same denomination, who had Jurisdiction over them, and answer the
Objections against Prelacy, that have been raised from Acts 20.17, 28. and
other places.

2. You argue from Clemens Romanus, that in the first Age, there were but two
Ranks of Ecclesiastical Officers, because he mentions no more, when he speaks
of the Bishops and Deacons, that were constituted by the Apostles, of those
that afterward should believe. As if the whole Scheme of the Government which
the Apostles established, might be taken from that one Act, or they had done
nothing, but what this Author left upon Record. But, as Epiphanius tells us
Epiphan. Haeres. 75. n. 5.
, All things could not be regulated by them on a sudden. And the Churches of
their Plantation afford us the best Pattern of Ecclesiastical Polity, not as
they were only in design, or in their infancy, but as they had received from
their Founders their due lineaments and just proportions, and were grown up to
some perfection.

This might have been a sufficient Answer to what you have objected from the
place before us, had you demonstrated, that when Clemens only mentions two
Ranks of Ministers; he meant to exclude a greater number. But this you have not
proved; as one might have expected you should, before you built so much upon
it. Because persons differing in Degree or Order sometimes come under the same
denomination. There were many that were said to be Rulers of the same
Synagogue, as some have gathered from Mark 5.22. Vid. Grot. Annot. in Matthew.
9.18.
. Yet one of those Rulers was the President. There were many, that at the same
time were said to be Princes of Asia Acts 19.31.
, yet one of them was called The Asiarcha, by way of Eminence, and
distinguished from the rest in Dignity and Power; as Spanhemius Vid. Spanhem.
de Praest. Numism. p. 693, 694.
and Harduinus Harduin. Number. Antiq. Illustrat. p. 423.
collect from some Ancient Coins, and from the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna.
And as a Learned Man of our own Bevereg. ^od. Can. Vind. ^. 2. c. 11. p. 316.
observes, Aaron and his Successor Eleazar are never styled High Priests in the
Books of Moses, but Priests only: and yet the other Priests were subject to
them, when they had no distinct Title. Clemens Romanus himself speaking of
Abraham, says, that all the Priests and Levites were descended from him (...).
Clem. R. c. 32.
, and in one of the Members of that Division he must be supposed to comprehend
the High Priests, whom he does not expressly mention. And probably, it was in
imitation of the Hellenist Jews Vid. Dodwel. Dissert. Cypr. 10. Sect. 9, 10.
, that many of the Primitive Christian Writers distinguished the Clergy into
two Ranks: and to make them speak consistent with themselves, we need only
grant, that two different Orders, by reason of some general agreement between
them, are contained in one of the Branches of the Distinctions which they use.
This one thing being considered, may answer a great part of Blondel's Apology:
And it shows, that if nothing else hinders, Clemens might comprehend all the
Ruling Officers of the Church, under the Name of Bishops, that being a word,
which, at that time, was of a general signification; yet some of them might be
Supreme, and others Subordinate to them. He might call them indifferently
Bishops or Presbyters, yet some of them might be Prelates; and the rest of an
inferior Rank, and under their Authority.

But supposing, what, for my part I am inclined to believe, that all the
Bishops mentioned by Clemens were mere Presbyters, I know not what service this
can do you. For he intimates (...), etc. c. 44.
, that there were Officers distinct from them, and superior to them: And only
to these Renowned Men, as he calls them, and the Apostles, whom he joins with
them, he ascribes the Power of Ordination, which has been the Prerogative of
the Bishops ever since his days.

It Is true, it may seem, that there was no Bishop at Corinth, when he sent this
Epistle thither, which was before the Destruction of Jerusalem: But if the Sea
was vacant at that time, it might be filled before the first Century was
expired. Certain it is, that about the middle of the following Age Primus was
Bishop of Corinth by Succession, as you may learn from Hegesippus Apud Eusebius.
H. E. l. 4. c. 22.
: And if you enquire into the Original of that Succession, Tertullian Tertul.
de Praescript. Haeret. c. 36.
will lead you to it; for he places at Corinth, one of the Chairs of the
Apostles.

It was in another of them that S. Clemens himself sat, who is the Author of
this Epistle. He was a Bishop or an Apostle, as he is styled by Clemens
Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 4. p. 516.
: He is mentioned in the Table of the Roman Apostles, which was taken by
Mabillon Mabillon. de re Diplom. l. 5. p. 357.
out of a Book of Canons in the Abbey of Corbie: and, which amounts to the same
thing, he is reckoned in all the Catalogues that are extant of the Roman
Bishops. S. Irenaeus Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.
, who lived near his time, informs us, that he was Bishop of Rome. The same is
attested by Tertullian Tertul. de Praescript. Haeret. c. 32. p. 213.
and Origin Origin. Comment. Ed. Huet. vol. 2. p. 430.
, by Eusebius Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 3.
and Epiphanius Epiphan. Haeres. 27. n. 6.
, by Optatus Optat. adv. Parmen. l. 2. p. 36.
and Jerome Hieron. Catalog. in Clemente.
, by Augustine Augustine. ad Fortunat. Ep. 165.
and many others. So that we have as great certainty of it, as there is, that
Clemens writ the Epistle which bears his Name. And if there be no ground to
doubt of it, as I think there is not, his silence concerning a Bishop of
Corinth, is not so cogent an Argument against Episcopacy, as his own Example is
for it: there not being the least cause to believe, that so Excellent a Person
would have born an Office, which himself condemned or believed to be sinful.

CHAP. XI. After the Apostles Decease the Churches were governed by single
Persons, who were distinguished by the Name of Bishops.
IN what has been already said of Episcopal Government, I have for the most
part limited my Discourse to the first Century, and only touched on it
incidentally, as continued in succeeding times. I come now more fully to show,
that after the Apostles decease, the Churches or Dioceses were governed by
Single Persons, who were then distinguished by the Name of Bishops.

This appears from many passages in the Epistles of S. Ignatius: as also from
the Fragments Vid. Eusebius. H. E. l. 4. c. 22, 23. l. 5. c. 24.
that remain of Hegesippus and Dionysius of Corinth, of Polycrates and others,
who flourished in the second Century. In the third Origin acquaints us, it was
the custom to have no more than One Bishop of a Church In singulis Ecclesiis
bini sunt Episcopi, alius visibilis, alius invisibilis. Orig. in Luc. 2. Hom:
13.
: and this he plainly intimates, where he tells us expressly, that in every
Church there were Two: For according to him, one of them was visible, and the
other invisible: One of them a Man, and the other an assisting Angel.

It Is true, near the beginning of that Age Narcissus had Alexander for his
Colleague in the Government of the Church of Jerusalem: But as he was the first
we meet with in Ecclesiastical History, that after the Apostles days admitted
of a Coadjutor: so his Case was Extraordinary, not only by reason of his
extreme Old Age Salutat vos Narcissus qui ante me hic tenuit Episcopalem locum
and nunc mecum eundem orationibus regit annos natus circiter centum sedecim.
Alexand. apud Hieron. In Cat. Script. Eccles.
, but also because, as Eusebius informs us Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 11.
, his breach of the Churches Rule was dispensed with by Divine Revelation.

The Rule was, that of One Church or Diocese, there might be no more than one
Bishop (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. p. 41.
. On which principle Cyprian Vid. Cypr. Ep. 46. and Ep. 55. p. 104.
and Cornelius Corn. apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 43.
argued against the Novatians: And the Council of Nice (...). Can. 8.
meant the same thing in prohibiting a plurality of Bishops in one City; and
did not thereby introduce an Innovation, but confirm an useful part of the
Ancient Discipline.

It was high time to do this, for when Epiphanius, speaking of Alexandria, says
(...). Haeres. 68. n. 6.
, that it never had two Bishops, as other Cities, he intimates, that in the
days of Alexander, who was present in the Nicene Council, some Cities in Egypt
had a plurality of Bishops; and if so, it was a thing fit to be repressed, as
being contrary to the Primitive Custom: a Custom so avowed, and which had been
so well established, that when the Roman Confessors abandoned the Schismatics,
by whose arts they had been deluded, and made their submission to Cornelius;
when they acknowledged their errors before him with great humility, they
professed, they could not charge themselves with the ignorance of this, That as
there is one God, one Christ, and one Holy Spirit, so there ought to be but one
Bishop of a Catholic Church Nec enim ignoramus unum Deum esse, unum Christum
esse Dominum, quem confessi sumus, unum Spiritum Sanctum, unum Episcopum in
Catholica Ecclesia esse debere. Vid. Cornel. Ep. ad Cyprian. inter Epp. Cypr.
n. 49. p. 93.
.

Yet a doubt still remains, on what account it was, that other Cities differed
from Alexandria in such a manner, as Epiphanius suggests. And some are of
opinion, that the reason of it was, because some Catholic Bishops assumed
Coadjutors, after the example of Narcissus. But I rather think, it proceeded
from the Meletians, of whom he discourses in this place, and who with a mighty
industry set up their Schismatical Bishops and Assemblies. At Alexandria, it
seems, they could not carry on their designs so successfully as in other parts
of Egypt, till, as Epiphanius relates the matter, they took their advantage of
the death of Alexander, and the absence of Achillas his Successon, and then in
opposition to him, they made Theonas their Bishop, and at Alexandria it self
erected Altar against Altar.

But if you are not mistaken, these Meletians reformed a great abuse at
Alexandria by that action: For there you say, the departure from the Primitive
Institution of having diverse Bishops of one City began, as we are told by
Danaeus, who cites Epiphanius, and might have cited others. Thousands,
doubtless, Sir, he might have cited to as much purpose, that is, to testify
such things as never entered into their thoughts. Epiphanius knew very well,
that plurality of Bishops in one City, proceeded commonly from Schism or
Heresy, and was far enough from taking that to be an Argument of the Purity of
the Church* which in the common sense of Christians, both before and after his
own time, was esteemed a Corruption.

Danaeus had a Conceit, that when there was in a City a plurality of Bishops,
they differed in this from the Bishop of Alexandria, that they were Presbyters,
and he a Prelate Haec praelatio unius in civitate Alexandrina primum nata
fuisse videatur; ex qua Urbe etiam Monastica vita and variae Ecclesiae pestes
ortae sunt. Dan. in Aug. de Haeres. c. 53.
; which sufficiently discovers the weakness of his judgment, or something
worse. But he was willing, we see, it should be believed, that the first
Prelate, was to be found at Alexandria, that he might have occasion to tell the
World, that Prelacy and Monkery, and other Plagues of the Church, had their
Original from the same place.

But that all Bishops were Equal, or that they had the same Prelatical
Authority, I shall show hereafter: and I am no farther concerned with it here,
than as it results from this Proposition, That according to the Primitive Rule,
the Government of every Diocese was Monarchical: And this, I think, is manifest
from what has been said, beyond all just exception.

CHAP. XII. The Bishops were Successors of the Apostles.
WE have seen that in the second and other Centuries, the Churches were
governed by single persons, who were distinguished by the Name of Bishops: And
in the next place, I shall prove, that the Bishops were Successors to the
Apostles: Because this will confirm my Leading Proposition, That the Apostles
were Ordinary Pastors, and prepare my way to consider, how the Bishops stood
related amongst themselves and to others, and what regard is due to persons of
their Character.

That the Bishops were Successors to the Apostles* S. Augustine thought might be
gathered from the Prediction that was made to the Church by the Psalmist in
these words, In stead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children Ps. 45.16.
; For of them he gives us the following Paraphrase Aug ^. 9. p. 169.
, The Apostles begat thee, they are thy Fathers. But could they remain with us
always? One of them said, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
far better: Nevertheless to abide in the flesh, is more needful for you. He
said so indeed. But how long could he continue here? Could he live on Earth to
this and future Ages? or was the Church deserted, when the Apostles were
deceased? God forbid. Instead of the Fathers, there are Children: Bishops are
constituted in room of the Apostles. Do not therefore think thy self forsaken,
because thou see not Peter: or because thou see not Paul, or because thou
see not any of those, from whom thou art descended, since Fathers are risen
out of thy own offspring.

The Author of the Commentary on the Psalms, that goes under the Name of Jerome,
agrees with S. Augustine in that Exposition. And S. Jerome himself, who upbraids
the Montanists for depressing the Bishop into the third Rank Apud nos
Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent. Apud ^os Episcopus ^ertius est. Habent enim
de Pepusa Phrygia Patriarchar. Hieron. ^. 2. p. 88. Ep. 52.
, says in opposition to them, With us the Bishops possess the place of the
Apostles. His sense of this he expresses more copiously in his Epistle to
Evagrius; for there he says, Wherever there be a Bishop, whether at Rome or
Eugubium, at Constantinople or Rhegium, at Alexandria or Tanis, he is of the
same Merit, and of the same Priesthood. The power of Riches and meanness of
Poverty may render one Bishop higher or lower than another (That is, with
respect to things external, or a priority of Order, if that be the true reading
which I follow) But they are all the Apostles Successors Potentia divitiarum
and Paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum facit (ita
enim lego sine negatione, ex fide Cod. M.S.) Caeterum omnes Apostolorum
Successores sunt T. 2. Ep. 85.
.

Long before Jerome, Firmilian, Potestas peccatorum remittendorum Apostolis data
est and Episcopis, qui eis ordinatione vicaria successerunt. Firmil. Ep. ad
Cypr. inter Epp. Cypr. n. 75, p. 225.
was of the same judgment: for speaking of the Bishops in general, he tells us,
that they succeeded the Apostles. And with him agrees Cyprian. Laboramus and
laborare debemus, ut unitatem a Domino, and per Apostolos nobis Successoribus
traditum, quantum possumus, obtinere curemus. Cyp. Ep. 45.
, and Clarus a Muscula Quibus (i. e. Apostolis) nos successimus. Vid. Council.
Carthag. de Baptizand. Haeret. inter Opp. Cyp. p. 242.
his Cotemporary.

Many others might be added: but here I shall only mention S. Irenaeus, who
argues thus against the Heretics in his time: We can number those, says he
Habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis
and Successores eorum usque ad nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt quale ab his
deliratur; Etenim si recondita mysteria scissent Apostoli, quae scorsim and
latenter ab reliquis perfectos dotibant, his vel maxim traderent ea quibus
etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant. Valde enim perfectos and irreprehensibiles
in omnibus eos volebant esse quos and Successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum
loc^m Magisterii tradentes. Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.
, who by the Apostles were instituted Bishops in the Churches, and their
Successors to our own time; and they taught us none of the dotages of, these
men: But if the Apostles knew any hidden Mysteries, which they secretly taught
the perfect, they would chiefly have imparted them to the persons to whom they
committed the Churches. For they desired that they should be very perfect and
unblamable, to whom they delivered their own Place of Government.

Thus that Excellent Father, and his Testimony is the more considerable,
because of his great Antiquity. For it is probable, he was born several years
before the death of S. John Vid. Dodwel. in Iren. Dissert. 1.
, and it is certain, he received instruction from some that had seen and heard
the Apostles themselves.

To invalidate his Authority, you tell me, he is agreed by some to have
affirmed, that our Lord Christ did undergo his passion in the fiftieth year of
his age. As if that might better be determined by their agreement about it than
his own Writings, in which we find no such thing. He no where fixes the period
of our Saviors Passion: He no where assigns it to a certain year: Yet I grant,
he was of opinion, that our Savior lived about fifty years, if that passage be
his, wherein he treats of this matter Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 39.
. But Antonius Pagi Critic. in Annal. Baron. A. D. 32. n. 5.
and other Learned Men conceive, it has been corrupted, it seeming incredible
to them, that Irenaeus should attribute to our Lord so many years in that very
Chapter, wherein he reckons no more than three Passovers which he celebrated
after he entered upon the thirtieth year of his Age, and declares, He did eat
the last of them the day before his suffering.

But there being no Copies to justify that Charge of Corruption, what I insist
upon is, That if Irenaeus was mistaken in the time of Christ's Passion, it does
not follow that he was so in the thing which I have cited from him. If he erred
concerning that Period about which all mankind have been in the dark; he might
notwithstanding be a credible Witness of such matters as could not well escape
his notice and have nothing in them that is improbable.

Such was the severity of our Saviors Life and deportment that, it may seem,
he appeared more aged than he was: For when the Jews said to him, Thou art not
yet fifty years old Joh. 8.57.
, doubtless they thought, he was near so much. And it is easy then to
conceive, how the report might arise and be continued, which Irenaeus followed:
But it was so far from becoming an universal Tradition, that it was never
embraced, that we find, by so much as two of the Fathers. The Case is very
different when he relates, who succeeded the Apostles, for of this lie could
hardly be ignorant, that lived so near them. And the account he gives having
been confirmed by many others, and having met with an universal approbation,
cannot be rejected by us with any shadow of reason.

But you say, Admitting Irenaeus 's Authority to be unblemished and cite as one
could wish it, yet on this occasion, it will do me but small service: for the
force of the testimony which I cite from him depends on the word Magisterium,
and Magisterium signifies, not, as I understand it, a Masterly Authority, but
Teaching and Doctrine: for in this latter sense the word is often used by the
Fathers and particularly by S. Cyprian, as I may see lib. 1. Ep. 3. and in
other places. Yet in that very Epistle to which you refer me, we may not
understand by it Doctrine without Authority, nor is it limited to any such
sense amongst Ancient Writers. In Suetonius Sueton, in vit. Domit. c. 4. and in
vit. Aug. c. 2.
in Ammianus Marcellinus Ammian. Marcel. l. 26. p. 455.
, in Sulpicius Severus Sulp. Sever. Dialog. page 162.
and many others, it signifies some Dignity or Office with Power and
Jurisdiction. It signifies Government in Apuleius Apul. Asin. Aur. lib. 1. p.
161.
; and Casaubon Casaubon. Not. ad Jul. Capitol. M. Anton. Philos. c. 4. p. 157.
observes, that (...) and Magisterium Sacerdotii are expressions equivalent.
From hence it appears that Locus Magisterii in Irenaeus may fitly be
translated, the place of Authority or Government. And that it ought to be so,
will be manifest, if it be considered, that he thought it peculiar to the
Bishops, to succeed the Apostles in their own place or Office. He could not
think it peculiar to them to derive from the Apostles the mere power of
preaching, which was known to be common to other Ministers. His words therefore
can import no less, than that the Bishops were constituted Supreme Pastors
without that dependence on Presbyters which these had on them; or, that they
were vested with such Authority over other Officers and Churches as the
Apostles before enjoyed and exercised.

And now it may be fit, and it will be no difficult matter, to answer your
Objection, which I omitted before, against the Succession of Bishops to the
Apostles, and which is to this effect. The Prelates, you conceive, cannot be
said to be the Apostles Successors, because the Apostles in their life time
could not constitute any Officers over whom they did not retain a Jurisdiction,
nor convey to others the places which, you suppose, they still kept. But if it
be said they appointed that the Prelates should be inducted into those places
after their decease, you think, there is no credible tradition transmitted to
us of that matter.

But here is one thing you have forgotten that may deserve to be considered,
which is, that unless all the Apostles had died together the Survivers might
put others into the places of the deceased. Accordingly, tho Simeon was not
nominated by S. James to be his Successor, nor came into his place whilst he
was alive, yet after the death of that Apostle, he was by others Constituted
Bishop of Jerusalem Vid. Eusebius. H.E. l. 3. c. 11.
.

It is farther observable, that the Apostles, before their decease, were
sometimes obliged to withdraw themselves from the Churches which they had
planted and governed, and thereupon they committed the Government of them to
fit persons, who may well be said to be their Successors in that
Administration. Especially since, as I have proved, the Apostles Communicated
to them the same Authority that themselves had exercised. Yet as Julius
Capitolinus acquaints us Vit. Ver. c. 3, 4. p. 225. vid. not. Salmas. ad loc.
, that Lucius was as observant of Marcus, who made him Partner of his Empire as
a President was wont to be of the Emperor himself: Thus Timothy and Titus and
others of the same Rank, who had been Ordained by the Apostles, might still pay
them such respect and deference as was due to persons of incomparable
excellence, and yet all be of the same Order.

The Apostles having Communicated their Episcopal Authority to some in their
own time, these transmitted it to others in the following Centuries: and in
this manner it has been conveyed to Bishops in all Ages. The Bishops therefore
may be said to succeed the Apostles, and that not only in the Government of
Churches, which were of their Plantation, but of others also in Countries to
which they never arrived. For since they had Commission to bring all Nations
under the Discipline of Christ, and govern them in his name, a Right to that
descends to their Spiritual Heirs, and they may exercise it in all the parts of
the World.

But notwithstanding your attempt to demonstrate that the Apostles could have
no Successors, you make no doubt to affirm, that Presbyters succeed them in
their ordinary work: And about this I shall make some enquiry, when I have
first put you in mind, that either you must suppose, these Presbyters were
subject to the Apostles in their discharge of that work, and if so, a
subjection was consistent with a Succession to them; or else they were not
subject, and then you must allow that the Apostles Constituted Officers over
whom they retained no Jurisdiction. Take it which way you please, you are
concerned, I think, to reject or answer your own Argument.

To prove that Priests are Successors to the Apostles, you quote a passage Ay,
every Priest this way is a Successor of that Apostle, from whom by Tradition he
received Priesthood. Let. 2. p. 21.

Paul. Golomes. Observat. Sacr. p. 42. Ed. 1688.


of Nilus, as you call the Author of the Treatise de Primatu Papae, which, as
Colomesius informs us, was composed by Mark the Ephesian. But to which of them
soever it belongs it is not very material: For neither of them flourished
within a thousand years of the days of the Apostles and therefore come too late
to determine what the belief of the Primitive Church was by their own Testimony.

Indeed if a Subordinate Officer may be said to succeed the Supreme for doing
some things after his example, by Authority derived from him, then may Priests
be said to succeed the Apostles; and so they are by some that use a great
latitude of expression. But the Ancients speaking exactly, and telling us that
the Bishops succeed the Apostles, thereby intimated, that they were both of the
same Order, or that both had the same Function. For this they believed and
urged when there was occasion. Photius mentions it as a thing commonly
acknowledged, that both had the same Dignity of Place (...). Phot. cp. 54. p.
108.
Clarus a Muscula acquaints us Manifesta est sententia Domini Nostri Jesu
Christi, Apostolos suos mittentis, and ipsis solis Potestatem a Patre sibi
datam permittentis, quibus nos successimus eadem Potestate Ecclesiam
gubernantes. Clar. ubi supra.
, that both governed with the same Power. S. Basil ascribes to both the same
Prelacy (...). Basil. ad Ambros. Episcopum. Ep. 55. p. 830.
: And according to Tertullian both sat in the same Chairs Ipse adhuc Cathedrae
Apostolorum suis locis praesident. Tert. de Praescript. c. 36. p. 215.
, and that not only as Teachers, but as Presidents or Rulers of the Churches.

It Is true the Bishops were not wont to assume to themselves the name of
Apostles for a reason already given, yet that it was sometimes ascribed to them
appears from several instances Quadratus vocatur Apostolus in Men. Gr. September.
2^. Item Meletius Antioch. Episcop. a Greg. Nyssen. T. 2. p. 1019. and plura
istiusmodi occurunt exempla in Scriptis Veterum.
. It is also manifest, that sometimes they were styled Apostolici Vid. Bignon.
ad Marculf. Formul. l. 1. c. 2.
, that their Office was called an Apostolate Vid. Alcim. Avit. Ep. 18.23.27.37.
Vid. Savar. Comment. in Sidon. Apoll. Lib. 6. Ep. 4. p. 388.
, and that any Bishopric, especially if it was founded by an Apostle, was
called an Apostolic See. For the Title of Apostolic, that I may note this by
the way, was not appropriated to the Sea of Rome before the Eleventh Century,
says the Author of the Notes on Paulinus Vid. Not. ad Paulin. Ep. 3. p. 10. Ed.
Paris. 1685.
: it was not before the thirteenth, says Mabillon De Re Diplom. l. 2. c. 2. p.
64.
: it was not certainly before the Popes had trampled under their feet the
Rights of Episcopacy.

CHAP. XIII. The Bishops after the example of the Apostles stood related
amongst themselves as Equals, but to other Ecclesiastical Officers as Superiors.
AS the Bishops were Successors to the Apostles, so after their example they
stood related amongst themselves as Equals, but to Presbyters as Superiors in
Office and Authority.

1. They stood related amongst themselves as Equals. According to Cyprian,
every one of them in his own Diocese was a Judge in Christ's stead Unus in
Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos and ad tempus Judex vice Christi. Ep. 59. p. 129.
And says that Father, None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or by a
Tyrannical terror compells his Colleagues into a necessity of obedience Neque
enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit, aut Tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit, Vid. Cypr. Tr. p. 229.
. This he spoke in a Council at Carthage, and with reflection probably on
Stephen Bishop of Rome, who injuriously invaded the Rights and Liberties of his
Brethren.

It Is true some Bishops were distinguished from others by a Primacy of Order,
and had the chief direction of Ecclesiastical Affairs. When Synods were called,
they presided in them; and for this they had the example of S. James in the
Council of Jerusalem. But their Primacy depended on the consent of other
Bishops, and was mutable. It did not render them Judges of the rest within
their several Provinces, nor might they condemn any of them by their own
Sentence, without the Suffrages of their Colleagues.

2. In the purest Ages after the Apostles, the Bishops stood related to
Presbyters as Superiors: And in this it is that our Controversy is chiefly
concerned. I shall therefore prove it more largely; and for this purpose. I
shall not only serve my self of such passages of Ancient Writers as describe
the Office or Authority of Bishops, but others also, that only mention them as
an Order distinct from Priests. For if they were so, there can be no question
to which of them the Supremacy did belong.

I begin with the Testimony of S. Ignatius, who says in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians, that he cried with a loud voice, Attend to the Bishop, and to
the Presbytery, and to the Deacons (...). p. 43. Ed. Land. 1680.
. He instructs the Ephesians to respect the Bishop as the Lord that sent him
(...). p. ^1.
. And to the Smyrnaeans he declares, that in things relating to the Church,
none ought to act without the Bishop (...), etc. p. 6.
: that the Eucharist is then valid when it is performed under his Authority or
by his permission; without which, he says, it is not lawful to Baptize or
celebrate the Feasts of Love. So clearly does he assert the Prerogatives of
Episcopacy.

What I have cited from Ignatius carries the greater weight with it, because,
as Chrysostom Chrysostom. T. 5. p. 499.
informs us, he was conversant with the Apostles and instructed by them. He was
a person of so much Sanctity and Zeal, that he was willing to endure all the
torments that the Devil could inflict, that he might be with Christ, and
thought it more desirable to be torn in pieces by wild Beasts for his sake,
than to be Emperor of the World. Having had the advantages of such an Education
and being so wonderfully inflamed with the love of Jesus, he cannot be thought
to have corrupted the Church: nor had he time to accomplish it, had he designed
a thing so detestable. For he did not long survive S. John whose Disciple he
was. He suffered death under the Emperor Trajan, as Simeon also did Vid.
Chronic. Oriental. p. 53. and Abulpharag. Dynast. 7.
, and probably both received the Crown of Martyrdom the same year.

If an Author so Ancient and Venerable had only told us that the Government of
the Church in his time was Episcopal, this might have signified much. But he
does not only relate it as matter of Fact, that there were Bishops: He shows
that Obedience was due to them as the Supreme Pastors, and as the
Representatives and Ambassadors of Christ. And because it was suspected, that
his asserting their Authority had no higher cause, than a prudential foresight
of the Divisions, which some were about to make, he calls him to witness for
whom he was in bonds, that it proceeded from the Spirit of God -- (...). Ep. ad
Philad. p. 43.
. And this Protestation being made at a time when miraculous inspirations were
frequent, there is not the least ground to question his veracity.

The truth is, the Epistles of this Admirable man afford such plain evidence
for Episcopacy, that this has been the foundation of all the quarrels against
them; and particularly, it was the cause, as Grotius informs us Vid. Praest.
Vir. Ep. Eccl. p. 825. Ed. Amstel. 1684
, why they were rejected by Blondel, tho in the Florentino Copy they were free
from those things for which they had before been suspected by the Learned. The
famous Isaac Vossius, who published them from that Copy, tells us Vid. Is.
Voss. Ep. Ignat. praefix.
, that every time he read them over, they presented him with fresh Arguments of
their Exellence, and of their being Genuine: and this will not appear strange
to any person that peruses them with care and without prejudice. But if you
take them to be spurious, you may try your skill in answering what has been
said by Dr. Pearson and others in their vindication: and if you succeed in that
attempt, I pray let us know, what grounds of certainty you have that there are
any Books of the Antiquity to which they pretend, now extant in the Christian
world.

To S. Ignatius may be added his Cotemporaries Philo and Agathopus, or whoever
were the Writers of the Acts of his Martyrdom: They attended on him in his
journey from Syria to Rome, at which time, they tell us, the Churches and
Cities of Asia did honor the Saint, by their Bishops, Priests and Deacons
Honorabant Sanctum per Episcopos, Presbyteros and Diaconos. S. Ign. Martyr. Ed.
Usser. p. 5.
. And they deserve the more credit as being Eyewitnesses of what they relate.

Not long after that time the Emperor Hadrian writ an Epistle to Servianus,
which was preserved by Phlegon, and transcribed from him by Flavius Vopiscus;
and in that there occurs a passage Devoti sunt Serapi qui se Christi Episcopos
dicunt. Nemo illic Archisynagogus Judaeorum, nemo Samarites, nemo Christianorum
Presbyter, non Mathematicus, etc. Fl. Vop. inter Hist. Aug. Scr. p. 959, 960.
from whence it is manifest, that Bishops were then esteemed of a different
Rank from Presbyters, and that the distinction between them was obvious to the
very Heathen.

But you are much surpised, you say, at my citation of this Epistle of
Hadrian; for certainly it appears by it, that Hadrian had but little
acquaintance with the Egyptian Christians, and then his Authority is of as
little moment: or else these Christians were of the worst of men, for he
represents them as well as the other inhabitants of Egypt to be a most
seditious, vain and most injurious sort of men, and particularly says, that
those that worship Serapis were Christians, and that the Bishops of Christ were
devoted unto Serapis. He adds that the very Patriarch coming into Egypt, was
constrained of some to worship Serapis, and of some to worship Christ. Was ever
any thing more virulently said of Christians or indeed more mistakingly! etc.
These are your words, and they seem an effect of the surprise you speak of,
rather than any sedate thoughts. For, to begin where you leave off, that I may
remove out of the way, what is little to our purpose.

1. You suppose that the Patriarch mentioned by Hadrian was a Christian.
Whereas there was not then in the World any Ecclesiastical Officer, who did
bear that title. Eutychius indeed informs us, that there were Patriarchs of
Alexandria; but this was an Argument of his ignorance, unless the Apology which
the Learned and Noble Job Ludolfus Comment. in Hist. Aethiop. lib. 3. p. 445.
makes for him may be admitted, that he mentioned them under that denomination
by way of anticipation. This is the most plausible thing that can be said in
his vindication: But that he did not only speak properly, but may as well be
believed to have forgotten his own name as that of his Predecessors, is a
thought peculiar to your self.

It is not my business here to enquire into the Original of Patriarchs in the
Christian Church. It is sufficient for my purpose, that they are not mentioned
by any Author under that Title before Socrates who flourished in the fifth
Century. But the Jews had their Patriarchs much more early, as Jacobus
Gothofredus Comment. 1^. Cod. Tutodes. Th. 8. p. 230.
and other Learned Men have proved from unquestionable evidence: and amongst
these Jewish Patriarchs I reckon this in Vopiscus, not only for the reason
already given, but because it is said, that he was compelled to worship Christ.
If he had been a Christian there had been no need of that compulsion: neither
can it be supposed that the Infidels would have attempted to force him to do
what his avowed Principles obliged him to perform. Indeed if some cruelty had
been used to extort from him a denial of Christ, this had been an argument that
he made profession of Christianity; to which he had no Title, if without
violence he could not be brought to confess our Savior and adore him.

2. You suppose, the little knowledge Hadrian had of the Egyptian Christians
confutes my Argument taken from his testimony, by which I would prove that the
Office of a Bishop in his time was distinct from that of a Presbyter, whereas
it gives it the greater force: For the thing may well be thought to be the more
evident, in that it was taken notice of by a person who was so little
acquainted with the Christian affairs in Egypt.

3. You suppose that because Hadrian was under great mistakes concerning the
Egyptian Christians and their Bishops, this must render his testimony useless;
whereas it evidently proves what I designed by it, whether his description of
them be true or false. For whosoever gave him this relation, it cannot be
imagined that they invented a sort of Men that never were in being, that they
might have a subject for their accusation: Nor is there any ground to believe
that Hadrian or his Informers had the Spirit of Prophecy or discovered by
Divination that there would be such Officers in succeeding times as had not
then been heard of; and that they contrived to bring an odium upon the Prelates
before they did exist. But as we may collect from the Emperors words, that
whether the Christians were so fickle or not as he represents them, yet there
were Christians; so we may conclude that whether the Bishops worshipped Serapis
or not, there were Bishops notwithstanding: And this is all that I intended by
this instance.

Yet I may further add, that if the charge against these Bishops be false, as
you would have it, it is more for my purpose than if it were true; as it is far
more desirable that persons of their Character should walk worthy of their
vocation, than dishonor it by their practices, and be loaded with infamy and
reproach. In your endeavors therefore to vindicate their innocence, you have
taken care to confute your own Objection; which is founded on the injustice of
the accusation that the Emperor brings against them. But if you had omitted
this stroke, you had lost a fair opportunity of being delivered of a quaint
conceit which I have not met with in any other Author, and I believe it to be
new. As for the Devotion you say of the Egyptian Bishops to Serapis, you cannot
imagine any occasion they should give, which with any color should render them
suspected of Idolatry, but their Signing with the Sign of the Cross, and the
reason why you are inclined to think so is, because Pignorius in his Mensa
Isiaca assures us that Serapis was anciently denoted by a Cross; and you
conceive that this might be the Hieroglyphick of the three headed Monster of
which Chartarius gives the Icon since that was annected to the Image of
Serapis. Now Chartarius and his terrible Icon I never saw, but am apt to think,
that the act of signing with the Cross, which leaves no visible impression
behind it, has no great resemblance of a three headed Monster: And however
Pignorius says, that the Cross denotes Serapis, I know not that he has given
us any assurance of it. We find another interpretation put upon it in Suidas
Suid. in voce (...).
, to whom you refer me, and in Socrates Socrat. l. 5. c. 17.
, who is cited by Pignorius, for in both it is said to signify the life to
come.

Be it as it will: The Egyptians must have been very foolish, if they gathered
that the Bishops were Worshippers of Serapis, from the use of that which was a
Sign of Devotion and of their adherence to Christ, in opposition to all
Idolatry. The Heathens could without any such ground cast reproach on the
innocent, and of this they made no difficulty. The Apologists generally take
notice how they accused the Christians of Atheism and Incest, and devouring
man's flesh, when they were the holiest and the most virtuous persons in the
world. Eusebius acquaints us Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 6.
, that they forged lies and calumnies against our Lord himself under the name
of Pilat's Acts; and no wonder that they treated the Servants no better than
they did the Master of the Family. But to give more color to their slanders,
they compelled some infamous persons to profess themselves Christians Vid.
Eusebius. ibid.
, that they might load those that were so indeed with the blackest aspersions.
And if the Pastors of the Church fled from the rage of Persecution or hid
themselves, it is easy to conceive that men extremely malicious against them
and their Religion, might hite or force some Wretches to personate them in the
worship of Serapis: and we may be assured that any thing which tended to the
dishonor of Christianity would gain an easy belief amongst the Adversaries.
But whether the Calumny was propagated this, or some other way against the
Bishops, I am not much concerned about it, since we are agreed about their
existence and their innocence.

But about their Character you have raised some doubt, for in this Epistle, you
say, there is only the name of Bishop or Presbyter without any specification of
the Office signified by it, either as to its nature or limits. As if these
things could not be known, unless we had here met with their description; or
the Emperor could not write intelligibly unless he had left us a Clavis or
Glossary to let us into his meaning. I thought it had been sufficient for that
purpose, that he uses the word Bishop in such a sense as the other Writers of
that Age generally did; none of which apply it to any other person of their own
time but the Prelate only. Besides, as I have showed, he distinguishes the
Bishop from the Presbyter, for which he would have had no reason, had their
Office been the same; as he would have had no cause to make the difference, he
does, between Jews and Christians, had they been of the same Principles and
Religion.

The next Witness I shall mention is Clemens Alexandrinus, who mentions the
three Orders, of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons (...), Clem. Alex. Strom. l.
6. p. 667.
, and he calls the advances or progressions from one of these Offices to
another, imitations of the Angelical Glory. But this you believe, I mentioned
for pomp rather than any cogency I thought was in it, it being only a conceit
or flourish of Rhetoric, in that Father. And you might as well have said, that
when he compares the visible Officers of the Church to the different Ranks of
Angels, it was a mere conceit or flourish of Rhetoric, that there were such
Officers or that there were Angels. Certain it is from this place, that Clemens
makes the Dignity of a Bishop superior to that of a Presbyter, as he does the
Dignity of a Presbyter superior to that of a Deacon. And in another place
Paedag. l. 3. c. 12. p. 264.
he shows that there were distinct Rules prescribed to each of them. And I take
this testimony of a person who flourished in the next Age after the Apostles to
be very considerable.

But say you, Tho in his Pedagogue he speaks of Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, yet in his Stromata where he treats of Ecclesiastical Orders more at
large, he mentions but two, the Presbyter and Deacon, and plainly intimates,
that the Bishop was only a Presbyter honored with the first Seat. And how is
it that he plainly intimates this? Has he in any other part of his Writings
given us any notice of such a Presbyter and his Seat? No: He has not said a
word about them. Has any other Writer in or near his time left us a
description of them? No: they mention no such matter. Could he not speak of
Presbyters, but one of them must needs be the President and Moderator in the
Consistory? That is not pretended. How has he then so plainly intimated, that
there was such a person? No other way, but by a profound silence about him. And
thus a man that speaks not a word, or is asleep, may plainly intimate what you
please.

It Is certain however, that in the passage to which you refer me, he speaks but
of two Ranks of Ecclesiastical Officers, yet he knew there were more; and he
mentions three not only in his Paedagogue, but in his Stromata: and his silence
in one place cannot evacuate what he expressly declares in another.

Tertullian was Cotemporary with Clemens, and he, in his Treatise of Baptism,
tell us Dandi quidem jus habet summus Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus: debinc
Presbyteri and Diaconi: non tamen sine Episcopi Auctoritate, propter Ecclesiae
honorem, quo falvo, falva pax est. Tert. de Bapt. p. 230. Ed. Par. 1675.
, that the Chief Priest, who is the Bishop, has the power of giving that
Sacrament, and after him the Presbyters and Deacons, but not without the
Authority of the Bishop, for the honor of the Church, which being safe, the
peace is secured.

But Tertullian, you tell me, does more than seem to be on your side, when
speaking of the Christian Congregations, both as to their Discipline and
Government, and to their Worship, he says, Praesident probati quiquo Seniores,
etc. That the Presbyters have the Rule and Government in them. And here you
take it for granted, that these Seniores are mere Presbyters, and yet you know,
this is a thing in question, a thing that has been denied by many, not without
good appearance of reason, since the Titles of Ancients or Elders have
sometimes been applied to Bishops, as Blondel will inform you, and that it is
so here, the words seem to import.

But about this, I may have occasion to discourse in another place. And at
present I will suppose, that the Seniors Tertullian speaks of, were mere
Presbyters, and yet did preside, I know not however, why he should more than
seem to be on your side; but that great is the strength of Imagination. For
manifest it is from him, as we have seen, that the Bishop stood related to the
Presbyters as their High Priest: and without his license or permission, they
could not baptize. Notwithstanding therefore they might preside in particular
Congregations, or otherwise as his Assistants, yet it was with dependence on
him, and subordination to him in the Administration of the Government.

To evade this, you say, That such a distinction of Officers, according to
Tertullian, was rather a matter of Order for peace sake, and the honor of the
Church, than by Divine Institution. There was however such a distinction, and
as for the Original of it, that is another Question; which may also be resolved
from this Father. For he declares, that Bishops were constituted by the
Apostles; and there is no doubt, but one Motive of it was, the welfare of the
Church; which without Peace and Order cannot be preserved. Indeed, if there had
been no such Institution, if the Honor of the Church were not to be regarded,
and if Peace, which is so much recommended in the Gospel were an unnecessary
thing, then he would have allowed, that even Laymen might baptize: But now he
charges them not to invade those things that belong to their Superiors, nor to
usurp the Episcopal Function Cum ea Majoribus competant, ne sibi adsumant
dicatum Episcopis Officium Episcopatus. De Bapt. c. 17. p. 231.
.

Not long after Tertullian, flourished Origin, and he tells us in his Discourse
of Prayer (...), etc. Orig. (...). Oxon. nuper Edit. p. 103. (...). Origin. in
Jerem. Homil. 40. p. 114.
, that the Obligation of a Deacon, is distinct from that of a Presbyter; but
the greatest of all, is that of a Bishop. And says he in another place, More is
required of me, than of a Deacon; more of a Deacon, than a Layman. But he that
governs in Chief must give an account of the whole Church. One passage more I
shall add, because it has something in it that is peculiar -- (...). Comment.
p. 395.
: and this is taken from his Commentaries on the Gospel according to S.
Matthew, wherein he shows, how necessary it was for those to repress their
arrogance, who thought too highly of themselves for this cause, especially that
their Ancestors or Great Grandfathers had been advanced to the Episcopal
Throne, or to the honor of Priests and Deacons. And this carries back his
Testimony much higher than his own time, and lower than that, I need not here
descend.

CHAP. XIV. After the Apostles days there was no space of time, nor any Country
where Christianity prevailed, without Episcopacy.
IF matters between us may be determined by the Writings of the Ancients, as
you have granted, I think it sufficiently evident from what has been said, that
Churches were governed by Bishops in the best Ages after the decease of the
Apostles. And for the improvement of this Argument, and to prevent evasions, I
observe, That it is manifest from the Testimony of the Fathers, 1. That after
the Apostles days there was no space of time without Episcopacy: Nor 2. Was
there any Country without it, where Christianity prevailed.

1. There was no space of time after the decease of the Apostles without
Episcopacy. There was no such Interval of forty years between that Period, and
the Constitution of Bishops, as Blondel Apolog. p. 3.
dreamt of; nor had he any thing but mere conjectures, to support his Opinion,
which is opposed by the whole current of Antiquity. His Friend Walo Messalinus
Wall. Mess. p. 7.
was more cautious, who acknowledges, that the distinction of the Orders of
Bishops and Presbyters was most Ancient, and only requires, that the Apostles
times should be excepted: and yet his demand is too extravagant. For the
Fathers generally believed, that there was such a distinction in their days,
and that by their appointment in Churches of their own plantation.

This may appear from what has been said already, and it may be farther
confirmed from Tertullian, who thus upbraids the Heretics with their Novelty*
and confutes their pretenses to Tradition Edant origines Ecclesiarum suarum:
evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per successiones ab initio decurrentem,
ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen
cum Apostolis perseveraverit, habuerit Auctorem and Antecessorem. Hoc enim modo
Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt. Tert. de Praescript. c. 31. p. 213.
. Let them declare, says he, the Originals of their Churches: Let them show an
Order of their Bishops flowing by Succession in such a manner from the
beginning, that their first Bishop had an Apostle, or an Apostolical Person,
who was conversant with the Apostles, for his Ordainer, and Predecessor, And he
adds, that this the Apostolical Churches did. And thus he thought to stop the
mouths of Gainsayers, and triumphs much in his Argument. But his attempt had
been extremely vain, if they might have returned him this Answer. Sir, you are
under a mistake, or would impose on us. The Apostles were Extraordinary
Officers, and had no Successors, nor did they constitute any Bishops, as you
pretend. The Bishops you speak of, have depraved the Government of the Church:
They have advanced themselves upon the steps to corruption, and contrary to the
Divine Institution, usurpt a power over their Brethren. What reason have we
then to believe, that they hold fast that profession of faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, since they have so ambitiously trampled on their
Equals, and made no conscience to establish their own Greatness on the ruins
of the Ancient Discipline. It Is our Glory, that we have none of them, and that
we regard not their Authority. Yet upon your grounds, this they might have
replied to the Confusion of that Learned Father, had it then been believed that
Episcopacy was an Innovation.

I know it has been objected, that there are Intricacies and Inconsistences in
the Catalogues of the Successions which the Fathers have left us. But so there
are in the Catalogues of the High Priests, that are g^ven by Jewish and
Christian Writers, as Mr. Seldom Seldom. de Success. in Pontificat. l. 1. c. 5.
and alibi.
will inform you: And also in the Catalogues of the Archontes, who amongst the
Athenians gave the Name and Title to the year, as you may find, if you compare
many of their Names, as they are expressed in the Marble Chronicle at Oxford,
with what is extant concerning them in the Books of the most famous Greeks, and
those Books one with another. Yet no Body doubts, but there was amongst the
Israelites a Succession of High Priests from Aaron, and amongst the Athenians a
Succession of Archontes from Creon. And we have no reason to question, but
there was such a Succession of Bishops from the Apostles as the Fathers speak
of, notwithstanding in the Tables of their Succession, which have been conveyed
to us, there be some variation.

The Words of King Charles l. Final Answer, etc. See his Works, p. 641.
are very apposite to my purpose. For says that Judicious and Excellent Prince,
All Humane Histories are subject to such frailties. There are differences in
Historiographers in reciting the Succession of the Babylonian, Persian and
Macedonian Kings, and of the Saxon Kings in England. And we find more
inextricable difficulties in the Fasti Consulares, ( the Catalogues of the
Roman Consuls) notwithstanding their great care in keeping the public Records,
and the exactness of the Roman Histories, than are to be found in the Episcopal
Catalogues, etc. Yet all men believe, there were Kings in those Countries, and
Consuls in Rome in those times. So that the discrediting of the Catalogues of
Bishops, in respect of some uncertainty and differences, which yet may be
fairly reconciled, tends rather to the Confirmation of the thing it self.

2. Wherever Christianity prevailed the Government of the Churches was
Episcopal. For as S. Irenaeus Neque hae quae in Germania fundatae sunt
Ecclesiae aliter credunt aut aliter tradunt: Neque hae quae in Hiberis sunt,
neque hae quae in Celtis, neque hae quae in Orient, neque hae quae in Aegypto,
neque hae quae in Libya, neque hae quae in medio mundo sunt constitutae. Sed
sicut Sol Creatura Dei in Universo mundo unus and idem est, sic and lumen,
praedicatio veritatis, ubique lucet, etc. Adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 3. p. 53.
argued for the Christian Religion, that the Churches amongst the Germans,
amongst the Hiberi and Celtae: the Churches planted in the East, in Egypt and
Libya, and in the Middle Region of the World, or Palestine, had not a Faith or
Tradition different from one another; but as one Sun gave light to all the
World, so did the same Truth shine every where. Thus may we say of the
Ecclesiastical Polity or Government in the first Ages after the Apostles, It
was every where the same. It was the same as we have seen in Europe, and in
Asia, and in Africa. And distant as the Nations were in situation, and
different as they were in their Customs and Manners; yet when Christianity was
received amongst them, it brought Episcopacy with it. A plain Argument that
both proceeded from the same Uniform Cause, and that Prelacy was not esteemed a
mere prudential thing, that might be rejected at pleasure.

In the passage that I last cited from Tertullian, he manifestly shows, that
all Apostolical Churches were governed by a Succession of Bishops from the
beginning: And in this he follows Irenaeus, who intimates, that he could have
set down such a Succession in the rest, as he did in the Church of Rome; but
that he was unwilling to swell his Volume into too great a Bulk Sed quoniam
valde longum est, in hoc tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare
Successiones, etc. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.
. And in the following Age S. Cyprian Jampridem per omnes Provincias and per
Urbes singulas Ordinati sunt Episcopi. Cypr. Ep 55. p. 112.
says, that Bishops were long since ordained through all Provinces and all
Cities.

To the Testimony of the Fathers I shall add another of a Modern Writer; but it
relates to the practice of former times, and is pertinent to my design. The
Author I mean is the celebrated Dr. Walton, whose Edition of the Polyglott
Bibles was not a little for the honor of our Church and Nation, yet it raised
the Envy of some, and that drew from him these words Considerator Considered,
c. 9. p. 194.
. It appears, says he, by these Ancient Translations, that what our Sectaries
have cried down in the Church of England as Popish Innovations, viz. Episcopal
Government, Set Forms of Liturgies, Observation of Festivals, besides the
Lord's Day, were used as they are still in those Eastern Churches, planted by
the Apostles and their Successors in Asia and Africa, from the first times of
their Conversion, so that what these men would exterminate, as Romish and
Antichristian Novelties, have been Anciently used by those famous and
flourishing Churches which never professed Subjection to the Sea of Rome. This
is that Cordolium of our Novelists, the Practice of the Universal Church of
Christ, all the World over.

I have showed what was the Original of Prelacy or Episcopacy, and how
universally it did obtain. But the Dissenters understanding by a Bishop, such a
Minister as may have no other Pastor above him, nor any Presbyter under him; I
would demand, Where there is any instance of him in the holy Scripture; or
whether the Primitive Fathers writ any thing of him. In what Country did he
live? In what Nation under the Heavens did he exercise his Pastoral Care? You
will not pretend, I presume, that there was any such person whilst the Apostles
were alive; for the Apostles, you tell me, constituted no Officers, over whom
they retained not a Jurisdiction: And I give you the space of five hundred
years after their days, to find but one single Presbyterian or Independent
Bishop in any sound part of the Catholic Church, or any approved Instances of
Ordinations performed by him. But if you attempt this, I am desirous, you would
only insist on good Authorities, and not, as I shall find you shortly, on
Legends and Romances.

CHAP. XV. Objections against Episcopacy taken from the Writings of the
Fathers, and some Later Authors examined.
I Shall despair of proving any matter of fact that was performed many Ages
since, if it be not manifest from the Testimonies which I have produced, that
the Government of the Primitive Church was Episcopal. Yet for the contrary
Opinion, you pretend, you have Vouchers, and these Fathers too, as Learned and
Pious Fathers, as any the Churches ever owned. And it is very true, you have
drawn Quotations from some that were of great Eminence. How pertinently you
have done it, I come now to enquire.

S. Cyprian is one of the Ancients to whom you appeal, and he says Meminisse
autem Diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and Praepositos
Dominus elegit: Diaconos autem post ascensum Domini in Coelos Apostoli sibi
constituerunt, Episcopatus sui and Ecclesiae Ministros.
, The Deacons ought to remember, that the Lord chose Apostles, that is, Bishops
and Praepositi: but the Apostles, after his Ascension, constituted Deacons for
the service of themselves and of the Church. And from hence you gather, that
the Praepositi, here were only Presbyterial or Congregational Bishops, because
they are contradistinguish'd to Deacons. That is, because this Father makes no
mention in this place of Presbyters, that being nothing to his purpose, the
Bishops must be depressed into their order. But it is obvious, and I wonder how
it escaped your notice, that the Apostles themselves were the Bishops or
Praepositi, of which he speaks. And now you may conclude, if you please, that
the twelve Apostles were no more than fixed Pastors of so many single
Congregations.

You likewise argue from S. Cyprian, that however he had the Title of Bishop,
yet he considered himself only as first Presbyter; for which you give this
notable reason, that his Name for a Bishop is always Praepositus, in respect of
the People; and you add, that he calls Presbyters Compresbyters, but he no
where calls Deacons Condeacons. But you might as well say, that S. Peter 1 Pet.
5.1. (...).
considered himself only as first Presbyter, because he addresses his
Exhortation to the Elders, as being also an Elder: Or that S. Basil Basil. t.
2. p. 789.1059, 1098. Ed. Paris. 1618.
was of no higher Order, than that of Deacon, because he styles Eustathius,
Elpidius and Sabinus, Condeacons. And the like may be said of other examples of
the same nature, for an account of which, I refer you to Blondel Blond. Apolog.
p. 62.
, and Mabillon Mabillon. de re Diplom. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 16.
.

I think it is observable, that howsoever S. Cyprian calls Presbyters his
Compresbyters, yet he never calls them his Colleagues: Nor did he think they
might overruled him by the number of voices. But when some of them attempted to
restore the Lapsi Cypr. Ep. 16. p. 36.
in his absence, without regard to his Authority, he expressed a just
resentment of it. He complained of this, as a thing that was never done in the
time of his Predecessors: So that however he could at other times dissemble the
Contempt that was cast upon his Office, he did not think fit on this occasion
to be silent or remiss: but gave order that the rash and insolent offenders
should be prohibited to exercise their Function.

It Is true S. Cyprian says Ep. 14. p. 33.
, he resolved from the time that he was made Bishop, not to act any thing
without the Counsel and Consent of his Clergy and People: But the reason of
this was, he treated the Lapsi with unusual Lenity, so that he needed the
Concurrence of others to support his Authority; yet as he did not prescribe to
others his own Rules of Discipline Vid. Ep. ad Stephan. p. 198.
, so neither did himself always take the same measures. Sometimes he restored
Offenders to the peace of the Church Vix plebi persuadeo imo extorqueo, ut
tales patiantur admitti, and justior factus est fraternitatis dolor ex eo quod
unus atque alius obtinente plebe and contradicente, mea tamen facilitate
suscepti pejores extiterunt quam prius fuerant. Ep. 59. p. 137, 138.
, when the people were brought to consent to it, but with difficulty; sometimes
when they opposed it. He also required his Presbyters and Deacons, and People,
to receive amongst the Clergy Ep. 40. p. 78, 79.
, Numidicus a Presbyter, without consulting them before about this matter. And
he acquainted his Clergy and People, that without their Suffrage Celerinus Ep.
39. p. 76, 77, 78.
was constituted Reader, and appointed that he should be joined with Aurelius,
and that both should have their share of the monthly maintenance, as Presbyters
had. At another time he thus expressed his thoughts to them about a breach of
Discipline Ep. 34. p. 68.
: If there be any person, said he, either amongst our Presbyters or Deacons, or
amongst strangers, so extravagant or rash, that he shall dare before our
sentence be given, to communicate with the Lapsed, let him be expelled from our
communion. And not expecting the concurrence of any, he deprived Philumenus,
Fortunatus, and Favorinus of their monthly Dividend, till their Cause should
have a public hearing.

Upon the whole we find, that S. Cyprian was a person of an excellent temper,
and as he used such great condescension toward his Clergy and People, as seems
not to have been practiced before, nor is always necessary, but was very fit
for the time in which he lived: so on the other hand, he was not wanting to
assert his own Authority, and the Dignity of his Order: For he tells us Ep. 66.
p. 166, 167.
, Christ says to his Apostle, and consequently to all Bishops who succeed the
Apostles, he that hears you, hears me; and he that hears me, hears him
that sent me. And he that rejects you, rejects me, and he that rejects
me, rejects him that sent me. He adds Inde enim schismata and haereses
obortae sunt and oriuntur, dum Episcopus qui unus est and Ecclesiae praeest
quorundam praesumptione contemnitur. Ibid.
, that Schisms and Heresies arise from hence, that the Bishop who is one, and
governs the Church, is by the presumption of some despised. And to those that
forsook their Bishop, and erected Altar against Altar, he applies these words
of Isaiah, Woe unto ye Children that are Deserters, says the Lord. Ye have
taken counsel, but not of me. Ye have made a Covenant, but not by my Spirit, to
add sins to sins Is. 30.1. fecistis conventionem. (...). LXX. Ed. Complut.
.

Another of the Ancients which you have quoted for the support of your Opinion,
is the Commentator on S. Paul's Epistles that bears the Name of Ambrose, and
from him you expect some assistance, because he says, that of a Bishop and
Presbyter there is but one Ordination Post Episcopum tamen Diaconatus
ordinationem subjecit. Quare, nisi quia Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio
est. Comment. in 1 Timothy 3. Uterque enim Sacerdos est.
. But his meaning is not, as you suppose, that their Consecration was the same;
but that they are both of the same Order: by which, he intends no more, than
that they agree in this, that both are Priests. He did not believe them to be
of Equal Power, however he comprehended them under one general denomination;
For, says he, the Bishop is the Chief: and Every Bishop is a Presbyter, but
every Presbyter is not a Bishop Sed Episcopus primus est, ut omnis Episcopus
Presbyter sit; non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus. Ibid.
. And what service this can do you, I do not understand.

But the Bishop, he tells us, is the First Presbyter: and this is a thing on
which you much insist, as if it afforded some great advantage to your Cause:
Whereas the Fathers who used that expression which you so well approve, had no
such Notion of a First Presbyter, as you have entertained, but made the same
distinction between him and his Clergy, as there was between the High Priest
and the other Priests that were under his Authority.

Another thing for which you cite this Commentator, is, the information he
gives us, that the Eldest was always the First Presbyter Comment. in Ephesians.
4.11.
, till the inconveniences of that course occasioned the change which he says
was made by a Council. But to this I know not how to assent, because it appears
from Scripture, and the Writings of the most Primitive Fathers, that they who
in the early times of Christianity, were advanced to the Charge of Bishops,
were commonly qualified for it, and distinguished, by the extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, or their own personal worth; and there is no probability
that a mere number of years was then held sufficient to recommend a person to
the highest Office in the Christian Church. Yet if there was sometime such
preference given to seniority, and such a change made in some particular
Country, as the Author mentions, I am not concerned about it. But if you think,
the Ancient Custom he speaks of, was universal, and that a departure from it
over the World, was decreed by a General Council, I would gladly know where it
was assembled. Blondel thinks, the alteration was introduced by the Council of
Nice; and for this, he directs us to the fourth Canon of that Council; in which
there is not a word of this matter, nor are there any footsteps of it in
Antiquity.

But whatever was the ground of advancing persons to the Office of Bishops,
manifest it is, that this Commentator believed, the Office it self was of
Divine Institution, and superior to that of Presbyters Jacobum vidit
Hierosolymae quia illic erat constitutus ab Apostolis Episcopus. Com. in Gal.
1.19. Caput in Ecclesia Apostolos posuit, etc. ipsi sunt Episcopi. Com. in 1
Cor. 12.28. Hunc jam creatum Episcopum instruit per epistolam. Praefat. in Ep.
1. ad Tim. Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum. Praefat. in Ep. ad Tit.
Angelos Episcopos dicit sicut docetur in Apocalypsi Johannis. Com. in 1 Cor.
11.10. In Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, quia primus Sacerdos est, hoc est
Princeps est Sacerdotum, etc. Com. in Ephesians. 4.11.
. For he declares, that James was constituted Bishop of Jerusalem by the
Apostles, and that the Apostles in general were Bishops. He affirms, that
Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the Asiatick Churches were Bishops also.
And in the Bishop, says he, all Orders are contained, because he is the Prince
or Chief of the Priests. And yet this is one of the Fathers, by whose
Testimony, you are content, matters between us should be determined.

Another of them is S. Jerome Idem est Presbyter qui Episcopus, and antequam
Diaboli instinctu studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego
sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio
Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam vero unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat, suos
putabat esse, non Christi, in toto orb decretum est, ut unus de presbyteris
electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret and
schismatum semina tollerentur. Hicrom. ln Tit. 1.
, who informs us, I confess, that originally a Presbyter was the same as a
Bishop; and that at first the Churches were governed by the common Counsel of
Priests. But it must be considered that, according to him, the Churches were
only under that Administration, till by the instigation of the Devil divisions
did arise, and one said I am of Paul, and another said, I am of Apollos, or I
of Cephas. And it may seem not a little for the advantage of Episcopacy, if, as
he intimates, it was the best means of extirpating Schism when a Presbyterian
parity was found insufficient for that purpose: and if it was therefore
established over the world by universal Decree, and that whilst many of the
Apostles were alive.

Blond. Apolog. p. 3.
Blondel I know assigns a later date to that Decree, and would have us believe,
that it was not made before the year 140. But I am much more inclined to think,
that it was never made at all, than that this project was first set on foot to
remove the seeds or beginnings of Schisms almost a hundred years after they
were sown at Corinth, or after it was there said among the people, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollos and I of Cephas 1 Cor. 1.12.
. Blondel saw this absurdity, and to avoid it, he falls into another. He would
persuade us that the Schisms here mentioned are such as did not disturb the
Church till a long time after the decease of Paul and Apollos and Cephas, and
did not arise amongst the Corinthians, but others that imitated their example.
But by this exposition he does not only force the words of the Author from
their plain literal meaning, without any necessity; but also makes him
contradict his own avowed sense, and say in effect that Episcopacy was not
instituted before the year 140, notwithstanding, in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers and other parts of his works, he has left us an account
of several Bishops, distinct from Presbyters, that were ordained by the
Apostles themselves.

It Is true S. Jerome sometimes in his heats, of which the cause is sufficiently
known, let fall such words as seem inconsistent with the Rights of Episcopacy:
yet if those words had been assaulted by his Adversaries, he would not have
been at a loss, but had made provision for a vindication of himself or a safe
retreat, either by other expressions or the secret meaning of the same.

He may seem to oppose the subordination of Presbyters to the Bishop as an
innovation, or a departure from a former institution of Government: yet he
allows, as we have seen, that this departure was made about the time that S.
Paul writ his first Epistle to the Corinthians: He intimates that it was
necessary; and in his Treatise against the Luciferians he declares Ecclesiae
Salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet: cui si non exors quaedam and ab
omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata, quot
Sacerdotes. Hieron. T. 2. p. 96.
that the welfare of the Church depends on the dignity of the Bishop, to whom,
says he, if there be not granted a certain peerless Authority, there will be as
many Schisms as there are Priests.

He may seem to believe that Bishops were not Constituted by any Divine
Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate
presbyteris esse majores. Comment. in Tit. 1.
order or disposal; and perhaps he thought that they were not appointed by any
Precept of Christ himself; yet he denies not that they were Ordained by those
that had Commission from him, and acted in his Name and by his Power.

He may seem to be of Opinion that the Episcopal Praeeminence or Jurisdiction
was at first a mere prudential Contrivance and afterward confirmed by Custom:
Yet in the production of it he ascribes no more to Prudence than the laying
hold on a sad occasion when it was offered, for its establishment Ubi supra.
: And the Custom he speaks of he resolves into Apostolical Tradition, and this
he grounds on Scripture. That we may know, says he Ut sciamus Traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas de Veteri Testamento, quod Aaron and filii ejus atquae
Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi
vendicent in Ecclesia. Ep. ad Evagrium in sine.
, that the Apostolical Traditions were taken out of the Old Testament, What
Aaron and his Sons and the Levites were in the Temple, That may the Bishops and
Presbyters and Deacons challenge in the Church. And this is as much as I demand.

Another of your Authors is S. Augustine; who acquaints us indeed Quanquam
secundum honorum vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit Episcopatus
presbyterio major sit. etc. Aug. Ep. 19.
, that the Titles of Bishop and Presbyter were distinguished by Custom. But it
does not follow that there was not the same disparity of Officers when those
words were of promiscuous use, as there was afterward, when they were limited
in their signification. If this gives you not satisfaction, Grotius will tell
you Consuetudinem cum dicunt Patres, non excludunt Apostolicam institutionem,
imo ut Augustinus ait, quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum,
sed semper retentum est, non nisi Apostolica auctoritate traditum rectissime
creditur. Grot. de Imper. Sum. Pot. c. 11.. 10. p. 355.
, what is agreeable to that which has been said already, That when the Fathers
speak of Custom, they do not exclude an Apostolical Institution. Nay, S.
Augustine says, that what has been always held by the whole Church, and was not
appointed by Councils, is most rightly believed to proceed from Apostolical
Authority. And that he did not believe Episcopacy was introduced into the
Church after the Apostles decease appears from several instances and
particularly from hence, that he thought the Angels of the Asiatick Churches
were their Bishops Divina voce laudatur sub Angeli nomine Praepositus
Ecclesiae. Aug. Ep. 162.
.

Thus far your Witnesses have appeared against you: and with them you have
fitly joined S. Chrysostom, who says not, as you pretend, that there is no
difference in a manner between Bishops and Priests, but that the difference is
not great (...), etc. T. 4. p. 289.
: Thereby intimating that some difference there was even in the Apostles days,
for of these he he speaks. And in this he tells us they were distinguished,
that only the Bishops had the power of Ordination (...), etc. ibid.
. A thing so destructive of the cause for which you are concerned, that the
Dissenters doubtless had rather see all the Volumes of Chrysostom in a flame,
than be concluded by his testimony.

After all, you must depend, I think, on the testimony of such as Danaeus,
Buchanan, Johannes Major and Hector Boethius; and of what Authority these men
are I come now to enquire.

If we may believe Danaeus, say you, Epiphanius himself was at last compelled
to confess that in the Age of the Apostles no such distinction between Bishops
and Presbyters, as I contend for, was to be found. To which I reply, If we may
believe Epiphanius himself, he confessed no such matter. On the contrary, when
he had represented Aerius as the plague of mankind Haeres. 75. n. 1, 4.
: when he had exposed and condemned his detestable ingratitude toward
Eustathius, and showed how he loaded his Benefactor with calumnies because he
was advanced to a Bishopric to which that modest Leveller aspired: he then
gives an account of this opinion of the Heretic N. 3, 4.
, That there is no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter; which he
censures as extremely foolish, and proceeds to the confutation of it. That a
Presbyter, says he N. 5.
, cannot be the same with a Bishop, the sacred word of the Apostle declares.
For thus he writes to Timothy, Rebuke not an Elder but entreat him as a Father
1 Timothy 5.1.
. But why should he forbid him to rebuke an Elder, but that he had Authority
over him? He admonishes him ver. 19. Not to receive an accusation against an
Elder, but before two or three Witnesses. But he did not give direction to any
of the Presbyters, not to receive an accusation against a Bishop, not to rebuke
a Bishop. This then is a manifest Argument of the disparity of those Officers
in the judgment of Epiphanius. But if you can make him confess what he denies:
if you can make him approve what he confutes; and bring him to an agreement
with one whom he represents as a prodigious villain and a monster; then you may
believe Danaeus. But his credit labors much at present, and you have said
nothing to relieve it.

It has been little for the honor of the Presbyterian Government that the
Father of it has been thought to be Aerius: But you think it is of more
ancient and better extraction. The Scots, you say, who received the knowledge
of Christianity in the first Age, had not any knowledge for many Ages after,
that appears, of any but Presbyterian jurisdiction. And for this you quote
Buchanan who tell us, that no Bishop ever presided in the Church of Scotland
before Palladius his time, and that the Church unto that time was governed by
Monks, without Bishops, with less pride and outward pomp but greater simplicity
and holiness. And if his word may be taken for it, this would be something to
the purpose. But Camden says Ca^^. (...) A. D. (...).
, that his History was condemned of falsehood by the Parliament of Scotland, and
that Buchanan before his death bitterly accused himself of the Calumnies he had
divulged. So that however I have a great value for his wit and learning, I
think no great credit is due to his testimony, since he wanted that veracity
which is essential to a good Historian.

But here it seems we need not depend on his word alone: for he is warranted by
the Authority of Johannes Major, whose words you set down and they are to the
same effect as the former. And really, say you, this testimony given by
Johannes Major is very full. And who would not now think that this Johannes
Major was an Ancient Father, that could give such a full and exact account of
the Primitive times! Yet did this man draw down his History of Great Britain as
far as the Marriage of K. Henry VIII. of England with the Princess Catherine of
Aragon, and dedicated it to K. James V. of Scotland. He was alive says Labbe in
the year 1520. And one that would undertake to declare what men were doing
above a thousand years before he was born, had need to vouch better Authority
than his own to gain belief.

But John Major is not the only Evidence Buchanan might have cited: Beda, you
tell me, says that Palladius was sent unto the Scots who believed in Christ, as
their first Bishop. How great an advantage is it to have the faculty of close
reasoning! Yet so dull am I that I do not perceive how the words of Bid prove
those of Buchanan to be true. For, 1. Palladius might be sent into Scotland,
and yet not into the Country now called by that name and intended by Buchanan.
It might be into Ireland, of which Beda himself says Haec (Hibernia scilicet)
proprie patria Scottorum est. Bed. H. E. l. 1. c. 1. p. 29. Ed. Chifflet.
, that it is properly the Country of the Scots: and accordingly in Claudian --
Totam cum Scotus Iernen Movit and infesto spumavit remige Tethys. Claudian. in
1. Consul. Scilich. l. 2. Carm. 22. v. 251, 252.
, the Scot is the Irish man. And that Palladius was sent to the Irish Scots
has been proved by those great Antiquaries the Bishops of S. Asaph Historical
Account of Church Government, etc. c. 2.
and Worcester Antiquity of the British Churches. c. 2. Pref. p. 65. etc.
, to whom I refer you for satisfaction. 2. The Christian faith has no such
dependence on Monkery, but the Scots might believe, though there had never been
any Monks in the world. And I take it to be manifest that there were none so
early as you imagine.

Polydor Vergil Polyd. Verg. de Rer. Invent. l. 7. c. 1.
ascribes the institution of Monkery to S. Antony who died, as he tells us, in
the year 361. Danaeus says Vid. Dan. Opera. p. 483, 484, 485.
, that it began to be in request in Egypt after the year 300: and that it was
later before it was received in Europe. He attributes the invention of it to
superstition and an idolatrous admiration of external things. He compares the
Monks to swarms of drones, and says that in the year 500. they were dispersed
and multiplied like the Locusts in the Revelation, upon the face of the whole
Earth. You see, Sir, what sentiments your friend Danaeus had of these men and
of their institution: and little did he think, that the Church of Scotland was
so happy in an excellent sort of Presbyterian Monks in the best and purest Ages.

S. Jerome himself who had such a zeal for the Monastic way of living, that he
was willing to say as much for the honor of it as he was able, carries the
original of it, notwithstanding, no higher than Antony or Paul the Thebaean --
Asserunt Antonium hujus propositi fuisse caput: quod ex part verum est.
Amathas vero and Macarius discipuli Antonii, etiam nunc affirmant: Paulum
quendam Thebaeum principem istius rei fuisse, quod non tam nomine, quam
opinione nos quoque comprobamus. Hieron. Ep. 50. p. 154. Edit. Francofurt. A.
D. 1684.
. But which of them soever was the Founder of it, it is not material, since
they were Cotemporaries and in the year 341. or thereabouts, one of them
received a visit from the other. After their decease, the Monks were despised
in the West for the novelty of their Constitution: and Jerome complains Quousque
genus detestabile Monachorum non urbe pellitur? Ep. 25. p. 104.
that in his time they were detested even at Rome it self. So far is it from
being true, that they had then made their progress as far as Scotland, and
flourished there in great Reputation.

It was therefore boldly done of Hector Boethius to tell the World Coepere
nostri eo tempori^ Christi dogma accuratissime amplexari, Monachorum quorundam
ductu, etc. H. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 6. fol. 92. Vid. Blondel. Apolog. Sect. 3.
p. 315.
, that his Countrymen, about the year 263. as Blondel interprets his words,
began diligently to embrace the Christian Faith, by the Conduct and persuasion
of certain Monks. Yet hardy as he was, you have exceeded Hector himself. For
you say, that the Scots had the knowledge of Christianity in the first Age,
which is much sooner than Hector allows: and if your Argument from Beda perform
what you design by it, these Converted Scots must have some kind of Government,
amongst them, and you undertake to show from Buchanan, that till the time of
Palladius the Scottish Church was governed by Monks with more Holiness and
Simplicity than it was afterward by the Bishops. And now, I think, it will
follow from these things laid together, that the Church of Scotland was very
well governed by the Monks, whilst some of the Apostles were alive, and after
their decease till the year of our Lord 430 Vid. Blondel ubi supra.
. And this makes more for the honor of Monkery than any thing else, I have yet
read.

You have likewise such an opinion of the Antiquity of the Culdees that you
censure Bishop Spotswood for insinuating, that in their time there were Bishops
of his Order, which he did, you say, that he might magnify his Office. A
strange and unadvised Project! That he should think to magnify his Office by
telling us, there were Prelates in Scotland before the Culdees were extinct,
who were not in being till many Ages after the death of Palladius. And are not
mentioned by any Writer that lived within five hundred years of his time See
the Bishop of S. Asaph. Hist. Ac. etc. c. 7.
.

Hector Boethius, whom you quote, was alive in the year 1526. and yet he is the
first, as the Bishop of S. Asaph observes Ibid.
, that found that the Monks were Culdees, who are said by others as well as
him, and of like credit, to have governed the Church of Scotland till the
coming of Palladius. He had no Records of the Primitive times to support his
Narrative, yet did not this abate the courage of Hector, who knew how to supply
that defect by a fertile invention. He made a Bishop of S. Alban's Cloak, and
called it S. Amphibalus. He placed it in the Isle of Man, and there he put
Culdees under it. And at the same rate he might have Scotland converted when he
would, and by whom he pleased, and bestow on them what Titles he thought
convenient.

It Is certain he was a very fabulous Writer and in your Letter of Feb. 9. your
self represented him as a Romancer and his story of the Culdees you called
Romancing: yet now you depend on it as good substantial evidence; and this
shows to what wretched shifts you are driven rather than you will acknowledge
that you have been mistaken.

CHAP. XVI. Prelacy is no degeneracy from an Apostolical Constitution. The
Pastors of the Church that came next after the Apostles did not conspire to
deprave any Form of Government which was of Divine appointment.
IF we may not believe the ridiculous Fable of the Scottish Monks, you have not
been able to prove, that any part of the Christian world, for many Ages after
the decease of the Apostles, was without Episcopal Government. Yet, as if the
matter were clear on your side, and past all doubt, you take it for granted,
that Prelacy is a degeneracy from an Apostolical Constitution. You pretend to
have observed the Springs and Motions by which it was advanced; and to
discover, on what grounds it was introduced, and by what degrees it grew up to
that Grandeur in which it now appears.

1. You say the Defection began on Tabernacle Grounds P. 19.
, and by pretenses of some Analogy unto the Orders of that Fabric. And a
little before you tell me, that when the Judaizing Opinion, which prevailed
mightily even in the days of the Apostles, had, after their decease, diffused
and spread it self farther, so that Christians came into the admiration of the
Orders, Beauty and Pomp of the Temple, which was but a fixed Tabernacle, and
Christianity it self became considered (as by some this day) but as another
kind of Judaism, then Ministers were turned into Priests, Deacons to Levites. A
wonderful transformation at such a time! And it may seem very strange, that the
Christians should be much more charmed with the Beauty and Pomp of the Temple,
when it was laid in ashes, than they were when it stood in its Glory. To deal
plainly with you, I take this to be very absurd, and inconsistent with the best
Records, we have, of the first Ages. For it appears from them, that the weak
Brethren, as they were called, were most zealous at the first for the Mosaical
Rites; and that S. Paul himself did more in compliance with them and the Jews,
than all the Bishops in the world in the following Century.

The truth is, when an end was put to the Jewish Polity, the Judaizers made a
Sect by themselves: and the Pastors of the Church thought fit to bury the
Mosaical Rites in the ruins of the Temple, and vigorously asserted their
freedom from them. At least they let them fall by degrees: And it is observable,
that when the great Controversy was raised about the keeping of Easter,
however they that contended, it ought to be observed exactly at the time of the
Jewish Passover, had more to say for themselves from Tradition, yet the matter
was carried and determined on the side of Christian Liberty.

But that Liberty does not leave all things indifferent that were drawn by
Analogy from the Jewish Laws or Customs. For such things there are, and some of
them of perpetual use. Amongst these I reckon Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord Vid. Ludolf Comment. ad Hist. Aethiop. l. 3. c. 6. n. 49.
. The Ordination of Officers by imposition of hands Vid. Ludolf Comment. ad
Hist. Aethiop. l. 3. c. 6. n. 49.
. The maintenance of those that Minister in things Sacred 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Vid.
Hieron.
, and the distribution of them into several Ranks Ep. ad Evagr. in fine.
. All these Institutions had their Basis in the Jewish practices, and with some
variation from the Original, were consecrated to serve the purposes of
Christianity, and that by unquestionable Authority.

By such Authority one is justified in ascribing to Ecclesiastical Officers the
Title of Priests; for it may seem, that they were opposers of such as did bear
it, who are said by S. Jude to have perished in the gainsaying of Core, ver.
11. And manifest it is, and it has been generally acknowledged, that the
Almighty speaks of the Professors of Christianity where he says, I will take of
them for Priests and for Levites. Isai. 66.21. And from hence we may gather, 1.
That the Christian Church is such a Society as should have its own Spiritual
Officers chosen out of the rest of the faithful of any Nation, and remaining
distinct from them. 2. That the Titles of Priests and Levites, which have been
so often attributed to the Officers of the Christian Church, had not their
Original from the mere fancies of the Ancient Fathers; much less were they an
invention of later times, but are founded on an expression of the Holy
Scripture. 3. That amongst these Officers there should be such disparity as had
been under the Law amongst the posterity of Levi.

2. You pretend to discover by what degrees Prelacy grew up to its present
Grandeur. And you tell me, one need but some experience in the course of things
and a little proportion of Mother wit, to make a clear and distinct conception
of what you have said on this Subject.

You believe, that all Presbyters were equal by a Divine Institution: Yet
notwithstanding that appointment of Heaven, it was requisite, you say, for
orders sake P. 7.
, that in every Assembly one should have the direction, and it is most probable,
the Eldest Presbyter had the first place and the first direction of matters.
Yet probable as it is, if one should affirm that it is a mere conjecture of
Mother Wit, you have said nothing that may be sufficient to confute him.
However, this must be made the first prudential reason for a departure from a
Divine Institution, and the first step toward the degeneracy of succeeding
times.

But this State of Affairs did not long continue: Another prudential reason
appears to justle out the former, and introduces another step to corruption:
For it was found by experience, you say, that the eldest was not always the
worthiest and fittest for the direction of matters. A very notable discovery!
But it may seem a little strange, that men inspired, or but of ordinary
capacity, did not foresee this; and that no care was taken to prevent the
inconveniences of the last contrivance. It also seems incredible, that the old
men should be so easily degraded from their accustomed precedence and suffer
their juniors to be pearcht into their places. They must be supposed to be
persons of a very complaisant humor, tho they had no great proportions of
Mother-Wit, seeing they would yield up their Title and Dignity of first
Presbyters without the least murmur or complaint. But that is no matter, Once
upon a time, all the world over, it came to pass that the place devolved not by
seniority but was conferred by Election made by all the Presbyters and not
unlikely but with Prayer and imposition of Hands. Things very piously reckoned
amongst the means of depraving the Institution of Christ! And now the first
Presbyter by this new Ordination begins to look pretty like a Bishop, yet he
had no more Authority in the College of Presbyters than is by all Protestants
allowed to Peter in that of the Apostles. But one step more brings him to the
Episcopal Throne. For the best men are but Flesh and Blood P. 8.
, and the best Institutions liable to rust and canker. There was a Diotrephes
in the Apostles own times, and those that followed after improved upon the
example. And so the first Presbyter soon became advanced into another order,
and from being First, commenced Prince of the Presbyters. A great and sudden
change! And the thing was managed with so much fineness, that it was concealed
many hundred years above a thousand: and it may seem strange that it should be
discovered at last, not from any Ancient writings or credible informations, but
by experience in the course of things and some proportions of Mother-Wit.

Authors indeed you quote, and several Arguments you have, by which you would
prove that corruptions were introduced into the Church in such a manner as you
have described; but you had much better have left us to depend wholly on your
own word, than at all have produced them. Since they can only serve to expose
the weakness of your Cause.

One of those Arguments you ground on 1 Timothy 5.17. P. 7.
. where S. Paul says, Let the Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of
double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. From hence
you gather, that there was a distinction of Elders; and that some of them being
better at Ruling and some at Preaching, they exercised themselves according to
the Talent, they had; those that were better at Ruling in Ruling, and those
that were better at Preaching in laboring in the Word and Doctrine. And you
farther conclude that there was always a first Presbyter, and make no question
but he was of the number of those that labored in the Word. And I make no
question, but here you have put together several things that might better have
been omitted. For you suppose, that the Elders who labored in the Word and
Doctrine, were excelled by others in Ruling; whereas all that the Apostle
mentions in this place are such as Rule well. And then to those that you
conceive were better at Preaching than at Ruling, you attribute the
praeeminence in Ruling, or that chief direction of matters in the Consistories
which belongs to the place of Presidents. And this I think is sufficiently
absurd. But what is worst of all, is, you make a Text of Scripture a foundation
of one of the steps to Corruption.

An instance of some that were better at Ruling than at Preaching, you think,
you have found in the Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians; and if you
had, the matter is not great, since all that you would infer from thence is,
that others were preferred before them who were not so well qualified, as
themselves for the Administration of the Government. I am willing however to
see the exercise of your Critical faculty.

You think then, that they who are said by Clemens to have Politiz'd well
(...). c. 44.
were the Presbyters, that Ruled, rather than Preached, well. But you might
have found, that in another place, this Father tells us, that Peter and Paul
Politiz'd divinely (...). c. 6.
(if I may borrow your expression) and doubtless did not mean thereby to
distinguish them from Preaching Apostles. You might also have found that when
he upbraids some for not Politizing as they ought -- (...). c. 3.
, he meant not to reflect on them as Bad Governors, but in general as persons
that did not walk (...). Hesych.
worthy of Christ. These things so plainly show your mistake, that you will
not, I believe review your Criticism with any great satisfaction.

For an example of one that was better at Preaching than at Ruling and was a
first Presbyter, you produce the President (...).
mentioned by Justin Martyr. And it is true that Preaching was the work of that
President; for so it appears from Justin Vid. Justin. Apolog. 2. p. 161. Grot.
de Imp. Sum. Pot. c. 11.. 7.
: And it is as true, that he governed in chief; For he was a Bishop, as Grotius
will inform you; whose Learning, you, with so much reason admire. But of what
use this can be to you, unless it be to overthrow what you would establish by
it, I do not understand.

You have some other quotations from the Fathers which I need not here examine,
having done it already. But I proceed to show, that it is altogether improbable
that the Pastors of the Church, who came next after the Apostles, should
conspire to deprave a Divine Institution. And this, I think will appear, if it
be considered, 1. That they were persons of admirable Holiness and Virtue. 2.
If they had not been such, they could not so suddenly have agreed in the same
design, to corrupt the Church, as you contend, in the same manner.

1. They were persons of admirable Holiness and Virtue. Clemens Alexandrinus
Lib. de Div. Salv. p. 110. Ed. Oxon.
gives an account, what care S. John took of the Churches after his return from
Patmos, and that he admitted such into the Clergy as were designed or
distinguished by the Holy Ghost. And, as I noted before, Irenaeus says Adv.
Haeres. lib. 3. c. 3.
, the Apostles were desirous, that they should be very perfect and unblamable
in all things, whom they left to be their Successors, to whom they committed
their own place of Government. And can we imagine that such persons as these
conspired to deprave an Institution of Christ? When they daily exposed their
lives to danger; when they despised the Vngulae and Catastae, the rage of
Savage Boasts and more Savage Men; when a firm adherence to their Religion
exposed them to the Scourge or the Cross, the Axe or the Fire, and when they
expressed such a cheerful readiness to embrace the sorest evils that could be
inflicted on them, and death it self under the most dreadful Circumstances,
rather than deny their Master, were they then contriving to ruin his
Discipline, or Caballing to make themselves great* Or if the mystery of
iniquity did so generally work in the Prelates, who are supposed to have usurpt
Authority over their Brethren, was there not an honest Presbyter in the world
to put them in mind of their Duty, or to admonish them to keep their Station?
Was there not one upon earth that would oppose their Innovations, or plainly
tell them, that by the appointment of Heaven all Presbyters are equal? If the
Presbyters had no regard for their own Authority, had they no concern for their
Masters glory? Had they no remembrance of what the Apostles taught, or of the
Instructions for the Government of the Church which they had given? Did they,
not only quietly see the degeneracy spread apace, but help it forward, by
relinquishing the Trust and Authority committed to them by the Holy Ghost? We
have no reason certainly to suspect any such matters of them: but if we had, I
should dread the Consequences of it.

2. If the Bishops who lived in the next Age to that of the Apostles had not
been persons of so much Perfection and Virtue, yet they could not so suddenly
have agreed to corrupt the Church in the same manner. Arnobius disputing
against the Gentiles says in vindication of the History of Christianity, Quod
si falsa, ut dicitis, historia illa rerum est, unde tam brevi tempore totus
mundus ista religione completus est? aut in unam coire qui potuerunt mentem
gentes regionibus dissitae, ventis, coeli convexionibusque dimotae ^ Arnob.
advers. Gent. l. 1. p. 33.
If that be false, whence comes it to pass, that the whole World was in so
short a time filled with this Religion: or how came Nations so distant to
receive it with one consent? And in like manner I may demand, If Prelacy be a
defection from an Institution of Christ or his Apostles, how came it to gain so
early an admission amongst persons of so many different Countries and
Languages! How came it so suddenly to be established in all the Churches upon
the face of the Earth? You say, that Ecclesiastical Prelates arose at best by
occasion, and prudentially upon the increase of Believers: But how did they
every where meet with the like occasions? How came all the Churches in the
World to act by the same Prudential Rules? If you can show, how all the Bishops
upon Earth agreed to exalt themselves above their Brethren, and how the
Presbyters every where so suddenly consented in their submission to them, you
are the man of the world fittest to write a Commentary on the Philosophy of
Epicurus, and to prove that his Atoms, by their accidental concourse, performed
all the feats and wonders that have been attributed to them.

That I have not been singular in matching such improbabilities, may appear
from the words of Mr. Chillingworth, which I shall here set down. When I shall
see Chillingw. Apost. Institut. of Episc. Sect. 11.
, says he, all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted and prove Stories: when I
shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the world lie down and
sleep, and awake into Monarchies: Then will I begin to believe, that
Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church during the Apostles
times, should presently after, against the Apostles Doctrine and the will of
Christ, be whirled about like a Scene in a Masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy. In the mean time, continues my Author, whilst these things remain
thus incredible, and, in human reason, impossible, I hope I shall have leave to
conclude thus:

Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church presently after the Apostles times.

Between the Apostles times and this presently after, there was not time enough
for, nor possibility of, so great an alteration.

And therefore there was no such alteration, as is pretended. And therefore
Episcopacy being confessed to be so Ancient and Catholic, must be granted also
to be Apostolic.

CHAP. XVII. Episcopacy cannot be thought a degeneracy from an Apostolical
Constitution, if the Testimony of the Fathers may be admitted: Their Testimony
vindicated.
IT is certain that the Testimony of the Fathers cannot be admitted to
determine the Controversy between us, but with the ruin of your Cause, it
being altogether inconsistent with your Opinion, That Episcopacy was not of a
Divine or Apostolical Appointment, but introduced prudentially, and gradually
advanced upon the steps to Corruption. Even of that select Company, who as you
say, were as Pious and Learned Fathers as any the Churches ever owned, and to
whom you professed your adherence, there was not a man, who did not believe,
that Bishops were constituted by Christ himself or his Apostles, or by both.
You have one Refuge however yet remaining, which is, to reject those as
incompetent Witnesses, who upon examination appear against you. And accordingly
you tell me P. 27.
, That the Fathers wrote things they saw not, and framed matters according to
their own conceits, and many of them were tainted with partial humors. You
farther add P. 49.
, That the Catalogues of the Succession of Bishops, which Eusebius has given
us, are only Conjectural and Traditionary (words fitly joined together!) That
himself tells us, there was a great Chasm in Ecclesiastical History for the
three first Centuries: Ay, that in the third Book of that History Chap. 4. he
says expressly, as to the persons that succeeded the Apostles in the Government
of the Churches, that it is hard to tell particularly and by name, who they
were: And that in making his Catalogues, he went by way of Collection and
Inference from what is written by S. Paul, etc. But the sum of what Eusebius
does indeed say in that place, of those that were the Disciples of the
Apostles, and succeeded them in the Government of the Churches, is only this,
That it is hard to determine, how many, and who they were (...).
; yet from the words of S. Paul, the Names of some of them may be gathered. He
does not say, that he could give an account of none that were constituted
Governors of the Apostolic Churches, except those that were mentioned by that
Apostle: Nor does he say, as you would have him, that he found the Names of
some in Scripture, and tacked Bishoprics to them from his own fancy. On the
contrary, he acquaints us in the Chapter to which you refer me, That Dionysius
the Areopagite was the first Bishop of Athens; where he did not establish him
by way of Collection and Inference: Nor does he pretend to ground the relation
he has left us of him, on the words either of S. Paul, or S. Luke, or on his
own invention: But he had it from Dionysius of Corinth; whom he calls a most
Ancient Writer, and that with good reason, for he flourished about the middle
of the second Century.

From an Epistle of the same Dionysius of Corinth Eusebius. H.E. l. 4. c. 23.
he was informed, that Publius succeeded the Areopagite in the Government of
the Church of Athens, and suffered Martyrdom; and that Quadratus succeeded
Publius. And this is that Quadratus Vid. Hieron. Catalog. Script. Eccl. in
Quadrato.
, who was a Disciple of the Apostles, and who declared in his Apology for the
Christians, which he presented to the Emperor Hadrian, that he had seen many
that had been cured, and raised from Death by our Lord himself. And that a
Person of such Eminence should be Bishop of Athens, after such Predecessors as
he had, is more for the advantage of Episcopacy, than all the Quotations are
against it, that have been heaped up by Blondel in his Laborious Collections:
and I am persuaded, that if an instance so early and so well attested, could
have been produced in favor of a Presbyterian Parity, it had long since made a
mighty noise, and alarmed the World.

It Is true, Eusebius is the first that left us a Body of Ecclesiastical
History: But he did not frame it out of his own Conjectures. Himself has given
us an account of the helps he had from others that were before him; and
Valesius will present you at one view with a Catalogue of Books and Records,
out of which he drew Materials for his Work, that are very considerable. They
are not so many indeed as one might have desired: yet as King Charles the First
observes Reply to the Answer of the Divines at Newport, amongst the works of K.
C. p. 619.
, with his usual exactness of Judgment, Even the Darkness of the Primitive
Times affords a very strong Argument for Episcopacy, which from the History of
them, obscure as they were, receives so full and clear a proof, as scarce any
other matter of fact has found the like.

Against Tertullian you object P. 49.
, that many Fob Traditions past for current in his time: An Exception that
would destroy the Credit of all the Books that ever were written, if it were of
force against any; For Fob Traditions, as you call them, have passed for
current amongst some in every Age since the days of Adam.

But Tertullian himself, you think, was one that transmitted such Traditions to
Posterity, and particularly you are offended at him for reporting that the
Apostles had Chairs in particular Churches: And yet you are not sure, that this
ought to be laid to his Charge. Only, you tell me, his words at first sight may
seem to sound that way. A notable way of confuting the Fathers, grounded on the
sense of one of them, and that not certain neither, but taken from his words,
as at first sight they seem to sound. One might have expected, that you should
have spent a thought or two more about them, before you passed your Censure on
them, or reckoned the Author amongst the Fabulous Writers, and made him an
instance of the Partiality or Impostures of the Ancients.

For my part, I think he meant by Chairs, what you so quickly apprehended at
the first glance, and that Bishops sat in the Material Seats of the Apostles
in the Administration of the Government. And yet I see nothing in this that is
incredible. It is neither contrary to the Faith of History, nor without Example
in it. Nor is it improbable, that before Adoration was paid to Relics, the
Chairs of the Apostles should be preserved about a hundred years. Sure I am,
that he might better judge of such a matter of Fact, than we can at this time.
And I know not, why this word may not as well be accepted when he discourses of
these Chairs, as when he adds Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae
adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesident, apud quas ipsae Authenticae
Literae little recitantur. Tert. de Praescript. c. 36. p. 215.
, That the Authentic Letters of the Apostles were read in the Apostolic
Churches.

But whatever he meant by the Chairs, it is plain enough, he thought, the
Bishops were the Successors of the Apostles in particular Dioceses or Churches:
P. 49.
And if you can no more believe this, than the Story of the Cells of the
Seventy Interpreters, though Justin Martyr affirms, that he saw the Ruins of
those very Cells, and that they were in the Pharos of Alexandria, I cannot help
it. Nor do I think it necessary to enter into a dispute about the truth or
falsehood of Justin's Relation. But since that which he says of those Cells
depends on the Credit of some unknown Alexandrians; since they were reported to
have been built in the Pharos only, and that about four hundred years before he
writ his Paraenesis to the Greeks: And since the Tradition which he has
conveyed to us about them, was not universally received, but was with some
disdain rejected by S. Jerome, the most Learned Critic of his Age; it was not,
in any of these respects, parallel to the Account which I have given from
Tertullian and others, concerning the Original of Bishops; nor is there any
such Connection between them, as that they must stand or fall together.

There is such clear evidence, that the Churches were governed by Bishops in
the beginning of the Second Century, that it has extorted a Confession from
the most Learned Adversaries: And if we had never been told, that they were
constituted by the Apostles or Apostolical Persons, or derived their Power by
Succession from them, the thing had notwithstanding been probable. But there is
not the least reason to doubt of it, when we find it so universally believed by
the Ancient Church: and particularly when Tertullian asserts it in such a
manner, as he does, and urges it with so much assurance against the Heretics.
For if he had no grounds for it, I should not say that he was tainted with
partial humors and framed matters according to his own conceit, but that he
was void of common sense; and as extravagant, as a Protestant would be at this
day, if, to confute the Exceptions of Papists against the meanness of some of
the first Reformers, he should affirm with great confidence, and insist on it
as a thing too notorious to be denied, that Calvin succeeded Peter de la Baume
in the Bishopric of Geneva, and that Luther and Melancthon were Spiritual
Princes of the Empire, and Electors of Germany.

We are now almost at twice the distance from the beginning of Luther's
Reformation, as Tertullian was from the days of the Apostles: And we are more
remote from the coming of King James the First to the Crown of England, than
Irenaeus was from the death of S. John, when he argued against the
Valentinians* from the Succession of Bishops to the Apostles, in the Government
of the Churches. And what he said of it must then have appeared either so
palpably false, that it would have exposed him and his Cause to derision, or so
evidently true, that your Exceptions against it, would at that time, have been
to the same effect, as if a Dissenter should now declare. That the Conformists
had in this last Age introduced several Corruptions into the Church, and
Episcopacy amongst the rest; That in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth all the
Ministers in the Kingdom were equal, but after her decease the Defection began,
and was afterward gradually carried on till the Prelates arrived at their
present Greatness. That one need but some Experience in the use of things, and
a little proportion of mother wit to discover this, and to make a clear and
distinct conception of it; That however the Bishops might pretend, that they
had Predecessors in the last Century, and produce for it the Testimony of many
Authors, yet those Authors were tainted with partial humors, and there were
Fob Traditions passed for current in their time, so that we are under no
obligation to believe them. And now, Sir, I leave you to judge, whether a
person that should discourse seriously in such a manner, were fit to be argued
with, or to be managed another way, according to the Rules of Art.

You have another Bold Stroke yet remaining, which is P. 49.
, that the Catalogues of Bishops deduced from the Apostles, for ought you see,
deserves but little more credit, as being but little better ascertained, than
the Catalogues of the British Kings deduced from Brute; And this falls heavy
upon S. Jerome, as well as others; for he approved such Catalogues, and has
helped to convey them to Posterity. When you pressed him into your service, you
made honorable mention of him under the Titles of Pious and Learned, of which
he must make a forfeiture, when he stands in your way; and though he only
confirms, by his own suffrage, what was generally believed in former Ages, yet
in that c^se; for ought you see, his word deserves little more Credit than the
most absurd or groundless Fables. For such are the Stories of Brute, and the
Kings of his Line: They have no foundation in any Ancient History, or
Authentic Records; but about two thousand years after the time of Brute's
reputed Landing at Totness, they were first published to the World.

He that gave the first reputation to them, was Geoffrey of Monmouth, who is
called by one of our Antiquaries Jo. Twin. Comment. de Reb. Albion, etc. l. 1.
p. 13.
, the English Homer, and the Father of Lies. And as for his Brutus* some have
observed, as Mr. Camden acquaints us Camd. Brit. p. 6, 7.
, that he was never hoard of, till, in a Barbarous Age, one Hunibald a foolish
Writer, feigned that Francion a Son of Priamus, was the Founder of the French
Nation. But then a report was raised, that our Countrymen were descended from
the Trojans, and our Princes from this Brutus; who was said to be the Son of
Sylvius, and Grandson of Aeneas; and it is no wonder, that, in the times of the
thickest ignorance, a fiction so agreeable was entertained and propagated
amongst our Ancestors, who disdained that their Neighbors should excel them in
extraction, whom they equaled in courage. And now if any shall affirm, that as
much, or near as much, may be said against the Testimonies of the Fathers
asserting the Succession of Bishops to the Apostles, I must beg your excuse, if
I tell him, in the words of a late Author, for whom I know you have some
fondness, that he has not wiped his eyes, but is moist with prejudice and
passion.

It is not any want of clearness or strength in the Testimony, which the
Fathers give concerning the Original of Episcopacy, that drew from you the
odious Reflections which you cast on them; but the force there is in it to
demonstrate, that the Strokes and Lineaments of your Scheme of
Church Government, are merely the work of Fancy, and that you have employed
your Pen in the service of a bad Cause. This appears from what has been said
already; and I shall here add nothing more to confirm it, but one Instance,
which, I think, I may safely oppose against all that ever was written for the
Presbyterian Equality of Ministers, from the days of Aerius, to this very
moment.

The Instance I intend, is that of Polycarp, who is not only said to have been
Bishop of Smyrna by Polycrates Polycrat. apud Hieron. in Catalog. Script. Eccl.
in Polycrate.
and Tertullian Tertul. de Prascript. c 32. p. 213.
, who flourished not long after him, and by Eusebius Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 36,
p. 106.
, Jerome Hieron. ^. 2. p. 177.
, Socrates Socrat. H. E. l. 5. c. ^2. p. 284.
, Sozomen Soz. H. E. l. 7. c. 19. p. 734.
, Victor Capuanus Vict. Cap. e Cod. M. S. a Feuardent. citat. in Annot. ad
Iren. p. 240.
, Suidas Suid. t. 2. p. 560.
, and many others, who lived at a greater distance from him, but by such as
knew him, and could not be ignorant of his Character.

There were many that had the advantage of his Ministry: Many that had lived
under his Government in the Church of Smyrna, and were Eyewitnesses of his
Martyrdom, who expressly declare (...). Smyrn. Eccles. Ep. Ed. Usser. p. 26.
, that he was their Bishop. This they do in an Epistle which is yet extant, and
which the famous Joseph Scaliger Certe Ego nihil unquam in historia
Ecclesiastica vidi, a cujus lectione commotior recedam, ut non amplius meus
esse videar. Aulmadvers. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 202.
, Critical as he was, so highly approved and valued, that he reckons it amongst
the Noblest Monuments of Christian Antiquity, and professes, that he could not
read it, without something of Ecstasy.

S. Irenaeus, who was his Scholar, informs us likewise Iren. advers. Haeres. l.
3. c. 3. p. 33.
, that he was Bishop of Smyrna. And the same is attested by S. Ignatius (...)
Ep. ad Magnes. p. 38.
, who was not only his Contemporary, but his Friend, as also by Philo and
Agathopus; who acquaint us further Applicans [Ignatius] post multum laborem
Smyrnaeorum civitati, cum multo gaudio descendens de navi, sestinabat S.
Polycarpum, Episcopum Coadjutorem videre; fuerant enim quondam Discipuli
Johannis. Martyr. S. Ignat. p. 5. Ed. Usser.
that Ignatius, on whom they attended being in his way to Rome, where he was
about to be torn in pieces by Wild Beasts, for the Christian Faith, paid a
Visit to Polycarp at Smyrna, and that both these Excellent Men had been trained
up under the same Master, and were the Disciples of S. John.

But if S. Polycarp was Bishop of Smyrna, he was not the only Minister there;
for he begins his Epistle to the Philippians thus, (...).
Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him. And from these Presbyters he
had no reason to distinguish himself, as he does, if both of them had born the
same Office. But in what manner he stood related to them, may appear from
hence, that there was not one of all the Ancients, I have cited, to prove that
he was a Bishop, who meant not that he was a Prelate. And if enquiry be made,
how he obtained his Office, from Tertullian Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum a
Joanne collecatum resert. Tertul. de Praescript. H^res. c. 32.
, and Polycarpus Joannis Apostoli Discipulus ab eo Smyrnae Episcop^s Ordinatus,
etc. Hieron. Catalog. in Polycarpo.
Jerome, and many others, we learn, that it was conveyed to him by S. John. But
S. John, it seems, was not alone in that Action; for Irenaeus tells us
Polycarpus autem non solum ab Apostolis edoctus, and conversatus cum multis ex
eis qui Dominum nostrum viderunt: sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in ea quae
est Smyrnis Ecclesia constitutus Episcopus, etc. Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
p. 233.
, that Polycarp was not only taught by the Apostles, but constituted by them
Bishop of Smyrna: And his words deserve the greater credit, because he was a
Hearer of Polycarp in his younger years Vid. Iren. ibid. and ^p. ad Florin.
apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 20.
, and understood doubtless what place he had in the Church, and the manner of
his Advancement to it. I need make no Inferences from this Example, because it
is so obvious, that it destroys your Hypothesis.

CHAP. XVIII. The Testimony of the Fathers is necessary for the ascertaining to
us the Canon of the Holy Scripture: It is as Cogent for the Divine Original of
Episcopacy.
THere are some that will hardly hear with patience any Arguments that are
drawn from the Authority of the Fathers; because, as they conceive or pretend,
it favors the Papists: A thing very acceptable to the Papists, could it be
proved. But we do them too much honor, if we believe, that the Ancient
Tradition is on their side, when some of the most Learned amongst them dare lay
no claim to it, for the support of those Doctrines wherein they differ from us:
and many of their greatest Bigots have found themselves so pressed by it, that
they have appealed from it to their Oracle for the time Being; the Pope, I
mean, to whom Cornelius Mussus Cornel. Muss. in Ep. ad Romans c. 14.
, one of their number, professed, that he attributed more credit, than to a
thousand Austins, Jeroms and Gregory's: and so ends the noise of Antiquity,
Universality and Consent.

It is not my business here to attempt a Vindication of the Fathers, any
farther than it answers my present design; and I shall only observe, that they
that despise them most, are sometimes forced to serve themselves of their
Authority. For example, Gittichius says Vid. Gittich. Ep. ad Ruar. ad calcem.
Epp. Ruar. Cent. 1. p. 469, etc.
, that his Friends, who had read their Books, found them plunged into the
profoundest ignorance, hardly understanding so much as one Article of the
Christian Faith, but, like blind men, moving irregularly, and with a trembling
pace. And such confidence he had, that the Censures which his party had passed
on them were just, or rather too modest, that he declares, The Truth of the
Christian Religion was wholly lost a little after the death of the Apostles,
and commends Flaccius Illyricus, for comparing the Disputations of the Fathers
to a Fight of Drunkards at a Feast, who are not solicitous to betake themselves
to their Swords, but supply the want of Weapons with Dishes or Trenchers, with
Bread, or any thing that comes to hand. Yet his Friends sometimes make use of
the Testimony of those whom he so impudently charges with Apostasy and Folly,
and whom they are wont to reproach; and they depend on it in matters of great
importance. They prove from thence in the Racovian Catechism, that our Lord
rose from the dead, as the Scriptures relate, and that the several Books of the
New Testament were written by the Persons whose Names they bear, herein
following the Example of their Master Socinus Legantur ea qua hac de re
Eusebius scribit pluribus in locis Historia Ecclesiastica and invenietur usque
ad illius Eusebii aetatem -- nunquam fuisse in Ecclesia qui dubitaret quin
quatuor quae habemus Evangella, liber Actorum Apostolorum, etc. ab iis scripta
fuissent quibus attribuuntur. Socin. lib. de Auct. S. Script.
, who argues from the unanimous consent of the Primitive Christians, that the
four Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, etc. were written by those to whom they
are attributed: and for this, he refers us to Eusebius. At other times he
treated the Ancients with great contempt, because they stood in the way of this
Animal of Glory, when he was resolved to make himself the Head of a Sect: yet
he plainly shows, that for the vindication of the Authority of the Holy
Scripture an assent is necessary and due to their Suffrage. And others, who
ascribe very little to that Suffrage, cannot but perceive, if they will
attentively consider it, that when there is a dispute about some passages or
parts of the Holy Scripture, whether they are genuine or not, one would render
himself extremely ridiculous, that should reject the Testimony of the Fathers
as useless on this occasion, and go about to determine the Controversy, and to
convince gainsayers by his own Instinct, or the dictates of a private Spirit.

But if, immediately after the Apostles decease, there was a general departure
from that Rule of Government which they appointed; if all the Primitive Bishops
were Usurpers of the Rights of those whom Heaven had made their Equals, and all
the Presbyters upon Earth did tamely abandon that Power which God had given
them, and all the Christians in the World with one Consent approved and
promoted the evil designs of the former, and the treachery of the last; and if
we must believe that the Primitive Writers conspired to put a Cheat upon us, in
the Representations they have made of the Affairs of the Church, I would then
be informed, what assurance we can have, that they have conveyed to us the true
Canon of Scripture: For it may seem, that if they were Men so extremely
Corrupt, they deserved no great Credit in any thing, and might be suspected to
have made as bold with the Oracles of God, as they had done with his
Institution of Church Government.

I make no doubt to affirm, that the Testimony of the Fathers is at least as
cogent for the Divine Original of Episcopacy, as it is when they ascertain to
us the Canon of Scripture; which yet is like to suffer nothing by this
comparison. For if we reject them as false Witnesses when they inform us, that
Bishops were appointed by the Apostles, we must not only believe, as I have
intimated already, that the Pastors of the Church, notwithstanding their great
distance from one another, and their different Customs and Interests, generally
hit, at the same time, upon the same Project, to destroy that Ecclesiastical
Polity, which had Christ for its Founder; but that every where they had the
same fatal Success. We must also believe, that however Government is a very
nice thing, and is not usually changed without fears, and jealousies, and
mighty clamours; and however the alterations of the Forms of Government are so
easily observed, yet did the Rising Prelates give so dextrous and nimble a Turn
to the Government of the Church, over all the World, that that there was not
the least notice taken of it; or else we must believe, that they destroyed all
the Records of that Transaction, so that no Monuments remain of their Ambition.
And this we must also believe against the declarations of those that were
conversant with the Apostles, and their immediate Successors; against the
informations of Martyrs and Confessors in the best and purest times; and
against the common faith of Christians for above a thousand years after the
death of our Savior. Being thus Credulous, we shall much resemble one
Vilgardus of Ravenna, mentioned by Glaber Rodulphus, who asserted, Apud usser.
in lib. de Succes. Eccles. c. 3.
that all the sayings of the Poets ought in every point to be believed. And
when we are arrived at that pitch of sense, no body, I suppose, will be much
concerned at what we contradict, or care to dispute with us, who are only fit
for the Entertainments of Enchanted Castles.

Thus, Sir, I have considered your Objections against that Authority, which I
still think, our Savior conferred on the Pastors of his Church; and also your
Exceptions against the Divine Right of Episcopacy: and I am apprehensive, that
I need an excuse, rather for paying you too nice an attendance, than for
neglecting any thing of moment, either in your Printed or Manuscript Papers.
But what comes not within the compass of my present design, may be examined in
the Second Part of this Treatise, in which you may expect a Review of your way
of managing this Controversy, which I omit at present, being willing to give
you and my self some respite, who am,

SIR, Your Faithful Servant, etc.
November. 2. 1691.
FINIS.

