THE Fathers Legacy: OR BVRTONS COLLECTIONS. Containing Many excellent
Instructions for Age, and Youth, showing them how to live godly in this life,
and to attain everlasting happiness in the life to come. First written for
the Instruction of his only Son, and now set forth for the benefit of others.
By EDW: BURTON.

PROVE. 7.1-2. My Son keep my words, and lay up my Commandments with thee. --
And my Law as the apple of thine eye.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, for Matthew Walbancke at Grayes Inn Gate. 1649.

The Fathers Directions to his Son.
MY Son I have thought good to direct those my poor labors unto thee; with a
charge, that thou do imprint them in thy memory, and God give thee grace to
make good use of them.

Thy careful and loving Father. E. B.

A wise Son will obey the instruction of his Father: but a scorner will hear
no rebuke. Prove. 13.1.
To the Reader,
COurteous Reader, having gathered together, out of many learned, and worthy
Writers, into this little Book, for my own comforts sake; certain Sentences,
Instructions, Meditations, and Resolutions. So to have them ready whereinto I
might look at my pleasure, and behold such things, as m^ heart desires, for
the refreshing o^ my mind. Which being seen by some of my friends, they have
earnestly persuaded me to put them in Print: which request I was very unwilling
to do to trouble the Press with such an i^ garnisht dish; but since they have
s^ far prevailed with me, I do intrea^ them, whosoever shall read it: First
that they be not moved with indignanation at that which I have done, because it
was not my mind, it should have come to public view: bu^ that they will
pardon the imperfection, and plainness of it: considering, that I am no professed
Scholar but a plain Country man. Therefore, if the sense in any place, appear
either not sound, or not clear enough, my desire is to have a godly Corrector
of the same; Telling him withal, that what faults he shall esp^e, it has
escaped from me not of purpose, but rather for that I was not heedy enough in
marking what I writ. And so I commend those my poor labors to the blessing of
God, and thy self to his most gracious, and all-sufficient protection.

Thine in the Lord, E. B.
From Stanton in Derbishire, near to Burton upon Trent, June 16. 1648.
To his deserving friend Mr. EDWVRD BURTON, Author of these Collections.
SIr, when I read your Book,
I think I see,
Of all learned Writers, an Epitome;
You have robbed no garden, but your well-spent hours,
Has made a Poesy of their choicest flowers,
Which with the greater luster to adorn,
Here Is some things of your own Minerva borne,
All well composed, all in due order set,
Resembling a well-furnish'd Cabinet,
Whose high prized Jewels fetched from every part,
Are placed in ranks by dainty hand and art
Here may wild youth (if youth will take the pains
To read your work) receive no little gains;
Here Is wisdoms Abstract, here your silver age,
Gives your Son Counsel, wholesome, grave, and sage.
O happy Son, whose Father both does give,
Precepts, and an Example how to live.
Since every one which ever saw your book
With an applausive smile does on it look
Answer the expectation of your Friends,
Let the world see you aimed at Public Ends.
ED. F.

To my much honored Friend Master EDWARD BURTON concerning his Collections.
SIR,
I Have read over your Collections, and if you be pleased to satisfy the
desires of your friends, and to commit them to public view, I think you shall
do very well; yea, my opinion is, you ought to do it. This Candle should not
be under a bushel, but on a Candlestick. The light of it will be most useful
many ways. First, the example will be exceeding good; you (as many others)
were by the troubles of this Kingdom taken off from you ordinary employment,
but you would not be taken off all employment; and that albeit your years
required ease; and your age (at least) an abatement of your labors, yet here
is neither, but rather an increase of more diligence and harder labor, and
your declining time more flourishing and fruitful, then your youth and best
days.

Then, you pitched on the best employment: what other you might have been fit
for, by reason of your former condition, and present age, I do not know; I am
confident, if you had been fit for any whatsoever, yet for none more, then for
the Work you have performed. Here is wisdom, and this very choice, and in
very much variety, and an admirable flowing vein of most sweet and sacred
eloquence. Neither is there mixture of any impertinencies, at least, there is
not any thing absurd, or that admits not a very good construction.

I will tell you what happened to me in the reading of it, from approbation, I
was carried unto admiration; almost to amazement. I see the race is not always
unto the swift, and the choysest Jewels, are not seldom hid in closest
secrecy. And how often do things fall far short of expectation, but sometimes
also, they as far exceed the same.

Your Wine is good throughout your whole Feast, but not best in the beginning;
your virtue is in the midst, but your midst-is almost all your Book, at least,
by many degrees the greatest part of it.

Sir, go on in your good endeavors, that you may say, as a Reverend old
Divine, said to a Physician, persuading to forbear study in his weakness,
nay, said he, but I will not, that when my M^ster comes, he may find me thus
doing.

Your very affectionate Neighbor, ARTHUR RICKARDS.

The Table.
TO mortify carnal affections. Page 16 Against vain glory. Page 17 What
Company to use. Page 19 Of Obedience. Page 20 Against idle meeting. Page 22 How
to come to quietness in mind, and to a godly life. Page 24 What profit comes
by adversity. Page 26 Of the works of Charity. Page 29 That men which offend,
must be borne withal sometimes. Page 30 The way to quietness, both temporal
and eternal. Page 32 The exercise of a true Christian. Page 33 Of
solitariness and silence. Page 37 Of the last judgment, and punishment for
sin. Page 42 Of the pains appointed for sinners after this life. Page 47 Of
the most honorable and munificent rewards, proposed to all them that truly
serve God. Page 62 Of the choice of Religion Page 79 That Divinity does not
cross nature, so much as exceed it. Page 87 Of man's imperfection. Page 91 Of
truth and bitterness in jests. Page 94 Of the uncertainety of life. Page 98 Of
reward and service. Page 101 That all things have a like progression. Page 106
Of Idleness. Page 111 Of the trial of Faith and Friendship. Page 116 Of
Censure. Page 121 Comfortable Sentences for such as are afflicted. Page 160
Comfortable Sentences concerning earthly blessings. Page 165 Meditations and
Resolutions. Page 171 A Morning Prayer. Page 180 An Evening Prayer. Page 185 A
Prayer for remission of sins. Page 188 A Prayer in time of W^rre. Page 192 A
prayer for Gods protection of his Church in respect of the present troubles of
it. Page 195 A Prayer before Sermon. Page 199 A Prayer before the receiving of
the Sacrament. ibid. A Prayer after receiving of the Sacrament. Page 200 A
Prayer at the hour of Death. Page 201
The Fathers Legacy, OR, Burtons Collections.
My Son,
FIrst honor God, then thy Prince, thy Parents, and thy Elders; be true and
just, and see thou never grudge to clear the cause of the oppressed Innocent;
for one day, God shall also be thy judge.

If gold, or bribes do corrupt thy Conscience, if fear, or favor, do sway thee
in thy Judgment, if thou respect the difference of Persons, be sure that God
will in the end repay thee for it.

Begin thy days work, when the day begins; first blessing Gods thrice blessed
name, and then at the Evening when thy labor is ended, praise him again, so
bring the year about.

Say not thou, my hand has brought this work to an end, nor this my virtue
has attained, rather say thus; This has God w^^^^ht by me, for God is the
Author of that little good we do.

The world is like unto a ^ound City, where ^ach man may be rightly said to be
a Citizen; as well the ^ude Barbarian, as the Greek; as well the meanest, as
the mig^tiest States.

In this fair Cities goodly Walls, God planted man, and placed him as in a
Sanctuary, where he himself in a Thousand parts has plan^ed with lively
col^ur^ that ^o never c^ange.

There is no^ a corner so small in all this City, wherein Gods greatness does
not appear plain, which that we might the bette^ view, he has placed man just
in the middle.

Yet can h^ n^ where better know the same, then in himself, wherein he may see
(as in a glass Earth, Water, Air, and Fire: For all the world his Essence
does infould.

Who of himself has gained perfect knowledge, is not ignorant of any thing
that he ought to know; but the best means, whereby it is attained, is
oftentimes to go to wisdoms glass.

That which thou see of man, is not man, but a prison that keeps him
Captive; it is but a Tomb wherein he is interred, it is but a Cradle wherein a
while he sleeps.

This mortal body, where the ravished sense, sees sinnues, flesh, bones,
muskles, blood and skin; it is not man, man is of more Excellency, it is the
fair Temple where God himself dwells.

Rightly to speak what we call man; it is a beamling of Divinity, it is a
dropling of Eternity, it is a moathling hatched of Unity.

O man, then know thine own original, and learn to scorn the base Cells of
earth; since thou shall flourish in Heavens glistering Hall, and art indeed a
Divine Plant by birth.

Well may thou vant thee of thy glorious race,
Not from thy mortal Parents either line:
But from thy true imm^rtall F^^^^^ grace,
Who by the model of his (...) thine.
Shun thou the filthy sect of (...) Epicures, bold miscreant^, every w^^
blaspheaming, the which do n^^ (...) ^^spect, nor acknowledge God, but only the
fatal sway of nature.

And in the mean while, like the grunting swine, lie always wallowing in the
stinking mud, and feeds on fi^th, like to the loathsome froggs voluptious
filth of every fleshie desire.

Happy is he, whose hope relies on God alone, and who on him, in either fortune
calls, as well in prosperity, as adversity, and puts no trust in humain help at
all.

Can thou assure thy hopes, on worldly trash, frail mortal things, I pray
thee tell me? such are the greatest of earthly men, and have more need to be
secured then thou.

God is the just man's aid, and his Anchor; his sure defense, when all the world
forsakes him; And therefore then is he the least dismade, knowing that God is
most strongest for him when all wordly means fayles him.

The goods, which we call the goods of fortune, they are not goods if we term
them rightly, for they are ever subject to the least change that is. But virtue
only still persists the same.

Virtue between the two extremes that hants,
Between too micle, and too little size^:
Exceedes in nothing, and in nothing wants.
Borrowes of none, but to it self suffizes.
O virtue, could we but see thy naked face, how would thou ravish us with thy
sacred beauty; since rarest wits, rapt with a seeming grace have in all ages,
courted even thy shadows.

The Parents comfort, is a prudent Son; now such a Son, if thou desire to
have, direct him young to run in duties race; But thy own example is the
nearest way.

If thou be born Son of a prudent Father, why do thou not follow his
example? if otherwise, why do not thou by virtuous deeds, strive to cover his
disgrace?

It is no small thing to be descended by our predicessours from an honest, and
religious stock; but it is much more to shine by their light unto our own
Successors.

So long as thou live, cease not to learn, think that day lost wherein thou
learnest not some good thing, that may give new grace, to make thy self wiser,
and better.

Respect thy credit more then thy own life, I mean that which draws each man's
duty to the uttermost we are able, to God, to our King, to our Laws, and our
Country.

What thou can do to day, defer not till to morrow, like sloth, Mother of
fowlest sins; nor be thou like to those who do borrow others hands, and what
themselves might do, will do by others.

Frequent the good, fly from ungodly men, especially in thy youths tender
age; the while outrageous appetites provoke, and arm thy senses against the
sway of reason.

Go not about to deceive the simple, nor wilfully offend thy weaker brother,
nor wound the dead with thy tongues bitter gall, neither rejoice at the fall of
thine Enemy.

Let thy discourse be true in all things whether then be^^ called as a public
witness to (...) a q^estion, or in thy ordinary and familiar ^^^k.

To beguile ^he silly birds, the crafty fow^er does feign their sweet notes; so
does subtle mates, counterf^ct the words, and guise of hon^st men.

Reveal not, whatsoever is ^^uld thee in secret, nor busily inquire things of
others; the Inquisitive, can hardly keep Council, and the charitable is
commonly a liar.

Make thou always lawful measure, and equal weight, though none could spy,
or discover thy dealing. And where thou have received a good turn, restore it
with some kindness back again.

Whatsoever is committed to thee in trust, keep it carefully, and when the
owner shall demand it again, deny it not, neither with a large Conscience by
subtle Law-tricks and strive to detain it.

It is not enough, that thou do wrong no man thy self; but thou must also
suppress the same in others, righting the weak man's cause, against the
unrighteous, whether it touch his life, his goods, or name.

Whosoever does desire the fame of honor, must tame his anger, and that
heart-swelling, marrow-melting fire, blown by the wind of sloth, and error.

The most victorious thing, is our own selfe-Conquest; for in our selves do our
greatest foes ambush: and the only way to make us ever glorious, is by stout
reason still to vanquish those.

If so be thy friend have offended thee, fall not out with him, nor urge him
with violence; but mild, and meekly without insolence, make thy complaint, and
take thou his excuse.

All men are faulty, no man alive can say, I have not erred, no not the
perfectest; if thou do survay his life, in word and deed, thou shall find that
he has mist perfection.

It is a most busy, yet a bootlesse pain, for to hide ones falt, for do the
best thou can, thou can not hide it from thy self.

Be ashamed more of thy self, then others be; thy self art most wronged by thy
own faults, and of thy self, thy self first selfly blamed must give an account
to thy selfs Conscience.

Care not so much to seem outwardly, as to be good indeed; for from false
rumors which the vulgar blow, a self clear Conscience is defense enough.

Re^^eve the needy after thine Estate, and to their want perticipate thy store;
for God does bless with plenty and tranquillity, the house that pitties the
distressed.

What boots thy baggs to be so crammed with Gold, thy trunks stuffed with such
store of change, thy bottles filled with such choice of wines, and of all grain
such plenty in thy Chambers; if all this while the naked-poor, half perished
with cold and hunger (...) trembles at thy door, and at the ^^^gth gets but a
piece of bread, and many times, perhaps, but hardly that.

Have not a heart so cruel, as to scorn the unhappy poor, that at thy beck
does crouch, who like thy self into the world was born, and bear^^ Gods Image,
even as w^ll as thou.

Misfortune is a common lot to all m^n, yea, even to Princes, Kings, and
Emperors, only the wise is freed from her, but where are they in this our age.

The wise man is freed among a Thousand troubles, he is only rich with his own
Estate content, he is only secure in danger, eased in pain, he is only a true
King of fate and fortune.

Who to himself is Law, no Law does need,
Off^nds no King, and is a King indeed.
He is not danted with the threats of Tyrants, but by his troubles grows more
hardy and strong, knows his own merit, and looks not for recompense from the
great, for virtue is his reward.

True moral virtue, cannot be purchased by study, by treasure, or by the grace
of Princes, nor by one actio^, or two, or three; but long practice brings her
perfection.

Who reads much, and never meditate, is like a greedy ^ater ^f much
victuals, who does so surel^y his stomach with his Cates, that commonly they
do him little good.

Cursed is he that defr^^ds the poor, or that detaines the hierlings wages; or
who, ungrateful of a good turn done, thinks never of his friend, but when he
sees him.

Forswear thee not, what cause soever is given thee, and if thou must of
nec^ssi^y ^ake an Oa^^, s^^^ar not by man, not by the earth, nor by Heav^n, but
by his sacred name who made all things.

For G^d, w^^ (...) all ^^jury, and justly plag^^ (...) an^us s^^ would (...)
w^ ^^ou contest the consta^^ (...) a^y ^^i^g t^^^ i^ ^^lse or alter^ble.

Apply ^^y wh^le ^ff ctio^^ to some one A^^, and s^^dom (...) af^^^ (...) in
the (...) m^^^ (...).

M^^^^ thou with no more then t^ou can^^ (...) ^o aspi^e (...) use thou the
wo^ld, (...) it, (...) o^ (...), ^^ther ^^sir^ i^

W^^^so^ver it b^ (...) by the (...), immed^^^ly (...) sh^n that mischief is,
to keep shut the Casements of the Ears.

Much talk is seldom without lies, or at the least, without some Idle speech;
unto the truth does belong brief Language, for many words are fit for fables
and dreams.

It behooves to picture slander to the life, to do it in the instant, while one
feels her; for who is so happy, that did never prove her, can scarce immagine
what she is.

She has not her residence in the Air, nor in the wild woods, nor in the S^a;
but she inhabits in the ears of great men, where she depraves the innocent and
honest.

Never give sentence in thine own cause, for in our own case, we are subject to
err; for our own interest, draws our partial judgment, and ever makes the
balance hang a wrie.

Always ground thy Judgment upon the Law, and not on man, for that is
affection-lesse; but man does abound strangely in passion, the one all like
God, the other too like to beasts.

Before thou promise any thing, ponder, why, and what; but having once past thy
promise, whatsoever it be, yea be it to thy greatest enemy, thou must perform
it, thy tongue has tied thee to it.

Nothing more beseemes a great (or rich) man, then liberality, so it be given
to those that deserve it, and without burden to his own estate.

The fear that springs from reverence and love, gives a firm support to
greatness; but he that through violence makes himself feared, himself fears
most, and lives still in distrust.

An enemy, disgrace, and misfortune, are three things to prove if friends be
just; for many bear the name to be friends, that are not so, i^ they be put to
trial.

Thou fortunes wonder, that from the lowest place, does as it were in a moment
spring up to the top of greatness, suppose it but a wind that blows, which
before night perhaps will calm again.

A mean Estate is best of all,
A dangerous thing its high to clime;
The mighti^st Oaks, have greatest fall,
When little shrubs, grow out their time.
The mean estate, is most permanent, we see the valleys are drowned with every
shower, and mountain tops are rent with every Thunder, when little hills are
pleasant and safe.

A small thing pleases nature, enough is a feast; a sober life requires but a
smal^ charge; but man, the Author of his own unrest, the more he has, the
more he still d^si^^s.

Man does repine at the shortness of his life, yet does not rightly spend that
time he has, which might suffice his mind, if to live well, he did desire to
live.

Thou can hardly require him sufficiently, w^o ^ath been tutor to thee in thy
(...) ^^^od: nor him that has inst^uc^^^ (...), ^oth well to speak, but
ch^^fl^ well ^o do.

(...) ^^^ces w^^re thou come, always give place unto the Aged; So when lik^
Age shall silverize thy Tr^sse, thou s^^^t by others be like honored.

T^ (...) and drink, and exercise in measure (...) ^he (...) c^^tainest means
of h^^^th; but (...) th^^ or other delights, en^^^seth (...) me, and does
hasten death.

If evil men speak evil of thee sometimes, what need thou to care? it is
thy Commendations, blame from the Author takes authority; and it is a good
report that good men raise.

Of what is spoken, ever make the best, bear with the faults of thy friends and
neighbors, bear with their defects, and publish them not abroad, be ready to
praise, and slow to reprehend.

He that esteems, or va^^s himself to be wise, think him a fool, and him that
does assume, the name of learned, whosoever tryes him, shall find him nothing
but bare words.

The better learned, learn more their want
And more to doubt, their own sufficiency,
And virtuous men are never arrogant,
These are the fruits of my Philosophy.
To mortify carnal affections.
Whenever a man does covet any thing immoderately, straight way his mind is
out of quiet, The proud, and covetuous, be ever vexed, but he which is poor and
meek in spirit, lives in great ease, he which does not mortify the inordinate
affections of his mind, may easily be carried away to wickedness, and with
trifling things be overcome: He that is weak, wordly, and carnal, can no ways
withdraw himself from earthly desires; And therefore when he resists them it
griveth him, when he is contraried he fretteth, and if he fulfill his mind he
sins; and by and by, does wound his Conscience, because he follows his
desires: which instead of that peace which he looked for, brings continual
disquietnesse; wherefore the true quietness of mind, i^ attained not by
following, but by resisting wicked affections, and remains in him which is
fervent and godly zealous, not in carnal and wordly men.

Against vain glory.
IT is a vain thing to trust either in man, or in any other Creature; be not
ashamed to be in subjection to others, not if thou be poor in this present
life; depend not upon thy self, but put thy confidence in the Lord. Do thy
part, and God will bless thy endeavor; Trust not to thine own knowledge,
neither do thou repose any confidence in the wit of man, but only in the Lord;
which exalts the humble, and brings down the proud. Glory thou neither in
thy riches, if thou have much, not of thy friends if they be mighty; but in the
Lord, who both gives all things, and gladly would give himself, before all
things. Be thou proud neither of thy beauty, or highness, for a little
sickness does both deform the one, and consume the other; Like not over well
of thy self, if thou have a good wit, least thou offend God thereby, which gave
whatsoever good thing thou have by nature: Think not thy self better then other
men; least God who knows what is in man, condemn thee utterly for thy
arrogant conceit: do thou well? take heed of pride, God judges not as man
does; for that commonly does displease him, which pleases man. If thou have
any goodness in thy self, think that another has more; so shall thou always
retain the true modesty of mind. To debase thy self even under all men, can
never hurt thee, but to prefer thy self before one man, may easily condemn thee.
The humble man is always in quiet, but the haughty minded fumeth commonly with
indignation.

What Company to use.
OPen not thy heart to every man, but communicate thine affairs to the wise
and godly; acquaint thy self with reverend old men, and delight not much in the
company of youths and strangers, flatter not the wealthy, and take heed of the
mighty, join thee to thy equals which are godly, and do that which is honest,
and for the public welfare; be familiar with no woman unlawfully, but
generally commend as many as are good, wish to be familiar, but with God only,
and his holy Angels, and utterly avoid the company of some men. Have peace with
all men, but not familiarity: many times it falls out that we love a stranger
through the report of others; whom afterward we hate, having tried his
conditions; and many times we displease others, by our lewd beheaviour, whom we
thought, we should please right well, if we had but their acquaintance.

Of Obedience.
IT is greatly for our behoof to live under others, not as we list ou^ selves,
and at more ease live Subjects then Rulers. Many obey for fear, rather then for
love, and grudgingly, no^ gladly; but such can never have the liberty of mind
before they obey bot^ for Conscience, and for the Lords sake wheresoever thou
come, never loo^ to live at ease, unless thou keep thy se^^ within thy
calling, and obey thy superiors; The opinion and change of places, has
deceived many a man: ever^ man by nature, would follow his ow^ mind, and
favors such as are of his own opinion; but if we fear God, we will sometimes
change our mind for quietness sake; for who is so wise, tha^ he knows all
things. Therefore trust not too much to thine own opinion: but willingly give
ear to the judgment of others; And albeit thou stand in a good matter, yet if
it be thought more expedient to have it otherwise alter thy mind, and thou
shall do bet^^^. I have heard many times, that it is easier, yet better, to
hear and take, then ^o give Council. And he bewrays his p^ide more, which
will stick in an opinion, though it be good, if wiser then himself through
deeper judgment and Circumstances would have it altered.

Against idle meetings*
SHun the common meetings of me^ as much as thou can, for to talk o^ worldly
matters, does greatly hu^ us, mean we never so well; the reason is, we are
easily drawn away with vanity. And for my part, I have wishe^ many times, that
I had been both silent, and absent: now if any would examine the cause, why so
gladly w^ chat, and prate together, seeing we seldom speak without offense to
God and hurt to our Conscience, he sha^^ find the answer to be, for comfort an^
recreation sake. For the more earnestly we desire a thing, or the more
certainly we know any evil to be toward us, the more vehemently w^ love to
talk and think thereof, albeit to small profit or purpose; for this outward
comfort, does not a little hinder the inward consolation; wherefore we are to
watch and pray, that we spend not our time idly: And if we will, or must of
necessity speak, let our speech be good to the use of edifying, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers. To babble much we should not use, both because
the custom thereto is naught, and for that in many words, there cannot want
iniquity: But godly speech greatly avails to a virtuous life, especially
where men of like minds and spirit are coupled together in the Lord.

How to come to quietness in mind, and to a godly life.
WOuld we not meddle with other men's doings, and sayings, we might live at
great ease, and quietness; but how is it possible we should be quiet, which
busy our selves with other men's matters, that touch us not: and pick occasion
to go abroad, and little or seldom, keep at home? blessed are the meek, for
they have much rest: In ancient time many attained to singular perfection, and
were zealous, and how so? They mortified their earthly Members; we loose the
bridle to all beastly desires, and care altogether, for temporal trash;
seldom, if at all, do we subdue our affections, neither do we desire to profit
more and more, daily in well doing; if therefore we remain in Religion, either
cold or lukewarm, what marvel? But were we dead unto our own selves, and not
entangled inwardly with parturbations, doubtless we should taste the
unspeakable sweetness of a godly life: and be inflamed with a burning desire
of celestial things; for in very deed, the greatest, (if not the whole) let
from godliness, is because we are in bondage to vild affections; and labor
not to follow the footsteps of the faithful. Hence it is, that if we be never
so lightly touched with adversity, we are marvelously dismayed, and seek help of
man, which comes of the Lord, now would we keep our places, like valiant
Soldiers, the Lord would help us from above; for he is ready to assist them
which serve him, and will give us victory if we fight his battles. But if we
place our Religion in doing these outward things, in short time our Religion
with them will utterly decay; wherefore the Axe must be laid unto the root, and
our wicked affections must be cut off, which is the only way to find rest for
our souls. If every year we would but root out one vice from our minds, oh
how quickly should we prove good men. But alas, we see by experience, that
after many years, we are worse then at the first, when we begin for to profess
Religion. And he is an holy man counted now a days, which can retain a part of
his former zeal; yet should the fire of godliness increase daily, and be
inflamed more and more. The remedy whereof is, at the beginning to strain our
selves, so shall we afterward do all things at pleasure. I confess indeeed it
is hard, for to leave an old custom and as hard, yea harder, for a man to
bridle his affection. At the beginning therefore strive with thine inclination,
and leave a wicked custom, least otherwise when thou would thou can not
easily; for it is impossible that we should vanquish and subdue mighty, which
cannot overcome light and trifling things. Oh if thou would consider, what
quietness to thy self, and joy to others, thou should bring by godly, and
good beheaviour, doubtless thy chiefest care would be how to live in the sight
of God religiously, and honestly in the eyes of men.

What prefit comes by Adversity.
IT is good for us sometimes to suffer affliction, for it makes us to know our
selves in this world, and to repose no confidence in any creature; It is good
for us sometimes, to be ill spoken of, and ill thought of, although we deserve
not the same; for that brings to humility, and drives from pride. And the
more earnestly we call for the testimony of God in our conscience, when we are
condemned among men, and of no credit: So that every man ought so to depend
upon God, that he need not care for any worldly comfort. For a good man, the
more he is troubled, either outwardly in body, or inwardly in mind, the more
he considers how greatly he stands in need of Gods assistance, without
which he sees he can do no good; then he sorroweth and sobbeth, and desires
to be delivered from misery; then it greeveth him to live any longer, and
wishes to be loosed, and to be with Christ; and then he perceives full well,
that in this life we cannot find perfect peace and security.

Against rash Judgment.
Look warily into thy self, and judge not other men. For in judgeing others,
we labor vainly, err commonly, and easily offend; but in judging and
examining our selves, we reap singular commodity. As we fancy a thing, so
we judge thereof, and blinded with private affection, we commonely give
partial sentence; now were the love of God, always our only guide, our
senses which are enemies to truth, would not so easily trouble us. But commonly
somewhat either lurketh within, or chances without, which carries us away.
Many in their doings, unwittingly seek themselves, which are so long quiet in
mind, as they enjoy all things according to their w^sh: but if any thing fall
out otherwise then they would, they chafe, fret, and fume; great descention
falls out, even among friends, and Countrymen; yea, among the godly and
zealous too, through the diversity of opinions; for such is our nature, we can
hardly break on old custom, and further then he sees will no man gladly go.
But if we cleave or depend, more upon reason and sense, then upon that virtue
which brings under the obedience of Christ, let us never look to be inflamed
with the light of Gods holy Spirit: for God will be served not with a piece of
man, but with whole man, neither does he allow reason to judge of Religion.

Of the Works of Charity.
We ought not to do wickedly, for any thing, nor for any man's sake; albeit in
respect of the weak, a good work may be undone sometimes, or done otherwise:
And that is not to neglect a good work, but to leave one good work, to do a
better. If thou have not love, there outward deeds profit nothing; if thou have
love, be thy works never so small and simple, they profit much, for God
respects not what is done, but how, and with what affection a thing is done.
He does much, that loves much; he does much, that does a thing as it should
be done, and he does so that seeks the common welfare before his own profit.
It many times seems a charitable deed, which indeed is a carnal: for that
which is done, as commonly works are done, either of affection, or desire of
gain, or hope of reward, which are carnal inclinations, is doubtless a
carnal, and not a charitable Work. A man endued with perfect charity, serves
not his own turn, but only in all things seeks the glory of God. He
envieth not, for he loves no private joy, neither will rejoice in himself,
but in the Lord, whose blessing he desires before all things. He ascribes no
goodness to any, but acknowledges all things to come of God; from whom every
good gift, and every perfect gift does proceed; in whom all the Saints do rest
in perpetual bliss. Finally, he which has but a spark of this true Charity,
accounts all worldly things but mere vanity.

That men which offend must be borne withal sometimes.
THat which thou can not amend neither in thy self, nor others, must
patiently be suffered, till God otherways work. Think with thy self, that
perchance, God does it to try thy patience, without which our merits do little
avail; notwithstanding in thy troubles, thou ought to beseech Almighty God
to assist thee with his grace, that patiently thou may endure his cross and
trial. If any, being diverse, and sundry times admonished, will not amend,
deal with him no more, but commit the whole matter to God, that his will and
glory may appear, in all his creatures, which knows well, how to turn all
things to the best; endeavor thy self patiently to bear the faults, and the
infirmities of other men, whatsoever they be; for so much as thou art faulty
thy self, and must be borne withal. And if thou can not be such as thou
would be, think thou to make another according to thy mind? We wish
that others were godly, and yet we our selves mend not: We would have others
severely corrected, which we refuse our selves: We find fault with the
licentiousness of others, and we our selves will not be gaine-said: We seek
that others should be bridled by Law, and we our selves refuse obedience;
whereby it is evident, that we love not our Neighbor as our selves. If all
were perfect, what should we suffer at other men's hands, for Gods sake; But
now it pleases God that we must bear one another burden; and that because no
man is without fault, no man but has his burden; no man that can live by
himself, no man but lacks advise sometimes, and therefore we ought to suffer
one with another, to comfort one another, to help, instruct, and admonish one
another. And never shall the virtue of a man be so known, as by occasion of
adversity; for occasions makes not a man frail, but shows what he is.

The way to quietness, both temporal and eternal.
THou must bridle and break thy will in many things, if thou will live a quiet
life: And if thou would stand upright, and go forward in godliness,
account thy self in this world but a banished man, and a pilgrim. And if thou
desire to be a Christian, thou must prove a fool before men for Christ's sake:
A hood or a shaven head makes not a religious man, but an alteration from vice
to virtue: and a mortication of thy lusts; he which loves any thing besides
God, and the salvation of his soul, shall find nothing but misery and sorrow:
and let not him look to be long in quiet, which labors not in the sight of
men to be most abject, and inferior to all: for thou art in this life to serve,
not to rule; and called to suffer, and labor, not to loiter and live at
pleasure. For men are tried in this world, as gold is in the surnace, and let
no man here look to stand upright; unl^sse with all his heart, he humble
himself for the Lords sake.

The exercise of a true Christian.
THe life of a Christian should be adorned with all virtues, that he may be
such inwardly, as he outwardly appears to the world; yea, more virtuous
should he be then he seems, in as much as God sees our hearts, who we must
entirely revere^ce, wheresoever we are, and before whom we should walk
uprightly as Angels. Every day we should renounce our minds, and as though we
were but newly converted from sin, we ought to inflame our zeal, and say; O
my Lord God, assist me, I humbly beseech thee, in this my good purpose and
zeal, and give me grace even at this present time, godly to enter into thy
service; for what hitherto I have done is nothing. In this our race and going
forward in godliness, we must use great diligence, if we mind to finish our
course as we should. For if he which courageously goes on, is tried many
times? What will become of him, which either seldom, or faintly sets
forward? Many things cause us to change our good minds; but, we never so
lightly omit spiritual exercise, but we greatly hinder our selves thereby. The
purpose of the just depends upon the favor of God, not upon their own
wisdom, on whom they trust in all their enterprises. For man may purpose, but
God disposes; neither can man of himself bring any thing to pass. If we omit
our accustomed exercise, either for Religions cause, or to profit our brethren,
we may easily attain thereunto again; but if carelessly, of sloth, or
faintness of mind, we neglect the same, we do both highly displease God, and
greatly endamage our selves. Let us do our best, yet shall we ^ffend in many
things. All be it will be good to shoot at some certain things, and especially
against those vices, which hinder us more then others; we must examine and set
in order, as well outward, as inward things, for both are nec^ssary to our
proceedings. If thou can^^ not at all times take account of thy self, yet do
it sometimes, and at the least, once a day, either at morn or night. In the
morning, consider how thou will spend thy time till evening. And at night call
to mind how thou ^ast spent the day; and what thy thoughts, words, and deeds
have been, for thereby we commonly both displease God, and offend men. Gird thy
loins like a man against Satan, bridle thy riotous appetite, so the more
easily shall thou bring under all the unruly desires of the flesh. Be thou at
no time idle, altogether, but always, either read, or write, or pray, or
meditate, or do somewhat for the publlique welfare. The body must be
exercised with judgment, for all exercises be not for every man; private
exercises must not be used in a public place, a^beit thou art to take heed
that thou be not too public, slow, and swift unto private, but having done
thy duty, according to thy calling, if any leisure be gotten, betake thee to
thy self as thy profession does require: All men cannot use one exercise, but
that is for some, which is not for others. Again, according to the diversity
of time, we think of exercises; for some, like us of holydaies, some on
working days, some in the time of war, some in the time of quietness, some
we mind when we are pensive, and some when we rejoice in the Lord; good
exercises should oftentimes be renewed, especially on holy days, as though we
were then departing out of this life, and going to the everlasting days of
rest. And therefore at such times especially, we should show our selves most
devout, and most carefully execute Gods Hests; looking, as it were, presently
to have a reward of our labor from God, which if it be deferred, let us think
with our selves, that we are not sufficiently prepared; but unworthy so great
glory to be revealed unto us, at a time convenient, and prepare our selves more
diligently to our end. Happy is that Servant says our Savior Christ, whom the
Lord when he comes shall find watchful, know ye of a truth, he will make him
ruler over all that he has.

Of solitariness and silence.
Seek a convenient time to meditate, and oftentimes call the benefits of God
into mind, omit curious things, and choose such matter, as may rather stir up
thy mind unto godliness, then busy thee too much: withdraw thy self from
speaking vainly, from gadding idly, from listening unto rumors, and novelties.
And thou shall find good leisure, and sufficient for thy spiritual exercise:
and that after the example of the most godly, who shunned the company of men as
much as they might, and chose to live a part unto God. One said, I never came
amongst men, but I departed more wicked then I was before. And this we find
true, when we talk much together; It is easier to be altogether silent, then
not to exceed in words, and to tarry at home then not to offend abroad it is
easier. Wherefore he which would be zealous, and godly, must avoid Company. No
man does safely go abroad, but he which gladly can abide at home, no man safely
does govern, but he which gladly can be in subjection. No man safely does
Command, but he that has learned willingly to obey. No man safely is merry,
but he that has a good Conscience. And no man safely can speak, but he that
willingly can hold his peace. And yet has not the security of good men, at any
time been without the fear of God, neither did their excellent, and heavenly
gifts make them any whit proud, but the more humble. But the security of the
wicked, as it arises of pride, so it turns to their destruction. Never look
to live at thy hearts ease, in this world, seem thou never so godly and
religious. It fails out many times, that they fall grievously through pride,
which in man's opinion were most religious men: whereby it is evident, that
tentation is very good for some, both to keep them from pride and outward
consolation, O if man would avoid vain pleasure, and not love the world, what a
good Conscience should he always retain. If man would cast away all vain
cares, and think only upon heavenly things, and trust only in God, what a
continual joy should he feel in his mind? No man shall find any spiritual
comfort, except he occupy himself diligently in stirring up his mind unto
godliness: the which thou shall the more easily attain, if thou enter into thy
Chamber, and shut thy self from troubles of the world, as it is written. Examine
your own hearts upon your bed, and be still. For commonly thou shall find that
in the Closet, which thou would leese abroad, the more thou usest thy
Closet, the more thou will like it; the less thou come thereinto, the more
thou will loath it. But frequent the same rightly, and tarry therein at thy
first conversion from wickedness, and afterward thou shall do it with
exceeding pleasure. Solitariness, and quietness, is good for him that would
proceed in virtue, and learn the mysteries of holy Scripture; for there shall
he find even floods of tears, whereby he may wash and cleanse himself every
night, that he may be so much nigher unto his Maker, by how much he is further
from the resort of men. So that God with his holy Angels comes unto him, which
withdraws himself from his friends and acquaintance. It is better to live in
a corner, so a man have a regard to himself, then without care of his own
salvation, even to work miracles. It is no shame, but praise, for a godly man
seldom to go abroad, to shun to be seen, and not to love to see. Why look
thou on that which is not lawful for thee to have? The world passes away, and
the lusts thereof. The desire of pleasure makes thee to rove abroad; but when
the pleasure is past, which is quickly gone, what gettest thou thereby, but
repentance, and a wandering soul? A merry out-going brings commonly: murning
return, and a merry evening watch, is sign of a lowering morning. Even so the
joy of this world enters pleasantly, but ends bitterly; what can thou see
in another place, which is not here? Behold the Heaven, Earth, and all the
E^ements; for of those do all things consist: what see thou in any place that
abides ever? perchance thou think to satisfy thy self with contemplation,
but thou shall never do so; what if thou s^west all things before thine eyes?
it were but a vain sight; but lift up thine eyes to God, and ask pardon for
thine offenses, leave vain things to vain folks, and give thou thy mind to do
the will of God. Shut thy self within thy door, and call thy welbeloved Jesus
unto thee; Tarry with him in thy Chamber; for elsewhere thou shall never find
so great quietness. Had thou not gone abroad, nor listened unto tumors, and
tales, thou might the better have enjoyed quietness, but now because thou
give thine ears to hear news, thou art troubled greatly, and vexed in thy
mind.

Of the last judgment and punishment for sin.
Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember thine end; and how thou must appear
before a severe Judge, in whose sight nothing is hid; which neither is pleased
with reward, nor admits vain excuses; but rightly and indifferently judges
all men. O fond man and miserable wretch, what answer will thou make unto God,
who knows all thy sins, which oftentimes fear the looks, even of an
angry man? why do thou not look to thy self, against the day of that judgment
when no man shall excuse, or defend another? for every man shall have enough to
answer for himself. Now may thou do good, if thou take pain, now will thy
tears be excepted, if thou weep, now may thy groans be heard if thou sigh, and
both pacify God, and purge thy self; And indeed, thoroughly is the patient man
purged, which being injured, does bewale the wickedness of the inferior,
rather then the injury offered unto himself, prays for his enemies, forgiveth
them from his heart, asks pardon speedily of others whom he has offended, is
more easily moved to pity then to anger, offers often violence unto himself,
and labors earnestly to bring his body into subjection of the spirit. And
these things must not be deferred, but be done while we live, and that with
speed. But we deceive our selves, through an inordinate desire of the flesh;
That Hell fire, what else will it burn but sinners? The more thou have loved
thy self, and pampered thy flesh, the more shall be thy pains, and the more
substance to burn thee, have thou laid together. For in what things a man has
sinned, in the same he shall be punished, according to the greatness of the
offense; There idle persons shall be pricked with burning forks, gluttons shall
be tormented there with extreme hunger, and thurst: There Epicures and
voluptious persons, for their sweet delights shall have burning pitch to boil
them, and stinking brimstone to anoy them, The envious there shall houle like
mad dogs; and no vice, but shall have his torment.

To be short, one hour of pain in that place, shall be more grievous, then
all the time they had in this world to amend their manners. For the^e is no
rest, comfort there is none. Here sometimes, their sorrow seized, and sometimes
they received comfort of their friends; wherefore have a care of thy self,
whilst thou art alive, and bewail thy sins, that in the day of that
judgment thou may safely rejoice with Gods elect. For then shall the
righteous with great boldness, stand against such as have vexed and oppressed
them. Then shall he sit to judge, which now is content to be judged of men;
Then shall the poor and meek, triumph, when the proud shall quake on every
side. Then shall they say, he was wise, which for Christ his sake seemed a
fool, and an abject; Then shall the memory of misery, patiently sustained be
sweet; when in the mean while, the wicked shall sobb, and sigh; Then shall the
godly rejoice and be glad, but the reprobate shall howl and weep. Then shall
the afflicted more triumph, then if continually he had been in joy. Then shall
the base apparel be glorious, and the proud attire infamous. Then shall the
poor Cottage be more commended, then is the gilded Palace praised. Then
shall constant patience more prevail, then all the power of the world. Simple
obedience shall be more commended then, then all the subilty of man. Then shall
a clear and good conscience more rejoice a man, then profound skill in
Philosophy. The contempt of Riches shall do more good, then all the riches in
the world; then shall a zealous Prayer bring more delight then ever did fine
Cates. Thy silence kept in thy life time, shall more cheer thy heart in that
time, then long babbling; good works then shall be respected, then copy of
sweet words, And then shall thy pains taken to reform thy manners, more
delight then could all the pleasure in the world. Wherefore learn in this
life, to suffer small things, that in the world to come thou may escape
great, and grievous dangers. Try first in thy life time, what thou can suffer
after thou art dead; and if thou can not endure but light things in
comparison now; how will thou bear afterward everlasting torments? And if now
so little pain can make thee impatient, what will the fire of Hell do? For,
persuade thy self, thou can not be twice happy; that is, to enjoy thy
pleasure in this life, and reign too with Christ in the world to come. Now
suppose thou had lived hitherto in perpetual honor, and pleasure, what good
would these things do thee, if thou should dye out of hand? See thou not
how all things are vain, save only to love, and serve God; for he which
loves God, with all his heart, fears neither death, nor pain, nor
judgment, nor damnation; for perfect love makes a man with boldness to
appear before God. But marvel it is not, though he which delights as yet in
sin, does both fear death, and the day of judgment. Notwithstanding, if the
love of God cannot allure thee unto godliness, yet let the fear of hell fire
drive thee from wickedness. But if neither the love of God, nor the fear of
Hell can better thee one jot, then look not to stand in a good estate long, but
quickly to fall into the snares of Satan. And gentle Reader, if none of these
persuasions ^ill prevail with thee, mark well his ensuing discourse that
follows.

Of the pains appointed for sinners after this life.
AMongst all the means which God uses toward the Children of men, to move
them to resolution against sin, whereof I entreat the strongest and most
forceable (to the common sort of men) is the consideration of punishments
prepared by God for rebellious sinners, and transgressors of his Commandments:
wherefore he uses this consideration often, as may appear by all the Prophets,
who do almost nothing else but threaten plagues, and destruction to offenders.
And this mean has often times prevaled more then any other that could be used,
by reason of the natural love which we bear toward our selves: and
consequently, the natural fear which we have of our own danger. So we read,
that nothing could move the Ninivites so much as the foretelling them of their
eminent destruction (...) And St. John Baptist, although h^ came in a simple,
and contemptibl^ manner, yet preaching unto the people the terror of vengeance
to come, and that the Axe must be put to the Roo^ of the Trees, to cut down for
the Fire all those which did not repent: he moved the very Publicanes, and
Soldiers to fear (which otherwise are people of very hard metal) who cam^
unto him upon this terrible Embassage and asked, what they should do (...)
avoid these punishments? After ther^ that we have considered of death, an^ of
Gods seveare judgments, which insueth after death, and wherein every man has
to receive, according t^ his works in this life, as the Scriptu^^ says, it
follows, that we consider also of the punishments which are appointed for
them that shall be foun^ faulty at that account. Hereby, (...) leastwise (if no
other consideration w^ serve) to induce all Christians to th^^ resolution of
serving God, for if ever^ man have naturally a love of himself, and desire to
conserve his own case, then shall he also have fear of peril, whereby he is
to fall into extreme calamity.

This expresses Saint Bernard excellently; O man (says he) if thou have lost
all shame, which pertains to so noble a creature as thou art, (if thou feel
no sorrow as carnal men do not) yet lose not fear also, which is found in
every beast: we use to lead an Ass, and to weary him out with labor, and he
cares not, because he is an Ass. But if thou would thrust him into the
fire, or fling him into a ditch, he would avoid it, as much as he could, for
that he loves life, and f^areth death. Fear thou then, and be not more
insensible then a beast; fear death, fear judgment, fear hell. This fear
is called the beginning of wisdom, and not shame, or sorrow, for that the
spirit of fear, is more mighty to resist si^ne, then the spirit of shame, or
sorrow. Wherefore it is said, remember thy end, and thou shall never sin:
that is, remember the final punishments which are appointed for sin, after
this. Thus far Saint Bernard.

First then to speak in general, of the punishments reserved for the life to
come; If the Scriptures did not declare, in particular their greatness unto
us, yet are there many reasons to persuade us, that they are most severe,
dolerous, and intolerable. For first, as God is a God in all his works, that
is to say, great, wonderful, and terrible; so especial^y, he shows the same
in his punishment, being called for that cause, in Scripture, the God of
justice, as also, God of revenge: wherefore seeing all his other works, are all
full of M^jestie, and exceeding our capacities: we may likewise gather, that
his hand in punishment must be wonderful also.

God himself teaches us to reason thus; in this manner, when he says: and
will ye not then fear me? and wi^ ye not tremble before my face, which have
put the Sand^ as a stop unto the Sea, and have given the water a commandment
never to pas e its bound^; no not when it is most troubl^d, and the floods most
outrageous? As who would say, If I am wonderful, and do pass your
imagination in these works, of the Sea, and others, which you see daily; you
have cause to fear me, considering that my punishments are like to be
correspondent to the same.

Another conjecture of the great 2nd severe Justice of God, may be the
consideration of his infinite and unspeakable mercy: the which as it is the
very nature of God, and without end or measure, as his Godhead is, so also his
justice is. And these two are the two Arms, (as it were) of God imbrasing, and
kissing one the other, as the Scripture says. Therefore, as in a man of this
world, if we had the measure of one arm, we might easily conj^cture of the
other; so seeing the wonderful examples daily of Gods infinite mercy toward
them that repent, we may imagine by the same, his severe justice toward them,
whom he reserveth to punishment in the next life: and when for that cause, he
calls in the Scriptu^es, Vessels of his fury, o^ Vessels to show his fury
upon.

A third reason to persuade us of the gr^at^esse of these punishments, may be
the mavelous patience, and long-suffering of God in this life. As for
example, in that he suffers diverse men from one sin to another, from one day
to another, from one year to another, to spend all in dishonor, and dispite of
his Majesty, adding offense to offense, and refusing all persuasions,
allurements, good inspirations, or other means of friendship, that his mercy
can devise to offer for their amendments, and what man in the world could
suffer this? or what mortal heart could show such patience? But now if all
this should not be requited with severity of punishment, in the world to come,
upon the obstinate, it might seem against the Law of Justice, and equity, and
one arm in God, might seem longer then the other. Paul does touch this
reason, in his Epistle to the Romans, where he says, Do thou not know, that
the benignity of God, is used to bring thee to repentance? And thou by thy
hard, and impenitent heart, do hoord up vengeance unto thy self, against the
day of wrath, and appearance of Gods just judgment, which shall restore to
every man according to his works? He uses hear the words of hoording, up of
vengeance, to signify that even as the covetous man, does hoord up money, to
money, daily to make his heap great; so the unrepentant sinner, does hoord up
sin to sin, and God on the contrary side, hoordeth up vengeance to
vengeance, until his measure be full, to restore in the end, measure against
measure, as the Prophet says, and to pay us home, according to the multitude
of our abominations. This God meant, when he said to Abraham, that their
iniquities was not yet full up. Also in the Revelation of St. John, when he
used this conclusion of that Boo^e. He that does evil, let him do yet more
evil, and he that ly^th in filth, let him yet become more filthy: for behold,
I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to
his deeds.

By which words, God signifies, that his bearing and tollerating with sinners
in this life, is an argument ^f his greater severity in the life to come. Which
the Prophet D^vid also declares, when talking of a careless sinner, he says,
The Lord shall scoff at him foreseeing that his day shall come. This day (no
doubt) is to be understood, the day of account, and punishment after this life;
for so does God more at large, declare himself in another place, in these
words. And thou Son of man, thus says the Lord God; The end is com^, now (I
say) the end is come upon thee, and I will show in thee my fury; and I will
judge thee, according to thy ways; I will lay against thee all thy
abominations, and m^^e eye shall not spare thee; neither will I take any mercy
upon thee; but I will put thine own ways upon thee, and thou shall know that I
am the Lord. Behold, affliction comes on, the end is come, the end (I say) is
come, that watched against thee; and behold it is come: crushing is come upon
thee, the time is come, the day of slaughter is at hand; shortly I will power
out my wrath upon thee: and I will fill my fury in thee; and I will judge thee
according to thy ways; and I will lay all thy wickedness upon thee, mine eye
shall not pity thee, neither will I take any comp^ssion upon thee, but I will
lay thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations in the midst of thee, and
thou shall know that I am the Lord that strikes. Hitherto is the speech of God
himself.

Seeing then, we n^w understand in general, that the punishments of God in the
life to come, are most certain to be great and severe t^ all such as fall into
them, for which c^^se the Apostle says, It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living G^^. Let us consider somewhat in particular, what
manner of pains, and punishmens they shall be.

And first of all touching the place of punishment, appointed for the damned,
commonly called Hell. The Scripture in diverse places, and Languages, used
diverse names, but all tending to express the grivousness of punishment there
suffered. As in Latin it is called Infernus, a place beneath, or under ground,
as most of the old Fathers do i^terpret. But whether it be under ground or no;
most certain it is, that it is a place most opposite to heaven, which is said
to be above: And this name is used for to signify, the miserable suppressing
and ^urling down of the damned, to be trodden under the feet, not only of God,
but also of good men for ever; for so says the Scripture, Behold the day of
the Lord comes, burning like a furnace; and all proud and wicked men shall be
straw to that furnace, and you that fear my name, shall tread them down, and
they shall be as burnt Ashes under the soles of your feet in that day. And this
shall be one of the greatest miseries that can happen to the proud and stout
Potentates of the world, to be thrown down with such contempt; and to be trodden
under feet of them; whom they so much despised in this world. The Hebrew word
which the Scripture uses for Hell, is Sheol, which signifies a great ditch,
or dungeon, in which sense, it is also called in the Apocalips, Lacus irae Dei,
The Lake of the wrath of God. And again, A Poole burning with fire and
brimston. Also in the Gospel, it is called utter darkness: And Job, says of
i^, there dwells no order but everlasting horror. Having now in some part
declared the names, and thereby also in part the nature. I^ rem^ineth now, that
we consider, what manner of pains men suffer there. For declaration whereof,
we must no^e, that as Heaven, and Hell are contrary, assigned to contrary
persons, for contrary causes, so have they in all respects contrary properties,
conditions, and ^ff^cts; in such sort, as whatsoever is spoken of the felicity
of the one, may se^ve to infer the contrary of the other. As when Saint P^ul
says, That no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived, the joys
that God ha^h ^^epare^ f^r them that shall be saved. We may infer that the
pain of the damned must b^ as great.

A a ne, when the Scripture says, that the felicity of them in heaven, is a
perfect felicity, containing all goodness, so that no kind of pleasure that
can be imagined, which they have not; we must think on the contrary part, that
the misery of the damned, must be also a perfect misery, c^n aining all
afflictions that may be, without wanting any. So that as the ^appinesse of the
good is infinite, and ^niversall: so also is the calamity of the wick^d
infinite, and universal. Now (...) ^^is life, all the in (...) and pains,
which fall upon men, are but pa^ticular, and no^ u^iversall. As f^^ example, We
see one man pained in h^s eyes, another in his back, which particular pains,
notwithstanding sometimes are so extreme, as life is not able to resist them,
and a man would not suffer them long for the wining many worlds together.

But suppose now a man were tormented in all the parts of his body at once, as
in his head, his eyes, his tongue his teeth, his throat, his stomach, his
belly, his back, his heart, his sides, his thyes, and in all the joints of his
body, besides, suppose (I say) he were most cruelly tormented with extreme
pains in all these parts; together, without case or intermission; what thing
could be more miserable then this? what sight more lamentable? If thou
should see a dog lie in the street so afflicted, I know thou could not
but take compassion on him.

Well then, consider what difference there is between abiding those pains for a
week, or for all eternity? in suffering them upon a soft bed, or upon a burning
gridiron, or boiling furnace; Among a man's friends comforting him, or among the
furies in Hell, whipping and tormenting him.

Consider this (I say) gentle Reader, and if thou would take a great deal of
pains, rather then abide the one, in this life: be content to sustain a little
pain, rather then to incu^ the other in the life to come.

But to consider these things yet further, not only all these parts of the
body, which have been instruments to sin, shall be tormented together, but also
every sense, both external and internal; for the same cause shall be
afflicted with his particular torment, contrary to the obj^ct wherein it
delighted most, and took pleasure in this world.

As if for example; the lacivious eyes, were afflicted with the ugly and
fearful sight of Devils, the delicate cares, with the horrible noyes of
damned spirits, the nice smell with poisoned st^nch of brimstone, and other
unsupportable filth, the dainty taste, with most ravonous hunger, and thirst,
and all the sensible parts of the body, with burning fire.

Again, the Imagina^ion shall be tormented with the apprehension of pain^s
present, and to come. The memory, with the remembrance of pleasures past; the
understanding with consideration of the felicity lost, and the misery now come
on.

O poor Christian, what will thou do a midst the multitude of so grievous
calamities? It is a wonderful matter, and able (as one further faith) to make
a reasonable man go out of his wits, to consider what God has revealed unto
us, in the Scriptures, of the dreadful Circumstance of this punishment, and
yet to see how little the retchlesse men of the world do fear it.

Now is the time we may avoyde all, now is the time we may put our selves out
of danger, of these matters; now (I say) if we resolve our selves out of hand,
for we know not what will become of us to morrow. It may be to morrow, our
hearts will be as hard, and careless of these things, as they have been
heretofore.

Resolve thy self therefore (my dear brother) if thou be wise, and clear thy
self from this danger; while God is willing to receive thee, and moves thee
thereunto by these means, as he did the rich man by Moses, and the Prophets,
while he was yet in his prosperity.

Let his example be often before thine eyes, and consider it thoroughly, and it
shall do thee good, God is a mereifull God, and a wonderful God, and to show
his patience, and infinite goodness, he woeth us in this life, seeks unto
us, and lays himself, (as it were) at our feet, to move us to our own good,
to win us, to draw us, and to save us from perdition.

But after this life, he alters his course of dealing, he turns over the
leaf, and changes his style; Of a Lamb, he becomes a Lion to the wicked. And
of a Savior, a just and severe punisher.

What can be said, or done more, to move us? He that is forewarned, and sees
his own danger before his, face and yet is not stirred, nor made the more
wary, or fearful thereby, but notwithstanding, will come, or slide into the
same, may well be pitied, but surely by no means, can he be helped. making
himself incapable of all the remedies that may be used.

Of the most honorable and munificent rewards proposed, to all them that
truly serve God.
THe reasons, and considerat^ons, laid down before, in the former discourse,
might well be sufficient to stir up the heart of any reasonable Christian, to
take in hand this resolution; whereof, and whereupon I so much covet to
persuade thee (for thy only good and gain) gentle Reader. But that all hearts
are not of one constitution, in this respect, not all drawn and stirred, with
the same means. I purpose to adjoyne here another consideration, whereunto
each man is commonly proane by nature. And therefore I am in hope, it will be
more forcible to that we go about, then any else, that hitherto has been
spoken. I mean then to treat of the ben^fits, which are reaped by the service
of God; of the gain drawn thence, and of the good pay and most liberal
reward, which God performs to his servants, above all the masters created,
that may be served.

And though the just fear of punishment (if we serve him not) might be
sufficient to drive us to this resolution; and the infinite benefits already
received, induce us to the same, in respect of gratitude: Yet am I content so
far to enlarge this liberty to the (good Reader) that except I show this
resolution, (which I crave) to be more gainefull and profitable, then any thing
else in the world that can be thought of; thou shall not be bound unto it for
any thing, that hitherto has been said in that behalf. For as God in all
things, is a God of great Majesty, full of bounty, liberality, and princely
magnificence; so is he in this point above all other, in such sort, as albeit,
whatsoever we do, or can do, is but due debt unto him, and of it self
deserves nothing. Yet of this munificent Majesty, he lets pass no one jot
of our service unrewarded, no not so much as a cup of cold water.

God commanded Abraham to sacrifice unto him his only Son Isack which he
loved so much; but when he was ready to do the same, God said, do it not; It
is enough for me, that I see thy obedience. And because thou have not refused
to do it, I swear to thee (says he) by my self, that I will multiply thy
seed, as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the Sea: and among them also
one shall be Christ the Savior of the world. Was not this good pay for so
little pains? King David, one night began to think with himself, that he had
ow a house of Cedar, and the Ark of God lay but under a Tent, and therefore
resolved to build a House for the said Arc: which only cogitation, God took
in so good part, as he sent Nathan the Prophet unto him presently to refuse the
thing: but yet to tell him, that for so much, as he had determined such a matter,
God would build a house, or rather a K^ngdome to him and his posterity; which
should last for ever; and from which he would never take away his mercy; which
promise we see now fulfilled in Christ; what should I recite many like
examples; Christ gives a general note hereof, when he calls the workmen,
and pays to each man his wages, so duly; as also when he says of himself,
Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me: by which place is evident,
that God suffers no labor in his service to be lost, or unpaid. And albeit,
he pays also, and that abundantly in this life: yet, as by those two examples
appears, he deferreth his chief pay unto his coming in the end of the day,
that is after this life, in the resurrection of the just; as himself says in
another place, of this payment then reserved for Gods servants in the life to
come.

We are now to consider, what, and what manner a thing it is, and whether it be
worth so much labor and travel, as the service of God requires, or no.

And first of all, if we will believe the holy Scripturs, calling it a
Kingdom, an heavenly Kingdom, an everlasting Kingdom, a most blessed
Kingdom. We must needs confess it to be a mavelous great reward. For that
worldly Princes, do not use to give Kingdoms to their servants, for recompense
of their labors: and if they did, or were able to do it; yet could it be
neither heavenly, nor everlasting, nor a blessed Kingdom.

Secondly, if we credit that which St. Paul says of it; that neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived, how great a matter it is;
Then must we yet admit a greater opinion thereof: for that we have seen many
wonderful things in our days, we have heard more wonderful, we may conceive
most wonderful, and almost infinite. How then shall we come to understand the
greatness, and value of the rewards? surely no tongue created, either of man,
or Angel, can express the same. No imagination conceive, no understanding
comprehend it, Christ himself has said, no man knows it, but he that
injoyeth it, and therefore he calls it, hidden Manna, in the same place;
notwithstanding as it is reported of a learned Geometrician, that finding the
length of Hercules foot upon the hill of Olimpus, drew out his whole body by
the proportion of that one part: so we by some thing only set down in
Scripture, and by some other Circumstances, agreeing thereunto, may frame a
conjecture of the matter, though it come far behind the thing it self.

I have showed before, how the Scripture calls it a heavenly, and
everlasting, and a most blessed Kingdom; whereby is signified, that all must be
Kings, that are admitted thither: To take effect it is called in other places;
a Crown of glory, a Throne of Majesty, a Paradise, or place of pleasure; a life
everlasting. St. John the Evangelist, being in his banishment, by special
privilege, made privy to some knowledge, and feeling thereof, as well for his
own comfort, as for ours, takes in and to describe it by comparison of City,
affirming that the whole City, was of pure gold, with a great, and high wall of
the precious stone, called Jaspis. This wall had also 12. foundations, made of
12. distinct precious stones, which he there names: also 12. gates, made of
12. rich stones, called Margarites, and every gate has an entire Margarite.
The streets of the City, were paved with gold, interlaid also with pearls, and
precious stones. the light of the City, was the clearness, and shining of
Christ himself, siting in the midst thereof.

From whose seat proceeded a River of water, as clear as Cristall, to refresh
the City, and on both sides of the banks, there grew the tree of life giving
out continual and perpetual fruit: There was no night in that City, nor any
defiled thing entered there but they that are within shall reign (says he) for
ever, and ever.

By this description, of the most rich and precious things that this world
has, St. John would give us to understand the infinite value, glory, and
majesty of this felicity, prepared for us in heaven: though, as I have noted
before) it being the princely inheritance of our Savior Christ, the Kingdom of
his Father, the eternal habitation of the holy Trinity, prepared before all
worlds, to set out the glory, and express the power, of him that has no end,
not measure, either in power, or glory: we may very well think with St. Paul,
that neither tongue can declare it, nor heart can imagine it.

O miserable Children of men, that are born to so rare and singular a dignity,
and yet cannot be brought, to consider love, or esteem of the same.

Other such considerations there be, to show the greatness of this felicity,
is that if God has given so many pleasures, and comfortable gifts in this
life (as we see are in this world) being a place of bannishment, a place of
sinners, a vail of misery, and the time of repenting, weeping and wailing, what
will he do in the life to come, to the just, to his friends, in the time of
joy, and marriage of his Son? This was a most forceable consideration, with
good St. Augustine, who in the secret speech of his soul with God, said thus.
O Lord, if thou for this vile body of ours, give us so great, and innumerable
benefits, from the Firmament, from the Air, from the Earth, from the Sea, by
light, by darkness, by heat, by shadow, by dewes, by showers, by winds, by
raines, by birds, by fishes, by beasts, by trees, by multitude of herbs, and
variety of plants, and by the ministry of all thy Creatures.

O sweet Lord, what manner of things, how great, how good, and how innumerable
are those which thou have prepared in our heavenly country where w^ shall see
thee face to face? If thou do (...) great things for us in our prison, wh^^
will thou give us in our palace, If th^^ give so many things in this world,
t^ good and evil men together, wh^^ have thou laid up for good men onl^ in the
world to come? If thine enemie^ and friends together are so well provided for
in this life, what shall the only friends receive in the life to com^^ If there
be so great solaces in the^^ days of tears, what joy shall there b^^ in that
day of marriage, if our goal (...) contain so great matters, what sha^^ our
Country, and Kingdom do.

O my Lord and God, thou art a gre^^ God, and great is the multitude of the
magnificence, and sweetness. And (...) there is no end of thy greatness, n^
number of thy wisdom; nor measure (...) thy benignity; so is their neither and
numbers nor measure of thy rewar^ toward them that love, and faithfully serve
thee. Hitherto St. Austin. Another way to conjecture of this felicity is to
consider the great promises which Go^ makes in the Scriptures, to honor* and
glorify man in the life to come* whosoever shall honor me (says God) I will
gloryfie him.

And the Prophet David, as it were complains joyfully, that Gods friends were
so much honored by him, which he might with much more cause have said, if he
had lived in the new Testament, and had heard that promise of Christ, that his
Servants should sit down and banquet, and that himself would serve, and
minister unto them in the Kingdom of his Father.

But now to come to that point of this felicity, which does appertain to the
soul, as the principal part, it is to be understood; that albeit there be many
things that do concur to this felicity, for the accomplishment, and perfection
of happiness, yet the fountain of a^l is, but one only thing called by
Divines, the sight of God, that makes us happy. This only sight of God is our
happiness: If we would enter into these considerations, no doubt but we should
be more inflamed, with the love of this felicity (prepared for us) then we are:
and consequently, should strive more to gain it, then w^ do. And to the end
thou may conceive, some more feeling in the matter (gentle Reader) consider a
little with me, what a joyful day shall that be at thy house, when having
lived in the fear of God, and archieved in his service the end of thy
peregrination (b^ the means of death) to pass from misery, and labor to
immortality; an^ in that passage, (when other men begin to fear) thou shall
lift up the head in hope, according as Christ promises, for that the time of
thy salvation comes.

Tell me, what a day shall that be when thy soul stepping forth of prison, and
conducted to the Tabernacl^ of Heaven, and shall be received the^ with the
honorable Companies, an^ Troops of that place? with all thos^ blessed spirits
mentioned in Scripture^ as Principalities, Powers, Vertue^ Dominations,
Thrones, Angels, Archangels, Cherubines, and Seraphines also with the holy
Apostles, an^ Disciples of Christ, Patriarks, Prophets, Martyrs, Innocents,
Confe^sors, and Saints of God?

All which shall triumph at thy Coronation, and glorification. What joy will
thy soul receive at that day, when she shall be presented in the presence of
these States, before the Seat and Majesty of the blessed Trinity, with
recital, and declaration of all thy good works, and travels, suffered for the
love and service of God? When there shall be laid down in that honorable
Consistory, all thy virtuous deeds, al thy labors that thou have taken in thy
calling; all thy alms, all thy prayers, all thy fasting, all thy innocence of
life, all thy patience in injuries, all thy constancy in adversities, all thy
temperance in meats, all thy virtues of thy whole life? When all (I say) shall
be recounted there, al commended, all rewarded; shall thou not see now, the
value and profit of a virtuous life? shall thou not confess, that gainful, and
honorable, is the service of God? Shall thou not now be glad, and bless the
hour, wherein first thou resolvedst thy self to leave the service of the world,
to serve God? Shall thou not think thy self to be beholden to him that
persuaded thee unto it? Yes verily: But yet more then this, when as being so
near thy passage here, thou shall consider into what a port, and haven of
security thou art come, and shall look back upon the dangers which thou have
passed, and wherein other men are yet in hazard; thy cause of joy shall
greatly be increased. For thou shall see evidently, how infinite times, thou
were in danger to have perished in that journey, if God had not held his
provident hand over thee.

Thou shall see the dangers wherein other men are; the death and damnation,
whereinto many of thy friends and acquaintance have fallen; the eternal pains
of Hell incurred by many, that used to laugh and be merry with them in this
world. All which shall augment the felicity of this thy blessed estate. And now
for thy self, thou may be secure thou art out of all danger for ever and
ever.

There is now no more need of fear, of watchings, of labor, of care; thou
may lay down all armor now, better then the Children of Israel might have
done when they had gotten the Land of promise; for there is no more Enemy to
assault thee, there is no wily Serpent to beguile thee. All is peace, all is
rest, all is joy, all is security. Thy only exercise, must be now to rejoice,
to triumph, to sing Hallelujah to the Lamb, which has brought thee to this
felicity, and will keep thee in the same, world without end.

But now to draw toward an end in this matter, (though there be no end in the
thing it self) let the Christian Reader consider, whereto he is borne, and
whereof he is in possibility if he will. He is born heir apparent to the
Kingdom of heaven, a Kingdom without end, a Kingdom without measure, a
Kingdom of bliss, the Kingdom of God himself: he is borne to be joint heir
with Jesus Christ, the Son of God, to reign with him, to triumph with him,
to sit in judgment with him, to judge the very Angels with him. What more
glory can be thought upon, except it were to become God himself? All the
joys, all the riches, all the glory that heaven contains, shall be powered
out upon him, who will not esteem of this royal Inheritance? Especially,
seeing that now we have so good opportunity, to the obtaining thereof, by the
benefit of our redemption, and grace purchased to us therein.

Tell me now (Gentle Reader) why will thou not accept of this his offer? Why
will thou not account of this his Kingdom? Why will thou not buy this glory of
him, for so little a labor, as he requires? There is not the wickedest man in
the world, but takes more travel and pains in going to Hell, then the most
painful servant of God in obtaining of heaven. Follow thou not their folly
then (dear brother) for thou shall see them suffer greevously for it one day;
when thy heart shall be full gald thou had no part among them. Let them go
now, and bestow their time in vanity, in pleasures, in delights of the world.
Let them build Pall ces, purchase Dignities, and pieces and patches of ground
together; Let them hunt after Honors, and build Castles in the Air, the day
will come (if thou believe Christ himself) wherein thou shall have small cause
to envy their felicity.

To conclude then, this prize is set up for them that will strive for it. For
it is not every one that says to Christ, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but they only which do the will of Christ his Father in
heaven. Though this Kingdom of Christ be set out to all: yet every man shall
not come to reign with Christ; but such only, as shall be content to suffer
with Christ. Thou art therefore to sit down, and consider, according to thy
Saviors council what thou will do, whether thou have so much spiritual
money as is sufficient to build this Tower, or no: That is, whether thou have
so much good will as to bestow the pains of suffering with Christ, (if it be
rather to be called pain then pleasure) that so thou may reign with him in
his Kingdom. This is the question, that is the very whole issue of the matter,
that has been spoken before, either of thy particular end, or of the Majesty,
bounty, and justice of God; and of the account he will demand of thee. Also of
the punishment or reward, laid up for thee. All this is spoken to this end,
that thou would finally resolve what thou should do; and not to pass
over thy t me in careless negligence, as many do: never spying their own
error, until it be too late to amend it. For the love of God, then (dear
brother) and for the love that thou bear to thine own soul, shake off this
dangerous security, which flesh and blood is wont to lull men in; and make some
earnest resolution, for looking for thy soul in the life to come, remember
often that worthy sentence; This life is but a moment of time, whereof all
eternity of life, or death to come depends. If it be a moment, and a moment
of so great importance, how is it past over by worldly men, with so little care
as it is? And if all this thatc has been said (gentle Reader) will not
prevail with thee, little hope is there, that any other will do thee good.
Wherefore here I end, beseeching our Lord God, and Savior Jesus Christ, which
was content to pay his own blood, for the purchasing this noble inheritance
unto us, give us his holy grace, to esteem of it as the great weight of the
matter requires; and not by negligence to lose our portions therein.

Of the choice of Religion.
VAriety in any thing disturbeth the mind, and leaves it waving in a dubious
trouble; and then, how easy is it, to sway the mind to either side? But among
all the diversities that we meet with, none troubles us more, then those that
are of Religion. It Is rare to find two Kingdoms one; as if every Nation had (if
not a God, yet at least) a way to God by it self. This stumbles the unsettled
soul: that not knowing which way to take, without danger of erring, sticks to
none; so dies, ere he do that for which he was made to live, the service of
the true Almighty.

We are borne as men set down in the midst of a Wood: circled round with
several voices calling us. At first we see not, which will lead us the right
way out: So divided in our selves, we sit still, and follow none, remaining
blind in a flat Atheism; which strickes deep at the Foundation, both of our
own, and the whole worlds happiness. It Is true, if we let our dimmed
understanding search in these varieties (which yet is the only means that we
have in our selves, to do it with) we shall certainly lose our selves in our
windings; there being in every of them, some thing to believe, above that
reason which leads us to the search.

Reason gives us the Annatomy of things, and illustrates with a great deal of
plaineness, all the ways that she goes; but her line is too short to reach
the depths of Religion: Religion carries a confutation along with it: and with
a high hand of soveragnity, awes the inquisitive tongue of nature: and when
she would sometimes murmur privately, she will not let her speak; Reason like
a mild Prince, is content to show his subjects the causes of his commands, and
rule; Religion with a higher strain of Majesty, bids do it, without
inquiring further then the bare command, which without doubt, is a means of
procuring mighty reverence. What we know not, we reverently admire; what we do
know, is in some sort subject to the triumphs of the soul, that has discovered
it: and this not knowing, makes us not able to judge. Every one tells us, his
own is the truest, and there is none, I think, but has been sealed with the
blood of some, nor can I see, how we may more then proprobably, prove any; they
being all set in such heights, as they are not subject to the demonstrations of
reason.

And as we may easier say, what a soul is not, then what it is: so we may
more easily disproove a Religion for false, then prove it for one that is
true. There being in the world far more error then truth. Yet is there
besides, another misery, near as great as this, and that is, that we cannot be
our own chousers, but must take it upon trust from others. Are we not often,
before we can discern the true, brought up and grounded in the false, suckng
Heresy with our milk in childhood? Nay, when we come to years of abler
judgment, wherein the mind is grown up complete man; we examine not the
soundness, but retain it merely, because our Fathers taught it us: what a
lamentable weakness is this in man, that he should build his eternal welfare,
on the approbation of, perhaps, a weak and ignorant Parent? Oh, why is our
neglect, the most in that, wherein our care should be greatest? How few are
there which fulfill that precept, of trying all things, and taking the best?
Assuredly though Faith be above Reason, yet is there a reason to be given of
our faith: he is a fool that believes he knows not what, nor why.

Among all the diversities of Religion, that the world holds, I think it may
stand with most safety, to take that, which makes most for Gods glory, and man's
quiet.

I confess, in all the Treatises of Religion that I ever saw,; I find none that
I should so soon follow, as that of the Church of England: I never found so
sound foundation, so sure a direction for Religion, as the Song of the Angels
at the birth of Christ. Glory be to God on high. There is the honor, the
reverent obedience, and the admiration, and the adoration which we ought to
give him. On earth peace. This is the effect of the former, working in the
hearts of men, whereby the world appears in his noblest beuty, being an entire
chain of inter-mutuall amity. And good will toward men. This is Gods mercy,
to reconcile man to himself after his fearful dissertion of his maker.

Search all Religions the world through, and you will find none, that ascribes
so much to God, nor that constitutes so firm a love among men, as does the
established Doctrine of the Protestant Church among us. All other, either
detract, from God, or infringe the peace of men.

The Jews in their Talmod say, before God made this, he made many other
worlds, and mard them again, to keep himself from idleness.

The Turks in their Alcaron, bring him in discoursing with the Angels, and
they telling him, of things which before he knew not: and after they make him
swear by Mahomets pen and lines, and by Figs and Olives.

The Papists portray him as an old man, and by this means dis-deifie him,
derogating also, from his Royalty, by their odious interposing of merits; and
for the society of men, what bloody tenants do they all hold? as he deserves
not the name of Rabby, that hates not his enemy to death. That it is no sin to
reven^e injuries: that it is meritorious to kill an Heritike, with whom no faith
is to be kept, even to the ungluing of the whole worlds frame, contexted only,
by comerse, and contracts.

What abhorred barbarism, did Selinus leave in precept to his Successor
Soliman? which though I am not certain, they were ratified by their Mufties. I
am sure they are practiced by the Inheritors of the Empire. By this taste learn
to detest them all.

Think not thy kindreds murder ill, it is none,
By thy slain brothers, to secure thy Throne.
This is the way, how kingly names may be,
In fast, and from distructive terrors free.
In other Religions of the Heathen, what fond opinions have they held of their
gods? reviling with unseemly threats; when their affairs have thwarted them:
as if allowing them the name, they would conserve the Numen to themselves: In
their sacrifices, how bucherly cruel? as if (as it is said of them) they thought
by inhumanity to appease the wrath of an offended Deity. The Religion which we
now profess does establish all in another strain; what makes more for Gods
glory? what more for the mutual love of man, then the Gospel? all our
abilities of good we offer to God, as the Fountain from whence they stream.
Can the day be light, and that light not come from the Sun? can a Clock go
without a weight to move it? or a keeper to set it? as for man, it teaches him
to tread on Cotton, milds his wilder temper, and learnes him in his patience,
to affect his enemies, and for that which does partake on both: it makes just
God, a friend to unjust man; without being unjust, either to himself or man.

Sure it could be no other then the invention of a Deity, to find out a way,
how man that had justly made himself unhappy, should with a full satisfaction
to exactest justice, be made again most happy. I would wish no man, that is
able to try, to take his Religion upon others words: but once resolved in it,
it is dangerous to neglect, where we know we do owe a service. For

God neglected plentiously,
Plagued mournful Ittaly.
And this before Horrace his time, when God is neglected of man, man shall be
condemned of God; when man abridgeth God of his honor, God will shorten man of
his happiness.

It cannot but be best to give all to him, of whom, whatsoever we have, we have
received and we hold: I believe it saftest, for to take that Religion, which
most magnifies God, and makes most for the peaceable conversation of men. For
as we cannot asscribe too much to him, to whom we owe more, then we can
asscribe; So I think, the most splended estate of man, is that, which comes
nearest to his first Creation; wherein all things wrought together, in the
pleasant imbracements of mutual love and Concord.

That Divinity does not cross nature so much as exceed it.
THey that are Divines without Philosophy, can hardly maintain the truth in
their disputations: it is possible they may have an infused faith, sufficient
for themselves: but if they have not reason too, they will scarcely make others
capable of their instruction: certainly, Divinity, and morallity are not so
averse, but that they well may live together. For, if nature be rectified by
Religion, Religion is strengthened again by nature: And as some hold of fate,
that there is nothing happens below, but is writ above in the Stars, only we
have not skill to find it: So I believe there is nothing in Religion that is
contrary to reason, if we knew it rightly. For conversation among men, and the
true happiness of man, Philosophy has agreed with Scripture.

Nay, I think I may also add, for defining of God, except the Trinity, as
near as man can conceive him: how exact has he made Justice? how busy to
find out truth? how rightly directed love? exalting with much earnestness, all
those graces, that are any way amiable: He that seeks in Plato, shall find
him, making God the solum summum bonum. To which a pure, and virtuous life is
the way. For defining God, my opinion is, that man, neither by divinity, nor
Philosophy can, as they say, tell what he is. It is fitter for man to adore,
and admire him, then in vain to study to comprehend him. God is for man to
stand amazed, and wonder at.

The clogged and drossie soul, can never sound him, who is the unimaginable
Fountain of spirits, and from whom all things by a gradnate derivation, have
their light, life, and being. In these things they agree. But I find three
other things wherein Divinity overtoureth nature: In the Creation of the world,
in the redemption of man, and in the way and rites, wherein God will be
worshipped: In the Creation of the world, no Philosophy, could ever reach at
that, which Moses taught us. Here the Humanists were all at a stand, and far,
all their conjectures, being rather witty, and conceits, then true and real.
Some would have all things from fire, some from Air, some from water, some
from earth, some from numbers, some from attomies, from simples some, and some
from compounds. Aristottle came the nearest in finding out the truest materia
prima; but because he could not believe this made of nothing, he is content to
err, and think it was eternal. Surely, his conceit was as far from reason as
the other, his reason might have fled unto omnipotency, as well as to eternity:
And so indeed when Philosophy has gone as far as she is able, she ariveth at
Almightinesse, and in that Abbi is lost, where not knowing the way, she goes
but by guess, and cannot tell when she is, or right, or wrong; yet is she
rather subordinate, then contrary. Nature is not cross, but runs into
omnipotency, and like a petty River, is swallowed in that bondles Main. For the
redemption of man: Even the Scripture calls it a mystery, and all that
humanity could ever reach of this, was only a flying to the general name of
mercy, by the urgins of the Conscience; They all knew they had failed and
fallen, their own bosoms would tell them thus: but the way how they might be
restored, never fell into their heathen thoughts.

This was a work that God declared only to his own peculier: by the immediate
revelation of his Word, and Will.

For the manner, how God would be worshipped, no Naturalist could ever find it
out, till he himself gave directions from his sacred Scripture. In the first
Chapter to the Romans, St. Paul grants, That they may know God, through the
visibilities of his works: but for their ignorance in this, he says: The wrath
of God is revealed against them, because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but turned the glory of the incomparable God to the
similitude of the Image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of foure-footed
beasts, and of creeping things. And these three things the Scripture teaches
us, which else we could never have learned, from all the Books in the world.
Thus we see for Morality, nature still is something peart and vigorous. But in
the things of God, it is confirmed that she is thick sighted, and cannot see
them. Can a Fly comprehend man upon the top of a Monarchy? no more can man
comprehend God in the height of Omn^potencie. There are as well mysteries for
Faith, as causes for reasons: This may guide me, when I have to deal with man:
but in divine affairs, reason shall wait on Faith, and submit to her
prerogative. The Conscience is great, but God is far greater then it.

Of man's Imperfection..
OF my self what can I do without the hazard of erring? nay, what can I
think? nay, what can I not do, or not think? even my best business, and my
best vacancy, are works of offense, and error; uncomfortable constitution of
man: that can not but be bad, both in action and forbearance; corruption
mixeth with our purest devotions: and not to perform them, is neglect: When we
think not of God at all, we are impious and ungrateful: when we do, we are
not able to think aright. Imperfection swaies in all the weak dispatches of
the Palsied soul. If the Devil be absent, our own fraileties are his tempting
Deputies. If those forbear, the meritorious world claps our cheeks, and fonds
us to a cozening fail. So which way soever we turn, we are sure to be bitten
with the one, or the other head of this Cerberus. To what can we intend our
selves, wherein there is not a Devil to entrap us? If we pray, how he casts in
wandering thoughts, or by our eyes, steal away our hearts, to some other object
then God. If we hear he has the same policy, and prejudicates our opinion
with the man, or part of his doctrine. If we read, he persuades to let reason
judge, as well as Faith: So measuring by a false rule, he would make us
believe, Divinity is much short of what it shows for. If we do good works, he
does poison them with Pharaisisme, and make us by overvaluing lose them. If we
do ill, he encourages us to a continuance: and at last accuses us. If nothing,
we neglect the good we should do. If we sleep, he comes in dreams, and
wantonneth the ill inclining soul: If we wake, we mispend our time; or at
best, do good, not well. So by bad circumstances, poison a well intended
principal.

Even actions of necessity, we dispatch not without a stain: We drink to
excess, and the drowning of the brain. We eat, not to satisfy nature, but to
overcharge her: and to venerate the unbridled spirits.

As a Mill wheel is continually turned round, and ever drenched with a new
stream: so are we always hurried with successions of various sins. Like
Arrows shot in mighty winds, we wander from the Bow that sent us. Sometimes
we think we do things well: but when they are past, we are sensible of the
transgression. We progress in the ways of vice, and are constant in nothing,
but perpetual offending. You may see the thoughts of the whipping Satyrist how
divine they are.

Nature is motive in the quest of ill,
Stated in mischief: all our ablest skill
Cannot know right from wrong: till wrong be done:
Fixed nature will to condemned customs run
Unchangeably: who to his sins can set
A certain end? when has he ever met
Blushes once from his hardened forehead thrown?
Who is it sins, and is content with one?
Surely there will not a man be found that is able to answer to these quaeries;
Their souls have ceeled eyes, that can see nothing but perfection in their own
labors. It is not to any man given absolutely, to be absolute.

I will not be too forward in censuring the works of others; nor will I ever
do any, that I will not submit to judgment, and correction: yet so, as I will
be able, to give a reason, why I have ordered them as the world sees.

Of truth and bitterness in jests.
IT is not good for a man to be too tart in his jests, bitterness is for
serious potions: not for healths of meeriment, and the jollities of a mirthfull
feast. An offensive man is the Devils bellows, wherewith he blows up
contentions and jarres.

But among all passages of this nature, I find none more galling than an
offencive truth; for thereby we run into two great errors.

One is, we child that in a loose laughter, which should be grave, and savor
both of love and pity. So we rub him with a poisoned oil, which spreads the
more for being put in such a fleeting suppleness.

The other is, we desend to particulars, and by that means, draw the whole
Company to witness his disgrace we break it on.

The Soldier is not noble, that makes himself sport, with the wounds of his
own Companion. Whosoever will jest, should be like him that flourishes at a
show: He may turn his weapon any way, but not any more, at one then at another.

In this case things like truth, are better then truth it self, nor is it less
ill, then unsafe, to fling about this wormwood of the brain: Some noses are
too tender to endure the strength of the smell. And though there be many like
tiled houses, that can admit a falling spark, unwarm'd; yet some again, are
covered with such light dry straw, that with the east touch they will kindle,
and flame about your troubled ears: and when the house is on fire, it is no
disputing, with how small a matter it came: it will quickly proceed to
mischief. Anger is but a step from rage, and that is wildfire, which will not
be extinguished. I know, wise men are not too nimble at an injury: For, as with
fire, the light stuff, and rubbish, kindles sooner, then the solid, and more
compacted; so anger sooner inflames a fool, then a man composed in his
resolutions. But we are not sure always to meet discreet ones: nor can we
hope it, while we our selves are otherwise, in giving the occasion.

Fools are the greater number: wise men are like Timber trees in a wood, here
and there one: and though they be most acceptable, to men, wise, like
themselves, yet have they never more need of wisdom, then when they converse
with the ringing elboes: who, like corrupt Air, require many Antidotes, to
keep us from being infected: But when they grow bitter to a wise man, we are
then worse; for he sees further into the disgrace, and is able to harm us more.

Laughter should dimple the cheek, not furrow the brow into rudgedness: The
birth is then prodigious, when mischief is the child of mirth. All should have
liberty to laugh at a jest, but if it throws a disgrace upon one, like a crack
of a string it makes a stop in the Music. Flouts we may see proceed from an
inward contempt, and there is nothing cuts deeper in a generous mind then
scorn. Nature at first makes us all equal, we are differenced but by
accident, and outward; and I think it is a jealousy that she has infused in
man for the maintaining of her own honor against external causes, and though
all have not wit to reject the Arrow, yet most have memory to retain the
offense; which they will be content to own a while, that they may repay it
both with more advantage and ease. It Is but an unhappy wit that stirs up
enemies against the owner, a man may spit out his friend from his tongue, or
laugh him into an enemy. Gall in mirth is an ill mixture, and sometimes truth
is bitterness: I would wish any man to be pleasingly merry, but let him beware
he bring not truth on the stage like a want on with an edged weapon.

Of the uncertainty of life.
MIserable brevity, more miserable uncertainty of life; we are sure we cannot
live long, and uncertain that we shall live at all, and even while I am
writing this, I am not sure my Pen shall end the sentence; our life is so
short, that we cannot in it contemplate what our selves are, and so uncertain
as we cannot say, We will resolve to do it. Silence was a full answer in that
Philosopher, that being asked, What he thought of humane life, said, Nothing,
turned him round and vanished: like leaves on Trees, we are the sport of every
puff that blows, and with the least gust we may be shaken from our life and
nutriment: We travel, we study, we think to desect the world with continual
searches, when while we are contriving but the nearest way to it, Age, and
consumed years overtake us, and only labor pays us the losses of our ill
expended time: Death whiskes about the unthoughtfull world, and with a Pegasian
speed f^yes upon unwearied man with the kick of his heel, or the dash of his
foot, springing fountain of tears of friends. If Nature had not made man an
active Creature, that he should be delighted in employment, nothing would
convince him of more folly then the durance of some enterprises that he takes
in hand, for they are many times of such a future length as we cannot in reason
hope to live till their conclusion comes. We build as though we laid
foundations for eternity, and the expeditions we take in hand, are many times
the length of three or four lives. How many Warriers have expired in their
expugnations, leaving their breath in the places where they laid their Seige?
Certainly, he that thinks on life's casualties, can neither be careless nor
covetous: I confess, we may live to the Spectacle and bearing-staffe, to the
stooping Back, to the Snow, or the slacknesse of the declining Crown, but how
few are there that can unfold you a Diarie of so many leaves? More do dye in
the spring and summer of their years, then live ^il autumn or their growned
wint^^ Wh^^ (...) exhaust his very vitality for the hoarding up of fatal Gold,
and shall then think how a hair, or fly, may snatch him in a moment from it,
how it quells his laborious hope, and puts his posting ^inde into a more safe
and quiet pace: unless we were sure to enjoy it, why should any man strain
himself for more then is convenient? I will never care too much for that I am
not sure to keep, yet I know, should all men respect but their own time, an
age or two would find the world in ruin. So that for such actions men may
plead their charity, that though they live not to enjoy those things
themselves, they shall yet be beneficial to posterity: And I rather think
this an instinct that God has put in man for the conservation of things, then
an intended good of the Author to his followers. Thus, as in propagation we are
more beholden to the pleasure of our Parents, then their desire of having us:
So in matters of the world and fortune, the aims of our Predecessors for
themselves have by the secret work of providence cast benefits upon us; I will
not altogether blame him that I see begins things lasting, though they be
vanities to him; because he knows not who shall enjoy them, yet they will be
things well fitted for some that shall succeed them: They that do me good and
know not of it, are causes of my benefit, though I do not owe them my thanks;
and I will rather bless them as instruments, then condemn them as not
intenders.

Of Reward and Service.
WHen it lights upon a worthy nature, there is nothing procures a more
faithful service then the Masters liberality, nor is there any thing makes
that appear more then a true fidelity; they are each of other alternate
Parents, begetting, and begotten; Certainly, if these were practiced, great men
need not so often change their followers, nor would the Patrons be abandoned by
their o^d Attendants; rewards are not given, but paid to servants that be
good, and wise, nor ought that blood to be accounted lost, which is out-letted
for a noble Master; worth will never fail to give desert her bays. A liberal
Master that loves his Servant well, is in some sort a god unto him, which may
both give him blessings and protect him from danger. And believe it on the
other side, a diligent and discreet servant is one of the best friends that a
man can be blessed withal; he can do whatsoever a friend may, and will be
commanded with lesser hazard of loosing; nay, he may in a kind challenge a
glory above his Master, for though it be harder to play a Kings part well, then
it is to act a Subjects, yet Natures inclination is much more bent to rule then
obey, service being a condition which is not found in any Creatures of one
kind but man: Now if the question be when men meet in these relations, Who
shall the first begin, the lot will surely fall upon the servant, for he is
tied in duty to be diligent, and that ever binds without exception. The Lord
is tied but by his Honor, which is voluntary, and not compulsive, liberality
being a free adjection, and not a tie in his bargain. It Is good sometimes for
a Lord to use a servant like a friend, like a companion, but it is always fit
for a servant to pay him the reverence due to a Master: pride becomes neither
the Commander, nor the commanded. Every Family is but a severalll plumbe of
Feathers, the meanest is of the self same stuff, only he that made the plumbe
was pleased to set the Lord highest: the power of commanding is rather
political then from equal natute.

The service of man to man followed not the Creation, but the fall of man; and
till Noah cursed his son, the name of servant is not read in Scripture; since
there is no absolute freedom to be found below: Even Kings are but more
splended Servants for the common Body. There is a mutuality between the Lord
and Vassels. The Lord serves them of necessaries, and they him in pleasures,
and conveniences; virtue is the truest liberty, nor is he free that stoops to
passions, nor he in bondage that serves a noble Master. When Demonax saw one
cruel in the beating of a servant; Eye (says he) forbear, least by the world
your self be taken for the servant. And if we have any faith in Claudian we
may believe: That,

He knows no bondage whom a good King swayes,
For freedom never shines with clearer rays,
Than when brave Princes reign.
Imperiousness turns that servant into a slave, which moderation makes as an
humble speaking friend. Seneca begins an Epistle with rejoicing, that his
friend lived familiar with his servant. Neither can have comfort where both are
uncommunicable; I do confess the like countenance is not to be showed to all;
That which makes a wise man modest, makes a fool unmannerly: It Is the saucy
servant that causes the Lord to shrink his descending favors, of the two,
pride is the more tolerable in a Master; The other is preposterousnesse, which
Solomon saw the earth did groan for. Hadrian sent his inferior servant a box
on the ear for walking but between two Senators. As I would not serve to be
admitted to nothing but to high commands, so I think, whosoever is rudely
malepert blemishes the discretion of himself, and his Lord. As there ought to
be equality, because Nature has made it; so there ought to be a difference,
because Fortune has set it; yet cannot the distance of their fortunes be so
much as their nearenesse in being men: no fate can fright away that likeness.

Let not the Lord abuse his servant, for it is possible he may fall below him:
Let not the servant neglect his Master, for he may be cast to a meaner
condition: Let the servant deserve, and the Master recompense; and if they
would both be noble, the best way is for those that be subject to forget their
services, and for those that are Commanders to remember them* So, each loving
other for their generous worthiness, the world shall strew praises in both
their paths. If the servant suppose his lot be hard, let him think that service
is nothing but the Free-mans calling, wherein while he is, he is bound to
discharge himself well.

That all things have a a like Progression.
THere is the same method through all the world in general, all things come to
their height by degrees: there they stay the least of time, then they decline
as they rose, only mischief being more important, ruins at once what Nature
has been long a rearing. Thus the Poet sung the fall:

All that man holds hangs but by slender twine,
By sudden chance the strongest things decline.
Man may be killed in an instant, he cannot be made to live but by space of time
in Conception: we are curdled to the fashion of a life by time and set
successions, when all again is lost, and in a moment of a minute gone. Plants,
Fishes, Beasts, Birds, Men, all grow up by leasurely progressions: so Families,
Provincies, States, Kingdoms, and Empires, have the same way of rise by steps:
about the height they must stay a while, because there is a nearness to the
middle on both sides, as they rise, and as they fall; otherwise their
continuance in that top is but the very point of time, the present now, which
now again is gone; then they at best descend, but for the most part tumble.
And that is true in the smallest particulars, is by taking a large view, the
same in the distended bark. There were first Men, then Families, then Tribes,
then Commonwealths, then Kingdoms, Monarchies, Empires, which we find have
been the height of all worldly dignities: So we find they have slid again to
decay. There was the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, the Roman; and surely
the height of the worlds glory was in the days of the Roman Empire, and the
height of that Empire in the days of Augustus; peace then gently breathed
through the Universal. Learning was then in her fullest flourish, no age either
before or since could present us with so many tow^ing ingenuities; and then,
when the whole world was most like unto ^od, in the sway of one Monarchy, when
they saluted him by the title of Augustus; and they then like God began to
rule, to be called Imperators. This I take it was the fullness of time, wherein
God the Savior of the world, vouchsafed by taking humane nature upon him, to
descend into the world; And surely the consideration of such things as these
are not unworthy our thoughts, though our faith be not bred, yet is it much
confirmed by observing such like circumstances. But then may we think how
small a time this Empire continued in this flourish, even the next Emperor
Tiberius began to degenerate, Caligula more, Nero yet more then he, till it
grew to be imbroyled, and dismembered to an absolute division; since, how has
the Turk seized on the East, and the other on the West? How much is it
sub-divided by the deduction of France, Britain, and Spain? Some have also
observed the sight of these Empires, how the first was nearest to the East, the
next a degree further of, and so on in distant removalls, following the course
of the Sun: As beginning in the morning of the world, they would make a
larger day by declining toward the West, where the Sun goes down after his
rising in the East. This may stand to the Southern and Western inhabitants of
the world, but I know not how to the Northern; for else how can that be said
to rise any where which rests no where, but is perpetual in the speed of a
Circular motion. For the time, it was when the world was within a very little
aged four thousand years, which I do believe was much about the middle age
of the world: though seeing there are promises that the latter days shall be
shortened, we cannot expect the like extent of time after it, which we find did
go before it: Nor can we think but that decay which hastens to the ruin of
all lesser things will likewise be more speedy in this. If all things in the
world decline faster by far then they do ascend, why should we not believe
the world to do so too? I know not what certain grounds they have that dares
assume to foretell the particular time of the worlds conslagration, but surely
in reason, and nature the end cannot be mightily distant: we have seen the
infancy, the youth, the virillity, all past, nay, we have seen it well stepped
into years, and desolution, the most infallable premonitors of a declination.
Some could believe it with less then this twenty nine years: Because, as the
Flood destroyed the former world one thousand six hundred and fifty years
after the first destroying Adam: so the latter world shall be consumed with
Fire, one thousand six hundred fifty six years after the second saving Adam,
which is Christ: But I dare not fix a certainty where God has left the world
in ignorance. The exact knowledge of all things is in God only, but surely by
Collections from Nature and Reason, man may help himself in likelihood, and
probabilities. Why has man an arguing and premeditating soul, if not to
think on the course and causes of things, thereby to magnify his Creator in
them? I will often muse on such like theames: for, besides the pleasure I shall
meet in knowing further, I shall find my soul by admiration of these wonders
to love both reason and the Deity better. As our admi^ing of things evil,
guides us to a secret hate; so whatsoever we do applaud for goodness, cannot
but cause some raise in our affection.

Of Idleness.
THe idle man is the barranest piece of Earth in the Orb, there is no Creature
that has life but is busied in some action for the benefit of the restless
world, even the most venomous and ravinous things that are, have their
commodities as well as their annoyances, and they are ever engaged in some
action, which both profits the world, and continues them in their natures
courses; even the Vegitables wherein calm nature dwells, have their turns and
times in fructifying; They leaf, they flower, they seed, nay Creatures quite
inanimate are, (some) the most laborious in their motion.

With what a cheerful face the golden Sun chariates through the rounding Sky?
How perpetual is the maiden Moon in her just and horned mutations? The Fire,
how restless in his quick and catching flames? In the Air, what
trans-actions? And how fluctious are the salted waves? Nor is the teeming Earth
weary after so many thousand years predictions; all which may tutor the
Couch-stretched man, and raise the modest red in showing through his unwasht
face, that Idleness is the most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane
mind. That ignorance is the most miserable which knows not what to do; the
idle man is like the dumb Jack in a Virginal, while all the other dance out a
wining Music; this like a member out of joint, sullens the whole body with an
ill disturbing laziness.

I do not wonder to see some of our Gentry grown (well near) the lewdest men
of our Land, since they are many of them so mufled in an nonimployment. It Is
action that keeps the Soul both sweet and sound, while lying still does rot it
to an ord^^'d noysomnesse.

Augustine imputes Esaus loss of the Blessing partly to his slothfulness,
that had rather receive meat then seek it. Surely exercise is the fatting food
of the Soul, without which she grows lanke, and thinly parted. That the
followers of great men are so much debauched, I believe to be want of
employment, for the Soul impatient of an absolute recesse for want of wholesome
food of business, preyes upon the lewder actions; it is true, men learn to do
ill by doing what is next it, nothing: I believe Solomon meant the field of the
sluggard, as well for the emblem of his mind, as the certain index of his
outward state; as the one is over-growne with thorns and briars, so is the
other with vices and innormities.

When one would brag the blessings of the Roman State, that since Carthage
was razed, and Greece subjected, they might now be happy, as having nothing to
fear. Says the best Scipio, we now are most in danger, for while we want
business, and have no foe to awe us, we are ready to drown in the mud of vice
and slothfulness. How bright does the Soul grow with use of negotiation? With
what proportioned sweetness does that Family flourish, where but one laborious
guide steereth an ordered course.

When Cleanthes had labored and got some Coin, he shows it to his
companious, and tells them, that he now, if he will, can nourish another
Cleanthes. Believe it, industry is never wholly unfruitful, if it bring not
joy with the in-comming profit, it will yet banish mischief from thy busied
gates. There is a kind of good Angel waiting upon diligence, that ever
carries a Laurel in her hand to crown her.

Fortune they said of old should not be prayed unto, but with hands in motion.
The bosomed fist beckons the approach of Poverty, and leaves besides, the noble
head ungarded; but the lifted arm does frighten want, and is ever a shield to
that noble director. How unworthy was that man of the world that never did
ought, but only lived, and died? Though Epaminondus was severe, he was yet
exemplary; when he found a Soldier sleeping in his Watch, and ran him through
with his Sword, as if he would bring the two brothers, Death and Sleep to a
meeting; and when he was blamed for that as cruelty, he said, He did but leave
him as he found him, dead. It is none of the meanest happiness to have a mind
that loves a virtuous exercise, it is duly rising to blessedness and
contentation.

They are idle Divines that are not heavened in their lives above the
unstudious man, every one shall smell of that he is busied in; As those that
stir amongst perfumes and spices, shall when they are gone, have still a
grateful odor with them: So they that turn the leaves of the worthy Writer,
cannot but retain a smack of their long-lived Author. They converse with
virtues soul, which he that writ did spread upon his lasting paper, every good
line adds sinews to the virtuous mind; and withal, hells that vice which
would be springing in it.

That I my self have liberty to do any thing, I account it from the favoring
Heavens, that I have a mind sometimes inclining to use that liberty well; I
think I may without ostentation be thankful for it, as a bounty of the Deity:
Sure I should be miserable if I did not love this business in this my vacancy.
I am glad of that leisure that gives me leisure to employ my self; if I should
not grow better for it, yet this benefit I am sure would accrue me, I should
both keep my self from worse, and not have time to entertain the Devil in.

Of the trial of Faith and Friendship.
FAith and Friendship are seldom tried but in extremes: To find friends when
we have no need of them, and to want them when we have, are both alike and
common. In prosperity who will not profess to love a man? In adversity, how
few will show it, that they do it indeed? When we are happy in the springtide
of abundance, and the rising flood of plenty, then the world will be our
servant, then all men will flock about us with bared heads, with bended bodies,
and protesting tongues: but when these pleasing waters fall to ebbing, when
wealth but shifteth to another stand, then men look upon us at a distance, and
stiffen themselves as if they were in Armor, least (if they should comply us)
they should get a wound in the close. Adversity is like Penelopes night, which
undoes all that the day did weave; it is a misery, that the knowledge of such a
blessedness as a friend is, can hardly be without some sad misfortune; for we
can never thoroughly try him but in the kick of malignant chance; and till we
have tried him, our knowledge can be called but by the name of hope. What a
pitiful plight is poor distempered man in, when he can neither be happy
without a friend, nor yet know him to be a true friend without his being
unhappy? Our fortunes, and our selves, are things so closely linked, that we
know not which is the cause of the love that we find, when these two shall
part, we may then discover to which of them affection will make winge; when
they are covied together we know not which is in pursuit; when they rise and
break, we shall then see which is aimed at. I confess, he is happy that
finds a true friend in extremity, but he is happier that finds not extremity
wherein to try his friend: Thus the trial of friendship is, by finding what
others will do for us. But the trial of faith is, by finding what we will do
for God; to trust him for estate, when we have the evidence in our Iron Chest,
is easy, and not thanks worthy; but to depend upon him for what we cannot
see, as it is more hard for man to do, so it is more acceptable to God if it be
done; for in that act we make confession of his Deity. We know not in the
flows of our contentedness what we our selves are, or how we could neglect
our selves, to follow God commanding us.

All men will be Peter's in their braging tongues, and most men will be Peter's
in their base denials, but few men will be Peter's in their quick repentance.
When we are well, we swear we will not leave him in our greatest sickness;
but when our sickness comes, we forget our vows, and stay! when we meet with
blows that will force us, either to let go our hold of God, or our selves,
then we see to which our souls will cleave the fastest. And of this trial
excellent is the use we may make, if we find our faith upon the test firm, it
will be unto us a perpetual banquet. If we find it dastardly starting aside,
knowing the weakness, we may strive to senew it with a stronger nerve, so that
it ever is either the assurance of our happiness, or the way whereby we may
find it; without this confidence in a power that is able always to aid us,
we wander both in trouble and doubt. Infidelity is the cause of all our woes,
the ground of all our sins; not trusting God, we discontent our selves with
fears, and solicitations; and to cure these we run into prohibited paths.
Unworthy earthen worm, that can think God of so unable a nature, as he will
suffer such to want, as with a dutiful endeavor do depend upon him

It is not usual with man to be so base, and can thou believe that that most
Heroical, and Omnipotent infiniteness of his, will abridge a follower of such
poor toys, as the accoutrements of this life are? Can a Deity be inhumane, or
can he that graspes the unemptied provisions of the world in his hands, be a
niggard to his Sons, unless he sees it for their good and benefit? Nay,
could thou that read this (whosoever thou art) if thou had but a
Sereptine Widows Cruce of Gold, could thou let a diligent and affectionate
servant that ever waited on thee want necessaries? Could thou endure to see
him shamed, in disgraceful rags? nipt to the benumming with the Icie Thumes
of Winter, complaining for want of sustinance, or neglected in time of
sickness? I appeal to thy inward and more noble acknowledgement; I know thou
could not. O perverse thought of perverted man, and will thou yet imagine
thou can want such things as those from so unbounden a bounty as he is? Serve
him, and but believe, and upon my soul he will never fail thee for what is
most convenient. O my God, my Refuge, my Altar, and my souls Anchor, I beg
that I may but serve thee, and depend upon thee; I need not beg supply. To
the other two thou give without asking, thou know for my self my souls
wishes are not for a vast abundance: If ever I should wish a plenty, it should
be for my friends, not me: I care not to abound in abounding, and I am
persuaded I shall never want, nor necessaries, nor conveniences: Let me find
a heart dutiful, and my faith upon the trial steadfast, and I am sure these
will be ground enough for sufficient happiness while I live here.

Of Censure.
It Is the easiest part to censure, or to contradict a truth, for truth is but
one, and seeming truths are many, and few works are performed without errors:
No man can write six lines but there may be something one may carpe at, if he
be disposed to cavil* Opinions are as various as false, judgment is from
every tongue a several. Men think by censuring to be accounted wise, but in
my conceit there is nothing lays forth more of the fool; for this you may
ever observe they that know least censure most And this I believe to be a
reason, why men of precise lives are often rash in this extravagancy; their
retiredness keeps them ignorant in the course of business, if they weighed
the imperfections of humanity, they would breath less condemnation. Ignorance
gives disparagement a louder tongue than knowledge does; wise men had rather
know then tell, frequent dispraises are at the best but the faults of
uncharitable wit; any Clown may see the furrow is but crooked, but where is the
man that can plough me a straight one? The best works are but a kind of
Messalany, the cleanest Corn will not be without some soil, no, not after
often winnowing: there is a tincture of corruption that dies even all
mortality. I would wish men in works of others to examine two things before
they judge, whether it be more good than ill, and whether they themselves could
at first have performed it better: If it be most good, we do amiss for some
errors to condemn the whole; who will cast away the whole body of the Beast
because it inheld the Guts and Ordure? As man is not judged good or bad for one
action, or the fewest number, but as he is most in general: So, in works we
should weigh the generality, and according to that, censure. If it be rather
good than ill, I think he deserves some praise, for raising Nature above her
ordinary flight: Nothing in this world can be framed so entirely perfect, but
that it shall have in it some delinquencies, to argue more were in the
compriser; if it were not so it were not from Nature, but the immediate Deity.
The next, if we had never seen that frame, whether or no we think we could
have mended it. To espy the inconveniences of a house built is easy, but to
lay the plot at first well, is matter of more repute, and speaks the praise of
a good contriver. The crooked lines help better to show the straight; Judgment
is more certain by the eye then in the fancy, surer in things done then in
those that are but in cogitation. If we find our selves able to correct a
Copy, and not to produce an Original, yet dare to deprave, we show more
Criticisme than ability: Seeing we should ^ather magnify him that has gone
beyond us, then condemn his worth f^^ a few fails.

Self exam^nation will make our judgment charitable, it is from where there is
no judgment that the heaviest judgment comes. If we must needs ^ensure, it is
good to do it as Suitonius writes of the twelve Caesar's, tell both their
virtues and their vices unpartially, and leave the upshot to collection of the
private mind: So shall we learn by hearing of the faults ^o avoid them, and
by knowing the ^ertues practice the like: Otherwise, we should rather praise a
man for (...) little good, then brand him for (...) more of ill; we are full of
faults by nature, we are good, not without our care and industry.

Let us never forget, but consider with good attention for what intent and
purpose God created us, and thi^ world for our sakes; and in placing us therein
as Lords of the same: for nothing made it self, so nothing was made for it
self, nor to serve it self: The Heavens we see do serve the Air, the Air
serves the Earth, the Earth serves the Beasts, the Beasts serves man: And
then is the question, Who man was made to serve? for seeing he was not made by
himself, it is not likely he was made to serve himself, but his Creator, who
created him and all things else for his use.

True faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things that
are not seen.

Prayer is an humble request made unto God in Christ, with the lively and
feeling affection of the heart, faithfully believing to receive what we
religiously desire.

Let a man never think to come to the Kingdom of glory except he enter in at
the gates of grace.

Where truth is not invested, grace is not in the heart.

A gracious man is lovely to himself, and sin makes him loathsome to his
soul, and afraid of his condition.

Let us use our Profession as it should be, not to have an upper Garment to
cover a naughty heart, but to labor more and more to put off the old Man, and
not to make Religion a cloak and veil of Hypocrisy, for besides all the
sins we have to make Religion serve our turns, it makes our sins the
greater.

When a man's Religion shall be a cover to his sinful courses, that in^reases
his sin, and makes his sins abominable.

A good Conscience is a Casket to keep Divine truths in, and when we have
gotten soule-saving truths, let us keep them by a good Conscience.

When we do any thing let us reason thus: Is this becoming my Religion? And
say thus to our selves; I should walk worthy of Christ, and as it becomes
the Gospel; for what is the ornament of a Christian but the graces he has:
All the beauty we have is, to be religious.

Many there be that can talk well, and discourse well, but for inward graces
they never look, nor regard: and it is this that upholds many Christians: they
see Religion is respected of those of whom they desire to be had in some
esteem, but God sees their Hypocrisy, and they shall have their reward.

What seasons War, but the hope of Peace? The troubles and Tempests at Sea,
but the hope of the Haven? The labor and cost in sowing, but the expectation
of Harvest? Shall not we much more endure a little labor here, for endless
happiness assured to us hereafter? this is much forgot.

But here is the pity, men labor, sweat, taking pains, and travel here,
spare no cost, and all this to go to Hell: to heap up wrath against the day
of wrath. The Devil has more servants in his barren and fruitless service,
then God gets with all promises, and good things that he so liberally bestows
upon them.

Observe the good motions of Gods Spirit in thee, further them to the most
advantage in thee, turn them to present practice, lose, nor delay them not,
for else the Devil will steal them away from thee.

If we do any good, the deed is Gods; if we will it, the will is Gods, and
then we please God, when we will that which God wills, and not when we do that
which God wills not.

We ought to be as thankful to God, for any sin he keeps us from, as for
any good he causes us to perform, for there is not any sin, that another has
committed, but if God had pleased, I might have committed it.

Light is a heavenly quallity. So is the Word of God, holy, pure, transforming
godly men to its own likeness; to be heavenly his bread is from heaven, his
affections, desires, thoughts, endeavors, are heavenly, his way is upward, he
is heavenly minded, while he is on earth, he is in heaven.

Light makes a thing full of Evidence, all the world cannot persuade a man
contrary to that he sees; so does the Word of God discover to us, our estates
in grace, and so severely as all the world cannot shake the foundation of our
Faith.

Therefore, if we desire to be lights, let us communicate, with the chiefest
light: As the Sarres are ever in the presence of the Sun, and from his light
they receive theirs. Be sure thou placest thy self in Gods eye continually;
secondly, use the means, use the glass of Gods Word, thou shall not only see
thy estate therein, but by it thou shall be transformed, into Gods Image; other
glasses have no such power; like this mirror of the Gospel: it makes us like
God, because it has the Spirit of God ever to accompany with it: whence it is
called the Word of light.

True patience is a fruit and effect of repentance, and humiliation for sin.

True patience is likewise the fruit of Faith.

True patience is a fruit of our obedience unto God, and of a heart subdued,
and made able to yield unto God in all things; Yea, it is indeed, a chief part
of our obedience unto him.

Patience perforce, as we call it, without all reference to the will of God,
and in respect of our obedience unto him, deserves not the name of true
patience.

True patience will make a man so to depend, upon the will God, in all his
afflictions, as he dares not ease himself of his cross by any unlawful
means, by any other way then such as the Lord h^th app^inted, or permitted him
to u^e.

True patience, whereby we obediently submit our selves to the will of God in
our affections, will moderate our passions, and make us more meek spirited,
even toward men; yea toward such men, as have had any hand, or bin any
instrument in our afflictions.

God finished the world in six days, and Christ finished his prayer he taught
us, in six Petitions; that so the works which God formed for man, and the words
which Christ framed for man may have a correspondency.

When we say, Hallowed be thy name, we mean not to make it holy; for it is
holiness it self: nor to make it more holy, for it is infinite it self: nor
to keep it holy, for it is eternity it self; but to join with the Heavens, in
declaring his glory, and with the Firmament in showing his handy-worke; as then
only hallowing his Name, when we name him only holy; and therein consisting
our work of Sanctifying him, when in him we acknowledge our works to be
sanctified.

And indeed, if we mark this Petition well, we shall find a peculiar Majesty,
an extraordinary pre-eminence in it above all the other: for it is not only
the Primum mobile from which all the other have their motions; but it is the
Center also, to which all the other bend their motions: For, when we say, Thy
kingdom come, it is but to come, that we may hallow Gods name; and when we
say, Thy will be done, it is but this, that we hallow Gods Name: and when we
pray for daily bread, it is but to strengthen us, that we may hallow Gods Name*
And when we say, Forgive us our trespasses, it is but to cleanse us, that we
may hallow Gods Name: And when we say, Lead us not into temptation, it is but
to remore impediments, that we may hallow Gods Name. O Lord our God, how
excellent is thy name in all the world.

Wherefore, O my Soul, do thou by this Name of God, as David (in the 1 19
Psalm) does by the Law of God, whereof he seems jealous, and so loath to leave
it, that the word is no sooner out of his mouth but he snatcheth it in again;
and there is not so short a sentence in all this long Psalm, but the Law of God
is a word in it. And so do thou by the Name of God, let it not only evermore
be in thy mouth, but evermore be in thy heart; that thou make it not a common
name, but keep it holy: For if thou take it not in vain to Gods dishonor,
thou shall be sure not to take it in vain to thine own benefit, for God will
plentifully ble^se it, and the next news thou shall hear of, will be the
coming of his kingdom.

When we say the Petition, Thy ^ingdome come, the meaning is, that God by his
Spirit would so rule over us, that our spirits may wholly be ruled by him; and
that his Kingdom of Grace may so come unto us, that we may come at last to his
Kingdom of glory.

In some the world governes, and he who is Prince of this world, the Devil,
and this government is a very tyranny, the people here are not subjects, but
slaves, they have fetters on all their faculties; and if they do not feel
them, it is because they are past feeling. The air of this place is only
Foggs, and Mists, which both blind these eyes, and infect their spirits, and
makes it their Paradise to be wallowing in puddle. He is no true Prince, but an
usurper, and therefore rules all by force, and falsehood. He takes upon him to
be their Pilate, launcheth them out into the maine, and then leaves them to
storms and tempests; and their Haven is to split against the rocks. So here is
no being for thee my Soul, thou had need to make haste hence, and to seek
thee out some better harbor. In some the flesh governes, and they which be
Ladies of the flesh, Pride, and Lust; and this government is a very Anarchie;
every base fancy has an even sway with noble reason: wisdom here is not
justified of her Children, they speak the Language of Canaan, but they are all
Natives of Sodom. Their eyes are sealed up, yet their flight is only down
hill, for they are traveling to the bottomless Pit: So this, O my Soul, is no
place for thee neither, no resting for thee here* seeing there is no rest, but
all in motion, and all motion here is commotion. In some the Spirit governes,
and he who is Father of Spirits, God himself: and this government is a perfect
Kingdom. He has Majesty for his Crown, Mercy for his Seat, and Justice for
his Scepter: He has Wisdom for his Councellor, Almightinesse for his Guard,
and Eternity for his date: He has Heaven for his Palace, the Earth for his
Footstool, and Hell for his Prison: He has Laws to which Nature assents, and
Reason subscribes, that do not fetter us, but free us: for by them Nature gets
the wings of Grace, and transcends the Earth: Reason gets the eyes of Faith,
and ascends up to Heaven: He has a yoke indeed, but it is easy: a burden,
but it is light: his reward is with him, and his work before him. He is
established in his Sovereignty, not by his Subjects election of him, but by his
election of his Subjects: not as raising himself to a higher title, but an
humbling himself to a lower Calling: and as not receiving it from a
Predecessor who is before all, so never leaving it to a Successor who is after
all.

This is the place where my Soul shall dwell, here will I pitch my Tabernacle:
Only, O Lord, let me be taken into the number of thy Subjects, and indue me
with the privileges of thy Kingdom, and I will freely and faithfully serve
thee for ever. Other Lords besides thee have heretofore ruled us, but now we
will remember thee only, and only thy name.

When we make this Petition to God that his Kingdom may come, we should do well
to remember a Petition which God makes to us; My Son, give me thine heart:
for unless we give God our hearts, whither do we think this Kingdom should
come? For if it come to the ears, as often times it makes offer at the hearing
of Gods Word, it finds that a thorow-faire which lies open on every side, and
no fit place to make a residence in, and therefore commonly goes away as it
came, and makes no stay there. And if it come to the eyes, as sometimes it does
at the sight of Gods works, it finds them not able to stay long open, but
must have their windows shut in, and so are apt to keep it out: or if they
stand open, they are apt to let in vanity, which this Kingdom likes not, and
therefore cannot abide to abide there neither, but vanish away. And indeed,
these are the out places, this Kingdom loves to be within us, as Christ says:
The kingdom of God is within you. And we have no place within us fit to make a
seat of a Kingdom but only our heart, and this indeed has no back door to let
it out, as the ear has: nor no Percullis to keep it out, as the eye has: but
it has a large entrance, and a boundless circuit, and therefore most fit to
give this Kingdom entertainment. And yet as fit as it is, God will not have it
unless we give it him: and he will not have it so neither, unless we give it
him all: for it is against his nature to have a Partner, and he cannot abide to
hear of Moyties, either he must have all, or he has nothing at all: To be a
piece for God, and a piece for the world, is to be all for the world. To
conclude, God at all, is to exclude him from all: Wherefore O my Soul, mangle
not thy heart in giving it to God, but give it him all, and think thy self
happy that he will take it all: For the more he possesses it, the freer he
makes it: the more he dwells in it, the fairer he builds it: the more he
reigns in it, the more richer he adornes it. O my Lord God, that thou
would come and dwell in my heart as the owner of it, and reign in my heart
as the King of it: I should not then envy the Palaces of Princes, nor the
Kingdoms of the Earih: seeing I should have within my self a Palace and a
Kingdom, not only to equal but far to exceed them.

O what happiness will this Kingdom bring, and wherein does happiness
consist? If in dainty fare? we shall all eat and drink with Christ at his
Fathers Table. If in fine clothes? we shall all be clothed, in long white
Robes. If in curious music? we shall hear the quire of Angels continually
singing. If in knowledge? we shall know, as we are know. If in dominion? we
shall judge the Angels. If in joy? our joy shall be full, and none shall be
able to take it from us. If in glorious sights? we shall see the blessed face
of God, which is the glory of all sights, and the sight of all glory.

O happy Kingdom, o happy coming, o happy we to whom it shall come; that we
can never be attentive enough in praying, never earnest enough in longing that
this Kingdom may come.

The next is, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. It is a fearful
thing to make this Petition to God; if we do not withal make it a rule to our
selves, that all the actions of our life may be squared by it.

And therefore, O my soul, if matter of profit be offered to thee, lay it to
this Rule; whether it be to the will of God, or no: for if it be not, what
great advantage soever it make show of, account it but loss. If matter of
honor be offered unto thee, lay it to this Rule, whether it be according to
the will of God, or no: for if it be not, what great advancement soever it
pretend, account it but shame. If matter of pleasure be offered unto thee, lay
it to this Rule, whether it be according to the will of God, or no: for if it
be not, what pleasing suggestion soever it has, account it but misery. It was
conceived by Ahab, that it would be for his profit, to buy Naboths Vineyard;
but when he would not lay it to this Rule, he paid for his purchase, with his
blood to dogs. It was pretended to Pharaoh, that it would be for his honor,
to pursue the Israelites: but when he would not lay it to this Rule, he
perished himself, and all his Host in the red Sea. It was suggested to
Solomon, that it would be for his pleasure, to entertain the love of strange
women: but when he would not lay it to this Rule; God laid it to his charge,
both raising up adversaries against himself, and renting the Kingdom from his
Son to his servant. We must therefore endeavor to make it a Rule to our
selves first, and then we may safely make it a Petition to God: otherwise, if
we say, Thy will be done, and intend not to do it: we shall but turn the
Petition from active to passive: Gods will into his anger, and draw it down to
be done upon us in earth, as it was done upon the Angels in heaven.

Many, can say this Petition devoutly enough, so long as they understand it
not; but when they are told how Christ said it, Not my will, but thy will; and
thereby come to know, that for praying to do Gods will, is to pray against
doing their own wills, against their unlawful lusts, against their covetous
desires, against their ambitious designs, against their malicious practices,
and such like. Then it stricks cold to their hearts. Their tongues cleave to
the roof of their mouths: and they could wish the Petition might never be
made.

But he that understands it, and yet stands to it; he that speaks it, more from
his heart, then with his tongue; he that is resolved to say it, because he
says as he is resolved, this man makes it a prayer for himself, and an
Hallelujah to God, and shall reap the fruit of both in the due time: to the
other it proves but as the Sacrifice of fools: and if it make a noise, it is
but as the tinkling of a Cymball. Music at which God stops his ears, only
the Devil makes himself meery.

O Lord God, let it be the pleasure of thy will, that I may take pleasure in
doing thy will: for unless it be thy pleasure, it can never be my will: for
though we may be good followers, yet we are no good beginners, and therefore,
though it please thee to say, turn unto me, and I will turn unto you: as
though we should begin first, yet we are feign to return it back, and say:
Turn us O Lord, and, we shall be turned. For we, God knows, are too unweldy
to turn us of our selves, it must be done by strong hand, and none has
strength enough to do it: but thou O God, who art the God of strength.

And if we would strive as much with the Angels for holiness, as we do with
men for place, and dignity, we should find God as ready to take our parts, as
he was to take our Nature, and by such a help, of such a helper, we should be
able to make good our saying: Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

O Lord God, If I cannot be like thee in holiness: yet let me be like the
Angels in obedience, and if I cannot attain to neither, let me at least,
aspire to both, and what I want in power and performance, make me to supply
with Vows and Payers.

And here now seems a fit place to sit down and wonder, at the unspeakable
love, and bounty of God, expressed toward us, in these three Petitions; for by
the first, we are assured of eternity: by the second of a Kingdom: by the
third, to be like the Angels: or if we like it better to say; by the first, we
are informed what we shall be as Angels: by the second, what we shall have, a
Kingdom; by the third, what we shall do; the will of God.

These are blessings worthy to come from a heavenly Father; these are rewards,
which worthily become a bountiful Master.

And now, let the swine (flesh and blood) go murmr against God, that he is a
hard Father, and a bad Master: and that there is no profit in serving him,
because he gives them not the mire of the world to wallow in: as though he had
no other way to express his favors, but by clods of earth.

But do thou, o my soul, meditate upon these Petitions, and in them, upon
these blessings, and in these, upon the infinite love, and bounty of God: and
think how happy thou art to have such a Father: how much thou art bound to love
such a Master: and think not much to love him with thy whole heart: seeing he
has blessings to bestow upon thee, which cannot enter into thy heart.

Think not much to submit thy self wholly to his will, seeing, his will is, to
give thee beauty for ashes: the oil of gladness for mourning, that we shall
ever find it, a most happy thing for us to say, Thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven. But why do we say, thy will be done in earth, which is done in
earth already: and that by creatures, which one would think we are never able
to do it: He has set bounds to the Sea, which it must not pass, and the Sea
as raging as it is, and provoked by all the Rivers of the earth, that come
running into it, as it were for the nonce, to make it pass its bounds, yet
keeps it self precisely within the limits: He has appointed the earth to
stand still, and not for to move, and the earth, though but hanging in the
Air, and nothing at all to hang upon: yet offers not so much, as once to stir:
He has charged the Trees to bring forth fruit, and the Trees, though almost
even killed with could of winter, and threatened with the tempests of the
spring, yet takes heart to come forth, and seem to rejoice, they can do as
they are bidden.

The very beasts, though never so wild and savage, yet observe the properties
of their kind, and none of them incroach upon the qualities of another.

And why all this? but only to do the will of God, and that which may seem
more strange: The flowers come out of the durty earth, and yet how neat and
clean, out of the unsavory earth, and yet how fresh and fragrant? out of the
sower earth, and yet how mellifluous and sweet? out of the duskish earth, and
yet how orient, and virmillion? out of the unshapen earth, and yet in what
dainty shapes? in what curious forms? in what inamilings? and diapers of
beauty? as if the earth would show, that for all her being cursed, she had
something yet of Paradise left. And why all this? but only to do the will of
God. And why then should there be complaining, as though the will of God, were
not done in earth.

O wretched man, it is only thy self, that is out of tune, in this harmony. Man
that should be best, is of all the worst; that should be cleanest, is of all
the fowlest; that should be most beautiful, is of all the most deformed; most
full of graces, yet most void of grace; of most understanding to direct his
will, yet of least will to follow the direction of understanding. Man endued
with celestial qualities, yet leaves them all, to incroach upon the qualities
of every beast: upon the obcaenity of swine in drunkenness, upon the
greediness of Cormorants, in covetousness, upon the craftiness of Foxes in
fraud: upon the cruelty of Tigers, in malice, as if he would strive to exceed
his first parents in transgressing, and try whether God had any greater
punishment left, then casting out of Paradise. That if Christ would have served
us in our kind, and as we deserve, he needed not to have gone for paterns to
heaven, he might have found paterns, good enough for us amongst the meanest
Creatures of the earth.

And as he told the Pharisees, that the Queen of the South, should rise up in
judgment against them, so he might have told us, the flowers, the trees, the
beasts, shall all rise up in judgment against man. That we have more need to
say. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night.

Then after trees and beasts have done Gods will, to come after them all, but
with only saying. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

O God so frame our wills, that they may be fit links, to be fastened to this
Chain of thy will, that as one link drawn on, draws on another: so our
spirits being guided by thy grace, may be guides to our flesh, and that our
flesh, as living by thee, may live to thee, knowing, that though the way of thy
will may be troublesome, in the going, yet the journey shall be comfortable in
the ending; and though it be the secret of thy will, that in doing it, we shall
meet with many crosses, yet it is the purpose of thy will, that by doing it,
we shall purchase many joys, and therefore can have no cause to make us a
fraid to say. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

And now having thought these Petitions to be for such most proper, let us
conform our selves according to them. When we say, Hallowed be thy Name, let
us lift up the voices of our hearts, as if we were now joining with the Angels,
in singing their Hallelujah. When we say, Thy Kingdom come, let us raise our
thoughts, as now offering to set our hands to the Petition of the Saints in
heaven: When we say, Thy will be done, let us fix our minds wholly as in the
solemnity of dedicating of our selves to God, with all the faithful upon
earth. When we say, Give us this day our daily bread, let us humble our selves,
as being in state of other Creatures, and are glad to join with them in their
common suit. When we say, Forgive us our trespasses, let us think our selves
enrolled in the company of Penitents, and as the greatest sinners chosen
speakesmen to present their supplication. And when we say, Lead us not into
temptation, let us acknowledge our selves in the number and weakness of little
Children, and are glad to join with them in crying for help; that the Angel
of Infants, which always behold the face of God, may be employed by him to
work our deliverance.

But what should be the cause that in the three latter Petitions we seem to be
altogether for our selves, as appears by our saying, Give us, Forgive us,
Deliver us; but in the three former there is no mention of us at all, as though
we were no parties to them at all? Is it not that we are, or ought to be more
jealous of Gods honor, than careful of our own benefits? And therefore when
we say, Hallowed be thy name, we dare not say, of us, least we should make God
a Music of too few voices. And when we say, Thy Kingdom come, we dare not
say, to us, least we should assign his Kingdom too small a Territory. And when
we say, Thy will be done, we dare not say, by us, least we should stint God in
the number of his servants. But we say, Hallowed be thy name, and stop there,
that so no mouth may be stopped from hallowing it. We say, Thy Kingdom come,
but name not whither, that so it may be intended to come every whither. We say,
Thy will be done in earth, but tell not by whom in earth, that so it may be
done by all in earth.

Many would desire to know, and prize it at a great rate, how the^ might get
the knowledge to be assured when their sins are forgiven, and yet it is a
knowledge easily to be had, and every man may tell himself; for if thou
find in thy heart a loathing of thy former sins, and a resolution to
continue in amendment of life, and specially a fixed charity to forgive others;
thou may be assured thou art in the favor of God, and all thy sins past are
forgiven thee; but if thou continuest to take delight in thy former sins, and
art unresolved in reforming thy courses; and especially, if thou find in thy
self a desire of revenge, and art implacable toward others, thou may then
be assured thou art still in the state of Gods displeasure, thy sins are not
yet forgiven; for, these things are not only the signs, but the certain
effects of Gods forgiving of us, when we confess, and be grieved for our own
trespasses to him, and are compassionate and relenting to the trespasses of
others to us.

There is no deed so acceptable to God, as to take all thankfully which he
lays upon us; for not to murmr, or not to cast our eyes upon vanity, are in
themselves any great matters; but when a man murmures not in adversity, which
gives so many causes of impatience; or when a man casts not his eyes upon
vanity in prosperity, which ministers so many occasions of alurements, this is
a man after Gods own heart; and this is one to whom the Devil may say, as he
said to Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time? but the difficulty
of doing this, and the danger of not doing this, gives us all just cause to
say, Lead us not into temptation.

O my Soul, if thou can not be strong enough to resist sin, be humble to
confess it with contrition; dissolve into tears for that which is past,
resolve upon amendment in that which is to come; and if thou can do this,
thou shall find it the true balm of Gilead, and though thy sins were as red
as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow.

And more, to speak of hallowing Gods name: it may not be unfit to consider the
three first Petitions, as they are only hallowings, or Hallelujas: for
observing the difference of the songs, we shall perceive the difference of the
singers.

The first when we say, Hallowed be thy name, is the Hallelujah of Angels, and
we may truly say, is the song of songs: not only, because it is sung without
ceassing: but because it shall be sung without ending, and is both the cause
and the effect, both the sign and the substance of our eternal happiness.

The second (when we say) Thy Kingdom come, is the Hallelujah, of the ^aints in
Heaven, and is an asspiring to the first: but an asspiring in a very near
degree, near in distance, though remote in existence: for they are in assurance
of attaining, and do but tarry the time, but the time will not be, till time
will not be.

The third, (when we say, Thy will be done) is the Hallelujah of the Saints on
earth: and is an asspiring to the second; but an asspiring in a remote degree:
for while they are in the world, they are subject to all the rubs of the world:
while they live in the flesh, to all infirmities of the flesh: yet they have a
confidence, though no assurance, or an assurance, though but in confidence: and
therefore are remiss, but not dejected, bold, but not presumptuous, not out
of heart, not out of fear.

And may it not here be observed, that as we begin in saying, Hallowed be thy
name, so we end in acting the hallowing it: and our first and last words, are
all for his glory, who is the first and the last: And these three Attributes,
seem to answer to our three first Petitions: Hallowed be thy name, for thine
is the glory: Thy Kingdom come, for thine is the Kingdom: Thy will be done, for
thine is the power.

And we seem to sing, not only in the first, an unisone with the Angels: but
in all the three, the same ditty with the Saints in Heaven, for their
Hallelujah is, Thou art worthy, o Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power: and ours here, Thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory: That
having sung the song of Saints and Angels here on the earth: we may be
admitted, into the quiere of Saints and Angels in Heaven, and sing eternally,
thou art worthy, o Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thine is
the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

And now, o my soul, consider how perfect a prayer this is: where are the
Petitions of men and Angels, the Petitions of the Church millitant, and
triumphant, the Petitions of innocent Inphants, penitent sinners, and faithful
believers: And then hearken what music it makes in Gods ears, how pleasing,
where the songs are all of Christ's own setting, how mellodious; where they are
all such sweet singers: how loud, where there are so many voices: especially,
when this quire of singers, which hitherto have sung their parts apa^t, shall
all join their voices together in that sacred Antheme. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory. And so end all, in that which ^s the end of
all: and is it self without end; the glory of God.

The children of God, begotten a new by the Holy Ghost, can never fall from
being like him that begat them: and therefore do they much dishonor God, who
in words do profess they are his Sons, and yet in their actions, they
resemble the Image of Satan.

It were a great blemish to a godly man, to be wrongfully suspected to be the
father of a wicked Son; much more is God dishonored, by such as would seem to
be, but are not of his seed. For they that are of God, indeed, cannot but in
some measure resemble him, in being righteous, as he is righteous: that is, by
casting off the old man, which is corrupt, through deceivable lusts, and to put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

This casting off, and putting on, does teach us, that there is in us something
that befits us not to retain, if we will be the true Sons of God: not by
reputation amongst men, but by imputation in Christ. What is to he cast off,
and what is to be put on, is plainly expressed in the Apostles words, namely,
to cast off all deceivable lusts, which includes all things forbidden, and to
put on righteousness, which implies a spiritual indowment of all heavenly
graces; among which, none is of that singular force, virtue, and effect, as is,
zealous, and hearty prayer, in faith unfeigned; which none can effectually make,
but such as have put on this new man. For the old man knows not how to pray,
being clothed with corruption: and blinded with the mist of ignorance.

The new man only shaped in holiness, knows to whom, when, in whom, for
what, and how to pray: all which circumstances, are duly to be considered in
Prayer: and yet none of these, does the natural man; that is, the old man
truly apprehend: and consequently, the lip-labor that he pretends, to
bestow in prayer, is not only, not profitable, but sinful.

To pray unto God with the lips, for any corporal benefit, and yet to have the
eye of the heart, fixed in confidence upon natural means, is a kind of
spiritual Adultery.

For, what man is he, that having a wife, outwardly affable, using words of
love unto him, and yet her heart set upon another man, will not think her a
faithless and unchaste wife? And is God less jealous think we? who craveth
our hearts, when we shall worship him in words, and outward show of works? when
our Consciences cannot but tell us, that we ask that of God, which we inwardly
believe more probably, and possible to be obtained, by means without him.

Is not this a fasilfying of our faith, and dissembling of our prayers? Is not
this a manifest breach of the Law, that says, we shall have no other Gods, but
JEHOVAH. As also, not to take his Name in vain, as they do, which call upon
him with their lips, their hearts far from him.

God requires not our prayers, because he has need of them; as a service
beneficial, or profitable unto him; but because we have need of his graces,
and blessings, and that he loves us, in his beloved Son, he wills us to
pray unto him for every spiritual and corporal blessing: And although it be
true, that he knows whereof we have need: yet in common reason, he that
wants, and disdaines to ask, he is not worthy to receive that whereof he has
need.

And heavily it will befall them, who having received so many blessings at Gods
hands, are no whit the more moved to love him: And so many threats for their
unbelief, and ingratitude, and yet not moved to fear him.

Will they not be drawn, then from their deceiveable vanities? Will they
rather then for less then an Aple, or a mess of Pottage, disclaim their
Birthrights and lose that Kingdom, and Crown, so dearly purchased for the
faithful.

Nay, were loss of it all, it were not so horrible: If a man missing the good
promised, could avoid the danger threatened, it would something mittigate the
dispairing Conscience, and ease the troubled mind. If after death, there were
neither life nor death: If a man might have no being, nor feel, nor endure
torment; though he had no comfort, it were a kind of ease to the carnal
mind, that knows no other heaven, then the profits and pleasures of this
life. Nor fears other Hell, then the misery, penury, and afflictions of the
same.

But the case is otherwise: They that miss the Kingdom of heaven, by not
believing the promises of God, by not praying unto God, for direction in the
course of their lives, may assure themselves, though they seem not yet to
believe it: that there remains for them, and attends them, the god of
darkness, and the Angel of Horror, and of Torment.

But possess thou me, my sweet Sovereign, and reign in my body, by obedience
to thy Laws: and in my soul, by confidence in thy promises.

Frame my tongue to praise thee, my knees to reverence thee, my strength to
serve thee, my desires to covet thee, and my heart to love and embrace thee.
And as thou have formed me according to thine Image, so frame me according to
thy will. And as thou have made me a vessel by the stamp of thy creation, to
serve thee here on Earth, so make me a vessel of Honor by the privilege of
thy grace to serve thee in thy everlasting Kingdom, sweet Father I beseech thee.

Comfortable Sentences for such that are afflicted.
COme and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he w^ll heal
us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6.1.

I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75.

We have had the fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence; spall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of our
Spirits, and live; for they verily for a few days did chastise us after their
own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partak^rs of h^^
holiness, Heb. 29.10.

There has no temptation taken you but such as is common to man, but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but
will with the temptation make way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it,
1 Cor. 2.3.

For his anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life; weeping may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5.

He will not always chide, neither will h^ keep his anger for ever, Psalm.
103.9.

For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, least
the righteous put forth their hands to iniquity, Psalm. 125.3.

For yet a very little while, and mine anger shall cease in their destruction,
Esa 10.25.

Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut the doors about thee, hide
thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past,
Esaias. 26.20.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but in great mercies will I gather
thee; in a little wrath I hid my self from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer,
Esaias 54.7, 8.

For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, for the
Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made, Esaias 57.16.

For I am merciful, says the Lord thy redeemer, and I will not keep anger
for ever, Jer. 3.12.

So will I make my fury toward the^ to rest, and my jealousy shall depart
from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no^ more angry, Ezekiel. 16.42.

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons the iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy, Micha^ 7.18.

For our light afflictions which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

For like as a Father pittyeth his Children, so the Lord pittyeth them that
fear him: for he knows our frame, he remembers we are but dust. Psalm
103.13.14.

Sing O heavens, and be joyful O earth, and break forth into singing O
mountains, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his
afflicted: but Sion, said the Lord, has forgotten me: Can a woman forget her
sucking Child that she should not have compassion on him? yea, they may
forget: yet will not I forget thee, Esa 49.13, 14, 15.

For the needy shall not always be for^otten, the expectation of the poor
shall ^ot perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.

In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence,
saved them (...) his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them,
and he carried them all the days of old, Esaias 63.9.

Behold, happy is the man whom God ^orrecteth, therefore despise not the
cha^tening of the Almighty, Job 5.17.

Blessed is the man whom thou chaste^est, O Lord, and teach him out of thy
^aw, that thou may give him rest for ^he days of adversity, until the pit
be ^igged for the wicked: whom he loves ^e corrects, even as the Father the
Son (...) whom he delights; therefore despise ^ot the chastening of the Lord,
neither ^e weary of his correction; for it is good ^or me that I have been
afflicted, that I ^ight learn thy Statutes, Psalm 94.^2, 13.

Who fed thee in the Wilderness with Manna, which thy Fathers knew not, that
^e might humble thee, and that he might ^rove thee, to do thee good at thy
latter and, Deuteronomy. 8.16.

For we know, that all things work together for good to them that love Go^ to
them that are called according to (...) purpose, Romans 8.28.

My brethren, count it all joy when y^ fall into diverse temptations, knowing
the that the trying of your faith works p^tienee, James 2.3.

Though he fall, he shall not be utter cast down, for the Lord upholdeth h^^
with his hand, Psalm, 37.24.

God will lighten our darkness, he w^ keep the feet of his Saints, he will not
fo^sake them, nor forget their complaint, the they shall not be confounded, in
time (...) trouble he will hide them, Psalm. 18.28.

His Angels shall pitch about them, (...) will heal them, and take all
sicknes^ from them, they shall not fear their enemies, but will make their
enemies afra^^ of them, be avenged of their enemies: (...) will repent him of
the evil pronounced against them. They cry, and the Lo^^ hears them, and
delivers them (...) of all their troubles. Many are the tro^bles of the
righteous, but the Lord del^vereth them out of all, Psalm. 34.7.

But the salvation of the righteous is the Lord, he is their strength in the
ti^^ of trouble, and the Lord shall help the^ and deliver them, he will deliver
them ^om the wicked, and save them, because ^ey trust in him, Psalm. 37.39, 40.

Comfortable Sentences concerning earthly Blessings.
FIrst, seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all good things
^^all be added unto you, Mat. 6.33.

O taste, and see, that the Lord is good, ^lessed is the man that trusts in
him. O ^eare the Lord ye his Saints, for there is ^o want to them that fear
him. The Li^ns do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord lack
nothing, Psalm. 4.8, 9, 10.

The Lord is a sun and shield, and no ^ood thing will he withold from them
that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.12.

Trust in the Lord, and do good, so ^halt thou dwell in the Land, and verily
^hou shall be fed: delight thy self in ^he Lord, and he will give thee thy
de^ires of thy heart: Commit thy way unto ^he Lord, trust also in him, and he
shall ^ring it to pass: For the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall
delight them selves in their abundance of peace: a little that a righteous man
has, is bette^ then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37 3, 4, 5.

O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee
which thou have wrought for them tha^ trust in thee before the sons of men,
Psalm. 31.21.

The Lord is good, and his tender mercies is over all his works, for seeing
godliness has the promises of this life, as wel^ as of the life to come. He
will dwell with his and not forsake them, that he will love and bless his
people, that he will be their God, will rejoice over them to do them good,
will compass them with favor as with a shield: will keep his Covenant with
them, that he will set peace in their borders, and prosper them in all they go
about, Psalm. 145.9.

My Son, forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my Commandments; for
length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee: length of
days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. She is a
tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that
retains her, Prove. 3 ^, 2, 16.

If thou will diligently hearken to the ^oyce of the Lord thy God, and wilt do
that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his Commandments, and
keep all his Statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee which I put
upon the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that heals thee, Exodus 15.26.

Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of thine
increase: so shall thy Barnes be filled with plenty, and thy Presses shall
burst with new wine, Prove, 3.9.16.

He that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully and God is able to make all
grace to abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all
things, may attain to every good work: 2 Cor. 9.6.8.

So shall thou find favor, and good understanding in the sight of God and
man, Prove. 3.4.

And I will give peace in the Land, and ^ee shall lie down, and none shall
make ^ou afraid, Levit, 26.6.

Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
Esaias 65.13, 14.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee: Peace b^
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, Psalm. 122.6, 7.

Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble,
Prove. 3.23.

The name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous run unto it, and is
safe, Prove. 18.10.

But who so hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear
of evil, Prove. 1.33.

He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee: in famine he shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power
of the sword: thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, neither shall
thou be afraid of destruction when it comes, Job 5.19, 20, 21.

He will honor those that honor him, and bring forth their righteousness as
the light, and their judgment as the noone day, Prove.

For I will have respect unto you, and make you faithful, and multiply, and
establish my Covenant with you. Levit. 26.9.

And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee, he will also bless
the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy Land, thy corn, and thy wine, and
thine Oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Deuteronomy. 7.13.

Thou shall know that thy seed shall be great, and thy offspring as the
grass of the earth. Job 5.25.

The Lord shall increase you more, and more, you and your Children. Psalm.
115.14.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine by the sides of thy house; thy
Children like Olive plants round about thy Table; yea thou shall see thy
Childrens Children, and peace upon Izrael. Psalm. 128.3.6.

I have been young, and now am old, yet have not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed, begging bread; he is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is
blessed. Psai. 37.25.26.

The just man walks in his integrity, his Children are blessed after him.
Prove. 20.7.

I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessi^g upon thy offspring, and
they shall spring up among the grass as willowes by the water courses. Esaias.
44.3.4.

And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among
the people; All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed
which the Lord has b^essed. Esaias. 61.6.

I will give them one heart, and o^e way, that they may hear me for ever, for
the good of them and of their Child^en. Jer. 32.^9.

The Children of thy Servants shall continue, and their se^d shall be
^stablished before thee. ^sal. 102.28.

Though h^nd join in hand, the wicked shall not b^ un^^^^shed, but the seed of
the righteous shall be delivered. Prove. 11.21.

In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his Children shall have a
place of refuge, Prove. 14.26.

All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of
thy Children. Esaias 54.13.

For God will show mercy to them that love him, and keep his Command ments.

Meditations and Resolutions.
PRide is the greatest enemy to reason, and discretion the greatest opposite to
pride; for whiles wisdom makes Art the Axe of nature, pride makes nature the
Axe of Art: The wise man shapes his apparel to his body; the proud man shapes
his body by his apparel: It Is no marvel then, if he know not himself, when he
is not to day like him he was yesterday.

And less marvel, if good men will not know him, when he forgets himself, and
all goodness.

I should fear whilst I thus change my shape, least my maker should change his
opinion, and finding me not like him he made me, reject me as none of his
making.

I would any day put off the cause of my apparel, but not every day put on new
fashioned apparel; I see great reason to be ashamed of my pride, but no reason
to be proud of my shame.

Hipocricy desires to seem good, rather then be so: honesty desires to be
good, rather then seeing so: The worldlings purchased reputation by the sale of
desert: wise men, by desert with the hazard of reputation.

I would do much to hear well, more to deserve well, and rather lose opinion
then merit.

It shall more joy me that I know my self what I am, then it shall grieve me to
hear what others report me. I had rather deserve well without praise, then do
ill with comendation.

There is nothing more certain then death, nothing more uncertain then the time
of dying.

I will therefore be prepared for that at all times, which may come at any
time, must come at one time or another: I shall not hasten my death by being
still ready, but sweeten it: It makes me not dye the sooner, but better. Had I
not more confidence in the truth of my Savior, then in the traditions of men:
poverty might stagger my faith, and bring my thoughts into a perplexed
purgatory, wherein are the poor blessed, if pardon shall be only by expense? Or
how is it hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, if money may buy out the
past, present, and future sins of himself, his deceassed and succeeding
progeny? It Heaven be thus sold, what been fit has my poverty, by the prise
alreapy paid? I find no happiness in room on earth. It Is happiness for me to
have room in Heaven.

Nature bids me love my self, and hate all that hurt me; Reason bids me love my
friends, and hate those that envy me; Religion bids love all, and hate none;
Nature shows care, Reason wit, Religion love, Nature may induce me, Reason
persuade me, but Religion shall rule me.

I will hearken to Nature in much, to Reason in more, to Religion in all.

Nature shall make me careful of my self, but hurtful to none; Reason shall
make me wise for my self, but harmless to all; Religion shall make me loving
to all, but not careless of my self: I may hear the former, I will harken
only to the latter; I subscribe to somthings in all, to all things in Religion.

A large promise without performance, is like a false fire to a great piece,
which discharges a good expectation, with a bad report: I will fore-think what
I will promise, that I may promise but what I will do: Thus whilst my words are
led by my thoughts, and followed by my actions, I shall be careful in my
promis^s, and just in their performance: I had rather do, and not promise, then
promise, and not do.

I cannot s^e two Sawyers work at a pit, but they put me in mind of the
Pharisee, and the Pub^ican, the one casts his eye upward, whiles his actions
tend to the p^^ infernal

The other standing with a dejected countenance, whiles his hands and heart
move upward.

It Is not a shame to make show of our profession, so we truly profess, what we
make show of. But of the two, I had rather be good and not seem so, then seem
good, and not be so: The Publican went home to his house, rather justified then
the Pharisee.

When I see leave^ drop from their Trees in the beginning of Autumn: just such
think I, is the friendship of the world; whiles the sap of maintenance lasts,
my friends swarm in abundance, but in the winter of my need, they leave me
naked; He is a happy man that has a true friend at his need; but he is more
truly happy that has no need of his friend.

When I see the heavenly Sun, buried under earth, in the evening of the day,
and in the morning to find a resurrection to his glory, why (think I) may not
the Sons of Heaven buried in the earth, in the evening of their day^^, expect
the morning of their glorious resurrection? Each night is but the past days
funeral, and the morning his resurrection.

Why then should our funeral sleep be other then our sleep at night? why
should we not as well awake, to our resurrection, as in the morning? I see the
night is rather an intermission of day, then a deprivation; and death rather
borrowes our life of us, then robs us of it: since then the glory of the Sun,
finds a resurrection, why should not the Sons of glory? since a dead man may
live again, I will not so much look for an end of my life as wait for the
coming of my change.

A bad great one, is a great bad one; for the greatness of an evil man, makes
the man's evil the greater.

It is the unhappy privilege of authority, not so much to act, as teach
wickedness, and by a liberal cruelty, to make the offenders sin not more his
own, then others.

Each fault in a leader is not so much a crime, as a rule for error. And their
vices are made, (if not warrants yet) presidents for evil.

To sin by prescription, is as usual as damnable, and men run post in their
journey, when they go to the Devil with authority: when then the vices of the
rulers of others, are made the rule for vises to others, the offenses of all
great ones, must needs be the greatest of all offenses; either then let me be
great in goodness, or else it were good for me to be without greatness.

My own sins are to heavy for me: why then should I load my self with others
offenses.

There is no security in evil society, where the good are often made worse,
the bad seldom better: for it is the peevish industry of wickedness, to find,
or make a fellow, it is like they will be birds of a fether that use to flock
together: For such does their conversation make us, as they are with whom we
use to converse.

I cannot be certain, no^ to meet with ill company, but I will be careful not
to keep with evil company. I would willingly sort my self with such as shall
teach, or learn goodness. And if my Companion cannot make me better, nor I him
good: I will rather leave him ill, then he shall make me worse.

It i^ the apish nature of many for to follow rather example, then precepts,
but it would be the saffest course of all, to learn rather by precept then
example. For there is many a good Divine, that cannot learn his own teaching.
It is easier to say, this do, th^^ to do it: when therefore I see good Doctrine
with an evil li^e, I may pity the one, but I will practice the other. The
good sayings belong to all, the evil actions only to their Authors.

I see corruption so largely rewarded, that I doubt not, but I should thrive in
the world, could I get but a dispensation of my Conscience for the liberty of
trading.

A little flattery would get me a great deal of favor, and I could buy a world
of this worlds love, with the sale of this little trifle honesty.

Were this world my home, I might perhaps be trading; but alas, these
Merchandise yield less then nothing in heaven; I would willingly be at quiet
with the world, but rather at p^^ce with my Conscience; the love of men is
good, whilst it lasts; the love of God is better, being everlasting.

Let me trade then for those heavenly Merchandise: If I find those other in my
way, they are a great deal more the^ I look for, and (within little) more then
I care for.

As faith is the evide^ce of things not seen, so things that are seen, are the
perfecting of faith.

I believe a tree will be green when I see him leafelesse in winter. I know he
is green, when I see him flourishing in Summer. It was a fault in Thomas, not
to believe till he did see. It were a madness in him not to believe when he
did see. Belief m^^y times exceedes Reason, not oppose it, and faith be often
above sense, not against it.

Thus whiles fa^^h does ass^^^ me, that I eat Christ effectually, sense must
assure me, that I taste bread really.

For thou^h I o^tentimes s^e not t^ese things that I beli^v^; yet I m st still
believe those things that I see.

The Cross is but a sign of Christ crucified. Christ crucified the substance
of the Cross, the sign without the substance is as nothing: the substance
without the sign is all things. I hate not the sign, though I adore but the
substance, I will not blaspheame the Cross of Christ, I will not worship but
Christ crucified, I will take up my Cross, I will love my Cross, I will bear
my Cross, I will imb^ace my Cross, yet not adore my Cross, All knees shall
bend in reference to his name, mine never bow in Idolatry to his Image.

As the giver of all things, so each receiver loves a cheerful giver; for a
bargen is valued by the worth of the thing bought, but a gift, by the mind of
the party giving, which made the widows mite of more worth, then the riches
of superfluity. I see then, he gives not best, that gives most, but he gives
most that gives best: If then I cannot give bountifully, yet I will give
freely, and what I want in my hand, supply by my heart: he gives well that
gives willingly.

When I see the Larkers day-net spread out in a fair morning, and himself
whirling his artificial motion; and obs^rves by the reflecting luster of the
Sun, on the whirling instrument, not only the merry Lark, and fearful Pigion,
are dazzled, and drawn with admiration: but stowter birds of pray, the swift
Merlin, and towering Hobby, are intised to stoop, and gazing on the outward
form; lose themselves.

Me thinks I see the Devils night-nets of intising Harlots fully paralleld,
spread out for us; in the v^gor of our youth, which with rolling eyes, draw on
the lustfulnesse of affection, and betray the wantonness of the heart, and
which their alluring glanses often make to stoop within the danger of their
fatal nets; not only the simple, and careless, but others also; men
otherwise, wary and wise, who coming within the pull of the net, lie at the
mercy of that merciless Fowler, to their certain destruction.

Hence, I resolve, when I see such glasses, to shun such motions, as assured
that these Glass^s have Nets adjoining, those Nets a Fowler attending, that
Fowler a death prepared for me, then which I cannot dye a worse. I may by
chance, I must of necessity, at some time come within their view; I will at no
time come within their danger. I cannot well live in this world, nor at all in
the better world, if I be caught in their fatal Nets.

As often as I hear the Robin-red-breast chant it as cheerfully in September,
the beginning of Winter, as in March the approach of the Summer: why should not
we (think I) give as cheerful ent^rtainment to the hoary Hairs of ou^ ages
Winter, as to the Primroses of our youths spring; why not to the declining
Sun in adversity, as (like Persians) to the rising Sun of prosperity; I am
sent to the Ant to learn industry, to the Dove to learn innocence, to the
Serp^nt to learn wisdom; and why not to this Bird to l^arne Equanimity and
patience, a^^ to keep the same teno^ of my mind^^ q^^etness, as well at the
app^^ac^^ of calamitous Winter, as of the Spring of h^ppin^ss^? And since the
Romans constanc^e is so commended, who changed not his countenanc^ with his
changed Fortunes; why should not I with a Christian resolution hold a steady
cou se in all weat^ers? and though I be ^orced with cross Winds ^o shift my
Sails, and catch at side Winds, yet skilfully to steare and keep on my course
by the Cape of good hope, till I arrive at the haven of eternal happiness.

And now to conclude, Meditation is a busy search in the Storehouse of
Fantasy, for some Ideas of matters to be cast in the moulds of resolution,
into some forms of words, or actions; in which search when I have used my
greatest diligence I find this in conclusion* that to meditate on the best, is
the best of Meditations; and a resolution to make a good end, is a good end of
my resolutions.

A Morning Prayer.
O Most gracious God and loving Father, we heartily thank thee for all thy
loving kindnesses so abundantly showed upon us: for our Election, Creation,
Redemption, merciful Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and continual
preservation, and for our assured hope of our Glorification in the world to
come.

We praise thy gracious goodness for so mercifully preserving us this night
past, and delivering us from all dangers both of soul and body, for that thou
have given us so sweet and comfortable rest, and have brought us to the
beginning of this day: And as thou have safely preserved us unto this present
hour, from all dangers of this life; so we beseech thee to continue this thy
favor toward us this day, and the whole course of our life; suffer us not by
vain alurements of this world to be drawn away into sin and wickedness:
assist us with thy Grace and holy Spirit, that we spend not our times vainly,
or idely, but that we may always be diligently exercised in the duties of our
Calling, to the benefit of our Brethren, and discharge of our Conscience: Grant
that in all our consultations, words, and works, we may ever have thee present
before our eyes, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
O Most gracious Lord God and loving Father, we heartily thank thee for all
thy mercies, blessings, benefits, and preservations, so abundantly showed
toward us. We do praise thy glorious goodness for so mercifully preserving
us this day past, and delivering us from all perils and dangers both of body
and soul, for prospering and preserving us in health and prosperity, for
giving us all things necessary for this present life, as health, food, and
apparel, and other convenient things needful; this gracious goodness of
thine we beseech thee, O Lord, to continue toward us for ever.

And here, O Lord God, we offer up unto thee our selves, and ours, our souls,
our bodies; we recommend our lives, our means, and all we have unto thy
gracious preservation and protection, in assurance that that cannot perish
which is committed unto thee; keep us this night in safety, and grant, good
Lord, that our bodies may sleep, and ou^ sou^es may watch for the commi^g of
our Savior thy Son Jesus Christ, tha^ so our souls and bodies may be more
apt, and able, to serve thee in that estate and Calling wherein thou have
thought good to place us; we do confess and acknowledge, O merciful God,
that we are most miserable and wicked sinners, as well by original corruption
of Nature, as by the course of our evil and naughty life; we have, and do
daily break and transgress thy most holy Law and Commandments, both in
thought, word, and deed. By the means of this sin and corruption, we do
continually deserve most just condemnation, and to be for ever cast out of thy
presence; yet such is thy goodness toward us, thou would not suffer us
thus to perish in our sins, but have sent thine own dear Son Christ Jesus,
to take upon him whatsoever is due to us, and to reconcile and mak^ us one with
thee again: In him therefore, and through him we come unto thee, beseeching
thee for his sake, that we feeli^g the griev^usnesse of our si^nes, and
groaning under the burden of them, may find the release and ^ase of them, in
that we through thy ^^^y Spirit steadfastly bel^eve that Christ has borne the
burden of them, even for us. Grant O Lord, that we being assured hereof in our
conscience, may through thy holy Spirit, be renewed with more graces, and hate,
detest, and abhor all manner of sin, and study to live in all things
according to thy blessed Will during our whole life. Grant this O dear Father,
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for remission of sins.
O Lord, glorious, ever-living, loving, everlasting Father, I wretched sinner
presume once again after my sin to return home unto thee, requesting,
begging, praying, and desiring of thy heavenly Majesty that thou will look
down upon me; I confess, were it not for the hope of thy mercy, an^ the hold
of thy comfort, and the renewing graces which sometimes I feel from thee, and
that sweet taste and feeling of thy good gifts, and thy heavenly Word, I should
sink in despair, for my sin is always before me; if I go, they follow me;
if I run, they fly after me; if I look back, they stare upon me; if I go
forward, they meet me; if I turn to the right hand, they terrify me; if to
the left hand, they torment me: If I look down to earth, Hell is ready to
devour me; now have I no way but to look up to thee (Lord) be thou then hoar
ready to receive me; help me good God, save me dear Father, succor me sweet
Redeemer, assist me merciful Creator, that my prayers may be so fervent, so
zealous, so affectionate toward thee, that they may draw down thy mercies upon
me; power down thy blessings, shower down thy graces, open thy hand of mercy,
restore joy and comfort to my heavy and laden soul, wash away my sins, wipe
away mine iniquity, heal my infirmities, purge my wicked mind of all evil
thoughts, pardon all misdeeds, and wicked dealings, renew the good Spirit of
he^venly graces, restore the joys of thy holy comsorts upon me: O Lord, let me
have some feeling, some taste, some scent, some glimmering of thy glorious
presence: Let me feel some comfort, find some joy, have some rest; good Lord,
let me be once truly renewed by thy grace, and settled in thy service, that I
never slip, nor slide back but grant unto me most merciful Father) a sure and
settled dependence upon thee; so that in all my wordt, work^, and deeds, I may
rejoice in serving, fearing, and obeying thee; and that I may spend all the
residue of my days truly serving thee, seeking to glorify thy Name, and
magnify thy goodness unto me, so long as it shall please th^e to lend me
breath to this f^aile body; And merciful Father, favorably govern and guide,
help, instruct, and teach me in thy wi^dom to magnify thy holy Name; multiply
and increa^e thy mercies on me, O Lord, preserve and prosp^r me in all my ways
and works, and all about me; remember thy poor flock, build up thy Church,
renew Sion govern, assist, and bless all pain ull Preachers and Pastors of
thy Word, teach them and us understanding, rihgtly to know thee, and truly to
follow thee; awake my drowsy soul, defend it from evil imaginations, keep me
in holy and heavenly meditations, grant me to observe thy ways, so that I may
walk in piety, and peace: set my sins so before mine eyes, that when I look
back on them, I may with sorrow weep, lament, and repent my time past, which
has been spent so wickedly, or unprofitably. O powerful Preserver remember
me, restore me to joy and comfort, and hasten in time, thy salvation unto me.
Draw my lingering soul, and it shall run after thee; turn me unto thee with
all willi^gnesse, come thou near unto me, g^^d Lord, and d^clare and show thy
mercies on me; est^blish me in grace, excite me to good^^sse: Give me grace
that I may always grow stronger and ^^^^^ger, to walk before thee, weaker and
we^ker to sin, faithful and ^^^me in thy service. Grant this, dear G^d, and
merciful Father, for Christ Ie^us his sake, our Savior and Rede^mer. Amen.

A Prayer in time of War.
O Glorious Lord God, and everlasting Father, we entreat the^ mercifully to
look down upon us* and hearken unto our complaint^ and desires, and grant we
beseech thee our requests, O gracious Father, thou know nor sins and our
iniquities are not hid from thee, they lie open to thy Judgments, yet we know
that thy mercies are the cure of our miseries; and when w^ fly to thee, thou
drawest near to us; we beseech thee now to be favorable, and spare us for all
our sinne^ past, and be ready to deliver us from sins to come; look down in
mercy upon us, and as thou have been ou^ everlasting defense, so now defen^ us
from the rage of our enemies; go^ in and out O Lord before our Armies, before
our Generals, before ou^ Fleets, and Commanders: And gran^ we may be thy
Soldiers, to fight under thy Banner; stir up our hearts and strength against
the enemy, defend thy afflicted Flock; remember we beseech thee the burden of
misery laid upon thy Church in this time, in these our Kingdoms, and
elsewhere, and in thy due time restore them to their former glory. Settle our
hearts and affections to regaine, and recover that which has been lost, and
grant that we seeing their double dealing may no longer trust to them which
have no truth; they imagine mischief in their hearts, and are set on fire to
do ill; but break thou the knot of their malice, lay open their plots,
discover their devices, weaken their Armies, overthrow their Inventions,
confound their Councels, and consume their numbers. O Lord, thou have in times
past made the Stars to fight in order, the Sun to stand still, the Seas to
devour, the Winds to overthrow thy enemies: So now, O Lord, cause these thy
Creatures to assist, and help us, and our distressed Neighbors, that all the
world may know, It is thou that fightest our Battles, and undertakest our cause.

Finally, O Lord, bless we beseech thee, us, and every one of us in what we
shall take in hand, for defense of thy Church, and Truth; bless we entreat
thee our King and Parliament, our State and Clergy, our Communalty; and give
thy blessing unto us all; and last of all, bless we beseech thee all the
worthy Companies of Soldiers, in Cities, and all other places in the Land;
bless O Lord their inventions of War, and make them expert by their
practices, prosper all their undertakings; so that all the world may know, that
thou art the Guider of our Counsels, and Leader of our Armies. Grant this
dear Father, and all other good things unto us, for the good of the Church
amongst us, and the relief of others by us, now and ever, for Christ Jesus
sake our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for Gods protection of his Church in respect of the present troubles
of it.
ALmighty God, the Lord of Hosts, and Governor of all things, whose power no
Creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent: Work in us, and in all thy people,
unfeigned and effectual repentance, that what thou see amiss in us, and
amongst us, or in any parts of thy Church, may speedily and thoroughly be
reformed; that which is righteous and good in thy sight may be established and
maintained, especially in this our Land, and other places professing thy Truth
and Gospel; and in the mean time while we strive after that which may be most
agreeable to thy holy Will, as it is revealed in thy holy Word; be merciful
unto us, and bring us on as thou see it needful, evermore supporting us in
our most gracious Shepherd by thy staff of comfort. And thou Son of David,
that know the merciless condition of Satan, and cruel men, his cursed
Instruments; we humbly beseech thee never to deliver us over into their power,
but save, and defend us, and all thy people, evermore from the hands of all our
enemies both bodily and ghostly: And more particularly at this time, we
earnestly beseech thee, O heavenly Father, by the mediation of thy Son Jesus
our only Mediator, to be merciful to those that are joined with us, or stand
out for thy Truth, or any righteous Cause; and give that issue to the present
troubles of thy Church as may make most for thy glory, the advancement of thy
Truth, and Gospel, the relief of all thy distressed people, in all those
parts of thy troubled Church, and for the establishing of truth and peace in
this our Land.

May it please thee once to free all our Brethren from the dominion of that
Mystery of Iniquity, as also still to shield and secure us, and all other
professing thy Name, and Truth, from that cruel Faction, which, as if they
delighted in blood, have already spoiled so many Nations.

Lord, thou only art the Catholic King, we can acknowledge no King over all
the Earth but thy self, nor any Univers^ll Head over all thy Church but that
only Archbishop of of our souls, thy Son Jesus our blessed Savior, to whom
all power is given both in Heaven and Earth.

Arise then thou Lord to whom the Kingdoms do belong, and show thy self, and
let not the man of the Earth any longer exalt himself, least he be too proud,
and least he ascribe to himself, or to his graven Images, or vain Idols, the
conquest that thou shall see, and suffer over thy people, Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name be the praise; For the honor of thy Name arise
before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses, before Great Britain, Ireland, and
other Countries that call upon thy Name; arise, and show thy self for us, for
on thee only do we call: We call on thee to save us, and our Forces, and thy
people now in more danger; how, and in what manner, and at what time fully to
declare thy Salvation, we refer to thy heavenly wisdom; only in the mean
time, that it may please thee to sanctify, and save, to preser^e and provide
for them and us, and all thine both in Field and City; Protect and defend,
deliver us and ours at home, and abroad: And thou great Sheheard of Israel, be
pleased to take down more and more that Man of Sin, that has, and would
exalt himself against thee; Assuage then the malice of those that are enemies
to us, or to any of thy people, and evermore confound all their devices, that
we being armed with thy defense, may ever more and more give praise to thee,
which art the only Author of our peace, and Giver of all victory. And all this
good Lord for us, for them, and all thine, not for our merits, but for thy
great Mercy sake, and for the Truth sake of thy gracious Promises in Jesus
Christ our Lord, and only Advocate and Redeemer. To whom with thee O Father,
and the holy Spirit, be all praise and glory now and for ever-more. Amen.

A Prayer before Sermon.
O Most gracious God, assist me I humbly beseech thee in this my good purpose
and zeal, and give me grace at this present time godly to enter into thy
service: Dear Father, assist me with thy holy Spirit, and drive away all vain
and idle cogitations out of my mind, that I may hear thy Word to my Souls
comfort; grant that it may take deep root in my heart, and bring forth
plentifully, to the honor of thy blessed Name, to the comfort of my Soul, and
the good example of my Brethren, who seeing my good works may glorify thee my
only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Most sweet lover of all Mankind, Lord and Savior, I beseech thee for thy
bitter Passion sake to remove from me all pride, envy, and detraction, wrath,
malice, and impatience, and all other sicknesses and diseases of the Soul; and
plant good Lord in my heart and mind true meekness, charity, temperance, and
modesty, with all such other virtues and preservatives unto the Soul; And
mortify in me good Lord, all unclean motions, carnal desires, and inordinate
affections, and revive in me the love of virtues, and the perpetual exercise
thereof; so that at this time, and at all times I may worthily receive this
holy and blessed Sacrament unto thine honor and glory, and my souls endless
joy and comfort. Amen.

A Prayer after receiving of the Sacrament.
JN most humble and most hearty manner, with most due reverence I thank thee
good Lord, most holy Father, and everlasting God; tha^ by the bounty of thy
merciful grace would vouchsafe thus to refresh and feed my Soul through
faith, with the benefit of the Death and Passion of thy Son our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ.

And I beseech thine infinite goodness, that this the Sacrament of this thy
Death and Passion, which I most unworthy wretch have now received, may never
come hereafter in Judgment and Condemnation unto me, for mine evil merits,
and deservings; but rather good Lord, it may come to the profit and comfort of
my body, and to the salvation of my Soul unto the life everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer at the hour of death.
O Heavenly Lord God, we poor wretches being overcome with grief, come all
here attending thy good pleasure with this sick Servant of thine, O Lord
incline to hear our Prayers, and his complaints unto thee; be now O Lord
present, and send thy good Angels and Spirit to attend us; be with us O Lord,
and comfort this sick person, and now if the time be come of his departure,
grant O Lord he may depart with godly comfort, and joy everlasting into thy
Kingdom: Ease O Lord his griefs, mittigate his pains, assuage his sorrows,
an^ give him a lively touch of thy heavenly comfort: put by all worldly
thoughts, and beat down all bad suggestions, let nothing but good come in his
mind, and grant that he may to the last gasp of breath, breath out still some
comfort of thy help, and grant when he has done his last, to finish this
mortal life, then he may with Lazarus be carried into Abraham's bosom. O Lord
forgive him, O Lord receive him, O Lord protect him, O Lord succor and save
him, and now and for ever grant he may rest with thee in eternal glory.

Hear us good Father for this our Brother, and do for him and us according to
thy Fatherly mercy in Jesus Christ; to whom we commend him, with these our
prayers for him, and all his, and our occasions, in tha^ prayer which thy
blessed Son has taught us.

Our Father which art, etc.

FINIS.
November. 29. 1648.
Imprimatur

John Downham.


