JEREMIAH BVRROUGHES

Late Minister of the Gospel.

J. Cro^s Sculpsit.

portrait of Jeremiah Buroughs

THE SAINTS TREASURY.

Holding forth 1. The incomparable Excellency and Holiness of God. 2. Christ's
All in All. 3. The glorious enjoyment of Heavenly things by Faith. 4. The
Natural man's bondage to the Law, and the Christians liberty by the Gospel. 5.
A preparation for judgment.


Being sundry SERMONS preached in LONDON, By the late Reverend and painful
Minister of the Gospel, JEREMIAH BURROUGHES.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for John Wright at the Kings head in the Old Bailey.
1654.

TO THE HONORABLE, FRANCIS ROUS, Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, and Provost of Eaton-Colledge.
Honored Sir,
IF a Heathen Poet could say, Non omnis moriar, I shall live though I die;
supposing his Works immortal, though himself were mortal; Upon how much
better an account may a Prophet of the Lord say, Non moriar, sed vivam, I shall
not die, but live; both in respect of his immortal soul, to which death is as
the gate of life; and in respect of the immortal travel of his soul, being
conversant in the Word of the Lord that abides for ever.

The works of the Saints of God in whom is the spirit of prophecy, not only
live when they are dead; but are isntrumental in the hand of grace, both to
plant life where it is not, and water it where it is, that it may spring forth
more abundantly.

The chosen Vessel of the Lord, by whose Ministry he was pleased to give out
the Heavenly treasures laid up in these Sermons, has some years since put off
his earth, and put on that Inheritance of the Saints in light, for which the
Lord seemed early to have fitted him, by his earnest and assiduous Travail in
sitting others. But though the Vessel be broken, or rather indeed refined and
translated to his masters more immediate use, yet the Treasures abide for the
common enrichment of the Saints. For spiritual Treasures (like the loaves
blessed by our Savior) multiply in their use, and when thousands have been
enriched by them, do still remain sufficient to enrich thousands.

To you honored Sir, is this small, but Precious treasury presented, not as
though your own store were not already full; for who knows not how many
precious Jewels (through the riches of Christ in you) you have richly set and
polished for the adorning the Bride the Lambs wife? Surely the spirit of Christ
seems to have chosen and sealed your Spirit to celebrate his own Nuptials in
your Mystical Marriage and song of loves.

But as gold, besides its own internal worth, receives an Authentic impression
from the Image and Superscription of the Prince: And as in honoring the Lord
with the best part of our substance, An humble acknowledgement of his Interest
both in the whole and our selves (not any Addition to his fullness) is
intended: So is this Treasury presented to the touch and test of your
Judgment, First as the Standard of approving things that are excellent. And
then as an humble testimony how much he owes himself to you that presents it.

That the Lord would make you long an Ornament and defense to his Saints, and
prosper his own pleasure in your hands, is the prayer of,

Honored Sir, The most humble, and most obliged of your Servants, J. W.

To the Christian Reader.
THe Author of these ensuing Sermons has so abundantly approved himself to
the Church of God by his former labors, both in preaching and writing, that it
would be rather a disparagement to him to offer any thing by way of
commendation. His name is yet like a precious Ointment; and so may it be so
long as the Sun and Moon endures. These Sermons will discover themselves to
be his genuine issue; the several lineaments and proportions of his style
(though styles differ as much as faces) are here discernable. Those that had
the happiness to be conversant with him, and auditors to him, are able to say,
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat, So he opened his Text, so he
handled his Doctrine, so he delivered his Application. It is true, these
fragments of his are under the prejudice of being Posthumus works; yet we may
say of them as Paul said concerning himself, We suppose they are not inferior
to the rest of his Works, though they are born out of due time; and fragments
though they are, yet are they to be esteemed, Ramenta auri sunt pretiosa. These
Sermons are to be prized for their own worth and intrinsecall excellency,
whoever was Author. And this Author is to be honored for his real worth,
whatsoever he is the author of.

We shall add this also for thy encouragement, that these Sermons have been
very happily taken by the pen of a ready writer, Mr. Farthing, now a Teacher of
Shortwriting; one who has given ample testimony of his great skill and
dexterity in writing Shorthand. We think we may say, there are not many words
delivered by the Author, that are left out. However, confident we are that
there is nothing material which was by him preached, but is here by the care
and faithfulness of the Scribe presented to thy view.

The desire of the publishers is, that the name of this worthy man of God may
be kept in honor, that thou may transfer these things to thy own use, and
express them in thy life, that what was spoken to some may be common to all;
what was accepted by them that heard it, may be received and improved by those
that read it. This is all we have to communicate to thee; it would be an injury
to detain thee longer from the reverend Author; we only commend thee to the
grace of God which is able to make thee abound in every good work, and bid thee
Farewell.

Ja. Nalton. Will. Cooper. Tho. Jacomb. Matthew Poole. Allen Gear. Ralph
Venning:


September. 29. 1653.

Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.

THE SAINTS TREASURY.
EXODUS 15. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods! who is like
unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders!
THis Scripture is this day fulfilled in our Ears, and before our eyes; that
which God has already begun to do for this Kingdom and the neighbor
Churches, does show unto us, that there is none like unto the Lord, Who is
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.

The words though they be in the middle of the song, yet they are a kind of an
Epiphonema, which usually is at the end; but the spirit of Moses being raised
in admiring at, and blessing God for the great things he had done for his
people, he contains not himself till he comes to the end, but breaks forth
in the very middle with this applause of the glory of God, Who is like unto
thee, O Lord amongst the Gods, who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders! You see then the words are a part of Moses
his song, occasioned upon the goodness of God in delivering of his people from
Egypt, and carrying of them through the Red Sea. And this song, is the most
ancient song that ever was in the world; it is the first in Scripture, and we
know of no Author before Moses; those that were skillful in the way of Poetry
were many hundred years after Moses. It is a spiritual and most excellent
song; the style of it is full of Elegancy, the matter of exceeding variety; it
is Eucharisticall, Triumphant, Prophetical, and it is pity we have not such an
excellent song as this is, turned into Meeter, to be sung in our Congregations.
And it is a most delightful song, and therefore you shall observe when God
promised a great mercy to his people in which they should exceedingly rejoice,
he has reference to this song, Hosea 2. 15. And I will give her Vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing there
as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the
Land of Egypt. When God intended any great mercy to his people, he would have
them sing according to this song of Moses: So then, if God be in a way of
mercy, if he be opening a door of hope to us, you see how seasonable this song
is. And it is a Typical song, as of the deliverance of Gods people out of
Egypt, so a Type of the deliverance of Gods people from the bondage of
Antichrist; therefore it is very observable, that this song was to be sung
again when the people of God should be delivered from Antichrist; In Revel.
15. and the beginning, you may see Gods judgments upon Antichrist. and in
verse. 3. it is said they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the
song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. By this you may see
that God would show us, that the bondage under Antichrist is like the bondage
in Egypt; and therefore Rome is called Egypt in the Revelations, because when
we shall be delivred from Antichristian bondage, we shall renew this song of
Moses: So that if we now expect deliverance from bondage under Antichrist, it
is good for us to acquaint our selves with this song, because it is that which
shall be sung over again when the bondage of Antichrist is removed. It is a
miraculous song according to the opinion of Austin; he brings in this song as
one of the miracles, that is, that God did at the same time by the spirit
inspire all the people of Israel, that they sung together one and the same
song; and therefore it was miraculous true if it had been so, but the Scripture
is not clear in that.

But we leave generals and come to the words; though there be many excellent
things in the Chapter to make way to that I have read; yet because I would not
be hindered, I will come instantly to the words, which are as it were a
recapitulation of all, containing the substance of all; as if he had said, I
have spoken of many particulars that God does for his people; but there is none
like unto the Lord, who is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders. There are four things (you see then) wherein the name of God is
advanced here: First, there is none like the Lord: Secondly, glorious in
holiness: Thirdly, fearful in praises: Fourthly, doing wonders.

I confess when my thoughts were first to speak upon this Text, I intended
only the third particular, the opening of that Title of God, fearful in
praises; we find not any such Title that I know of in all the book of God but
only in this place; but because I saw there was much of God in the two former,
therefore I thought it might be useful to show you what there is of God in
them, and was unwilling to pass them by. For the two first then, who is like
to thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods, who is like unto thee, glorious in
holiness, who is like to thee? this you see is put by way of interrogation;
now interrogations in Scripture are especially brought in two ways: First, by
way of admiration. Secondly, by way of negation. Sometimes by way of
admiration, Isaiah 63. 1. Who is this that comes from Edom with died garments
from Bozrah! Many others we might name by way of admiration: and by way of
negation you know there are hundreds of examples; and both these we are to
understand here in the Text: First, by way of admiration, who is like unto thee
O Lord amongst the Gods, etc. The spirit of Moses and the people being struck
with astonishment at the glory of God, now manifested by the great works he
did, they ^^mire and say, who is like unto thee O Lord? and then by way of
negation, who is like unto thee O Lord? that is, there is none like unto thee;
that is the first expression of the glory of God, the lifting up of the name of
God above all things whatsoever; there is none like to God.

And God does much glory in this expression of his glory, that there is none
like to him; we have it very often in Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 17. 20. O Lord there
is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that
we have heard with our ears: So in Psalm. 86. 8. Among the Gods there is none
like unto thee, O Lord: and Psalm. 89. 6. For who in the heaven can be compared
unto the Lord? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?
we might name diverse other places where God glories much in this expression of
his glory: and the people of God have gloried much in it; and there is great
cause they should do so. It is said of the godly Machabees that at first by
reason their name was an offense, meeting with this sentence, (...)
who is like unto thee O Lord amongst the Gods? and being much taken with it,
they wrote the first Hebrew Letter of every word in this sentence in their
ensigns of war, and carried them about with them; and upon this ground they
were called the Machabees, glorying in this Title of God, who is like unto
thee? And upon this ground the Holy Ghost concludes, that all should honor and
glorify God, because there is none like unto him. Psalm. 86. 8. Among the Gods
there is none like unto thee O Lord, neither are there any works like unto thy
works. Mark what follows in 9. 10. 11. 12. verses. All Nations whom thou have
made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name;
for thou art great and do wondrous things, for thou art God alone; teach me
thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy name; I
will praise thee O Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify thy Name
for evermore. Thus you see how the holy Prophet was taken with this expression
of God; that there is none like to him, therefore teach me thy way, O Lord, I
will walk in thy truth, etc.

There is none like unto the Lord amongst the Gods: So it is here, it may be
translated as well amongst the mighties. God is lifted up here not only above
the Heathen gods, so that there is none like to him amongst them; but he is
lifted up above whatever has any excellency in it; there is none like to thee
amongst the mighties: who ever is mighty and great, or let there be what might
and greatness and excellency soever in the world, yet God is infinitely above
all. It would take up too much of our time, if we should dilate our selves in
showing to you somewhat of the glory of God in this, how he is above all
things, and that there is none like to him: I will therefore but briefly name a
few passages, and apply this particular, and pass to the second, that we shall
dwell longer upon.

There is none like to God: First, in that whatever is in God, is God himself;
this is a propriety of God: there is no creature has any excellency in it that
reaches to this excellency, that whatever is in that creature should be the
being of it, all creatures being made up of several things; but now whatever
is in God is God himself. Again, there is an universal goodness in God, and
there is none like to him in that; one creature has one good in it, and
another, another: but God has all good in him, there is all excellency and
beauty in God in an eminent manner; there is none like to him in that. And then
all beings are but one excellency in God, however we apprehend God in several
excellencies; one attribute shining through one creature, and another through
another, yet all are united in God; And all that is in him is primitively in
him, he is of himself, and from himself, and for himself. And then none can
communicate himself so as God can; none can inflict evil, or convey good so
as God can, and that this expression of God has reference too: for it is
peculiar to God to communicate as much of himself as he will, which no
creature can do; though the creature has but little, some drops only of
goodness in comparison of the infinite Ocean that is in God, yet the creature
cannot communicate of those drops as it will; it is the propriety of God only
to communicate of his goodness as he will. And not only so, but he can make
the creature that he communicates his goodness to, to be as, sensible of his
goodness as he pleases, which none else can do; though one creature can
communicate good to another, yet it cannot make that creature as sensible of
that good as it will, which God can do. And so in inflicting of evil there is
none like to the Lord in that, the Lord is able to let out all evil, to bring
all evil at once; which none else can do; and he is able to make the creature
upon whom he inflicts an evil, to be as sensible of that evil as he will; one
that hurts another, yet cannot make him as sensible of that hurt as he pleases,
but this is the propriety of God; as he can bring all evil together, so he is
able to make the creature as sensible of all as he will; and God challenges
this as his own propriety, that he alone can do good, and he alone can do
evil; and therefore there is none like to him; from hence it follows then,
that there is none to be worshipped as the Lord, there is none to be honored as
the Lord; the Heathen gods, because they did but communicate some particular
good, therefore they challenged but particular service; external worship, and
worship in some particulars would serve the Heathen gods, and they were
satisfied with it, and required no more; and there was reason for it, because
they could not challenge to themselves a communication of a universal good;
for one god was for one particular good, and another for another particular
good; and therefore they had but particular worship suitable thereunto: but now
there is none like to the Lord, he challenges a universal worship and
obedience: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul,
and strength: so that there is no such worship to be given to any as is given
to God; and all because there is none like to him in the excellency of his
nature, and in the way of communicating of himself unto his creature.

Now this that I have spoken, is exceeding useful in the whole course of our
lives, in ordering of our ways and thoughts toward God: consider how useful
this is, thus: It should be our care in beholding any beauty, any good, or
excellency in the creature, to keep still in our thoughts and hearts, the sense
and apprehension of the infinite distance that there is between God and that
creature; the want of this is the cause of almost all the evil that there is
in the world, and the true apprehension of this is a special means to enable
us to glorify God as a God. I say thus, when thou beholdest any excellency,
beauty, or comeliness in a creature, and tastest any sweetness in it, be sure
thou do then keep in thy heart the sense of this truth, that though there be
some sweetness here, yet God is infinitely above the creature, and there is an
infinite disproportion between that good, and beauty, and excellency that is in
these creatures, and that which is in God himself. God gives us leave to let
out our hearts upon, and to take the comfort of the creature, when we see a
beauty and excellency in it; and that because it is his similitude upon the
creature, and it is Gods excellency that is there, and a spiritual heart has
more freedom to let out it self to the comforts of the creature then any in
the world besides, because he can meet with, and taste God there; but though
God give us leave to do this, yet evermore so that we be sure to reserve our
hearts to God; to be sensible of the infinite excellency that is in God above
any creature; and if we be not careful of this, we shall soon fall off from
glorifying God as God, and our hearts will stick in the creature. And this
has been the ground of all the outward Idolatry and spiritual Idolatry in the
world: Of outward Idolatry, which did arise thus; men at first seeing some
excellency and worth in the creature, as the Sun and Moon, and Stars, they did
acknowledge God above them; and that these were but creatures, and that there
was more excellency in God then in any of these: but at last coming to look
upon the creature too much, and being taken with the excellency they saw there,
their hearts stuck in the creature, and they lost the apprehension of the
infinite excellency of God above the creature, and so fell from God, and
worshipped them that were no gods.

And so for spiritual Idolatry; those that commit Idolatry with riches, or any
creature: come to them at first, and say to them, how do you apprehend the
comforts of the creature? is there not infinitely more in God then there is in
the creature? yes, they will say. I but by letting our hearts out upon the
creature, and by poring upon the beauty of the creature, we begin at length to
lose the power of this apprehension that was at first upon our hearts, and so
commit spiritual Idolatry with the creature; and therefore it must be our care
to keep entire and fresh our apprehension and sense of that infinite distance
that there is between God and all the comforts of the creature: and so long as
thou do keep thy apprehensions fresh and strong here, there is no danger,
and thou sinnest not in letting thy self out to the creature, if it have not
abated thy apprehensions of the infinite disporportion that there is between
God and all creatures, therefore now seeing there is an infinite stupendous
height of excellency in God above all creatures, there should be the like
thoughts in our hearts toward God and the creature, thus: as there is an
infinite distance between the excellency of God and the excellency of all
creatures, so there ought to be a kind of infiniteness in the distance and
disproportion between that esteem and delight, and dependence we have in, and
upon the creature, and that we have in and upon God; therefore you should not
satisfy your selves in this that you acknowledge God above the creature, for
all will do so; but you are to find in your souls such a disproportion between
your esteem and joy, and desire after the creature, and that you have after
God, as is somewhat like the distance that there is between God and the
creature, now the distance is infinite that is between God and the creature,
therefore there should be a kind of infiniteness in the distance between your
esteem of, and the working of your hearts and endeavors after the creature;
and that esteem and working of your hearts and souls which you have toward
God; and this is to glorify God as a God; this is the soul worship we owe to
God in the world; this is the true sanctifying of the name of God when this
comes practically upon our hearts.

Secondly, if there be none like to God, then it follows that there is none
like to the people of God; for as a man's god is, so is he; look what god a man
chooses, he is as his god is; a covetous man, if he make riches his god, he is
so to be judged; and so a voluptous man or a Heathen. Now if the Saints of God
have chose this God to be their God, and there be none like to him, then it
must needs follow, that there is no people like to Gods people: and mark how
the Holy Ghost makes this reference in diverse Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 29.
compared: verse 26. There is none like unto the God of Iesurun, who rides upon
the Heaven, in thy help and in his excellency in the sky; what is the
inference of the Holy Ghost upon this? verse 29. Happy art thou O Israel, who
is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, etc. So that you see according
to the glory of God in any particular there is a reflection of it upon the
Saints of God, and this is the wonderful excellency of Gods Saints to have the
reflection of God upon them, happy are they that have God to be their God; if
God be excellent, so are they: if God be above all, and there is none liketo
him, so are they above all, and there is none like to them. You have the same
inference of the Holy Ghost, 2 Samuel 7. 22, 23. Wherefore thou art great, O
Lord God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee;
according to all that we have heard with our ears. Mark what follows, and
what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel? etc. So that
there is none like the people of God; and it must needs follow from hence, for
they are as their God; therefore says Moses (when he speaks of the people of
God) Exodus 33. 16. So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the
people that are upon the earth, so you read it in your Bibles; but the word in
the original signifies wonderfully separated; Gods people are wonderfully
separated from the world; as God is wonderfully high above all creatures so are
his people, therefore in Numb. 23. 9. it is said that Gods people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the Nations: why because they are the
people of God and the people of that God that has none like to him, and
therefore there is none like to them; that is for the consolation of the Saints
of God.

Thirdly, it follows from hence, that therefore it should be our care that
none should do for their gods so as we do for ours: for if there be none like
to our God, then it is a shame, that any that choose other gods should do that
for them that is above that which we do for our God. As now for Idolators, to
instance in outward and spiritual Idolatry: why, there is none like to our
God, certainly all the Idolaters in the world have not such a God as we have,
their rock is not as our rock, our enemies themselves being judges. What a
shame then were it, if we should not do more for our God then they do for
theirs? yea, we should labor to do that for our God that may come up to that
height of excellency which we apprehend to be in him. Will you see what
Idolaters do for their Gods: First, observe the earnestness of the spirits of
Idolaters after their gods, their hearts are enflamed after their Idols: so we
have it Isaiah 57. 5. enflaming your selves with Idols under every green Tree:
their hearts were enflamed after their Idol gods, which are not like our God: O
how then should our hearts be enflamed after our God! should we content our
selves with, and rest satisfied in cold and in dead services to our God! how
much strength should that exhortation of the Apostle have upon us Rom, 12. 11.
Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord? It is the Lord we serve, it is our God,
the great and glorious God, and therefore we should be fervent in spirit,
serving him.

Secondly, the Scripture says that Idolaters, those that worship false gods,
are mad upon their Idols Jer. 50. 38. The people of God then should have their
hearts run after God, so that those that are carnal and not able to judge,
should look upon them even as mad men, and indeed they do so: whenever the
hearts of the Saints are after God fully, they are looked upon as mad men; St.
Paul was counted a mad man by Festus, Acts 26. 24. and we should not be afraid
of the reproaches of the world in this kind; though they despise us and think
us base and vile, and out of our wits: Why Idolaters are mad upon their Idols,
therefore if there be any thing God calls for at our hands, though the world
account it madness, yet our hearts must work after God in it: and it is a
shame that any men's hearts should be more after their gods, then our hearts are
after ours; because there is none like unto our God.

Thirdly, the earnestness of the hearts of Idolaters after their Idol gods
appears from Jer. 8, 1, 2. At that time says the Lord, they shall bring out
the bones of the Kings of Judah. etc. And they shall spread them before the
Sun, and the Moon, and all the host of Heaven, whom they have loved, and whom
they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought,
and whom they have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried, etc.
I have often thought of this Scripture, it is exceeding remarkable: I know no
one Scripture in all the book of God, that has so many expressions together,
to show the strength of the hearts of Gods people after God, as here we have to
show the strength of Idolaters after their Idols: And they shall spread them
before the Sun, and the Moon, and all the host of Heaven. Mark, 1. Whom they
have loved. 2. Whom they have served. 3. After whom they have walked. 4. Whom
they have sought. 5. Whom they have worshipped; and all in so few words. Thus
their hearts were after their Idol gods: how much more then ought it to be
said of us concerning our God, whom we have loved, and whom we have served, and
after whom we have walked, and whom we have sought, and whom we have worshipped?

Again, observe how the Scripture sets out the spirits of men after their
Idol gods, in regard of the cost they are willing to bestow upon them. Isa.
46. 6. They shall lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance,
and hire a goldsmith, and he makes it a god. They care not what cost they are
at to worship their Idols. O what a shame would it be if we should not be
willing to part with much of our estates for the true worship of the true God:
and though we should lose our estates, yet if we can serve God better, and in a
purer way, we should be content; for Idolaters will lavish gold out of the bag
upon their Idols. Now there is none like to our God; therefore it is a shame
that they should do more for their gods then we do for ours. And then what
are Idolaters willing to suffer for their gods? 1 Kings 18. 28. how did Baals
Priests there cut themselves after their manner, with Knives and Lancers, till
the blood gushed out, to show their respect to their Idols: let us then be
willing to suffer any thing that God calls us to. And how constant were they to
their Idols therefore says God, Jer. 2. 10, 11. Consider diligently and see,
if there be such a thing: has a Nation changed their gods which are yet no
gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit;
how ill does God take this that Idolaters should not change their gods that are
infinitely below him, and yet that his people should change their God who is
infinitely above them?

Again let us take heed lest there be any found that should have their hearts
set more upon their lusts, then we are upon God: take all the excellencies in
the world, and they are infinitely below God; how much more then is a lust? for
what is a lust in comparison of all creatures in heaven and earth? and yet how
are men's hearts set upon their lusts? yea, how has thy own heart been set upon
wicked lust heretofore? think then with thy self what an infinite
unreasonable thing is it that the heart of any man in the world, or thy own
heart, should be set more upon a base lust then upon the living, eternal, and
infinite God. It Is said of Ahab, that he sold himself to work wickedness, 1
Kings 21. 20. be thou willing then to sell thy self to God, to give up thy self
to God; the hearts of the sons of men, (it is said) are set, and fully set to
do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. do not thou content thy self with some faint wishes
and desires after God, but let thy heart be set and fully set for God. In Micah
7. 3. it is said they do evil with both hands earnestly; mark, they do
evil, and they do evil earnestly, and they do evil earnestly with both
hands. Now then, for shame be not thou sluggish in doing service for thy God;
do that which is good, and do it with both thy hands, and do it earnestly
with all thy heart.

Again, we have one notable Scripture more that shows how the hearts of men
are set upon that which is evil, Prove. 19. 28. The mouth of the wicked
devoureth iniquity; it is an elegant expression of the Holy Ghost; its a
metaphor taken from the practice of brute creatures; as now take a beast that
has been kept from drink a long time, and is exceeding thirsty, if you bring
it to the water, it will thrust its head into the water, as if it would devour
the whole River, and could never be satisfied: that is the meaning of this
phrase, the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity, that is, when he comes to
his sin, he is as greedy upon it, as the beast that has been kept long from
water is greedy of water. O how should our hearts be infinitely more greedy
after God, and his service, then wicked men are or can be after the service of
their lusts! to conclude all this, with that you have Exodus 30. from verse 34.
to the end; there was a perfume there to be made by the composition of the
Apothecary; but there was this charge given, as for the perfume which thou
shall make, you shall not make to your selves, according to the composition
thereof, it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord, etc. So I conclude this
point, there is none like to God, he being above all: when your hearts
therefore are in any good frame toward God, perfumed and lifted up toward
God, take heed they be not lifted up toward any creature in the same manner as
they are toward God: for your service to God must be suitable to the nature of
God; now there is none like to God, therefore there should be no such service
tendered to any, as is tendered to God: thus much for the first thing, whereby
the name of God is advanced here; who is like unto thee O Lord among the gods!

We come now to the second, glorious in holiness; The word translated here
glorious, does as well signify magnificent, noble, and so it is used in many
places: thou art magnificent and noble in thy holiness. Brethren, it is the
greatest magnificence, the greatest nobility, and height of spirit, that can
be, to be holy: God himself is a magnificent God, and he is ennobled by his
holiness: this sets out the excellency of holiness.

Again, glorious in holiness, it is rendered by some glorious in holy things:
that is, glorious in thy holy Angels, glorious in thy holy Saints, glorious in
thy holy word, glorious in thy holy Ordinances, glorious in thy holy worship;
God indeed is very glorious in his Angels, and in his Saints, and in his word,
and in his worship, and in his Ordinances; but we will take the words as you
have them here, glorious in holiness.

And for the explication of the glory of God in this Title, there are these
three things to be done: First, to show you a little what holiness in God is.
Secondly, I shall open unto you, how God is said to be glorious in holiness.
And then Thirdly, I shall show you why God has this Title given him here in
this place; why he is rather said here to be glorious in holiness, then
glorious in power: for it was an act of power rather, that God did put forth in
the destruction of the Egyptians, and deliverance of his people.

For the first: what is holiness in God; we understand this (as generally we
do almost all things of God) rather by way of negation then otherwise; rather
by what it is not, then by what it is, therefore we use to say that Gods
holiness is that whereby his nature is free from all kind of mixture, and
from the least soil and filth of sin; therefore God is called light, because
light is so pure a creature and so free from any mixture of pollution, that it
can be amongst filthy things without any defilement of it self: so God can
work with sin it self, and yet without any defilement of his nature; but
besides this negation, if you would know somewhat positively, what the
holiness of God is, I would describe it briefly to you thus: It is the
infinite rectitude and perfection of the will of God especially, whereby he
does will and work all things suitable to the infinite excellency of his own
being; the excellency of God is the highest* and therefore the rule of all
excellency; and the will of God being always suitable to his own infinite
excellency, and impossible to vary in the least from it, therefore his will is
the rule of all holiness. Let us consider it a little by looking into the
holiness of the creature, and by that we shall see somewhat of the holiness
of God: for as we cannot see the glory of the Sun by looking directly upon it,
it being too bright an object for us: but by the reflection of its beams in
the water we may behold its glory: so, the holiness of God is too bright to be
beheld in it self; we cannot behold the infinite purity and holiness of God
immediately: but by looking upon the holiness of the creature, which is as it
were the reflection of Gods holiness upon it, and a ray and beam of it, we may
come to see somewhat of the holiness of God. Now the holiness of a creature
is this, the separation of it from common things to a holy use, or the
dedication of a creature in some immediate manner to God, for the lifting up of
the name of God; the holiness of the Saints is this, the separation of their
spirits from all common things to God as the highest and last end. And when
they are able to work to God as the utmost end, and to will that they do in
order to God as the last end; and so as is suitable to God as the highest end,
that is the holiness of their wills: so it is in Gods holiness: Gods
holiness is a dedication, as it were, of God to himself: that is, God being
of and from himself, and himself being his own last end, he gives up himself
unto himself, and wills himself as the highest and utmost end, and so wills
all things in order to himself as the last and highest end: this is the
holiness of God; and the image of this holiness is that stamp and work of
grace that is upon the creature: when the creature is enabled to will God as
the highest end, and all things in subordination to him, the creature is then
said to be holy, because it has a stamp of God upon it: this is Gods
holiness.

But glorious in holiness: how is God glorious in holiness? God is glorious
in all his attributes and works: and the truth is, there is not one thing in
God more glorious then another, every attribute of God being in it self
equally glorious; but in regard of manifestation and according to our
apprehension, so one thing appears more glorious then another; and God is
pleased to speak to us according to our apprehensions: therefore you may see
how the Saints do especially glory in God as a holy God: looking upon him as a
holy God, they do exceedingly rejoice and glory in him: therefore says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 99. 3. Let them praise thy great and terrible name, for it is
holy: and verse 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool,
for he is holy: and again, verse 9. exalt the Lord our God and worship at his
hily hill, for the Lord our God is holy. Thus the people of God look upon God
in his holiness as the special ground of his praise and exaltation; yea the
Angels themselves in heaven, look upon God in his holiness, and especially
exalt him from thence, Isaiah 6. 3. the Cherubims and Seraphines cry three
times, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts. You never find any of Gods
attributes mentioned so three times together: though it is true, God is
infinite in power, and in wisdom, as well as in holiness; yet you never
find in Scripture that God is said to be wise, wise, wise, or, almighty,
almighty, almighty: but holy, holy, holy, three times together: and as the
Angels of Heaven adore God especially for his holiness, so the Church of God,
Rev. 4. 8. cries out, holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, showing the blessed
condition of the Church of God, when it shall be hereafter more sanctified, and
God shall dwell amongst them, they shall exceedingly then adore God in his
holiness above any other attribute: yea God himself seems to glory in his
holiness above any other attribute; therefore when God would lift up himself
in his glory, and give you the highest expression of himself, he does it in
this, as he is holy. Isaiah 57. 15. For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy. When God would lift up himself, it is
in this whose name is holy: and so when God would swear by himself (Amos 4.
2.) he swears by his holiness. Now as the Scripture says, when God could
swear by no greater, he swear by himself: so I may say, when God could swear
by no excellency above this, he swares by his holiness.

Again, God glories in heaven it self as the habitation of his holiness:
heaven is the habitation of Gods glory, there God lets out his glory fully: but
what is that glory? why the top of all, is, the holiness of God. Isaiah 63.
15. Look down from heaven and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and
thy glory: yea the throne of God is Gods holiness, Psalm. 47. 8. God sits
upon the throne of his holiness; you know Kings upon their thrones are exalted
and lifted up, so is God lifted up upon the throne of his holiness. Solomon,
he made himself a throne of Ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold, 1 Kings
10. 18. But the throne of God is a throne of holiness, a throne of bright
shining holiness.

Again, when God reloyces in his people, he does it as they are a holy people,
Deuteronomy. 7. 6. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God
has chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself above all the people
that are upon the face of the earth. Yea further, you shall find that this
attribute of holiness is more especially ascribed to the third person in the
Trinity: God the Father is a holy God; the Son, he is the holy one of God; but
the Holy ghost has his name from Holiness: and it is very observable, that all
the three persons challenge an equal share in the working of holiness in the
creature, it being such a part of Gods glory, that all the three persons work
it wheresoever it is: as the Father, he is a Sanctifier. Jude speaks of the
work of sanctification wrought by God the Father in the first verse of his
Epistle, To them that are sanctified by God the Father. And then for the Son,
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water by the Word. Christ he gives himself for his Church; to
what end? Not that he might bring it to Heaven only, but that he might
sanctify it also; and then the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some
of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. So that all the three
persons come in for a share in this work: this is the glorious work of Father,
Son, and Holy ghost.

But yet further for the demonstration of it: holiness must needs be the glory
of God, because it is the highest perfection and rectitude of an Intelligent
free Agent. An Intelligent free Agent is the highest being of all, and
holiness is the rectitude of that being, and therefore must needs be glorious.
Hence it is, that grace is called Gods image, because it is that which
represents God in his highest excellency: for that is properly an Image of
another thing, that sets it out in the excellency of it: if it do it only in
a common and general way, it is not an Image of it. And then, in Scripture,
holiness is called the beauty of God, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his Temple. Now what is Gods beauty but the beauty of holiness, the holiness
of God appearing in his Ordinances, and his worship is the luster and beauty of
the infinite glory of God, as Psalm. 110. 3. the Ordinances are called the
beauty of holiness: Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power in the
beauties of holiness, etc. Yea holiness, some seeds of it, the very Image of
it, only in the creature, is called the glory of God, Romans 3. 23. All have
sinned and come short of the glory of God; the very beginnings of the work of
holiness in the hearts of Saints is called the glory of God; much more then the
infinite holiness of Gods own nature. Further, it is holiness that puts a
luster upon all the other attributes of God, and makes them glorious and
honorable, Psalm. 111. 9. Holy and reverend is his name; the name of God is
therefore reverend, because holy; so take all the height of excellencies that
are in God, yet if they be such as you can conceive them separated from his
holiness, they do not make his name reverend: and this shows how infinitely
it concerns us to labor after holiness; if all the excellencies of God
cannot make his name reverend, being separated from holiness, then let the
creature have what excellency it will, for parts, for estate, for dignity, and
honor in the world; take away holiness, and you cannot say reverend is his
name; but, holy and reverend is his name; so it is said of God, his name is
reverend, because holy.

Again, Gods name is glorious by holiness, because it is the special end of
all his works, to advance holiness: a workman when he draws a work, he
shows Art in the beginning of it: but when he comes to the top of it, there he
shows the excellency of his workmanship: it is so with God, God will be
honored in all his works, of creation and providence: but now come to the
height and pitch of all, and it is that he might be honored as a holy God; and
that he might have a holy people to honor him here, and to all eternity. I say
holiness is that which God aimed at in creating of heaven and earth; it is that
which God aims at in all the ways of his providence: It is the great
business for which the son of God came into the world, that he might redeem to
himself a people to serve him in holiness: it is the end of the great council
of God from all eternity; yea and that he might manifest the beauty of his own
holiness in those two great attributes, Mercy and Justice, which are the
branches of his holiness, that he might make them shine to all eternity: this
is that God aims at; therefore holiness must needs be the glory of Gods name.

Now a little for the third: but what is the reason that this Title is given to
God here in this Song of Moses, glorious in holiness? the reason is this: to
show, that the infinite excellency of Gods power is such, that it is without
any mixture of the least evil in the exercise of it: here was an act of mighty
power put forth, and God was infinitely holy in this act of his power. It is
otherwise with men (observe the difference between God and man) It is a very
hard thing for a man to do great things, and to manifest great power without a
mixture of evil: as it is with the waters, while they run shallow, they may run
clearly: but when once the waters rise and overflow, they run muddy, and
usually there is a great deal of filth comes in with great streams: so though
in common and ordinary works we do not manifest our uncleanness, yet it is
seldom when we aim to do great things, but we manifest a great deal of
filthiness: but it is otherwise with God; God is great in power, and in that
keeps the glory of his holiness. And God manifested here the greatness of his
wrath upon his enemies, and yet the glory of his holiness too. It is a very
hard thing for men to do so; let men have their anger stirred a little, O how
much filth do they presently discover? how many have we that all the while
they are pleased are exceeding meek and loving, but let any thing stir their
passion, and O what a great deal of filth appears, like a pond that is full
of mud at the bottom, and clear at top, but stir it a little and then its
nothing but filth. A father or a mother cannot tell how to be displeased with a
child or correct it, but abundance of corruption comes with that anger; and so
a governor a servant. Who can execute Justice upon others, but there will be
much of self, self ends and self-interest; but now here is the glory of God,
that when he manifests his wrath, though it be sore wrath, yet he is glorious
in holiness in great wrath; he is infinitely powerful in his wrath, and in
the execution of his Judgments, and yet infinite in holiness too; therefore
the vials of Gods wrath are said to be of gold, which is the purest metal; so
is God in the executing of his Judgments. O let us labor to imitate God in
this: thou that have a passionate spirit, and art soon provoked, and
discoverest abundance of filthiness, see how unlike thou art unto God; though
thou should be displeased with that which is sinful, and may correct thy
children and servants, yet be sure to keep that which is the beauty of all in
thy correcting of others, and that is holiness.

Again, this Title is given to God here, because in this great work of his he
did manifest his faithfulness in fulfilling of his promises to his people;
many promises God had made to his Church for their preservation and
deliverance: and God in this work of his did fulfill these promises: now Gods
faithfulness is a branch of his holiness; therefore because he manifested his
faithfulness in this work, Moses and the people extol his name by this
Title, glorious in holiness. It is observable, and it is of great use to us,
that Gods faithfulness is a branch of his holiness: if you compare two
Scriptures, you will find it so; Isaiah 55. 3. says God, I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. and this
Scripture is quoted Acts 13. 34. I will give you the sure mercies of David: so
we read it; but in the original it is the holy and faithful things of David:
so that when God comes to show mercy according to his word, he does manifest
the glory of his holiness, and it is of admirable use to Gods people to
strengthen their faith. You have heard that the glory of God is his holiness,
now one part of this holiness is his faithfulness, in fulfilling his promises
to his people: therefore it concerns God as he loves his own glory, to be
faithful in fulfilling of his promises, and God looks at it as his glory to
do it; thy comforts are dear to thee, and thy preservation is dear to thee,
but Gods glory is dearer to him, yea Gods glory is dearer to him then thy soul,
or thy eternal estate can be to thee; and the top of Gods glory is his
holiness; and his holiness consists in this (in one thing) his faithfulness
in his promises.

Now for the application of this, first: hence you may observe, whether ever
you understood God aright or no; let me put this question to you, what is that
excellency of God that your soul closes with? we speak much of Gods
excellency, and we all say, we love God, and delight in God, and bless God;
but now, what is it in God that draws thy heart so to him, and causes thy
soul to love thy God, and to bless thy God, and to delight in thy God (as thou
say) since the time that ever thou knew him? what, is it that God will
show mercy to thee, and pardon thy sin, and save thy soul, and bring thee to
heaven? these are things indeed that we are to love and bless God for: but
there must be more; it is the very person of God himself that our hearts must
be taken with, and it must be the person of God in his excellency: and what is
that? his holiness; therefore has ever the luster of the infinite holiness
of God shined upon thy heart, and drawn thy heart to God, and caused thee to
stand and adore him, and admire him; and has thy heart leaped upon the sight
of the brightness of his holiness? and do thou therefore love him? if so,
thou know God aright and thy heart has been aright drawn to him: says
David, Psalm. 119. 140. thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
Can thou say so, O Lord, thou art pure, thou art holy, therefore does thy
servant love thee; and thy word is holy, and thy worship is holy, and thy
servants are holy, and thy Ordinances are holy, and therefore does thy servant
love all these: for if the beauty of Gods holiness be that which draws thy
heart forth in love unto God, then proportionably it will be the beauty of
holiness in all holy things that will draw thy heart to love and delight in
them: then thou will look upon his Saints as glorious in holiness, and upon
his worship, and word, and Ordinances, as glorious in holiness, and so thy
heart will be drawn unto them. Psalm. 33. 21. you shall see there how the
Saints of God did rejoice in the Lord, and had their hearts drawn to him,
because of his holiness; for our hearts shall rejoice in him because we have
trusted in his holy name: the trusting in Gods holy name, is that which makes
our hearts rejoice in him.

But Secondly, hence the people of God should exceedingly comfort themselves in
God; in that they have to deal with him as a holy God: that though they meet
with much unholinesse in the spirits of men with whom they do converse: yet
there is in God nothing but holiness, yea the very beauty and glory of
holiness: Brethren, it is a delightful thing, yea a rare and a blessed thing,
to meet with a friend that has a clean and a pure heart, that has no mixture
in him, that is holy in his ends and aims, and that has a spirit free from
guile: O what rejoicing is there, when one friend that has a heart pure and
clean, and free from guile, can meet with another such as himself, and can
close together in every point! but what a delight then is it to meet with a God
that is infinite in purity and holiness, in whom there is no mixture at all!
God he takes delight in us, because we have but some drops of his holiness. O
how should we then rejoice in him who is infinite in holiness: Indeed when we
deal with men, we do not always find them as we expect; we many times meet
with men of excellent parts and gifts; but when we come to close with them we
do not find their ways and spirits suitable to the eminency and excellency of
those parts and gifts; and this is a grievous vexation to the Saints, when they
look upon men that are eminent and excellent, and hope to find a proportion of
spirit suitable thereunto, but instead thereof find abundance of filth in their
spirits; though this may trouble thee, yet bless thy God in this that when
thou art to deal with God thou shall find nothing but holiness in him, thou
shall find him working according to his excellency; for that I told you was
the nature of Gods holiness, it is the perfection of his will whereby he works
all things suitable to his eminency and excellency. Man has an excellency in
him, but not always grace in his heart to work suitable to it; but God, I say,
always works suitable to his eminency and excellency. Now when our hearts are
raised with the sight of Gods excellency, and then think with our selves we
shall always find God working according to it, O what a comfort is this to a
gracious soul against all the evil he meets with in the spirits of men,
amongst whom he converseth?

Again, further for the comfort of the Saints, if God be glorious in holiness
(then as in the former point, as there is none like to God, so there is none
like to his people; for as a man's god is, so is he,) so are the Saints glorious
in holiness too; for that which can make an infinite God glorious, must needs
make a poor worm a glorious creature. It is true, that which will make a poor
man glorious, will not make a King glorious, but that which will make a King
glorious must needs make a beggar glorious: now holiness puts a luster and
glory upon the divine nature it self, upon the infinite God: so that if thou
have it, it must needs put a glory upon thee: therefore it is observable, that
the communication of Gods holiness to us is expressed in another way then when
he communicates any other attribute to us: when God communicates his knowledge
to us, we are not said to partake of the divine nature by it; and so his power,
and the like: but when he communicates his holiness to us, we are then said to
be made partakers of the divine nature: the holiness of the Saints is the same
with Gods holiness; as it were a beam of his: so says the Scripture, Heb.
12. 10. He chastneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Mark, his holiness: and therefore it puts a wonderful glory and
excellency upon us; for it enables us to work as God, and to live as God: for
what is Gods holiness, as I said before, but that whereby he works to
himself as his last end, suitable to his own excellency? so the Saints come to
work to God according to their measure, as their last end, suitable to the
infinite excellency of God himself: and so they live as God lives and work as
God works, and so are fitted to have communion with God; as the life of a
plant makes it not fit to have communion with beasts: nor the life of beasts
with men: nor men with the life of God. Now holiness is the highest life of
all beings, being the life of God: and therefore fits for communion with God:
for in communion there must be the same life: therefore no creature can have
communion with God, that does not live the same life that God does: but if thou
partakest of holiness, thou live the life that God does, and so art fit to
have communion with God himself.

Further, it puts not only a glory upon thy person, but upon all thou have and
do: it sanctifies all; as the gold was sanctified by the Altar: so the very
natural actions, and the ways of Gods common providence, are sanctified to
Gods people: there is a luster upon all the good they enjoy, by virtue of that
holiness which God puts in them: as Gods holiness puts a luster upon all his
attributes, so holiness in the Saints puts a luster upon their parts, names,
estates, converse with others; there is a beauty upon all by holiness; take a
man that has excellent natural parts, if he have no holiness, there is no
luster and beauty in him: but take a man that has able parts, and holiness
too, O the luster that then appears in him.

Again, holiness is the very principle of eternal life, the very beginning
of eternal life in the heart, and that which will certainly grow up to
eternal life. Again, holiness is the proper object of Gods delight; God
delights not in the legs of a man, but in his holiness; let a man be what he
will, if God see any impression of holiness in him, the soul of God closes
with that soul.

Further, holiness is that which is the separation of the creature for God,
and eternal life: there is (you know) a twofold separation of a creature for
God: you have the expression, Psalm. 4. 3. The Lord has set apart him that is
godly for himself: he is set apart passively; and then he has an active
principle to set apart himself for God. God in his eternal election sets
apart those he intends to save for himself; here are those, says God, that I
have set apart from the common lump of mankind, to magnify the riches of my
grace upon, and to live with me to all eternity. If God should now look from
heaven upon a man or woman in the congregation, and say, Be it known to all the
word that I from eternity have set apart such a man and woman, to glorify them
with my self for ever: every one would look upon such a man and woman as
glorious creatures indeed: but now know, that if God has stamped the image of
his holiness upon thee, thou have as much honor from God, as if he should
thus speak to thee: and in some respects more: for if God should declare, that
from all eternity thou art set apart from the creature for God, this were
glorious; but when God has put a principle of his own spirit into thee, to
enable thee to set apart thy self, and to consecrate thy self, and thy all to
God, this is more: for in the other thou art but passive, in this thou art
active: As on the contrary, there is more dreadful evil in unholinesse then
in reprobation; men are afraid of reprobation, that God should set them apart
from eternity to magnify the glory of his Justice upon them; and it is true,
this is terrible: but while thou apprehendest this as terrible, thou thy self
art active in that which is more terrible; that is, by the filthiness and
wickedness of thy heart and life, thou do actively set thy self apart for
eternal wrath and misery: the other is passive, and thou art only set apart:
but in the wickedness of thy heart thou art active, and setst thy self apart:
For as holiness is the dedication of the creature to God, the separation of it
from all other things unto God by an active principle; so on the contrary,
sin is the separation of the creature by an active principle from God to all
misery. I thought to have enlarged my self in comparing the glory and
happiness of the Saints, and the misery of the wicked together, but time will
not give leave.

Further, as holiness makes the name of God to be reverend, so holiness in
the Saints puts a reverend respect upon them in the very consciences of wicked
men: take the vilest of wicked men, though they cry out of thee; yet know, if
thou walk strictly, thy close walking with God will gain respect and
reverence from their hearts, in spite of their hearts. And the reason why the
people of God gain not respect and esteem, is, because they do not walk
strictly; many men mistake themselves: they think that strictness is slighted
and contemned, and therefore they begin to lessen and abate in their exact
walking: but this makes them disesteemed; and it is just with God it should be
so: does the abating of holiness help thee to a reverend respect? no, walk
more closely with God, and thou will have respect from men's consciences: do
what they can, thou will anger their lust; but thou will convince their
consciences: and in their most serious mood they will say, O that my soul were
in this man's souls stead: and how often do they say so on their death bed? and
if holiness put an excellency and glory upon low and mean things, as in the
law what a glory did it put upon a piece of Wood, or Leather, or Brass, when
once it was consecrated to a holy use? because that was Gods Ordinance, God did
put it in it, and not man: for a man to think it is in the power of his will
to make God esteem, or that others in reference unto God should esteem of a
creature, more then what God has put into it, is a great mistake: that common
stones by my will should be holy, and consecrated to God, and must not be
meddled with, that I should put a divine excellency upon that which has only a
natural excellency in it; what a boldness would this be in me: but now, if
Gods Ordinance be so, then there is a glory put upon it, as in the Temple,
because it was dedicated to God by divine institution, there the very wood, and
brass, and every thing had an excellency upon it. Now I would argue thus,
shall ceremonial holiness put such an excellency upon a piece of Leather!
what then shall the image of God put upon an immortal soul!

A further use should have been this, If God be glorious in holiness, then
certainly (brethren) God will maintain holiness in the world: and this is one
reason amongst others, of this Title given to God here, because he did work
for his Church: God will honor his own Ordinances and worship, and will
maintain his Saints that are holy; preserve me O Lord (says David) for I am
holy: and thou will not give thy holy one to see corruption. If thou be Gods
holy one, he will not leave thee to the power of corruption, he will defend
thee and maintain thee: therefore says the Psalmist in Psalm. 68. 35. O God
thou art terrible out of thy holy places; what are there any that will be
injurious to Gods people when they are in the way of his holy worship? God will
be terrible out of his holy places unto such; these expressions are against the
enemies of God, because it is the holiness of God, and the people of Gods
holiness that they set themselves against. And let all men take heed what they
do in opposing the Saints, and the ways of Gods holy worship; for God will
maintain holiness: therefore it concerns us all to honor holiness our
selves, and to set up the glory of Gods holiness as much as we can in the
world. O let us labor all to be holy, as our heavenly Father is holy: let that
be our prayer, Psalm. 90. 17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us. O
grow up more in holiness, which is the beauty of God: converse much with God,
that thou may est be holy: when Moses was forty days in the Mount conversing
with God, he came down with his face shining: and certainly, those people that
converse much with God will have their faces shine with holiness: there is
much to be had in conversing with God, who is a holy God. And show forth the
beauty of holiness in thy conversation, that others may say, if one beam of
holiness be so delightful in such a man or woman, O how glorious in holiness
then is God himself! I remember what a heathen said of the God of the
Christians, when he saw the courage of the Christians, certainly (says he)
the God of the Christians is a great God: why let us walk so holily before
others that they may read holiness in our conversations, and be forced to say,
certainly the God of this people is a holy God: Especially look to thy heart
to cleanse that when thou drawest near to this holy God, in this holy worship,
then labor to sanctify his name; look to thy feet, come not in thy filth
into the presence of so holy a God; it is a notable expression of Joshua, Joshua
24. 19. when the people say, we will serve the Lord, for he is our God: says
Joshua, you cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, etc. As if he should
say, it is another manner of business to serve the Lord then you think for,
for you have to deal with a holy God, and it is not external worship will serve
his turn. It is an argument people do not know God, when they can turn his
service off so slightly: the sight of God would put thee into another frame;
did thou know God in his holiness, thou would look upon the service of God
as a great service; thou servest a holy God, as they say, Sam. 1. 6. 20. who
can stand before this holy God? so, did thou apprehend God to be a holy God,
thy heart would be stricken with fear and awe, and thou would say, who can
stand before this holy God? God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the
Saints, and to be had in reverence of those that are round about him, Psalm.
89. 7. God is to be had in reverence of all men; but if you come near to him,
certainly then you must labor to sanctify your hearts. How can thou come
before the luster and beauty of Gods holiness with wilful uncleanness in thy
heart? that Text in Job is very remarkable Job 13. 11. Shall not his excellency
make you afraid? You have heard that Gods holiness is his excellency: now I
say, to thee that have to deal with him, shall not his excellency make thee
afraid? art thou conscious of thy uncleanness and do thou come into the
presence of a holy God and not fear and tremble before him? O bold daring
heart that thou have, that can come into the presence of a holy God with an
unholy heart, and not tremble: it would be of admirable use in all our dealings
with God, to have clear apprehensions of his holiness.

Again, labor to magnify God this way: as God is glorious in holiness, so
set him out in his glory by keeping his worship pure. It is a special thing
God looks at, that we take heed what we do in defiling of his worship. Gods
Ordinances are the beauty of his holiness, therefore we must labor to come
pure and clean unto them: it is that which God commands his Church, to keep the
vessels of his sanctuary holy, and those are the ordinances: and we are
unfaithful in our charge, if we do not keep the ordinances holy: in Exodus 20.
24. 25. God gives them charge there to make him an Altar: but says God, If
thou will make me an Alter of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stone:
for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it. What, might they
say, shall we have an Altar of rude stone? shall we not polish and make it fine
and sumptuous? will not that make it more specious to look upon? no, says God;
if you lift up a tool upon it you pollute it. We are apt to think, that such
and such mixtures of men, and such and such ceremonies would make the worship
of God glorious; but this is a great mistake. It is a usual thing for whores
to paint their faces; they will not be content with their natural beauty, but
are more pompous in their apparel then the chaste Matrons are. It is so with
the whore of Babylon: how glorious are they in all their worship? and what
strange things have they to take the outward senses? they are feign to dress
and trick up themselves, having not the purity of Gods worship: but certainly
these things defile the worship of God: compare two Texts for this, Isai. 44,
9. They that make a graven Image are all of them vanity, and their delectable
things shall not profit: mark, the Images of Idolaters are delectable things
in their esteem: but see what God speaks of them, Ezekiel. 7. 20. As for the
beauty of his ornament, he set it in Majesty: but they made the Images of their
abominations, and of their detestable things therein. They call them delectable
things, but God accounts them detestable: but when God speaks of his own
ordinances, he says, as for the beauty of his ornament he set it in Majesty. O
the worship of God in the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel it is the
ornament of God, the beauty of his ornament, and the beauty of his ornament set
in Majesty: what phrases are here? this is Gods worship; but if man mix any
thing of his own in Gods worship, it is detestable to God: therefore if we
would honor and magnify God in his holiness, let us keep pure his worship;
for holiness becomes the worship of God for ever.

And then the consideration of this should humble us, and make us ashamed, for
the remainder of all that unholinesse that is in our hearts; the sight of Gods
holiness made Isaiah cry out, Isaiab 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because
I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean
lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. And certainly there
is nothing in the world has that power to humble the heart so as Gods
holiness: and then is your heart humbled for sin aright, when you look upon
it as that which is opposite to the pure nature of God. I am not only troubled
for my sin because I am afraid it will bring hell along with it, but because
I have had a sight of the infinite holiness of God, and the purity of his
nature: and O that I should have a nature so filthy, and opposite to that
infinite holiness of his. And hereby examine your hearts whether your
humiliation be right or no; and this is one good argument, when the infinite
holiness of God has made you see your uncleanness, and upon that has
humbled you.

Lastly, what need have we all of Jesus Christ! if God be glorious in
holiness, we should all of us say, who can stand before so holy a God! were it
not for the holiness of the blessed mediator who stands between the father and
us, and presents his infinite satisfaction to the father for our sins, and
clothes us with his righteousness, woe, woe unto us: if you could possibly
imagine that all the excellencies of heaven and earth were put into one
creature, except holiness, yet if that creature had but the least drop of
uncleanness and unholinesse in it, God would eternally hate that creature; and
were there not a mediator between that creature and God, God would eternally
let out his wrath upon it: for God is so glorious in holiness that he does
infinitely hate filthiness: we wonder to hear of such great misery threatened
to wicked men, but we should not wonder, did we know Gods holiness: God does
so infinitely hate sin that he did instantly send all the Angels that fell,
down in chains of eternal darkness, and refused to enter into the least
parley with them, or to be reconciled to them for ever. Now what is the reason,
that though we have so much uncleanness in us, yet God is pleased to be
reconciled to us, and to admit us into his presence, and give us hopes to see
his face with joy to all eternity? it is this, because we have a mediator, and
they have none: were it not for that, could we weep streams of blood from our
eyes, yet God would hate and abhor us, and his wrath would eternally seize upon
us. And therefore, though you may rejoice in inherent holiness, yet let your
hearts especially be upon the perfect holiness of Jesus Christ, and tender up
that to God: and though thou have much uncleanness in thy self and in thy
duties (for alas what is it for us to tender duty to the holy God) yet let this
comfort thee, thou have not to deal with God in thy self, but through Christ;
and in him thou have liberty to come, and may look upon Gods face with
boldness; this is the great mystery of godliness, revealed in the Gospel,
that notwithstanding the infiniteness of Gods holiness, yet there should be a
way for us polluted creatures to look upon this God with joy. This mystery is
only taught in the Gospel. Though men now think they can come and cry to God
for mercy; yet hereaafter when God shall let out the brightness of his
holiness to thee, and thou come to see thy uncleanness, then thy heart will
sink down in eternal despair; thou will not endure to behold God then: And
if thou be not acquainted with God in this way of reconciliation, thou art
undone for ever; therefore study the mystery of the Gospel, and make use of
Christ, that the glory of Gods holiness may not be to thy terror, but to thy
comfort.

This Sermon was preached March 21. 1640.
COLOS. 3. V. 11. latter end of it.
But Christ is all in all. March 28 1641.

IT is not long since (as some of you may remember) that in this place that
subject was handled of the Saints enjoyment of God, to be all in all, out of 1
Cor. 15. v. 28. and then I told you we had such an expression in Scripture but
only twice: applied to God in the happiness of the Saints enjoyment of him in
heaven, and applied here to Christ, of what Christ is to them for the present.
That which was handled about Gods being all in all, is the end: this that is to
be delivered concerning Christ being all in all, is that which brings the soul
to that blessed end. Wherefore then, as Christ him self says, John 14. 1. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me: So I say, as God shall be all in all
eternally to the Saints, do you believe in that? believe also in this, that I
am to deliver to you this day, that Christ, he is all and in all.

The Apostle Saint Paul was a chosen vessel to bear the name of Christ, to
carry it up and down in the world: and indeed his spirit was full of Christ,
he desired to know nothing but Christ, to Preach nothing but Christ, to be
found in none but Christ; the very name of Christ was delightful to him: he
seeks in all his Epistles to magnify Christ, and in these words (that I have
read unto you) he does omnifie Christ; he makes him not only great, but makes
him all. There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all: that is,
there is no privilege in the one to commend them to God, and no want of any
thing in the other to hinder them from God; let men be what they will in their
outward respects, what is that to God? let them be never so mean in regard of
all outward, that cannot hinder them from the enjoyment of God: for God looks
not at these things, but Christ is all and in all to them; so far as God
sees Christ in any, he accepts of them: if Christ be not there, whatever they
have, he regards them not. Christ is all in all, even in the esteem of the
Father himself: he was the delight of the father from all eternity, Prove. 8.
30. and the father took infinite contentment in him upon his willingness to
undertake this blessed work of the redemption of mankind. God the father is
infinitely satisfied in Christ, he is all in all to him: Surely if Christ be an
object sufficient for the satisfaction of the father, much more then is he an
object sufficient for the satisfaction of any soul.

But that which is the maine scope here of the holy Ghost in this high
expression of Christ's transcendent excellency (that I may come presently to it)
I shall deliver it in this doctrinall proposition, That Christ is the only
means of conveighance of all good that God the father intends to communicate
unto the children of men, in order to eternal life; he is all, and in all.
This that I am now to Preach unto you, namely, Gods communicating of himself
in his mercy to mankind, through a mediator, it is the very sum of the
Gospel, the great mystery of godliness, it is the chief part of the mind and
counsel of God, that he would have made known to the children of men in this
world. This is the great embassage that the ministers of the Gospel have to
bring unto the sons and daughters of men, and it is the most absolutely
necessary point in all Divinity.

I suppose in the first hearing of it, every one yields to the truth of it;
it is true you will say, we can have no good from God, but in and by Christ.
Well, there is a great deal in that you say, when you say all must come from
God in Christ: in all your prayers and petitions you usually conclude them
through Jesus Christ; but certainly this is many times spoken when we see
little of the glory of God that there is in such an expression: and that which
I shall this day endeavor, shall be to show you somewhat of the glory of God
shining in this truth that God does communicate himself through a mediator,
through his son. This is the great point of Divinity that is absolutely
necessary to be known to eternal life: it is possible to be ignorant of many
other truths, and yet be saved; but there must be some knowledge of this, or
there can be no salvation: the mistake in this very thing is the miscarriage,
and the eternal undoing of thousand thousands of souls; many there are who
believe that they have need of, and can never be saved but by Gods mercy, and
this the light of nature convinces us of: but that God is to communicate his
mercy through a mediator, this they are ignorant of, and see not into the
reallity of this truth; and miscarry and perish eternally with cries to God for
mercy, because they come to God, but not through a mediator. This is the sum of
the Gospel, and the most supernatural truth revealed in all the book of God.
It is a truth that was hidden almost from all the world for many ages; the
Scripture says, The Princes of the world knew it not. A truth we are not able
to understand any thing of by the light of nature. 1 Cor. 1. 21. The world by
wisdom knew not God, that is, by all their arts and sciences, by all their
natural wisdom, they knew not God savingly; they did not know God in Christ.
There is no footsteps of this truth in all the works of creation or providence;
therefore in Ephesians. 3. 8. Saint Paul says, he was appointed to Preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ; that riches that has no footsteps: that is the
propriety of the word; there is no footsteps of the riches of the Gospel in
the creature; therefore you cannot trace it there; whereas many other points of
religion have many footsteps in the creature, and by the light of nature much
may be discovered about God: as that all our good consists in communion with
God, that when we have offended God, we must seek to him for pardon and mercy,
and the like: But that God communicates himself through Christ, and that not
one drop of mercy in order to eternal life can be communicated from God, but
through Christ the mediator, of this there is not one footstep in all the works
of God.

This is that which is so supernatural, that it is above perfect nature. Adam
knew nothing of this in his perfect estate. Yea this is that which the Angels
themselves desire to pry into, looking upon it as a mighty depth. 1 Peter 1.
12. the Angels stoop down (for so the word signifies) it is as if a thing
should lie in a deep pit, and when any would see it, they stoop down with their
bodies to pry into the pit: that's the propriety of the word: so the Angels they
see a mighty depth in the mystery of the Gospel, and they stoop down to pry
into it, that they may know what it is. Yea this is that which requires a work
of the spirit, beyond the ordinary work of the spirit of God, to reveal it to
the soul, 1 Cor. 2. 10. speaking there of the Mystery of the Gospel, says the
Apostle, The spirit that searches the deep things of God, etc. discovers this;
that is the spirit of God in an extraordinary work of his, as he is a spirit
searching the deep things of God, so he is a discovering spirit of this truth
unto us: and therefore seeing it is thus, it is not so light to be past over.
I, you will say, it is true, all must come through Jesus Christ: well, you see a
little at first, but there is much more in this truth then we are aware of.
It Is a truth that is the most profitable of all the truths contained in the
book of God: there is no growing up in godliness till we come to know God in
Christ: the knowledge of God is something to work upon the heart, and many
labor against their sin because they see it is against the law of God, and
set upon duties because God requires them; and this is well; but till they come
to understand indeed the mystery of the Gospel, of Gods letting himself out
unto his people through a mediator, they do but bungle in the ways of
godliness, they do not thrive and grow up in them; and therefore these
Christians that live under such a ministry, where though they have many good
truths revealed to them, yet having but little of the mystery of Christ, as the
mediator, their way of Christianity is very low, they do not sanctify God in
their conversation. I remember a speech that Erasmus has when they would have
had him write against Luther, and promised him a great Bishopric for it; he
answers, Luther is greater then that I can write against him; for I am
instructed more in one small page of Luther, then out of whole Thomas Aquinas,
that was the great Schoolman. So certainly the understanding but some one
truth, some one sentence in the mystery of the Gospel, in this way of Gods
communication of himself unto us through his Christ, does instruct the soul,
and cause it to thrive and grow up in godliness abundantly more then thousands
of Sermons about mere moralities: and you have a most admirable Text for this,
Ephesians. 3. 17. and so on, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge: mark what follows, That ye might be filled
with all the fullness of God, v. 19. By coming to know God in Christ, that is,
to know Christ to be the way of Gods communicating himself unto us, we come to
be filled with all the fullness of God: many Christians their hearts are very
scant and empty, there is not a fullness in their spirits; and all because they
know so little of God in Christ, in this mystery of the Gospel.

Lastly, there is no truth revealed in all the Scriptures whereby we can honor
God so much as by this: this indeed is the great honor that God would have in
the world, to be honored in his Son, and in the great design he has of
bringing forth glorious things by his Son: and therefore though we know never
so much of God, and would honor him merely as the Creator of heaven and
earth, yet God does not accept of that honor, that is but to honor him in a
natural way; we never know what it is to honor God aright, so as to be
accepted of him, till we come to honor him in an Evangelicall way, to honor
him in his Son: and yet the greatest honor he has from most in the world, yea
from multitudes in the very Church of God, that hear the mystery of Christ
opened to them, is tendered up to him merely in a natural way, and not in this
spiritual Evangelicall service of God. You see now the consequence of the
point, let us then fall to it.

And First I shall show you the truth of it in Scripture.

And Secondly how it comes to pass that there can be no good communicated to
us from God in order to eternal life but by Christ.

And Thirdly, how Christ comes to be the means and way of conveighance of all
good unto us from his father.

Fourthly, I shall instance in some special things, great things wherein most
of the goodness of God is communicated to us, and show you how in them Christ
is all in all to us.

And Fifthly the reasons why God will have this way of communication of
himself unto us through his Son, why he will not communicate himself
immediately to us, but through a mediator; these are the five things for the
doctrinall part.

For the first, the course of Scripture especially of the new Testament runs
this way; you know that of Christ, John 14. 6. I am the way, the truth and the
life; no man comes unto the father but by me; there is no coming to the Father
but by Christ, and Christ he is the way: and that in 1 Cor. 3. at the latter
end, says the Apostle there: All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours. How is that? mark, All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods: God the Father he is the principle of all good; all firstly
comes from him, but it comes not from him immediately: he does not say, all are
yours, for ye are Gods; because you have an interest in God, therefore all
comes to be yours: no, but all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods; so that you see here how that Christ comes between yours and Gods.

All good is in God, true; but how shall we come to partake of that good? there
is such a distance between these two terms, yours and Gods, that were not
Christ in the middle, they would never come together. Yea, but Christ's coming
between, and joining them together, then all are yours, because ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods; so that we may take the intent of the Holy Ghost
here, in this similitude (though it be too low for the great mystery we are
about to express.) Conceive God the father as the fountain of all good, and
Christ as it were the Cisterne: and then from him, pipes conveiged to every
believer; and faith, that sucks at the mouth of every pipe, and draws from
God, but it comes from God through Christ. The Father he fills the Son with all
good, and so it comes from the Father through the Son by faith unto the soul of
every beliver: we have a notable expression further of this mystery in the
Epistle to the Ephesians. in the second and third Chapters, in Chapter 2. verse. 12,
having told them that they had been without hope, and without God in the world;
but says he verse. 13. Ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ: It is by the blood of Christ that you have any thing to do
with God; but especially in Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness and
access with confidence by the faith of him; in whom? in Christ, we come to
have boldness and access: boldness, the word signifies liberty of speech
that we can come with liberty of speech before God, and we have access:
Manudction, we are led by the hand of Christ to the father, there is no coming
to the father but by Christ, and Christ he takes a believer by the hand and
leads him to the father, and so he comes to have boldness: as if a Traitor
should be banished, the Court, and afterward the Prince should be a means of
his reconciliation with the King, and comes and takes the Traitor by the hand,
and says to him, come, I will lead you in my hand to my father, and though you
have provoked him, yet being in my hand, you need not be afraid, but may go to
him with boldness and confidence. Just the meaning of the Text here, In Christ
we have boldness and access with confidence; and although before there was a
dreadful breach between the father and us, yet being led by the hand of
Christ, there is access and freedom of speech for us: well the truth is
clear enough in the whole tenor of the Gospel.

If you would know now how it comes to pass, that though God be in himself
the fountain of all goodness and infinite mercy; that yet there is such a
stoppage as it were that there is not one drop of this mercy can be
communicated to the children of men but this way? that although we have to deal
with God, who in his own nature is infinitely merciful; yet such is the case
with man, and such are the terms between God and man, that there is not, I
say, one drop of this infinite ocean can be expected to come for ever from God,
but only this way, It comes to pass thus:

First, because of the breach of the first covenant that God made with
mankind; for only men and Angels, the humane and angelical nature, are
capable of a covenant with God, to speak of a covenant properly: and because
they are capable of this way of Gods proceeding with them, God would go
according to the nature of his creature; and therefore at first makes a
covenant with them, and intended to convey and communicate his goodness to
them by that convenant; now this covenant being broken, and so there being a
breach between God and man, there is a stoppage made by virtue of that breach:
So that there is no good now to be had by virtue of the first covenant: and
unlessse there be a second, there can be no good at all expected; the first
being broken, and we being lost by that.

And further, there is such an infinite distance between God and us, that there
can be no coming together; and that not so much in regard of Gods excellency in
himself, and our meanness, that we are such poor low creatures, as in regard
of the infiniteness of his holiness, and our uncleanesse and sinfulness,
this makes the distance.

Besides, there is the strength of the law; the curse of the law is upon every
soul naturally, and that stops: there was never vessel stopped closer to be kept
from having a drop of liquor poured into it, then the curse of the law is close
upon every soul, to keep mercy from it, so far as God looks upon it merely in
its naturals, and not through his Son.

Then there are the cries of infinite Justice against men, which must have
satisfaction: and till Justice be satisfied mercy stirs not, unless it be in
a way of providing satisfaction unto Justice: so that put these together, the
breach of the first covenant, the distance between God and man in regard of
Gods holiness and man's sinfulness, the power of the curse of the law upon
man, and the cries of divine Justice, that will never be quiet till it has
received satisfaction: these things being rightly apprehended, we may come to
see that we are far off from receiving mercy from God, though he be an
infinite fountain of mercy, except there be some strange way of conveying it
to us. We know, according to Gods dealing with the fallen Angels, there is no
way of conveying mercy to them, but they are left to perish for ever: if the
thousands of Angels that fell from God should be thousands of thousands of
years crying out for mercy, they could not obtain one drop: why? because there
is no mediator between God and them; and it would have been our case with them,
had there not been a mediator between God and us. Many think if they are
sensible of their sins, and can believe that God is infinitely merciful,
they shall do well enough: but I must tell you, that though there be infinite
mercy in God, yet if thou have no interest in Christ, thou may be undone for
ever.

But how is Christ all in all to us in Gods communication of good to us?

The first ground of all is the covenant that God the Father made with his Son
from all eternity. Therefore in Titus 1. 2. the Apostle speaks of the promise
that was before the world began. Now this promise can be meant only of that
covenant that past between the Father and the Son: and therefore says the
Apostle in 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
which love him: but the spirit which searches all things, yea the deep things
of God, he has revealed them unto us, that is, the spirit of God in the Gospel
discovers what were the eternal thoughts and purposes of God concerning us, and
what the transactions were between the Father and the Son in reference to
mankind before the world was. The covenant now being between the Father and
the Son, and the Father requiring in this Covenant satisfaction to infinite
divine justice, Christ he yields to this.

And therefore in the second place, Christ he actually comes to be the way of
conveyance, by taking our nature upon him, and so makes us reconcilable to God,
by taking humane nature into such a near union to the divine nature, to the
second person in the Trinity; so as that there should be but one (...) but one
person in them both, that there should be a personal union, which is the great
mystery of the Gospel. There are two great mysteries in the Gospel; the one,
that there should be diverse persons in one nature; and this is the mystery of
the Trinity: the other that there should be diverse natures in one person; and
this is the mystery of the hypostaticall union of our nature with Christ. So
that Christ taking man's nature into such a near union to himself, it was a
mighty preparative for God to have thoughts of peace toward humane nature,
rather then to the Angels: and it was one part of his humility, and therefore
has a meritorious efficiency in this work of reconciling God to man. But this
was not sufficient.

Therefore in the third place, Christ was content now to come into the world,
and be made the head of a second covenant between God and mankind; to perform
what ever God the Father should require, for the satisfaction of divine
Justice: so that, look as Adam by being the head of the first covenant, was the
means of conveying all evil to us: so Christ by being the head of the second
covenant, is the means of conveying all good to us; by his subjecting to this
we come to receive all grace and mercy from God. And it could not have been
otherwise; for though God would have thought of a second covenant, yet if he
had left it to us to have performed the terms of it, we should as soon have
broken that, as we did the first: but Christ undertaking to be the head of the
second covenant, and performing whatever the Father required in it, by his
perfect obedience to the law, and satisfaction to divine Justice, divine
Justice had nothing to lay to the charge of those that Christ undertook to
satisfy for: This was a mighty way of Gods letting out his grace and mercy to
the souls of believers; for what is it that stops the current of his mercy?
it is the curse of the law and cries of divine Justice: but now, Christ
undertaking to undergo that curse, and to satisfy divine Justice, God has as
much honor now by his suffering, as he had dishonor by man's sinning: so that
man's sin is made up in this; and that is it Justice requires. I have had
dishonor by sin says Justice, I must have this dishonor made up by
suffering, and so much suffering as in which I must have as much honor as I
had before dishonor in sinning. These are the conditions upon which God will
be reconciled to man; and upon no other. I beseech you consider this, and
herein you will see an infinite necessity of Christ: God is with us upon these
terms: says God, you have sinned against me and dishonored me; how do you
think to be delivered? why Lord, thou art merciful: I, says God, but I am
resolved upon this, I will have as much honor by suffering, as I had dishonor
by sinning. And Lord what would have become of us, if we had been left to make
up this breach. This is the very reason why the damned in hell are there
eternally, because they are there upon these terms; says God, I am infinite,
and I am dishonored, and there they must lie, till I have as much honor by
their suffering as I had dishonor by their sinning. Now after they have been
there thousands of thousands of years, still the honor of God calls for more:
and therefore they must lie there for ever. But now, Christ who is the great
Savior, he comes, and entering into covenant with God, and fulfilling that
covenant, he lays down God such a price, that God shall have as much honor
in his suffering for sin, as he had dishonor before in the committing of
sin. Now this being done, the current of mercy being unstopt, and the
passages of it opened, and God being infinite in grace and mercy in himself,
what a glorious way is made for the streams of his mercy to issue and flow
forth to the children of men.

And (take in this one particular more, and then we shall have done with this
head) In this we may see, that God in forgiving of sin, and showing mercy to
sinful creatures is just; and goes in a way of Justice, as well as in a way of
mercy: therefore that Text Romans 3. 25. 26. is very observable (a Text that
Luther for a while was exceedingly troubled about the meaning of it) Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus. This was that
which troubled Luther so much, that God should declare his righteousness in
the remission of sins: that God declares his mercy every one knows, but that
God declares his righteousness, and that Christ is set to be a propitiation,
that God might declare his righteousness, this may seem strange: and then the
Holy Ghost repeats it, To declare I say his righteousness: as if he should
say, consider that God in the pardoning of sin, does not only manifest his
grace and mercy, but declares his righteousness, That he might be just: and
the justifier of him which believes in Jesus; Not merciful, but just: thus
we see what way Christ takes to be the means of conveying Gods goodness to
us; by performing the covenant, and so satisfying divine Justice.

Lastly, he is the way of conveying good to us, as by his satisfaction, so by
his intercession: for he is now, and shall for ever be, at the right hand of
the Father in glory, making intercession for his people: that is, continually
presenting before his Father the work of his mediation, his merits, what he
has done and suffered, and as it were pleading with his Father for the
conveyance of all needful mercy and good unto the souls and bodies of his
people whom he has redeemed. As if he should every moment eternally speak
thus to the Father: Father, behold here is my blood, my merits, my death, all
my sufferings; the work of my humiliation, it is for these; yea for this poor
soul, and for that poor soul particularly: for know that Christ thinks not only
of the lump of believers in the general, but particularly of every believer,
and is continually presenting before the Father his infinite merits, to plead
with him for supply of all grace and mercy to us: and thus he comes to be an
infinite way of conveyance of good to the souls of his people, and so to be all
and in all to them, both here and eternally: that is the third particular; how
Christ comes to be the way of conveyance.

But now the fourth, and that is, to instance in some special things we have
from God, and to manifest that Christ is all in all in those things; As now
first, in the point of justification and the pardon of our sins, the
acceptance of us as righteous: that is the great thing we stand in need of
from God, Christ is all in all to us here: this is the tenor of the Gospel,
Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is
in Jesus Christ. Luther has this expression concerning justification: says
he, in the point of justification, there Christ and faith must be only put
together; they must be alone, and nothing else with them; but in our
conversation, there indeed comes in good works: just as it is between the
bridegroom and the bride, the bridegroom and the bride are alone in the bride
chamber; but when they go abroad, there they have their train and servants
attending them: so he compares justification to the bride chamber; none but
Christ and faith must be there; but when they come abroad in their
conversation, then all other graces attend them, and good works come in; but
Christ is all in all here.

First, It is not all we have done; no, nor all that we can possibly do, that
can be our justification. You will say, true, we have for the present done but
little: I, but suppose any of you should do your utmost in any particular that
God requires: you will say, I hope if I do what I can, God will accept it of
me: no, you mistake exceedingly if you think so; people are very apt to look
upon God as if the terms between God and them were no other then thus: God he
is a pitiful and a merciful God; and it is true, we are weak and can do but
little: but yet doing what we are able, God he will accept the will for the
deed: no, God accepts not the will for the deed in point of justification. It
is true, in those that are already justified, God in the performance of duty
accepts the will for the deed, so as to take delight in them: but in point of
justification, as to pardon of sin and acceptance to righteousness, there
he must have perfect obedience; and though we endeavor never so much, yet
unless we can bring God a perfect righteousness, we are undone for ever; yea,
woe to Abraham, and woe to Isaac, and woe to Jacob, and woe to David and
Daniel, and to all the Prophets and Apostles, notwithstanding all their
righteousness, if they had not had a righteousness beyond what was in
themselves; If they had not had a perfect righteousness to tender to their
Father, they had been utterly lost for ever: therefore it is not for thee to
rest upon this, that thou do what thou can, and have good wishes and
desires, and the like; for were all the righteousness of all the righteous men
that ever were in the world in one man, it would not be sufficient for his
justification. I but it may be you will say, true I can do but little of my
self, but if God enable me, then he will accept of me. Nay further, it is not
what God enables thee to do, that can be the formallity of thy justification:
such are the terms between God and thee, that there is nothing thou can do
of thy self, or can be enabled to do, that is accepted of him for thy
righteousness to eternal life.

But it may be said, it is true, though God should enable me, yet there may be
imperfections; but God is merciful, and will pass them by: therefore I add
another consideration, that it is not only what thou can do, or can be
enabled to do, but it is not Gods mercy added (if barely considered, as the
mercy of God as a creator to his creature, and not under this consideration
through Christ, and accepting a righteousness beyond thy own) that can eke out
thy justification. This is a great mistake, many think that that which they
have in themselves and what they are able to do, is but little: but when they
have done something, if God will come then and add his mercy to it, that they
think will eke it out: no, it is not that and mercy together that is thy
justification, I say mercy out of this notion we are speaking of.

And that you may understand it yet more clearly, consider it thus the work of
Gods mercy in justification, it is not of this use, that it should be our
justification, or should eke out what we are wanting in for our justification;
but the work of Gods mercy in justifying a soul is, to take him off from
himself, to unbottome him, and to make him see and be sensible of his own
unrighteousness and uncleanesse: this is a great and mighty work of Gods
mercy. I remember Luther says of himself, that while he was a Papist, he was
not obedient out of worldly respects for a livelihood, and the like; but he did
what he did out of conscience: and yet says he afterward, (after he knew God
in Christ) That which I counted gain was loss unto me. He did not think it
enough to do what he did out of conscience, and that Gods mercy should make up
the rest: no, he was taken off of that way. It Is not the work of mercy to do
this, but to discover to the soul a righteousness of a higher nature, even of
the mediator God and man; and to enable the soul by faith to tender up that
righteousness to God the father for satisfaction: this is the work of Gods
mercy in point of justification. The mistake of the way of Gods mercy having an
influence into our justification is a very dangerous mistake; and we had need
be very wary in this great point of justification, for all depends upon it. I
remember Luther in this, says he, it is an easy matter to say we close with
Gods grace, and the righteousness of Christ alone in the point of
justification, till the soul be brought to a conflict: and then it is the
hardest thing in the world to do it, and the people of God have found it so in
the time of trouble of conscience: that's the first, that Christ is all in all
in point of justification.

Secondly, he is all in all in point of adoption, so says the Scripture, Gal.
3. 26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; and Chapter
4. v. 4. 5. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons: and especially that is very
remarkable John 1. 12, But as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. The word
translated power, is another word in the greek. -- He gave them authority to
become the sons of God: it is a word that imports more then bare power. Every
one will challenge a part in sonship, that they are the children of God; but
only those that are in Christ have authority to challenge it as their due. If a
stranger should say he was the Kings son, and were heir to the Crown, it would
cost him his life, because he is none of the Kings son; but if one be declared
by Act of Parliament to be the right heir to the Crown, then he has authority
to challenge it. It Is so here; when once we come to be in Christ, then we have
authority to claim this privilege, to be the sons of God, and heirs of
heaven. And this great privilege that is so mightily above us, we have it in
Christ, not only by way of the redundancy of his merit, but by our union with
him, we are married to Christ; and by union with his person, are made one with
him; and so are sons by virtue of his sonship: And are therefore sons of God in
a higher way then the Angels are; the Angels are sons by creation, but we are
the sons of God in Christ, by virtue of our union in his sonship: as Christ is
the son of God the second person in Trinity, and we made one with him, so we
come to be the sons of God in a mystical way of union with him, and Christ is
all in all in that.

And then in point of reconciliation and peace with God, Christ is all in all
there, Being justified, by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 5. 1. It is not all the created power in heaven and earth that can
bring true peace to a troubled soul: there is no salve for a wounded spirit,
but the blood of Christ applied unto it: it is he that is the brazen Serpent that
is only able to cure the strings of conscience; as Luther says, it is a
harder matter of comfort an afflicted conscience, then to raise the dead: few
think it so, and wonder what people mean in being so troubled in conscience as
they are: I tell you, were there not a mighty redeemer, the conscience of a man
or woman could never be pacified that once apprehends the wrath of God against
them; so that Christ is all in all there.

And so he is all in all in point of all our sanctification, that is
sanctification to life. There is a general kind of sanctification the
Scripture speaks of, which comes some way from Christ: but now I speak of that
sanctification which is our spiritual life. You know what the Scripture says,
John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and John 1.
16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. There is the
fullness of Christ conveyed into the soul: so that our sanctification is not
only from him meritoriously, but efficiently, yea, and in a kind materially
too, for he does not only merit it, and work it by his spirit; but through our
union with him there is a kind of flowing of sanctification from him into us,
as the principle of our life: as from the Liver there flows blood into all the
parts of the body; so through our union with Christ, he having the fullness of
the Godhead in him, from him as from a fountain, sanctification flows into
the souls of the Saints: there sanctification comes not so much from their
struggling, and endeavors, and vows, and resolutions, as it comes flowing to
them from their clossing with Christ and their union with him; there may be a
great deal of striving and endeavoring that may be utterly ineffectuall, for
want of having recourse unto Christ as the spring and well head of all grace
and holiness. I remember a Germane Devine professes of himself, that before
he understood the grace of Christ in the Gospel, he vowed and vowed, and
covenanted and covenanted a thousand times, and could never overcome his
corruptions, till he understood Gods letting out of his grace through Christ,
and then he got strength against them: and the reason why we fail in point of
sanctification is, because we think to get it all by maine strength; but the
ready way is to close with Christ by faith, and then there will flow in life
and grace to the soul: there may be many morallities by the light of nature,
and the remainders of that light left in us; but that is not the sanctification
that is to life. And hence it is, that there is so much beauty and glory in the
sanctification of the Saints, because Christ is all in all in it; and that
there is such power and strength in it, because it is of the strength of
Christ; for Christ is all in all in it. And hence it is of an abiding nature,
and an immortal seed; And therefore of a higher nature then that of Adams in
innocence: that lost, but so cannot this; because Christ is all in all in it;
so that Christ is all in our sanctification likewise.

Again, he is all in all in the want of all things, whatsoever we want: do we
want grace, do we want gifts, do we want outward comforts in the world? there
is enough in Christ: it is Christ that is instead of all, that is better then
all, and that will supply all in his due time. Those that know Christ, and have
acquaintance with him, though they have this and that comfort taken from them,
yet they know how to make supply out of Christ: they have that skill, and art,
and mystery of godliness, that they can make Christ to be all in all in the
want of all: and it is a great skill and mystery of godliness, to know how to
make up all in Christ in the want of all.

Again, Christ to the Saints is all in all in the enjoyment of all: when they
enjoy never so much of creature comforts, Christ is all in all in them; the
satisfaction that their souls have, is not so much that they have the
creatures, that they have larger estates, more friends, greater comforts then
others; but in this, they know how to enjoy Christ in all, and can look upon it
as a fruit of the covenant that God has made with them in Christ; and as
coming from the fountain of Gods eternal love and mercy in his Son Zech. 9.
11. God says there, As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. That which is
spoken there of the deliverance of the prisoners, may be applied to all the
mercies that a believer enjoyes: whatever deliverance he has from evil,
whatever good he is possessed of, it is by the blood of the covenant; a
believer can look upon every bit of meat he has, and upon all the good he
enjoyes, and see it all come streaming to him in the blood of Christ; and so it
comes abundantly the sweeter. As it is with the Sun, when it shines through the
air it is not so warm, as when it shines through a burning-glasse. Take a
burning-glasse, and hold it between you and the Sun, and the glass will
contract the beams of the Sun, so that it shall have an efficacy of heat,
even to burn again: So the goodness of God that comes to people through the
general bounty and patience of God, has not such an efficacy to warm and heat
their hearts, and to draw them to God; but now, Christ is as it were the
burning-glasse, that is held between God and the soul; and the mercy coming
through this burning-glasse, O how does it warm and heat outward comforts!
therefore there is no people in the world can enjoy outward comforts with so
much fullness of contentment as the people of God do, because they all come to
them through Christ. Christ is all in all in the enjoyment of all. And so I
might show you how he will be all in all in Heaven to eternity.

But to give you one particular more: as he is all in all in the good we have
from God, so he is all in all in whatever we tender up to God; as in descent
from God to us, so in ascent from us to God: Christ must come in there, he must
be all in all in our services, let our services be never so good; yea, though
spiritual, yet they must find aceptance with the Father through Christ. That
Text is very remarkable for this, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also, as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; mark, To offer up spiritual
sacrifices. I, but though the sacrifice be spiritual, that is not enough to
make it acceptable, but Christ he must come in; therefore he adds, acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ. Many people offer up sacrifice, and they think that is
enough; but the people of God they rest not only in the duty, no, nor in the
spirituality of the duty, though that be counted a great matter: but they go
one step higher, and so must you in all the duties you tender up to God, and
that is, not only to be careful that your duties be spiritual, but you must
tender them to God in the hands of Jesus Christ, and expect acceptance through
him. When thou have to deal with God in all thy approaches to him be sure thou
do not omit the work of Faith, in laying hold upon Christ and carrying him
along with thee; or else thy service will not be accepted. We know the
sacrifices in the law, though they were never so good, yet they were not
accepted unless a man brought them to the Priest, and the Priest he must offer
up the sacrifice, and then it was accepted. Now what was that to signify to
us, but Christ's Priestly office: this is the very work of the Priestly office
of Christ, to take all our sacrifices that we tender up to the Father, and to
offer them up for us: for we must not presume to offer them our selves; and
though they offered a sacrifice that was never so good, yet if they did not
offer it upon the right Altar, it was not accepted: so Christ he is the right
Altar upon which we must offer up all our sacrifices to the Father; we must
look toward the Temple, toward Christ, in all that goes from us unto God,
Christ being all in all for acceptance of our duties.

And thus we have done with the fourth particular, showing wherein Christ is
all in all.

But now it may be demanded; how it comes to pass that God will have this way
of communicating himself to mankind, and will not go in that other way, that
we by the light of nature and reason would think he should go? true indeed, we
are sinners: I, but God is merciful, and we will seek, and cry to him for
pardon and mercy, and deliverance from our sins; and what needs there more? why
will not God save us this way? I will not stand now to dispute about the
possibility of this, but we know this is not the way.

We are therefore now to enquire why God should rather take this strange way,
then go any other way? and indeed it is a wonderful way, if we rightly
consider it: there is nothing in the world that works so much upon a man's heart
to adore and admire God in the mystery of the Gospel, as the understanding of
this, that God should have a peculiar way of communicating himself to man,
different from Angels, and from all other creatures; that it must be through
the second person in the Trinity; and he must take man's nature upon him, and
suffer, and dye, and all the mercy we have must be through him: this is a
wonderful mystery of godliness; and should take up our serious thoughts in
the consideration of it.

Now if you would know the reason of it; the first is this, That hereby God
might manifest to all the children of men, what a dreadful breach their sins
had made between God and them: we cannot imagine any way how the breach between
God and man could have been so clearly set out, as by this means; when we
understand that such was our condition by nature, and such our apostasy from
God, that there was no way of communication of any good from God to us, but by
this strange and wonderful way of a mediator between God and man: that he
should obey and suffer, and dye for us, we must needs apprehend now, that
certainly there was some mighty difference between God and us: and that man's
estate was very low, and his condition very desperate, that must have such a
remedy as this is. And this is that which God would have men to know, even what
that breach is between him and their souls: and it is such a breach that few
think a right of it. If I should open the law to you, with all its curses, and
set the torments of hell before you, all this could not set out the
dreadfulnesse of the breach between God and you, so as this point does, when I
tell you that it was such as requires so strange and wonderful a way of Gods
being reconciled and pacified toward you.

Secondly, God takes this way, because he sees it the most advantageous way for
the manifestation of his glory; first the glory of his mercy: there is no way
that could have been devised by men or Angels to set out the glory of Gods
mercy in man's salvation, so as by this way: if God should have said to
mankind; You poor creatures have sinned against me, but I am merciful and
will pardon you; God had been glorious in this: but now there is infinitely
more mercy showed when God shall say, You miserable creatures have sinned
against me; and such is your condition, that except the Son of my bosom be
made a curse for you, there can be no mercy for you: well I am content that he
shall not be spared; but shall be given to be a curse to prepare mercy for you:
here is glory indeed. Therefore when Christ was borne, the Angels sung, glory
to God in the highest, Luke 2. 14. As if they had said, this is the highest
pitch of the glory of God, in providing such a way of reconciliation with the
children of men; and God was so set upon this work of showing mercy to
mankind, that though it cost the death of his Son, he would have it, and that
shows it to be infinite mercy and love indeed, when it breaks through such
mighty difficulties; there is the glory of his mercy.

And then secondly, there is the glory of his Justice: God sets out the glory
of his Justice here, more then if all mankind had been eternally damned: Gods
Justice would not have been honored so much in that as in this way of Gods
reconciling man unto himself; and that in these two regards: First, because in
Christ Gods Justice is glorified actively; whereas if all men had eternally
perished, it should have been glorified but passively: and it is more to have it
glorified actively, then passively: and as God delights more in active
obedience then in passive, so he delights more in the active glory of his
Justice then in the passive, (though there is a kind of activenesse in
suffering, and so in Christ's suffering: therefore that distinction of active
and passive is needless; for his active obedience was passive, and his passive
obedience had activenesse in it.)

But Secondly, Gods Justice is now glorified perfectly; the debt is fully paid:
whereas if all mankind had been damned, the debt should have been but a
paying, and not have been paid to all eternity. As suppose a poor man owes a
thousand pounds, and he pays two pence a week, he may be paying of it, but
cannot pay it in all his life: but now if a rich man shall come, and at once
lay down the money for him, the debt then is paid: and this is a great deal
more then if it should have been always paying. So I say, if all mankind had
been damned eternally, God should have had his debt but paying; but the debt
would never have been paid: but now Christ comes and lays down the payment at
once upon the board, and asks Justice whether it has enough or no; so that
Justice is more glorified this way.

And Thirdly, the infinite glory of his wisdom appears in reconciling Justice
and Mercy together: that God should be infinitely merciful and just both in one
thing; this is that that no Angel in Heaven could ever have imagined: suppose
God should have said thus to all the Angels in Heaven, Mankind is in a lost
and undone condition, yet I am willing to save him, but so as that I will have
infinite mercy and Justice reconciled: if all of them should have gone and
consulted together, they could not possibly have told how this should be. Now
the infinite wisdom of God, and nothing but infinite wisdom could find out
such a way; as that God should be infinitely merciful, and infinitely just too.

And Fourthly, the infiniteness of Gods holiness is hereby manifested: if God
in a general way should have thrown his mercy as it were up and down in the
world without any more ado, Gods holiness, and hatred of sin, would not
have appeared as now it does, when nothing can expiate sin but the death of
his Son; if God should carry any of you to the brinke of hell, and there let
you see all the miseries of the damned, and hear all their yellings under the
fruits of divine wrath, O you would say, how does God hate sin! but be it
known to you, in the sufferings of Christ there is a greater manifestation of
Gods hatred of sin then in all the torments of hell: You that would know how
infinitely hateful sin is to God, come and behold Christ, God and man
sweltering under the wrath of his Father; look upon him in the garden, sweating
drops of blood: come and follow him to the Cross, and hear him cry out in the
bitterness of his soul that doleful cry, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? behold Jesus Christ, God man, who was God blessed for ever, made a
curse for sin, and for thy sin; look upon sin in this glass, and here
see Gods hatred of sin. There are two glasses wherein we see the evil of
sin; the bright crystal glass of the law, and the red glass of the
sufferings of Christ: and this latter does more fully, more sensibly (I am
sure) set out the nature of sin, and Gods hatred of it: and by this you may
see the meaning of 2 Cor. 3. 18. where the Apostle speaking of the mystery of
the Gospel says, But we all with open face (mark) beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, etc. We behold but Gods back parts in his works: as God
says to Moses; we behold but the footsteps of God in his works: but when we
behold him in Christ, we behold him with open face. Now look what difference
there is in knowing a man when we only see the print of his foot upon sand, and
when we look him in the face, so much difference there is between the knowing
of God and his glory as it shines in the works of creation, and as it shines
in the face of Christ; that God therefore might manifest his glory, he would
not pardon sin so freely as to say, you have sinned, but yet I will pity you,
and pardon you, and there is an end; no, though he would pardon sin, yet he
would do it this way.

A Third reason why God would bring things about this way, is this: because God
saw there could be no such way to draw poor sinners to himself as this. When
God shall reveal to a sinner that he is not only a merciful God, but that he
has provided such a strange way to convey his mercy: this has a mighty
efficacy to draw the soul to God: for the poor soul apprehending its own
guiltiness, and Gods hatred of sin; and understanding withal, that the heart
of God is set upon such a way of mercy; is by this as by a mighty argument
prevailed with to draw near to God in a way of dependence upon him: for thus
will the soul argue, Well, I hear that God, to the end he might let out mercy
to poor sinners, has of his own infinite wisdom provided such a strange way
of conveyance as this is; and when God has made it appear by revealing to me
the mystery of the Gospel how his heart is set upon this way of showing mercy
to sinners, I conclude now, that the Lord is willing to be reconciled to me,
and why then should I be unbelieving any more? why should I have hard thoughts
of God any more? why should I remain in my doubting condition any longer? thou
can not be more desirous of the salvation of thy soul, then God is of
magnifying his grace and mercy: and God has done more for thee then thou can
possibly do for the salvation of thy soul. Besides, it is a mighty drawing
argument; for by this means the infinite distance that conicience apprehended
to be between God and the soul, is taken away: for when the soul sees it has
to deal with an infinite deity, that is so far above it, it stands shaking
and trembling, and dares not draw nigh to God. What have I to do, says the
soul, with such a God as this is, who is so infinitely above me? but now when
thou know that Christ is between God and thee, then this distance needs not
scare thee; yea now all thy guiltiness and all the filthiness and pollution
of thy soul, and all that the law has to say against thee, need be no
discouragement to thee, when thou see thou have to deal with God through
Jesus Christ. Therefore no soul can stand off and say, how do I know it
belongs to me? do but take this one rule, for that there is nothing can
interest the soul in Christ but Christ himself: there is no preparation to
Christ, but Christ must be all in all in it: therefore stand not off, and say,
how shall my heart be wrought to these and these preparations, and work thus
and thus, before I have part in Christ? no; puzzle not thy self about thy
preparations, but set before thy soul the mystery of the Gospel in this
glorious way of Gods communication of himself to thee, and of reconciling man
unto himself; and the very efficacy of these truths will have a power upon thy
heart to draw thee unto God in this way of reconciliation; and that is the way
of true comfort.

The Gospel it self, though there be no preparation before, yet has an
efficacy to draw the heart to Christ; for Christ is all in all in that. And do
not say, I am a poor mean creature, I can do nothing, I cannot remember a
Sermon, I cannot pray, or perform any good duty as I ought: why, remember
soul, Christ is all in all: true, if any thing were required of thee in the
business of salvation, it were somewhat; but know that God has laid help upon
one who is mighty; therefore it is not thy weakness, nor the distance between
God and thee, that can hinder, if thou rightly apprehendest God in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself.

Another reason might have been this: God does it to indeare his mercy to his
Saints for ever; for indeed nothing indeares Gods mercy to them so much as
this, that they see it come to them in such a way of conveyance; and that which
will indear mercy to the Saints in heaven to all eternity, and for which they
shall be full of the praises of God, shall not be so much for the good things
they enjoy, as for that strange and wonderful way by which they come to enjoy
them. This I say is that which shall take up the hearts, and be a great part of
the work of the glorified Saints in Heaven to all eternity, even their
admiring, adoring, and praising God in Jesus Christ.

And then God delights to honor his Son, and that he might set him up, he
makes him to be the means of conveyance of all good to those he intends it to;
as if a King were to honor his Son, what way can he take to do it more
effectually then this, that all the favor he means to show to any shall be
only through his Son? so when God the Father would honor his Son, he appoints
from all eternity, that all the grace and mercy that any shall have from him
shall be only through his Son. Therefore as Christ says, All judgment is
committed to the Son, that all men might honor the Son, as they honor the
Father: So I may say of the work and dispensation of Gods grace, that all is
conveyed to Christ, and by him communicated to those that have interest in him,
that the Son might be honored to all eternity.

I shall conclude in a few words of application, to work upon you this that
has been said.

First, if it be thus, let us stand a while and admire at the depths of the
council of God, and the infinite glory of the riches of his grace to mankind;
that God should ever have such thoughts toward such poor worms as we are,
that he should not rather have let such despicable creatures eternally perish,
then go in such a strange way to show mercy to them: Truly brethren, God has
done more in bringing a poor soul to himself then in creating Heaven and Earth:
the work of creating Heaven and Earth is but a low piece of work in comparison
of this wonderful way of Gods conveying his grace and mercy to the children of
men through his Son: this is the masterpiece of the works of God, which he
has already done, or will ever do to all eternity: and God therefore is to be
admired and adored in this. We are to glorify God in every creature, but how
is God to be glorified then in his Son, wherein so much of his glory does
appear? If it be a sin for us not to sanctify the name of God when we
behold his glory in his meanest works, O what a sin is it not to sanctify
the name of God in beholding the mystery of the Gospel and his glory shining
in the face of Jesus Christ! God, expects (brethren) that those who live under
the Gospel, should spend their days and thoughts, and talk, about that glory
which he has manifested in his Son. O you that have such chaffy drossy
spirits, that can spend your precious thoughts upon such poor things as you
do, know that here is an object to take up your thoughts; and your sin is
abundantly the greater in this, that you spend your thoughts about such
vanities, when God sets before you so glorious an object to raise up your
hearts unto himself; and you that spend a great deal of your lives in vanity,
know, that this day you have heard of a truth that above all things in the
world should take up your time and thoughts in the contemplation of it.

And you that have more time and greater estates then others, and are not put
upon it to get your bread as others are, and so have greater opportunities for
the worship and service of God, and for searching into his truth, yet how do
you spend your time in vanity and light things, as if there were no greater
matters to take up your hearts! It is a sign of a vain and frothy spirit,
that when God propounds such glorious things to you, that yet it should be the
content of your souls to baffle out your time in vanity; and things that will
not profit. Well, if you would have an evidence to your souls, that Christ is
all in all to you, and shall be to all eternity, take it in this: if ever God
has opened thine eyes to see his glory in the mystery of the Gospel; and that
thy heart is taken with it, and overcome by it, it is an argument that thou art
indeed the soul which God has received to mercy in his Christ; but says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.
There are a great many to whom the Gospel is preached, and yet it is hidden to
them; and it is hidden to you if you speak of Christ only in a formal way, and
think it enough to say, I hope to be saved by God in Jesus Christ; but do
thou see that in the Gospel which raises thy heart with admiration, and that
darkens all the glory of the world? do thou see more of the glory of God
shining in that one sentence, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, then thou see in the whole frame of the creation of Heaven
and Earth? thou hopest thou say to get to Heaven; but what would thou do
there? the work of Saints and Angels in Heaven joined together, is to magnify
God for this great work of his: do thou then begin this work here, and give
God his glory, for the great things he has done for the children of men.

The Second use should have been this: If Christ be thus all in all, then let
us bless God that ever we knew Christ; and that the mystery of the Gospel
has been revealed to us: for otherwise we had been without God in the world;
and what would have become of us had not this grace of God in the Gospel been
revealed to us? could you ever have thought of it your selves? could it ever
have entered into your hearts? certainly no; nor into the heart of any creature
in Heaven or Earth: therefore blessed are your ears, that hear the things
which you hear: and blessed are your eyes, that see the things which you see:
and know, that when you come to live under the Ministry of the Gospel, you
enjoy the greatest mercy that ever you enjoyed since you were borne: the coming
under a powerful Ministry, that reveals Christ and brings the day of salvation
to the soul, it is no other then the fruit of the prayer of Jesus Christ for
that soul: compare Isaiah 49. 8. with 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2. and you shall see this.
Isaiah 49. 8. Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and
in a day of salvation have I helped thee, etc. Now it is apparent by the
context, that this is to be understood of Christ: that God the Father speaks
there to his Son: well, what is this acceptable time and day of Salvation in
which Christ is heard? look 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2. in the chapter before he had told
them, That they were ambassadors for Christ. We then as workers together with
God, beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: Now what
is this grace of God? it is the Ministry of the Gospel, For he says I have
heard thee in a time accepted: and mark how he applies it, Behold now is the
accepted time: behold now is the day of salvation. As if he should say; the
acceptable time and day of salvation in which God the Father has heard Christ,
is now: now that we the ambassadors of Christ come and open the mystery of the
Gospel to you; now is the time wherein God the Father hears the Son for you:
what a mercy is this? and what an engagement upon you, that when you hear any
thing of the mystery of the Gospel opened to you, you are to look upon it as
the fruit of the prayer of Jesus Christ: and so when Gods sends a faithful
Minister to any congregation, it is the fruit of the prayer of Christ. Christ
prays, O Father, that there might be an acceptable time for such a people, for
such a man and woman; it may be they have gone on a long time in ignorance and
profaneness; I but Christ has been praying to the Father for them, and when
this acceptable time comes, then God disposes of them, that this man shall go
out of such a wicked family, and shall live in a godly family, or shall come to
such a Sermon, and there shall hear the wonderful things of the Gospel
opened to him, and shall come to understand this great mystery of Gods letting
himself out through Christ unto his people: and there the Lord will renew him
by a work of grace, and bring his heart over unto himself, this is the
acceptable time when God reveals the mystery of the Gospel to any soul:
therefore bless God for this.

Thirdly, this shows how dear Jesus Christ should be unto us. O how should we
delight and take contentment in him that brings the Treasuries of grace from
the bosom of the Father, and opens them unto us: and not only opens the mind
of God the father to us, but comes and lets out the treasure of Gods goodness
to us. It was stopped before, I but Christ he opened as it were the flood gates,
and lets the current of grace and mercy in upon us. O how dear therefore
should Christ be unto us? it was the speech of that Martyr, Master Lambert,
None but Christ, none but Christ. Yea when he suffered Martyrdom for Christ,
then none but Christ was dear to him; because he saw that Christ was the way
of conveyance of all good unto him: as if God now make a man a means of
conveyance of a great deal of good to a nation, every man will be ready to have
his eye upon that man: I, but there was never such a way of conveyance of good
to us as Christ is: therefore how should our hearts love him, and prize him,
and rejoice at the very thoughts of him? If you have a friend, and God makes
that friend an instrument of mercy to you, O how does it indeare you to that
friend: if the husband be an instrument of good to the wife, or the wife to the
husband; if a Minister to his people, or people to their Minister, and so in
all relations: when we can look upon others as a means of conveyance of Gods
mercy to us, it is a mighty argument to knit our hearts unto them, and indeed
this is the way to obtain love. It may be the wife complains, she has not
love from her husband; or the husband complains he has not love from his
wife: Why now, be as isntrumental as you can to convey the goodness of God to
them, and this will mightily indeare and knit them to you; and if it does so
between man and man: how should it do so much more between us and Christ, who
is indeed the husband of his Church, and through whom the fullness of God is
let out unto his people? O how dear and precious therefore ought he to be unto
us!

Fourthly, is Christ all in all? then if we have an interest in him, it should
satisfy and content us, though we have nothing, or be nothing in our selves:
Why, because if we have Christ, we have all; though thou want parts,
friends, estate, outward comforts; yet know Christ is to be thy all, and is not
he enough? as he said, am not I better to thee then ten sons? so says Christ
to the soul, what do thou want? thou want this comfort, and the other
comfort, but am not I all in all to thee, and better then all? yea, be willing
to be made nothing, for all is made up in Christ.

Again, it should have put us upon this, to be willing to give up all we have
to Christ; alas, our all is but a poor all: yet give it to Christ; our parts,
estates, interest, names; let Christ have all because he is our all.

And let him be the rule of our prizing all things: so far as we see any
thing of Christ, prize it sutably: as it is reported of Master Bucer, if he could
see any thing of Christ in any man or woman, though they were never so poor and
mean, his heart would close with them. And it is said of Austin, that before his
conversion he took great delight in reading of Cicero's works; but afterward,
says he, I find not the name Christ in all Cicero; and that took off his
heart from him: so in all thou do enjoy, look how much thou see of Christ
in it, so far let thy delight and esteem be carried out toward it, and no
farther.

Again, with what mighty intention of spirit should the heart be put forth
toward Jesus Christ above all things! what though God give thee an estate and
honor in the world: if thou have not Christ thou have nothing, thou have not
that that makes way for thee to eternity. Therefore be not satisfied with any
thing without Christ. As Abraham says, What will thou give me Lord, seeing I
go childlesse? So say thou, Lord, thou have given me a portion in the world,
thou have given me credit and repute amongst men; but Lord, what is all this to
me, if I go Christlesse, and have not him that is the conveyance of grace unto
my soul, that is all in all? O Lord, thou have this day taught me, that such is
the distance and breach between thee and me, that unless it be made up
through a mediator, I must eternally perish: therefore give me Christ, whatever
thou denyest me. O satisfy not your selves with any thing, without Christ.
Many hypocrites they satisfy themselves with gifts: if they have gifts, then
they are contented. Consider that parable in the Gospel, Matthew. 13. 45, 46.
The merchant-man sought after goodly pearls, but when he had found the pearl
of price, then be went and sold all that be had, and bought it. Now gifts and
parts, and other achievements are these goodly pearls: I but Christ he is the
pearl of price: therefore whatever thou have, be willing to part with it for
him: if God have discovered to thee the pearl of price, let no goodly pearls
satisfy thee. Many souls perish eternally because they are satisfied with
goodly pearls, and do not endeavor to obtain this pearl of price.

Again, the application should further have been, to have endeavored to work
this upon you, that in your seeking after God, you would be sure to take Christ
along with you.

I will give you only this note, if it were your last time to pray to God, and
your everlasting estate did depend upon Gods mercy, should you now seek God
never so earnestly, yet if it were only in a natural way, as your creator,
your condition would be very dreadful, and you would perish eternally. If God
should lay any of you upon your sick beds, or death beds, and you should cry to
God, mercy, mercy Lord, be sure you take Christ along with you, and look upon
God through Christ, or else all your cries will be to no purpose. It is a
speech of Luther, that God looked upon out of Christ, is most dreadful and
terrible; and it argues a great deal of ignorance in us, when we think we can
go to God, and shall find mercy with him, without considering him as a God
that will be reconciled to us only through his Son. To conclude all, as Christ
says, If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto me: so this is the work of
our Ministry, we have spent time amongst you that we might labor to lift up
Christ to you: and O that God would be pleased to draw all your souls to him.

This Sermon was preached March 28. 1641.
HEBR. II. V. I. Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence
of things not seen. April 25. 1641.

IN the latter end of the former chapter the Apostle exhorts to perseverance,
and shows the great evil and danger of drawing back. Now, to the end this
evil might be Prevented, he shows what it is that will deliver us from it.
Whatever others do, or whatever temptations or afflictions we meet withal to
draw us back, yet still the just shall live by faith: Now faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

In this Chapter (therefore) he falls upon this argument, to wit, the opening
of the doctrine and practice of faith. And the words read are an excellent
description of faith (not an exact definition of it) It is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. The substance; the word in
the original is very full, the (...), it has many significations: the
fundamental, the foundation of things hoped for; the subsistence, the
substantiality of things hoped for: those things that in themselves have no
real present subsistence to us, but are things to come, and hoped for; yet
faith gives them a present real substantial being to us. The substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. The word translated
evidence, is a Logical term, and signifies such a kind of conviction as is
by way of dispute and clear demonstration, so as it must needs compel one to
yield unto it; that is the propriety of the word, that although the objects of
faith are things not seen, either by the eye of sense, or by the eye of reason,
yet faith brings such a light with it, and makes them so demonstratively
clear, that it even forces the soul to a belief of them: so that it has the
fullest conviction of them that possibly can be.

Two things then (you find) are here said of faith:

First, that it gives a substantial real present being to things hoped for.

And secondly, that it is the evidence of things not seen. In the first of
these, we have these two things: First, that there are many glorious things
which the Saints hope for, that yet they have not: they are men of hopes.
Secondly, that their faith does give a real and substantial being to those
things which they hope for.

In the Second of these we have likewise two things: First, that the things of
God are things not seen. And Secondly that faith is the evidence of those
things that are not seen.

For the first, but briefly, There are great things that the Saints hope for,
that yet they have not; they are men of hopes. They hope that they shall ere
long be delivered from all sin and sorrows: that they shall never sin more,
never be tempted more, never suffer more, never fear more; they hope that the
time is coming when it shall be said of all their sins, as Moses said of the
Egyptians, These your enemies that now you see, you shall never see them more.
They hope that these vile bodies of theirs, these bodies of clay, bodies of
vileness, bodies of sin, shall ere long be made glorious bodies; that these
pieces of dirt shall (within a while) shine more gloriously then the Sun in the
firmament. They hope that the Image of God shall ere long be perfected in them,
so as they shall be fully united to God, and be made one with the Father, as
the Father and the Son are one. They hope that they shall meet with their
blessed Savior in the air; and with these their eyes behold him coming in his
glory: They hope that they shall be possessed of those glorious mansions which
he is gone before to prepare for them. They hope that their eyes shall be
blessed with the glorious vision of a deity that they shall see God, and so see
him, as to be like unto him. They hope that they shall enjoy full communion
with the Lord; that they shall have the immediate and full lettings out of a
deity into their souls and bodies, without any intermission. They hope that
they shall join with the blessed Angels and Saints in eternal Hallelujahs,
and shall be everlastingly admiring and adoring the name of the great God, for
those glorious mysteries of redemption by Christ. They hope that they shall
keep a perpetual and eternal Sabbath, and shall no more be combred with
natural things, with the things of the earth, but shall have perfect and
everlasting rest in Christ, and shall live in God as in an infinite ocean of
all excellency; these things they hope for. I but are not these conceits? are
they not notions, pretty fine fancies, with which they please themselves? is
there any reallity in these things: indeed if these things were real and
substantial, if there were as great a reallity and as much substance in the
things they hope for, as there is in the things they enjoy in the world for the
present, and that they could see them as certainly as they see the things that
are before their eyes, it were somewhat like. Well, says the Apostle, there is
a principle to make all these things substantial to you; and faith is the
substance of things hoped for. These hopes are not conceits and notions, but
they are raised up in their hearts by the mighty power of the holy Ghost. Romans
15. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
you may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost. There needs not the
power of the holy Ghost to raise fancies and conceits in men's hearts; but the
hopes of the Saints are such as are raised in them by the power of the holy
Ghost: And God himself is styled by their hopes: Now the God of hope, etc. Now
God is not the God of fancies and conceits, but he is the God of the hopes of
his Saints? And these hopes are given to them, to the end they might be kept
from drawing back, and might be upheld for the present in whatever they suffer.
Therefore the Scripture compares our hope to an Anchor, and to an Helmet: you
know that of all dangers, those are the greatest, of shipwreck by Sea, and of
enemies by Land: now our Hope is to help against both: against our dangers by
Sea, of shipwreck, our hope is an Anchor: against our dangers by Land, of
enemies, our hope is a helmet.

The hope of the Saints for the present is as the cork to the net that keeps
it from sinking to the bottom; though they may be in the water, and the lead
of troubles and afflictions may weigh them down, yet their hope keeps them
above water; they have great hopes, and they have that which makes their hopes
substantial; for their faith is the substance of things hoped for. And that is
the second thing I now come to: Carnal hearts think there is no substantial
real excellency in any thing, but in the outward excellencies of the world;
they think that money, Lands, honors, the pleasures and delights of the flesh,
have substance in them; and that there is something of reallity in these: Now I
beseech you, observe the difference between the judgment of the holy Ghost,
and the judgment of a carnal heart: whereas a carnal heart looks upon
outward things as the only substantial things, (therefore you call your rich
men substantial men: and so the Scripture, speaking in the language of men,
calls a man's estate his substance, because men count their estate here their
substance,) now the holy Ghost accounts all those things that the world looks
upon as substances, to be but mere conceits: and those things that the world
accounts conceits, to be substances: (and those that judge according to the
judgment of the holy Ghost, do the like.) For the first, you know St. John
reckons all things in the world in three ranks; either such as are profits,
pleasures, or honors: the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life, and the
delights of the eye: now for those things that the world counts their greatest
substance, their estates, and riches, mark how the holy Ghost thinks of them,
Prove. 23. 4, 5. Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom: will thou
set thine eyes upon that which is not? That which you call your substance, the
holy Ghost says, it is not, it has not being at all. Well, but honors and
preferments have somewhat in them. Nay, they have nothing in them neither. Acts
25. 23. it is said, Agrippa and Bernice came in great pomp to the judgment
seat, glittering in their brave apparel; but the word translated great pomp,
is, they came with much fancy: what greater honor is there then for Princes to
come in their robes upon the judgment seat, glittering before the eyes of
their subjects? thus did they: and yet their great glory in the judgment of
the holy Ghost, was all but a great fancy: And for the lusts of the flesh, Amos
6. in verse 5, 6. you have the sensualty of the people set out very fully, They
lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall; they
chant to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instruments of
music; they drink wine in bowls, etc. and in verse 13. it comes all to this,
Ye rejoice in a thing of naught, in that which has nothing in it; there is no
reallity, no substantial excellency in all these things; neither in riches,
honors, or pleasures; but mark now how the holy Ghost judges of spiritual
things: what substance there is in them, which are only conceits to carnal
hearts, Prove. 8. 20, 21. (says wisdom there) I lead in the way of
righteousness etc. that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance;
to inherit that which is; so Tremelius, as if nothing had a being, but that
which wisdom causes to inherit. And Hebr. 10. 33, 34. You were made a gazing
stock both by reproaches and afflictions, and took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, etc. (but how came this to pass? mark,) knowing in your selves
that ye have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. So that that which
was but a conceit and notion to the world, by their faith they saw it to be
substantial unto them: and Hebrews 11. 10. It is said of Abraham, that he
looked for a City with foundations: there was no City in the world that had
foundations in Abraham's eye, but only the City that he looked for; and it was
his faith that gave that City foundations. Thus we see the different judgment
of the holy Ghost and the world. As now while we live upon the earth, we think
the earth to be very great, and the Sun and Moon and Stars to be but little
things, and they seem so to us: but were we in heaven, we should then see the
Sun and Moon and Stars to be great and vast bodies, and the earth to be but a
point in comparison of them: so while men have earthly hearts, they look upon
the things of heaven as conceits, and poor small inconsiderable things, not
worth looking after: but if by divine principles they were once lifted up to
heaven and could converse there, then they would see the things of heaven to be
great matters, and the things here below to be but a point; to be but poor low
inferior things, not worth minding or affecting. Those things that are the
objects of faith are substantial things, and faith gives them that substance.

And they are substantial things, First, because they have in them more then
appears to be in them: we count that substantial which has in it more then
it appears for: those things that make a great show, and have not that in them
which they make show of, we count them vain, and without substance, as a piece
of cloth that has not that in it which it shows for, we say it has no
substance in it.

Now the things of God have more in them abundantly then they show for, and
therefore they are substantial: hence it is that when Christ shall come in
glory, the Text says, He shall be admired in all them that believe, 2. These.
1. 10. They see for the present a great deal of excellency in Christ, and they
love him, and their hearts are toward him for that they see in him now; but
hereafter he shall appear abundantly more glorious then they thought for: then
they shall say, indeed we did see much in Christ, but we see now infinitely
more glory and excellency then ever we imagined.

Secondly, the things of heaven that are the objects of faith are substantial,
because there is most of God in them. Now God is the infinite first being of
all, and gives being to all: that therefore which has most of the first being
in it, must needs be the most substantial and real good: Now though it be
true that all creatures are filled with Gods excellencies, yet spiritual and
heavenly things are above all other most filled with God: the very divine of
nature of God is in them, and there is the very life of God, and the Image and
glory of God, and there God does especially communicate himself. God has two
ways of his communication: the one is to his Son, and that is in an infinite
way that we understand not: and the other is to his creatures: and his special
communication of himself to his creatures is in spiritual and heavenly things:
therefore they must needs be the most substantial and real things to the soul.

And then Thirdly, they are substantial things and not notions and conceits,
because they are the very center of the thoughts and intentions of God himself,
and that which he aims at in all his works toward his creatures, and the
very center of the happiness of the most excellent creatures that ever God
made. Now that which is the very issue of the great design of God in making
the world, and of all the works he does in the world, and the highest good any
creature is capable of, certainly it is no conceit, but has a great deal of
substantial being in it: but the good we have in spiritual and heavenly
things, is the very issue of Gods design from all eternity, in his full
communication of himself unto his creature; and it is the highest good any
creature is capable of: therefore spiritual things are real and substantial.

Again, real and substantial things they are, because we find they have a
real and substantial operation upon the souls of those that are acquainted
with them. O the mighty work that appears upon the hearts of the godly from
the apprehension of spiritual things, that are the objects of faith! how do
spiritual things tune and raise the hearts of men that were low, and base, and
drossy, and vile before, to converse with God in the highest way and kind that
it is possible for a creature to converse with God in; and what great things
do they enable the soul to do! those things that have such a substantial
operation, must needs be real and substantial.

Lastly, they have an eternal subsistency, that shall never vanish or fade
away, that when all other things shall wither as the grass, spiritual and
heavenly things shall abide for ever: therefore they are the only substantial
things.

But then, as they are thus in themselves, so how come they to be thus to the
soul? why it is by faith; faith gives them the bottom, the foundation, the
substantiallity of their being. And I note this the rather, because the great
reason why our hearts are not taken with spiritual things, is, because we do
not see into the reallity and substantiallity that is in them, and into the
presentnesse of the good they have.

Now faith gives them this their substantial being:

First, because it is faith that carries the soul to contemplate upon God
himself, and enables the soul to discern the excellency and glory that there
is in God, to know much of God in his own essence and being; and elevates the
sold to converse with God in a higher way abundantly then reason can do
(though it is true, a great deal of God is understood by reason.) And then by
faith the soul comes to know what riches there are in these excellent and
glorious things of God. It first sees them in God, and then after that it sees
this God to be infinitely willing to communicate and let out himself to his
creature; And then by faith the soul converseth with the deep and glorious
councels of God, between himself and his Son: It sees into the great design
God had in sending his Son into the world for the working and bringing to pass
those high and glorious intentions he had in communicating himself to the
children of men through a mediator. Again, faith converseth with the great
things, of the covenant of grace, and there sees into those unsearchable riches
(as the Apostle speaks) that have no footsteps in the creature; so the word
signifies; we cannot see them by reason, or the creature. A special object
faith works upon, is the covenant of grace in the Gospel, and it sees the
riches that are revealed there: And faith receives the testimony of the holy
Ghost; the holy Ghost is appointed by the Father and the Son to witness these
great things, to manifest to the soul the deep things of God; those things that
are but mere notions otherwise to the heart of a man, the spirit of God
discovers these to the soul; and so faith working upon these objects, and
closing with them as the proper sphere for it to move in, it makes all those
glorious things that are revealed concerning the happiness of those that God
intends eternal good unto, substantial and real to the soul; such things as
the soul can build upon, and dare venture its self, and its eternal estate
upon; and we had need have a good foundation in those things we are content to
venture our eternal estate upon: and because it must be the work of faith
(when God intends to save the soul) to have such apprehensions of the Gospel
as to be willing to venture its eternal condition upon it, therefore it had
need have a sure foundation: and hence faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and gives a real being unto these things.

And as it makes them real and substantial, so there is another thing
included in this word, It makes them present; though they are but things hoped
for, yet by faith they have a present subsistence to the soul; they are looked
upon by faith as now subsisting, though in themselves they do not: faith
partakes much of the nature of God, it has a kind of omnipotent power in it,
out of nothing to create something: there are many excellent works of faith,
and amongst the rest this is a special one, to give a being to that which in
itself has none, to make it for the present a substantial real being to the
soul: the work of faith in this kind is very observable: for evil things that
are very high, faith can make them at a mighty distance; and for good things
that are never so far off, faith can make them to be as present to it. Observe
what the Scripture speaks of it this way: first for evils that are very nigh,
and encompasse us round about, when we are in the midst of them, faith can put
the evil at a distance, as Psalm. 91. 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side,
and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee; not come
nigh thee: If he had said, it shall not be upon thee, it had been somewhat; but
to say, it shall not come nigh thee, this is a strange kind of expression; how
could it be said not to come nigh him, when thousands fell on the both hands,
and he was in the midst of it? it was by faith: faith put that at a distance
which was just upon him. The strength of reason will help one, when the plague
is a great way off, then a man thinks, I am safe enough; because far enough
from it: but suppose the plague come into thy house, into thy chamber; now to
believe a promise, it shall not come nigh thee, here is a mighty work of faith;
faith puts evils present at a far distance. And then on the other side, for
good things that are absent, and a great way off, faith can make them as if
they were really subsisting: therefore (Heb. 11. 13.) It is said of the
Fathers, that they saw the promises afar off, and embraced them: the word in
the original is saluted the promises; now friends when they salute, must be
nigh one another; their faith made the promises which were a great way off to
be with them as if present: therefore it is said of Abraham, that he saw
Christ's day, and rejoiced; and the Scripture speaks of taking hold of eternal
life, and that we do by faith; and of being in heaven, receiving the end of
your faith: It Is not, you shall receive, but now you are receiving. Psalm. 108.
7. 8. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Sechem
etc. Gilead is mine, Manasseth is mine: mark, is mine: he presently concludes,
as if the thing were already done, for it was so by faith: faith gives a
present subsistence to things. Reason it self has a great deal of power to
make things that are future, to be as present, both in evil things and in
good. In evil things, a man that is a contemplative man, and has a wicked
heart, he will fetch the sweetness of his lust and sin which is a great way
off, and make it as present by mediation, and roling it up and down in his
thoughts in a way of discourse; and so acts his sin contemplatively, though
he may be in hell before he act it really; Now as reason and discourse can
fetch in a lust, and make it as if it were present: so reason can go a great
way in making a future good thing as if it were present. And this is the
difference between a rational creature, and a sensual: a sensual creature is
only for the things that are before it; but now reason can fetch things that
are absent, and make them as present: and in regard of this, God has a mighty
advantage of mankind, either for the bringing of his wrath upon them, or for
bestowing happiness upon them: as you can fetch in your lusts that are absent,
and make them as present to you in your thoughts, by the work and discourse of
reason: so by the work of this faculty, God can make evils and plagues though
future, yet to be as present with you. And in this respect the woeful evil of
those that perish eternally may be set out dreadfully: namely thus, they being
reasonable creatures, by the work of their reason they may fetch in all the
misery that they shall endure to eternity, to fill up every moments misery,
that all the misery they shall endure to eternity, they shall possess it
presently and together: and therefore the torment of a brute creature is
infinitely short of a reasonable; suppose a brute beast were in hell, yet its
misery would come infinitely short of a man's, because a brute creature
apprehends no more misery, then that instant: but now, if a reasonable creature
be in torment, and knows it shall be in it eternally, by thought and discourse
it can fetch into that very instant, all the pain that it must endure for
ever. And so for happiness, those that are saved, shall be infinitely happy
every moment, because they shall fetch in all the happiness they shall have to
eternity to make them every moment happy: this is the work of reason. Now if
reason can make future, things to be as present, how much more can faith, that
is not only reason elevated, but is a principle higher then reason? as it is in
despair, a man that dispaires brings hell to himself before he is in hell; and
makes hell that is absent, as if it were present. Hence some in their
dispairing have cried out, they were in hell: as Francis Spira, he said he was
in hell, and hell fire, was upon him, because by despair that which is future
has a real kind of subsistence in the heart of a man, as if it were now
present. Now as despair brings in the reallity of Gods wrath that is future,
and makes it as present, so faith brings in the reallity of Gods love and mercy
that is to come, and makes it as present: and it is as genuine a work of faith,
to make future things present, as any work of faith. Now I should have shown
you in what respects faith makes things present, that are to come, and what is
the work of faith in them. But briefly, it makes all things present that are to
come:

First, because it sees all things as certain as if they were already; if a man
have a bond of one for a hundred pounds, that he is sure off, he says here is
a hundred pounds, because of the certainty of it.

Secondly, because faith looks upon the possession of things, that not only
they shall be, but that now there is a possession of them, and that two ways;
First, Christ our head is gone before to prepare mansions for us, and in our
name to take possession of heaven, therefore we have taken possession in our
head; and then Secondly, we have the first fruits of the spirit, the first
fruits of the glorious things of heaven; and in that regard, we our selves have
taken possession, and therefore they are as present to faith. Thirdly, there is
such an infiniteness in eternity, that the time that is to be before we have
full possession is not considerable: therefore faith looks upon them as present.

And then Fourthly, faith eyes the things of heaven continually, and they are
therefore present, because they are always in the eye of faith.

And Fifthly, the presentnesse of them is seen in this, because the Saints
enjoy all in God: for this is the happiness of heaven, to see all glory and
blessedness in God: Now faith does something of this here; faith inables us to
see great things in God. Now the enjoying communion with God for the present,
and beholding of heaven in God, and seeing all things in him, this must needs
make a present real subsistence of them to the soul. Thus I have spoken
briefly of faiths, being the substance of things hoped for.

For the use: If faith be the substance of things hoped for, and gives being to
things so high and glorious as the things of God are: First, then certainly
faith it self must needs be a very substantial thing; faith is not a conceit
and notion, for it gives reality and substantial being to those things the
world counts conceits: faith is the most substantialest glorious thing in the
world: It is that, in the working of which, the power of God appears more then
in any thing in the world: therefore in Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. there are some six or
seven gradations of the wonderful power of God that appears in the working of
faith: Now that must needs be an exceeding substantial thing, that has such a
mighty power of God in working of it: God does not use to put forth
extraordinary power for the doing of ordinary things. Now when he speaks of
faith, he sets out his power in a glorious manner, and in an extraordinary way;
and thereby tells us, that faith has some great matter in it. And indeed faith
has much in it; though it be a grace that empties us of our selves, yet it is
that whereby the believer is enabled to do one of the most glorious works
that ever creature was enabled to do: as now for a poor soul to see its self
in its own filth, under sin and guilt, and to see the wrath of an infinite
deity incensed against it; to see the infinite justice of God requiring
satisfaction, and the infinite holiness of God hating of sin; to have the
accusations of conscience, of Satan, of the world, and being sensible of all
this, yet to lay hold upon a mediator between God and man, and to trust in a
righteousness beyond it self, and to tender it up to God the Father for a full
atonement and satisfaction, and to venture its self, and eternal estate upon
it; and being unholy and filthy in it self, yet to unite it self to God in as
near a union (for the kind of it) as possibly a creature can have with the
Creator, next the hypostaticall union of the humane nature of Christ with the
divine: I say; for faith to be able to do this, it is a high and most glorious
work, and there is an abundance of the power of God appears in it.

By this how may we discover the vanity of the faith of the greatest number of
people in the world, who have nothing but mere emptiness in them, their very
faith is only a notion, and no marvel then if all things they believe be but
notions, they can do nothing with their faith. You say you hope and believe
and trust in Gods mercy, but what can you do with your faith? what real
substantial work of faith is upon your hearts? when faith comes, there comes
the mighty power of God and his wonderful glory into the soul, that creats (as
it were) and gives substantial being to the most high and glorious objects in
the world: therefore know, that faith is not a dead slight empty thing in the
soul, but it has a mighty operation upon the hearts of men and women: and
certainly that faith that must save a soul must have high and glorious
operations in the soul.

Again if faith gives a substantial being to things hoped for, then we must
learn to strengthen and exercise our faith in the things we hope for: which of
us do not hope for great and glorious things (as I gave you a hint of them?)
Now let faith be exercised and strengthened in these things; if all those
blessed things we spak of were present to the soul, O how would our hearts be
above the creature, how should we look upon all things here below as dung,
filth, dross, how would our thoughts be raised in the admiration of spiritual
and heavenly things, how would our spirits be taken up in wondering at the
glory of God that appears in these things, how would our hearts be enflamed
with love to God! how would our conversations be in heaven for the present!
what heavenly thoughts and heavenly affections would be in us in all our ways!
and how would we venture to go through fire and water for God! to do any
thing, suffer any thing, be any thing for God. And did our faith make such
glorious things as these real and substantial to us? how substantial would our
duties and services be. Why is it then that our duties have so much vanity in
them, are so empty, having nothing but circumstance in them; certainly
(brethren) if our faith gives a subsistence to such blessed and glorious things
of eternal life, it will likewise give a subsistence to all our duties and
services, that we shall not tender to God empty and dead services. Consider,
this you, who though you dare not omit duties, yet what empty duties do you
tender to God; your works should be the works of faith, and faith should give
them a subsistence, as well as it gives your hopes; therefore satisfy not your
selves with that faith that will not give a subsistence to your duties; and do
not think it will give a subsistence to such glorious things we speak of. Thus
much of the first particular, Faith is the substance of things hoped for. I
would feign speak a little of the second, It is the evidence of things not seen.

There are two things here.

First, that the things of grace, spiritual and heavenly things, are things not
seen.

And secondly, that faith gives an evidence to those things.

First, that grace, spiritual and heavenly things, are things not seen.

The Apostle says Gal. 5. 19. 22. the works of the flesh are manifest; but
when he comes to the works of the spirit, he says the works of the spirit
are these: he does not say, they are manifest; for indeed they are things that
are not seen: though it is true, the operations of them appear, yet there is no
external work of grace, but an hypocrite may do it: therefore the works of
the spirit cannot be said to be seen either by the eye of sense or reason. And
then for the things of heaven, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 18. While we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen, for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal. I might here discover to you how it comes to pass, that spiritual
and heavenly things are not seen unto sense and reason. Many arguments I
thought to have given to discover this: I must but cull out two or three
particulars. The riches of a Christian in spiritual and heavenly things are
like the riches of the Sea; it may be outwardly you see nothing but hideous
waves, and a great deal of filth, I but the riches are at the bottom, and the
riches of the earth are within, and hidden, they do not appear: so the riches
and treasures of a Christian are things not seen, they are things that are in
the very bosom of God, in the very heart of God. Now as no man knows the
things of a man, but the spirit of man; so no man knows the things of God, but
the spirit of God, and him to whom God does reveal them.

And then they are things that are beyond the principles of reason, they are
too high. and so too glorious for such a faculty as reason is: if an object be
too glorious for sense, it destroys the sense: so these objects are too high
for reason, and and therefore cannot be seen by reason.

And the blindness of man naturally is such that he cannot see these things.
And chiefly God so orders things in his providence, that he goes a quite
contrary way (as to sense and reason) to that which he has promised. I say it
is the way of God to hide his glorious excellencies by seeming to go in the
ways of his providence directly cross to what he has promised; we might show
how God has hid from sense and reason his mercy to his own people: that of
Abraham is considerable; there were two promises God made to Abraham, the one
of going out of his own country, and carrying him to a land flowing with milk
and honey; the other, that he would make his seed as the stars of heaven for
multitude, and that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed.
Mark now, if Abraham had not had something to evidence that which was not seen,
he could never have seen the faithfulness of God in these promises: for when
he was gone out of his own country, he comes to Ganaan (the country promised)
but as soon as he was there, he was ready to starve, and was feign to fly to
Egypt: and if he had not had faith he would have fallen off, and have been
ready to turn back again. And then for the second promise, That in his seed
all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: Abraham goes on seaventy
years, and his wife had no child; and it ceased to be with her after the
manner of women; she was old, and Abraham's body dead: and after he had a child,
he must kill him, and being saved, Isaac must be forty years before he is
married; and when he is married, he must have no child in twenty years: and
in the first hundred and fifty years after the promise, there was but seaventy
of all his seed: yet this was the promise, that in his seed all the Nations of
the earth should be blessed: thus God seems to go cross to what he promised.
We might instance also in Jacob; God commands Jacob to return from Laban: and
after that, mark how God follows him. First, his uncle Laban follows him with
thoughts to slay him. Secondly, In his Journey his wives nurse dies. Thirdly,
his wife dies. Fourthly, Dinay is ravished. Fifthly, his two Sons, Simeon and
Levy commit that villainy, that makes him stink in the nostrils of the people of
the land. Sixthly, Esau comes to destroy him; and all this in that journey that
God commanded Jacob to take. Now if Jacob had not had faith to look through
these to the things that might encourage him in his way to things not seen, it
had been impossible he should have gone on. So when God brings Israel to
Canaan, you know what a way they go about through the wilderness: when they
were come to Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey, God brought them to the
worst part of it: for the south part was the hottest, and dryest, and
barrennest part of the country: thus God seems to go on in cross ways, and
this hides the excellency of the things of God: and hence it comes to pass
they are not seen. If it be so, then that the things of God are not seen to a
carnal eye, and require more then reason to apprehend them:

First, it should make us cease wondering, that men of excellent parts and
reason, do not see the things of God, but slight them: be not offended at
this, they are things not seen: it is a great deceit in many, who think that
because such and such men have larger abilities of reason then others to
understand natural things; that therefore it must needs follow, they have
deeper apprehensions of spiritual things: and yet men reason thus, what you
poor simple men and women understand these things, when there are great
Scholars and learned men, that see them not: this argues a carnal heart; as if
the strength of reason could make men apprehend more then faith can do. You
know what Christ says, Father I thank thee, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes, Math. 11. 25.
Notwithstanding such expressions of Christ, yet we see the temper of the men of
the world: alas, they look upon religion as a most foolish and ridiculous
thing; and so for strictness in the ways of religion: when a man shall see
another very earnest about a thing that he thinks is of no consequence at all,
he cannot but impute folly to him: so, when the men of the world see the people
of God servent, and zealous about those things that they can see no excellency
in; and see them willing to venture and suffer for them; they count this folly
and madness: when Christ (being in danger of his life, John 18. 37, 38.) tells
Pilate that he came into the world to bear witness unto the truth, says
Pilate, what is truth? speaking in a slighting way, as if he had said, you come
here to answer for your life, and you had need look to that; and what do you
talk of truth now your life is in question. So carnal men, when they see
others venture their estates, and lives, for poor inconsiderable things, as
they esteem them, they count this folly: and why do they do so? because the
things of God are not seen. Therefore in spiritual and heavenly things we must
always endeavor to beat down reason, and to advance faith: says Luther, In
the things of God we must not continually be asking the reason, for they are
the things that are not seen: Nay (says he) faith kills the beast reason, in
spiritual things. Though it is true, being kept under faith there is good use
of it, yet it is as a beast to be slain, that so we may see the more of
spiritual things. I meet with a story in a book of a company of Bishops that
were gathered together, and there was a Philosopher with them, who disputed
against the Christian faith; and he argued so subtly that he non-plust the
Bishops. Now there was a godly man, a poor weak man there, and he desired he
might have liberty, to dispute, for that they were so non-plust in: and though
at first they were afraid he would spoil the cause through his weakness, yet
at length they gave him leave to speak; and he propounds certain principles of
religion to the Philosopher, and said to him, do you believe these things? and
said no more, but do you believe these things? and upon this the Philosopher
yields. I have heard (says he) nothing all this while but words; but now I
find a divine virtue come into me, that I can no longer resist the Christian
faith, and this merely upon the propounding of the objects of faith, with
urging upon him, Do you believe? certainly in the things of faith we must
believe before we can understand them fully: our faith must sometimes help us
to conceive, and not always our conceiving help to us to believe, we find
this in Peter, John 6. 69. And we believe and are sure that thou art the Christ
the Son of the living God: mark, we believe and are sure: He does not say, we
are sure, and believe: but first believe, and then are sure; by believing we
come to be sure. There are many they would feign be sure that Christ died for
them, that their sins are pardoned, and that they are the children of God; and
they endeavor to make this out by arguments, from the effects, and would try
themselves by such and such notes: but we should rather, and in the first place
go the way the Apostle does here, we believe and are sure: we should cast our
souls upon the truth of the word, and by believing come to be sure.

So much for the First, the things of God are things not seen.

But now faith, that does evidence and make them clear, We know in whom we
have believed, 2. Tim. 1. 12. and the mercies of God in Christ are called The
sure mercies of David, Acts 13. 34. Faith is not a mere notion, imagination, or
conceit, but it is that which makes all sure and certain to the soul. I should
have answered a case here, whether or no there may not be faith without
assurance, that is without assurance of a man's own salvation by Christ.

Certainly it must needs be a great mistake to put that upon the being of
faith, which is the riches of faith; for so the Scripture calls assurance: a
man may be able to carry on his Trade, though he be not rich; and a man may be
a believer, though he be not rich in assurance: now assurance is the cream of
faith, the riches of faith. I should have shown also how far faith can be an
evidence, where there is doubting. Only thus: the assurance we have by faith
building upon the word, and drawing conclusions from divine principles, (for
that I should have spoken of, how faith draws things up to an evidence, by
divine and spiritual principles; and what these principles are: but we cannot
stand to open this: but) it is so far an evidence, that the soul can venture
upon it, as I told you before; faith is a foundation that the soul dare
venture upon: as that Martyr said, though I cannot dispute for the truth, yet I
can dye for the truth. Where faith comes with a convincing light, though there
may be doubts and fears, and temptations; yet it can trust, and depend; and the
soul resolves if I perish, I will perish here: let all the world say what they
will, I find this is the way, and whatever comes of it I will not go back:
and by this means over-powers the soul, and carries it through opposition; and
so faith is an evidence.

Many things should have been spoken by way of application.

As First, If faith be an evidence to other things, and makes, them seen, then
it is an evidence to it self. I mean thus: It is therefore possible for a soul
to know its own good condition and its interest in Christ, merely by the very
work of faith it self; though for the present it be not able to argue,
aposteriori, from the effects of faith, yet it may argue apriori; faith may
evidence it self. Many Christians go on in a doubting way, merely because they
think they must have evidences of their faith, by some effects that follow
their faith; and till then they can have no comfort; it is true, where true faith
is, there will be fruits and effects of it: but certainly if you could learn
this mystery of the Gospel, to find an evidence in faith it self, you would
sooner come to comfort; And it is a safer way a great deal: as thus, if you
have doubts about your condition, and fear your sins are not pardoned; and
that you have no interest in Christ, the way to be freed from these doubts and
fears; is by renewing the act of faith it self, by presenting to your souls
the riches of the grace of God in the Lord Jesus; and by viewing the glory of
that, see if it will not draw out your souls to believe. And if upon this your
hearts stir not for the present, set these things before your souls again,
and turn not from renewing the acts of faith, to pore upon your corruptions,
and then say, you can see no interest that you have in Christ: but look upward
again and again, and by the very viewing of them, a virtue will come in, to
draw the heart to believe. As by presenting the law, there is an efficacy to
terrify and afright: so by presenting the glorious things of the Gospel, there
is an efficacy to draw out faith: And then you are to renew the very primitive
work of faith; that is to close with Christ, and to cast your selves upon the
freeness of the grace of God in Christ; and though you find in your hearts
such and such corruptions, and are ready to say, shall such a one as I am, so
polluted and defiled, cast my self upon the grace of God in Christ? yet lay
hold upon Christ, and you have as much reason to do it from thence, as from
any thing; and therefore this must be thy course to renew this primitive act of
thy faith again and again. I but yet my doubts and fears remain: but if thou
would have an evidence, to it again and again a thousand times over, and at
last there will be an evidence of the act of faith it self. But you will say,
this may be presumption to cast ones self upon the free grace of God in Christ.
I answer, this is no presumption, because the very act it self gives thee a
right to all that is in God and Christ. Now presumption is when a man takes
that which he has no right to: and if a man do that to which he has no right
before, yet if that he does give him a right, it is no presumption. But you
will say, this is a licentious way, and gives liberty. O do not wrong faith,
when thou (though thou can see no reason for it) in the want of sight and
sense can venture thy self upon the riches of the grace of God in Christ, it
is the most glorious work that thou can possibly do in this world: should
thou be able to live to overcome all thy corruptions, and to do the greatest
service imaginable, it could not be so glorious a work as this. And it is the
most difficult thing in the world; and therefore no doctrine of liberty; that
soul that can go through all the difficulties of faith, that can overcome its
infinite guilt, and the terrors of the law, and notwithstanding all that comes
between God and it, can venture upon the free grace of God in Christ, may
overcome all the difficulties in the world. Many other things might have been
in urging of this, as now, though we are in the dark, and sight and sense, and
all is gone; yet exercise faith, and if thou would study to magnify God as
a Christian, this is the only way. There is a notable instance of credit that
Alexander gave to his Physician, and the example of the trust he put in him did
mightily honor him before all his Nobles: Alexander being sick, one sends to
him and advises him to take heed of Philip his Physician, for that one had
feed him to poison him; his Physician brings him the potion, and Alexander
gives him the letter, and drinks the potion presently, intimating that he
would not believe what was reported of him: and this was a mighty honor done
to his Physician, and so when thou have no evidence in thy self, yea when thou
have many temptations that speak ill of the free grace of God in Christ, and
that tell thee Christ has left thee and forsaken thee; and that it would never
be thus and thus with thee if Christ intended any good to thee; and when
temptations are in their greatest heat, and speak the worst of Christ; Now to
venture thy soul upon Christ, Christ will take it as the greatest honor thou
art capable of doing to him: and it is the readiest way to advance the riches
of his grace and mercy. And be afraid of unbelief, as well as of presumption;
be afraid least thou should not magnify the riches of the grace of God in
Christ, which is his great design amongst the children of men. I thought to
have laid down something to show what encouragement we have to believe in case
of want of evidence, when we are in the dark, and can see no light; and to have
given rules to help our faith:

But I will conclude with this one use.

By what has been delivered you may all see what an excellent and admirable
grace faith is, and of what use it is. O brethren, in these times wherein there
is such fear, trouble and distraction; now to have faith to give a subsistence
to all, the things that God has spoken of; a subsistence to all the glorious
promises that God has made to his people: what a wonderful blessing is this!
now exercise faith, and by faith give a subsistence to all these promises; make
them a foundation to rest upon; be willing to venture all you have, your
Estates, names, liberties, lives, for the furthering and fulfilling the
glorious promises which God has made unto his Church: and if you have faith,
that gives foundations to those promises, you will do so. And though we see
nothing but darkness, and misery upon the world, yet let us exercise faith; if
the hour of temptation be yet to come, as who knows, then we shall have need
of faith; and faith only, in such darkness can help us to light. And for
preparation for such times, labor to strengthen faith, and by what you have
heard, you may see what stead faith will stand you in, in any danger. It is a
great comfort to a Christian that though he be in the dark in many things (as
there are many truths now disputed about Churches, and the like) yet to know he
has that in him that will make the things of eternal life evident to him: It
is a wonderful blessing of God to have a principle that gives subsistence and
evidence to such things as these are. How exceedingly would many poor souls
rejoice, if they might have an evidence but of some one truth of religion; as
the truth of a deity, which reason gives light in; they are so pestred with
Atheism, that they would give a thousand worlds to be rid of it. Now if this
be so great a mercy, to have that which does evidence only one principle of
religion; what a glorious mercy then is it, to have faith to evidence all the
glorious things of God; and to make them clear and plain to you! you can
remember there was a time when you thought them fancies and conceits, but now
you see them as clear as the light of the Sun, and you would not now for a
thousand worlds but you saw them as you do. Hereafter (brethren) when we shall
see them not by faith, but by sense, O how shall we bless God then, that we
had before an evidence of these things made to our souls. What would have
become of us if we had not had an evidence to clear those things to us that
lead to this glory, to evidence the righteousness of God in Christ for eternal
life. I saw these things subsisting and evident before, and now God reveals
them fully to me; whereas on the other side, those that want a principle of
faith to make them substantial and evident to them, when they shall come to be
substantial and evident to their sense, O what a horrid terror will it be
unto them: then you will say, O Lord, that I had seen these things before, my
heart then would never have been taken so with the things of the world: I ran
madly upon the vanities of the world, to get riches, and honors; and I thought
I was the only happy man, and that those things were the only substantial and
real things, and those things that I heard the Preacher speak of, I thought
them to be but notions and conceits: but now I see they are real and
substantial. O miserable man that now I am!

O the work of faith that can make those that are of weak parts, to see the
great things of God, James 2. 5. Hearken my brethren (says the Apostle) God
has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith. To understand the great
things of faith; that poor men should understand the great, the deep, the
glorious things of God, that were hid from the foundations of the world, it is
a wonderful work; therefore when John sent to Christ, to know if he were the
Messiah, Christ gives this as one argument, The poor receive the Gospel, Matthew
11. 5. Why, was that an argument that Christ was the Messiah, was it not rather
an argument against him? that the poor did it: if the great ones had done it,
it had been an argument. No, The poor receive the Gospel. And that those that
are poor and weak in other things, should have this mighty work wrought in
their souls, to be able to receive Christ and the Gospel: this is an argument
of the mighty power of God. Brethren, to have the use of the eye of the body by
which we can see the great works of God, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and can take
notice of the glory of God in these, this is a great blessing: what man would
be willing to loose the sight of his eyes, to gain a world? because it
discovers so much of the glory of God. Now if the eye that receives only these
natural things, be so preecious O then what is it to have a principle within
us, an eye of faith clearly to evidence the great things and glorious councels
of God unto us? if a crystal that can receive colors into it from without,
be precious; O what is the crystal of faith? it may well be called precious
faith, for it receives into the soul the glory of God, and the excellencies of
Christ; and the great things of eternal life. And these are brought into the
soul by faith, in the reallity and power of them to raise the heart, and to
fill it with all joy and peace in believing, and to carry the soul through all
the troubles of this world. O the eye of faith is a precious eye! the eye of
sense is precious, because we can see visible objects by that; but the eye of
reason is more precious, because that can make things seen which are not seen
by the eye of sense; reason can discourse up to God himself: and it is the
wonderful excellency of a reasonable creature that God has given him that
ability, that he can discourse so from the effect to the cause, and from one
cause to another, till at last he gets up to God, the first being of all. This
is an admirable indowment we should bless God for: but now, if the use of
reason have such an excellency in it; because by that we have an evidence of
reasonable things to us, then still go higher and labor to have a right
esteem of this precious faith, that gives unto us such evidence of the glorious
things of God, even that faith that God puts into our hearts on purpose that by
it we might be able to receive into our souls those glorious and hidden
mysteries of godliness that do infinitely concern our eternal peace.

This Sermon was preached April 25. 1641.
JOHN. 8. V. 36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.
IN this Chapter we have Christ continuing of his contest with the wrangling
peevish Jews, in answering all that they said, notwithstanding they snarled at
every word almost that past. But however it was with the multitude, yet there
were some that were taken with what he said: for in verse. 30. it is said, As he
spoke these words many believed on him, at least there were some beginnings of
faith, or some preparations to it. And Christ tells them verse. 31. That if they
continued in his word, then they were his disciples indeed: as if he should
say, it is not enough that you are stirred for the present and profess you
believe in me; I will not take you for my disciples, unless you continue in my
word: how often do the flashes that are upon the hearts and consciences of men
vanish and come to nothing? they continue not in the word of Christ, and
therefore are not his disciples. Christ tells them further, that they must
understand more concerning their condition then yet they apprehended. And ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. v. 32. as if he should
say, though you have some confused apprehensions of things for the present, yet
it is but very little you know of your condition: but if you will go on in the
way that God is beginning with you, in stirring your consciences; if you will
continue, you shall come to know more then yet you know, Ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free; and then in verse. 33. say they, we
are Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man; how say thou, ye
shall be made free. See here, they begin to snarle again. Master Calvin, I
remember, thinks that these are the words rather of some other of the Jews
that were present, then of those that are said before to believe: but others
think it may be understood even of those that are said to believe; for though
they did begin to assent to the doctrine of Christ, and were very much
convinced, yet there was still abundance of frowardness, perverseness and
crookedness in their spirits: so that they begin again to wrangle with
Christ, especially when he does but intimate to them any thing of their
bondage. It is a usual thing for many people, that have some stirrings of
conscience, and some beginnings of the working of Gods spirit in them, and it
may be saving ones too, yet to continue a long time in much frowardness, and
perverseness of spirit, if they be opposed in their way. Therefore, say they,
do you speak to us of bondage, and tells us of freedom? why, We were never in
bondage to any. verse. 33. What never in bondage to any? were not the Jews in
bondage to the Babylonians, when in captivity to them? and were they not at
this very time in bondage to the Romans? and yet we were never in bondage: thus
carnal hearts, till grace fully subdue them, are very loath to know their
wretched condition; they love not to hear of any thing that discovers to them
the misery that they are in: they were never in bondage, they say, but yet
Christ pittyeth them: he did not take advantage to fling away presently,
because he saw them continue still in their perverseness, and snarling at what
he spoke, but tells them, what bondage he meant. As if he should say, the truth
is, though you think your selves free, yet there is a bondage that you are in,
and such a bondage that none can deliver you, but the Son of God alone. If the
Son therefore shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. Thus we come to
the words of the Text.

These words, you see then, hold forth unto us the blessed liberty of the
Gospel; that freedom that believers have by Christ.

I come then presently to the maine doctrinal conclusion, which is this:

There is a blessed liberty, that Christians enjoy by Christ, and only by him.
This doctrine of Christian liberty that is enjoyed by Christ, is a Treasury of
abundance of admirable consolation, and much of the mystery of the Gospel is
contained in this doctrine. I should enlarge my discourse too far, and seek
to gripe too much, should I think to give you but a view of this doctrine in
all the points of it. If we should intend to handle it at large, I should show
to you. 1. What that is that Christ does set believers free from. 2. The
privileges of this freedom they have by Christ. 3. The Subject of it: who it
is that has this freedom. 4. By whom it comes: how it is by the Son, and
only by him. 5. The price and purchase of this freedom. 6. The interest that
believers have in this freedom: how they come to be enfranchised and to have
interest in it. And 7. the application of it. But should I go this way to
work, it is but little I should be able to do: therefore I will not graspe so
much. I intend therefore to handle but one special thing in this our freedom
by Christ.

If I should show to you, first of all what we are freed from; then there is
the freedom from the law, the freedom from the power of sin, the freedom
from the bondage of fear, the freedom from an accusing conscience, the
freedom from slavishnesse in the performance of holy duties; we are set at
liberty in holy duties; the freedom from death, and the evil of that; the
freedom from the slavery of the devil, and the freedom from the ceremonial
law; but neither must we seek to gripe all these particulars: to show you our
freedom in these, I shall only pitch upon one, and that is our freedom from
the law. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

The doctrine of freedom from the law, is the subject that we are to handle at
this time: and when I speak of freedom from the law, I mean, not freedom
from obedience to the law: it is an erroneous conceit, to think we are freed from
obedience to the law: and it is a conceit too mean and absurd for us to spend
time about it now, that have so little, and having to deal in a matter of so
great consequence as we have; for what is the law, but the image of God, the
very beam of the wisdom and holiness of God himself, if you look at it, as
requiring obedience; and for any to say, we should be freed from obedience to
the law, is as much as to say, we should be freed from the image of God, from
the beam of the wisdom and holiness of God himself, therefore we will spend
no time about that, but when I speak of freedom from the law, I mean freedom
from the rigor of the law, from the condemning sentence of the law, in which
all the rigor of it appears.

Wherefore then it is necessary, first to give you a view of the bondage that
we are all in, under the law, unless delivered by Christ.

And then Secondly, I shall endeavor to open to you, wherein the liberty of
the Gospel does consist, that Christ has purchased for us, These two things
(brethren) have in them the chief doctrine of divinity, and except you be well
instructed and settled in these two, you cannot know aright any point of
religion.

For the first: I will be but brief in that, though there be many particulars
in it, for it is the second I chiefly intend. And for a preparation to this
first, this I shall tell you before hand, that I shall name many things unto
you that will seem exceeding hard; but yet take this consideration along, that
although the things I name to you appear never so hard, yet they are but in
order to that which I shall afterward deliver to you, that shall have much
comfort and peace in it. If I tell you any thing of your bondage, it is only
to this end, that you may know the blessedness of your freedom and liberty.

Wherefore then, for the rigor of the law (that you may know what you are
freed from) you must know what this is, and what you are all under by nature as
considered out of Christ, for so the holy Ghost expresses our subjection to
the law, he says, we are under it. Romans 6. 14. Now ye are not under the law:
there was a time when they were under the law; first, then the rigor of the
law is in this, it requires hard things of those that are under it. I shall
show you afterward, how the things are not so to those that are set free by
Christ: but to those that are under the law it is a hard yoke, it requires hard
things, things that are cross and contrary to the hearts and dispositions of
all that are under it; things between which and their hearts there is an enmity
and antipathy. Now to require such things as one has (...) ^inde to, but are
quite contrary to ones nature, and that ones nature has an antipathy against;
this is very tedious; and yet such are all the duties of the law, to those that
are in bondage to it.

Secondly, the law requires not only hard, but impossible things, impossible
to be performed by those that are under it, the law it is a yoke that neither
we nor our fathers were able to bear Acts 15. 10. but that you will say is meant
of the ceremonial law: I, but there is more in it then so, for do but consider
the occasion of that speech, it was upon this ground, there were some that came
from the Church of Jerusalem to the Church of Antioch, and they troubled the
disciples there with two doctrines, the doctrine of the necessity of the
ceremonial law, and the doctrine of being justified by the law; now this
Church of Antioch sends to the Church of Jerusalem, to be satisfied about both
these questions, and that which is spoken is spoken concerning them both, not
only the ceremonial law was that whereby they looked for justification, but the
morrall law too, and both were a yoke that neither they nor their fathers were
able to bear; and the rather it must be meant of both, because in the very next
words we find it opposed to the grace of Christ, in verse. 11. But we believe
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as
they. As if he should say, you must not think to be saved by the law, but by
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is
opposed to our justification, by obedience to the morrall law, as well as to
the ceremonial: so that the morral law is a yoke that neither we nor our
fathers were able to bear. It requires of us such things as are impossible to
be done by those that are under it. We must not dispute now how this can be, or
the justice of it; that will fall in afterward.

And then thirdly, the law exacts all of us under the condition of perfection:
the law accepts of nothing but that which is complete and absolutely perfect
every way, both in regard of the principle from whence, and the manner how, and
the rule by which, and end to which, it requires absolute perfection.

Fourthly, the law accepts of (...), it must have it done in our own persons:
like a severe creditor that will be paid to the utmost farthing, and by our
selves. I say the law, in it self considered, looks for a perfect
righteousness of our own persons, or else it condemns us, this is the
righteousness of the law, That he that does the things therein contained,
shall live by them. Romans 10. 5. He that does: there must be doing, and that by
himself personally, or not at at all.

But it may be, though there be much required, yet upon some endeavors there
may be some remission.

In the fifth place therefore, such is the rigor and severity of the law, that
let us endeavor never so much to obey it, yet all our endeavors are rejected,
if they come not up to perfect obedience: It Is a vain plea of many people to
say, they do what they can, and desire well, and endeavor well; It is true,
this is somewhat to those that are children, and have freedom by Christ (as
you shall hear by and by) but to those that are under the law, endeavors to
obey, though never so strong, if the work be not done, are not accepted by God.

Sixthly, the law requires constancy in all these: suppose we could obey the
law, or go on very far in many things, yet such are the terms between God
and us, as we are under the law, that if we were able to obey the law in every
thing as long as we live, till the very last moment, and should offend but in
any one particular at the last moment, were it not for this freedom we have by
this Son, we were utterly undone for ever; you may see by the way still as you
go of what infinite concernment our freedom by Christ is. You must look to
your selves how you get deliverance by Christ, for certainly this is your
condition as long as you are under the law.

Seaventhly, the law exacts the obedience it requires exceeding rigorously, in
a way of violence upon all that are under it, it comes roughly upon them as
Pharoahs taskmasters; it requires the work, and looks not at strength,
strength or no strength, the work is required, and required with exceeding
rigor, with dreadful threatening if it be not performed: therefore it is, the
law was delivered in so dreadful a manner with thundering, and lightning, and
earthquakes, and fire, so that it made even Moses himself to shake and tremble
at the manner of delivering it, and in Deuteronomy. 33. 2. it is called a fiery law,
it came with mighty rigor: that is the seventh.

Eighthly, there is this rigor in the law too, that upon any breach of it in
the least thing, it does by the severity of it break the soul, so that it does
utterly disinable it for ever performing any obedience to it again: there is
such hardness in the covenant of the Law, the Law is like an Iron or Brazen
wall, that upon any breach of it, the soul is but as an earthen vessel, that
dashes against it, and is broken in pieces; so that there must be a creating
power to make it whole again: consider I beseech you, I say, this is the
condition of the Covenant of works, which was made with us in Adam, which is
now the covenant of the Law, that upon any one breach, by the severity of it,
it breaks the soul, so that it does utterly difinable it, for keeping it
again: it roots out all the principles whereby the soul should be enabled to
obey again: sins against the Gospel do not do so, as you shall hear
hereafter. And this is the very ground, why upon the first sin of Adam, we
were all gone, and so were the Angels upon their sin, because they had to
deal with God only in a covenant of works. But if upon the breach of the Law,
we come to have all principles rooted out by which we should keep it,
afterward, it will (we hope) pity us, and not exact obedience from us.

Therefore in the ninth place, notwithstanding this, the Law goes on in its
curse, and requires as perfect obedience, and that upon pain of eternal death,
to every thing of it, as if we had all principles that might enable us to keep
it still: this is the severity of the Law, it does not remit at all of the
threatening, or punishment, or exactness of obedien^^ notwithstanding we have
lost all power to obey it.

Yea further in the tenth place, it requires this of us, and gives us no
strength at all to do what it requires; it finds us divested of those
principles that once we had to yield obedience, and it affords us no new
principles: therefore some have compared the severity of it to Pharaohs
Taskmasters; it requires the tale of Brick, but gives no strength at all.

Yet further in the eleventh place. In all it does, it strikes at our life; the
Law is satisfied with no affliction; let it be transgrest in the least degree,
all the afflictions that can possibly be in this world, will not satisfy it:
such is the severity of it (I say) that it strikes at life, and at eternal
life, it follows to pursue us to our blood, to temporal and eternal death:
and here I might open the condemning sentence of the Law, but that would
require a subject by it self, therefore I only name what is in this head, that
it strikes at our lives, upon every transgression of it.

Again twelfthly, the severity of it, is in this, that upon any breach it does
presently bind over the soul (though it do not execute it presently) by the
strongest bonds that possible can be, to everlasting death; it suspends
execution, but the bond is immediately sealed upon the breach of it: so that
all men, upon every breach of it, have chains clapped upon their souls, which is
the guilt of sin, whereby they stand bound to eternal death, by such bonds
as all created power in heaven and earth is not able to loose.

Thirteenthly, In the next place, such is the severity of the law, that when it
is once offended, it will never be made amends again by any thing we are able
to do. Suppose we have offended the Law in some one thing, and that but once;
if after this, we should endeavor what we can for our lives, and swelter our
heart bloods to obey the Law, and think to make up the breach we have made, yet
we can never make it amends again. It is true, some, though they be offended,
yet by double diligence may be pleased again: but we must never think to do so
with God; being under the law, when we have once broken it, we cannot with all
our care and diligence be able to make it am^^^s; and that is a great part of
the severity of the Law.

I, but what have we to do, but to mourn and cry, and rent our hearts because
of this distressed condition we are in.

Fourteenthly, Nay the Law accepts of no repentance; it will not discharge the
guilt of any one sin, for all the sorrow in the world. And here lies a great
mistake of people, when they have offended, they think they will be careful to
make amends; and they will mourn and repent, etc. It is true, if you be under
the covenant of grace, this is something; but if you be in your natural
condition, should you weep your hearts out, and send streams of blood from
your eyes, in mourning but for any one sin; suppose that which thou countest
a little matter, a sin in thought, should thou resolve to cry out and
mourn for that one sin all thy life, it will not be accepted, unless thou
come under the blessed liberty purchased by Christ: therefore know the
difference of being under the Law and under the Gospel.

Fifteenthly, Yet further, such is the rigor of the Law, that when it has
opened our wounds and miseries, it goes no further; it shows us no means of
deliverance: like a Surgeon, that opens the wound, but applies no remedy.
Certainly were it not for a Mediator, we should find the Law only to open our
wound, and there leave us.

Sixteenthly, but yet again, such is our bondage to the Law, that instead of
mortifying any of our sins, it rather stirs them up, and makes them more:
it threatens indeed grievous things against the transgressors of it, but it
does not mortify any sin; it does stir up lust, (though accidentally) and
makes our sin out of measure sinful.

Sevententhly, Yea there is one thing more, after all this: If we should keep
the Law, yet the promises of it are but mean and low in comparison of the
promises of the Gospel. I do not say they are but temporal, though before the
Gospel was revealed, there was but little of Spiritual promises, yet we know
what the Apostle says, 2 Timoth. 1. 10. That life and immortality is brought
to light through the Gospel. And though I do not say, there are none, yet there
are very few Scriptures of the old Testament that speak of eternal life.

Thus you see your bondage under the Law, and surely you will now think it a
blessed condition, ^o be freed from the Law. And it is one Argument that a soul
is delivered from the bondage of the Law, when it can hear all this, and yield
to Gods justice in it, and can have the heart raised to God in the hearing of
it. But if the soul at the hearing of these things, think them so hard and
unreasonable, that it is ready to rise at them, it is a sign that the spirit
is not acquainted with them; and although these things may seem hard unto us,
yet if we consider but three or four particulars, they will not appear so
hard.

First, do but consider, you have to deal with a God of infinite justice and
worth; indeed did we look upon God, as we look upon a creature like our selves,
we should think it mighty hard: but now, when we have to deal with a God of
infinite worth, we should not think it hard.

Secondly, we shall not think it hard, if we consider that state of perfection
wherein God made man at first: however it is with us now, yet God did at first
give us a stock to trade in the way of obedience, and to enable us to do what
the law required.

And then Thirdly, if you did but understand aright what sin is, then you would
not think it hard, that upon that sin, we should be given up to such a woeful
condition we speak of: if you look upon sin as that which strikes at an
infinite deity, at the very being of God himself, as much as in us lies, then
you will not wonder that one sin should bring us into such a hard condition.

Fourthly, if we consider those things that we all take for granted that yet
are as hard as these, and do but lay them with them, and they will not seem so
hard. As that God for one thought, should cast the Angels into eternal
torments; and not so much as parley with them about any terms of peace: and
that God for one sin in Adam, should condemn all mankind, you all grant this
in the general; yea further that God the Father should deal so with his own
Son, the Son of his love, as to make him a curse for man; and should lay the
weight of his wrath upon him, so as to make him sweat drops of blood, and to
cry out, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? if you had never heard of
such a thing, this would seem as hard as any thing we have spoken of.

Now before we come to speak of the other, let that which has been said teach
us, that surely then, all men in their natural condition are in a hard case: as
the Israelites when the bondage they were in under Pharaoh increased upon them,
the Text says, they saw themselves in an evil case. O that upon the hearing of
these things, you would learn to see what you are out of Christ: that you
would see your selves in an evil case, in a sad and dangerous condition.

Secondly, if this be the case that every soul naturally is under such a
bondage to the law: then the saving of a soul is a great and a mighty work; yea
such a work, that God must make heaven and earth to move to save a soul; and to
deliver it from the bondage of sin: the reason why people do so slight this
great work of salvation and mediation by Christ is, because they know not their
bondage. Understand but this bondage aright, what it is to be under the law (I
have not told you all this while of the condemnation of the law or the curse of
the law: I have only set out to you the bondage of the rigor of the law) and
by this you will see it is a great work to save a soul.

Thirdly, you may see by this, how that vain plea of carnal hearts comes to
nothing; what will you trust now to your good meanings, good desires, and good
intentions? and you will mourn and grieve, because you are no better; and you
will do what you can for God: it is true, these are good things but are these
the things you rest in for standing before God? if they be, certainly you know
not the terms you stand in to God, nor what your bondage is.

Fourthly, if God reveals himself to a man only by the law, it is impossible
but the soul of that man must fly off from him and look upon God and his law
as enemies to him, unless it were revealed together with the Gospel. Which is
that I am now to tell you of, even that liberty we have by the Gospel.

Therefore then for the liberty of the Gospel, it is a precious liberty,
wherein the treasury of the mystery of grace is laid up: it is the only ground
of support to our souls; and Saint Paul that was the great instrument of God in
opening the doctrine of the liberty of the Gospel, sets it down in all his
Epistles; and in many places elegantly: and in one Text wherein is some
difficulty, In Gal. 4. from verse 21, and so forward, Tell me, ye that desire
to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? for it is written, that Abraham
had two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a free woman: but he who was
of the bondwoman, was borne after the flesh, but be of the freewoman, was by
promise: which things are an allegory; for these are the two covenants, the one
from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage which is Agar; for this Agar
is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in
bondage with her children: but Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the
mother of us all: for it is written, rejoice thou barren that bear not,
break forth and cry thou that travellest not: for the desolate has many more
children, then she which has an husband. The Text seems at the reading of it,
to be somewhat obscure; and yet does most excellently set out this doctrine I
am now upon, of bondage under the law, and liberty under the Gospel: the
allegory, you see, is from the two sons; Abraham had one Son by a bond-maid,
another by a free woman; It is an allegory, says the Apostle, and it signifies
the two covenants; the covenant of works, and the covenant of grace: the
covenant of works, that was from mount Sinai; there was the law revealed,
which is Agar, for this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia. I remember Luther says;
that Agar in the Arabian tongue is as much as mount Sinai, they call it so in
the Arabian tongue: and so the Apostle alludes to it; therefore the law that is
of Agar, that tends only to bondage. Agars posterity were Gentiles, and in
bondage, and were not to have the privilege of the Sons of the free woman:
therefore all those that have to deal with God in the covenant of works, are
bondmen; and are not to have the privilege of the children of the free woman,
of the children of God. Well, This Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers
to Jerusalem, which now is, and is in bondage with her childron, he sets out
the estate of the Church of the Jews, the Jerusalem that now is, to be an
estate of bondage, in comparison of the Church of the Gospel; because they had
so little knowledge of the Gospel, but were in bondage unto the law, and knew
little else but the law. But Jerusalem which is above, that is the state of the
Church under the new Testament, is above, in regard of the Gospel, which is
free, and is the mother of us all: the Church of God under the Gospel is the
Jerusalem which is above; but now it is written, rejoice thou barren that
bear not, break forth and cry thou that travellest not; for the desolate
has many more children then she which has an husband. That is, those that
acknowledge the doctrine of the liberty of the Gospel, at first are but as
desolate, as the barren woman, before it be revealed; as Sarah was barren for a
while, but afterward she had a child: so the doctrine of the liberty of the
Gospel, is but as a barren thing for a while, till people are acquainted with
it; and we that are Ministers of the Gospel, it is our work to beget children
to Christ, If we should be legal and preach only the law, we should beget
children to bondage, to Agar, but this is our chief work, to beget children to
the free woman; to beget children to the free grace of God in Christ. And O
that I could beget one child to this free woman! I cannot think, but that
there may be many here that are children of Agar, that it may be have had
terrors, and fears in their consciences; and yet are but children of the
bondwoman still: Now it is the Gospel that proclaims the Trumpet of Jubilee
to those that are under bondage; therefore it is observable what time the
Trumpet of the Jubilee was to be blown, Levit. 29. 9. Then shall thou cause the
Trumpet of the Jubilee to sound, on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the
your land. What was this day of atonement? it was the day of the public
humiliation of all the people for their sins: the day of fasting and prayer
appointed by God to afflict their souls, is called a day of atonement, and the
Trumpet to proclaim the Jubilee must be blown upon that very day, wherein the
people had been afflicting their souls for their sins: therefore now, if there
be any soul that has been humbled before the Lord and has been afflicted for
sin; behold this is the work that is now to be done, to blow the Trumpet of
Jubilee to such a soul, and to proclaim liberty in the name of Christ unto you,
and as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed is the people that know the
joyful sound. It is translated by some, they are blessed that know the joyful
sound of the Jubilee. Now this Jubilee having reference to our Jubilee by Christ,
blessed are they that hear this joyful sound that we have here in the Gospel.

Now the first thing of this joyful sound of the Jubilee, and liberty we have
proclaimed by Christ from the law, is this, thou shall not be cast for thy
eternal estate by the law; the law may terrify thee, but it shall not cast
thee; indeed it must cast the children that are in bondage to it, for their
eternal estate; but if thou be a believer in Christ, if thou art a child of
the free woman, this is thy liberty, I say, thou shall not be cast for thy
eternal estate by the law, we do not love to have any business of great
concernment to be cast by those that are rigid and severe, be of good comfort O
believer, thou have heard of much severity in the law: but the great business
concerning thy soul and eternal estate, is above the law; It has nothing to
do with thee; thou hear many times dreadful threats of the law, and these
threats it may be do often terrify thee, and thou art ready to say, who can
stand before this holy God? but peace be to thee thou believing soul, for thou
art set at liberty from the law by Christ; and this is the first joyful sound.

The second joyful sound of liberty thou have by the Gospel, is this, thy
lawgiver is no other then he that is thine husband, thou have to deal with no
other now, in the matters of thy soul but with him that is thy husband and thy
advocate by whom all is ruled, John 1. 2. 1. If we sin, we have an advocate
with the Father: and advocate, that is, thou have to deal now with Christ thy
lawgiver, who upon every transgression, presently is thy advocate with the
Father, who stands up to plead for thee, and to answer all accusations against
thee; I say, he that undertakes for thee, and engages all the interest he has
in his Father, for thee, thou have to deal with him, for thy lawgiver, about
thy soul and eternal estate; and this is the second joyful sound thou have of
the Trumpet of the Jubilee of the Gospel, of the liberty thou have by Christ.

Thirdly, being delivered from the bondage of the law, this is now thy liberty,
that thou art made a law to thy self. I mean thus: there is nothing now
required of thee but it is written in thy own heart: God writes his law in the
tables of stone: and all that is required of thee in obedience to it, is
written in thy heart: so that thou do not now so much yield obedience to the
law; because of the condemning power of it, and punishment due unto it, as from
a principle of love to it: For we must know, that we are not set free by Christ
from obedience to the law, we are bound to obey the law still; but here is the
difference, we are not servile to the law, we keep it freely: thou keep the
law now, by being a law to thy self, and having all that God requires of thee
in his law written in thy heart, by the law of sanctity that he has given
thee; that is the third joyful sound.

The fourth joyful sound, is this; by the liberty thou have now by Christ, this
is thy condition, that whatever thou do, though there be never so many
imperfections in it, yet if God can spy out but the least good thing in thee,
he will take notice of that, and cast away all the evil: if God sees but any
thing of his own spirit in thee, he will be sure to take notice of that. If
there be but one dust of Gold, though it be mixed with abundance of dross, God
will not loose it, but will find it out: God he is not strict to mark what is
done amiss by his children, but he is strict to mark what is done well by
them. Indeed the law tells us, nay a moral man will tell us, that to make an
action good, all circumstances must concur: but the liberty of the Gospel
tells us, that where there is any good, any grace in an action, God observes
and takes notice of it. To give but one instance for this, and it is an
excellent one for this purpose, Peter 1. 3. 6. the Apostle propounds Sarah as a
pattern for good women, Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. She
never calls him Lord; but then when she did it unbelievingly, and yet God
takes notice of that word, and never mentions her unbelief. Now Sarah was a
free woman; and this is the gracious dealing of God with the free woman; and if
thou be a child of the free woman, this is thy privilege, that God will take
notice of every good action thou do. Isai. 42. 3. A bruised reed shall he
not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench, The word signifies as
soon as ever the flax begins to be black, God will not reject it: so that if
there be but the least degree of good, it is accepted. And that is the fourth
joyful sound by the Gospel.

The fifth joyful sound, is this, suppose thou can not do any thing, yet if
there be but a will, a desire in thee, God accepts that will for the deed. Many
carnal hearts please themselves with this, but this is the case of those that
are set at liberty by Christ: perhaps thou can not pray; I but present thy
self before God, as the Apostle speaks, and that shall be accepted of God; and
know if there be any excuse to be made for thee, Christ will find it out, and
make it before God for thee; that is the fifth joyful sound.

The sixth thing wherein the liberty we have by Christ consists, is, that though
the Gospel call for obedience, yet it does it in such a sweet and loving way
that it would make any heart in the world in love with it, it draws by the
cords of love. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ stead, be ye reconciled to
God; and Philip. 2. 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, etc. The Gospel comes not as the law upon mount Sinai, with
thunder and lightning, and darkness, but it comes in a mild and gentle way,
and by that allures and draws the soul unto it self; and that is the sixth
joyful sound.

The seventh joyful sound of the Gospel is, that the Gospel and liberty of it
comes, as gently, so with abundance of life and strength, together with it: it
comes as the spirit is, and where the spirit is, there is power, as the Apostle
speaks, I remember Luther has this note upon Romans 8. says he, the law is a
spiritual law, because it is the law of God; but it is not the law of the
spirit of life: it is the law of the Gospel that brings the spirit of power and
life along with it; there goes a virtue together with the commands of the
Gospel to strengthen the sold to obedience: And the Gospel gives grace and
strength beyond what Adam had, two ways: the grace that Adam had was only a
power to do, but there was not the will and the deed given: but the grace of
the Gospel, it gives both the power, and the will, and the deed.

The eight joyful sound of the Gospel, is that tender pity and compassion that
is in God to those that are made free by it. This is the difference between the
sins of those that are under the law, and those under the Gospel: the sins of
those under the law makes them hated by God: but the sins of those that are
under the Gospel, makes them pityed by God.

The ninth joyful sound is this: the Gospel has a mighty efficacy to melt the
heart, and to resolve it into sorrow and mourning, and such mourning, that is
one of the most acceptable things to God in the world; the law, I told you,
accepts not of repentance: I, but the Gospel does; the tears of repentance
that come from believers, next to the blood of Jesus Christ, are the most
precious things in the world. I say, next to the drops of the blood of Christ,
the drops of thy tears, coming from Evangelical repentance, are most
acceptable unto God: That is the ninth joyful sound.

Tenthly, another is this; the Gospel it comes with healing: as it has a
melting power, so it has a healing power. Christ is described to come with
healing in his wings: water makes the lime burn the more, but oil which
provokes other things to burn quenches that: so it is with the oil of the
Gospel, Christ was anointed for this purpose, to heal thee, and to quench thy
lust and corruptions, In Isai. 57. 18. we have an excellent promise, verse. 17.
He went on frowardly in the way of his heart, mark what follows, I have seen
his ways, and I will heal him.

The eleventh joyful sound is, that now being set at liberty by Christ, though
thou do sin not only against the law, but against the Gospel, thy sins
against the Gospel shall not have power to root out any habits of grace; but
still the grace of the Gospel will uphold the habits of grace in thy soul. It
is otherwise with the law, for one offense against the law does not only root
out the habit that is contrary to that offense, but all other habits also: but
the grace of the Gospel is such that the habits of grace within us are not
touched.

The twelfth joyful sound is this: the Gospel is so full of grace that it takes
advantage of our misery; this is a good argument of the tenor of the Gospel,
Pardon my sin O Lord, for it is great; strange argument of a child of the
bondwoman; but a good argument of a child of the freewoman; and it is Gods
argument, Genesis 8. 21. I will not destroy the world again, for the imagination
of man's heart is evil from his youth.

Thirteenthly, Another joyful sound of the Gospel is this the Gospel proclaims
this liberty to us, that all that is required of us may be done, and accepted,
by and from another, namely Christ.

Fourteenthly, Further the grace of the Gospel shows a way wherein God shall
have all the wrong made him up, that ever thy sins did him: for suppose the
Gospel had proclaimed that God were willing to pardon, this were not enough, as
long as God stood wronged: but now the Gospel does not only proclaim to thee,
that God is content to forgive thee all thy sins, but it tells thee of a way
how God shall have all the wrong made up that ever thou have done him: and this
Son that sets thee at liberty has undertaken it, and has done it.

Fifteenthly, And then another joyful sound of the Gospel is this, That there
is a most absolute perfect righteousness made over to us; the righteousness
of the Son of God is thine, made over to thee, to be presented before the
Father for thee.

Sixteenthly, yet further: there is this joyful sound of the Gospel: It
proclaims admirable promises, glorious and high things; even the infinite
Treasures of Gods grace: the Son is come from the bosom of the Father, and
has opened the treasures of the grace of God, and has discovered those things
that were kept secret from the foundations of the world.

Seventeenthly, And yet there is one thing more, that is necessary for the full
consolation of the liberty of the Gospel, and this blessed Jubilee, that it may
make a Jubilee indeed in thy heart; and that is this: that such is the covenant
of the Gospel, and Christ has so undertaken for thee, that it shall never be
forfeited: this is the full, rich, and glorious grace of the Gospel, that now
Christ has undertaken, and engaged himself to the Father; and the Father has
promised, and has engaged his own truth, and mercy, and faithfulness, that
this covenant shall never be forfeited: yea the very condition of the covenant
that is required of thee, is that which Christ has undertaken to the Father to
perform in thee. If perseverance be a spiritual blessing, it is part of the
purchase of Christ, and must stand: and therefore peace be to thee, thou art in
such a condition as thou can not forfeit and break the covenant: the
marriage covenant between thee and thy Savior can never be dissolved.

I should now have shown you a little more the blessedness of this liberty,
that all this grace comes in and by the Son; not from the bounty of God in
general, but in a higher way, by the Son of God we come to be set at liberty,
by being made one with him who is God and man, the heir of all things, and so
are made co-heires with him. But I must here break off.

This Sermon was preached April 21. 1641.
HEBR. ^. v. 27. the latter end of the Verse.
But after this the judgment. April 29. 1641.

THe scope of the Holy Ghost in this Epistle, is to prove the excellency of
Christ: that he is the Messiah that was to come into the world; and that all
the types and shadows of the law pointed at him: And a special part of the
Epistle is to show the excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, by preferring it
above the Priesthood of Aaron: and amongst other regards, in this, that those
Priests did offer up sacrifices often, but Christ offered himself but once; and
this once offering of himself was available for ever, and needed no further
offering. And this the Holy Ghost does illustrate, by comparing the efficacy of
Christ's sufferings, with the efficacy of what a man does here in this world:
that as the actions of men here in this world, whatever they are, whether good
or evil, are available for ever; what a man does in this life, accordingly,
when he dies he comes to be stated eternally: so the death of Christ it is
available for ever. It is appointed for men once to dye, and then comes
judgment.

By judgment here I do not think the Holy Ghost intends especially the
judgment of the great day, (though it be true, that after death the judgment
of the great day will follow, and all men must come to judgment; but I shall
not speak one word of the judgment of that day.) But there is another
judgment that I conceive is the intent of the Holy Ghost here, and that is the
particular judgment that passes upon every soul immediately after death;
which is the stateing of the soul in the eternal condition of it, either of
happiness or misery.

While men live here, their condition is not stated by any act of God (though
in regard of his eternal purpose it is the same for ever) even the Saints
themselves would be here in much hazard and danger about their everlasting
estate (in regard of themselves, and what they have actually bestowed upon
them) were it not that the grace of God is above them; the people of God in
this life, are not without many fears and doubts about their everlasting
condition; and what would many poor children of God give to be delivered from
their fears, and doubts which are a grievous burden to them, that they might
never have fear or doubt more about their eternal estates? Well, if thou be
godly, in a little time it will be so with thee: this is the good that death
will bring unto thee, that after death judgment will come to thee; that is,
thou shall be so actually stated in thy everlasting condition, as to be beyond
all hazard about it; thou shall be beyond all fears, and doubts and
temptations; thou shall never fear more, never doubt more, never be tempted
more, never more lose any of the good that thou art possessed of: this is the
judgment that comes to the Saints after death.

And on the other side, wicked men here in this world are not without their
hopes and confidences that all shall be well with them: but after death comes
judgment to them: that is (as we have it Proverbs 11, 7.) when a wicked man
dies, his hope perishes, he is stated in such a condition as he is never like
to have hope of good more; he is past all hope and possibility of ever
receiving further mercy from God: and this is the meaning of the Text on both
hands, that after death comes Judgment. Whatsoever men's conditions are here in
this world, though the Saints have many fears and doubts about their estates,
yet I say immediately after death, they shall be so stated and actually
possessed of happiness, that they shall never doubt more. And howsoever wicked
men in this world have many hopes and confidences, and bless themselves in
their way, yet immediately after death all shall vanish, for then judgment
shall come. Job has this expression Job. 8. 14. The hope of the hypocrite is
as the spiders web; he spins out of his own spirit a cunning web, but the
besome of death at once dasheth it all away, for immediately after death he
comes to judgment.

This then is the doctrinal conclusion we are to handle out of these words thus
opened unto you,

That the only time that men have to provide for their eternal condition, is
the time of this life: if it be not done here, there is no help afterward; for
after death comes judgment.

I shall desire to handle this point so far as it may be a ground to work
upon your hearts, and to stir you up in the time of your lives to make all
sure between God and your souls; for after death comes judgment.

This point that I am now to treat about, it is one of the most serious points
that concerns the children of men: and usually one of the first things that the
Lord settles upon the hearts and consciences of those whom he converts to
himself. For a man going on in ways of sin and death, to bethink himself, Lord
where am I? what am I doing? what is like to become of me? wherefore was I
borne? wherefore came I into the world? what have I to do here? Then God
answers, that which thou have to do here, and art sent into the world for, is
to make provision for eternity: it is about this great business, to make up all
between God and thy soul, and look thou be careful in it: for though thy
life be short and uncertain, yet this great business does depend upon this
short and uncertain time of thy life; and if it be neglected in this little
space of time I give unto thee, thou art lost and undone for ever: for
presently after death comes judgment; and you shall be then stated so as there
can be no alteration. It is the observation of the Schoolmen, that what did
befall to the Angels that sinned, that in death befalls unto wicked men; that
is, as the Angels upon the first act of sin, were presently stated in an
irrecoverable condition; so wicked men when they dye are stated in an
irrecoverable condition. It is true while we live in this world, though we are
sinful, yet our condition is to be looked upon as better then the condition of
the fallen Angels; there is not here such an actual stating of us: but when
once death comes, a wicked man is then in the same condition with the devils
themselves: that is, his condition is then so stated and made as certain and
sure, and as irrecoverable as any of the Angels that sinned. While we preach to
men, though never so wicked, and ungodly, because an actual judgment (such as
the Text speaks of) is not past upon them, we are to offer grace and mercy to
them in Christ; but if this offer be neglected for a while; if the twine
thread, the single thread of thy life be once cut, then thou art gone for ever,
For after death comes judgment.

In the meditation of this point, me thinks I cannot but look upon God, as
beholding all the children of men in their fallen lost sinful and miserable
estate with pity and compassion, saying, poor creatures they have sinned
against me, and have made themselves liable to eternal wrath, which they
understand not, which they are not able to bear; well, a little time I will
grant unto them, to sue out their pardon, and to come in and make up their
peace with me: and I will give them means for that end: but let them look to
themselves; for according to the improvement of the time that I now give them,
so shall it be with them to all eternity: if they neglect it, they are gone for
ever; mercy then shall do them no good: so that the tenor upon which we all
hold our lives, it is no other then as a malefactor condemned to dye, who has
granted to him through the favor of the Prince, a little time of reprieval,
and some intimation withal given of a possibility in that time to sue out his
pardon; and according as he spends that time, so it shall be with him for life
or death. Thus I say we all hold our lives, we are all condemned before the
Lord: only God has out of his infinite grace provided a way and means of
salvation for the children of men, and gives us a little time (we know not how
long whether two or three days, but as long as we live) to look about us, to
provide for the making of our peace with him; and if that be neglected, all is
gone, and we are undone for ever: great things then do depend upon this
uncertain small time of our lives. It is reported of Alexander, that when he
went against any City, he did use to set up a lamp burning, and would make
proclamation, that whosoever came in while this lamp was burning, should find
favor and have his life; but whosoever staid till this lamp was out, he was
but a dead man, and must expect no mercy; brethren know that God has set up a
lamp, and our life is this lamp; and God proclames, Whosoever comes in while
this lamp is burning, shall find mercy; but if you stay till the lamp be
out, there is nothing but eternal misery to be expected. Now this lamp of your
lives may not only go out upon the consumption of the oil, but it may be put
out by accidental means; and if this lamp be once out, and your work not
done, you are lost for ever. We read 1 Kings 6. 7. that when Solomon was
preparing the Temple, he made all things so ready before hand, that there was
no noise of axe or hammer heard there: Whosoever God intends for a living
stone in the glorious Temple of Heaven, he squares and fits them here; there is
no noise of repentance and sorrow for sin after this life; what is to be done,
must be done here; nothing will do it hereafter. Whatsoever thou have to do,
do it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nos knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whother thou go. Eccles. 9. 10. and Chapter 11. verse.
3. In the place where the tree falls there it lies. Which way thou fallest
when thou dyest, that way thou shall lie eternally: if Godward, then God is
thine for ever: if sinward, then misery and destruction is thine for ever.
Eccles. 12, 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it. The souls of wicked men do return
to God that gave them, as well as the souls of the godly; that is, they do
presently return to God to receive the sentence of their eternal doom from
him, and to be stated in their everlasting condition; there is a mighty change
in the soul, immediately after it is departed from the body, and is brought to
stand before the glorious God, to be stated in its eternal condition. There are
twelve hours in the day (says Christ) wherein a man may work, but the night
comes when no man can work: John 9. 4. The time of this life is thy working
time: I, but the night is coming, and then no man can work. Revel. 6. 8. And I
looked, and behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was death, and
hell followed him. Hell immediately follows death, where death surprizeth any
in their natural condition, that have not finished the work of making their
peace with God. 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, to receive according to what we have done in the flesh, whether it be
good or bad. It is not according to what we do afterward, but according to
what we have done here in the flesh, so it must be with us for ever. There can
be no repenting, no believing after this life; body and soul being parted, the
whole man is not capable of a work of God upon it.

And besides, immediately after death, God takes all means away: you shall
never hear Sermon more, never have admonition more, never have good connsel
more, never have any working of Gods spirit more, to draw you souls to Christ.

And not only so, but God then withdrawes himself so fully, in regard of all
the common works of his spirit, that there is a kind of stating the soul in
sin (which yet cannot so properly in regard of God be said to be sin as evil,)
so that it shall be impossible for thee to do any thing but sin; as the Saints
though while they live here, they have many lusts and corruptions in them, yet
immediately after death their souls are so fully possessed of the spirit, that
then they cannot sin: so on the contrary, though wicked men while they live
here have diverse common gifts of Gods spirit, and many restraints upon them;
yet immediately after death, they are so fully separated from God, and God so
fully withdraws himself from them, that it is impossible for them to do any
thing else but sin and rebel against God, and blaspheme him to his face. There
was in Adam in innocence a possibility not to have sinned; there is in us,
while we live in this world, an impossibility but that we should sin; but in
the world to come there is in the Saints an impossibility that ever they should
sin: and look how the impossibility is on the one hand with the Saints, so is
the impossibility directly contrary on the other hand with the wicked:
therefore the wicked must needs be stated in an everlasting evil condition.
There is no more possibility for the damned souls in hell ever to do any thing
but to blaspheme God, then there is a possibility for the Saints in heaven ever
to sin against God.

And yet further, at the great day Christ gives up the kingdom to the Father,
and then there will be another manner of administration then before; Christ
will not then be exercised in the work of his mediatorship, to mediate any
further for those for whom he did not mediate in this life. And presently after
the separation of the soul from the body, the spirit of God wholly departes
from the soul, and the wrath of God is let out so fully into it, that it breaks
the soul, and fills up every faculty of it: so that it is impossible in regard
of the strong current of divine wrath that carries the soul along with it, that
ever it should be exercised to all eternity any one moment in any thing but
only in bearing of torment, and divine wrath. As the Saints shall be filled up
with the presence of God, and carried on with such a strong current of divine
mercy, that it shall be impossible that their souls should ever to all eternity
be exercised in any other thing but in the enjoyment of God, and living to his
praise: so on the quite contrary is it with the wicked: therefore after death
there is a stating of both. I will enlarge my self no further in the opening of
this point, but come presently to apply it, for this point is applicatory
rather then doctrinal, and I shall content my self with three or four branches
of application and so conclude.

In the first place, hence we may see what cause we have to bless God for the
continuance of our lives, especially any that are here this day, that have not
thoroughly made their peace with God, that are not upon certain and infallible
terms in this great business of providing for their eternal estates. If there
remains but any doubt in thy heart concerning thy eternal condition, and if
the fears of eternity have been upon thy spirit, thou Will from this point,
that has been thus briefly spoken to, see cause to bless God with thy face up
on the ground, adoring the riches of his grace that thou art alive this day?
why, because thy life it is the time of making up thy peace with God; it is the
time of providing for thy eternal condition: if thy life be at an end, and this
work not done, then all is gone, then judgment comes, and thou will be
infallibly and unalterably stated in a lost and undone condition. O therefore
its well that thou art alive this day; if a man have a great business to do
that concerns his whole estate, or life, and it must be done in a very little
time, O what a favor would he count it, to have his time lengthned out, though
but a little, because his business is of great weight, and he thinks with
himself, if I miscarry in it, I am lost and undone for ever: so all those that
have ever had serious apprehensions of the infinite consequence of what depends
upon their lives here, they cannot but sit down and bless God for lengthening
out their lives; for the time of this life is a happy time, it is a day of
grace, a day of salvation. O how happy would those poor creatures, upon whom
this judgment is past, that are stated in their eternal condition, think
themselves if they might have but one day wherein it might be said, there is a
possibility for them to make provision for themselves concerning their eternal
estate! As they were not long since, so art thou now: and therefore know how to
prize thy life. O the lives of men and women (especially such as have not yet
done that great work) are worth a thousand thousand worlds. I remember I have
heard of a speech of a great Gentleman, who being very sick, and Physicians
telling him that there was no way for him but death: O, says he, that I might
live, though it were but as a Toad! and indeed what man or woman is there that
has not got a thorough and Scripture-assurance of this great work that their
peace is made up with God, but may upon very good ground (if sickness be upon
them) desire to live though but as a Toad, because such great things depend
upon their lives here in this world? Brethren, do but say this to your own
hearts upon serious meditation of this that I am now speaking of. What if God
should come now to this Congregation, and say to every one of you, Well, now
the time that I have given you to provide for your eternal estate, is at an
end; if you have done your work, well and good, you shall be saved and possess
eternal glory; but you must be cast according to that which is now done. I
fear if such a message should come from heaven to many of us, it would make
our hearts to ache within us, and we should cry out, O Lord, give me a little
space before I go hence and be no more seen: O that I might yet have a little
more time. Suppose God had taken you away when he took away such a kinsman or
kinswoman of yours, such a neighbor or friend, and death had come then, and
judgment had then been past upon you; which way do you think you must have
been cast? cannot some of you remember, that if God had taken you away at such
a time, or when such a one dyed, you were then in such a case, that you have
cause to think you had been certainly stated in a condition of eternal misery?
therefore bless God that you are alive at this day, to hear of such a
doctrine as this is; that so long as you live, God gives you time to provide
for your eternal estate. Psalm. 78. 38. the Text says, God did not stir up
all his anger, but called back his wrath; when sickness comes upon men and
women, some part of Gods anger is let out; I, but if God had let out his anger
but a little more, what would have become of you? you had been gone: one
stroke more had cast you for ever. I, but God was pleased to call back his
anger, and did not stir up all his wrath. O bless God for sparing you at
such a time; for certainly had you died then, your condition had been as
irrecoverable as the Devells themselves; now it is a day of grace, now you have
the voice of the Gospel, and the glad tidings of salvation sounding in your
ears: but then you had been past the time of grace, past praying, and past
repenting: now that you are not past this day, you are to prize your lives. And
brethren know wherein consists the worth of your lives, and the continuance of
them; there is a horrible impudence in some men, they would feign have their
lives lengthened, to have their lusts more satisfied; did God give thee thy
life for this end? no, the end why thou should desire to live is, that thou
may have further time to make provision for that which is of such infinite
consequence, which if it be not done, it had been better for thee to have been
a Toad or Serpent, or the vilest creature that ever lived. O that we had hearts
to give God the glory of our lives, and to prize our lives aright; excellent
effects would proceed from it, were our hearts wrought to these things.

But Secondly, If the only time that we have to provide for eternity be the
time of this life, how then are those to be reproved that mispend and squander
away this precious time of their lives about vanities, and neglect the great
business that they were sent into the world for? If such great things depend
upon our lives, then the loss of the time of our lives is a most dreadful
loss; we all say time is precious, and it is so, and the through-understanding
and applying of this point would make us see time precious indeed: If there
could be an extract of the quintessence of all the pearls in the world put
into one, it would not be such a precious pearl as this time of our lives,
because there is that depends upon it that is infinitely more worth then ten
thousand worlds; however men and women make little of their time, and play and
sport it away, yet there is no moment of thy time that thou do mispend, but
for ought thou know it might be the very moment upon which thy eternal
condition does depend: thou go abroad, and art merry, and jocund, and
mispendest thy time, and abusest thy self; I say for ought thou know that
instant of thy sinning might be the very moment upon which the very hinge of
all thy eternal condition depends; and did we understand this doctrine aright,
we should see it to be an exceeding great evil and folly, to mispend our
precious time: men ordinarily live in the world as if they had nothing to do
here, but only to make provision for the flesh. If a man should come to the
City about a business that concerns his life, and the time he has to do it
in were very short, how industriously (do you think) would he spend that time!
every time the clock strikes, would strike to his heart; or suppose God should
send a damned soul that is now in hell into the world again, and should say
thus to him, Soul, you shall go and live again in the world; and I will give
you a little space, you shall live a quarter or half a year; (or if it were
but a month or week) and I will put you in such an estate that there shall be
a possibility for you to make your peace with me, and to deliver your self from
this misery that you are under: I appeal to you, how do you think such a one
would spend his time? now as you are persuaded and convinced in your
consciences, how such a one would spend his time, so do you labor to spend
your time; many would have rules to guide them in their way; why take this
rule, if such a thing could be, that a damned soul could be sent into the world
again, and be in a possibility of another estate, I say, What you think such a
one would do, that do you: If one should come and say to him, what shall I
give for your time that is granted to you? how would he contemn him? if you
offer him Crowns and Kingdoms, yea all the world for his time, (be it but a
week, or a day) he would scorn such an offer, and prize one day more then a
thousand worlds. Now you have had days and weeks, one after another, and yet
for ought you know you are liable to eternal ruin; and you know not whether
you have a week or a day more before your eternal condition be stated upon you;
O what need then have you to improve your time!

How few think of the passing away of their time, or that any great matter
depends upon the time of their lives here in this world! you would count it a
great folly and madness if a man had a precious oil that were worth a
thousand pound a pint, and he should set up a light with this oil to talk or
play, or do trifling things by; what! a lamp that is sed by such oil, that
is worth thousands! surely this lamp should be for some weighty business, and
not for trifles: Know brethren, that the time of your lives is this lamp,
lighted up, and fed with such precious oil: O do not squander it away then
about trifles and vanities; for there are things of infinite concernment that
you have to do in this time of your lives; it is the great charge of Christ
against Jezebel, Revel. 2. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her
fornication, but she repented not. I remember an expression of a woman that was
in great distress of conscience; some came to her, and endeavoring what they
could to persuade her that there was hopes of mercy for her, she looked with a
ghastly countenance upon them, and said, Call time again, call time again: as if
she had said, if you can call time again, there may be hope for me. Certainly
we do not consider what depends upon time; it is a good sign of an enlightened
conscience, to make conscience of time: there is nothing puts a more serious
frame into a man's spirit, then to know the worth of his time; says one (in
discovering the loss of the opportunity of time) suppose there were a company
of men sailing to sea, and they come at last to a little Island that lies in
the midst of the sea many thousand miles from any other Land, and they go
and refresh themselves upon the Island, but says the Mariner, look to your
selves, be not far off, be within call, for I will not stay for any of you:
the old men it may be are afraid to be too far; but the young men trust to
their legs, and think they can make haste; but the Mariner is gone, and they
are left behind and perish: it is true, while we are here in this world, we are
refreshing our selves; but be sure, says God, you be ready when I call; and
Gods call is the time of death: now God he calls, and poor creatures are not
ready, and so they perish eternally. O the loss of the time of your lives will
be a dreadful loss one day, and it will pierce your souls to think that once
you had a day of grace, but now you have no time; judgment is now past upon
you, and there is no remedy. It is reported of a woman who had her house on
fire, that she was very busy and spent her time about saying of trifles, and
in the mean time had a child in the cradle, and forgot that; and when she
looked upon what she had saved, she saw a few trifling things, but then it came
into her mind, O what is become of my child! and imagining that her child
had been burnt (though it was saved) she ran mad, to consider that she should
be so foolish, as to mind things of no concernment, and to forget her child.
Take heed it be not your case; you hear that time is precious, and that there
are great things that concern your souls and eternal condition, which you have
to do; and you spend your time to get estates, to get a little pleasure, or
honor in the world; but now, when the conclusion of all shall come, and you
shall look back to see what you have done, and God shall come and call you to
an account, and say, Well, now there is an end of your time, what have you done
in this world? It may be you can say, Lord, I have got an estate, and I have
led a merry and jovial life; but all this while, what have thou done for thy
soul? what have thou done for eternity? what have thou done for the making up
of thy peace? what have thou done about those things that are of such infinite
weight and consequence? thy heart now will be overwhelmed with this thought, O
Lord, I did forget my soul, I had no thoughts about my eternal estate, I have
spent a great deal more time in playing, then in praying; at least more time in
playing then I have done in praying to God in private, to make my peace with
him: however it may be you can pass away your time merrily here, yet it will
be a dreadful thing to you hereafter, when you shall know what was the
business of your time, and what you were borne for. I remember Bernard has a
notable expression, speaking of some calling one to another, Come let us be
merry till an hour be past; says he (speaking with indignation against such
folly) What will thou do thus and thus till an hour be past, till time be
past! what pass away that which the mercy of thy Creator has so far
indulged to thee as to give it thee for repentance, and to get grace and to
obtain pardon. What to pass away time in which thou ought to be breathing
after that life and blessedness which thou have lost! It becomes men that have
not made up their peace with God, to spend their days in bewailing of their
sinful and miserable condition, and not in merrinesse and jollity, in
chambering and wantonness; how will thou wish one day that thy time had been
spent rather in mourning and lamenting? says Abraham to Dives, Son, remember
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasures; this life is not the life
of thy sensual pleasures, but to make all even between God and thy soul; when
God is so gracious as to give us space for such great ends as he does in this
world, he expects that all the children of men should spend their days in
seeking his face, and in making up their peace with him; in prizing his mercy,
in admiring and adoring the riches of his grace and goodness in his Son: but
where do we find this? what a different course of life is there in most men
from what God expects? they are guilty of desperate folly that squander away
their precious time, seeing all depends upon it.

Thirdly, If after death comes judgment, certainly then when death finds any
man unprepared in an estate of unregeneracy, that has not made his peace with
God, it must needs be exceeding dreadful because it brings judgment, and
states such a one in his eternal condition. Job. 18. 14. Death is called there
the King of terrors; and well may it be so; for indeed it is the most dreadful
thing in the world, to those that understand the meaning of their own sinful
state and condition: there is enough in this to daunt the heart of the proudest
stubbornest wretch that lives upon the earth, to consider that now I am
launching into the ocean of eternity; but God knows I have made little
provision for it; it may be it is the ocean of the wrath of this infinite God
that I am now launching into, and must be in for ever; certainly (except thou
have good assurance of the work done between God and thy soul) the sight of the
infinite ocean thou art launching into immediately after death, cannot but make
thee give a dreadful shrieke when thou see thou art now like to miscarry
eternally; death taking an ungodly man, it is no other but the cutting asunder
of the thread upon which he hung over the pit of eternal misery. It is the
pulling up of the flood gates of Gods eternal wrath. Here when afflictions are
upon men and women, Gods wrath is but only like the little droppings of water
through the floodgates; as you see in floodgates, there will be some leakings
forth of some drops of water only; but there is a vast difference between
those drops, and when the floodgates are pulled up, then the streams gush out
abundantly: just so is it with Gods dealings here in the world with ungodly
men; it may be Gods hand is upon them in many afflictions, but these are but as
some few drops of his wrath; but when death comes and finds them unprepared,
then God pulls up the floodgates, and then the streams of the wrath of the
almighty overflow them; death to them will be no other then the Sergeant of the
Lord of hosts to hale them to prison: It will be a taking up of the
drawbridge, It will be to them a dismal and dreadful Sunset, that brings with
it a night of eternal darkness, and that will be a most dreadful Sunset that
shall never have day more; why, know that at death the day of grace and
salvation sets to thee, and an eternal night of dismal blackness and darkness
will be upon thee; so that when thou art going out of this world, and thy peace
not made with God, thou must then bid farewell to all comforts and to whatever
thou did enjoy. Now farewell those excellent truths of God, that I have had
revealed to me: I shall never hear such gracious truths out of the mouths of
Gods ministers more. Now farewell all my loving friends, that I rejoiced so much
in, and all the mercy meetings that ever I have had; I shall never have them
more. Farewell now wife, husband, children, I shall never see your faces more.
Yea farewell house and lands, and all delights; farewell Sun and Moon and Stars,
and all the world; I shall never see you again till I see you all of a light
fire, at the great and dreadful day of Christ. And now I am leaving the world
and all the comforts here, and all the means of grace here; and O Lord,
whither am I going? It was a speech of Pope Adrian, when he was to dye, says
he, O my soul, my soul, whither art thou going? thou shall never be merry more,
as thou was wont to he. It is a doleful thing for a poor creature, whose time
is at an end, not to know whither he is going; to think of former pleasures and
delights, and never to have them more. Me thinks when I consider the death of
any ungodly man, that place in Isaiah 10. 3. comes to my mind, And what will
you do in the day of visitation? It is true, thou do now ruffle it out in
the world, and take thy fill of pleasure, and bear all before thee, and
wilt have thy mind, and art stout, and stubborn in thy way, and scornest the
truths of God by his Ministers: but what will thou do in the day of
visitation, when the time shall come that puts an end unto thy days here? O
the change that will then be in thy spirit! God will then look upon thee with
indignation, and say, O wretched creature, that have spent thy days in vanity,
thou shall continue no longer in this world; and now the wrath of the Almighty
is let out upon thee; Thou art upon thy sick bed in distress, and conscience
now is awakened, and tortures that soul of thine, and tells thee, that such and
such wickedness at such a time, in such a company, in such a chamber, thou
did commit; and thou beginst now to curse thy self for thy folly, and for
neglecting the day of grace and salvation; and now thy time is almost gone;
well, thy sickness increases, thy pains continue, thy friends are all sent
for, and they come about thee bewailing of thee, and thou beginnest to look
ghastly, and drawest thy breath short, and the devil waits for his prey; thy
mouth falls, thy soul departs, and there is an end of thee; an end of all thy
pride, and an end of all thy stoutnesse, and an end of all thy vanity, and
wickedness: and this is the man that has not made God his portion: mercy has
had her time, but thou have neglected it, and now thou art gone for ever, We
speak much of the mercy of God, and is it not rich mercy for God to give to
thee, a wretched sinful creature, such a blessed time of repentance as thou
have in this world? for God to call, and cry to thee, and to tender thee grace
and pardon, and peace; he did not do so to the Angels that sinned; when they
committed but one sin against God, he cast them away, and would not so much as
treat with them about any terms of peace: and therefore seeing thou have had
thy time already, let all the Angels in Heaven, and Saints and creatures, yea
and devils themselves, acknowledge that God was merciful to this man, to this
wretched man and woman, that had such a fair time, though now judgment be
upon them. O my brethren, the thoughts of death under this notion, has a great
deal in it to work upon your hearts. I remember I have heard of one that used
to pray six times a day, and being asked why he spent so much time in praying,
he gave no other answer but this, I must dye, I must dye; that which was to
come after, would put a period to the time of his life, upon which so much did
depend. O that we had hearts to consider it; and that we knew, even now in this
our day, the things that belong to our everlasting peace, before it be too
late. Brethren, these things are of infinite concernment to your immortal
souls; the Lord grant they may be prevalent upon every one of us.

We may apply this dreadfulnesse of death (that follows upon the meditation of
this point I have been upon) unto diverse sorts of people: as first, me thinks
it should be of great force and efficacy to work upon the hearts of old people;
your time is near, you had need be sure that your work is done; for certainly
you have no long time for the accomplishing of that great work, of making your
peace with God; it is three or four a clock (as it were) in your day of grace,
the Sun is setting with you. Now if a man be to go a journey upon his life,
and has neglected the fore-noon, and much of the afternoon also, and sees the
Sun draw low, he thinks with himself, I had need make haste now, for if the
Sun be once set, and I not at my journeyes end, I am a lost man, my life is
gone. They that go over where the Sea is dry at one time, and flows at
another, but so that if they miss but half an hour, they are dead men, if by
their watch they find the time is almost come for the waters to return, then
their hearts are daunted, and they say one to another, we had need make haste,
for the time is almost at an end. O consider this you old men, that have
neglected the time of your youth, and now your time is almost at an end, know
in this your day the things of your peace, double now your diligence. It is a
most dreadful thing to see an old wicked man, an old sinner, an old scorner, an
old carnal wretch, that never understood the great business that he came into
the world for.

Secondly, this concerns all profane wretches, who instead of doing the work
of their time, and preparing for their everlasting estate, go directly
backwards, and make the breach between God and their souls wider. If a man have
a journey to go for his life, and he must go it before the Sun be set, and he
goes a quite contrary way; when he begins to reflect upon himself, he then
says, where am I? If the Sun go down before I am at my journeyes end, I am a
dead man: so is it with you that go on in ways of profaneness, God has sent
you here to live; to the praise of his name, and to work out your salvation
with fear and trembling, and you have gone directly backward, and the time of
your lives has been spent in nothing else, but in making your selves
seaven-fold more the children of wrath then before: you had need now look to
your selves; for if you dye in your course of profaneness you are undone for
ever.

Thirdly, for those that have been heretofore in a good forwardness in the way
of life and salvation, that have had some stirrings of conscience in them, but
yet through the violence of their lusts have been turned back again, and have
fallen off from their former state; certainly this point might strike thee to
the heart. As a man that is to go over the Sea for his life by such a time,
and he has a good gale for the present, but when he is come near the haven, a
great gust drives him back again; O what a sad condition is this man in? so is
it with thee; the time was when thou had a good gale; God came graciously to
thee, by the work of his spirit, and thou seemedst to be in a good forwardness
in the work thou wast borne for; but the gust of fin, and the violence of lust,
has carried thee quite back again, and now thou art further off then before:
how should this awaken thee to improve all thy time and opportunities to the
uttermost for the good of thy soul.

Again, this concerns those that upon every discontent wish themselves dead;
as some froward people, if any thing crosses them; they presently wish
themselves in the grave. O vain man and woman, do thou know what thou do,
to wish the time of thy life at an end? thou may meet with another manner of
discontent then ever thou metst withal here; for after death comes judgment.
Amos 5. 18. We unto you that desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for
you? the day of the Lord is darkness and not light. So I say, woe to them that
in a froward mood desire the day of the Lord, which is not a day of light, but
like to be a day of darkness unto them, for ought they can tell. Instead of
giving God the praise of thy life, upon every sullen mood do thou wish thy
self dead? this is a great dishonor to the grace and mercy of God extended
toward thee.

Again, this concerns those that upon every drunken occasion, for a word or
two, will venture their lives: it is true, fools will venture their lives for
trifles, because they know not the worth of them; but those who know the worth
of their lives will not do so. I remember a story of a Philosopher, being at
Sea and in danger of his life, he was mightily afraid, and the Mariners were
not at all afraid: what (say they) are you a Philosopher afraid, when we rude
Mariners do not fear? I (says he) there is reason for it; for if I dye, a
Philosopher is gone; but for you, your lives are not worth much: so they that
are ready to venture their lives in a drunken quarrel, and will venture nothing
for God, and a good cause, know not what their lives are worth, and that is the
reason they are so willing to throw them away.

Again, it concerns those that in trouble and anguish of conscience are ready
to lay violent hands upon themselves to take away their lives; one would think
this point thus opened and applied might for ever keep back such a temptation
for time to come. What an infinite desperate folly is this, that I that am made
sensible of Gods wrath, and am afraid of it, shall yet do that which may put
me irrecoverably into it, and state me eternally in it, as they do who lay
violent hands upon themselves. If any people in the world should desire the
continuance of their lives, and prize them at a high rate, those that are
troubled in conscience should do it; they should pray David's prayer, Psalm.
39. 13. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence and be no
more. And use Gods own argument Psalm. 103. 13, 14. where it is said, God is
merciful to his people, because he remembers they are but dust. So do thou
plead with God, and say, O Lord, spare me, I am but dust, and as a wind that
passes away and shall never return again; now is the time wherein thou have
said thou will be entreated: O let my life be continued, for if this time be
out, I am gone for ever.

Lastly, this concerns those that have been (as they thought) upon their death
beds, that have apprehended themselves as dying, and have had this truth
somewhat settled upon them, that have seen eternity before them, and have been
in danger (as they conceived) of everlasting ruin, and in their own hearts
have received judgment, but God has magnified his mercy toward them, and
restored them again: perhaps in this condition when thou saw and had the
judgment in thine own heart, that thy time was gone, thou then made
promises, and saydest, O if God would spare my life, what a new man would I be!
I would be sure to make use of my time in another manner then ever heretofore:
Well, God has raised thee up again, and what then? why now thou will venture
upon Gods patience, and his wrath too; O woe to thee, when thy days are ended,
and this judgment comes, it will fall dreadfully upon thee.

Wherefore my brethren, let me speak to you all (for I am not come this day
only to spend an hour with you, but to do your souls some good) be it known
to you, this is your day, the day of grace and salvation: And yet once again,
in the name of God, I declare unto you, this truth (supposing you have heard it
many times before) that there is not the worst, the vilest in the congregation,
that is come through the providence of God before God this day, but for ought
we know it is possible for thy sins to be pardoned; it is possible yet for
thy soul to be saved, for God to be reconciled to thee, and this day it is once
more declared to thee, that thou art not yet stated in eternal misery, which
might have been thy condition before now: O that when you are gone home, you
would get into your closets, and fall down before God, and bless him for this
message, once more preached to you. Beloved, if I, or any of the servants of
the Lord, should be sent by God to the gates of hell, with this message, O you
damned spirits, know from the Lord, that there is a possibility for you to be
saved, certainly they would with joyfulnesse hearken to such tidings. Now this
cannot be preached to them, but this may be, this is preached to the vilest and
wickedest wretch, and enemy to God and goodness that is in the congregation;
and God declares this now to you, but how long it will be before judgment
comes to state thee in another condition, thou can not tell, therefore know
in this thy day the things of thy eternal peace: and who knows what may depend
upon one day? yet prayers and tears may do thee good; but stay a while, and
though streams of blood should flow from thee, and thou should cry and
howl to God to all eternity, it would never do it; therefore know your time;
it is a happy thing for a man to do a business in such a time wherein he may
have the benefit of it; amongst men, though a thing be done, yet if not in the
season of it, it loses of its worth and efficacy: so now prayers, and tears,
and mourning, and crying to God for mercy, the efficacy of these things are
gone, except they be done in time; and for ought thou know unless they be
done this day, or to morrow, or very shortly, they may do thee no good at all:
therefore now take your time; God proclaims and says to every one of you this
day, Poor creatures, as ever you expect to receive mercy in the day of Christ,
look to it now; for now the golden scepter is stretched forth, now is the
acceptable time, and the day of grace and salvation, come in and accept of the
offers and tenders of grace and mercy now, or else you are gone for ever.

Wherefore then let this take off all slightness of heart, and those roving
dispositions of your spirits, that run so after vanities. If a man that were
wild in his thoughts, and that had his eyes roving up and down, should have
one say to him, Sir, consider what you do, for it concerns your life, if you
miscarry you are a dead man, it would make him call in his thoughts, and
compose his spirit: so, if thou have a slight and wandering heart, this is said
to thee this day, friend, poor soul, know what thou art doing; even this days
work concerns thy life, thy eternal estate, and take your selves off from all
creatures, til you have done so great a work; so says the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.
29, 30, 31, 32. Brethren, the time is short, it remains that both they that
have Wives be as if they had none; and they that weep as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though
they possessed not; the time is short. The word is, the time is wrapped up, it is
folded up; it is a Metaphor taken from cloth that is folded even to the very
fag end: the time is all folded up (says the Apostle) therefore let your
hearts be taken off from the creature. Truly brethren, whatever you think of
this point, yet those that understand themselves aright, would not venture to
be in an unconverted estate one half hour for ten thousand worlds; for they
know that when death comes, then judgment also comes.

And you that are poor people, who live hardly, and in great extremity in this
world, yet so long as you live here, your condition is comfortable; for you
have time to do that work that is of such mighty consequence for the good of
your souls: And indeed upon the consideration of this point, peoples hearts
should be taken off from the creature; for a man had better live here in order
to that great work, though as a stock or log in the fire, then to be taken away
before he has done that work he was sent into the world for. When men are in
pain, they would feign dye; I, but did they know what will be the state and
condition of a wicked man immediately after his death, they would rather live,
though as the miseablest creature in the world.

And consider all you young ones, now while God gives you time, of this great
work of making your peace with him. If a man were to go over Sea about a
business of great weight, after he comes upon the shore, what should his first
thought be? let him first make sure of his great work, and then be merry
afterward. If thou have made sure of this great work, that thy peace is made
up with God, and that thy everlasting estate is secure, then thou may be
merry amongst thy friends, and may live joyfully, and comfortably all thy
days. It was the complaint of one, that Art is long, and life short; but
surely the art of providing for eternity is a long and difficult art, and thy
life is short and uncertain: O therefore do not put off this great work, as
Seneca speaks of some, they are always about to do, they will, and they
will, and are about to live, but never live. O that you that are young ones
would begin betimes; and this point settled upon the hearts of young ones, would
cause them to apply themselves with all their might to the great work of their
souls, And that which you do, be sure you do it with all your might; which is
the Argument of the Holy Ghost, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor wisdom in
the grave whither thou go. If ever thou had a work to put forth thy
strength about, O do it here, do not only have some faint wishes and
desires, and some sudden good moods, as perhaps at the hearing of such a truth
as this is, you have some sudden wishes and inclinations; no, but work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, and be sure to take hold of all
opportunities, seeing so much depends upon the short time of your lives. If a
man were to go over Sea for his life, and had a fair day and wind, it were
desperate madness for him to say, Well, I have two or three days more to go
over in, and therefore I will not go now, and so neglects his gale; and when
those days are past, and the last day comes, he thinks to go over, but cannot
have a wind, for a world: so, many think they will repent when they come to
dye. O but take heed when thou have a gale that thou do not neglect it, for
fear it never come again; and know that if the Lord stirs any of your hearts
this day, or any other day, by his word, and you neglect it, and go to your
business, and shops, and to your sensual pleasures and delights, you may
hereafter desire to have such a time of the working of Gods spirit again, and
if you would give a thousand worlds for it (were it in your power) you cannot
have it, therefore take heed you do not neglect this great work. And upon this
ground labor to make sure work; for if a man had a work to do, and having
done it amiss, he might mend it afterward, he need not be so exact about it:
but if a man be set about a work, and he knows when it is gone out of his
hands, he can never mend it, he will not be careless in it, but will lay his
work to the rule, and labor to make all sure. Know, it is so with you about
your eternal condition: that which you do in this world, must be available for
ever, you cannot mend it afterward. If after you see your selves cast, you
should say, O Lord give me farther time, and let me come into the world again,
and then I will mend this and the other fault that I was rebuked for; God will
say, no; you cannot return into the world again; therefore it nearly concerns
you to make all sure while you have time. And do not rest upon blind hopes,
and desperate adventures, I hope it will be thus and thus with me; but
entertain this thought, What if it should prove otherwise? what if I should
miscarry? this will mightily daunt the heart of a man, especially if he knows
that upon his miscarriage, he is undone for ever.

Yet further, (which is another branch of the exhortation) my brethren never
baulk any way of God for fear of suffering; be willing to suffer any hardship
for Gods way. How does that follow? thus: If the time of thy life be that upon
which the stating of thy eternal condition depends, then it concerns thee to
go through stitch whatever comes in thy way; as for instance, suppose a man
were going to such a place, and he must be there at such a time for his life,
and riding apace through the streets the dogs bark at him (as usually the dogs
bark most at those who ride fastest) how little does he regard the barking of
the dogs: but did a man ride only for his recreation, then it would be a
little troublesome to him: And when a man rides for his life, though the clouds
gather, and the rain falls, yet he will not return; and if he meet with foul
and dirty way, he will through it, or with a slough he will over it, because it
is for his life: but if a man rides for recreation only, and meets with
winds, and clouds, and storms, he turns back again. And truly brethren, the
ways of most Christians in religion are (me thinks) such as if they took them
up for recreation, and nothing else; therefore if there be but a cloud arise, a
little trouble and affliction appear, they repent their way, and presently
return back again. O but did God reveal to thee what eternity is, and what
depends upon the course of thy life here? then though there be clouds, and
storms, and tempests, and rugged ways, yet thou will be ready to go through
all. The conclusion therefore is this, whenever thou art tempted to sin, labor
by what thou have heard this day to repel temptations; and say, God has
showed me this day the great errand and business I came into the world for; of
what infinite concernment those things are, that depend upon the time of my
life: shall I then satisfy the lusts and corruptions of my own heart, and
gratify the devil, and the world, and in the mean time neglect that which is
of so great importance for the good of my soul? Then once again, O that you all
knew in this your day the things that concern your eternal peace! Consider
what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding hearts to make use of
it.

This Sermon was preached April 29. 1641.
FINIS.
The CONTENTS of the foregoing SERMONS.
SERMON I.
THe words are a part of Moses his Song which Song is, page 2 1. The most
ancient Song in the world ibid. 2. A spiritual and most excellent Song ibid.
3. A very delightful Son ibid. 4. A Typical Song ibid. 5. In the opinion of
Austin a miraculous Song 3 Doctrine. There is none like to God 4 1. Because
whatever is in God is God himself 5 2. There is an universal goodness in God
ibid. 3. All beings are but one excellency in God ibid. 4. All that is in God
is primitively in him ibid. 5. God can communicate himself so as none can. God
can communicate as much of his goodness as he will. And can make the creature
as sensible of it as he will ibid. And God can bring all evil at once upon the
creature. And can make the creature as sensible of that evil as he will 6 Use.
It should be our care in beholding any good or excellency in the creature, to
keep in our thoughts and hearts, an apprehension of the infinite distance that
there is between God and that creature ibid. The want of which has been the
cause both of ontward Idolatry, and of Spiritual Idolatry 7 There is none like
to God; therefore none like to the people of God 8 None should do for their.
Idol-gods so as Gods people should do for their God 9 What Idolaters will do
in reference to their Idol-gods ibid. Idolaters are, 1. Earnest after their
Idol-gods 10 2. They are mad upon their Idols ibid. 3. The strength of the
affections of Idolaters after their Idol-gods appears from Jer. 8. 1, 2. ibid.
4. Idolaters will be at any cost upon their Idols 11 5. Idolaters willing to,
suffer any thing for their Idol-gods ibid. 6. Idolaters constant to their Idols
ibid. We should take heed lest any should have their hearts more set upon their
lusts, then ours are upon God ibid. Gods title of being glorious in holiness
considered 13 Holiness in God what it is. 1. Negatively: It is that whereby
his nature is free from all kind of mixture, and from the least soils and filth
of sin ibid. 2. Positively: It is the infinite rectitude and perfection of
the will of God especially, whereby he does will and work all things suitable to
the infinite excellency of his own being 14 The holiness of God considered by
looking into the holiness of the creature ibid. How God is glorious in
holiness. The Saints do especially glory in God as a holy God 15 The Angels
in Heaven look upon God in his holiness, and do especially exalt him from
thence ibid. The Church of God adore God in his holiness ibid. God himself
seems to glory in his holiness above any other attribute ibid. God glories in
Heaven as the habitation of his holiness 16 God rejoices in his people as
they are a holy people ibid. Holiness is more especially ascribed to the third
person in the Trinity ibid. All the three persons in the Trinity challenge an
equal share in the working of holiness in the creature ibid. Yet further,
holiness must needs be the glory of God, because it is the highest perfection
and rectitude of an intelligent free agent 17 Holiness in Scripture is called
the beauty of God ibid. Holiness, some seeds of it, the very image of it only
in the creature, is called the glory of God ibid. Holiness puts a luster upon
all the other attributes of God, and makes them glorious ibid. Gods name is
glorious by holiness, because the special end God aims at in all his works
of creation and providence, is to advance holiness 18 Why God has this title,
glorious in holiness given him here in this Song of Moses 1. To show that the
infinite excellency of Gods power is such, that it is without any mixture of
evil in the exercise of it ibid. 2. God manifests here the greatness of his
wrath upon his enemies, and yet the glory of his holiness also ibid. 3. This
Title is given to God here, because in this great work of his he did manifest
his faithfulness in fulfilling of his promises to his people 19 Use. 1. Hence
Christians may observe whether ever they understood God aright or no, viz. by
considering what is that excellency of God that their soul closes with 20 2.
Gods people should exceedingly comfort themselves in God, in that they have to
do with God as a holy God 21 3. If God be glorious in holiness, so are the
Saints glorious in holiness also 22 Holiness puts a glory upon their persons
ibid. Holiness puts a glory upon all they do and enjoy 23 Holiness is the very
principle of eternal life ibid. Holiness is the proper object of Gods delight
ibid. Holiness is a separation of the creature for God and eternal life ibid.
Holiness in the Saints puts a reverend respect upon them in the very
consciences of wicked men 24 4. If God be glorious in holiness, then certainly
God will maintain holiness in the world 25 It concerns all men to honor
holiness, and to set up the glory of Gods holiness as much as they can in the
world 26 Christians are especially to look to their hearts, to cleanse them,
when they draw nigh to God ibid. 5. As God is glorious in holiness, so we are
to set him out in his glory, by keeping his worship pure 27 6. The
consideration of Gods holiness should humble us, and make us ashamed for the
remainder of that unholiness that is in our hearts 28 7. If God be glorious in
holiness, then we have all need of Jesus Christ 29
SERMON II.
THe words are briefly opened 31 Doctrine. That Christ is the only means of
conveyance of all good that God the Father intends to communicate unto the
children of men, in order to eternal life; he is all, and in all. 32 This
truth is the great point of Divinity that is absolutely necessary to eternal
life 33 It Is the sum of the Gospel, and the most supernatural truth revealed in
all the book of God ibid. A truth the Angels themselves desire to pry into
ibid. It Is that which requires the work of the Spirit beyond the ordinary works
of the Spirit of God to reveal it 34 It Is a truth that is the most profitable
of all the truths contained in all the book of God ibid. There is no truth in
Scripture whereby we honor God so much as by this 35 The Doctrine proved 36
How it comes to pass that there can be no good communicated unto us from God,
in order to eternal life, but by Christ. 1. Because of the breach of the first
Covenant that God made with mankind 37 2. There is such an infinite distance
between God and man, that there can be no coming together but by Christ 38 3.
There is the strength and curse of the law upon every soul naturally, that
keeps the soul from mercy ibid. 4. There are the cries of infinite justice
against men, which must have satisfaction ibid. How Christ is all in all to us
in Gods communication of good to us. 1. From the covenant that God the father
made with his son from all eternity 39 2. Christ actually comes to be the way
of conveyance of all good to us, by taking our nature upon him, and so making
us reconcilable to God ibid. 3. Christ was content to come into the world, to
be made the head of a second covenant between God and mankind, to perform
whatever God the Father should require for the satisfaction of divine justice
40 4. By this means God in forgiving of sin, goes in a way of justice as well
as in a way of meccy 41 5. And he is the way of conveying good to us, as by his
satisfaction, so by his intercession 42 Some special great things we have from
God, instanced in; and that Christ is all in all in those things. 1. Christ is
all in all in the point of Justification and pardon of sin, and the acceptance
of us as righteous 42 It is not all that we have done, nor all that we can
possibly do, that can be our justification 43 It is not what God enables us to
do, that can be the formality of our justification ibid. It is not only what
we can do, or can be enabled to do, but it is not Gods mercy added, if barely
considered, that can eeke out our justification 44 2. Christ is all in all in
point of Adoption 45 3. Christ is all in all in point of our reconciliation and
peace with God 46 4. Christ is all in all in point of all our Sanctification,
that is, Sanctification to life ibid. 5. Christ is all in all in the want of
all things 47 6. Christ is all in all in the enjoyment of all ibid. And as
Christ is all in all in the good we have from God, so he is all in all in what
ever we tender up to God 48 Reasons why God will have this way of communication
of himself unto us through his Son. 1. That hereby God might manifest to all
the children of men what a dreadful breach their sins had made between God and
them 50 2. God takes this way, because he sees it is the most advantageous for
the manifestation of his glory 51 The glory of his mercy ibid. The glory of his
justice ibid. The glory of his wisdom 52 The glory of his holiness ibid. 3. God
saw there could be no such way to draw poor sinners to himself, as this 53 4.
God does it to endeare his mercy to his Saints for ever. 55 5. God delights to
honor his Son, and therefore makes him to be the means of conveyance of all
good to those he intends it to ibid. Use. 1. To admire the depths of the
council of God, and the infinite glory of the riches of his grace unto
mankind. ibid. The work of Redemption greater then the work of Creation 56 2.
We should bless God that ever we knew Christ, and that the mystery of the
Gospel has been revealed to us 57 3. It shows how dear Jesus Christ should be
unto us 59 4. If we have an interest in Christ, it should satisfy and content
us though we have nothing, or be nothing in our selves 60 5. We should be
willing to give up all to Christ ibid. 6. Christ should be the rule of our
prizing all things ibid. 7. The heart should with mighty intention be carried
forth toward Jesus Christ ibid. 8. In seeking after God, we should be sure to
take Christ along with us 61
SERMON III.
THe words of the Text opened 63 There are great things that the Saints hope
for; they are men of hopes 64 Nine particulars instanced in, that the Saints
hope for ibid. The hopes of the Saints are raised up in their hearts by the
mighty power of the Holy Ghost 65 The different judgment of the Holy ghost and
carnal hearts 1. About earthly things 66 2. About spiritual things 67
Spiritual and heavenly things that are the objects of faith, are real and
substantial things, and faith gives them that substance 68 They are
substantial; for, 1. They have more in them then appears to be in them ibid.
2. They have much of God in them ibid. 3. They are the very center of the
thoughts and intentions of God himself, and that which he aims at in all his
works toward his creatures 69 4. They have a real and substantial operation
upon the souls of those that are acquainted with them ibid. 5. They have an
eternal subsistency ibid. And faith gives them aubstantiall being; for, 1. It
is faith that carries the son ocontemplate upon God himself 70 2. By faith the
soul comes to know what riches there are in the glorious things of God ibid. 3.
Faith converseth with the glorious counsels of God ibid. 4. Faith converseth
with the great things of the covenant of grace ibid. 5. Faith receives the
testimony of the Holy Ghost ibid. Faith makes the things of God that are
absent, and but hoped for, yet to be present to the soul 71 Evils that are very
nigh, faith can make them at a mighty distance ibid. Good things that are
absent, and a great way off, faith can make them as if they were really
subsisting ibid. Faith makes the things of God that are absent, to be as
present. 1. Because it sees them as certainly as if they were already 73 2.
Faith looks upon the present possession of things ibid. 1. In Christ our head
ibid. 2. We have the first fruits of the Spirit ibid. 3. This time is nothing
to eternity ibid. 4. Faith eyes the things of Heaven continually 74 5. The
Saints enjoy all in God ibid. Faith it self is a very substantial thing ibid.
The vanity of the faith of most people discovered 75 We must learn to
strengthen and exercise our faith in the things we hope for ibid. Spiritual
and heavenly things are things not seen 76 1. They are hidden 77 2. They are
beyond the principles of reason ibid. 3. The blindness of man naturally is such
that he can not see these things ibid. 4. God orders things so in his
providence, that he goes a contrary way (as to sense and reason) to what he
has promised ibid. We should cease wondering that men of excellent parts and
reason do not see the things of God 79 Faith does evidence and make spiritual
things clear 80 If faith be an evidence to other things, then it is an evidence
to it self 81 One way to be freed from doubts and fears, is, by renewing the
act of faith it self 82 It is no presumption to cast ones self upon the free
grace of God in Christ ibid. Christians should be afraid of unbelief, as well
as of presumption 83 The admirable use of faith 84 It Is a wonderful mercy to
have faith to evidence all the glorious things of God ibid. Faith can make
those that are of weak parts to see the great things of God 85
SERMON IV.
Doctrine. THere is a blessed liberty that Christians enjoy by Christ, and
only by him 88 In what sense Christians are freed from the Law 89 The rigor
of the Law opened in seventeen particulars. 1. It requires hard things of those
that are under it 90 2. It requires things which are impossible to be performed
by those that are under it 91 3. The Law exacts all of us under the condition
of perfection ibid. 4. The Law accepts of no surety 92 5. The rigor of the Law
is such, that it acceps of no endeavors short of perfection ibid. 6. The Law
requires constancy in all we do ibid. 7. The Law exacts the obedience it
requires exceeding rigorously 93 8. There is this rigor in the Law, that upon
any the least breach of it, it does utterly disenable the soul for ever
performing any obedience to it again ibid. 9. The Law requires as perfect
obedience as if we had all principles that might enable us to keep it ibid. 10.
It requires it of us, and yet gives us no strength to do what it requires 94
11. In all the Law does, it strikes at our life ibid. 12. Upon any breach, it
does presently bind over the soul to everlasting death ibid. 13. When the Law
is once offended, it will never be made amends again by any thing we are able
to do ibid. 14. The Law accepts of no repentance 95 15. The Law when it has
opened our wounds and miseries, it shows us no means of deliverance ibid. 16.
The Law accidentally stirs up lust ibid. 17. The promises of the Law are but
mean and low, in comparison of the promises of the Gospel ibid. This rigor of
the Law will not seem hard, if we consider, 1. That we have to deal with a God
of infinite justice and worth 96 2. If we consider that state of perfection
wherein God made man at first ibid. 3. If we understand aright what sin is
ibid. 4. If we consider those things that we all take for granted, that yet are
as hard as these ibid. Use. 1. All men in their natural condition are in a
very evil case 97 2. The saving of a soul is a great and mighty work ibid. 3.
It Is a vain thing for carnal hearts to trust to their good meanings. ibid. 4.
If God reveal himself to a man only by the law, it is impossible but the soul
must fly from him ibid. The liberty of the Gospel is a precious liberty 98 Our
bondage under the law, and liberty under the Gospel, opened from Gal. 4. 21
etc. ibid. The liberty of the Gospel opened in seventeen particulars 1. If thou
be a believer in Christ, thou shall not be cast for thy eternal estate by
the law 100. 2. Thy Lawgiver is no other then he that is thy husband and thy
advocate ibid. 3. Thou art made a law to thy self by having the law of God
written in thy heart 101. 4. Though there be many imperfections in what thou
do, yet if God can spy out but the least good thing in thee, he will take
notice of that, and cast away all the evil ibid. 5. If there be a desire in
thee to do good, God accepts the will for the deed 102 6. Though the Gospel
call for obedience, yet it does it in a sweet and loving way ibid. 7. The
Gospel and liberty of it comes with abundance of life and strength 103 8. God
does compassionate those that are made free by the Gospel ibid. 9. The Gospel
has a mighty efficacy to melt the heart ibid. 10. The Gospel as it has a
melting power, so it has a healing power ibid. 11. Sins against the Gospel
shall not have power to root out any habits of grace 104 12. The Gospel takes
advantage at our misery to pardon us ibid. 13. All that is required of us, may
be accepted from another ibid. 14. The grace of the Gospel shows a way wherein
God shall have all the wrong made him up that ever thy sins did him ibid. 15.
There is a perfect righteousness made over unto us in the Gospel 105. 16. The
Gospel proclames admirable promises ibid. 17. The covenant of the Gospel shall
never be forfeited ibid.
SERMON V.
THe Text opened 107. 108. Doctrine. That the only time that men have to
provide for their eternal condition, is the time of this life; if it be not
done here, there is no help afterward, for after death comes judgment 109 This
point is one of the most serious points that concerns the children of men
ibid. Wicked men when they die, are stated in an irrecoverable evil condition
ibid. The tenor upon which we all hold our lives 110 There can be no repenting,
nor believing after this life 112 After death God takes away all means of grace
ibid. The souls of wicked men are then stated in such a condition that they can
do nothing but sin ibid. At the great day Christ gives up the Kingdom to the
Father 113 Presently after death the wrath of God is let out fully into the
souls of the wicked ibid. Use 1. We have cause to bless God for the
continuance of our lives, especially those that have not thoroughly made their
peace with God, and are not upon certain and infallible terms in this great
business of providing for their eternal estates ibid. 114, 115 Use 2. Those
are to be reproved that mispend and squander away the precious time of their
lives about vanities, and neglect the great business that they were sent into
the world for 116 Time an exceeding precious thing ibid. Few think of the
passing away of their time, or that any great matter depends upon the time of
their lives here in this world 117 Use 3. When death finds any man unprepared
in an estate of unregeneracy, that has not made his peace with God, it must
needs be exceeding dreadful, because it brings judgment, and states such a
one in his eternal condition 120 Gods wrath let out fully upon the wicked
immediately after death 121 Then they must bid an everlasting farewell to all
comforts that ever they did enjoy ibid. The dreadfulnesse of death is
applicable, 1. To old people, whose time is near at an end, therefore had need
be sure that that great work be done, of making their peace with God 123 2. To
profane wretches, who instead of doing the work of their time, and preparing
for their everlasting estate, go directly backwards, and make the breach
between God and their souls wider 124 3. To those that have heretofore been in
a good forwardness in the way of life and salvation, but yet through the
violence of their lusts have been turned back again ibid. 4. To those that upon
every discontent wish themselves dead 125 5. To those that upon every drunken
occasion for a word or two will venture their lives ibid. 6. To those that in
trouble and anguish of conscience are ready to lay violent hands upon
themselves ibid. 7. To those that have been upon their death beds as they
thought, and in danger of everlasting ruin, and did then promise if they lived
what new people they would be, but afterward forgot all 126 The efficacy and
worth of a thing is when it is done in the season of it 127 The consideration
of time, and the worth of it, should take off all sleightnesse of heart, and
roving dispositions 128 The consideration of this point should take off peoples
hearts from the creature ibid. All young ones should now while God gives them
time, labor to make their peace with him 129 The danger of putting off the
work of repentance till we die 130 We should labor to make sure work in the
great business of our eternal estate, because that which is done in this world
is available for ever ibid. We should not baulk any way of God for fear of
suffering ibid. Temptations to sin are to be repelled by the consideration of
the great business we came into the world for 131
FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN some of the books, p. 8. l. 33. for reference read inference, p. 9. l. 11.
for notion, r. Nation, l. 19. for Numb. 27. r. Numb. 23. p. 17. l. 27. for so
take all, r. take all, p. 23. l. 19. for them, r. him, p. 25. l. 3. observe no
stop at consciences, p. 26. l. 26. for in this holy worship, r. in his holy
worship, p. 31. read the text thus, but Christ is all, and in all. p. 37. l.
33. for the humane, r. humane, p. 54. l. 24. read do but take this one rule
for that; p. 76. last line, for 2 Cor. 2. r. 2 Cor. 4. p. 99. l. 30. for Levit.
29. r. Levit. 25.


