THE POOR MAN'S Friend, OR A NARRATIVE of what progress many worthy Citi of
London have made in that Godly Work of providing for the POOR. WITH An
Ordinance of PARLIAMENT for the better carrying on of the Work.

Published for the information and encouragement of those, both in City and
Country, that wish well to so Pious a Work.

MATTHEW. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

LONDON, Printed by* A.M. for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1649.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL Alderman Andrews, Alderman Witham, Lieut Coll. Lee, Mr
Rich. Floyd, Capt. Coish, Dr Odeling, Mr Loaves, Mr Hartlipp, Mr Fisher, Mr
Jenner, Mr Edmonds, and the rest of the active Gentlemen, whose endeavors in
behalf of the Poor, have been sufficiently manifested for these five years last
past.
Gentlemen,
YOur labor of love to the poor is had in remembrance before God, and ought
not to be forgotten with men. I make bold to mention Your Names, minding You of
what You have well begun, beseeching You to go on ti'l You have perfected the
work; else this will stand as a blot upon Your Names. Not having time and
opportunity to prosecute the business as formerly, I held it convenient to
publish what is done, that some of those now acting may reap the benefit
thereof.

Your Friend, R.B.

TO MY LOVING BRETHREN Henry Hurl, William Leg, and Rich* Millard, Gent.
Sirs,
A Short Epistle best suits a short discourse, you may remember I gave to you a
hint formerly, that some Citizens were endeavoring a reformation of and
provision for the necessitous poor in our City, which would be an example and
inducement to all the Kingdom to do the like. It is now in some probability of
effecting: An Ordinance is past both Houses, creating a Corporation for that
purpose, which Ordinance being (as is conceived) not full enough, some
additions thereto are by the Corporation desired, which is the present
obstruction, and will doubtless be removed as soon as the emergent business
of State will admit. In the meantime I thought good to give you this account,
it being one of the most probable ways to promote it with You in my own native
County, and after through the whole Kingdom: and being effectually and
conscionably performed, will, doubtless, remove from us many evils, disorders,
clamours and tumults, and procure upon us the blessings promised to them that
consider the poor, The Lord will deliver them in the day of trouble. Despair
not because it has been long preparing: great bodies move slowly, and good
designs take not effect as could be desired. I had thought to have given you
the sum of the discourse, but on second thoughts, I conceived it better to
refer you to the relation at large, the which, if you shall approve, do your
endeavor to do your County that service to promote so good a work, which will
be a blessing to the poor, and a comfort to the rich. The Lord direct and
assist You. So prays,

Your loving Brother RICH BUSH.
London, March 16, 1649.
To the READER.
Reader,
THis Account was intended long since to be published, but for some reasons
that then offered themselves to consideration, it was forborne then to be
printed, but is now thought convenient and useful to be communicated to
others, not only for the ends herein mentioned, and much less for any worth or
excellency that is in it self, save only that it may fitly serve to revive and
stir up the Corporation already appointed, who might long since have set this
work on foot in this County, yea (I am confident) have settled it to the relief
of the poor in general, housekeeper or other, had not some few men judged a
lion to be in their way, who I hope will be convinced, either by this plain
method chalked out to them, or by the multitude of petitioners their way, and
propositions pressing the necessity to undertake it, with the facility of the
work if once begun, and of what consequence it will be to poor and rich,
tending to peace and prosperity in this nation, particularly and especially the
Proposals drawn up by that ingenuous lover of his Country Dr Chamberlain, both
excellent and methodicall, with sound reason to convince the doubtful and
satisfy the ingenuous lovers of their Country: so also it may fitly serve to
unite the several streams that run this way, bringing them all into one
channel, for the more effectual carrying on this Pious, Just and Honorable
design: all which, with such other helps as are hinted in this discourse, with
their Authors here mentioned, conjoined and committed to honest, active men,
who affect this business, it may through Gods blessing make this flourish with
outward prosperity, and may be a means to draw down a blessing upon all our
affairs, considering that promise, If our ways please God, he will make our
enemies to be at peace with us. For which blessing prays,

Yours, R.B.
March 16. 1649.
THE POOR MAN'S FRIEND, OR A Narrative of what progress many worthy Citizens of
London have made in that Godly Work of providing for the POOR.
THE great God that in his wisdom made all things very good, did so order all
things by his all-seeing providence, that every creature has some quality and
property to defend it self from injury, and preserve its well being, and
likewise did provide in a most excellent manner all things fit and necessary
for the well being of those creatures he has created: But to man in particular
God had more respect then to any other of his creatures, for he made him after
his own Image, and next to himself, endued him with reason and understanding,
and made him Lord over the rest of his creatures that he might be more
servisable to his Creator, and provided all things for the being and well being
of man (before he was made) viz. a Paradise to dwell in, fruit for food, and
all other things that might conduce to man's happiness; and put him in
possession of that which he had thus prepared for him, and gave him laws to try
whether he would obey, serve and honor his Creator. But man being in honor
continued not, but was like the beast that perishes, for man transgressed the
command of his Maker, and by his sin cast himself at once out of Gods favor,
and of that Paradise wherein he was placed, and brought himself and his
posterity under that curse, viz. Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the earth for thy sake,
and cursed art thou, in the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread: so
that man is appointed to labor, and he that will not work, neither shall he
eat (says the Apostle) but God in judgment remembering mercy, provided for man
a Savior, with laws and rules by which the well being of man might be
preserved and maintained: and injoins us to show mercy and do good to all men,
and not to hide our selves from our own flesh, and condemns Cain for killing
his brother, not accepting of his excuse ( Am I my brothers keeper?) To show to
us that God requires us to take care of others as well as of our selves: And to
this end the Lord gives us command, that we become eyes to the blind, ears to
the deaf, and that we cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and bring the stranger
to our house, and threatens judgments to such as do or shall neglect the
same. Upon consideration whereof, and the great neglect of this so weighty a
duty, that is both commanded and commended by God (as a great work of charity)
to whom an account must one day be given whether we have fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, visited the sick and imprisoned, etc. And according to our
doings herein shall we be rewarded or condemned at that day, when that sentence
of Christ shall be pronounced, Matthew. 25.41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. And also observing those many good
laws formerly made in this Kingdom, and of how little use they have been to
this day, has moved me, with others, to search out the cause thereof, and to
endeavor to put life into those laws (which I had almost said were dying.) An
account whereof I shall briefly give unto you.

Brother, It is not my purpose here to look so far back as to make mention of
what others have long since done, nor to insist at all upon that book set forth
by King Charles, wherein are many excellent orders and directions, the which
might seem to be sufficient to do the work in hand, viz. the regulating and
relieving the poor, but is found by experience to miss of its desired end,
namely, the putting life into Laws formerly made concerning the poor, as
aforesaid: But my purpose is here to set forth the late endeavors of diverse
well affected men within this City and the suburbs, and that in brief thus.

1644.
About five years since a gentleman having observed the good government of the
poor in other Kingdoms, and the ill government of them in this, being grieved
in mind to observe the aged, blind, lame, and sick, neglected, with many poor
families almost starved, little children lie in the streets under stals and
such like places, uneducated; being stirred with zeal, addresses himself to
many Knights and Burgesses of the house, as also to the L. Major of London and
many of his brethren the Aldermen, with diverse other well affected Citizens, as
also many Justices of the peace, and others of the out parts of the said City,
did endeavor to possess them with the goodness, necessity, and consequence
of relieving and setting the poor to work, and likewise did procure diverse
meetings within the City, of men affecting this pious design, where the
undertaking was generally liked and commended by all, and many sad reports and
complaints were then and there made of the miseries that many poor families did
endure (which the present experience of these times proves to be true) and of
the wickedness and vile abuses committed by vagrants and counterfiets, and of
the great neglect of our Laws in that particular, and also of the great wast
and loss of food made within the City, sufficient to maintain one half of the
indigent poor therein (as is probably conceived) together with the not
improvement of our native commodities, abuses in Trade, increase of Ale houses,
with many other things not yet sufficiently provided for, by any Law or statute
within the Kingdom, or these laws or statutes not now put in execution, and
therefore fit to be considered of, and remedied at this time of reformation,
for the general good of the poor: Many months were spent in meetings in this
way of complaining, and the Gentlemen's good resolutions commonly ended with the
meeting, till at last it was moved that there might be a time and place
appointed for a constant meeting, and that some way might be thought on
effectually to prosecute those good thoughts and endeavors, and to procure the
removal of all those evils. At our meeting we took into our consideration,
that beyond the sea, viz the Lowcountries, by setting their poor on work, most
of those evils are removed and remedied, and those places blessed of God and
enriched: And likewise that in some Towns in this our Kingdom, is not a beggar
or idle person to be seen, as Norwich, Ipswich, Dorchester and other places, to
their great honor, and that in this City is nothing wanting which those other
parts and places do enjoy, that might conduce to the regulating and effectual
relieving of the poor: yet that we might the better herewith possess our
selves, and be the better able to possess and persuade others, we did desire
every man to deliver in writing, his thoughts, which way it were best, and
might be done with most advantage; the which was performed, and those
propositions brought in, were by Mr Steel Counselor at Law, abbreviated, and
the substance of the whole was by him drawn into three heads, viz.

First, Of Government.

Secondly, Stock.

Thirdly, Account.

And upon each Head diverse particulars, such as were conceived most necessary
to carry on the work, when a Committee of Aldermen and Common Counsel should
be procured and appointed for that end and purpose. Which to procure, October. 7.
1645. we with many others, both Ministers and Citizens, petitioned the then L.
Major and Common Counsel, desiring them to take into their consideration, the
multitude of poor, in and about the City, their misery, necessity, disorder,
and increase, and what remedies were fit to be applied thereto, with such
propositions as we should tender to them, tending to the relief of the said
poor. The Common Counsel granted what we desired, and withal ordered that
Committee to consider of an Act made six or eight years before, with an intent
to create a Corporation that should take care to see the Laws and Statutes
concerning the poor, put in execution: The said Committee after many meetings
and much debate, did agree that it was necessary that there should be a
Corporation made consisting of eight Aldermen, and thirty two Commoners,
Freemen of the City, chosen out of each ward respectively, and to that end drew
a draught, which being agreed upon, after many alterations by council, is by
M. Maynard and M. Hayle, Counselors at Law, in a short draught perfected and
approved as fit to pass the House, and to establish a Corporation, who might
afterward gain an enlargement of power, as occasion should require. But after
much attendance and many obstructions, and other new alterations, a long
draught for an Ordinance was agreed upon and committed to Coll. Veun a Member
of Parliament, to obtain the power of the Parliament to confirm it. But through
the multitude of their affairs, and length of the Ordinance, we could not in
six months procure it to be read and committed, whereupon by advise we drew up
a short petition and representation of our complaints and desires to the House
of Lords.

The Lords readily embrace this pious and charitable work, and to their great
honors within fourteen days caused an Ordinance to be drawn up, and the same
soon after concluded, and sent down unto the Commons, which was likewise by
them committed and perfected: and sent down to the right Honorable John
Warner, then Lord Major of London, and the Corporation appointed for that
purpose, to put in execution the aforementioned Ordinance, which Ordinance I
have here inserted.

Die Veneris 17. December. 1647. An Ordinance for the Relief and Employment of
the Poor, and the Punishment of Vagrants and other disorderly Persons.
Whereas the Necessity, Number and Increase of the Poor is very great within
the City of London and Liberties thereof, for want of the due execution of such
wholesome Laws and Statutes as have been formerly made. For remedy thereof, and
for other the purposes herein after specified: Be it, and it is Ordained by the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That from henceforth
there be, and shall be a Corporation within the said City of London and
Liberties thereof, consisting of a President, Deputy to the President, a
Treasurer, and forty Assistants, whereof the Lord Major of the said City for
the time being to be the President, eight of the said Assistants to be of the
Aldermen of the said City for the time being; and the other thirty and two to
be Freemen of, and Inhabitants in the said City, chosen out of the several
Wards of the said City equally, and that John Warner, Sir George Clarke, John
Foulke, William Gibbs, Samuel Avery, John Bide, George Witham, Thomas Viner,
Aldermen of the said City, shall be the first eight Aldermen of the present
Assistants; and that Francis Waterhouse shall be the present Deputy to the said
President: And that Maurice Gething shall be the present Treasurer; and that
John Offeild, Richard Morrall, James Russell, Walter Pell, Ralph Hough, Robert
Mainwaring, Anthony Webster, William Adams, Richard Glide, William Jesson,
Tempest Milner, Thomas Arnold, William Kendall, Toby Lisle, Nathaniel Hall,
Humphrey Hawley, William Antrobus, John Green, Edmund Whitwell, John Cook,
Robert Meade, Robert Dallison, William Bromewich, John Everet, Thomas Clowes,
John Jones, John Bellamy, Abraham Chamberlain, John Babbington, Richard
Garsorth, John Perryn, and Stafford Clare shall be the other thirty two
Assistants: And that the Deputy and Treasurer from henceforth shall be Eligible
by the Common Council of the said City yearly on the 25th of June, or at the
next Common Council following, or within twenty eight days next after the
said 25th of June; and that such two of the eight Aldermen, being Assistants,
and eight of the other thirty two Assistants as the said Common Council shall
think fit, shall fall off, or be amoved yearly at the said day and time of
election; and that two other Aldermen and eight other Commoners, Citizens of
and Inhabitants in the said City, shall be yearly elected by the said Common
Council on the day and time aforesaid to be Assistant in the place of such as
shall so fall off, or be amoved.

And it is further Ordained, that the said President, Deputy, Treasurer and
Assistants for the time being, shall for ever hereafter in name and fact be one
Body Politic and Corporate in Law to all intents and purposes, and shall have
a perpetual Succession, and shall be called by the name of, The President and
Governors for the Poor of the City of London and Liberties thereof: And by
that name shall and may without License in Mortmeine purchase, or receive any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, not exceeding the yearly value of two
thousand pounds, of the Gift, Alienation or Devise of any Person or Persons,
who are hereby without further License enabled to give the same, and any Goods,
Chattels or Sums of Money whatsoever, to the use, intent and purpose
hereafter limited and appointed: And sue or plead, and be sued or impleaded by
the name aforesaid in all Courts and places of Judicature within this Realm.

And the said Corporation, or any nine of them, whereof the said President, or
any of the said Aldermen, or the Deputy to the President, or the said Treasurer
to be one, shall have hereby power and authority from time to time, to meet and
keep Court for the ends and purposes herein expressed, at such time and place
as the said President or his Deputy shall appoint: And shall have hereby
authority from time to time to make and appoint a common Seal, for the use of
the said Corporation, and to choose such Officers, and them, or any of them from
time to time to remove, as they shall see cause; and upon the removal or death
of them, or any of them, to choose others in their places for the carrying on of
this work; and to make and give such reasonable allowance to them, or any of
them, out of the Stock and Revenue belonging to the said Corporation, as they
shall think fit, and shall have hereby full power and authority to do and
execute all such other Acts and things as are hereby ordained and appointed for
the effecting the work hereby intended to be done and executed.

And be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, for the further relief and
employing of the said poor within the said City and liberties thereof, that the
said Corporation or any nine of them, whereof the said President, or any of the
said Aldermen, or the Deputy to the President, or the said Treasurer to be one,
shall have power to Erect one or more Workhouses for receiving, relieving, and
setting the poor on work, and one or more houses of Correction for punishing of
Rogues, Vagabonds, and Beggars, as they shall think fit.

And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that in regard of the
great inequality in the ordering and relieving of the poor through the
different abilities of the several and respective Wards in the City of London
and Liberties thereof, the said Corporation, or any Nine of them, shall hereby
be authorized with consent of the Common Council of the said City to divide
the several Wards with the poor and stock to them belonging, into four equal
parts or proportions for the more effectual and indifferent relief of the
poor, and the avoiding future differences and dissentions between the rich and
the poor Parishes; provided this division of the said City and Liberties
thereof, shall not be any prejudice to the relief of those parts of Parishes
which lie without the Liberties of the City, which Parishes lie part within the
Liberties, and part without: but that those parts which lie without the
Liberties of the City shall and may have such relief from Parishes within the
City, as formerly they have had.

And be it ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for the further relief and
employing of the said poor within the said City and Liberties, if the said
Corporation shall find that the Annual Rates and Levies, or other Stock, come
to their hands, shall not be sufficient for the effecting the purposes
aforesaid; that then and from time to time, it shall and may be lawful for the
said President and Governors to certify such want of Stock, and what Sum or
Sums of Money they think fit will supply the same, under their Common Seal,
to the Common Council of the said City, and the same to be Levied by them
equally and indifferently upon the several Wards respectively; and that the
said President and Governors, or any nine of them, whereof the said President,
or any of the said Aldermen, or the Deputy to the President, or the said
Treasurer to be one, shall have power from time to time to make and constitute
Orders and Bylaws for the better relieving, regulating, and setting the poor
on work, and the apprehending and punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars
within the said City and Liberties, that have not wherewith honestly to
maintain themselves; and for other the matters aforesaid, which said Orders and
Bylaws shall be presented to the Lords and Commons for confirmation before the
end of this Session of Parliament, and shall have hereby power to put forth,
and bind such children Apprentices as shall be under their charge.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the said
Treasurer to the said Corporation for the time being, shall once in every year
between the 24. of June and the 29. of September, or oftener if need require,
give a true and perfect account in writing of all the receipts, charges and
disbursments in and about the premises, unto the Auditors for the time being,
appointed for taking the accounts of the Chamberlain and Bridgmaster of the
said City, and the said account to remain in the custody of the Chamberlain of
the said City.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, for the better
effecting the premises: That the President, the eight Aldermen, the Deputy
President, and Treasurer for the time being, shall be Justices of the Peace,
and the four eldest Aldermen shall be of the Quorum.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Suite or Plaint shall be commenced or prosecuted by any Person or Persons in
any Court whatsoever against the said President and Governors or any of them,
or against any Person or Persons for doing or executing any thing by their or
any of their Order, Command or Direction, or coming into their or any of their
aid and assistance, in, about, or concerning the premises; It shall and may be
lawful to and for the said President and Governors, and Officers, or any of
them, and every person against whom any such Action, Suit or Plaint shall be
commenced or prosecuted, to plead thereunto the general issue, that he or they
be not guilty, and to give such special matter in evidence to the Jury that
shall try the same, which matter being pleaded had been sufficient matter in
Law to have discharged every such Person so prosecuted as aforesaid.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may
be lawful to and for any County, Corporation, or Boroughs in any County of
this Kingdom, or Dominion of Wales, to make choice of a fit number of able and
sufficient persons for the like effectual relieving and regulating of the poor
in their respective places; and in like manner to draw up and present Orders
and Bylaws best suiting to those Counties and places for confirmation as
aforesaid, and for the ends and purposes herein above expressed.

ANd now having done our parts, we must leave the same unto those of whom an
account will be required, if they shall not effectually prosecute the same (a
high price being in their hands, and they having no heart to use the same)
which tends so much to the glory of God, the honor of the Parliament, and the
joy of the City and Kingdom. And truly we now thought our ends were answered,
and that we might sit down assured that what we had so long labored for, was
now effected, but still we meet with more obstructions in our way, like to the
Israelites in their journey to Canaan, even enough to make us turn back, repent
our former pains, and desert all further prosecution: but being yet desirous to
see this so pious a work effected and vigorously prosecuted, not only in the
City, but also through the Kingdom, I thought good to give this brief account
of our endeavors.





First, For the things desired by us in general, they are all summed up in a
Committee or Corporation, enabled to remedy all the grievances of the poor that
are hinted in this discourse, or at least to be appointed to take all such
things into their consideration, with such remedies as to their wisdoms shall
seem meet, and the same to report to a Common Council of the aforesaid City,
that so further power may be procured from the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
and given to them, or some others for that purpose, for the better
encouragement, ease and indemnity of the said Corporation* But more
particularly we desire that there may be a view had of all the poor of this
City, and a Register made of what poor are in each Ward, with this distinction
following.

First, The aged and all children under six years of age, with all such

Secondly, Of all males and females who are of six years age and upwards,
purpose (and not by the Wards themselves) that so an equal hand may be carried
throughout all the Wards in the said City.





A notorious counterfeit cripple.
was not only a spectator but an actor in the work: the manner thus: A
counterfeit pretending that his heels grew to his buttocks, lay begging in
Moorfields; M. Jackson Minister, seeing some milk-maids whipping the supposed
cripple with nettles, to try if he would find his legs (for that some of the
maids affirmed that they had seen him go) yet would he not for all his smart
make away from them: the maids being wearied out, and not obtaining their
desires, left him: a Carre-man coming by and hearing what had been affirmed,
lashes him with his whip several times over the shoulders, in so much that
some tenderhearted spectators were much displeased with the Carre-man for so
abusing the supposed cripple; whereupon the Carre-man willing to work a cure of
him, took him up under the arms, and offered to put him into a ditch near at
hand, which he did accordingly, and somewhat wet his breech, but all this
nothing prevailed; until the aforesaid Divine having observed the former
passages, and what was the relation of the maids, tried his experiment upon
him, which was thus, caused him to be laid upon his back, and kneeled upon his
breast, with one of his knees, causing one of his legs to be drawn forth (if
possible) which was accordingly done, and so the other; having both his legs
thus suddenly straightened (without any miracle) he was lifted up upon his feet,
to try if he could or would go, which presently he did in the sight of them all
(though seemingly very feeble) The Divine having so discovered him, sends
hastily for a Constable to send him to the house of correction, and in the mean
while the fellow desired the people to stand further off him, and he would try
his utmost to mend his pace, which the people having done, he as hastily runs
away, leapt over a gate and escaped them all.

That some way be settled, that the food of the City of London

That consideration be had of grievances in the common Trade of

That the Acts and Statutes for sowing of Hemp and Flax be put in

That granting of Licenses to Alehouses thought good to be Licensed,

That some definitions or positive signs be set down to discover a be required
to execute the Law upon him, unless he shall lay down his fine in the hands of
the said Officers or others to be appointed for that purpose, and some rule
likewise set down to evince an equivocating swearer; for by this means much sin
will be prevented, and revenue brought to the poor, as a present raising of
stock, till further course be had, and besides much trouble, suits and disputes
avoided, that may or shall happen to the Officers or others appointed as
aforesaid.













The motives, grounds and considerations that moved us hereto are these,

First, The glory of God in the suppressing of sin and wickedness,

Secondly, The honor of this City, which for neglect of this so Mr Harris his
printed Sermon.
Great cries turned into great joies: but now these great joies are turned into
great cries, and as bad or worse then ever they were, as was delivered by Mr
Harris in a Sermon at the Spittle, of late years.

The great good and benefit of the City, which by the labors

The miseries of the poor which appear by multitude of daily complaints

First, Children destitute of nourishment and education, being

Secondly, The complaints of widows, whose husbands lost their

The complaints of wounded soldiers, having lost their limbs in

The cries of the poor creatures for bread in our gates as we pass in

The complaints of wives, of many spend thrifts disolute husbands, but
prodigally pawn and spend what the industrious wife has earned and provided,
and so unnecessarily and inevitably bring misery upon themselves, and a charge
unto the Parish in which they inhabit, besides the many sad accidents that fall
out by means of distracting cares and extreme necessities, as people making
away themselves and their children, because they have not to answer their
cries, A sad relation.
as by a sad experience is two well known of a woman that dwelt in Hounsditch
about three years since being in childebed, she ripped her belly while she lay
in, and it was credibly reported, poverty occasioned her to do it: A
surgeon was sent for to put in her guts and sow up her belly, but requiring
a sum of money to do it, which she was not able to procure through her
poverty, he would do nothing for her, yet he would be paid for his coming,
which the poor wounded woman was not able to do, but her neighbors and
friends with her were foreced to gather five shillings, to satisfy that
merciless and uncharitable surgeon, before he would depart the house, and
so left he this miserable woman in her extremity.

Stanley and other judicious men, that there is at the least fourscore thousand
poor within this Kingdom, the which at a small rate ( viz three pence per diem
to every person) amounts to a thousand pounds a day, which in the year comes to
three hundred sixty five thousand pounds, all which moneys, besides the great
gain which might be made by working, our own manifactures (which is utterly
lost, viz. by some commodities; nineteen pound in twenty, in the not making
thereof) which by the hands of our own idle poor might be saved with notable
advantage to the whole Kingdom.

vix. poverty, theft, languishing, imprisonment of hundreds of able bodies,
whose labors might maintain themselves and others, their trial and sentence,
some to be burnt in the hand, and so marked out for thieves, and others
executed, and so gradually such drinking brings destruction. For this see more
in M. Cooks Poor man's case: Cooks poormans case.
Besides the releasing out of prison such as have no place to go to, but the
streets and fields, no employment to take to, but beg, steal, whore, cheat,
playing the counterfeits, and abusing good peoples charity.

The misery that attends the truly poor, that is, the lame, sick and The Broker
taking 120lb interest per year, for 100lb stock.
to pawn his clothes, to pay the Doctor, Surgeon, Apothecary and Nurse, and
when that fails, through want of these, they pine, languish, and almost, if not
altogether starve themselves and theirs.

Give me leave here to give you a sad instance (omitting many other that might
be mentioned) Not long since there was a poor woman carried home her work to
her work-master, Mr Hodges his report of two sad miseries that befell by reason
of poverty.
who when he had received it, told her, he could give her no more, by reason
the times were so bad he could not fell off his commodities, the poor woman
departed full of grief and distraction, and meeting with her brother, he asked
her how she did and her children, she answered never worse, why? said he, she
answered, my Master refuses to give me more work, and I have no bread at home,
nor know I what to do, her brother bid her go to his wife, and take three picks
of wheat, and tell her that he was paid; the which the woman did, but her
sister in law would not believe her relation nor answer her expectation. The
poor woman's misery hereby augmented, and Satan setting strongly upon her,
caused her to go home to her children, and there first killed her two babes, and
after her self. Her brother returning home, asked his wife if his sister had
been for the corn, she said, yea, he demanded if she had any, his wife said,
no, her husband in anger hasted to his sister, where he found her and her
children dead on the ground, he returned home and killed his wife by a box given
her on the ear, and was himself committed to custody, as says the relator.

Another sad instance thus, An aged man used to fetch grains from a Gentleman's
house, who being by the Gentleman taken notice of, he sent his man to find out
what he did with them, who found that he used to get blood at another place,
and of the blood and grains mixed, made he food to eat, the Gentleman hearing
his man's relation, allowed the poor man a pension ever after. Oh that this were
seriously considered of in this City, where we throw away better food then
blood and grains, whilst the poor swoon in our streets for want thereof, but of
this no more, having occasion to hint it elsewhere in this discourse, and
hoping its now upon remedying. Fifth particular, how to effect the relief of
the poor.


As to the fifth head propounded, namely the ways and means to effect the
removal of the aforesaid grievances.
The first is, in general, To find out the causes of the poverty of etc.

The grievances thus stated, I come to the remedies; and do conceive (and it
agrees with the sense of those active Gentlemen that did use to meet to
prosecute this work) that as the opposite virtues is the best cure for any sin,
so is the opposites of all these evils a proper cure for all such maladies; and
for your more ease and satisfaction herein, I will give an instance or two by
which you may judge of the rest.

18. Eliz. Regis, an Act for setting the poor on work, and avoiding of
idleness.
The Law says, Provide houses and work, apprehend the vagrant, set to work the
destitute, and then fine the giver and the Constable that admit any to beg: But
instead of execution and practic, we say, the cost of building houses will be
great, there will be loss by work, let the poor beg, they will get more by
their complaint then we can do by cessing; and infer, why should the giver be
fined when the poor is almost starved? why the Constable fine for not
apprehending, when there is no work to set the poor unto? thus inverting the
right way of our fathers, we are altogether out of order, and the consequence
is to all men evident, that Foolish pity spoils a well governed City and
Kingdom.

A second instance; The poor of this City are all Tradesmen, and etc. provide
stock, utterance, etc. and your poor cease.

Thirdly, Some are poor, not for want of stock or vent, but by

Fourthly, Some can work but will not; make them work and their

Fifthly, Pride is one chief cause of poverty and theft too; many servants

Sixthly, Many are poor by reason of sickness, lamenesse, plague or etc. as in
other parts it is.

But against me I know will be alleged, Object.
that I have all this time but brought you into a wood, and there left you;
prescribe a ready way to help all this, and then you do something.

For satisfaction hereto, Answ.
consider the remedies hinted already in this discourse with such as you shall
find in Stanley, Robinson, Lee and others, who in their writings have hinted
something this way; and for your better encouragement I will methodize to you
their sense.

First, Number your poor, by which you shall know two things; 1. What poor you
have: 2. Whether the poor that oppress you be your poor.

Secondly, View your poor, and hereby you shall know how many with work will
maintain themselves, and what the charge would be to releeve the rest.

Thirdly, Fill your Hospitals that are already furnished with stock and all
necessary provisions, and see that the most necessitous be first there provided
for.

Fourthly, Keep such as you commit to Bridewell in custody, until it appears
they have some place and employment to go unto, so should not Bridewell want
company to grind brasell, or to turn the mill.

Fifthly, Divide your ground so, that the poor be not in one division and their
stock in another division, but as equal as may be, that so each division may
have encouragement to set their poor on work.

Sixthly, For this City, it is needful to provide four work houses, and them to
be distinguished, the east, west, north, and south workhouses, and to divide
the City into four parts accordingly, for one or two Parishes are not
sufficient for a workhouse, to build it, to furnish it, to maintain
manufactures in it.

Seventhly, As also to distinguish your poor belonging to each quarter by
badges, to prevent straglers.

Eighthly, It is necessary likewise to appoint a place in each Ward, to receive
stuff from their General storehouse, for such as work at home, and to
receive in the work so wrought back again, paying for the same according to the
worth thereof, for the better ease and accommodation of the said indigent poor
and of the Corporation; as also to receive such food as might be frugally
saved, and prudently ordered, multiplied and disposed in such sort, as that it
may be sufficient to stop the mouths of such as complain, We are almost
starved; and prevent the mention of that sad disease in the weekly bills of
mortality.

Ninethly, For the better effecting of the former rules, its necessary that a
Register book be kept for the poor in each Ward, and each Parishes poor be
distinctly set down with their charge and abilities, and that they be truly
represented by some appointed and sworn for that purpose, and those severely
punished if they fail, for their neglect and perjury in a matter of that
consequence.

Tenthly, That certain known rules for relief be set down, the family of four
children to be provided for before that of three, so that some receive not all,
others none at all, as now it is; but following the wise counsel of our
forefathers, discovered by their good Laws, donations and foundations, or the
laudable practice of other parts of this Kingdom and elsewhere.

Eleventhly, That care be taken, that by releeving one poor we make not
another, as is 1. The very form of government in Bridewell, by multiplying
apprentices to the destruction of a trade; as also through pity to strangers to
undo our own poor, as may and does appear in the Weavers case stated to the
Committee of Parliament. 2. By allowing multiplicity of Alehouses, to the
relief of a few, and the utter undoing of many. 3. By allowing Hucsters, by
means whereof our poor housekeepers (especially) buy their food at the third or
fourth hand; with Costermongers and such like callings, that tend only to the
spoil of young fruit, and enhancing the price of old; the excess of Bruers,
and abuse of bakers, which produce the like inconveniences.

Twelfthly, A consultation with the several Trades of London, what their
grievances are, and how they may be remedied; our fathers have left us
footsteps of their care herein, as appears in the grant to Weavers, to
regulate disorders in their trade for seven miles round about London, and
diverse Laws and orders tending to uphold the well-being of Joyners, Carpenters,
Painters and other trades in and belonging to this City.

Thirteenthly, A course be taken for removing that slight or trick in Law
(called Mistaking the Case) and the trying causes according to the truth of the
matter, all circumstances impartially considered.

Fourteenthly, A course for preventing of cheating by morgages, Judgments,
etc. by which multitudes of families are undone; and buying lands in other men's
names, and compounding their own debts, making that land not liable to satisfy
their creditors; which things considered and removed, would doubtless produce
much good to this City and the whole Kingdom.

But yet Sir you say nothing for matter of stock: To which I answer, Object.
If you lessen your poor any way it is equivolent to stock; Answ.
but in our Propositions delivered in to the Committee of Common Counsel, we
propounded ten ways to raise a stock, as after follows.

The raising of a Stock is done,

First, By the Parish Stocks of Moneys and Lands.

Secondly, By voluntary Contributions in the several Parish Churches on the
Lords day, Fast days, Thanksgiving days, and on extraordinary occasions upon
the Ministers motion.

Thirdly, By gift of Victuals gathered at every house thrice in the week, by
some honest persons appointed for that purpose.

Fourthly, By loan of Moneys from some well-affected persons, and to be repaid
them at the years end, either in money or such commodities as they shall like
of.

Fifthly, By taking the benefit of some penal Statutes.

Sixthly, By concealed Legacies given to charitable uses.

Seventhly, The goods and money of Pentioners that die, at least such as have
no children, to go to the common stock (as it is in Holland.)

Eighthly, By gifts of old clothes, shoes, boots, hats and the like, gathered
quarterly at every house, by some honest person appointed to that purpose.

Ninethly, By Contributions of well-affected persons at the time of their
death, being pressed thereto by the Ministers that visit them in their
sickness.

Tenthly, The assistance of such persons as will take off some considerable
number of poor, by employing them in their several Trades, which will be as
effectual as so much stock.

And if all that will not do, it were better sell all the bells in our
steeples, then that so good and so great a work should fail (it were but a
little music lost, and happily many lives saved) the value of the bells in
London, accounting four in a steeple one with another, and those at twenty
Pound apeece, would in one hundred twenty two Parishes, amount unto nine
thousand six hundred and sixty Pound: or could we but persuade the Citizens of
London, but one year to forbear altering their apparel into other fantastic
fashions, and lay by as much for the poor as they use to spend that way, it is
clearly believed the same would amount to four times as much as the rates of
the poor come to. But what need these shifts? how or wherewith are the poor now
maintained? few working, most playing, begging, stealing, whoring, cheating and
the like? can these by their shifts now live? and could they not much better
live by honest labor? especially if work, if stock and other helps were added
to them, easy to be procured, if not already in our power to give and grant. I
beseech you let this City no longer plead excuse, and live under this sin and
shame: leave off preferring your friends to places and privileges, to gifts
and other helps, and let the destitute of friends perish before your eyes, and
go effectually about the work, else when I cease further to plead the cause of
the poor, God take the cause into his own hand, and it prove bitterness in the
end.

And now to conclude all, as I never intended to satisfy every man that shall
read or hear what is here set forth, so shall I not regard the censures of
such who regard their own private interest more then the Public good, and are
seldom pleased, save in their own invention. But conceiving this work to be in
it self good and a work of charity, and that many godly people throughout the
Kingdom do daily expect ^he promotion of it by the power of Parliament, I
thought this to be one of the likeliest means to satisfy them, promote and
make public to design in these hard and miserable times, with such as desire
the piece and tranquillity of the Kingdom, and good of their poor brethren; and
in regard the work is of great consequence, and the delay at the time extremely
prejudicial, I therefore resolved upon this boldness, to put in print this
short Account of our endeavors to effect the same, in^ending hereby good to
all, hurt to none, nor any just offense to any m^n, whether concerned or not
concerned in any thing expressed or hinted ^erein, but as an incitation and
encouragement to all active and able m^n, to improve their interest for the
public good, that so the example of London may cause the like course to be
taken throughout the Kingdom; and we hope the Corporation now authorized by
Parliament, will according to the great trust committed to them, and power put
into their hands, without any delay, vigorously and effectually prosecute the
premises; and I doubt not but all such as have been active for promoting the
design, will still to the utmost of their power help forward and promote the
same; and God that enjoynes and commands this as a duty, will doubtless reward
the faithful and zealous prosecution hereof, and a blessing shall rest upon
their heads, which is the prayer and desire of*

Your (...) friend and servant in behalf of the Poor, Rice Bush.

FINIS.
READER, If thou meetest with any omission or mistake, be please (...) ^ith thy
pen to amend the same.


