A Defense of the Doctrines of the HOLY TRINITY, and Incarnation Placed in
their due Light.
In Answer to a Letter, written to the Clergy of both Universities.
THat there is One is only True God, is most Frequently and Earnestly
inculcated in the H. Scripture in both Testaments: yet does the same Scripture
give the title of God to Three distinct Persons: and to reconcile such an Unity
with such a Trinity, is the present endeavor of many pens; among which some
have been so unhappy, as to produce nothing but a more irreconcilable enmity
between themselves.

To avoid the undecencies into which the dispute has lately transported
(especially) Two great Doctors, I choose to follow a greater than them Both;
who shunning the Elenctical way,) has cast his sentiments into 28
Propositions; and I presume to build on upon his foundation. For it is easier
to stop the mouth of an Adversary, than to satisfy an Inquisitive mind,
desirous to see the Truth, not only Defended, but positively Stablished.

I shall not recite all the 28 Propositions, supposing it sufficient to reduce
them to this summary, viz.

The name of God is used in Scripture, in more senses than one.

Self existence is the first and highest of all Perfections: and in the highest
sense belongs to the Father alone.

The other two Persons derive their beings from the first, and therefore are
not beings Absolutely Perfect in reference to their manner of Existence.

The Only self existent may derive all other Perfections, but That of
self-existence upon other beings; each whereof must have a right to the name of
God in a sense next to That which is peculiar to the Father.

If such Being proceed from the original self-existent by way of Natural and
Necessary Emanation, they are Equal in all other Perfections: and it is so far
from a Contradiction to say, they are Equally Eternal, that it is a flat
Contradiction to say the contrary.

This gives the second and third Persons their due honor, without robbing the
Father of what is due to him as the Original of their Divinity.

To these Propositions of this judicious author, I add

1. The Second and Third Person proceed from the first by way of Natural and
Necessary Emanation: and when our Church speaks of Generation, and
Proceeding, she regards not o much Exactness of Expression, as the Capacity of
the Vulgar; who else might take them to be Creatures.

2. Spiritual Emanations are analogous to Corporeal; yet not subject to all the
same laws, They come from their Originals, as Consequents do from their
Antecedents, from which they so proceed, as still to remain in them, yet not as
Parts of them: E. G. Let the Antecedent be This, viz. God is a being infinitely
perfect. From This Antecedent necessarily proceed these Consequents viz. God is
infinite in Wisdom, and ^. God is infinite in Power, Of these we may more
Truly then Properly say, they are begotten or proceed from the Antecedent; yet
are they eternally contained in it, nor is the Evidence of the first
Diminished, but Confirmed, by the confident belief of the other two: nor (for
the same reason) is the honor of the Father lessened by what is paid to either
of the other.

3. The same Being may have many Properties, which do not make it so many
several Beings, but One so much the more Perfect, We doubt not but God has
many Perfections, whereof we cannot have the least Idea.

4. All that we can know or need to believe concerning God, is comprehended in
Three Properties. 1. Original Being is Father of All other Beings: This
implies Goodness, Mercy, Infinity, Eternity, All Sufficiency, Justice, etc. 2.
A Perfect being must be a Thinking Mind, the Word is the immediate Issue and
exact Image of the Mind, This Implies Wisdom, Veracity, Omniscience, etc. 3.
Goodness and Wisdom would be Useless without Power to execute; and the H. G. is
the doer of wonderful works, and the mover of our Minds. This is Power,
Providence the Sanctifier, Comforter, etc.

5. Divine Properties are not Concretes, which receive their Beings by
Participation from some Universal Nature: but are themselves That Universal
Nature, from which all Particulars receive whatever Measures they enjoy. St.
John, to express the Infinity of Gods Love, speaks in the Abstract, God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in Him: and if we
will speak exactly, we must speak of all the rest in the same dialect.

6. Concretes, which receive by Participation, enjoy only their Measure. But
the Universal Nature is Immense; That which is but an Adjunct in Creatures, is
Essence in God: and every Property is God Himself under its peculiar Idea.

7. Though the Second and third Properties be not equal to the First in point
of Independence, in a Physical sense; because they derive their being from him;
yet they are so, in a Logical sense; because the First can no more be without
either of Them, than either of Them can be without the First. We therefore do
not rob the Father, when we adore either of Them, because we do not Separate,
(though we Abstract) them in our Minds. Yea, some of the Christian Fathers have
not thought it necessary to be exact, even in Abstracting: for they sometimes
ascribe to One, such acts as properly belong to Another.

8. The belief of such a Trinity is safe from Both Extremes. On the one side,
it is out of danger of Tritheism, and on the other of Trifleing, But Three
Spirits sound so like three Gods, as to affright a timorous mind. and Three
Modes or Internal Relations make such a Barren Speculation, as cannot justly
pretend to any place in our Devotion, or in That Scripture, which is therefore
given by inspiration of God, because it is profitable, etc.

9. If Those Three, which we have styled Properties, be capable to advance
their substance to the character of PERSONS, we may safely communicate with our
Church, both in her Creeds, because then they will be Three Persons and One
God; and in her Litany too, because then, the Second and Third will not be
either such slight things in Themselves, or so regardless of Us, as to be
unworthy of our adorations.

This therefore must needs be worth our enquiry; wherein we may the better hope
for satisfaction; because it will not be matter of Discourse, but Fact, which
is less subject to Doubts and Objections.

PLato and his followers saw so much of the invisible things of God by the
things which were made, as to discover that there must be One (and but One)
Self existent being, which must be Good, Wise and Powerful. These Three
Properties, they celebrated under the Common characters of (...); Subsistence,
Principles, Causes, etc. under their Respective ^^^es of 1. (...), the Being,
the Good etc. 2. (...), the Word or Reason etc. 3. (...), the Soul.

2. This plain truth they so sublimed as to multiply Mysteries, Difficult, if
not altogether Impossible to be understood. For they still believed the Unity
of God, but so discoursed of the Three, that they seemed to make every one a
several God: Insomuch, that the Best and Wisest of all heathen Princes M. Aur.
Antoninus said, I thank God that having such a passion for Philosophy, I did
not fall into the hands of any Sophist, that I did not amuse my self in reading
their Books, or answer the vain Subtilties of their Discourses.

3. This Gnostick humor of the Sophists wrought in all ages: and Origin (thank
him) plainly distinguishes the Gospel into Sensible and Intelectual;
appropriating the Former to Children, and the Later to Adult and Exalted
understandings. And another age (accounting it no less honorable for the
Gospel, to exceed the discoveries of Reason (even in Natural Theology) than for
Themselves to surmount the capacities of the Vulgar) so disguised the Doctrine
of the Trinity, that as occasions varied, they sometimes Professed, and
sometimes Denied it, to be the same with That of Plato.

4. The Consequents were Lamentable, Religion was degraded from a reformer of
Manners to a refiner of Wits, and filled the Christian world with Debauches
and Disputes.

5. The First most Cruel and most Durable contention was That with Arius, which
was not ended when the Catholics fell into a controversy between the Greeks
and Latins, concerning the title of the Three. The Greeks would call them
Subsistences: This the Latins thought too much, and would not allow them to be
more than PERSONS, And Greg. Naz. celebrateth it, as one of Athanasius's best
performances, that he indulged to both parties the use of their own expressions.

6. The Greeks therefore kept possession of their Platonic word, Subsistences,
which being not Classical, needed to be explained. The most Authentic
paraphrase was That of Justinian and his Council, (...). So the Geeeks never
acknowledged the Trinity to be more than Three Properties in the Godhead.

7. On the other side, what the Latins meant by their word PERSON, St. Ang.
has given us a full account, not of his Own private thoughts, but of the
general sense of the Christian World. The word PERSON he says was taken up
for want of a better, that might import Tria quaedam, Three Somewhats, of which
he could not give a clear Idea. And at the foot of the account we have this
memorable Summum total Aeternus, Sapiens, Beatus, haec tria sunt Trinitas, quae
appellatur Deus. Thus far we meet no other Trinity, but of Properties in God.

8. But when Religion fell under the empire of the Schoolmen, the poor word
PERSON was so racked, as to exceed Both extremes. When they will talk
Mysteriously they so discourse, that if I can reconcile their Trinity of
Persons with the Unity of God, I must be obliged to them for their nice
instructions; if I cannot, I must reverence their more exalted apprehensions:
Yet when they speak to a learned reader, they debase the word so low, that it
shall not signify so much as a Porperty. The truth hereof is (perhaps) all
that we can learn in the writings of the two angry Doctors, who with equal
confidence vouch the same authority of the Schools; the one for three Spirits,
the other for three Modes and Relations.

9. All agree in This for the Definition of a Person, that it is an
Intellectual Substance differing from all others. By the General, but most
Irregular interpretation of This Definition, the Later half is utterly idle.
For if every single Substance already differ from all others by its mere
Existence; what means the addition of those needless words? It is intolerable
in Definitions, to have the one half impertinent: but so it must be, if an
Intellectual Substance and a Person be terms Aequipollent and Convertible, as
some contend.

10. Common practice supplies this defect. For it tells us that one Person
differs from all others, not by his single Existence, but by some proper
marks, peculiar to himself: And since one man may wear many such Characters, he
may thereby sustein as many Persons. Thus the great oracle of language says of
himself. I who am but One man, sustein Three Persons, mine own, that of an
Accuser, and that of a Judge; and a very late writer of Animadversions on a
Postscript, etc. makes his entry with such a frump, as intends to Ridicule, but
effectually Verifies the Doctrine. The Doctor (says he) or Dean, or Defender
(no matter which I name, for They Three are One) Are they so? then what can be
answered to these questions? Is not the Doctor a Person? Is not the Dean, a
Person? Is not the Defender a Person? If the same Man may be Three Persons, Why
may not the same God?

11. The angry Doctor, that so frequently complains of the Church of England,
for not engaging in his quarrel; and in every page pleads the Church, the
Church, confesses that his Hypothesis appeared first in the eighth or ninth
Century: What a misery is it that we have lost so many of that Churches
Doctrines! The Mystery of Transubstantiation! the worship of Images! the fires
of Purgatory etc.

12. God be blessed, Our Church is reformed both from the Corrupt Doctrines,
and Cruel Spirit of the eighth and nineth Century. In our present question,
either she sits silent, or insinuates the same sense which we have heard from
St Augustine. For in his First Article, wherein she stablisheth the Unity of God
and Trinity of Persons, she names the Three comprehensive Attributes,
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power.

How this is to be understood, I appeal to the Church of France, which in the
Sixth Art. of her Confession de foy, says, This Holy Scripture teaches us,
that in this One and Simple Divine Essence which we have confessed, there are
Three Persons; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The Father the First
Cause, Principle and Origin of all things. The Son, his Eternal Word and
Wisdom. The Holy Ghost, his Virtue, Power, and Efficacy.

13. The Holy Scripture, by a Prosopopaeia, proper to the Time and Place
wherein it was written, represents the divine Properties, as Speaking and
Acting in the manner of Complete, Intelligent Substances. Concerning the Second
Person this is plain Fact in the First, eighth, and nineth Chapters of the
Proverbs of Solomon: the Third is no otherwise a Person, than the Second; So
the Consequence is indifferent to Both.

The sum therefore is This, that as the former Classis of Propositions prove by
plain Reason, that every Divine Property is God, so does matter of Fact prove,
that no Authority, Humane or Divine, obliges us to believe more than this,
that the Divine Trinity of Persons is only a Trinity of Properties.

I envy not those Eagles, that can soar higher, and see more: my simple
Ambition pretends to no more than is necessary to reconcile the Word of God
in Scripture, with the Dictates of Reason; and the peace of my Conscience, with
Conformity to the Church; which having obtained by the help of what I have
said, I desire to communicate as far I can to those that want it: To the
Socinians especially, of whom I have so good an Opinion (Errors excepted) that
I should look upon it as a great Blessing, if I might help toward their Peace
with our Church.

BUT there is another, and greater Obstacle; and I must either leave my work
half undone, or so represent the other Doctrine of the Incarnation, that
Rational and Conscientious Men may apprehend it lawful to communicate with us,
as well in our Liturgy, as our Creed. I therefore think necessary to add some
Propositions concerning that Article also.

1. Who-ever believes J. C. to be his Savior, must needs think himself
obliged to pay him all the honor that he can think consistent with Scripture
and Reason.

2. The Scripture declares J. C. to be as much God, as is possible for a Man
to be. This appears from many Texts, particularly from the Words of St. Paul,
who says, that in him dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily; and from
those of our Savior himself, who says, God gave not the spirit by measure
unto him; which import no less, than that God gave him as much Divinity as
possibly he could.

3. To determine how much God Can do, is more derogatory to his honor, than to
say he Has done more than he really has done: For the later is only an
innocent Error in matter of Fact; but the other, is a saucy confinement of
God's Omnipotence.

4. It is not impossible, or so much as difficult, to apprehend, that the
Wisdom of God (which implies his Purity) should unite it self to a Man without
Self-Existence and Omnipotency: and so the (...) may be incarnate without the
joint Incarnation of the Father and the H. G.

5. If we believe not Christ to be God Eternal: yet if we believe him Deified
in Time; whether we compute that Time from his Conception in the Womb of the
Blessed Virgin (as some) or from his exaltation to the Right Hand of God (as
others.) This will justify our Adoration of him: and since Practice is the
only end of Speculation, we need not doubt, but our Gracious Redeemer will
allow for our innocent failings in the Later, when we pay him his due in the
Former.

6. Though we adore him under the Character of the Son of David, yet we thereby
intend the Person that is the Son of God, and our worship is properly directed
to his Divinity, since That only can Hear and Grant Prayer.

7. If these Propositions be true, then is there no danger (...) communicating
with our Church, both in Creed and Liturgy; but in departing from her, there is
double danger of two great Sins, viz. Schism and Sacrilege.

WHat I have thus said, I hope may convince the Socinians, that they may more
safely Communicate with our Church, than trouble her Peace: and I need not
speak of the other comprehensive side of the word to show how Two Natures may
make One [Person] Both because That Notion has no place in the Devotions of
our Church, and because it is exemplified in a paper very lately published in
form of a Letter directed to the Clergy of both Universities, as to One Person,
though the Author cannot imagine they should all meet in a consult: nor does one
of the Universities ever answer the Books which they dislike, but by a decretum
to burn them. He therefore must write to them, not Conjunctim, but Divisim: and
if so, must not take unkindly if any One answer the Request (shall I call it or
Challenge) that is made to All.

This I speak because I have lately learned, that some men call it spitting it
in their faces, if a man write against their opinions.

And Dr S -- th employeth his talent of scolding at me for so doings; and
aggravates the crime, as therefore intolerable, because I never had any
conversation with him; wherein he has done himself the honor to profess that
he wrote against Dr Sherlock, not out of love to Truth, but Malice to him.

He is (indeed) so civil to my Hypothesis, as not to give it one hard word; and
I shall this way also oppose him: for I shall not meddle with his Person; but
against his Hypothesis, shall put this case, A Doctor, a Prebend of W. a Canon
of C. C. a Rector of I. and one or more Sine cura's it W. and a Landed man, are
every one a Distinct Person; yet All meet in one Man: suppose now it were
possible for me to make All these Personalities as useless to him, as so many
Modes, or Internal Relations; would not this more justly provoke his rage, than
the harmless writing against his Opinion? Yet this is the consequence of his
Hypothesis: For the notion of a mere Internal Relation, depriveth every Person
of his Honor, by depriving the World of the Inte^

The Socinians cannot object to me the same heavy provocation: I have conversed
with some of the chief of them (and that, very amicably) whom I believe to be
excellent persons, and by what I see in them. I judge of the Generality of the
Party: This I take to be so far from a Restraint upon me, that it is one of the
reasons which induce me to endeavor to make them like my self; and in order
thereto, if they be sincere (as I hope) I pray them to practice all their
Objections upon their own Trinity of Humane Persons: I shall here give them a
short Specimen of it, in answer to that Paragraph in the now mentioned Letter,
which is the first after the Introduction, and contains the Substance of the
whole, that is afterward objected against our Hypothesis.

In that Entry upon the dispute, (after some lines cast away upon proving the
Absurdity of contending about the meaning of the word PERSON by its place in
the Creed, which proves its Necessity) the Author proceeds to say that Those
that pay the highest adoration to a Person have no different Ideas of God and a
Divine Person. To this our Tally answers, that those who honor Dr Sherlock
most, have an Idea of Will. Sherlock, different from the Ideas of Dr, Dean, and
Defender. And for a fuller and more formal answer I add, that the Idea may be
Adaequate, and so it will comprehend the whole of him; or Inadaequate, and so
it may be restrained to any One of his Characters: So the Adaequate Idea of God
comprehends All Divine Perfections; but by an Inadaequate Idea, That
Perfection of God may be contemplated in any Divine Property, which constitutes
a Divine Person.

To frame another Idea of God, (says the Letter) it must be lower, and
consequently Blasphemy against God. No (say I) it is no robbery to the Dean, to
speak of him as Doctor, if we leave him all the dues of his Deanery: Nor is it
Blasphemy to consider any one of God's Properties by way of mere Abstraction,
while we Deny him not the Honor due to him from all the rest.

In a word (says the Letter) if a Person be God, there can be no real
difference or distinction between them, for no Being can be but it self; it is
the same with it self, and distinct and different from all other: Yes, Dr.
Sherlock may be the same Individual Man; though different from himself, with
respect to his Different Characters; so God, etc.

By this Specimen it appears easy to go through every clause of the Letter
that concerns our Hypothesis. My great fear is, that the Socinians Confidence
of Victory will make them reject all terms of Accommodation: Yet will not my
labor be quite lost with Him, who accepts Sincere, though Succesless
Endeavors, and has said, Blessed are the Peacemakers.

FINIS.

