A Warning-Piece FOR THE UNRULY; IN TWO SERMONS AT THE METROPOLITICAL
VISITATION OF THE Most Reverend Father in God, Richard Lord Archbishop of YORK,
held at Preston in Amondernes in Lancashire, and there PREACHED, The former on
that day, the latter the day following.

By Seth Bushel D. D.

(...). Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Ephesians. Edit. Savil. p. 823. LONDON, Printed for Will.
Cademan, at the Popes head in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand:
and Tho. Passinger, at the three Bibles on London Bridge, 1673.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, RICHARD LORD ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.
My LORD,
I Have made humbly bold to fix your Name before these Sermons, not to entitle
your Grace to any the weakness that may have escaped therein (in some kind the
inseparable attendant of humane frailty:) but to testify the respect and duty
under which I stand obliged, which is deservedly yours. Besides, the tender of
them may seem, in point of right, firstly to belong unto your Grace, being
Preached (and by appointment) at your Metropolitical Visitation.

The favorable acceptance of them from the Pulpit, giving hope of no less
candid entertainment from the Press, is one main motive to make them public.
Perhaps there may be that in them, which may conduce not only to the advantage
of the Churches Sons in their Establishments; but to the conviction of others,
who through weakness, or perverseness may be gone astray, and have left the
fold; and so become instrumental for their orderly reduction. Upon these
accounts I was not unwilling to cast them upon the waters. Such as they are, I
here humbly present them to your Grace, as a real testimony, that I am

My LORD, Your Graces most faithful servant, SETH BUSHEL.

A Warning-Piece FOR THE UNRULY.
1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Warn them that are unruly.


THe Doctrine of the Church has in no age been so pure and plain, but there
have arisen Heresies: nor the pale of Discipline so compact and good, but there
have been some Schisms. The purity of its Doctrine has not secured malignant
spirits from being tainted with soul-destroying errors: neither has the
excellency of its Discipline preserved tumorous members from going beyond the
due bounds of the body. 1 Cor. 11.19.
As there must be heresies; Jud. 19.
so there will be such who separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit.

Now as Heresy is a renting from the Head; so is Schism a dividing from the
Body. Heresy does not hold the Head; and Schism will not keep to the Body.
There may be Schism without Heresy; but never Heresy without a Schism. Now
both these, as they are evil in their nature, so they are pernicious to the
Church in their issue. For in that body, whose strength and beauty does consist
in the unity and order of it, by the unhappy means of these two fatal sisters,
the unity is dissolved, and the order confused; and so its beauty's blemished,
and strength impaired.

The orderly peace of the Church is to he prayed for, Psalm. 122.6. and 137.6.
and preferred before all outward mercies. Now the stress thereof seems to rest
upon the two Pillars of unity and verity: which Heresy and Schism not only
undermine, but openly endeavor the subversion of. Heresy strikes at verity;
and Schism would dissolve its unity; that so the Church's peace might be
broken, and confusion and every evil work might follow.

It should be the design therefore as well, as it is the duty of every true Son,
to endeavor the preservation of their Mother. It Is no less their interest,
than their honor, to watch on her behalf, and to seek her safety, and
securement, not only against the onsets of the professed enemy; but the
corrosions of those vipers, that would gnaw in pieces her intestines: that the
bowels of their Mother may not be fretted by the worms of faction, nor her
members distorted by the rack of Schism. And as the true Sons of Sion bear upon
their hearts this filial respect and duty to her, that bare them; so this care
is not only commended to, but commanded them by the Apostle in the words of the
Text. (...). Warn them that are unruly.

I shall trouble you no further with the coherence of the words, than to tell
you, that they are ranked amongst, and summed up with diverse Apostolical
precepts given by the Holy Ghost, to be referred to Christian Practice.

The words express a duty, wherein there is 1. An Act enjoined. Warn. 2. The
subject, or persons about which this Act is to be conversant, viz. the unruly.


Warn them, that are unruly.

The word (...) rendered here unruly, as used in Scripture, is expressed often
by disorderly. So 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Now we command you, brethren, that ye withdraw
your selves from every brother ((...)) that walks disorderly. So Verse. 7.
(...). We behaved not our selves disorderly among you. So Verse. 11. We hear
that there are some ((...)) which walk among you disorderly.

(...). Qui faciunt praeter ordinem a Deo constitutum: So the Schol. has it.
Those are unruly which go aside, or beyond that order, that God has limited,
and appointed for them.

For the word (...), it is emphatical, and imports not barely a giving warning;
but so to warn, as to press it home, and to put it into the mind. The word used
by the Apostle which is rendered admonition, Ephesians. 6.4. is the same with this,
and (as Hemingius upon that place explains it) talem in genere admonitionem
notat, qua alicui veluti in animam ponas ac ingeras quid factu opus est. So the
Apostle pressed upon the Ephesians, and brought (as much as in him lay) his
warning home. Act. 20.31. I ceased not (says he) (...), to warn every one
night and day with tears. So that

Observe. The disordered and unruly are to be warned. Warning is so to be given
them, as to put it into their minds.

Herein 1. Of the Subject, or Persons. 2. Of the Act, or Duty.

1. We are to enquire about the Subject or Persons, who these unruly are. Is
not every way of man right in his own eyes? Prove. 21.2.
Who follows not a rule? The most enormous indeed that are, gather some salvo
to their thoughts, lest their hearts should condemn them; thinking either that
they are regular; or not so chargeable with irregularity, as some would seem to
make them: for that they imagine the rule to have such a latitude, as may admit
of their transgressions upon some indifferent compensation. Now to detect the
nature of unruliness, and to show you who they are, that justly fall under this
charge; we shall reduce them to these following particulars.

unruly, who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Christ, nor receive the wholesome
truths thereof. This Doctrine firstly laid down in Scripture is capitulated in
the Articles of Religion, and distinctly reduced to Heads into the Doctrine of
the Church. Now what Article of Religion is there, but it has been impinged by
some or other in the bosom of the Church? There Is no Doctrine so certainly and
surely laid down in Holy Scripture, which has not been impugned by men of
corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith. It might be showed by an
enumeration of particulars, that all the doctrinal Articles of Religion have
been struck at by some or other. Some disputing one Article, others
contradicting a second, some denying a third. So that from the Alpha of man's
Creation to the Omega of the eternal judgment; with all the intervening
passages of man's Fall, Redemption, and Resurrection, there is no Doctrine
(though otherwise never so plain and evident) but has met with opposition.
Surely those must needs be unruly, whom the Doctrine of our Savior cannot
rule. How can they be acquitted from the just charge of rebellion, who refuse
to be governed by Christ's Scepter? or from the guilt of disorder, who will not
be ordered by his Law? The Apostle hints some such to step into the place of
Teachers, 1 Timothy 6.3.
who consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the doctrine which is according to Godliness; but teach otherwise. And some
such he hints to be hearers too, The time will come when they will not endure
sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.
but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears.

city compact together; to an army with banners; Psalm. 122.3. Cant. 6.4. and
4.12, 13. Isa. 5.2.
to a garden enclosed; a spring shut up; a fountain sealed; to an orchard
planted; a vineyard fenced; sheep folded, Joh. 10.16.
and the like. Now look what Government is to a City, Discipline to an Army, a
Closure to a Garden, a Door to a Spring, a Seal to a Fountain, a Wall to an
Orchard, a Fence to a Vineyard, a Fold to the Flock, such is Discipline to the
Church of God. It is a preservative against ruin and rapine; and keeps the
humble members thereof within their due bounds in safety. When the hedge of
Discipline is broken down, then all that go by the way do pluck her; Psalm.
80.12.
and there is occasion given for her luxuriant members to stray abroad. But when
the Fence of Discipline is well made up, and yet persons will not be kept
within the Churches pale, what other account can be given of them, than as
unruly? When they turn aside from the footsteps of the flock, and will not feed
their kids besides the shepherds tents, Cant. 1.7, 8.
but violently break the Fold, or wantonly leap over the Wall, and pick out a
Pasture of their own choice, as they expose themselves to the greatest danger,
so they are the occasion of no small disorder. Dum conventicula sibi diversa
constituunt, veritatis caput atque originem reliquerunt. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
We have too many such ('it is to be feared) in these our days, who are led more
by a selfish humor, than a ruling judgment; by a floating fancy, than solid
reason: who rather choose to indulge a factious and self-espoused interest, than
to give up themselves to the sober conduct of humble Christian Principles. And
these would submit to no rule, Extra. Ecclesiam consistens, and contra pacem
and dilectiomen Christi faciens, inter adversarios computetur. Cypr. Ep. 6.
but their own; would own no Discipline but of their own framing: And they
cannot well tell what that is, or would be neither; but probably as
multifarious in its shape, as there are persons or interests to promote it. We
may look upon most of these out-strays, as led more by the spirit of
contradiction, tempered with the two ingredients of pride, and self-conceit,
than by any other principle: and we shall hope that a little time (through Gods
mercy) will produce more wisdom in them, Nulla ab eis tanta potest fieri
correptio, quanta est schismatis pernicies. Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 62.
and that they will account, as well the Churches Discipline, the means of
their safety, as her Doctrine, of their Salvation.

not only for wrath, Romans 13.5.
but for conscience sake. And the good and wholesome Laws, they make, are to be
obeyed: therein we yield obedience to God himself, whose Vicegerents they are
upon the earth. Now to resist these, is to resist the Ordinance of God: and to
deny obedience to their wholesome Laws, as it arrives at an high pitch of
unruliness, so of danger too; for the Apostle tells us, Romans 13.2.
that they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

When the Magistrate by his known and good Laws does command this to be done,
and forbids the other, and your course is cross to his commands, how can you
acquit your selves from the guilt of unruliness, and of the sin of impinging
against Gods Ordinance in the fifth Commandment? Do you not in effect say, (for
men's actions are the surest expressions of their minds) whatever your pretexts
may be, Luke 19.14.
that you will not have this man to rule over you? The Apostolical command is
to submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the 1 Pet. 2.13.
Lords sake. Tit. 3.1.
And to be subject to principalities, and powers, to obey Magistrates, to be
ready to every good work: as if obedience to Magistrates were the first of, and
a preparatory to all good works. Fear, as God's due, 1 Pet 2.17.
and honor, as the Kings, are, by the Apostle, joined together. How fondly
conceited may those then be deemed to be, who pretend to Gods fear with the
Kings dishonor, I mean disobedience to his known and wholesome Laws? For as
there is no surer demonstration of a reverential respect to the Authority over
us, than by a humble subjection to their good Laws: so there is no greater
Argument of a dishonorable esteem toward our Superiors, than by a capricious
contradicting their constitutions.

Oh then, as you tender the glory of God, the quiet of your own estates, the
welfare of your souls, the honor of the Christian Profession, and the
excellency of its order, take heed you be not presumptuous, or self-willed, to
despise government, or speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10, 12.
lest you utterly perish in your own corruption.

unruly, whose conversations are not ordered according to the rule of the new
man. Gal. 6.16.
Irregularity in the Converse justly charge the Converser with unruliness. He
whose life is dissolute and inordinate cannot be said to live by rule, to wit,
that rule, the careless neglect and breach whereof, in the Apostle's sense,
denominates a man unruly. The Precepts of the Lord Christ do set before us a
rule of Holiness, so does his practice too, in whom we have a most perfect
pattern, and exemplar of all righteousness. He told St. John Baptist, that it
became him to fulfill [(...)] all righteousness: whatever had a show, or
appearance of goodness; So Grotius, vox haec (...) latissime sumitur, ita ut
significet non modo (...), sed and quicquid ullam aequi atque boni habet
rationem. In him we may learn our duty toward God, our way with men, and our
demeanor in reference to our selves. His Precepts are full, and so is his
Pattern too: for as Blosius well has it, Lud. Blos. Speculum spirituale, cap.
10.
Etiamsi codices omnes, qui toto orb habentur, intercidissent: vita and passio
Christi abunde Christianis omnibus sufficeret, ad virtutem omnem, and veritatem
perdiscendam. Now they who will not attend to the voice of Christ, by his
Precepts teaching Holiness; nor to the way of Christ, by his Pattern leading to
it; what else can be said of them, than that they are unruly? Of these ('it is to
be feared) there are too many, and this charge does justly reach some, both
Priest and People.

Psalm. 50.16.
What have such to do to declare Gods statutes, or Ministerially to take his
Covenant in their mouths? 2 Cor. 5.19.
seeing the word of reconciliation was never committed to them. Such climb up
over the wall into the sheepfold, Joh. 10.1.
and enter not by the door. That order and polity which God has set in his
Church, these (what in them lies) are the subverters of. How presumptuously
self-confident are these men, who dare to adventure upon those things with such
unadvised rashness, for which the blessed Apostle apprehended in Mortals such
an insufficiency, and upon a sober and mature consideration cries out, 2 Cor.
2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? It Is not gifts will authorize a person to
step up into Moses chair: neither because he is excellently qualified with
tongues and knowledge, is he therefore a Minister of Christ. These may perhaps
puff up, and make a man swell, so as to appear something in his own eyes, yea,
and in the eyes of others too; but he travails with froth and wind, and brings
forth vanity, who upon this ground dares to approach Gods Altar. Methinks, this
piece of unruliness and enormity in the Church of God might be repressed and
regulated by the countermands of sobriety, modesty, humility, and self-denial,
and other the like Christian graces, were such gifted men but subjects of them:
but if these be not (as it is to be feared such spirits are too empty of soul
seasoning graces) yet surely the sad instances upon record of persons usurping
the Priestly Office, and the fatal issues thereupon, should not only awaken,
but so terrify, as to reduce all such pretenders, and affright them from the
like usurpations for the future; when it is considered how God dealt with Korah
and his accomplices, for rising up against Moses, and against Aaron, but chiefly
their design was to invade the Priesthood: for this they did not die the common
death of all men: Numb. 16.10, 30, 31.
but the Lord made a new thing, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
them up, (a sign of sore and sad displeasure.) So we read the men of
Bethshemesh were smitten with a great slaughter, 1 Samuel 6.19.
because they had looked into the Ark, which was not for them, but only for the
Priests and Levites to have intermedled about. The case of Vzzah may not be
forgotten, who was smitten to death by Gods immediate hand, because he put
forth his hand to hold the ark, when the oxen shook it: 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
Doubtless his intent was good, to secure the Ark from harm, and to that
purpose put forth a helping hand: but a good intention will not acquit from the
guilt of error; when the act is cross to Gods command, or the Agent not
warranted by a due call unto it. And who dares draw nigh to the office of
Priesthood without a Call, if the matter of Vzziah be considered? It Is said
when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: 2 Chronicles. 26.17,
18, 19.
Ambition transported him to invade the Priesthood, for which fact the signal
mark of Gods high displeasure was notorious in his forehead, and he became a
leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, and was
separated from the society and communion of Gods people: and this in Scripture
phrase was accounted as destruction, for so Menochius glosseth, Lepra instar
mortis erat, quia ab hominum consuetudine, tanquam mortuum, separat. Now all
this, as it evidenceth Gods special care of the Priestly Function, not
suffering it to be polluted by common hands; so it shows his mindfulness of
what he spoke to Aaron, and to his sons, Behold I have given your priests
office unto you, as a service of gift: and the stranger that comes nigh shall
be put to death. Numb. 18.7.

Those must needs be accounted irregular in their courses, who walk cross to
Apostolical rules and practice. Were not the Ministers of Christ in the
Primitive times separated unto the Gospel of God? Act. 13.2.
Did not St. Paul put his hands upon Timothy? Romans 1.1.
and did not he enjoin Timothy carefulness in the laying on of his hands, and
in the commitment of a Gospel trust to faithful men, 2 Timothy 1.6.
who should be able to teach others also; 1 Timothy 5.22.
that so there might be a good succession? Mar. 3.14.
None were then to preach, but those that were ordained and sent. No man took
this honor unto himself, Romans 10.15.
but he that was called of God, as Aaron was. Heb. 5.4.
God gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Evangelists: Ephesians. 4.11.
and some Pastors; not all. And therefore to check (as't were) this spirit of
giddiness, 1 Cor. 12.29.
and unruly humor, the question was fitly put by the Apostle, viz. are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Now from the first times to our
days there has been a succession downwards, and the work of the Ministry has
been committed to distinct persons, and they are and have been distinctly and
severally enjoined to wait upon their office. Therefore as to Ecclesiastic
Order, and the outward Polity of the Church, we may conclude that confusion in
Religion will as certainly follow every man's turning Priest or Preacher: as it
will in that State, where every one affects to rule as King.

Psalm. 50.23.
do not order their conversation aright. Their owning the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church, and acknowledging obedience to their Superiors will
not acquit them from this charge, if there be enormity in their lives. The
messengers of Christ are to be exemplary unto others in word, in conversation,
in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity: 1 Timothy 4.12.
and their light should in an especial manner so shine before men, that they
may see their good works. Mat. 5.16.
The examples of some are greatly influential, and their influence if bad of a
most prejudicial nature. Persons eminent in Church or State, if of scandalous
and evil lives, do not only prejudice themselves by irregular courses; but are
occasions of harm to others by their evil conduct: which as it renders their
sin more heinous, so doubtless their punishment will be proportionate, when it
falls; as having a just God to deal withal, before whom as they must give up
their account, so from him they must receive their pay.

How does it therefore concern leaders to look about them, and to set a watch
upon their ways? with what diligence should they mark their steps, lest they
should lay a stumbling block before others? Now the Ministers of Christ above
all others do lie under special obligations, to take heed to their ways. Numb.
16.10.
The Lord has brought them near unto himself; Joh. 15.16.
and ordained them that they should bring forth fruit. They are the salt of the
earth; Mat. 5.13, 14.
the light of the world; a city set on a hill: Ezekiel. 33.7.
They are called God's watchmen; Christ's shepherds; 1 Pet. 5.2. Act. 20.28.
the holy Ghost's overseers, and the like. Now these titles as they point at
their honor and office, so they express their personal and relative duties. If
holiness becomes Gods house, Psalm. 93.5.
then surely it becomes those, who are taken near unto him in his house. Their
lives as well as doctrine are to be fruit-bearing. They are to season by their
gracious lives, as well as lighten others by their radiant doctrines. To watch,
feed, and oversee the flock of God are works of such a nature, as to the
execution of them, there is necessarily required temperance, judgment, and
sobriety. Thus to shine in the mids of a crooked and perverse nation, Phil.
2.15.
holding forth the word of life, is the undoubted duty of every Minister of the
Gospel. But now when he that teaches another, Romans 2.21.
teaches not himself, but sets a bad example before the flock, is he not
irregular? The salt that has lost his savor (our Savior tells us) is good
for nothing, 1 Pet. 5.3.
Mat. 5.13.
but to be trodden under foot of men. And no way so direct to the losing of all
savor, both of the truth in a man's own heart, and of esteem and relish with
good men; as is looseness and scandal in the conversation. I know the livid
Viper envy is still alive, and none can so converse as utterly to exempt
himself from all the darts of calumny cast by the tongues, and pens of perverse
and ungodly men: but (my brethren) let us give no occasion for these to stick,
but let our innocence blunt the edge of malice, so as the blast of our
reproachers may be but as a storm against the wall. Isa. 25.4.
But sad it is that the Ministers of Christ should lay themselves naked by
their looseness to the just retorsions of the wicked: that what they reprove in
others, as matter of blame, should be recharged upon themselves. Turpe est
doctori cum culpa redarguit.

It Is for a lamentation to see gravity in the Pulpit countercheck'd by
wantonness in the Marketplace: and the weightiness of Sermons fly away in the
lightness of behavior: and the luster of sound Doctrine blemished with the
spots of a sullied life! The affectionate expressions of the Apostle, with
tears in his eyes, to the Philippians, concerning unruly walkers, should by
such be again, and again remembered, Phil. 3.18, 19.
They are (says he) enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction,
whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame. And that sharp
correption of the holy Ghost, given to such (which sometimes happened to be
Origen's fit text, then with great trouble upon his mind) should not be
forgotten, viz. What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and
casts my words behind thee, Psalm. 50.15, 17.

Therefore, a word to you, my brethren; set a watch over your feet, as well as
over your lips. Study to show the power of godliness in your lives, as well as
the flower of eloquence in your lines. You are not without your observers: And
as there are some, who do pray for you, and would willingly, and are ready to
draw a charitable veil over your infirmities; so there are many squint eyes
upon you, that watch for your halting: Jer. 20.20.
magnifying eyes that turn motes into beams: cursed eyes of Cham's kind, which
glory in the shame of others, and are pleased most with your nakedness, as a
delightful object. Therefore do you endeavor to cut off occasion from them, 2
Cor. 11.12.
which desire occasion: that when you rebuke the unruliness and disorder that
is in others, you your selves may not be judged as transgressors.

work all uncleanness with greediness. The sins that now abound are of a
crimson color, and scarlet hue. Ephesians. 4.19.
They over-pass the deeds of the wicked. It may be said of our times, Jer. 5.28.
as it was of Judah in the days of Jeremiah, chap. 17.1. The sin of Judah is
written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond, it is graven upon
the table of their heart, and upon the horns of their altars: or as of those in
Ezekiel's days, chap. 9.9. The iniquity of the house of Israel and Juda is
exceeding great, the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness:
for they say the Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not. Do not
men live now, as if there were no law to regulate, no God to judge, no heaven
to reward, nor hell to punish? as if sin were a privilege, and wickedness their
proper work? As if our natural pravity were not enough to render us miserable,
but we must make our selves ten times more the children of wrath, by the
witting and willing choice of many great and abominable sins, and the actual
commitment of them. The enormities that now abound, notwithstanding the good
Laws of God and man, bespeak an unruly age. What age so overflowing as this of
ours, with the sins of drunkenness, swearing, uncleanness, revelling, and all
manner of debaucheries; with pride, malice, oppression, covetousness; with
envy, blasphemy, sabbath-breaking, and all sort of profanations, and contempt
of God's Ordinances? And whereas formerly sin has sought a covering, and the
works of the wicked have been in the dark: Isa. 29.15.
they that were drunken, were drunken in the night. 1 These. 5.7.
Now these hellish acts are naked, and destruction has no covering. We may
justly fear a scourge to come for these crying crimes. Jer. 5.29.
Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? What wonderful and horrible thing was
committed in the land of Israel, which is not to be found amongst us; and ours
attended with such aggravations, as the sins of Israel were not capable of?
What, are they punished, and shall we think to escape? Did the rod and
vengeance meet with Israel, Numb. 32.23.
and will not our sin find us out? The things which happened unto them (says
the Apostle) were for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition, 1
Cor. 10.11.
upon whom the ends of the world are come. I shall not take up time further to
evince how ruleless, lawless, and controlless the lives of men now are: It Is so
obvious, that there is no place for a plea, no room for excuse. It Is against all
light, all rule both of Nature and Grace, of Law and Gospel. Mat. 13.25.
Sad it is that these tares should be the fruits of that Gospel-seed, which so
long has been sown amongst us; Deuteronomy. 32.5.
that we should thus requite the Lord, for the ample expense of Grace and Love
which he has been at about us. Well may the Lord take up a grievous complaint
against us: Hosne mihi fructus? Now oh that such, whose lives are thus
repugnant to all good rule and order, would but seriously consider their
deformity, with the impendent danger; the shame to which they expose
themselves, and the dishonor they cast upon the name of God: and duly compare
their fluid sensual lusts, with the future abiding wages of sin; Romans 6 23.
and so see how transient and frothy the one is, but how remedilesly lasting
the other will be: for then as they could not but be convinced of their folly,
so surely they would not but turn their course; and with Ephraim, being thus
turned, repent; and being thus warned, smite upon the thigh: and be ashamed,
yea, Jer. 31.19.
even confounded to bear the reproach of sin upon them.

Thus I have done with the former part, viz. the Subject proposed, and therein
the detection of the unruly: the discovery of whose sin does implicitly couch a
warning in it; in as much as where sin is opened, and particularly applied,
there also the persons, whose sin it is, are put in mind of their evil, that
being warned, they may flee from it. And to that end is this discovery thus far
made.

I should now go on with the latter part, viz. the act or duty enjoined: But
the other business of this day will not seasonably allow us any more time at
present to lengthen our discourse in. Rather therefore than too far to entrench
upon your patience, and therein to retard the procedure of your further work, I
shall here choose to put a period to this task, leaving the remainder to a
following opportunity. Now to the eternal and glorious Trinity, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, be continually ascribed glory, praise, power, dominion and
thanksgiving, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

Here ends the first Sermon.
A Warning-Piece FOR THE UNRULY; The Second SERMON, PREACHED The day following,
viz. May 9th.

A Warning-Piece FOR THE UNRULY.
1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Warn them that are unruly.


THe last day (you know) we made an entrance into, and some progress in these
words, wherein there is

1. An Act enjoined. Warn.

2. The subject, or persons about which this Act is to be conversant, viz. the
unruly.

And hence was observed

That the unruly are to be warned.

We then treated about the subject or persons, who these unruly are, or who
they are, that are to be accounted so. I need not now take up time to remind
you of the particulars, and procedure of the yesterdays discourse in that
respect. And therefore having done with the inquiry into the subject or
persons, viz. Who these unruly are? We come now to the act or duty enjoined,
viz. they are to be warned.

To give warning of sin or danger, it is a charitable work and duty. God himself
does not pour out his wrath upon the wicked, but he first warns the wicked of
his way. Noah was a preacher of righteousness to the old world; 2 Pet. 2.5.
and his blows in the building of the Ark, were as so many warning-pieces
discharged to the ungodly: God had given him warning, and he as Gods messenger
gave warning to the old World. Heb. 11.7.
So did Lot to Sodom, whose righteous soul in seeing and hearing was vexed from
day to day with their unlawful deeds. 2 Pet. 2.8.
How many warnings did God by Moses give to Pharaoh, before the floodgates of
the mighty waters were opened on him? And how did the Prophets warn Israel
before their captivity came? Did not the Lord send unto them all his servants
the Prophets, daily rising up early, Jer. 7.25.
and sending them? Though they ill requited his love and kindness, For they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
till there was no remedy. And how affectionately was Jerusalem warned by our
Savior Christ before its final overthrow? He beheld the city, Luke 19.41, 42.
and wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy
day, the things which belong unto thy peace. How often would he have gathered
her children together, Luke 13.34.
as a hen does gather her brood under her wings; before their house was left
unto them desolate? The Lord gives it in special charge to the watchman of the
house of Israel, to hear the word at his mouth, Ezekiel. 33.8, 9.
and warn them from him: further telling him, that no less than his soul, and
the guilt of the sinners blood upon it lies at stake, if this duty be
neglected. If he do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man
shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood shall be required at the watchmans
hand. Nevertheless if he warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do
not turn from his way, yet the Watchman has delivered his own soul.

Thus we see to give warning to the unruly has been Gods usual way; and here
it is our commanded duty. Warn them that are unruly.

Now we are to enquire, how the unruly are to be warned? And here we are to
consider, that warning is to be given not only generally in the public
Ministry of the Word; where sin and sinners are to be reproved; and particular
sins, and sinners also are to be spoken to: though nominally we are not to
single out the persons. But more particularly where the irregularities of
individuals (known to us) do appear, there a more special, express, and
personal warning is required.

done, privately, seasonably, thoroughly, affectionately, in meekness, and
without partiality.

First, privately, a word whispered in the ear may so affect the heart, as
graciously to lead it captive: whereas a more open warning, which may expose to
public shame, by rendering notorious, what before was hidden, or conceived to
be so, does sometimes harden the heart, and cause the sinner stubbornly to
start aside. Therefore it is wisdom that our first addresses in warning the
unruly of his way be, in a friendly manner, private. This is the counsel of our
Lord Christ, and the rule which he has left in such cases unto his Church: If
thy brother (says he) shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone. Matthew. 18.15.
Do it privately, make not others privy to, and partners with thy discourse in
this respect* Though the sin be notorious, and known abroad, yet the
transgressor may not know of its notoriety, and suspects nothing less than that
it is made public. He may think that it is hidden from the eye of the World,
as't was from the light of the day in the commission of it: or as it veiled at
least from his own apprehension (for so does the deceitfulness of sin blindfold
the sinner.) Now if the first address for warning have attendant witnesses, the
transgressor (being thus accosted) will look upon it as a sudden onset; and
will be so far from giving entertainment to you as his friends, that he will
suspect you as secret enemies combined to pick advantage; or at least as
publishers of his shame; and so (turning away from you) become more hardened in
his sin. Therefore, says our Lord Christ, tell him his fault between thee and
him alone. Do this office of love to thy brother, when thou and he shall be
alone. Such Private monitions may sink deep into the heart, and become matter
of serious meditation: which if he shall so hear thee, will be the gaining of
thy brother.

Secondly, Seasonably; opportunity is the wing of action. That work which goes
slowly forward at other times, in an opportune season goes freely on: and those
Essays which prove abortive, being unseasonably begun, will issue to a good
effect upon a fit occasion. We are to wait the opportunity, and to take it by
the forelock too, if we design the good success of our endeavors. In observing
the opportunity, there will be a serving the Lord. (...) will be (...). Romans
12.11. Prove. 25.11.
A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, says the
wise man: Now the fitness of speaking does not only lie (as Cartwright well
observes) in the truth and goodness of the matter, or in the adequate adaption
of the expression to the conception; but in the choice of a proper season too,
to utter our conceptions in: which is prudently to be gathered from
circumstantial considerations of time and place, together with a due poise of
the matter that is before us, and the persons with whom we have to do, their
present state and temper. Sententia tum in se vera, concinna, and bona;
Cartwright in loc.
tum observatis locorum, temporum, and personarum circumstantiis prolata. Now
when there is an opportune occurrence of these things then to speak it is a fit
time and season. Verbum dictum super rotis suis. Piscator. Ar. Mont. Mercer.
A word so spoken is upon its wheels, and succeed freely, and without
obstruction toward the accomplishment of that, for which it is intended: for
so by some that place of the wise man has been rendered. Thus to time a word is
to put it upon its wheels. Sermoni eleganter tribuuntur rotae super quas
circumvolvitur: quando scilicet diligenter quis moderatur sermonem aurigae
more, and temperat observatis debitis circumstantiis.
Though all truths still carry their glory with them, and we are to be instant
about them in season, and out of season: yet there is a double glory upon
truths, when they are seasonably delivered. And so to warn the sinner from the
error of his way; though it is at all times good: yet in a fit season it is most
effectual. Now a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccles.
8.5.

Thirdly, Thoroughly, the word (...) notes such a manner of monition, as
whereby the duty enjoined, or thing spoken about is pressed home, and put (as't
were) into the mind. A formal perfunctory admonition, as for the most part it is
vain and fruitless, so it falls short of the duty, that is here enjoined. Old
Eli warned his sons of their miscarriages, and told them, that he heard of
their evil dealing by all the people, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.
and that they made the Lords people to transgress: and that their sins being
more immediately against the Lord, there was none to entreat for them. Thus far
'twas well in Eli; and what he said was right: but the warning was not thorough
and home, and improved to the uttermost. There was too much of a cockering
indulgence in it, evidenced in those soft words, Nay, my sons: which argue
either fatherly affection to a sinful excess: or else are the note of a slavish
fear: for his children were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord, and
therefore probably had no honorable respect for their Father, more than for
any other man, if they were provoked. However this soft superficial warning is
charged upon Eli as a grievous sin, and therein, as he is said, to honor his
sons above God; 1 Samuel 3.13, 14.
so for this his house is threatened to be judged for ever; and that the
iniquity thereof shall not be purged away (a sad warning for all Parents, that
love their children more than they hate their sin.) Warning that it may be
effectual, it must be thoroughly given and pressed home. You may remember how
Nathan came to David: the parable seemed to be at a great distance, (a proper
way of address to a personage of that grandeur) and David stood and heard it,
as an unconcerned man all the while, any further than only to pass a righteous
judgment: yet when the speech was opened, how closely comes it home, it
reaches the very heart of David. 2 Samuel 12.7.
That close Application, thou art the man, leaves no way to escape, but so
blocks up all subterfuges, that it draws out, from David, an ingenuous
confession and acknowledgement of his sin. And david said unto Nathan, I have
sinned against the Lord. How thoroughly home was the return of Elijah unto
Ahabs rash and injurious charge? telling him, 1 King. 18.18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house. So closely in like
manner did the man of the sons of the Prophets come up to him, (though under a
disguise) and charged his fault upon him in letting Benhadad escape: 1 King.
20.40.
So as he passed judgment upon himself, in his decision of the parable. And
the like did Elijah, 1 King. 21.27.
pressing his guilt and judgment so far home, as forced him into a course of
humiliation: he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and
fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. Slight superficial warnings are
but of small avail with an unruly temper; they return without effect. And
therefore in giving warning do it thoroughly, so as it may take impression upon
the heart, and draw out the consideration to it. The Preacher tells us, that
the words of the wise are as goads, and nails fastened by the masters of
assemblies, Eccles. 12.11.

Fourthly, Affectionately; The unruly are affectionately to be warned. As love
will hide a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8.
under the candidness of its nature, in passing by what is done amiss, and
clothing actions with the best construction; so it will hide a multitude of
sins by the energie of its working, in turning sinners from the error of their
ways: In both regards (...). Jam. 5.20.
When reproofs are imbittered with self and passion (though for the matter they
be true, and 'twere wisdom to accept them, yet) we frequently see such reproofs
prove ineffectual, and are with regret retorted upon the giver. Nay, sometimes
those that are given in love find but slender entertainment; Exodus 2.13.
as in Moses his warning the Hebrew, who wronged his fellow: much less shall
such be kindly accepted, wherein the pride, passion, or envy of the giver shall
appear. Therefore it should be our care, if we intend our giving warning to be
effectual, therein to show the reality of our affection, and to evidence the
truth, and simplicity of our love. Let it appear that what you say is out of
love to the transgressors soul, to recover him out of Sathan's snare: that it is
because you desire his present and eternal good that you so entreat him: that
your own concern is not so much therein, but it is his own interest (the
promotion whereof you desire, as your own) that is imbarqued. Endeavor to make
it evident, that you pray for, desire, and seek his good. The Apostle charged
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8, 11,
as a father does his children: and was affectionately desirous of them. He
traveled in birth again for the Galatians until Christ was formed in them. Gal.
4.19.
Do you show the like tenderness of affection in your addresses for the
recovery of transgressors. This is the most probable way to win them. St. Paul
reminds the Elders of the Church of Ephesus of his former course with them,
while he was amongst them; that by the space of three years, Act. 20.31.
he ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. His warnings were
affectionate, and therefore in all probability the more effectual. He warned
those that stood, to take heed of staggering; those that staggered, to beware
of falling; the fallen he warned against disobedience; and the disobedient of
their danger: and all this from deep affection: that he might confirm those
that stood, strengthen those that staggered, recover the fallen, and reclaim
the disobedient. And the like Precept, according to his own pattern, he gives
us, in reference to the management of our admonitions toward the unruly; not
to deal with him as an enemy, from whom our affections may be twined: but to
admonish him as a brother, toward whom our affection is intended. 2 Thessalonians.
3.15.
(...), where we have not only, the self-same word used with this in the Text;
but the modus utendi also given us, viz. as a brother: Arguing an endearedness
of affection to be expressed in such admonitions.

Fifthly, It is to be done in meekness. Reproofs given in a spirit of meekness
will incline the ear, and be as an excellent oil, Psalm. 141.5.
which shall not break the head. These will sink down into the heart, and lodge
there: when warnings given in wrath, or heat of passion will recoil, finding no
room of acceptance. The wise man tells us, that a soft tongue breaks the
bone. Prove. 25.15.
Oration mollis, etc. as Mercer. Placidum responsum, ubi omnis abest asperitas,
convictum, cavillum, etc. Ge^^rus.
A quiet and meek speech will pierce a stony heart. The flint is easily broken
on a soft pillow, and the parts kept together: which will not abide a blow,
when lying on a harder substance, but flies away, and the parts are scattered.
A bony hardness will yield to a soft tongue, when as grievous words do but stir
up anger. Prove. 15.1.
St. James tells us, that it is a great part of spiritual wisdom, even that
which is from above, to show out of a good conversation our works with
meekness: Jam. 3.13, 14, 15.
joining peaceableness with purity; and a gentle frame with a pious
disposition: and that not only in accepting the word of exhortation, as being
easy to be entreated; but in the giving of it too, as being void of bitter
envying, and strife in our hearts. If a man be overtaken in a fault, he is to
be restored in the spirit of meekness: Gal. 6.1.
Your addresses for his recovery are not to be rough and tart, for this instead
of joynting may break the bone; but they are to be sweet and gentle, and thus
you may put him in joint again. So the Apostle St. Paul hints it in that
expression (...), Gal. 6.1. And showing the qualifications, and duty of
teachers in reference to the unruly, and those that oppose themselves; his
direction is express, that in meekness they are to instruct those that oppose
themselves; 2 Timothy 2.24.
as if meekness fitted instruction for its end: and that the servant of the
Lord must be gentle unto all men, apt to teach; as if the main part of an
aptitude to teach did lie in a gentle frame of spirit, and this is to be shown
to all men, whether friends or others; relations, or those at a further
distance; all are gently to be treated. Such is the excellency of a meek and
quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4.
that it is not only an ornament to those that have it, and in the sight of God
of great price: but beneficial to opposers who are treated with it, as a means
by which God gives them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 2. Tim.
2.24, 25.

Sixthly, Without partiality. Warning is inpartially to be given, none are to
be spared. It was Levi's signal commendation in the blessing wherewith Moses
blessed him before his death, Deuteronomy. 33.9. that his zeal was such, and so
sincere for God, that in the cause of God, he made no difference between
strangers, and the nearest of his relations. Who said unto his father, and to
his mother, I have not seen him, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
neither did he acknowledge his brethren, Referunt hoc ad factum illud
Levitarum, Exodus 32. Ibi dixit Moses, [occidite quisque fratrem suum] Et
Levitae reos quosque citra personarum del^ctum, interfecerunt. Menoch. Oleaster
in loc.
nor knew his own children. Herein probably alluding to that zeal, which Levi
showed, in that holy and impartial revenge, they took for God, upon the guilty:
Exodus 32.27. For so diverse gloss upon it. Now that which is the chief part of
Levi's praise is his impartiality. And as this is excellent in the execution of
justice (which if 'twere otherwise, 'twould be unjust:) so in our giving
warning of those evils, against which vindictive justice has threatened to go
out, to be impartial, has both its proper praise and benefit. We are not to
rebuke for some sins only, and let others go scot-free; to meet with greater,
and give a pardon of course for less: as if all sin were not against a great
and infinite God, and the breach of a most just and holy Law. It Is true, gross
enormities, being of greater scandal, are more prejudicial to Church and State:
and it is as true that lesser evils are running down the channel toward that
black Ocean, and therefore are to be stopped in the beginning; for otherwise,
if indulged, they will prove of as bad a consequence in the issue: in as much
as all sin, yea the least, aims at the highest in its kind.

And for persons in our giving warning none are to be spared. In this respect
we are to know no man after the flesh. 2 Cor. 5.16.
The wisdom that is from above, the Apostle tells us, is without partiality.
Jam. 3.17.
To warn the poor and spare the rich: speak home to our enemy, and connive at
our friend: to look narrowly upon strangers, and pass by relations: as it would
bespeak us (unlike God) respecters of persons; Act. 10.34.
1 Pet. 1.
so it would make us become sharers in their sin. The grandeur of the person is
so far from lessening his offense, that it is a grand aggravation of it, and
makes his sin the more sinful, because a spreading evil, and therefore he is to
be warned. The great man upon whom our present dependence is, and 'tmay be,
some future hopes too, he is not to be indulged in his evil way; but the nearer
we are to him, the more home we are to treat him; and it is our Christian
prudence, as well as duty, to improve the advantage of our intimacy with him,
to estrange him from his sin: otherwise the present dependence holds but by a
band of wickedness, and the future hopes will fail. Thus neither fear nor
favor; friendship nor alliance; present advantage nor future hopes should be
any block in the way to hinder the impartial discharge of this duty, here given
in charge, viz. the warning the unruly. And this is the first part of the duty,
as more particularly enjoined.

admonition be rejected, and persons persist in their unruliness, what then is
to be done? Answ. Then they are sharply to be rebuked; Judicabit spiritualis
and eos qui Schisma operantur, qui propter modicas and quaslibet causas, magnum
and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt, and dividunt, vere liquantes culicem,
and camelum diglutientes. Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 62.
and more openly to be dealt withal. If thy brother trespass against thee
(says our Savior) first go, and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, Mat. 18.16.
thou have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then nextly take
with thee one or two more, and go unto him. And here thou may deal more
sharply with him; and thy rebukes are to be enforced with greater weight, as
witnessed and established. Here he is to be told that he adds sin to sin, Job
34.37.
even rebellion unto his sin: and that rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft;
and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. 1 Samuel 15.23.
Tell him that he that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief: Prove.
28.14. and 29.1.
and who so stiffneth his neck against reproof, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. If soft words will not break the bone, let the terror
of the Lord affright him: and as knowing the terror of the Lord do you
persuade men. 2 Cor. 5.11.
Such are to be dealt with in all speed and earnestness, as being upon the
brink of deadly ruin, and upon whom the flames of the everlasting burnings
seem ready to take hold: and therefore they are to be saved with fear, pulling
them out of the fire. Here the danger and dreadful effects of sin are to be
discoursed, Jude 23.
and applied home to them. And it is to be pressed upon their thoughts, how sin
through its deceitfulness will harden the heart; and sear the conscience; Heb.
3.13.
and deliver over unto a reprobate mind. 1 Timothy 4.2.
And they are to be told, Romans 1.28.
that they are even upon the borders of such a wretched condition, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and ready to fall into the devils snare, to be led captive by him at his will.
Tit. 1.13.
Thus according to the rule St. Paul gives to Titus, they are sharply to be
rebuked. (...), was the rule for such to Titus. Our reproofs in this case they
are to be (as Beza hints it) cutting, so as to divide between their hearts and
lusts, and to cure their souls by cutting off their sin. The Authoriy and
Majesty of the Word of Christ as Divine is here to be showed, and therefore
they are to be rebuked (...), as St. Paul directs. Tit. 2.16.
And because this second address is more sharp, and to be more solemn than the
first, and in that it will issue to the discovery of a more broken, or
otherwise refractary frame of spirit; therefore the rule of our Savior is,
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word may be established, Mat. 18.16.

warning be withstood, and the offenders brow be brazed against it, what then
is to be done? Answ. Our Savior gives the rule (...), tell it to the Church,
Mat. 18.17. Let the Church be acquainted that there is an unruly member that
will take no warning, neither be reclaimed from his unruliness: that private
monitions have been given, and means used, with the concurrent witness and
attestation of friends and brethren for the orderly reduction of such a person,
but all has proved ineffectual, and to no purpose: and therefore the way now is
to try what the solemn admonition of the Church in this respect can do. He that
will sleep out the friendly advice of one single brother, or more coming to
him, will perhaps awake and rouse up himself under the Churches admonition. The
Authority of the Church and power by Christ committed to it, will spirit with
energy the admonition, and strike an awe into the offenders heart. Surely, if
there be left in him any sparks of reverence toward God, regard of man, or
respect to his own soul, when the Churches warning is given, his ear will open,
his heart will break, and godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10.
which works repentance to salvation not to be repented of, will ensue and
follow.

warning prove ineffectual, Isa. 48.4.
and the neck of the unruly through obstinacy become an iron sinew, what is then
to be done to such contumacious persons? Aversandus est talis atque fugiendus
quisquis fuerit ab Ecclesia separatus. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
Answ. Such, as putrid gangrened members, are to be cut off. We say --
immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est.
They are to be separated from the Communion of Gods people, and from the
enjoyment of his Ordinances. And as not fit to be reckoned within, they are to
be cast out of the Church of God; accounted unworthy the society of the
Faithful. This is the Rule given by our Savior in such a case, Tell it (says
he) to the Church: Mat 18.17.
but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man,
and a Publican. Hence the rule left by the Apostle St. Paul is, to reject an
heretic after the first and second admonition; Tit. 3 10.
and to withdraw from him that walks disorderly: 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
and to note that man that obeys not the word of Christ, and to have no company
with him. Now all this is but to warn such unruly ones, and thereby to prevent
their eternal ruin. They are cast out of the Church, to shame them out of
themselves; and cut off from the Communion of the Faithful, to break their
fellowship with their sin: 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
note that man (says the Apostle) and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. So that the highest of Church censures is but a warning-sentence, the
great design whereof is to do the person good, by taking away his evil: and so
to save the soul, by killing of its sin. The Apostle gives it fully in a few
words, saying, that such a one is delivered to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5.

Now all these are but as so many several ways of warning in order to the
performance of that duty which is incumbent on us in reference to the unruly.
And thus I have done with the latter part, viz. the duty enjoined, and the
manner of the performance of it.

Now for a close, in a word; My Brethren, hence we see what our duty is as
touching the warning of the unruly: in the faithful discharge whereof we either
save a soul from death, or leave the blood of the wicked upon his own head: 2
Ezekiel. 33.4, 8, 9.
however we deliver our own souls. But if there be a remissness or neglect on
our parts in the due performance of what is here enjoined, the wicked man may
dye in his iniquity, but his blood will be required at our hand. The sacrifice
that the Priest was to offer under the Law was (you know) greater than that of
the Kings, yea, as great as that of the whole congregation, for all their sins:
to show not only the horrible aggravation of their sins as Ministers: but the
great charge that was rolled upon them in reference to the defaults of others,
which by several ways might become their own. And this was it made Chrysostom
on Heb. 13.17. wonder how any in that office could be saved: but that which
seems impossible with man, is possible with God.

Now if there be any persons here of what Calling or Rank soever, upon whom the
former charge of unruliness does in any wise take hold, and whose consciences
bring home the guilt thereof upon themselves: Let my exhortation (I pray) be
accepted with them. That they would but consider the excellency of the Churches
peace and order, with the interest and welfare of the Nation; and how much a
lawless, ruleless, disorderly, selfish frame, and course is adverse to both:
That what Christ has established and ordered in his Church ( viz. peace and
unity) they by such irregular practices are endeavoring to subvert and
overthrow. Let such now say, Job 34.32.
If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Let them show themselves men, by
subjecting all selfish humors to the dictates of that more high and noble
principle of an enlightened judgment; and no longer hold the truth in
unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.
Oh that Zions interest were engraven upon their hearts, and the means for the
right pursuance of that interest were understood, and in their eyes. Let all
such now come out of the confused night-walks of their own fancies, into the
clear light and liberty of the day: and no longer put darkness for light, Isa.
5.20.
and light for darkness: and let this be freely done from a Principle of
Christian ingenuity too. Hear the counsel of the Psalmist, Be ye not as the
horse, Psalm. 32.9.
or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with
bit and bridle. Let the fredom of an ingenuous spirit from humble Christian
Principles so actuate your souls, as preventingly to suspend the execution of
all coercive power. Remember this and show your selves men: bring it again to
mind, Isa. 46.8.
O ye transgressors. And besides the evil consequences of a ruleless temper as
issuing to your selves; let the consideration of the great prejudices done
thereby to the Church, and the advantage thence given to the common adversary,
either to turn Atheist, or to persist in his false opinion, be as so many spurs
to quicken your thoughts to a due debate about your way. The Churches unity
should be no less dear unto us than its peace and order; now unruliness strikes
at both: and if these be disturbed or broken, though its verity will still
remain (for the Church of the living God is the pillar and ground of truth) yet
the luster thereof of will be exceedingly sullied and defaced: 1 Timothy 3.15.
and so truth comes to be a sufferer through your breach of order. Oh, that
those who are unwilling to come as yet within the Churches rule, would but
thoroughly consider of these things. We ought to endeavor to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace: Ephesians. 4.3.
but while one is of Paul, another of Apollo, 1 Cor. 1.12. and 2.4.
another of Cephas, what peace or order can there be expected? And if peace be
once shaken, unity will not be lasting. St. Austin has long since expressed his
thoughts concerning those, who prize not the Churches unity; Non habent Dei
charitatem (says he) qui Ecclesiae non diligunt unitatem. Aug. de Bapt. lib.
3. cap. 16.
Therefore in a word, as you tender the Churches peace and unity, which is
exceedingly influential to your own, and the happiness of a Nation, let me
prevail with you to accept the word of exhortation given: and submit your
selves to the good Rule, wholesome Laws, and decent order of the Church
established. For certainly next to truth of Doctrine, purity of worship, and
holiness of life, there is nothing more necessary for the promotion of Gods
honor, and men's salvation, for preventing all Atheistical prejudices against
Religion, and departures to a common Adversary, for strengthening the interests
of all both governors and governed in the Church, than the unity and order
thereof is. Which that all good Christians may have it upon their hearts to
pursue, should and ought to be the prayer of us all. Now unto him that is able
to establish us in the faith, and to keep us from falling, and to present us
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: to the only wise
God our Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and power now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by William Cademan.
CLarks Examples two Vol. fol. The Protestant Religion is a sure foundation, by
Charles Earl of Derby, Lord of Man and the Isles. Sandys Travels, fol. Sherleys
Philosophical Essay, 80 Gulielmi Ferrarii de Bello Batavico, 80 Dr. Cozens
Devotions, 120 Westminster Quibles 120
PLAYS.
RIvals. Cambyses, King of Persia. Island Princess. Town Shifts. Juliana.
Flora's Vagaries. Marcellia. Dumb Lady. Rehearsal. Imperial. Citizen turned
Gentleman. Catalins Conspiracy. Fatal Jealousy. Morning Ramble, etc.
FINIS.

