THE COMPLETE Ship-Wright.

Plainly and Demonstratively Teaching the Proportions used by Experienced
Ship-Wrights, according to their Custom of Building; both Geometrically and
Arithmetically performed.

To which is added, Certain Propositions in Geometry, the use of a Diagonall
SCALE, to draw a Draught, with the Making, Graduating, or Marking of a Bend of
Moulds, and ordering of the same. The Extraction of the Square Root, with a
Table of Squares.

Also, a way of Rowing of Ships, by heaving at the Capstane, useful in any
Ship becalmed; with other things useful in that ART.

By EDMUND BUSHNELL Ship-Wright.

LONDON, Printed by W. Leybourn for George Hurlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Magnus Church corner in Thames Street, near London Bridge, 1664.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
THe Matter contained in this Treatise, is written only for the good and
profit of my Countrymen, who are still in that capacity that once I my self
was; that is, ignorant of what they should know in their Trades, and desire
Instruction; not that I presume to teach those long experienced Ship-Wrights,
whose actions has declared their Abilities to the whole World, in their
Building of so Gallant, and Serviceable a Fleet of Ships, as at present his
Majesty, the King of England, is furnished withal, no King having the like,
either for Offense, or Defense: yet their knowledge they desire to keep to
themselves, or at least among so small a number as they can; for although some
of them have many Servants, and by Indenture (I suppose) bound to Teach them
all alike the same Art and Mystery that he himself uses; Yet it may be he may
Teach some one, and the rest must be kept ignorant, so that those Ship Wrights,
although bred by such knowing Men, yet they are able to teach their Servants
nothing, more then to Hew, or Dub, to Fay a Piece when it is Molded to his
place assigned, or the like: but if occasion require, that the greatest part of
these Men, by being Carpenters of Ships, or the like, may be removed from
England to Virginia, or New England, or the like Countries, where Timber is
plenty for their use, yet through their ignorance, they durst not undertake
such a Work: For their sakes I have written this Book, wherein the Reader shall
find instructions sufficient for Moulding of any Ship, or Vessel whatever,
with the Masting of them, drawing of Draughts, and all in a very plain and
exact Method, which I am confident will be understood by the meanest
capacities, if they can but read English, and have the benefit of a little
Arithmetic as Adition, Substraction, Multiplication, Division: be diligent,
and I shall be thereby encouraged, if need be, to help thee farther in the Art.

Farewell, Thy Friend, Edmund Bushnell.

THE CONTENTS.
Chapter I. OF Geometrical Problemes Page 1 Chapter II Of your SCALE Page 4 Chapter III
Concerning the drawing your Draught upon Paper Page 6 Chapter IV. Showing, how to
sweep out the Bend of Moulds upon a Flat Page 9 Chapter V. The Description of the
Rising Lines aftward on, and forward on; with the Narrowing Lines, and Lines of
Breadth: As also the Narrowing of Lines at the top of the Timbers Page 12 Chapter
VI. Showing the Making and graduating, or marking of the Bend of Molds Page 15
Chapter VII. Arithmetically showing how to frame the body of a Ship by Segments of
Circles: being a true way to examine the truth of a Bow Page 22 Chapter VIII. How
to Extract the Square Rooot Page 31 Chapter IX. A Description of the Table of
Squares Page 39 Chapter X. Showing, how to hang a rising line by several sweeps,
to make it rounder aftward, then at the beginning of of the same Page 53 Chapter
XI. Concerning Measuring of Ships Page 59 Chapter XII. Concerning the Masts of
Ships Page 62 Chapter XIII. Concerning Rowing of Ships, when they are becalmed.
Page 65
Advertisement.
IF any Gentleman, studious in the Mathematics, have, or shall have occasion
for Instruments thereunto belonging, they may be furnished with all sorts,
useful both for Sea or Land, either in Brass, or Wood, by Walter Hayes, at the
Cross-Daggers in Moore-Fields, next door to the Pope's Head Tavern; where they
may have all sorts of Maps, Globes, and Mathematical Paper, Carpenters Rules,
Post and Pocket-Dyalls for any Latitude, Steel Letters, Figures, Signs,
Planets, or Aspects, at reasonable Rates.

ERRATA.
PAge 7, Line 9, Read Halses 8 16 come not fowl 8 21 faied 11 2 at f or G 12 23
before 13 2 before 13 19 aftward 14 15 L o 14 28 ^/^ 15 25 dele off 16 7 Sirmarks
18 ^ none, that 18 11 at the top 19 2 stick 20 29 you h^w to 22 5 make a 23 3
and 5 3/5 54 16 12 foot 57 1 two last numbers.

Books Printed and Sold by George Hurlock, at Magnus Church-Corner in
Thames Street, near London Bridge.
SEamans Calendar, or Ephimerides of the Sun, Moon, and certain of the most
notable fixed Stars, etc.

Norwoods Doctrine of Triangles, with Logarithmes, lately printed, exactly
corrected, and much enlarged by the Author himself. Norwoods Epitomy, applied
to plain and Mercators sailing Norwoods Sea man's Practice, containing a
Fundamental Problem in Navigation, experimentally verified. Safeguard of
Saylors, or Great Rutter, by To. Norman. Sea man's secrets. A Table of Gauging
all manner of Vessels, by Jo. Goodwin. Pathway to perfect sailing, by Richard
Poltar* Pitiscus his Doctrine of Triangles, with Canons. Navigator by Cap.
Charles Saltonstal, newly printed, with additions, showing the Deceipts of the
plain Charts used in our time, and a way to prove the projection of any Plain
Chart. Dary's description and use of a Universal Quadrant. Seamans Dictionary,
or the Exposition and Demonstration of all the parts and things belonging to a
ship* together with an Explanation of all the Terms and Phrases used in the
practique part of Navigation, by Sir Henry Manwarring.

Exact Tables of Natural and Artificial Sincs, Tangents, Secants and
Logarithms, and an Institution Mathematical, containing their constructions
and use in the solution of all Triangles Plain and Spherical, and the
application thereof in Astronomy, Dialling, and Navigation.

Seamans Glass, now newly published, with the addition of many propositions in
Navigation, Astronomy, and Dialling, not before printed.

The Complete Canoneer, showing the principles and grounds of the Art of
Gunnery, as also several Fireworks for Sea and Land.

The Advancement of the Art of Navigation, or Sea-mans Canon of Triangles,
showing by a new Canon of Sines, Tangents, and Secants, how to resolve all
Cases of right lined Triangles, only by looking into the Tables, without any
Calculation. Particularly applied to all the three kinds of Sailing, viz. by
the Plain Chart, Mercators Chart, by a Great Circle; and to the Art of
Surveying.

Trigonometria Brittannica, or the Doctrine of Triangles, in folio, exhibiting
the Logarithms of all numbers, from one to a hundred thousand, and the Sines
and Tangents to the hundred part of a Degree, with Mr. Gellibrands Doctrine of
Triangles, faithfully translated from the Latin Copy.

The Sector on a Quadrant, containing the Description and use of three general
Quadrants, accommodated for the ready finding the Hour and Azimuth universally
in the equal Limb.

The Complete Modellist, showing how to raise the Model of any Ship or Vessel,
either in proportion, or out of proportion* and to find the length and bigo^ss
of every Rope, in all Vessels exactly, with the weight of their Anchors and
Cables.

There is a new Book* called the Pilots Sea-Mirror, which is a Compendium of
the largest Wagoner, or the lightning Sea-Collumbe; Containing all Distances or
thwart Courses of the Eastern, Northern, and Western Navigations, with a
general Tide Table, for every day, and the Change and Full of the Moon exactly
for eight years, also Courses and Distances throughout the Straights. Printed
for George Hurlock, at Magnus Church Corner, by London Bridge.

The Saints Anchor-hold in all storms and Tempests, Published for the support
and comfort of Gods people in all times of Trial, by John Davenport Pastor of
the Church in New Haven in New-Ingland.

There will shortly be made public a Book, Entitled, The Mariners Compass
Rectifled, containing, First, a Table showing the hour of the day, the Sun
being upon any point of the Compass. Secondly, Tables of the Suns rising and
setting. Thirdly, Tables showing the points of the Compass, that the Sun and
Stars rise and set with. Fourthly, Tables of Amplitudes; all which Tables are
Calculated from the Equinoctial, to 60 degrees of Latitude, with Tables of
Latitudes and Longitudes, after a new order, with the description and use of
all those Instruments that are in use in the Art of Navigation, either for
Operation or Observation.

THE COMPLETE Ship-wright.
CHAP. 1. Of Geometrical Problemes.
BEfore we proceed to draw the Draught of any Ship or Vessel, it will be
necessary to be acquainted with some terms in Geometry: as to know what a Point
and a Line means, which every Book treating of Geometry plainly teaches, and
therefore we shall pass that by, supposing that none will endeavor to study
the Art of a Ship-wright, that is ignorant of these things; and therefore
leaving these Definitions, I will proceed to some Geometrical Problemes
necessary to this Art.

PROB. 1. How to draw a Parallel Line.
PArallel lines are such lines as are equidistant one from another in all
parts, and are thus drawn. Draw a line of what length you please, (according to
your occasion) as the line A B, then open the compasses to what distance you
pleas, or as your occasions require, and set one foot of the compasses* toward
one end of the given line, as at A, with the other foot make a piece of an arch
of a circle, over or under the given line, as the arch C, keeping the compasses
then at the same distance, make such another arch toward the other end of the
line, setting one foot in B, and with the other describe the arch D, then
laying a Ruler to the outside of these two arches, so that it may exactly touch
them, draw the line C D, which will be parallel to the given line A B, or
equidistant, for so signifies the word Parallel, to be of equal distance.



PROBL. 2. How to erect a Perpendicular, from a point in a right line given.
LEt there be a point given in the line A B, as the point C, whereon to raise a
perpendicular.

Set one foot of the compasses in the given point C, and open them to what
distance you please, as to the point E, make a little mark at E, and keeping
the compasses at the same distance, turn them about, and make a mark at the
point F, in the line A B: Then remove the compasses to one of those marks at E
or F, and seting one foot fast therein, as at the point F, open the other foot
wider, and therewith draw a small arch over the point C, as the arch D, then
keeping the compasses at the same distance, remove them to E, and seting one
foot in E, with the other foot draw another little arch, so as to cross the
former arch in the point D, through the crossing of these two arches A D, draw
a line to the given point C, as the line D C, which shall be perpendicular to
the line A B.

Diverse other ways there are to raise a perpendicular, which I shall leave to
the farther practice of such as desire diversity of ways, and proceed to the
raising of a Perpendicular on the end of a line.



PROBL. 3. To raise a Perpendicular on the end of a line.
DRaw a line at pleasure, or according to your work, as the line A B: On the
end thereof as at B, set one foot of the Compasses, and open them to what
wideness you please, as to C, and keeping fast one foot at B, pitch one foot
by adventure in C, then keeping one foot of the compasses in C, and at the same
distance, remove the foot that was in B, to the point D in the line A B: then
(keeping the compasses still at the same distance) lay a ruler to the points D
and

C, and with your compasses set off the distance from C to E: Lastly, draw the
line E B, which will be perpendicular or square to the end of the given line A
B.

There are other ways to effect this, which I shall leave to farther practice
of the learner, this being the properest for our purpose.

PROB. 4. From a Point given, to let fall a Perpendicular upon a Line given.
FRom the point C, let it be required to let fall a perpendicular upon the line
A B, proceed thus: Fix one foot of the compasses in the point C, and open them
to a greater distance then just to the line A B, and make with the same extent
the two marks E and F, in the given line A B, then divide the distance between
the two points E and F into two equal parts in the point D, then lay a Ruler
to the given point C, and to the point D, and draw the line C D, which will be
perpendicular to the given line A B.



CHAP. II. Of your SCALE.
BEing perfect in the raising and letting fall of perpendiculars, and in the
drawing of Parallel lines, you may proceed to draught: but first I will unfold
unto you the use of a Diagonall Scale of Inches and Feet, whose use is to
represent a foot measure, or a Rule so small, that a Ship of 100 foot by the
Keel, may be demonstrated on a common sheet of paper, really and truly to be so
many foot long, and so many foot broad, of such a depth, and of such a height
between the Decks. And therein, the first thing to be considered is, the length
of the platform, and of the Vessel you intend to demonstrate, to the end you
may make your Scale as large as you can, because the larger the Scale is, the
larger will the draught be, and so the measure of the demonstration will be the
larger, and more easy to unfold. The Scale adjoining consists (as you see)
of 12 feet in all, 11 thereof are marked with figures downwards, beginning at
1, 2, 3, 4 and so to 11: the first at the top is sub-divided into inches by
diagonal lines, as the distance between the first line of the Scale and the
first diagonal line is one inch, the second is 2, and the third 3 inches, and
so to Six. The way to demonstrate the Scale, you see, is very easy: Draw Seven
lines parallel to each other, and of what length you please, to retain what
number of Feet you please, then beginning at the top, set off with the
compasses the length of your Feet both allow and aloft, then draw lines thwart
the parallel lines, to every foot of the Scale, and set numbers to them,
beginning at the second foot 1, and to the third 2, to the fourth 3, and so
forward, leaving the first Foot to be divided into Inches by the Diagonall
lines, as you see in the foregoing Scale.

CHAP. III. Concerning the drawing your Draught upon Paper.
HAving fitted your Scale ready, draw a line to represent the Keele of the
Ship, as you see in the draught following of 60 foot long by the Keele, and 20
foot broad: the straight line that represents the Keele is marked with A B.
Then draw a line underneath of equal length to signify the bottom of the
Keele. Then next you may proceed to the Stern-post, as the line A C will
signify the foreside or the inside thereof, racking the one quarter of his
length aft, and for the length of the Stern-post it must be directed to the
built of the Ship, as whether she be to be a deep Ship or a shallow Ship, so
that the draught of the water ought to be respected first, and then the lying
of the Ports for the convenience of Ordnance, for that the upper transome of
the Buttock, commonly is just under the Gun-Room ports, to the upper edge of
the said transome we understand the length of the Stern-post, although if the
Stern-post were continued to the height of the Tiller, and another Transome
fard there for the Tiller to run on, it would steady the quarters of the Vessel
very much, and do good service.

The Stern-post being drawn, we may proceed to draw the Stem, which in the
following Draught is not so much racked as was the old proportion of England,
which was the whole breadth of the Ship, for then it should be 20 foot, but it
is no more then 15 foot, just of the breadth, for too much rack with the Stem
does a great deal of damage to any Ship, if we consider that in this small
Vessel, had we given 5 foot more Rack, all the weight of the Ships Head, and
Boltspreet, Foremast, Manger, Halsps, Brest-hooks aloft, had been so much
farther forward, where there would have been want of Body to lift it, so that
it must of necessity be detriment to the Vessel when she saileth against a head
sea, and a great strain to her. Now it will be very good to spend as much of
this rack as we can under the water, for it will help the Ship to keep a good
Wind, by giving her something more Body in the water.

Next draw the Water-line, in the following draught signified by the pricked
line; it is drawn to 9 foot height before, and to 10 foot height abaft from the
upper edge of the Keele, and higher abaft then before, for the most Ships sail
by the Stern, and also for that the Guns should lie something higher abaft
then before from the water.

Then proceed to hanging of the Waals, and here you see the lower Waalle drawn
from the head of the Sterne-post, to signify that it should lie against the
end of the Transome, that the Transome Knees might be bolted to the Waals
without board to one foot and an half under the Waterline, a little before the
middle of the Water line, and at 9 foot high on the Stem, and the next Waale
parallel to the lower Waale, one foot and an half asunder, so that the upper
Waale will lie just at the waters edge, in the mid-ships, the upper edge of the
Gun-deck will lie one foot aboye the water line abaft, and half a foot above
water on the Stem; so then letting the lower sell of the Ports be two foot from
the Gun-decks* the lower edge of the Ports will be three foot from the water
abaft, and two foot and an half before, in the middle of the Gun-deck 2 foot 9
inches, sufficient for so small a Vessel, a greater Vessel would require to
have the Guns something farther from the water, then if another Waale be
required, first set off the Ports in their places, that the Waale may ly above
the Ports, or else he would be cut with the ports in pieces, the upper Deck
with height respecting the bigness of the Ship, having respect to not over
building small Ships, to damage their bearing of Sail.

Then for the Head, the length of the Knee would be two thirds of the breadth,
so then the Knee of the Head in this Draught will be 12 foot 8 inches long, and
for his place, as low as conveniently he can, provided that the Rails of the
Head, fall not fowl of the ha^shols, because that in placing of the Knee low,
gives room to round the Head, and steeve it to content: The place of the Knee
will be at, or very near, the upper Waal, the upper edge of the Knee against
the upper edge of the uper harping, which will be very well for the lower
Cheeks of the head to be faced against, for by that means they will be clear of
any Seame to avoid Leakings, and will very well bolt the end of the harping, if
a Brest-hook be fastened also within board against them, will very well fasten
all together.

Then for the steeving of him, and rounding the Knee, a regard must be had to
the lying of the Boltspreet, leaving room enough for the Lion and Scrowl under
the Boltsprit. Then* for the rounding of the Rails, round them most at the
after ends.

For the heights between Decks and Steeridge, Cabine, Fore-Castle, those
heights are commonly mentioned in contract by the Master or Owners building.

Place this Draught at Page 8
cross-section of a ship's hull

CHAP. IV. Showing, how to sweep out the Bend of Moulds upon a Flat.
FIrst, draw a line, as the line AB, then in the middle thereof, as at the
point C, raise a perpendicular, as is the line CM, perpendicular to the line
AB; then set off the half breadth, on either side, at the Points AB, and draw
the two lines IA, and KB, parallels to CD, signifying the breadth of the
Vessel 20 foot; then draw the two lines OF, and HG, signifying the breadth of
the Floare thwart Ships, 8 Foot, more then one third part of the breadth, which
was formerly an old Proportion; so that according to that it should have been
but 6 Foot 8 Inches.

Herein any may do as they please, give more or less; my judgment is, rather
more then less: for, that it makes a Vessel to carry more in Burden, and I
conceive it may, if it be well ended forward, it will not damage the Sailing: I
also think, it does stiffen a Vessel on this account. Our English Vessels
have been used to have their breadth lying at the height of the Half Breadth,
then observing 1/3 breadth for the length of the Floare Thwart Ships, it makes
the Vessels Body to be very near a Circle, as is a Cask, which causes such
Vessels to be easy to slew in the Water; yet I would not exceed neither, or
run into extremes herein, but if I were to make a Vessel stiff, I would that
the Half Breadth be more then the draught of Water, which causes that the
Body be stronger in the Water, and will not Slew so easily. Now to sweep out
the Sides under Water, I draw the Diagonall lines DA, and DB; then I divide the
Diagonall lines into 9 parts, and set off 2 of them from the Corners A and B,
to the points e, then I set off the Dead Rising, which is 4 Inches, one Inch to
a Foot, for half the breadth represented in the Figure above, by the little
line parallel to FG: from which Dead Rising, take with the Compasses the
Distance that will draw a piece of an Arch from ^ to ^, and so as one foot of
the Compasses stand in the line OF, and exactly touch the points at the
Dead-Rising, at f or g, and touch also the points e, over which point falls at,
in OF, or in HG, wherewith I describe the Arch e F, or e G, which is by the
Scale in the Draught 4 Foot 8 Inches: then for the other part of the Side
upwards, seek for a Point in the breadth line IK, at which, if one foot of the
Compasses be set, and the other foot opened to the Extreme Breadth, will also
draw, or signify an Arch to meet with the other Lower Arch, on the Diagonall
line at e, which is at the points and; thus the point, between D and K, near
H, Sweepeth the contrary Side I e, and so the point, between DI, near E,
Sweepeth the contrary side at K, extend the same Sweep also above the Breadth
line above Water 3 or 4 Foot, the length of this Sweep is 12 Foot 9 Inches:
then set off the Tumbling Home, at the Height of the two first Haanses, at the
Maine Mast and Foarcastle, 2 foot of a side; then draw a line from the said 2
Foot of Narrowing, at the points o v, till it break off on the back of the
Sweep, on either side. This kind of Demonstration I conceive most suitable to
our following discourse of Arithmeticall Work, I could have cited other ways,
but I Judge this way sufficient.

CHAP. V. The Description of the Rising Lines aftward on, and forward on; with
the Narrowing Lines, and Lines of Breadth: As also the Narrowing Lines at the
top of the Timbers.
DRaw a Hanging line on the Draught, from the Keele, from the middle of the
Keele to the height of the Water line, on the Post which will be the Rising
line, as the line DE; this line DE is supposed to be sweept, or drawn by a
Semidiameter of a Circle, extended on a Perpendicular raised at the point E,
for if it be shorter then such a Semidiameter of the true Circle, it will make
a fuller line then it should be, and so must not be so long, or else it will
make a breach at the beginning of the line; this, if the Center be supposed to
be Abaft such a Perpendicular, that should draw a Rising line Abaft, I say,
that it will shorten the Rising line, and make it fuller then it should be; or
then if it be farther forward, it will be straighter then a Circle, and also be
a breach at the beginning of the Rising line; therefore it should be a Circle,
I say, whose Semidiameter will be on the Perpendicular line, at the beginning
of any such Rising line, on the Heel, either Afoare, or Abaft, and the like
ought to be for all other crooked lines, as the narrowing lines Abaft, or
Afoare, or at the Narrowing of the Floare, or other Circular lines, as Hanging
of Waals, and the like; the way whereof I shall describe, to find the lengths
of all such Sweeps by Arithmetic; as also the true Rising, Narrowing of any
Timber, according to exact pieces of Circles, very useful for the setting of
Bows, to try whether they hang to a true Sweep or no: I shall demonstrate it,
I say, in the following discourse, and in this place end what I intend to say.
For Demonstration then, At of the Keele forward I draw a Rising line forward to
the height of the Water line, forward on the Stemm, as you see the line op; and
the little line, between these two lines, parallel to the inside of the Keele,
marked Eo, is the dead rising 4 inches high, as in the bend of Moulds it is
parallel to FG, the height of the breadth from the Mid-Ship forward is the
lower Edge of the upper Waale; but afterward on it is the pricked line, between
the Water line and the lower Waale, on the Post, which runs forward to the
edge of the Waale, and has Figures set to it, to signify the places of the
Timbers marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to 15; as you see answers to the Figures on the
Keele: and the Letters set to forward on, signify the places of the Timbers
forward, marked ABCD to L, in the middle of the Vessel: the places marked with
a Cipher signify the Flats, which have only Dead rising, although they ought
to have, some of them, something more Dead rising then each other; and those
that have least, to be placed in the middle of the rest, that so there be no
Clings in the Buldge, but that it have also a little Hanging in it, it will
seem the fairer: Then I draw a straight line, parallel to the bottom of the
Keele, as is the line FG, parallel to the line AB, the Keele, and distant 10
foot by the Scale, which is the half breadth of the Vessel; for this line
signifies a line stretched from the middle of the Sterne-Post to the middle of
the Stem, called by Ship-wrightes, a Ram-line: Parallel to this Middle line I
draw another line straight, marked nm, and is 4 foot asunder from the Middle
line, to signify the half length of the Floare thwartships, as in the Bend of
Moulds OF is distant from DC 4 Foot: then I draw a Crooked line Abaft, within
this line nm, to signify the narrowing of the Floare, to bring, or form the
Vessels way Abast, as you see the line ik; Abaft and Afoare it is represented
by the line lo: then here in this Draught I draw a Sweep, or a piece of a
Circle, from the point G, the mark of the Timber G, on the Keele, to the half
breadth of the Stemm, to the point G on the Stemm, signifying the Sweep of the
Harping, and is Sweept by the breadth of the Vessel 20 Foot; the piece of the
Pricked Circle Abaft at the Starne, which is drawn by a Center on the line FG,
is the length of the Transom thwart the Starne, as is the Arch FS, the length
whereof is 8 Foot, which doubled is 16 Foot, for the whole length: which is of
the breadth 20 Foot, the length of the Sweep that sweepeth it is the length of
the Starnpost to the bottom of the Keele 14 Foot, then the Crooked line, from
the end of the Transom, or from the point S, and touches the Keele at the
point p: this Arch Sp, is the narrowing line Abaft at the breadth, and the
Crooked pricked line within the Keele, marked with TR, is a Rising line, to
order a hollow Moulde by the Timbers, are placed at 2 Foot Timber and Room, as
you may see by the Scale, the line drawn from the Poope to the Foar-Castle,
marked by the letters VW, is a line signifying the breadth of the Vessel, at
the top of the side, from the top of the Poope to the Fore-Castle, the top of
the Poop is in breadth 10 Foot, half the breadth at the beam; the use of this
line is in ordering of the Moulds, to stedy the Head of the Top-Timber Mould,
to find his breadth aloft.

CHAP. VI. Showing the Making and graduating, or marking of the Bend of Molds.
Repair to some House that has some Room or other broad enough to
demonstrate the breadth of the Vessel, and height enough for the top of the
Poope in the length of the Room; or else if you cannot find such a Room
convenient, lay boards together, or planks, that may be large enough for your
business, as in the following Scheame you see; First, a long square made for
the breadth of the Vessel, as in the following Figure IABK: then make the
Moulds by their Sweepes, and make Sirmarks to them for the laying of them
together in their true places, off first the Mould, for the Floare being made,
you may make a Sirmarke by the line OF, on the head of the Floare Mould, and
another on the foot of the Navill Timber Mould, at the same place, to signify,
that those two marks put together, they are in their true places, and will
compare so when any Timbers are Molded by them: those Sirmarks must also be
marked off on the Timbers, and so in putting the Timbers up in the frame, a
regard being had to compare Sirmarks with Hirmarks, each Timber will find his
own place, and come to his own breadth, and give the Vessel that form
assigned her by your Draught, if it be wrought by it, and so for all the other
Moulds.

In making your Moulds, that they may be smaller and smaller upwards, and not
all of a bigness, you may measure the depth of the Side in the Mid Ships
Circular, as it goes from the Keele to the top of the Side, as here the Side,
as it Roundeth, is 26 foot, and in depth at the Rounheads, or at the end of the
Floare, is one Foot, as m m; and at the other end, at the head of the Timber is
but half a Foot, as at n n, so then drawing two lines, as the lines n m,
represents the diminishing of the Moulds in thickness upwards, as those two
lines represents; as if you would find the thickness of the Timbers at the
breadth, take your 2 Foot Rule, and measure the length from the end of the
Floare at the point F to I, at the breadth in the crooked body, and it is 11
Foot 9 Inches, signified at the Sirmarks there, those two lines show the
thickness to be 9 Inches; and so thick ought the Moulds to be at the breadth of
the Vessel.

By this Proportion the Moulds being made and Sirmarked to the body of the
Vessel, and that they must be marked, or ordered, to find the decrease of her
bulks body in the Midships, and to come to her way Abast, that the Water may
pass to her Rudder to make her Stere, repair to the Draught, and first set off
her Risings thus; Example, We will begin at Timber 3 Abast, and his Rising is 7
inches: therefore draw a line parallel to the Base, or Ground line F G, as the
line 3 3; 7* Inches, from it then take the narrowing of the Floare with the
Compasses off 3 also, and it is here 4 Inches, showed by the little Spot, or
Cross, in the Rising line 3 3, then seeking for the Narrowing at the breadth
for Timber 3, there is none that shows that she keeps the same breadth at 3
still, 20 Foot, but seek for the height of the breadth, and it will lie higher
at 3, then in the Midships, by 6 Inches, signified by the little mark in the
line A I, a little above I, at the point 3; then for the breadth at top of the
Side, find that at the point 3, in the line V W, drawn to that end, and you
will find that it is narrower there by 2 Foot 7 Inches, then at the breadth,
or Tumbleth Home, so much at the height, 24 Foot signified by an Occult dark
line, drawn from the top of the Poope to the Foarcastle, to order* the height
of the Head of the Toptimber Mould, answering to the Narrowing of the same, at
the line V W; and this point for 3 falls at the little Cross Mark 3, in the
upper part of the figure: For the next Example we will set off on our Platform
the rising narrowings of Timber 6, and 6 risth from the Keele 1 foot 7 inches,
as you see the parallel* line 6 6 for breadth, the same still at the breadth,
but the height of the breadth is higher by one foot, then at the Midship,
signified by the mark at 6, in the line; at the breadth, the Tumbling home, 1
foot* 7 inches and a half, at the height of 25 foot 4 inchos, at the point 6,
and so proceed of all the rest, beginning at one till you come aft* to the
fashion Pieces; when you have set off all the heights of Risings, narrowings of
the Floare, narrowings of the Breadth, height of the Breadth, at the Breadth of
the Vessel, and also of the Head of the Toptimber: Then at each point of the
Floare, still in a Nail, or a Gimblet, or some such thing, as suppose we begin
here at 3, stick one in the Midship line at 3, another in the little Cross, at
the narrowing of the Floare at 3; another at the height of the Breadth at 3;
another at the little cross, at the head of the Toptimber for 3; then if you
have a lower Futtocke Mould, and an upper futtocke Mould, otherwise a navell
Timber Mould, and a futtocke Mould, nail them together with small Nails, and
lay the Sirmarks of the floare Mould, and futtock Mould to the Gimblet that
sticks at the shortning of the floare; for by this means the floare Mould
and futtock Mould is hauled downward: then make a mark at the cross, in the
Midship line C D, setting to the mark of 3 for Timber 3, which will be the
shortning of the Floare; then be sure the Navell Timber Moulds touch the
Gimblet at the breadth, and at the narrowing of the floare, keeping the lower
Sirmark thereto; and make a mark on the Futtocke Mould, at the upper Gimblet,
for the rising allow lifts up the Moulds higher; and if there be any Crossing
at the foot of the Navell Timber, and Head of the Floare Mould, mark it, and
set to the mark 3 to it, that you may know to lay them together again, and
keeping the Futtocke Mould fast, lay to the Toptimber Moulde the breadth
Sirmarke of the Toptimber Moulde, to the Gimblet at the breadth, so have you no
more Sirmarkes on the Toptimber Moulde but one, and guide the head of him till
a line stretched from the Cross, at the head of the Toptimber, till it
compares with the right part of the Toptimber Mould, then regard the Crossing
of the foot of the Toptimber Mould, and the back of the futtocke, and mark it,
setting to the proper Mark 3 to it, that laying those marks together again,
they may find their own places again, so having finished for this Room 3,
take up the Moulds, and remove the Gimblets to the next, as to 6, here in our
Example, and stick the Gimblets at all the marks of 6, then lay down the
Mouldes again, laying down the floare Moulde to the Sirmarke of 6, on the
narrowing of 6, and to the Gimblet, sticking on the Midship line of D C, and
right on the same line, at the crossing, make a mark on the floare Mould,
which will be the narrowing of the floare; then lay down the futtocke Mould,
the Sirmarke on the foot to the Gimblet, on the narrowing of the floare, and
keeping the Mold to touch the Gimblets at both places, make a mark for the
breadth Sirmarke at 6, on the futtoke Mould, and set to 6; then lay down the
Toptimber Mould, the breadth Sirmarke thereof to the Gimblet, sticking at the
height of the breadth, that the backside of the uper end may randge fair, by a
right line from the cross at the uper end of the Toptimber at 6, by the back of
the Toptimber Mould, a straight line may compare therewith* then keeping fast
the Mouldes so till you have marked the crossing of the foot of the Toptimber
Mould, by the back of the futtocke, mark it on the foot of the Toptimber
Mould, and set to the mark of 6, so that when you are in any other place, as
in the Woods a hewing of a Frame, where you to every place his Timber, you may
be able to lay your Moulde together, and moulde it according to your Draught:
We will lay down the taking of one bend of Timbers moreafte, where the breadth
is narrowed, as at Timber 13, take his rising off, and measure it by the Scale,
and it will be 6 foot 8 inches, which set off on your Plat-forme, and draw
thereto a Parallel line, to the Ground line A B, as is the line 13 13, then
take off the narrowing of the floare, as at 13, it is 2 foot 2 inches; set that
off on the line 13, from the line E F, as at the little cross thereon, then
take off the narrowing of the Breadth at 13, and it will be 8 inches; draw
therewith a little parallel line, parallel to I O, as is the parallel line 13
13, then seek the height of the breadth, as at 13, it will be from the uper
edge of the Keele 12 foot 3 inches, and crosses the parallel line, at the lower
end of it, just then for the tumbling of the Toptimber it will be 3 foot 3
inches, and at the height of 27 foot 7 inches, at the little Cross 13: Now for
the order of the hollow Mould, the little round piece of an Arch, in the Scegg
of the Vessel, as it were, take off all the Risings, and mark them on the
Rising Staff, on one edge, that they may be known from the other Risings; as
here, for Timber 13, take off the hollow Rising, which will be at 1 foot 10
inches, set it off on the rising Staff, at 1 foot 10 inches from one end, and
the use of it will be in Moulding, set off the height of this hollow Rising on
the middle line of the Timber, when the Mouldes are laid to pass, and strike a
line from this Rising, on the middle line, until it breakoff on the back of
the Moulds, then lay the hollow Mould to the lower part of the britch of the
Timber, and at the half breadth of the Keele, and so bear in the other end
till it just touch the streightline, made by the hollow Rising, and the back of
the Moulds, and this mouldeth the lower part, or britch of the Timber, and
brings in the hollow very fair; the same orders may be observed afoare, as
abaft, on the other side of the Moulds, and marked with letters, to be known
from them abaft: Then for the height of your Waals, you may mark a mark at
every third or fourth Timbers, which you resolve to make frame Timbers; I say,
you may make a mark at every third or fourth Timber, for the height of the
upper edge, or lower edge of the Waale, and so bring on the Waale fair by those
marks on the one side, and with a level find the height of the other side by
the former.

Now I have briefly touched the Demonstration of a Ship, by Projection, I shall
now come to an Arithmeticall way, far surpassing any Demonstration for
exactness.

CHAP. VII. Arithmetically showing how to frame the body of a Ship by Segments
of Circles: being a true way to examine the truth of a Bow.
LEt A B represent the length of a Rising line 12 foot long, or 144 inches, the
height whereof let be B C, 5 foot, or 60 inches, to find the side D E, or D A,
the radius of the circle A C, whereto A D is the Semidiameter; multiply the
side A B 144 inches in it self, and so comes 20736, which sum divide

144 144 576 576 144 20736 by the side B C, the height of the rising 60 inches,
and so comes 345, and 3^6/60, which is abreviated 3; unto this 345 ^/^ must be
added again the height of the Rising, the side B e, 60, which make 405 3 of an
inch, which is the whole Diameter of the Circle, the half whereof is 202 1/^
inches, and something more, near ^/4, therefore we will avoid the fraction,
and account it 203* inches, or 16 foot 11 inches, which is the length of the
Sweep, or the side D E, and so in all other Sweeps given whatsoever; the Rule
is general, and holds true in all things: as to find the Sweep at once, that
will round any Beam, or other piece of Timber that is to be Sweept;
remembering, that if it be a Beam, you are to find the Sweep you take but the
half of his length.

23(3 20736(345 6000 66

Example, As if the Beam be 30 foot in length, and to round one foot, you must
Work by 15, the half length of the Beam; and turn 15 foot into inches, by
multiplying 15 by 12, so comes 180 inches: remember the length of the Rising
line, if it be to find the Sweep, it must be multiplied by it self, or the
half length of the Timber must be Multiplied in it self, as 180 by 180, so
comes 32400, which must be divided by 12 the rounding, comes in the quotient
2700, to which must be added the 12 again, the rounding of the piece, and so it
is 2712 the whole Circle, the half of this 2712 is 1356 for the length of the
Sweep, and so in all other matters where the Sweep is required: This I read in
Mr. Gunters Book, where he calls it the half Chord, being given, and the
Versed fine, to find the Diameter, and Semidiameter of the circle thereto
belonging:

Now this half Chord in our Work is the length of the Rising line, and the
height of the Rising on the Post is that in our Work, which he represents by
the name of the Versed sine, where remember to multiply the length of the
Rising line by itself, if it be a Rising line, and divide by the height of the
Rising, and to the division add again the height of the Rising, so have you
always the whole Circle, divide it by 2, so have you the length of the Sweep.

Example in the Draught foregoing.
Where the length of the Rising line is from the point E, to the point i, 32
foot; and half the height thereof is the line D i, 10 foot: turn both Sums
into inches, as 32 foot multiplied by 12 produces, adding the foot 6 inches,
390 inches length for the Rising line: then turn the height of the Rising into
inches, as 10 foot multiplied by 12, produces 120 inches, from which 4 inches
must be subtracted, because of the dead Rising is 4 inches, so then the height
is 116 inches: Now multiply the length 390 inches by it self, 390 makes 152100.

390 390 000 3510 1170 152100

This Multiplication of the sum 152100, must be divided by 116 inches, the
height of the Rising, and so comes in the quotient of the devision 1311
inches; unto this 1311 inches, must be added the 116 inches, the height of the
Rising 116/1427, and it makes 1427, which is the whole

112 3323 46344 152100 (1311 116666 0111 11 Circle: divide it by 2, to find
the half of it, so have you in the quotient 713 inches inch for the length of
the Sweep, which divided by 12, to bring it into feet, makes 59 feet, 5 inches
and a half, and so for all other Circular lines whatever, when the length is
known, and the rounding of them also known; as for the hanging of Waals, the
height of them known in the Midships from the Keele, subtracted from the
height, at the Post, and that will be the hanging of them, which is the same
with the height of the Rising line on the Post, in the Arithmeticall Work, and
is the same with the Versed sine in Geometry; these I think Examples
sufficient, to signify the Construction of this way of Working by Sweepes.

1 1427 (713 222

It follows now that I show the manner of finding the Risings of Timbers by
Arithmetic also.

To find the Rising of the line F E, in the Figure foregoing.
The Sweep being first found to be as before 203 inches, as the side D E
signifies, then there is known the side E G, 108 inches; now these two sides
being given, we are to find the third side D G, so here is made a right Angled
Triangle, two sides thereof are given to find a third, which to do, proceed
thus; Multiply the two sides given by themselves, and substract the
Multiplication of the shortest side, from the Multiplication made of the other
sides, and extract the square Root of the remainder, so have you the third side
sought for.

Example in the following Triangle.


Having the side D C, 12 foot, which is 144 inches* and the side A C, 10 foot,
otherwise 120 inches; to find the side D A, multiply the sides given, in
themselves, which is called squaring of them: as, multiply the side D C, 144
inches, by 144 inches, so comes 20736. Then multiply the other side A C 120
also by it self, so comes in the quotient 14400, which must be subtracted
from the other Multiplication, as you see, so comes in the quotient 6336, from
which the greatest square must be extracted, called extraction of the square
root,

144 144 576 576 144 20736 120 120 000 240 120 14400 20736 14400 6336 which is
79 inches, and almost another by the Fraction, that is 6 foot, and very near 8
inches.

1 595 147 6^3^(79 14

Note, These Demonstrations, this and the former, are laid down by the first
Scale, made to show the Demonstration of a Scale in this Book, at the beginning.

Another Example.
So in the last Figure foregoing but one, the side D E, 203 inches, which
squared, or multiplied in it self, is 41209.

203 203 609 000 406 41209

Then the other side G E, 108, multiplied in it self, which is squaring of it,
is 12664, as you see.

108 108 864 000 168 11664

Which subtracted from the other multiplication, as 11664 subtracted from
41209, rests 29545, the square Root extracted from it, or the side of the
greatest square that can be taken from the substraction being found, is 171,
and; which 171, subtracted from 203, the length of the Sweep for one side, is
always the length of the Sweep, rests 31 inches, for the Rising of the line
E F, and the like for any other Rising.

41209 11664 29545

(3 156(08 29549(^7.2. 34

Another Example.
As at the place K I, the Rising thereof is required, the side D I is as D E,
203 inches.

Note, The length of the Sweep being found, always is one of the sides, in
the finding the Rising of any Timber, and is always one of the numbers, which
when you have squared, note in a piece of Paper by it self, where you may
always see what it is, so that in the finding of Risings, after the Sweep is
found, all you have to do, is to know how many feet, or inches, the Timber you
seek for is removed from the beginning, or foot of the Rising line, which is
the second side, and in this third Example it is 11 foot, or 132 inches K I,
from the foot of the line A, which squared, is 17424, which must be subtracted
from the square made of Radius, which in the other example is 41209, and so
rests 23775, from which extract the side of the Square therein contained, and
it is 154 inches and, which subtracted from the length of the Sweep, leaves
48 inches for the Rising, and inches, or 4 foot, and of an inch, and so much is
the Rising of the said Timber.

132 132 264 396 132 17424

41209 17424 23775

10 132(69 23785(154.2.0. 3

One Example in the Draught, The length of that Sweep we found heretofore to
be 713 inches, then we will seek to find the Rising for Timber 13, standing
aft from the point E, or foot of the Rising line 324 inches, these are the
given Sides; then proceed; square the Semidiameter of the Sweep 713, so it
makes squared 508363; then square the distance of the Timber 13, which is 324,
and it makes 104976; these subtracted from the former figures, rests
403387, the square Root thereof is 635, nearest, which subtracted from the
Radius 713, rests 77 inches and, that is 6 foot 5 inches, which with 4 inches
Dead Rising, is 6 foot 9 inches; and so much is the Rising of Timber 13 from
the Keele.

I suppose these Examples are sufficient to illustrate the truth and plainness
of this Arithmeticall Work, for the truth of it; it has this to say for it
self, that it is the very exact truth it self: The great Objection may be, that
many know not the way to Extract the Square Root, and therefore cannot attain
to this Work, by reason of that let, or hinderance.

To this I Answer, There are many Books that will instruct thee in it, that
thou may buy, or borrow; but to answer thee better, I will briefly show thee
the manner of Extracting the Square, not doubting but thou can perform
Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and Division already.

CHAP. VIII. How to Extract the Square Root.
KNow then that a square number has its sides equal every way, as are the
sides of 4, represented by pricks; and you see that every way of all the 4
sides it contains 2, and so 2 times 2, make 4, which is the squaring of a
number, so you see 9 pricks is a square, or 9 is a square number, whose side is
3, and 3 times 3 make 9, but 2 times 3 is not a square number, as you see:::,
being but 2 one way, and the other way 3, that make but 6; so then all the
numbers between 4 and 9, are not square numbers: by the like reason, a square,
made of the Next square number 4 is 16, for 4 times 4 is 16, as by the Pricks
you may see it represented here, every of the 4 sides containing 4, make a
squared number of 16, and all the numbers that are between 9 and 16, as 2 times
4, or 3 times 4, are not squares, but have a fraction annexed to them; so also
any number between 16 and 25, are not squares, as 4 times 5, or 2 times 5, or 3
times 5, these are not square numbers, but 5 times 5 is a squared number, and
makes 25, where note, that to square a number, and to extract the square root,
is two different things; for when we say, to square a number, is to multiply it
in it self, or by it itself; or



when we say, or speak of a number squared, it is a number multiplied in it
self, but to extract the square Root, is to find the side of the square in a
number given, or the extracted square Root is the square Root found in any
given number.

Thus you may conceive of the Squares of 6, for 6 times 6 make 36; 7 times 7
make 49; 8 times 8 make 64; 9 times 9 make 81; 10 times 10 make 100: there is
all the squares made of the 9 Figures, expressed by this little Table annexed,
as against each Figure is the square made of them, as 2 times 2 is 4, so is 4
against 2, as you see.

1 1 2 4 3 9 4 16 5 25 6 36 7 49 8 64 9 81 10 100

Now to extract the square Root from greater numbers, as from 144 proceed thus,
write down the sum given, as follows, and make a quotient on the right
hand, as you see, then set pricks under every other figure beginning at the
right hand, and set pricks toward the left hand, under every other figure, so
in this number 144, consisting of 3 figures, there is 2 pricks, and so many
figures must the quotient consist of; then begin at the left hand of the sum,
and say, or enquire for the greatest square in the figure, or figures, over the
first prick, at the left hand, which here is but 1, therefore you can take but
1, for 1 is always the Square, or Cube of 1, therefore write 1 in the
quotient, and substract that 1 from the 1 over the left hand prick,

144 (..

0 144 (1.. and Cancel it, nothing remainining, write a Cipher over it, as you
see, so have you one figure of the quotient, then double your figure found in
the quotient, as 2 times 1 is 2; write that 2 under the figure between the next
pricks, which is the Divisor for the second figure, then say, how many times 2
can I have in 4, over the Divisor, I say 2, therefore I write 2 in the
quotient, saying, 2 times 2 is 4, which substract from the 4 over head, Cancel
the Divisor, and the 4 over head, and write a Cipher over it, then square the
last figure found in the quotient, saying, 2 times 2 is 4, which substract from
the 4 over the prick, and so rests 0, therefore cancel the 4, and write
Ciphers over head, signifying, that the number given to find the root of, is
a just square number, the root or side is 12, the proof hereof is by
Multiplication of the quotient in it self, as 12 by 12 make 144, which, if it
be the same with the sum given to be Extracted, it is rightly done* if it do
not agree, it is not true.

000 144 (12.2.

Example of another Sum.
Let 625 be given to find the Square Root of it, write down the sum, make a
quotient, and set pricks under every other figure; then enquire for the
greatest square in the figure, over the prick, at the left hand; I say, 2 is
the greatest square can be taken: for 3 times 3 is 9, and here the figure is
but 6; so I write 2 in the quotient, and square it, saying, 2 times 2 is 4,
taken from 6, so rests 2; I cancel the 6, and write 2

2 625 (2.. over it, as you see, then double the figure in the quotient,
saying, 2 times 2 is 4; this 4 is the second Divisor, I write it between the
two next pricks, and say, how many times 4, can I have in 22, and I find 5
times; for 5 times 4 is 20, taken from 22, the figures over 4, so rests 2;
therefore I write 5 in the quotient, and saying, 5 times 4 make 20* therefore I
cancel the 4 Divisor, and the 22, and write 2 overhead, then square the last
figure found, 5 by 5 make 25, taken from 25 over head* rests nothing, so the
number given is a square number.

2 625 (2.4.

22 625 (25.4.

22 625 (25.4.

A Sum of 5476, given to find the nearest Square Root in it, write down the
Sum, and make a quotient and prick underneath, as before showed; say, What is
the greatest Square in the figures over the left hand prick? and I find it to
be 7, for 7 times 7 make 49, but 8 times 8 make 64, 10 too much, therefore I
write 7 in the quotient, and take 7 times 7, that is 49 from 54, so rests 5,
which I write over the prick, and Cancel the 5 and the 4; then I double the
figure in the quotient, which makes 14, for the Divisor, I write the first
figure of the Divisor, if there be more then 1 under the figure, between the
two next pricks, and all the other figures, in their places, toward the left
hand; then inquire how many times can 1 be taken from 5, overhead, and I find
it may be taken 4 times; I write therefore 4*

5 5476 (7..

1 51 5476 (74.. 14 in the quotient, and say, 4 times 1 is 4, from 5; so
rests 1: I Cancel the 1 and the 5, and write 1 over the 5, then I say, 4
times 4 make 16, from 17 rests 1: I Cancel the 4 Divisor, and write 1 over
7, and Cancel the other 1 and the 7; then I square the last figure found, for
so it must be at every prick, 4 times 4 make 16, which I substract from the 16
over the last prick, and so I see nothing remains, that shows the sum
given, to be a just square sum.

10 510 5476 (74.. 14

Example of another Sum.
As if 528563 be given to find the greatest side of the Square therein, I
write down the Sum, as follows, and make the quotient, and set the pricks
under every other figure, as you see; and seeing there is 3 pricks, it tells,
that there must be 3 figures in the quotient, then beginning at the figures
over the left hand prick, I take the greatest square in 52, and I find it 7,
for 7 times 7 make 49; therefore I write down 7 in the quotient, and Substract
49 from 52, so rests 3, therefore Cancel the 52, and write 3 over the 2, as
you see; then double the quotient 7, it makes 14, for a new Divisor, which
write down, the first figure thereof, under the figure between the two next
pricks, namely 4 under 8, and the other figure of the Divisor one place farther
to the left hand, under the 3, as you see; then take the Divisor 1 as many
times as you can, from the figure

3 528563 (7...

3 528563 (7... 14 3 over head, so as that after the Division be made, there
may be the square of the last figure of the quotient, taken from the figures
over the next prick, as I can take 1 but 2 times from 2, therefore I write 2 in
the quotient, and Cancel the Divisor 1, saying, 2 times 1 is 2, from 3; so
rests 1: I Cancel the figure 3 also, and write 1 overhead, as you see: then
2 times 4 is 8, from 8 over head rests nothing; therefore I Cancel the
second figure of the Divisor, 4 and 8, and write a Cipher over 8, as you see;
then the next place being a prick, I must square the last figure found, saying,
2 times 2 make 4, from 5; the figure over the prick rests 1, as you see;
therefore I Cancel the 5, and write 1 over it, as you see, and here is a
fraction of 101.

1 30 528563 (72 14

1 301 528563 (72 14

Then for a new Divisor, Double the quotient 72, and it makes 144, which is a
new Divisor, the first figure thereof write under the figure between the next
pricks, as the first 4 under 6, in the sum; and the other figures toward the
left hand, in the order as you see: then, how many times 1 in 10 over head, and
I see I cannot take 8 times, for that there will not be left to take out the
other figures from, nor for the square of the last figure, which if it were 8,
would be 64 from the figure over the prick, therefore I take but 7, for by a
light examination I see that will do, therefore I write down 7 in the
quotient, and proceed to the

1 301 528563 (727 14 4 14 Division, thus, 7 times 1 is 7, from 10 over head
remains 3, which I write down, and Cancel the 10, as you see; then 7 times 4
is 28, from 31 over head, so remains 3, which I also write down, and Cancel
the 31; then again, 7 times 4, the other figure of the Divisor, is also 28,
which taken from 36 over head, rests 8, which I write down over 6, and so
Cancel the 36, and then the Sum stands as you see.

13 301 528563 (727 14 4 14

133 301 528563 (727 14 4 14

133 3018 528563 (727 14 4 14

133(3 530^8 (4 528563 (727 14 4 14

Then lastly, square the last figure of the quotient, 7 times 7 make 49, taken
from 83, the figures over the prick, rests 34, as a fraction, and the Sum is
finished: But in regard here is a fraction, by that it tells you, that the Sum
given was no square number; and the greatest square therein is 727, the proof
is by Multiplication adding in the fraction thus, 727 Multiplied by 727, make
528529, then adding in the fraction of 34, makes it 528563, the just Sum
given.

But some may Object, and say, That this is a very tedious way of Work, and
will take up a great deal of time; It is true, it is more labor then
demonstration, but the truth of it might very well plead for patience to Work
it, but it is not necessary you perform all the parts by it, that is, in every
particular: as the exact hanging of the Waal at every Timber, but it may
suffice at every third or fourth Timber, to find the hanging of the Waals,
only the Risings allow, afoare and abaft, I would work to every Timber there.

But to make it more brief, here follows a Table that the numbers are
therein contrived to the same purpose, to avoid the tedious Extraction of the
Root, and only use Addition and Substraction, only being but a very little
difference between the finding the Risings by this Table, and by the Draught,
for in this kind of Arithmeticall Work, it mattereth not, whether or no there
be any Draught drawn at all, or no, if the builder only note in his Book the
length by the Keele, and the breadth at the Beam, the Rack of the Stem, Rack
of the Post, depth of the Water, to Sail in depth of the Hold, height of the
Waals abaft, afoare, at the Midships, and all the remarkable things to be
noted, he may be able to Build a Vessel, and never draw a Draught at all, and
yet affirm his Work to be absolutely true, according to Art, and a great deal
more exact then by Draught: I shall in few words show you the use of the Table,
and so conclude.

CHAP. IX. A Description of the Table of Squares.
TO save the Practitioner a labor of Extracting of Roots, for here they are
ready done to thy hand of purpose, and all the use of Arithmetic required is
only Substraction, as Example in the Figure of the Sweep foregoing, being
found to be 203 inches, as you saw it found before, which is, I say, always
one side of the Triangle, made of the side DI, then knowing the length of ^I,
132 inches, which is the distance of the point, of which the Rising is sought
at; seek in the Tables, under the Title of inches, at the head of the Tables,
for 132, you will find it in the second Page, and the twelfth line; and right
against it, in the same line, under the next Title of Squares, you have 17424,
the square made of 132, which Substract from the Square made of 203, which is
41209, which is found in the second Page of the Tables, and the third line: Now
the other number 17424, Subtracted from 41209, so rests 23775; seek the
number nearest to it in the Table, under the Title of Squares, which you will
find in the second Page, 34 line, you find not just the same number, for in
stead of 23775, you find 23716 too little by 59, and the Root answering
thereto, is in the same line, under the Title of inches, toward the left hand,
which is 154; now if you take the next square lower to the left hand 35 line,
it is 24025, 250 too much, so you may see it is nearer to the 34th line,
because there it was too little but by 59, so that you may see it will be of an
inch less then the number of inches, belonging to the 35th line, and about of
an inch more then the numbers in the 34th line; so that you see it is answered,
the third side D 0 is 154, and of an inch, which Subtracted from the whole
Sweep 203, leaves 48 inches for the Rising, so you have no need of extraction
of the Roots by these Tables, it is already done to your hand; the Column
that is between the inches and the squares, and written feet inches in the
head, is to show you, how may feet, and inches of the foot any number of inches
is; as here, the number 203 inches sought, and found in the Tables, in the
second page, and third line, just against it, in the same line, between that
and the squares, is 16 -- 11, showing that it is 16 feet and 11 inches; or if
the square were given, as 41209, found at the second page, and third line, next
toward the left hand, you have 16 foot, 11 inches; and if you seek for it in
inches, in the third Column toward the left hand, and the same line, you have
203 inches: Thus is it very ready to reduce inches into foot measure, or feet
into inches.

Another Example.
In the same figure, to find the Rising at the point F, the sweep being 203
inches, as before is said, is always one side, throughout the whole Work of
the same Rising line is 41209, as is found in the second page, the third line;
the other fide from the point A to F, is 9 foot, or 108 inches, whose square is
11664, found in the first page, and the 28th line; now substract the square
made of the side A F, 11664, from the square of the side D E, so remains 29545

41209 11664 29545

Seek in the Table of squares for that number, and I find in the second page,
and 12 line, and the sixth Column, 29584, the nearest number to it, yet it is
a little too much near the of an inch; and toward the left hand in the same
line, the next Column under the title feet inch, you find 14; 4 signifying
that to be 14 foot, 4 inches: and in one Column more to the left hand, and the
same line, you see under the Title of inches 172 over the head you tituled
inches, which must be subracted from 203 inch, so remains 3 inches for the
Rising of F E, which is 2 foot, 7 inches, as in the first page of the Table,
and the 31 line.

203 172 031

These few Examples I think may be sufficient to show the use of the following
Tables of squares, the benefit where of may be very great, for such as shall
make use of the same: If any desire the finding of the Fractions of these
squares, when he finds not his just figures in the squares, let him do thus,
substract the Figures under his number, from the Figures above his number,
which shall be the denominator, then these Figures given, subtracted, from
which the next squares less, shall be the denominator to that Fraction.

As for Example, In the foregoing figures, after substraction, should have been
29553; the nearest agreeing in the Tables, is 29584, the next lesser square
number in the Table is 29241, which is more a great deal too little, then the
other is too great; then substract the lesser square number 29241, from 29584,
and so rests 343, which must be the denominator, then again substract the
true number given, 29553, the next lesser square number in the Table is 29241,
which must be subtracted, I say, from the true number given, 29553, and so
rests after substraction 312, which is the Numerator to the Fraction, and
must be thus written, ^ so then the number belonging to 29584, is 171 inches,
and 312/343 parts of an inch, which being abreviated, is something more then of
one inch, and not full of one inch.

29584 29241 343

Thus he that pleases may find the rising of any Timber, or narrowing of any
place by these Tables and the help of Substraction, exactly to any Circle
whatsoever, but it may suffice, that a Man, going to his Tables, may see which
square his figures have greatest affinity with, and may estimate the difference
near enough, without seeking for the fraction, which will be easily known by
much practice herein.

HEre follows a Table of Square Roots, ready Extracted, from one Inch to 1300
Inches, which is to 108 foot* and 4 Inches, and it is thus contraved, That from
one Inch, to 840 Inches, all the Inches are reduced into Feet and Inches* for
the ease and help of Workmen, who always take their Measures by Feet and Inches;
but from thence to the end of the table you have the Inches only, and the
Squares thereof against them as the Titles over every Page do make appear.

A Table of Square Roots.
Inch Feet Inches Squares 1 1 1 2 2 4 3 3 9 4 4 16 5 5 25 6 6 36 7 7 49 8 8 64
9 9 81 10 10 100 11 11 121 12 1 00 144 13 1 1 169 14 1 2 196 15 1 3 225 16 1 4
256 17 1 5 289 18 1 6 324 19 1 7 361 20 1 8 400 21 1 9 441 22 1 10 484 23 1 11
529 24 2 00 576 25 2 01 625 26 2 2 676 27 2 3 729 28 2 4 784 29 2 5 841 30 2 6
900 31 2 7 961 32 2 8 1024 33 2 9 1089 34 2 10 1156 35 2 11 1225 36 3 00 1296
37 3 1 1369 38 3 2 1444 39 3 3 1521 40 3 4 1600 41 3 5 16^1 42 3 6 1764 43 3 7
1849 44 3 8 1936 45 3 9 2025 46 3 10 2116 47 3 11 2209 48 4 00 2304 49 4 1 2401
50 4 2 2500 51 4 3 2601 52 4 4 2704 53 4 5 2809 54 4 6 2916 55 4 7 3025 56 4 8
3136 57 4 9 3249 58 4 10 3364 59 4 11 3481 60 5 00 3600 61 5 1 3721 62 5 2 3844
63 5 3 3964 64 5 4 4096 65 5 5 4225 66 5 6 4356 67 5 7 4489 68 5 8 4624 69 5 9
4761 70 5 10 4900 71 5 11 5041 72 6 00 5184 73 6 1 5329 74 6 2 5476 75 6 3 5625
76 6 4 5776 77 6 5 5929 78 6 6 6084 79 6 7 6241 80 6 8 6400 81 6 9 6561 82 6 10
6724 83 6 11 6889 84 7 00 7056 85 7 1 7225 86 7 2 7396 87 7 3 7569 88 7 4 7744
89 7 5 7921 90 7 6 8^00 91 7 7 8^81 92 7 8 8464 93 7 9 8649 94 7 10 8836 95 7
11 9025 96 8 0 9226 97 8 1 9409 98 8 2 9604 99 8 3 9801 100 8 4 10000 101 8 5
10201 102 8 6 10404 103 8 7 10609 104 8 8 10816 105 8 9 11025 106 8 10 11236
107 8 11 11449 108 9 0 11664 109 9 1 11881 110 9 2 12100 111 9 3 12321 112 9 4
12544 113 9 5 12769 114 9 6 12996 115 9 7 13225 116 9 8 13456 117 9 9 13689 118
9 10 13924 219 9 11 14162 120 10 0 14400 121 10 1 14641 122 10 2 14884 123 10 3
15229 124 10 4 15376 125 10 5 15625 126 10 6 15876 127 10 7 16029 128 10 8
16384 129 10 9 16641 130 10 10 16900 131 10 11 17161 132 11 00 17424 133 11 1
17689 134 11 2 17956 135 11 3 18225 136 11 4 18496 137 11 5 18769 138 11 6
19044 139 11 7 19321 140 11 8 19600 141 11 9 19881 142 11 10 20164 143 11 11
20449 144 12 00 20736 145 12 01 21025 146 12 2 22416 147 12 3 21609 148 12 4
21904 149 12 5 22201 150 12 6 22500 151 12 7 22801 152 12 8 23104 153 12 9
23409 154 12 10 23716 155 12 11 24025 156 13 00 24336 157 13 1 24649 158 13 2
24964 159 13 3 25381 160 13 4 25600 161 13 5 25921 162 13 6 26244 163 13 7
26569 164 13 8 26956 165 13 9 27225 166 13 10 27556 167 13 11 27889 168 14 00
28224 169 14 1 28561 170 14 2 28900 171 14 3 29241 172 14 4 29584 173 14 5
29929 174 14 6 30276 175 14 7 30625 176 14 8 31076 177 14 9 31329 178 14 10
31684 179 14 11 32041 180 15 00 32400 181 15 1 32761 182 15 2 33124 183 15 3
33489 184 15 4 33856 185 15 5 34025 186 15 6 34596 187 15 7 34969 188 15 8
35344 189 15 9 35721 190 15 10 36100 191 15 11 36481 192 16 00 36864 193 16 1
37249 194 16 2 37636 195 16 3 38025 196 16 4 38416 197 16 5 38809 198 16 6
39204 199 16 7 39601 200 16 8 40000 201 16 9 40401 202 16 10 40844 203 16 11
41209 204 17 00 41616 205 17 1 42025 206 17 2 42436 207 17 3 42849 208 17 4
43264 209 17 5 43681 210 17 6 44100 211 17 7 44521 212 17 8 44944 213 17 9
45369 214 17 10 45796 215 17 11 46224 216 18 0 46656 217 18 1 47089 218 18 2
47524 219 18 3 47961 220 18 4 48400 221 18 5 48841 222 18 6 49284 223 18 7
49729 224 18 8 50176 225 18 9 50625 226 18 10 51076 227 18 11 51529 228 19 0
51984 229 19 1 52441 230 19 2 52900 231 19 3 53361 232 19 4 53824 233 19 5
54289 234 19 6 54656 235 19 7 55225 236 19 8 55696 237 19 9 56069 238 19 10
56644 239 19 11 57121 240 20 0 57600 241 20 1 58081 242 20 2 58564 243 20 3
59049 244 20 4 59536 245 20 5 60025 246 20 6 60516 247 20 7 61009 248 20 8
61504 249 20 9 62001 250 20 10 62500 251 20 11 63001 252 21 0 63504 253 21 1
64009 254 21 2 64516 255 21 3 65025 256 21 4 65536 257 21 5 66049 258 21 6
66564 259 21 7 67081 260 21 8 67600 261 21 9 68121 262 21 10 68644 263 21 11
69169 264 22 0 69596 265 22 1 70425 266 22 2 70756 267 22 3 71289 268 22 4
71824 269 22 5 72361 270 22 6 72900 271 22 7 73441 272 22 8 73984 273 22 9
74529 274 32 10 75076 275 22 11 75575 276 23 0 76176 277 23 1 76729 278 23 2
77284 279 23 3 77841 280 23 4 78400 281 23 5 78961 282 23 6 79524 283 23 7
80089 284 23 8 80656 285 23 9 81225 286 23 10 81796 287 23 11 82369 288 24 0
82944 289 24 1 83521 290 24 2 84100 291 24 3 84681 292 24 4 85264 293 24 5
85849 294 24 6 86436 295 24 7 87025 296 24 8 87616 297 24 9 88209 298 24 10
88804 299 24 11 89401 200 25 0 90000 301 25 1 90601 302 25 2 91204 303 25 3
91809 304 25 4 92416 305 25 5 93025 306 25 6 93636 307 25 7 94241 308 25 8
94864 309 25 9 95481 310 25 10 96100 311 25 11 96721 312 26 0 97344 313 26 1
97969 314 26 2 98596 315 26 3 99225 316 26 4 99856 317 26 5 100489 318 26 6
101124 319 26 7 101761 320 26 8 102400 321 26 9 103041 322 26 10 103684 323 26
11 104329 324 27 0 104976 325 27 1 105625 326 27 2 106276 327 27 3 106929 328
27 4 107584 329 27 5 108241 330 27 6 108900 331 27 7 109561 332 27 8 110224 333
27 9 110889 334 27 10 111556 335 27 11 112225 336 28 0 112896 337 28 1 113569
338 28 2 114244 339 28 3 114921 340 28 4 115600 341 28 5 116281 342 28 6 116964
343 28 7 117349 344 28 8 118336 345 28 9 119025 346 28 10 119716 347 28 11
120409 348 29 0 121104 349 29 1 121801 350 29 2 122505 351 29 3 123206 352 29 4
123909 353 29 5 124604 354 29 6 125311 355 29 7 126025 356 29 8 126736 357 29 9
127449 358 29 10 128164 359 29 11 128881 360 30 0 129600 361 30 1 130321 362 30
2 131044 363 30 3 131779 364 30 4 132496 365 30 5 133225 366 30 6 133956 367 30
7 134689 368 30 8 135424 369 30 9 136161 370 30 10 136900 371 30 11 137640 372
31 0 138384 373 31 1 139129 374 31 2 139876 375 31 3 140625 376 41 4 141676 377
31 5 142129 378 31 6 142984 379 31 7 143641 380 31 8 144400 381 31 9 145161 382
31 10 145924 383 31 11 146689 384 32 0 147456 385 32 1 148225 386 32 2 149006
387 32 3 149769 388 32 4 150544 389 32 5 151321 390 32 6 152210 391 32 7 152831
392 32 8 153664 393 32 9 15444^ 394 32 10 155236 395 32 11 156025 396 33 0
156816 397 33 1 157609 398 33 2 158104 399 33 3 159201 400 33 4 160000 401 33 5
160801 402 33 6 161604 403 33 7 162409 404 33 8 163216 405 33 9 164025 406 33
10 164836 407 33 11 165649 408 34 0 166464 409 34 1 167281 410 34 2 168100 411
34 3 168921 412 34 4 169744 413 34 5 170569 414 34 6 171396 415 34 7 172225 416
34 8 173056 417 34 9 173889 418 34 10 1747^4 419 34 11 175561 420 35 0 176400
421 35 1 177241 422 35 2 178084 423 35 3 178959 424 35 4 17977^ 425 35 5 180625
426 35 6 181476 427 35 7 182329 428 35 8 183184 429 35 9 184041 430 35 10
184900 431 35 11 185761 432 36 0 186624 433 36 1 187789 434 36 2 188^56 435 36
3 1898^5 436 36 4 190096 437 36 5 190960 438 36 6 191044 439 36 7 192721 440 36
8 193600 441 36 9 194481 442 36 10 195364 443 36 11 196249 444 37 0 197136 445
37 1 198025 446 37 2 198916 447 37 3 199809 448 37 4 200704 449 37 5 201601 450
37 6 202509 451 37 7 203401 452 37 8 204304 453 37 9 205^90 454 37 10 206116
455 37 11 2070^5 456 38 0 207936 457 38 1 208849 458 38 2 209^64 459 38 3
210681 460 38 4 2116^0 461 38 5 212521 462 38 6 213444 463 38 7 214369 464 38 8
215296 465 38 9 2162^5 466 38 10 217156 467 38 11 218089 468 39 0 219024 469 39
1 219961 470 39 2 220^^0 471 39 3 221841 472 39 4 222784 473 39 5 223729 474 39
6 224676 475 39 7 225625 476 39 8 226576 477 39 9 227429 478 39 10 228484 479
39 11 229141 480 40 0 2304^^ 481 40 1 231361 482 40 2 232324 483 40 3 233289
484 40 4 234216 485 40 5 235225 486 40 6 236196 487 40 7 237^69 488 40 8 238144
489 40 9 239121 490 40 10 240100 491 40 11 240981 492 41 0 2420^4 493 41 1
243049 494 41 2 244036 495 41 3 245025 496 41 4 246016 497 41 5 246509 498 41 6
247004 499 41 7 249001 500 41 8 250000 501 41 9 251001 502 41 10 252004 503 41
11 253009 504 42 0 254016 505 42 1 255025 506 42 2 256036 507 42 3 257049 508
42 4 258064 509 42 5 269081 510 42 6 260100 511 42 7 261121 512 42 8 262144 513
42 9 363169 514 42 10 264196 515 42 11 265225 516 43 0 266256 517 43 1 267289
518 43 2 268324 519 43 3 269361 520 43 4 270400 521 43 5 271441 522 43 6 272448
523 43 7 273529 524 43 8 274576 525 43 9 275625 526 43 10 276676 527 43 11
2777^9 528 44 0 278784 529 44 1 280^41 530 44 2 280900 531 44 3 281961 532 44 4
284^24 533 44 5 2870^9 534 44 6 285156 535 44 7 286225 536 44 8 287296 537 44 9
288369 538 44 10 290444 539 44 11 290521 540 45 0 291600 541 45 1 292681 542 45
2 293764 543 45 3 294849 544 45 4 295936 545 45 5 297025 546 45 6 298016 547 45
7 299209 548 45 8 300304 549 45 9 301401 550 45 10 302500 551 45 11 303601 552
46 0 304704 553 46 1 305809 554 46 2 306916 555 46 3 308025 556 46 4 309136 557
46 5 310^49 558 46 6 311364 559 46 7 312481 560 46 8 313600 561 46 9 314721 562
46 10 315844 563 46 11 316969 564 47 0 318096 565 47 1 319225 566 47 2 320356
567 47 3 321489 568 47 4 322624 569 47 5 323761 570 47 6 324900 571 47 7 326041
572 47 8 327184 573 47 9 328329 574 47 10 330276 575 47 11 330625 576 48 0
331776 577 48 1 332929 578 48 2 384048 579 48 3 335241 580 48 4 336400 581 48 5
337561 582 48 6 338724 583 48 7 340089 584 48 8 341056 585 48 9 3422^5 586 48
10 343396 587 48 11 344669 588 49 0 345744 589 49 1 346921 590 49 2 348100 591
49 3 349281 592 49 4 350464 593 49 5 351649 594 49 6 352836 595 49 7 353925 596
49 8 354216 597 49 9 355409 598 49 10 356^04 599 49 11 358801 600 50 0 360000
601 50 1 361201 602 50 2 362404 603 50 3 363609 604 50 4 364816 605 50 5 366025
606 50 6 367236 607 50 7 368449 608 50 8 369664 609 50 9 370881 610 50 10
372100 611 50 11 373321 612 51 0 374544 613 51 1 375769 614 51 2 376996 615 51
3 378225 616 51 4 379456 617 51 5 380689 618 51 6 381924 619 51 7 383161 620 51
8 384400 621 51 9 385641 622 51 10 386884 623 51 11 388129 624 52 0 389376 625
52 1 390625 626 52 2 391876 627 52 3 393129 628 52 4 394384 629 52 5 395641 630
52 6 396900 631 52 7 398161 632 52 8 399424 633 52 9 400489 634 52 10 401956
635 52 11 403225 636 53 0 404496 637 53 1 405769 638 53 2 407044 639 53 3
408321 640 53 4 409600 641 53 5 410881 642 53 6 412164 643 53 7 413449 644 53 8
414736 645 53 9 416025 646 53 10 417316 647 53 11 418609 648 54 0 429904 649 54
1 421201 650 54 2 422500 651 54 3 423801 652 54 4 425104 653 54 5 426403 654 54
6 427716 655 54 7 429025 656 54 8 430336 657 54 9 431449 658 54 10 432969 659
54 11 434181 660 55 0 435600 661 55 1 436921 662 55 2 438244 663 55 3 439569
664 55 4 440896 665 55 5 442225 666 55 6 443556 667 55 7 444889 668 55 8 446224
669 55 9 447561 670 55 10 448900 671 55 11 450241 672 56 0 451544 673 56 1
452829 674 56 2 454276 675 56 3 455625 676 56 4 456976 677 56 5 458329 678 56 6
459684 679 56 7 461041 680 56 8 462400 681 56 9 463761 682 56 10 465124 683 56
11 466489 684 57 0 467856 685 57 1 469225 686 57 2 470596 687 57 3 471939 688
57 4 473344 689 57 5 475721 690 57 6 476700 691 57 7 477841 692 57 8 478864 693
57 9 480269 694 57 10 481636 695 57 11 482825 696 58 0 484416 697 58 1 485809
698 58 2 487204 699 58 3 488601 700 58 4 490000 701 58 5 491401 702 58 6 492804
703 58 7 494209 704 58 8 495616 705 58 9 497025 706 58 10 498436 707 58 11
498849 708 59 0 501264 709 59 1 502681 710 59 2 504100 711 59 3 505521 712 59 4
506944 713 59 5 508669 714 59 6 509796 715 59 7 511225 716 59 8 512656 717 59 9
514089 718 59 10 515824 719 59 11 516961 720 60 0 518400 721 60 1 519841 722 60
2 521284 723 60 3 522729 724 60 4 524176 725 60 5 525625 726 60 6 526976 727 60
7 528529 728 60 8 529984 729 60 9 521421 730 60 10 522900 731 60 11 524361 732
61 0 535844 733 61 1 537289 734 61 2 538656 735 61 3 540225 736 61 4 541696 737
61 5 543169 738 61 6 544644 739 61 7 546031 740 61 8 547600 741 61 9 549081 742
61 10 550564 743 61 11 552049 744 62 0 553436 745 62 1 555025 746 62 2 556516
747 62 3 558009 748 62 4 559504 749 62 5 561001 750 62 6 562500 751 62 7 564001
752 62 8 565504 753 62 9 567009 754 62 10 568516 755 62 11 570025 756 63 0
571536 757 63 1 573049 758 63 2 574564 759 63 3 576081 760 63 4 577600 761 63 5
579121 762 63 6 580644 763 63 7 582169 764 63 8 583696 765 63 9 585225 766 63
10 586756 767 63 11 588289 768 64 0 589824 769 64 1 591361 770 64 2 592900 771
64 3 594441 772 64 4 595984 773 64 5 597529 774 64 6 599076 775 64 7 600625 776
64 8 602176 777 64 9 604729 778 64 10 606284 779 64 11 607841 780 65 0 608400
781 65 1 609961 782 65 2 611524 783 95 3 613099 784 65 4 614656 785 65 5 616225
786 65 6 617796 787 65 7 619369 788 65 8 620944 789 65 9 622521 790 65 10
624100 791 65 11 625681 792 66 0 627964 793 66 1 628849 794 66 2 630466 795 66
3 632125 796 66 4 633616 797 66 5 635209 798 66 6 637404 799 66 7 638401 800 66
8 (...) 801 66 9 641601 802 66 10 642204 803 66 11 644809 804 67 0 646416 805
67 1 648025 806 67 2 649836 807 67 3 651249 808 67 4 652864 809 67 5 654481 810
67 6 656100 811 67 7 657721 812 67 8 659344 813 67 9 660969 814 67 10 662596
815 67 11 664225 816 68 0 665856 817 68 1 667429 818 68 2 669124 819 68 3
671771 820 68 4 672400 821 68 5 674041 822 68 6 675684 823 68 7 677329 824 68 8
678976 825 68 9 680625 826 68 10 682276 827 68 11 684129 828 69 0 685584 829 69
1 688241 830 69 2 688900 831 69 3 689661 832 69 4 692224 833 69 5 693889 834 69
6 695556 835 69 7 697225 836 69 1 698896 837 69 9 700569 838 69 10 702244 839
69 11 703921 (...) (...) (...) (...)

Inch Squares 841 707281 842 708964 843 710649 844 711336 845 714025 846 715716
847 717309 848 719004 849 720801 850 722500 851 724^01 852 725904 853 727609
854 729216 855 721025 856 732736 857 734449 858 736164 859 737681 860 739600
861 741321 862 743044 863 744769 864 746396 865 748225 866 749956 867 753689
868 753824 869 755161 870 756900 871 758641 872 760384 873 762129 874 763776
875 765625 876 767376 877 769129 878 770884 879 772641 880 774400 881 777161
882 777924 883 779589 884 781456 885 783225 886 784996 887 786769 888 788544
889 790321 890 792100 891 793081 892 795664 893 797449 894 799236 895 801025
896 802816 897 804609 898 805904 899 808201 900 810000 901 811801 902 813604
903 815400 904 817216 905 819025 906 820836 907 822649 908 824464 909 826281
910 828100 911 829921 912 831741 913 833569 914 835369 915 837225 916 839056
917 840789 918 842724 919 844561 920 846400 921 847241 922 850084 923 851929
924 853746 925 855625 926 857476 927 859329 928 861^84 929 863041 930 864900
931 866761 932 868624 933 870489 934 872356 935 874225 936 876096 937 877869
938 879844 939 881721 940 883600 941 885481 942 886364 943 889249 944 881136
945 893025 946 894916 947 896809 948 898704 949 900601 950 902500 951 904401
952 906304 953 908209 954 910016 955 912025 956 913936 957 915849 958 917764
959 919681 960 921600 961 923521 962 926444 963 928369 964 929296 965 931225
966 933256 967 935089 968 937024 969 939961 970 940900 971 942741 972 944784
973 946729 974 948676 975 950625 976 952576 977 954529 978 956484 979 958441
980 960400 981 962361 982 964324 983 966^89 984 968256 985 970225 986 972196
987 974169 988 976144 989 978121 990 980100 991 982081 992 984064 993 986049
994 988036 995 990025 996 992016 997 994009 998 996004 999 998001 1000 1000000
1001 1002001 1002 1004004 1003 1006009 1004 1008016 1005 1010025 1006 1012036
1007 1014049 1008 1016064 1009 1018081 1010 1020100 1011 1022121 1012 1024104
1013 1026196 1014 1028196 1015 1030225 1016 1032256 1017 1034289 1018 1036324
1019 1038361 1020 1040400 1021 1042441 1022 1044484 1023 1046529 1024 1048576
1025 1050625 1026 1052676 1027 1054729 1028 1056784 1029 1058841 1030 1060900
1031 1060961 1032 1065024 1033 1067089 1034 1069156 1035 1071225 1036 1073296
1037 1075369 1038 1077444 1039 1079521 1040 1081600 1041 1082681 1042 1085764
1043 1087^49 1044 1089936 1045 1092025 1046 1094116 1047 1096209 1048 1098304
1049 1100401 1050 1102550 1051 1104601 1052 1106704 1053 1108809 1054 1110916
1055 1113025 1056 1115136 1057 1117249 1058 1119364 1059 1120489 1060 1123600
1061 1125721 1062 1127844 1063 1129969 1064 1132096 1065 1134225 1066 1136358
1067 1138489 1068 1140624 1069 1142761 1070 1144900 1071 1147041 1072 1149184
1073 1151329 1074 1153476 1075 1155625 1076 1157976 1077 1159929 1078 1162074
1079 1164241 1080 1166400 1081 1168561 1082 1170724 1083 1172889 1084 1175056
1085 1177225 1086 1179396 1087 1181569 1088 1183744 1089 1185921 1090 1188100
1091 1190281 1092 1192464 1093 1194649 1094 1196836 1095 1199025 1096 1201216
1097 1203409 1098 1205604 1099 1207801 1100 1210000 1101 1212201 1102 1214404
1103 1216609 1104 1218816 1105 1221025 1106 1223396 1107 1225449 1108 1227664
1109 1229881 1110 1232100 1111 1234321 1112 1236544 1113 1238769 1114 1240969
1115 1242625 1116 1245459 1117 1247689 1118 1249924 1119 1252161 1120 1254400
1121 1256^41 1122 1258884 1123 1261029 1124 1263376 1125 1265625 1126 1267876
1127 1270029 1128 1272384 1129 1274641 1130 1276900 1131 1279161 1132 1281426
1133 1283689 1134 1285956 1135 1288225 1136 1287496 1137 1292769 1138 1294094
1139 1297321 1140 1299640 1141 1301881 1142 1304164 1143 1306449 1144 1308736
1145 1311025 1146 1313316 1147 1315509 1148 1317904 1149 1320201 1150 1322500
1151 1324801 1152 1327104 1153 1329409 1154 1331716 1155 1334025 1156 1336336
1157 1338649 1158 1340964 1159 1343381 1160 1345600 1161 1347921 1162 1350244
1163 1352569 1164 1354396 1165 1357225 1166 1358556 1167 1361689 1168 1364124
1169 1366921 1170 1368900 1171 1371240 1172 1373584 1173 1375929 1174 1378276
1175 1380625 1176 1382979 1177 1383329 1178 1387284 1179 1390041 1180 1392400
1181 1394761 1182 1397124 1183 1399489 1184 1401856 1185 1404225 1186 1406606
1187 1408904 1188 1411124 1189 1413711 1190 1416100 1191 1418481 1192 1420864
1193 1423249 1194 1425639 1195 1428025 1196 1430416 1197 1432809 1198 1435204
1199 1437601 1200 1440000 1201 1442401 1202 1444804 1203 1447209 1204 1449616
1205 1452025 1206 1454436 1207 1456849 1208 1459264 1209 1461681 1210 1464100
1211 1466521 1212 1468944 1213 1471369 1214 1473796 1215 1476225 1216 1478656
1217 1480989 1218 1483924 1219 1485961 1220 1488400 1221 1490841 1222 1493244
1223 1495729 1224 1498246 1225 1500125 1226 1503076 1227 1505529 1228 1507984
1229 1510441 1230 1512900 1231 1515361 1232 1517824 1233 1520289 1234 1522656
1235 1525225 1236 1527696 1237 1530169 1238 1334244 1239 1535121 1240 1537600
1241 15400^1 1242 1542564 1243 1545049 1244 1547536 1245 1550025 1246 1552516
1247 1555009 1248 1557504 1249 1560001 1250 1562500 1251 1565001 1252 1567504
1253 1570009 1254 1572416 1255 1575025 1256 1577536 1257 1580049 1258 1582564
1259 1585081 1260 1587600 1261 1590121 1262 1592644 1263 1595169 1264 1597706
1265 1600225 1266 1602756 1267 1605289 1268 1607824 1269 1609361 1270 1612900
1271 1615441 1272 1617984 1273 1620529 1274 1622076 1275 1625625 1276 1628176
1277 1530729 1278 1633464 1279 1635841 1280 1638400 1281 1640961 1282 1643524
1283 1645989 1284 1645656 1285 1651225 1286 1653796 1287 1656369 1288 1658944
1289 1661521 1290 1664100 1291 1666681 1292 1669264 1293 1671849 1294 1674336
1295 1677025 1296 1679616 1297 1682209 1298 1683804 1299 1687401 1300 1690000

CHAP. XI. Showing, how to Hang a Rising line by several Sweeps, to make it
rounder aftward, then at the beginning of the same.
IF any be desirous to have a Rising line rounder aftward then it is at the
foar part of it, they must proceed thus; first Work by the Sweep that they
would have first, and then begin again, and find the other Sweep, that they
would have the roundest; An Example of this will make it more plain, as in the
following Figure will appear.

Let D E represent the length of a Rising line E I, the height thereof 8 foot,
on the after end thereof; first I find the Sweep that Sweepeth it, by
Multiplying of 20 foot the length, which is 240 inches: for if you look in the
Tables, under the Title of Feet-Inches, for 20 feet, you will see in the next
Column, toward the left hand, 240, over head is written Inches, signifying,
that in 20 feet is 240 inches; and just against it, and in the same line,
toward the right hand, under the Title of Squares, you will see written 57600,
signifying, that the square of 240 is 57600, these numbers you will find in
the second Page of the Tables, and the last line, the seventh, eighth, and
ninth Columns.

This squared number 57600, made by the Multiplication of D E, 240 inches, must
be divided by the height of the Rising line assigned E I, 8 foot, or 96 inches,
so remains in the quotient 600, to which must be added the height of the
Rising, as is before taught, and they make 696, which is the Diameter of the
whole Circle: the half thereof is 348 inches, which is 29 foot, as you may see
by dividing it by 12; or else, if you turn to the Tables, and seek under the
Title of Inches for 348, you will see in the same line, toward the left hand,
29 feet, which you will find in the third Page, and the 28th line, the seventh
and eighth Column; then I Work by that Sweep to 3/5 of the length of the Rising
line, or 12 foot of the same, at the point C it is represented, at which point
I seek the Rising C B, I seek in the Table for the Square made of 144, and I
find it in the second Page, 24 line, at the first Column; and toward the
right hand, under the Title of Squares, I find 20736, which is the Square made
of 144: then I seek for the Square made of the Sweep, or side A B, 348 inches,
and I find it in the Tables to be 121104, from this 121104 I Substract the
other Square, made of the side D C, 144 being 20736, and there remains
100368, whose Root I find in the Tables, in the third Page, and the 37th line,
and the sixth Column, 100489, which is too much by near 121; but the other
number before it being much more too little, the number answering hereunto is
316 inches, and near, Subtracted from 348, the whole side leaves 31 inches,
or two foot 7 inches for the Rising,

0 30 57600 (600 9666 89

121104 20736 100368 at the point C: Now to make a rounder Sweep aftward on, or
at the other end of the line, as from B to F, which runeth higher up, or
Roundeth more, as from I to F: Here will be something more of trouble to find
the Sweep that shall exactly touch the two points assigned, as from B to F*
then to find the former Sweep. Now the Demonstration will show it to be thus.



Let B and F be the two points to which the Sweep is confined to touch; draw a
straight line from B to F, as you see, and so you have a Right lined Triangle,
made of the sides B H, the length of the line to be swept by the second Sweep,
and the side H F, the height of the same, together with the Subtending side B
F; then a straight line drawn from the middle of the side B F, and
perpendicular, or square, to the same line B F, and extended, till it touch the
side D A, the place where it touches shall be the Center of the same Sweep, as
is the line G H, passing through the middle of the side B F, at the point O,
which to find Arithmetically, proceed thus; find first the length of the side
B F, as before is taught, of two sides of a Right Angled Triangle given, to
find the third side, which will be found to be 134 inches, the half whereof
is 67 inches, from B to O, then if a perpendicular be let fall from O to the
line B H, it will cut that Base line also in halves, as at the point P, being
48 inches: then again, find the side O H, and that will be, in this Example,
equal to the side B O, but in other cases it may not so fall out: So then,
those two sides being known, as the side O H, 67, inches, and the side P H, 48
inches, and the whole length of the side K H, 240 inches, you may then Work by
the Rule of Three, saying, if 48, the side P H, give 67 inch, for the side O H,
what will 240 give, for the side K H, as thus;

If 48 give 67, what will 240

240 2 67 144 1680 4640 1440 16080 (335 48888 16880 44

If you Multiply the two first numbers together, and divide by the first
number, you will beget in the quotient 335, for the length of the whole side G
H.

I here neglected the inch in this Multiplication, for the inch should have
been Multiplied into the 240, by adding to the Sum 16080, 120, the half of
240, and it makes 16200, which divided by 48, makes 337 inches for the whole
side G H; So then, these two sides being found, find the side G K, thus, as
before is taught, look in the Table of Squares for the Square made of the side
337, and it will be 113569, from which Substract the Square made of 240, the
other side, being 57600, there rests 55969, as you may see, for that number
sought for in the Tables, and you find the nearest number to it, to be 56069,
and the root of it to be 237, for the side G K, to which must be added the
Rising of the point C B, or K D, which is all one, and is as we found it before
to be, 31 inches, added to 237, makes 268 inches, or 22 foot 4 inches;
showing, that at 22 foot 4 inches, from the point D, towords G, will be the
point where the Center of the Rounder Circle ought to stand: Then again, you
have the side G K, found as before, to be 237, and the side K B 144, and if you
work as is taught before, but remember, that if the longest side be sought for,
as is now in the last side sought for, G B being the longest side, you must add
the squares made of the other two sides together, and the square of those two
Sums shall be the longest side G B, 277 inches, that is 23 feet, 1 inch, which
is the length of the second Sweep: and so have you the length of the Sweep. The
same order you may observe to round your Sweep as often as you please.

113569 57600 55969

237 31 268

If any have knowledge of the Doctrine of Triangles, it may be found more
readier, that I leave to those that know the use thereof.

Note also, that when you seek for any number in the Tables, take heed that you
mind the number of Figures you seek for, to agree in number with those that
directs you to seek for them.

As for Example, In the other figures abovementioned, 55969, they are in number
5, by their places, as you see; then repairing to the Table, I find 559504,
but telling the Figures, I see that they are in number 6, but should be but 5:
therefore this number, represented in the seventh Page; and the 28th line, and
third Column, is not the place I seek for, then I turn toward the beginning
of the Table, till I see that the Columns of Squares contain but 5 figures,
and there seek the nearest number agreeing to 55969, and in the second Page,
37th line, last Column, I find 56069, the nearest agreeing to it, which is the
place answering to the other directory figures.

Note also, That the Example of finding the Sweep aforegoing, is laid down by
the small Scale of the Draught, by which you may try it for your better
directions.

And in that Table you may see that any farther then 70 foot, being the end of
the seventh Page, I have not mentioned the Feet and Inches belonging to the
number of Inches, but have left it out because they are of little use any
further, because that will reach far enough for the length of any Rising line
of any Ship whatever: If any be desirous to convert any of the following
numbers into inches, he may do it by Dividing by 12.

Thus I think I have spoken enough to the Ingenuous, concerning the singular
use of the Tables, or of this way of Working by Segments o Circles.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Measuring of Ships.
60 20 1200 10 120100

I Shall say something concerning it; the Shipwrights have to themselves a
custom of measuring at London, or on the River of Thames thus, they multiply
the length of the Keel into the breadth of the Ship, at the broadest place,
taken from outside to outside, and the product of that by the half breadth, this
second product of the multiplication they divide by 94 or sometimes 100, and
according to that division, the quotient thereof; they are paid for so many
Tuns; as suppose in the former draught being in length 60 foot and 20 foot
broad, 60, being multiplied by 20, the breadth, produce 1200, that 1200 being
again multiplied by 10, the half breadth produce 12000, if you divide by 100,
you need do no more than cut off the two last figures toward the right hand,
which shall be the answer and renders the Ship to be 120 Tuns, but if you
divide the sum 12000 by 94, you will have 127 2/3 of a Tun very near, but this
cannot be the true ability of the ship to carry or lift, because two ships by
this rule of equal breadth and length shall be of equal burden,
notwithstanding the fullness or sharpness of those Vessels, which may differ
them very much, or the one ship may have more timber than the other in her
building, and so shall carry less than the other: But the true way of measure
must be by measure of the body and bulk of the ship underwater, for if one ship
be longer in the floor than another of the same breadth and length, she shall be
more in burden than the other; as a Flemish ship shall carry more than a
French or Italian Vessel of the same length and breadth; Therefore I say the
measure of the ship being known by measuring her, as a piece of timber may be
measured of the same form, to the draught of water assigned her, the weight of
the same body of the same water that the ship swimmeth in shall be the exact
weight of the ship; and all things therein; loading, rigging, victuals included
therein: then if the ship be measured to her light mark as she will swim at
being lanched, the weight of so much water being taken or subtracted from the
weight of the water when she is laden, the residue shall be the weight that
must load her, or her ability of carrying, called her burden, by this means you
may know the weight of the ship light, and what she will carry to every foot of
water assigned to her, which cannot be done by no general rules in Arithmetic
because of their great irregularity, according to the differing minds of
Shipwrights; you may if you please first measure the content of the Keel and
Post and Stem-rudder, all of it that is without the Plank, and under the water
line, and note it by it self, then measure the body of the ship in the
Midships, made by the square made of the multiplying of the depth of the water
line, and the breadth, then you may find; the content of the want by the
circular part of the ship under water, being narrower downward, and substract
this from the whole content of the squared body of the depth of the Water-line
and breadth of the ship, and this shall be the solid content of that part of the
ship, I mean in solid foot measure of 1728 inches to the foot, then proceed to
the fore part or the after part of the ship, and to 3 or 4 Timbers more, find
the mean breadth at the narrowing aloft at the water-line, and allow at the floor
and the mean depth, and measure that piece of the ship, as I told you of the
middle part of the Ship, and so measure the whole Ship by pieces and add them
together, and so many feet as it makes, so many feet of water shall be the
weight of the said ship; and the reason may be considered thus; there is a
ponderosity in warer, but there is a greater in the air, only to the heaviest
of things; and there is a ponderosity in water it self, but not so much as in
other things more solid as in Iron: Suppose a Gun or an Anchor of Iron, it
sinketh in the water, but yet it is not so heavy in the water as in the air,
by the weight of so much water as shall make a body of the same water equal to
the body of the Gun or Anchor in magnitude; which weight subtracted from the
weight of the Iron body weighed in the air, and so much must be the weight of
it in the water.

Again, if a body be lighter in weight, than water of the same bigness, it has
an ability of lifting in the water, and can lift or carry so much as is that
difference, as a piece of cork or wood of firr-trees, being lighter than water,
it swimmeth on the face of the water, and refuses to be depressed without more
weight added to it.

Thus a ship being a concave body, is made capable of lifting according to the
greatness or littleness of this concavity, respect being had to the greatness
of the Timber put into it, or the nature of it, all which makes a ship swim
deeper or lighter in the water.

I have proved by the Thames water, that fresh Water is lighter then salt
water, so then salt water being heavier than fresh, causes that a ship
swimmeth deeper in the fresh water than in salt.

I shall not need to say any thing more concerning the mesauring, for it will
be understood by those that have any Judgment in the mesuring of triangles, the
matter it self being but a nicity rather than usefll: I only touched it to show
those that are so curious minded, which way they may accomplish their desires;
I shall forbear to give examples, because it will much increase my Treatise,
and augment the Price, which might prove more prejudicial to youngmen than
advantageous.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the Masts of Ships.
FRom the length and breadth is gained the Mainmasts length, and all the other
Masts as well as yards, is derived from thence, and there is different
proceedings in this case, according to the largeness of the Ships, thus, the
main Masts of small Ships to be three times as long as the Ship is in breadth;
as a ship of 20 foot broad, by the same rule must have a Mast of 60 foot long.

Others for greater Ships, add the breadth to the length, and to that the half
breadth, which some they divide by 5, and the quotient is the number of yards,
as a ship 114 foot long and 34 foot in breadth, as the breadth added to the
length, and the half breadth added together, make 165, that divided by 5, yields
33, and so many yards is the length to be of that Mast, the foremast must be a
yard shorter at the head, that is to say besides the height of the step, which
commonly in most ships the step of the foremast stands higher from the
bottom of the ship than the step of the Mainmast; the foremast must be shorter
by that difference, and one yard more, or the bigness of the ship considered, 4
foot shorter at the head, or besides the difference below,

114 34 17 165 10 165 (33 55

The Top-masts two thirds of the length of the lower Masts.

The Main-yard to be 2/^ and ^/22 of the Mainmast, as in the Mast
aforementioned of 60 foot long, two thirds of 60 is 40, and the 2/12 of 60 is
5, added to 40 make 45, for the length of the main yard.

The foreyard to be 6/7 of the Main-Yard, as the Mainyard being 45 foot, divide
45 by 7, so comes 6 in the quotient, and a fraction remaining of 3, signifying
3/7, so that the 1/7 of 45 will be 6 and 3/7, you must take 6 times so much, a^
6 times 6 makes 36, and if you take 6 times 3/7 make 18/7, that is, two whole
numbers, and 4/7 remaining, which added to 36, make 38, and 4/7 of a foot for
the length of the fore-yard.

The Top-sail Yards must be half the length of the lower Yards, the Mizne Yard
usualy is made of equal length with the fore-yard, the Crosjack yard, of equal
length with the Main top-sail yard, and the mizen Top-sail yard to be half the
length of the Crosjack yard.

The mizen Mast to be of the length of the Main-top mast from the upper Decks,
and so much longer as is the height of the ship between Deck, the Boltspreete
to be of length equal to the foremast from the upper Deck of the Fore-castle
upwards.

For the bigness of these Masts, to a yard in length, of an inch, or else of an
inch to the foot, and so of yards likewise, only the Boltspreet something
bigger, would be the better if he be made as big as the foremast.

The Spritsail yard in length ^/^ of the Boltspreete, the Spritsail to psail
yard as of the rest, to be 1/2 the spritsail yard, the mizen yard in bigness,
but ^/^ inch to a yard: And directing my discourse to Young Men that desire
instructions, I will avoid troubling of them as near as I can with Arithmetic,
therefore I will show them the sweeping out of Mast and Yards, for the filling
up their Quarters according to circles. Thus, make a half circle equal* in
diamiter to the bigness of the Mast, in the partners, or if it be a Topmast,
equal to his bigness in the Cap; as suppose for to make a Mast 60 foot in
length, then by the former directions of an inch for his bigness to a foot,
renders him to be 15 inches through, but for a Mainmast it is always better
that they be made bigger, to every 6 inches ad of an inch more, so then this
Mast will be 16 inches, I make a sweep of 16 inches, as from A to B, supposing
the feet of the small scale, to be inches, draw, the Sweep or Arch A C B, 15
inches from A to B, than at the Center draw a line perpendicular to A B, as
from D to C, divide the perpendicular into four equal parts, with the
compasses, and set off 3 of them, on the perpendicular from D to E, and through
that point draw a line parallel to A B, as is the line f g, which shall be the
bigness of the Mast at the Hounds, then middle the space between D and E as at
h, and draw the line i k, which shall be the bigness of the Mast at the middle,
then two other lines drawn again through the middle between D h and another
between h E, shall be the bigness of the Mast in the quarters, so then take off
from the sweep, the bigness at each place from the middle line D C, to the arch,
and in like manner middle the mast from the Partners to the Hounds, and quarter
it, and strike a middle line from end to end, and at each place set off the
thickness given you by your Sweep, for the length of the Heads of the Masts,
you may allow to every foot 1 inch of an inch from the head to the uper part of
the Crostrees, the length of the Trestle trees to be 1/3 of the Ships breadth,
and in depth half the thickness of the Head, at the Hounds, and for the
thickness, half the thickness of the Head, at the very end of the Head of the
Mast, for yards you may draw the Sweep of them to their bigness at the Slings,
and let the ends of them be but one third of the bigness in the Slings,
accordingly draw your sweep, and fill him out in the quarters, according to the
Circle, which I shall leave now to your practice, hoping, what I have spoken
shall be well taken of the ignorant, who desire instructions.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning Rowing of Ships, when they are becalmed.
I Have here invented a means of Rowing of a Ship, by the heaving at the
Capstane, where will be many benefits; First, of a greater purchase of
strength, for it is evident, that 10 Men at a Capstane shall heave a Ship a
Head, when 30 Men shall not Haall her a Head by hand, nay 50; neither shall
they be so soon tired, for that Owers are a great weariness to the Arms,
beside a double motion of the body, as when the stroke is fetched, to way down
the Ower, that the blade may be elivated out of the Water, where it must be
kept so, until another

stroke be fetched, and then great strength put to the Ower by the Arms, or
else heavy bodies, will not be moved: beside, if you have never so many Owers
as you can put, they all fetch their stroke at once, but when Rowed by hand,
one is likely to fetch a stroke before another, so that much of the strength is
lost by a disagreement in the labor: But to proceed to the description of this
invention.

Let the two lines, C D, and C D, represent the sides of the Ship, 16 foot
broad, as is the line C C, 16 foot long, by the Scale of the Draught; and let
the two long squares, d d, and d d, represent the two Bitt-pins, with the
Cross-piece of, let the Black, between the two Bit-pins, represent a Roll, or
Windless, with a Surdge in the middle, as is the Surdge of a Crab, or Capstane;
in the two ends of this Roll let there be placed two Winches, as you may see
represented by Cranks, a and a; let there be made a hollow place in the Head of
the Bit-pins for these two Winches to rest in, that they may turn round in
them, and bide in them: then let there be two pieces of Timber, equal in
length, to the space of the Ship you would have filled with Oars, represented
by the two black lists, marked b b, and b b; then let there be fitted two small
pieces, made of good Ash, or some good strong Wood, of equal length as is the
two black Lists, n L, m L, fastened into the pieces of the frame, as at the
points L and L, by a Boult, but so, that they may play on that Boult, and the
other ends must be with a Hoale made in the ends, put over the handles of the
Cranks, at n and m, then in the two long pieces for the frame let the Oars be
fixed, as at the points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, of each side of the Ship
representing 7 Oars of a side, they may be fastened in the Frame, by a Mortis
made therein, and a Tenent on the Oar, made to go slack, in that the Oar may
play, and have liberty to fetch a Stroke, in the middle whereof must be placed
a Iron bolt, to fasten him, and keep the Oar from launching in and out, and on
the Roughtre, or side of the Ship* as in C D and C D, must be placed Thoule
pins to each Oar, as in Boats that Row; then must you have a Halser splised
together, in manner of a Vial, that must take two or three turns about the
Roll, in the Surdge, as you may imagine, at the middle of the Black Roll, or
notch therein, and pass from thence to the Capstane, with two or three turns
there also; then this Vial also, reeved thorough some other Blocks, as in
manner of Snach block, and these blocks placed between the Capstane and the
Roll, you may thereby increase that purchase so, as that it may heave very
easy, and with great strength, so as to be able to Row a Ship a Head in a
calm, or in little wind, two, threee or four leagues, a watch or more,
according as the Ingine shall be better or worse fitted; for if you mark in
the Figure of the Work, and suppose the Vial Reeved, and by heaving of the
Capstane, shall turn the Roll, as the Crankes goes round, it shall carry
with it about, and then the small pieces shall cause the frame to pass forward
to and again, to fetch a stroke with the Oars.

FINIS.

