HUDIBRAS. IN THREE PARTS. Corrected, with several Additions and Annotations.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by W. Rogers, at the Sun against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1684.

HUDIBRAS. The First Part. Written in the time of the Late Wars. CORRECTED and
AMENDED WITH Several Additions and Annotations.

LONDON, Printed by T.N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold by T. Basset
at the George in Fleetstreet, 1684.

HUDIBRAS.
The ARGUMENT of The FIRST CANTO.
Sir Hudibras his passing worth,
The manner how he sallied forth:
His Arms and Equipage are shown;
His Horse's virtues, and his own.
The Adventure of the Bear and Fiddle
Is sung, but breaks off in the middle.
CANTO I.
WHen civil Fury first grew high,
And men fell out they knew not why;
When hard words, Jealousies and Fears,
Set Folks together by the Ears,
And made them fight, like mad or drunk,
For Dame Religion as for Punk,
Whose honesty they all durst swear for,
Though not a man of them know wherefore:
When Gospel-Trumpeter, surrounded
With long-ear'd rout to Battle sounded,
And Pulpit, Drum Ecclesiastic,
Was beat with fist, instead of a stick:
Then did Sir Knight abandon dwelling,
And out he rode a Colonelling.
A Wight he was whose very sight would
Entitle him Mirror of Knighthood;
That never bent his stubborn knee
To any thing but Chivalry;
Nor put up blow, but that which laid
Right Worshipful on Shoulder Blade;
Chief of Domestic Knights and Errant,
Either for Chartel or for Warrant:
Great on the Bench, Great in the Saddle,
That could as well bind over, as swaddle:
Mighty he was at both of these,
And styled of War as well as Peace.
(So some Rats of amphibious nature,
Are either for the Land or Water.)
But here our Authors make a doubt,
Whether he were more wise, or stout
Some hold the one, and some the other:
But howsoe'r they make a pother,
The difference was so small, his Brain
Outweigh'd his Rage but half a Grain:
Which made some take him for a Tool
That Knaves do work with, called a Fool.
And offer to lay wagers, that
As Mountaigne, playing with his Cat,
Complains she thought him but an Ass,
Much more she would Sir Hudibras.
(For that is the Name our valiant Knight
To all his Challenges did write.)
But they are mistaken very much,
It Is plain enough he was no such.
We grant, although he had much wit,
H' was very shie of using it,
As being loath to wear it out,
And therefore bore it not about.
Unless on Holy Days, or so,
As Men their best Apparel do.
Beside it is known he could speak Greek,
As naturally as Pigs squeek:
That Latin was no more difficile,
Than to a Blackbird it is to whistle.
Being rich in both he never scanted
His Bounty unto such as wanted;
But much of either would afford
To many that had not one word.
For Hebrew Roots, although they are found
To flourish most in barren ground,
He had such plenty, as sufficed
To make some think him circumcised:
And truly so perhaps, he was
It Is many a Pious Christians case,
He was in Logic a great Critic,
Profoundly skilled in Analytick.
He could distinguish, and divide
A Hair 'twixt South and South-West side:
On either which he would dispute,
Confute, change hands, and still confute.
He Would undertake to prove by force
Of Argument, a Man's no Horse.
He Would prove a Buzard is no Fowl,
And that a Lord may be an Owl;
A Calf an Alderman, a Goose a Justice,
And Rooks Committee Men and Trustees
He Would run in Debt by Disputation,
And pay with Ratiocination.
All this by Syllogism, true
In Mood and Figure, he would do.
For Rhetoric, he could not open
His mouth, but out there flew a Trope:
And when he happened to break off
In The middle of his speech, or cough,
He Had hard words, ready to show why,
And tell what Rules he did it by.
Else when with greatest Art he spoke,
You Would think he talked like other folk.
For all a Rhetoricians Rules
Teach nothing but to name his Tools:
His ordinary Rate of speech
In loftiness of sound was rich;
A Babilonish dialect,
Which learned Pedants much affect.
It was a parti-colour'd dress
Of patched and pyball'd Languages:
'Twas English cut on Greek and Latin,
Like Fustian heretofore on Satin.
It had an odd promiscuous Tone,
As if h' had talked three parts in one.
Which made some think when he did gabble,
The had heard three Laborers of Babel;
Or Cerberus himself pronounce
A Leash of Languages at once.
This he as volubly would vent,
As if his stock would never be spent.
And truly to support that charge
He had supplies as vast and large.
For he could coin or counterfeit
New words with little or no wit:
Words so debased and hard, no stone
Was hard enough to touch them on.
And when with hasty noise he spoke 'em,
The Ignorant for current took 'em.
That had the Orator who once,
Did fill his Mouth with Pebble stones
When he harangu'd; but known his Phrase
He would have used no other ways.
In Mathematics he was greater.
Then Tycho-Brahe, or Erra Pater:
For he by Geometrick scale
Could take the size of Pots of Ale;
Resolve by Signs and Tangents straight,
If Bread or Butter wanted weight;
And wisely tell what hour o'th day
The Clock does strike, by Algebra.
Beside he was a shrewd Philospher;
And had read every Text and Gloss over:
What e're the crabbed'st Author has
He understood b'implicit Faith,
What ever Sceptick could inquere for;
For every why he had a wherefore:
Knew more then forty of them do,
As far as words and terms could go.
All which he understood by Rote,
And as occasion served, would quote;
No matter whether right or wrong:
They might be either said or sung.
His Notions fitted things so well,
That which was which he could not tell;
But oftentimes mistook the one
For the other, as Great Clerks have done.
He could reduce all things to Acts
And knew their Natures by Abstracts,
Where Entity and Quiddity
The Ghosts of defunct Bodies fly;
Where Truth in Person does appear,
Like words congealed in Northern Air,
He knew what is what, and that is as high
As Metaphysick wit can fly.
In School Divinity as able
As he that hight Irrefragable;
Profound in all the Nominal
And real ways beyond them all;
And with as delicate a hand
Could twist as tough a Rope of Sand;
And weave fine Cobwebs, fit for skull
That Is empty when the Moon is full;
Such as take Lodgings in a Head
That Is to be let unfurnished.
He could raise Scruples dark and nice,
And after solve'em in a trice:
As if Divinity had caught
The Itch, of purpose to be scratched;
Or, like a Mountebank, did wound
And stab her self with doubts profound,
Only to show with how small pain
The sores of faith are cured again;
Although by woeful proof we find,
They always leave a Scar behind.
He knew the Seat of Paradise,
Could tell in what degree it lies:
And, as he was disposed, could prove it,
Below the Moon, or else above it
What Adam dreamt of when his Bride
Came from her Closet in his side:
Whether the Devil tempted her
By a High Dutch Interpreter:
If either of them had a Navel;
Who first made Music malleable:
Whether the Serpent at the fall
Had cloven Feet, or none at all.
All this without a Gloss or Comment,
He would unridle in a moment
In proper terms, such as men smatter
When they throw out and miss the matter:
For his Religion it was fit
To match his Learning and his Wit:
'Twas Presbyterian true blew,
For he was of that stubborn Crew
Of Errant Saints, whom all men grant
To be the true Church Militant:
Such as do build their Faith upon
The holy Text of Pike and Gun;
Decide all Controversies by
Infallible Artillery;
And prove their Doctrine Orthodox
By Apostolic Blows and Knocks;
Call Fire and Sword and Desolation,
A godly-thorough-Reformation,
Which always must be carried on,
And still be doing, never done:
As if Religion were intended
For nothing else but to be mended.
A Sect, whose chief Devotion lies
In odd preverse Antipathies;
In falling out with that or this,
And finding somewhat still amiss:
More peevish, cross, and spleenatick.
Then Dog distract, or Monky sick,
That with more care keep Holy Day
The wrong, than others the right way:
Compound for Sins, they are inclined to,
By damning those they have no mind to;
Still so perverse and opposite,
As if they worshipped God for spite.
The self-same thing they will abhor
One way, and long another for.
Free Will they one way disavow,
Another, nothing else allow.
All Piety consists therein
In them, in other men all Sin.
Rather than fail, they will defy
That which they love most tenderly;
Quarrel with minced Pies, and disparage
Their best and dearest friend, Plum-porridge;
Fat Pig and Goose it self oppose,
And blaspheme Custard through the Nose.
The Apostles of this fierce Religion,
Like Mahomet's, were Ass and Widgeon,
To whom our Knight by fast instinct
Of Wit and Temper was so linkt,
As if Hypocrisy and Nonsense
Had got the Advouson of his Conscience.
Thus was he gifted and accouter'd,
We mean on the inside, not the outward:
That next of all we shall discuss;
Then listen Sirs, It follows thus.
His tawny Beard was the equal grace
Both of his Wisdom and his Face;
In Cut and Die so like a Tile,
A sudden view it would beguile:
The upper part thereof was Whey,
The neither Orange mixed with Gray.
This hairy Meteor did denounce
The fall of Scepters and of Crowns;
With grizly type did represent
Declining Age of Government;
And tell with Hieroglyphick Spade,
Its own grave and the State's were made.
Like Sampson's Heart-breakers, it grew
In time to make a Nation rue;
Though it contributed its own fall,
To wait upon the public downfall.
It was Canonick, and did grow
In Holy Orders by strict vow;
Of Rule as sullen and severe,
As that of rigid Cordeliere:
'Twas bound to suffer Persecution
And Martyrdom with resolution;
TO oppose it self against the hate
And vengeance of the incensed State:
In whose defiance it was worn,
Still ready to be pulled and torn,
With red-hot Irons to be tortured,
Reviled, and spit upon, and martyred.
Maugre all which, 'twas to stand fast,
As long as Monarchy should last.
But when the State should hap to reel,
'Twas to submit to fatal steel,
And fall, as it was consecrate
A Sacrifice to fall of State;
Whose thread of life the fatal Sisters
Did twist together with its Whiskers,
And twine so close, that time should never,
In life or death, their fortunes sever;
But with his rusty Sickle mow
Both down together at a blow.
So learned Taliacotius from
The brawny part of Porter's Bum,
Cut supplemental Noses, which
Would last as long as Parent breech:
But when the Date of Nock was out,
Off dropped the Sympathetick Snout.
His Back, or rather Burden, showed
As if it stooped with its own load.
For as Aeneas bore his Sire
Upon his Shoulders through the Fire:
Our Knight did bear no less a Pack
Of his own Buttocks on his Back:
Which now had almost got the Upper-
Hand of his Head, for want of Crupper.
To poize this equally, he bore
A Paunch of the same bulk before:
Which still he had a special care
To keep well crammed with thrifty fare;
As White-pot, Butter-milk, and Curds,
Such as a Country house affords;
With other Victual, which anon
We further shall dilate upon,
When of his Hose we come to treat,
The Cup-bord where he kept his meat.
His Doublet was of sturdy Buff,
And though not Sword, yet Cudgel-proof;
Whereby 'twas fitter for his use,
That feared no blows but such as bruise.
His Breeches were of rugged Woollen,
And had been at the Siege of Bullen;
To old King Harry so well known,
Some Writers held they were his own.
Through they were lined with many a piece
Of Ammunition-Bread and Cheese,
And fat Black puddings, proper food
For Warriers that delight in Blood:
For, as we said, He always chose
To carry Vittle in his Hose.
That often tempted Rats, and Mice,
The Ammunition to surprise:
And when he put a Hand but in
The one or the other Magazine,
They stoutly in defense on it stood
And from the wounded Foe drew blood
And till the were stormed, and beaten out
Never left the Fortified Redoubt;
And though Knights Errant, as some think,
Of old did neither eat nor drink,
Because when thorough Deserts vast
And Regions desolate they past,
Where Belly-timber above ground
Or under was not to be found,
Unless they grazed, there is not one word
Of their Provision on Record:
Which made some confidently write,
They had no stomachs, but to fight,
It Is false: for Arthur wore in Hall
Round Table like a Farthingal,
On which, with Shirt pulled out behind,
And eke before his good Knights dined.
Though 'twas no Table, some suppose,
But a huge pair of round Trunk-hose;
In which he carried as much meat
As he and all his Knights could eat,
When laying by their Swords and Truncheons,
They took their Breakfasts or their Nuncheons,
But let that pass at present, lest
We should forget where we digrest;
As Learned Authors use, to whom
We leave it, and to the purpose come.
His puissant Sword unto his side
Near his undaunted Heart was tied,
With Basket-hilt, that would hold broth,
And serve for Fight and Dinner both.
In it he melted Lead for Bullets
To shoot at Foes; and sometimes Pullets,
To whom he bore so fell a Grutch,
He never gave quarter to any such.
The trenchant blade, Toledo trusty,
For want of fighting was grown rusty,
And ate into it self, for lack
Of some body to hew and hack.
The peaceful Scabbard where it dwelt,
The Rancor of its Edge had felt:
For of the lower end two handful,
It had devoured 'twas so manfull;
And so much scorned to lurk in case,
As if it durst not show its face.
In many desperate Attempts,
Of Wars, Exigents, Contempts,
It had appeared with Courage bolder
Than Sergant Bum, invading shoulder.
Often had it taken possession,
And Prisoners too, or made them run.
This Sword a Dagger had his Page,
That was but little for his age:
And therefore waited on him so,
As Dwarfs upon Knights Errant do.
It was a serviceable Dudgeon,
Either for fighting or for drudging
When it had stabbed, or broke a head,
It would scrape Trenchers, or chip Bread,
Toast Cheese or Bacon, though it were
To bait a Mouse-trap, 'twould not care.
'Twould make clean shoes, and in the Earth
Set Leeks and Onions, and so forth.
It had been Prentice to a Brewer,
Where this and more it did endure.
But left the Trade, as many more
Have lately done on the same score.
In the Holsters, at his Saddle-bow,
Two aged Pistols he did stow,
Among the surplus of such meat
As in his Hose he could not get.
They were upon hard Duty still,
And every night stood Sentinel,
To guard the Magazine in the Hose
From two legged and from four legged Foes.
Thus clad and fortified, Sir Knight
From peaceful home set forth to fight.
But first with nimble active force
He got on the outside of his Horse.
For having but one stirrup tied
TO his Saddle, on the further side,
It was so short, h' had much ado
To reach it with his desperate Toe.
But after many strains and heaves,
He got up to the Saddle eaves.
From whence he vaulted into the seat
With so much vigor, strength, and heat
That he had almost tumbled over
With his own weight, but did recover,
By laying hold on Tail and Mane,
Which often he used instead of Reyn.
But now we talk of mounting Steed,
Before we further do proceed,
It does behove us to say something,
Of that which bore our valiant Bumkin.
The Beast was sturdy, large, and tall,
With Mouth of meal and Eyes of Wall:
I would say Eye, for h' had but one,
As most agree though some say none.
He was well stayed, and in his Gate
Preserved a grave, majestic state.
At Spur or Switch no mor he skipt,
Or mended pace, then Spaniard whipped:
And yet so fiery, he would bound,
As if he grive'd to touch the Ground:
That Caesar's Horse, who, as Fame goes,
Had Corns upon his Feet and Toes,
Was not by half so tender-hooft,
Nor trod upon the ground so soft.
And as that Beast would kneel and stoop,
(Some write) to take his Rider up:
So Hudibras his ('it is well known)
Would often do, to set him down.
We shall not need to say what lack
Of Leather was upon his back:
For that was hidden under pad,
And breech of Knight galled full as bad.
His strutting Ribs on both sides showed
Like furrows he himself had plowed:
For underneath the skirt of Panel,
'Twixt every two there was a Channel.
His dragling Tail hung in the Dirt,
Which on his Rider he would flurt
Still as his tender side he pricked,
With armed heel or with unarmed kicked:
For Hudibras wore but one Spur,
As wisely knowing, could he stir
To active trot one side of's Horse,
The other would not hang an Arse.
A Squire he had whose name was Ralph,
That in the adventure went his half.
(Though Writers, for more stately tone,
Do call him Ralpho, it is all one:
And when we can with Meeter safe,
Well call him so, if not plain Raph,
For Rhyme the Rudder is of Verses,
With which like Ships they stear their courses.
An equal stock of Wit and Valor
He had laid in, by birth a Tailor.
The mighty Tyrian Queen that gained
With subtle shreds a Tract of Land,
Did leave it with a Castle fair
To his great Ancestor, her Heir:
From him descended cross-legg'd Knights,
Famed for their Faith and warlike Fights
Against the bloody Canibal,
Whom they destroyed both great and small.
This sturdy Squire had as well
As the bold Trojan Knight, seen Hell,
Not with a counterfeited Pass
Of Golden Bough, but true Gold-lace.
His Knowledge was not far behind
The Knight's, but of another kind,
And by another way came by 't,
Some call it Gifts, and some New light;
A liberal Art, that costs no pains
Of Study, Industry, or Brains.
His Wits were sent him for a Token,
But in the Carriage cracked and broken.
Like Commendation Nine-pence, crookt
With to and from my Love, it looked,
He never considered it, as loath
To look a Gift-Horse in the mouth;
And very wisely would lay forth
No more upon it than 'twas worth.
But as he got it freely, so
He spent it frank and freely too.
For Saints themselves will sometimes be
Of Gifts that cost them nothing, free.
By means of this, with hem and cough,
Prolongers to enlightened Snuff,
He could deep Mysteries unriddle,
As easily as thread a Needle;
For as of Vagabonds we say,
That they are never beside their way:
Whate'r men speak by this New light,
Still they are sure to be in the right.
It Is a dark-Lanthorn of the Spirit,
Which none see by but those that bear it:
A Light that falls down from on high,
For Spiritual Trades to cosen by:
An Ignis Fatuus that bewitches,
And leads Men into Pools and Ditches,
To make them dip themselves, and sound
For Christendom in dirty pond;
To dive like Wild-foul for Salvation,
And fish to catch Regeneration.
This Light inspires, and plays upon
The noise of Saint like Bag-pipe drone,
And speaks through hollow empty Soul,
As through a Trunk, or whispering hole,
Such language as no mortal Ear
But spiritual Eaves-droppers can hear.
So Phoebus or some friendly Muse
Into small Poets song infuse;
Which they at second-hand rehearse
Through Reed or Bag-pipe, Verse for Verse*
Thus Ralph became infallible,
As three or four-legg'd Oracle,
The ancient Cup, or modern Chair;
Spoke truth point blank, though unaware:
For mystic Learning, wondrous able
In Magic Talisman, and Cabal,
Whose primitive tradition reaches
As far as Adam's first green breches:
Deep-sighted in Intelligences,
Idea's, Atoms, Influences;
And much of Terra Incognita,
The Intelligible world could say;
A deep occult Philosopher,
As learned as the Wild Irish are,
Or Sir Agrippa, for profound
And solid Lying much renowned:
He Anthroposophus, and Flood,
And Jacob Behmen understood;
Knew many an Amulet and Charm,
That would do neither good nor harm:
In Rosy-Crucian Lore as Learned,
As he that Vere adeptus earned.
He understood the speech of Birds
As well as they themselves do words:
Could tell what subtlest Parrots mean,
That speak and think contrary clean;
What Member it is of whom they talk
When they cry Rope, and Walk, Knave, Walk.
He Would extract numbers out of matter,
And keep them in a Glass, like water,
Of Sovereign power to make men wise;
For dropped in blere, thick-sighted Eyes,
They Would make them see in darkest night,
Like Owls, though pur-blind in the li^h^*
By help of these (as he professed)
He had First Matter seen undrest:
He took her naked all alone,
Before one Rag of Form was on.
The Chaos too he had descried,
And seen quite through, or else he ly'd:
Not that of Past-board which men show
For Groats at Fair of Bartholomew;
But its great Grandsire, first of the name,
Whence that and Reformation came:
Both Cousin-germans, and right able
TO inveigle and draw in the Rabble.
But Reformatiom was, some say,
OF the younger house to Puppet-play.
He could foretell whats' ever was
By consequence to come to pass.
As Death of Great men, Alterations,
Diseases, Battles, Inundations.
All this without the eclipse of Sun,
Or dreadful Comet, he has done
By inward light, a way as good,
And easy to be understood.
But with more lucky hit than those
That use to make the Stars depose,
Like Knights of the Post, and falsely charge
Upon themselves what others forge:
As if they were consenting to
All mischief in the World men do:
Or like the Devilish, did tempt and sway 'em
To Rogueries, and then betray 'em.
They Will search a Planet's house, to know
Who broke and robbed a house below:
Examine Venus, and the Moon
Who stole a Thimble or a Spoon:
And though they nothing will confess,
Yet by their very looks can guess,
And tell what guilty Aspect bodes,
Who stole, and who received the Goods.
They Will question Mars, and by his look
Detect who 'twas that nimm'd a Cloak:
Make Mercury confess and peach
Those Thieves which he himself did teach.
They Will find in the Phisiognomies
OF the Planets all men's destinies.
Like him that took the Doctor's Bill,
And swallowed it instead of the Pill.
Cast the Nativity of the Question,
And from Positions to be guest on,
As sure as if they knew the Moment
Of Natives birth, tell what will come on it.
They Will feel the Pulses of the Stars,
To find out Agues, Coughs, Catarrhs;
And tell what Crysis does divine
The Rot in Sheep, or Mange in Swine,
In men what gives or cures the Itch,
What makes them Cuckolds, poor or rich:
What gains or loses, hangs or saves;
What makes men great, what fools or Knaves;
But not what wise, for only of those
The Stars (they say) cannot dispose,
No more than can the Astrologians.
There they say right, and like true Trojans.
This Ralpho knew, and therefore took
The other course, of which we spoke.
Thus was the accomplished Squire endu'd
With Gifts and Knowledge, per'lous shrewd.
Never did trusty Squire with Knight,
Or Knight with Squire jump more right.
Their Arms and Equipage did fit,
As well as Virtues, parts, and wit.
Their Valors too were of a Rate,
And out they sallied at the Gate*
Few miles on horseback had they jogged,
But fortune unto them turned dogged.
For they a sad Adventure met,
Of which we now prepare to Treat:
But ever we venture to unfold
Atchievments so resolved and bold,
We should, as learned Poets use,
Invoke the assistance of some Muse;
However Critics count it sillier
Than Juglers talking t'a Familiar.
We think it is no great matter which,
They Are all alike, yet we shall pitch
On one that fits our purpose most,
Whom therefore thus do we accost.
Thou that with Ale or viler Liquors,
Did inspire Withers, Pryn, and Vickars,
And force them, though it were in spite
Of Nature, and their Stars, to write;
Who, as we find in sullen Writs,
And cross-grained Works of modern Wits,
With Vanity, Opinion, Want,
The wonder of the Ignorant,
The praises of the Author, penned
By himself, or wit-ensuring friend,
The Itch of Picture in the Front,
With Bays, and wicked Rhyme upon it,
All that is left of the forked Hill
To make men scribble without skill,
Can make a Poet, spite of fate,
And teach all People to translate;
Though out of Languages in which
They understand no Part of Speech:
Assist me but this once, I'mplore,
And I shall trouble thee no more.
In Western Clime there is a Town
To those that dwell therein well known;
Therefore there needs no more be sed here
We unto them refer our Reader:
For brevity is very good,
When w' are, or are not understood.
To this Town People did repair
On days of Market or of Fair,
And to cracked Fiddle, and hoarse Tabor
In merriment did drudge and labor:
But now a sport more formidable
Had raked together Village rabble.
It Was an old way of Recreating,
Which learned Butchers call Bear-baiting:
A bold adventurous exercise,
With ancient Hero's in high prize;
For Authors do affirm it came
From Isthmian or Nemean game.
Others derive it from the Bear
That Is fixed in Northern Hemispere,
And round about the Pole does make
A circle like a Bear at stake,
That at the Chain's end wheels about,
And over-turns the Rabble-rout.
For after solemn Proclamation
In the Bear's name (as is the fashion,
According to the Law of Arms,
To keep men from inglorious harms)
That none presume to come so near
As forty foot of stake of Bear;
If any yet be so foolhardy,
TO expose themselves to vain Jeopardy;
If they come wounded off and lame,
No honor's got by such a maim.
Although the Bear gain much, b'ing bound
In honor to make good his ground.
When he is engaged, and take no notice,
If any press upon him, who it is,
But let them know at their own cost
That he intends to keep his post.
This to prevent, and other harms,
Which always wait on feats of Arms,
(For in the hurry of a Fray
It Is hard to keep out of harm's way)
Thither the Knight his course did stear,
To keep the peace 'twixt Dog and Bear;
As he believed h' was bound to do
In Conscience and Commission too.
And therefore thus bespoke the Squire;
We that are wisely mounted higher
Than Constables; in Curule wit,
When on Tribunal bench we sit,
Like Speculators; should foresee,
From Pharos of Authority.
Portended Mischiefs farther then
Low Proletarian Tithing-men.
And therefore being informed by bruit,
That Dog and Bear are to dispute;
For so of late men fighting name,
Because they often prove the same;
(For where the first does hap to be,
The last does coincidere)
Quantum in nobis, have thought good,
To save the expense of Christian blood,
And try if we by Mediation
Of Treaty and accommodation
Can end the Quarrel, and compose
The bloody Duel without blows.
Are not our Liberties, our Lives,
The Laws, Religion, and our Wives
Enough at once to lie at stake,
For Covenant and the Cause's sake;
But in the quarrel Dogs and Bears,
As well as we must venture theirs?
This Feud by Jesuits invented,
By evil Counsel is fomented.
There is a Machiavilian Plot,
(Though every Nare olfact it not)
A deep design in it, to divide
The well-affected that confide,
By setting Brother against Brother,
To claw and curry one another.
Have we not enemies plus satis,
That Cane and angue pejus hate us?
And shall we turn our fangs and claws
Upon our own selves, without cause?
That some occult design dothly
In bloody Cynarctomachy,
Is plain enough to him that knows
How Saints lead Brothers by the Nose.
I wish my self a Pseudo-Prophet,
But sure some mischief will come of it:
Unless by providential wit
Or force we averruncate it.
For what design, what interest
Can Beast have to encounter Beast?
They fight for no espoused Cause,
Frail Privilege, Fundemental Laws;
Nor for a thorough Reformation,
Nor Covenant, nor Protestation;
Nor Liberty of Consciences,
Nor Lords and Commons Ordinances;
Nor for the Church, nor for Church Lands,
To get them in their own no Hands;
Nor evil Counselors to bring
To Justice that seduce the King;
Nor for the worship of us men,
Though we have done as much for them.
The Egyptians worshipped Dogs, and for
Their faith made fierce and zealous War.
Others adored a Rat, and some
For that Church suffered martyrdom.
The Indians fought for the truth
Of the Elephent, and Monkey's Tooth:
And many, to defend that faith,
Fought it out mordicus to death.
But no Beasts ever was so slight,
For Man, as for his God, to fight.
They have more wit, alas! and know
Themselves and us better than so.
But we, we only do infuse
The Rage in them like Boute-feus.
It Is our example that instills
In them the infection of our ills.
For, as some late Philosphers
Have well observed, Beasts that converse
With Man, take after him, as Hogs
Get Pigs all the year, and Bitches Dogs.
Just so by our example Cattle
Learn to give one another Battle.
We read in Nero's time, the Heathen,
When they destroyed the Christian Brethren,
They sowed them in the skins of Bears,
And then set Dogs about their Ears:
From whence, no doubt, the invention came
Of this lewd Antichristian Game.
To this, quoth Ralpho, Verily,
The Point seems very plain to be.
It is an Antichristian Game,
Unlawful both in thing and name,
First for the name, The word Bear-baiting
Is carnal, and of man's creating:
For certainly there is no such word
In all the Scripture on record.
Therefore unlawful and a sin,
And so is (secondly) the thing.
A vile Assembly it is, that can
No more be proved by Scripture than
Provincial, Classick, National;
Mere humane Creature-Cobwebs all.
Thirdly, it is Idolatrous.
For when men run a-whoring thus
With their Inventions whatsoever
The thing be, whether Dog or Bear,
(...) Idolatrous and Pagan
No less than worshipping of Dagon.
Quoth Hudibras, I smell a Rat;
Ralpho, thou do prevaricate.
For though the Thesis which thou lay'st
Be true ad amussim as thou say:
(For that Bear-baiting should appear
Jure Divino lawfuller
Than Synods are, thou do deny,
Totidem verbis so do I)
Yet there is a fallacy in this:
For if by fly Homoeosis,
Thou would Sophistically imply
Both are unlawful, I deny.
And I (quoth Ralpho) do not doubt
But Bear-baiting may be made out
In Gospel Times, as lawful as is
Provincial or Parochial Classis:
And that both are so near of kin,
And like in all as well as sin,
That put them in a bag and shake 'em,
Your self of the sudden would mistake 'em,
And not know which is which, unless
You measure by their Wickedness:
For it is not hard to imagine whether
OF the two is worst, though I name neither.
Quoth Hudibras, Thou offer'st much,
But art not able to keep touch.
Mira de lent, as it is in the Adage,
Id est, to make a Leek a Cabbage.
Thou can at best but overstrain
A Paradox, and the own hot brain
For what can Synods have at all
With Bears that is analogical?
Or what relation has debating
Of Church Affairs with Bear-baiting?
A just comparison still is,
Of things ejusdem generis.
And then what Genus rightly does
Include, and comprehend them both?
If Animal, both of us may
As justly pass for Bears as they.
For we are Animals no less,
Although of different Specieses.
But, Ralpho this is no fit place
Nor time to argue out the Case:
For now the Field is not far off,
Where we must give the world a proof
Of Deeds, not Words, and such as suit
Another manner of Dispute.
A Controversy that affords
Actions for Arguments, ^ot Words:
Which we must manage at a rate
Of Prowess and Conduct adaequate
To what our place and fame does promise,
And all the godly expect from us.
Nor shall they be deceived, unless
W' are slurr'd and outed by success:
Success, the mark no mortal wit,
Or surest hand can always hit:
For whatsoever we perpetrate,
We do but row, we are steered by Fate,
Which in s^ccess often disinherits,
For spurious causes, noblest merits.
Great Actions are not always true Sons
Of great and mighty Resolutions:
Nor do the bold'st attempts bring forth
Events still equal to their worth;
But sometimes fail, and in their stead
Fortune and Cowardice succeed.
Yet we have no great cause to doubt,
Our actions still have born us out.
Which though the are known to be so ample,
We need no copy from example,
We' are not the only person durst,
Attempt this Province, nor the first.
In Northern Clime a valorous Knight
Did whilom kill his Bear in fight,
And wound a Fiddler: we have both
Of these the objects of our wroth,
And equal Fame and Glory from
The Attempt or Victory to come.
It Is sung, There is a valiant Mamaluke
In foreign Land, yclep'd --
To whom we have been often compared
For Person, Parts, Address, and Beard;
Both equally reputed stout,
And in the same Cause both have fought.
He often in such Attempts as these
Came off with glory and success,
Nor will we fail in the execution,
For want of equal Resolution.
Honor is, like a Widow, won
With brisk Attempt and putting on;
With entering manfully, and urging;
Not slow approaches, like a Virgin.
This said, as once the Phrygian Knight,
So ours with rusty steel did smite
His Trojan Horse, and just as much
He mended pace upon the touch;
But from his empty stomach groaned
Just as that hollow Beast did sound,
And angry answered from behind,
With brandished Tail and blast of Wind.
So have I seen with armed heel,
A Wight bestride a Commonweal;
While still the more he kicked and spurred,
The less the sullen Jade has stirred.
The ARGUMENT of The SECOND CANTO.
The Catalogue and Character
Of the Enemies best Men of War;
Whom in a bold Harangue, the Knight
Defy's, and challenges to fight:
H' incounters Talgol, routs the Bear,
And takes the Fiddler Prisoner;
Conveys him to enchanted Castle,
There shuts him fast in Wooden Bastile.
CANTO II.
THere was an ancient sage Philosopher,
That had read Alexander Ross over,
And swore the World, as he could prove,
Was made of Fighting and of Love:
Just so Romances are, for what else
Is in them all, but Love and Battles?
OF the first of these w' have no great matter
To treat of, but a World of the latter:
In which to do the injured Right
We mean in what concerns just fight.
Certes our Authors are to blame,
For to make some well sounding name
A Pattern fit for modern Knights,
To copy out in Frays and Fights,
(Like those that a whole streat do raze,
To build a Palace in the place.)
They never care how many others
They kill, without regard of Mothers,
Or Wives, or Children, so they can
Make up some fierce dead-doing man,
Composed of many ingredient Valors
Just like the Manhood of nine Tailors.
So a wild Tartar when he spies
A man that is handsome, valiant, wise,
If he can kill him, thinks t'inherit
His Wit, his Beauty, and his Spirit:
As if just so much he enjoyed
As in another is destroyed.
For when a Giant's slain in fight,
And mowed o'rthwart, or cleft downright,
It is a heavy case, no doubt.
A man should have his Brains beat out,
Because he is tall, and has large Bones;
As men kill Beavers for their Stones.
But as for our part, we shall tell
The naked Truth of what befell;
And as an equal friend to both
The Knight and Bear, but more to Troth,
With neither Faction shall take part,
But give to each his due desert:
And never coin a formal lie on it,
To make the Knight o'rcome the Giant.
This b'ing professed, we hope's enough,
And now go on where we left off.
They rod, but Authors having not
Determined whether Pace or Trot,
(That is to say, whether Tollutation,
As they do tearm't, or Succussation)
We leave it, and go on, as now
Suppose they did, no matter how.
Yet some from subtle hints have got
Mysterious light, it was a Trot.
But let that pass: they now begun
To spur their living Engines on:
For as whipped Tops and bandy'd Balls,
The learned hold, are Animals:
So Horses they affirm to be
Mere Engines made by Geometry,
And were invented first from Engines,
As Indian Britans were from Penguins.
So let them be, and, as I was saying,
They their live Engines plied, not staying
Until they reached the fatal champain,
Which the Enemy did then incamp on,
The dire Pharsalian Plain, where Battle
Was to be waged 'twixt puissant Cattle,
And fierce Auxiliary Men,
That came to aid their Brethren:
Who now began to take the Field
As from his Steed the Knight beheld:
For as our modern wits behold,
Mounted a Pick-back on the Old,
Much further off, much further he
Raised on his aged Beast could see:
Yet not sufficient to descry
All postures of the enemy.
And therefore orders the bold Squire
TO advance, and view their Body nigher
That when their motions he had known,
He might know how to fit his own.
Mean while he stopped his willing Steed,
To fit himself for Martial deed:
Both kinds of mettle he prepared,
Either to give blows, or to ward,
Courage within, and Steel without,
To give, or to receive a Rout.
His Death-charg'd Pistols he did fit well,
Drawn out from life-preserving vittle.
These being prim'd, with force he labored
To free's Sword from retentive Scabbard:
And after many a painful pluck,
He cleared at length the rugged Tuck.
Then shook himself, to see that Prowess
In Scabbard of his Arms sat loose;
And raised upon his desperate foot
On stirrup side he gazed about,
Portending Blood, like Blazing Star,
The Beacon of approaching War.
The Squire advanced with greater speed
Than could b' expected from his Steed;
But far more in returning made,
For now the Foe he had surveyed
Ranged, as to him they did appear,
With Van, main Battle, Wings and Rear.
In the head of all this Warlike Rabble
Crowdero marched, expert and able:
Instead of Trumpet and of Drum,
That makes the Warrier's stomach come,
Whose noise whets Valor sharp, like Beer
By Thunder turned to Vinegar.
(For if a Trumpet sound or Drum beat,
Who has not a months mind to combat?)
A squeaking Engine he applied
Unto his Neck, on North-east side,
Just where the Hangman does dispose
To special friends the fatal Noose:
For it is great Grace when Statsmen straight
Dispatch a friend, let others wait.
His warped Ear hung over the strings,
Which was but Souce to Chitterlings:
For Guts, some write, e're they are sodden,
Are fit for Music; or for Pudden:
From whence men borrow every kind
Of Minstrelsy, by string or wind.
His grizly Beard was long and thick,
With which he strung his Fiddle-stick.
For he to Horse-tail scorned to owe,
For what on his own chin did grow.
Chiron, the four legged Bard, had both
A Beard and Tail of his own growth,
And yet by Authors it is averred,
He made use only of his Beard.
In Staffordshire where Virtuous worth
Does raise the Minstrelsy, not Birth;
Where Bulls do choose the boldest King
And Ruler, over the men of string;
(As once in Persia, it is said,
Kings were proclaimed by a Horse that neigh'd)
He bravely vent'ring at a Crown,
By chance of War was beaten down,
And wounded sore: his Leg then broke,
Had got a Deputy of Oak:
For when a shin in fight is cropped,
The knee with one of timber's propt;
Esteemed more honorable than the other,
And takes place, though the younger Brother.
Next marched Brave Orsin, famous for
Wise Conduct, and success in War:
A skilful Leader, stout, severe,
Now Marshal to the Champion Bear.
With Truncheon tipp'd with Iron-head,
The Warrior to the lists he led;
With solemn march and stately pace,
But far more grave and solemn face:
Grave as the Emperor of Pegu,
Or Spanish Potentate Don Diego.
This Leader was of knowledge great,
Either for Charge or for Retreat.
Knew when to engage his Bear Pel-mel
And when to bring him off as well.
So Lawyers, lest the Bear Defendant,
And Plaintiff Dog should make an end on it*
Do stave and tail with Writs of Error,
Reverse of Judgment, and Demurrer,
To let them breath a while, and then
Cry whoop, and set them on again.
As Romulus a Wolf did rear,
So he was dry-nurs'd by a Bear,
That fed him with the purchased prey
Of many a fierce and bloody fray;
Bred up, where Discipline most rare is,
In Military Garden-Paris.
For Soldiers heretofore did grow
In Gardens, just as Weeds do now;
Until some splay-foot Polyticians,
TO Apollo offered up Petitions,
For licensing a new invention
The ^ad found out, of an antique Engine
To root out all the Weeds that grow
In public Garden at a blow,
And leave the Herbs standing. Quoth Sir Sun,
My friends, that is not to be done.
Not done? quoth Statesmen; yes, an't please ye,
When it is once known you will say it is easy.
Why then let us know it, quoth Apollo.
We Will beat a Drum, and they will all follow.
A Drum (quoth Phoebus) troth that is true,
A pretty invention quaint and new.
But though of Voice and Instrument
We are ('it is true) chief President;
We such loud Music do not profess,
The Devil's Master of that Office,
Where it must pass, if 't be a Drum,
He Will sign it with Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
To him apply your selves, and he
Will soon dispatch you for his Fee.
They did so, but it proved so ill,
The had better have let let them grow there still.
But to resume what we discoursing
We on before, that is, stout Orsin:
That which so often by sundry writers
Has been applied to almost all fighters,
More justly may b' ascribed to this,
Than any other Warrior, (viz.)
None ever acted both parts bolder,
Both of a Chieftain and a Soldier.
He was of great descent and high,
For Splendour and Antiquity,
And from Celestial origin
Derived himself in a right Line.
Not as the ancient Hero's did,
Who, that their base births might be hid,
(Knowing they were of doubtful gender,
And that they came in at a Windore)
Made Jupiter himself and others
OF the Gods Gallants to their own Mothers,
(To get on them a Race of Champions,
Of which old Homer first made Lampoons)
Arctophylax in Northern Sphere
Was his undoubted Ancestor:
From him his Great Forefathers came.
And in all Ages bore his name.
Learned he was in Medc'nal Lore,
For by his side a Pouch he wore
Replete with strange Hermetick Powder,
That Wounds six miles point-blanck would solder
By skilful Chemist with great cost
Extracted from a rotten Post;
But of a heav'nlier influence
Than that which Mountebanks dispense;
Though by Promothean Fire made,
As they do quack that drive that Trade.
For as when Slovens do amiss
At others doors by Stool or Piss,
The learned write, a Red-hot Spit,
B'ing prudently applied to it,
Will convey mischief from the Dung
Unto the part that did the wrong:
So this did healing, and as sure
As that did mischief, this would cure.
Thus virtuous Orsin was endu'd,
With Learning, Conduct, Fortitude,
Incomparable: and as the Prince
Of Poets, Homer, sung long since,
A skilful Leech is better far
Than half a hundred Men of War;
So he appeared and by his skill,
No less than Dint of Sword could kill.
The Gallant Bruin marched next him,
With Visage formidably grim,
And rugged as a Saracen,
Or Turk of Mahomet's own kin;
Clad in a Mantle della Guer
Of rough impenetrable Fur;
And in his Nose, like Indian King,
He wore for ornament a Ring;
About his Neck a threefold Gorget,
As tough as treabled leathern Target;
Armed, as Heralds cant, and langued,
Or, as the Vulgar say, sharp fanged.
For as the Teeth in Beasts of Prey
Are Swords, with which they fight in Fray;
So Swords, in Men of War are Teeth,
Which they do eat their Vittle with.
He was by birth, some Authors write,
A Russian, some a Muscovite,
And among the Cossacks had been bred,
Of whom we in Diurnals read,
That serve to fill up Pages here,
As with their Bodies Ditches there.
Scrimansky was his Cousin-german,
With whom he served, and fed on Vermin:
And when these failed he would suck his claws,
And quarter himself upon his paws.
And though his Contrymen, the Huns,
Did use to stew between their Bums,
And their warm Horses backs, their meat
And every man his Saddle eat:
He was not half so nice as they,
But eat it raw when 't came in's way.
He had traced Countries far and near,
More than Le Blanc the Traveller;
Who writes, He Spous'd in India
Of noble house a Lady gay,
And got on her a Race of Worthies
As stout as any upon Earth is
Full many a Fight for him between
Talgol and Orsin often had been;
Each striving to deserve the Crown
Of a saved Citizen: the one
To guard his Bear, the other fought
To aid his Dog; both made more stout
By several spurs of neighborhood,
Church-fellow-membership, and blood
But Talgol, mortal foe to Cows,
Never got ought of him but blows;
Blows hard and heavy, such as he
Had lent, repayd with Usury.
Yet Talgol was of Courage stout,
And vanquished oftener than he fought:
Inured to labor, sweat, and toil,
And, like a Champion, shone with Oil.
Right many a Widow his keen blade,
And many a Fatherless, had made;
He many a Bore and huge Dun Cow
Did, like another Guy overthrow.
But Guy with him in fight compared,
Had like the Bore or Dun Cow fared.
With greater Troops of Sheep he had faught
Than Ajax or bold Don Quixot:
And many a Serpent of fell kind,
With wings before and stings behind,
Subdued; as Poets say, long agone
Bold Sir George, Saint George did the Dragon.
Nor Engine, nor Device Polemick,
Disease, nor Doctor Epidemick,
Though stored with Deletery Medicines,
(Which whosoever took is Dead since)
E're sent so vast a Colony
To both the under Worlds as he.
For he was of that noble Trade
That Demigods and Heroes made,
Slaughter, and knocking on the head,
The Trade to which they all were bred;
And is, like others, glorious when
It Is great and large, but base if mean.
The former rides in Triumph for it;
The later in a two wheeled Chariot,
For daring to profane a thing
So Sacred, with vile bungling.
Next these brave the Magnano came,
Magnano great in Martial Fame.
Yet when with Orsin he waged fight,
It Is sung he got but little by it.
Yet he was fierce as Forrest-Bore,
Whose Spoils upon his Back he wore,
As thick as Ajax sevenfold Shield,
Which over his brazen Arms he held,
But Brass was feeble to resist
The fury of his armed fist;
Nor could the hardest Ir'n hold out
Against his blows, but they would through't.
In Magic he was deeply read,
As he that made the Brazen-head;
Profoundly skilled in the black Art,
As English Merlin for his heart;
But far more skilful in the Spheres
Than he was at the Sieve and Shears.
He could transform himself in Color
As like the Devil as a Collier;
As like as Hypocrites in show
Are to true Saints, or Crow to Crow.
Of warlike Engines he was Author,
Devised for quick dispatch of slaughter:
The Cannon, Blunderbus, and Saker,
He was the inventer of and maker:
The Trumpet and the Kettle-Drum
Did both from his Invention come.
He was the first that ever did teach
To make, and how to stop a breach.
A Lance he bore with Iron pike,
The one half would thrust, the other strike:
And when their forces he had joined,
He scorned to turn his Parts behind.
He Trulla loved, Trulla more bright
Than burnished Armor of her Knight:
A bold Virago, stout and tall
As Joan of France, or English Mall.
Through perils both of Wind and Limb,
Through thick and thin she followed him,
In every Adventure h'undertook,
And never him or it forsook.
At Breach of Wall, or Hedge surprise,
She shared in the hazard and the prize:
At beating Quarters up, or Forage,
Behaved her self with matchless courage;
And laid about in sight more busily,
Than the Amazonian Dame, Penthesile.
And though some Critics here cry shame,
And say our Authors are to blame,
That spite of all Philosophers,
Who hold no Females stout, but Bears,
And heretofore did so abhor
Their Women should pretend to War,
They would not suffer the stout'st Dame
To swear by Hercules his Name,
Make feeble Ladies, in their Works,
To fight like Termagants and Turks;
To lay their native Arms aside,
Their modesty, and ride a-stride;
To run a-Tilt at Men, and wield
Their naked tools in open field;
As stout Armida, bold Thalestris,
And she that would have been the Mistress
Of Gundibert, but he had grace,
And rather took a Country Lass:
They say it is false, without all sense,
But of pernicious consequence
To Government, which they suppose
Can never be upheld in Prose:
Strip Nature naked to the skin,
You Will find about her no such thing*
It may be so, yet what we tell
Of Trulla, that is improbable,
Shall be deposed by those have seen't,
Or, what is as good, produced in print:
And if they will not take our word,
We Will prove it true upon record,
The upright Cerdon next advanced,
Of all his Race the Valiant'st;
Cerdon the Great, renowned in Song,
Like H^rc'les, for repair of wrong:
He raised the low, and fortified
The weak against the strongest side.
Ill has he read, that never hit
On him in Muses deathless writ.
He had a weapon keen and fierce,
That through a Bull-hide shield would pierce,
And cut it in a thousand pieces,
Though tougher than the Knight of Greece his;
With whom his black thumb'd Ancestor
Was Comrade in the ten years War:
For when the restless Greeks set down
So many years before Troy Town,
And were renowned, as Homer writes,
For well-sol'd Boots, no less than Fights;
They owed that Glory only to
His Ancestor, that made them so.
Fast friend he was to Reformation,
Until 'twas worn quite out of fashion.
Next Rectifier of Wry Law,
And would make three, to cure one flaw.
Learned he was, and could take note,
Transcribe, Collect, Translate and Quote.
But Preaching was his chiefest Talent,
Or Argument, in which b'ing valiant;
He used to lay about and stickle,
Like Ram or Bull, at Conventicle:
For Disputants like Rams and Bulls,
Do fight with Arms that spring from Skulls.
Last Colon came, bold man of War,
Destined to blows by fatal Star;
Right expert in Command of Horse,
But cruel, and without remorse.
That which of Centaure long ago
Was said, and has been wrested to
Some other Knights, was true of this,
He and his Horse were of a piece.
One Spirit did inform them both,
The self-same Vigor, Fury Wroth:
Yet he was much the rougher part,
And always had a harder heart;
Although his Horse had been of those
That fed on Man's flesh, as Fame goes.
Strange food for Horse! and yet, alas,
It may be true, for Flesh is Grass.
Sturdy he was, and no less able
Than Hercules to cleanse a Stable;
As great a Drover, and as great
A Critic too in Hog or Neat.
He ripp'd the Womb up of his Mother,
Dame Tellus, 'cause she wanted fother
And Provender wherewith to feed
Himself and his less-cruel Steed.
It was a question whether He
Or's Horse were of a Family
More Worshipful: till Antiquaries,
(After the ad almost por'd out their Eyes)
Did very learnedly decide
The business on the Horse's side,
And proved not only Horse, but Cows,
Nay Pigs, were of the elder house:
For Beasts, when Man was but a piece
Of earth himself, did the earth possess.
These Worthies were the Chief that led
The Combatants, each in the head,
Of his Command, with Arms and Rage,
Ready and longing to engage.
The numerous Rabble was drawn out
Of several Countries round about;
From Villages remote, and Shires,
Of East and Western Hemispheres:
From forain Parishes and Regions,
Of different Manners, Speech, Religions,
Came Men and Mastives; some to fight
For Fame and Honor, some for sight.
And now the field of Death, the lists,
Were entered by Antagonists,
And blood was ready to be broached;
When Hudibras in haste approached,
With Squire and Weapons to attack them:
But first thus from his Horse bespake them.
What Rage, O Citizens, what fury
Does you to these dire actions hurry?
What Oestrum, what phrenetick mood
Makes you thus lavish of your blood,
While the proud Vies your Trophies boast,
And unrevenged walks -- ghost?
What Towns, what Garrisons might you
With hazard of this blood subdue,
Which now y' are bent to throw away
In vain, untriumphable fray?
Shall Saints in Civil bloodshed wallow
Of Saints, and let the Cause lie fallow?
The Cause for which we fought and swore
So boldly, shall we now give over?
Then because Quarrels still are seen
With Oaths and Swearing to begin,
The Solemn League and Covenant
Will seem a mere God-dam me Rant;
And we that took it, and have fought,
As lewd as Drunkards that fall out.
For as we make War for the King
Against himself, the salf-same thing
Some will not stick to swear we do
For God and for Religion too.
For if Bear-baiting we allow,
What good can Reformation do?
The Blood and Treasure that is laid out,
Is thrown away, and goes for naught.
Are these the fruits of the Protestation,
The Prototype of Reformation,
Which all the Saints, and some, since Martyrs,
Wore in their Hats, like Wedding-Garters,
When 'twas resolved by either House
Six Members quarrel to espouse?
Did they for this draw down the Rabble,
With zeal and noises formidable;
And make all Cries about the Town
Join throats to cry the Bishops down?
Who having round begirt the Palace,
(As once a month they do the Gallows)
As Members gave the sign about,
Set up their throats with hideous shout.
When Tinkers bawled aloud, to settle
Church Discipline, for patching Kettle.
No Sow-gelder did blow his Horn
To geld a Cat, but cried Reform.
The Oyster-women locked their Fish up,
And trudged away to cry No Bishop.
The Mousetrap-men laid Save-alls by,
And against Ev'l Counselors did cry.
Botchers left old Clothes in the lurch,
And fell to turn and patch the Church.
Some cried the Covenant instead
Of Pudding-pies and Ginger-bread:
And some for Broom, old Boots and Shoes.
Baul'd out to purge the Common's House:
Instead of Kitchinstuff, some cry
A Gospel-preaching-Ministry;
And some for Old Suits, Coats, or Cloak,
No Surplices, nor Service Book.
A strange harmonious inclination
Of all degrees to Reformation.
And is this all? is this the end
To which these carr'ings on did tend?
Has Public Faith like a young heir
For this taken up all sorts of Ware,
And run int' every Tradesman's book,
Till both turned Bankrupts, and are broke?
Did Saints for this bring in the Plate,
And crowd as if they came too late?
For when they thought the Cause had need on it,
Happy was he that could be rid on it.
Did they coin Piss pots, Bouls, and Flaggons,
Int' Officers of Horse and Dragoons;
And into Pikes and Musketeers
Stamp Beakers, Cups, and Porringers?
A Thimble, Bodkin, and a Spoon
Did start up living men, as soon
As in the Furnace they were thrown,
Just like the Dragon's teeth b'ing sown.
Then was the Cause all Gold and Plate,
The Brethrens offerings, consecrate
Like the Hebrew-calf, and down before it
The Saints fell prostrate, to adore it.
So say the Wicked -- and will you
Make that Sarcasmous Scandal true.
By running after Dogs and Bears,
Beasts more unclean than Calves or Steers?
Have powerful Preachers plied their tongues,
And laid themselves out and their Lungs;
Used all means, both direct and sinister,
IN the power of Gospel-Preaching Minister?
Have they invented Tones, to win
The Women, and make them draw in
The Men, as Indians with a Female
Tame Elephant enveigle the Male?
Have they told Prov'dence what it must do,
Whom to avoid, and whom to trust to?
Discovered the Enemy's design,
And which way best to countermine;
Prescribed what ways he has to work,
Or it will never advance the Kirk;
Told it the News of the last express,
And after good or bad success
Made Prayers, not so like Petitions,
As Overtures and Propositions,
(Such as the Army did present
To their Creator the Parliament)
In which they freely will confess,
They will not, cannot acquiesce,
Unless the Work be carried on
In the same way they have begun,
By setting Church and Commonweal,
All on a flame bright as their zeal,
On which the Saints were all-a-gog,
And all this for a Bear and Dog?
The Parliament drew up Petitions
To It self, and sent them, like Commissions,
To Well-affected Persons down,
In every City and great Town;
With power to leavy Horse and Men,
Only to bring them back again:
For this did many, many a mile,
Ride manfully in Rank and File,
With Papers in their Hats, that showed
As if they to the Pillory rode.
Have all these courses, these efforts,
Been tried by people of all sorts,
Velis and Remis, omnibus Nervis,
And all to advance the Cause's service:
And shall all now be thrown away
In petulant intestine fray?
Shall we that in the Covenant swore,
Each man of us to run before
Another still in Reformation,
Give Dogs and Bears a Dispensation?
How will dissenting Brethren relish it?
What will Malignants say? Videlicet,
That each man swore to do his best,
To damn and perjure all the rest:
And bid the Devil take the hinmost,
Which at this Race is like to win most.
They Will say our business to reform
The Church and State is but a worm;
For to subscribe, unsight unseen,
TO an unknown Churches Discipline
What is it else, but beforehand.
TO engage, and after understand?
For when we swore to carry on
The present Reformation,
According to the Purest mode
Of Churches, best Reformed abroad,
What did we else but make a vow
To do we know not what, nor how?
For no three of us will agree
Where, or what Churches these should be.
And is indeed the self-same case
With theirs that swore Et caeteras;
Or the French League, in which men vowed
To fight to the last drop of blood.
These slanders will be thrown upon
The Cause and Work we carry on,
If we permit men to run headlong
TO exorbitancies fit for Bedlam,
Rather than Gospel-walking times,
When slightest Sins are gteatest Crimes.
But we the matter so shall handle,
As to remove that odious scandal.
In name of King and Parliament,
I charge ye all, no more foment
This feud, but keep the peace between
Your Brethren and your Contrymen;
And to those places straight repair
Where your respective dwellings are.
But to that purpose first surrender,
The Fiddler, as the prime offender,
The Incendiary vile, that is chief
Author and Enginier of mischief;
That makes division between friends,
For prohane and malignant ends.
He and that Engine of vile noise,
On which illegally he plays,
Shall (dictum factum) both he brought
To condign Punishment as th'y ought.
This must be done, and I would fain see:
Mortal so sturdy as to gainsay:
For then I Will take another course,
And soon Reduce you all by force.
This said, he clapped his hand on Sword,
To show he meant to keep his word.
But Talgol, who had long suppressed
Enflamed wrath in glowing breast,
Which now began to rage and burn as
Implacably as flame in furnace,
Thus answered him. Thou Vermin wretched,
As e're in Meazel'd Pork was hatched;
Thou Tail of Worship, that do grow
On Rump of Justice as of Cow;
How dare thou with that sullen Luggage
O'th thy self, old Ir'n and other Baggage,
With which thy Steed of Bones and Leather
Has broke his Wind in halting hither;
How durst the, I say, adventure thus
TO oppose thy Lumber against us?
Could thine Impertinence find out
No work to employ it self about,
Where thou secure from Wooden blow
Thy busy vanity might show?
Was no dispute afoot between
The Catterwauling Brethren?
No subtle Question raised among
Those out-o'-their wits and those in the wrong?
No prize between those Combatans
OF the times, the Land and Water- Saints;
Where thou might stickle without hazard
Of outrage to thy hide and mazzard,
And not for want of business come
To us to be thus troublesome,
To interrupt our better sort
Of Disputants, and spoil our sport?
Was there no Felony, no Bawd,
Cutpurse, nor Burglary abroad?
No Stolen Pig, nor Plundered Goose,
To tie thee up from breaking loose?
No Ale unlicenc'd, broken hedge,
For which thou Statute might allege,
To keep thee busy from foul evil,
And shame due to thee from the Devil?
Did no Committee sit, where he
Might cut out journey-work for thee;
And set the a task, with subornation,
To stitch up sale and sequestration;
To cheat with Holiness and Zeal
All Parties, and the Commonweal?
Much better had it been for thee,
He Had kept thee where the art used to be;
Or sent the on business any whither,
So he had never brought thee hither.
But if the have Brain enough in skull
To keep within it is lodging whole,
And not provoke the rage of Stones
And Cudgels to thy Hide and Bones;
Tremble, and vanish while thou may,
Which I Will not promise if thou stay'st.
At this the Knight grew high in wroth,
And lifting hands and eyes up both,
Three times smote on stomach stout,
From whence at length these words broke out.
Was I for this entit'led Sir,
And girt with trusty Sword and Spur,
For Fame and Honor to wage Battle,
Thus to be braved by Foe to Cattle?
Not all that Pride that makes thee swell
As big as thou do blown-up Veal;
Nor all thy tricks and slights to cheat,
And sell thy Carrion for good meat;
Not all thy Magic to repair
Decayed old age in tough lean ware,
Make Natural Death appear thy work,
And stop the Gangreen in stale Pork;
Not all that force that makes thee proud,
Because by Bullock never withstood;
Though armed with all thy Clevers, Knives,
And Axes made to hew down lives;
Shall save or help thee to evade
The hand of Justice, or this blade
Which I her Sword Bearer do carry,
For civil Deed and Military.
Nor shall these words of Venom base,
Which thou have from their native place,
Thy stomach, pumped to fling on me,
Go unrevenged, though I am free.
Thou down the same throat shall devour 'em,
Like tainted Beef, and pay dear for 'em.
Nor shall it e're be said, that weight
With Gantlet blew and Bases white,
And round blunt Dudgeon by his side,
So great a man at Arms defied
With words far bitterer than Wormwood,
That would in Job or Grizel stir mood.
Dogs with their Tongues their wounds do heal;
But Men with hands, as thou shall feel.
This said, with hasty rage he snatched;
His Gunshot, that in holsters watched;
And bending Cock, he levelled full
Against the outside of Talgol's Skull;
Vowing that he should never stir further,
Nor henceforth Cow or Bullock murder.
But Pallas came in shape of Rust,
And 'twixt the Spring and Hammer thrust
Her Gorgon-shield, which made the Cock
Stand stiff as if 'twere turned to a stock.
Mean while fierce Talgol gathering might,
With rugged Truncheon charged the Knight.
And he his rusty Pistol held
To take the blow on, like a Shield;
The Gun recoyl'd, as well it might,
Not used to such a kind of fight,
And shrunk from its great Master's gripe,
Knocked down and stunned with mortal stripe.
Than Hudibras with furious haste
Drew out his sword; yet not so fast,
But Talgol first with hardy thwack
Twice bruised his head, and twice his back.
But when his nut-brown Sword was out,
Courageously he laid about,
Imprinting many a wound upon
His mortal foe the Truncheon.
The trusty Cudgel did oppose
It self against dead-doing blows,
To guard its Leader from fell bane,
And then revenged it self again.
And though the sword (some understood)
In force had much the odds of Wood;
'Twas nothing so, both sides were ballanc't
So equal, none knew which was valiant'st.
For Wood with Honor b'ng engaged,
Is so implacably enraged,
Though Iron hew and mangle sore,
Wood wounds and bruises Honor more.
And now both Knights were out of breath,
Tired in the hot pursuit of Death;
While all the rest amazed stood still,
Expecting which would take, or kill.
This Hudibras observed, and fretting
Conquest should be so long a getting,
He drew up all his force into
One Body, and that into one Blow.
But Talgol wisely avoided it
By cunning slight; for had it hit,
The Upper part of him the Blow
Had slit, as sure as that below.
Mean while the incomparable Colon,
To aid his Friend began to fall on,
Him Ralph encountered, and straight grew
A fierce Dispute betwixt them two:
The one armed with Metal, the other with Wood;
This fit for bruise, and that for blood.
With many a stiff thwack, many a bang,
Hard Crab-tree and old Iron rang;
While none that saw them could divine
To which side Conquest would incline:
Until Magnano, who did envy
That two should with so many men vye,
By subtle stratagem of brain
Performed what force could never attain,
For he, by foul hap having found
Where Thistles grew on barren ground,
In haste he drew his weapon out
And having crop'd them from the Root
He clapped them under the Horses Tail
With prickles sharper than a Nail
The angry Beast did straight resent
The wrong done to his Fundament,
Begun to kick, and fling, and wince,
As if he had been beside his sense,
Striving to disingage from Smart,
And raging Pain, the afflicted Part;
Instead of which he threw the pack
Of Squire and Baggage from his back;
And blundring still with smarting rump,
He gave the Champions Steed a thump,
That staggar'd him. The Knight did stoop
And sat on further side aslope.
This Talgol viewing, who had now
By flight escaped the fatal blow,
He rallied, and again fell to it;
For catching him by nearer foot,
He lifted with such might and strength,
As would have hurled him thrice his length,
And dashed his brains (if any) out.
But Mars that still protects the stout,
In Pudding-time came to his aid,
And under him the Bear conveyed;
The Bear, upon whose soft Fur-Gown
The Knight with all his weight fell down.
The friendly Rug preserved the ground,
And headlong Knight from bruise or wound,
Like Feather-bed betwixt a Wall,
And heavy brunt of Cannon-ball.
As Sancho on a Blanket fell,
And had no hurt; ours fared as well
In body, though his mighty Spirit,
B'ing heavy, did not so well bear it.
The Bear was in a greater fright,
Beat down and worsted by the Knight.
He roared, and raged, and flung about,
To shake off bondage from his snout.
His wrath enflamed boiled o'r, and from
His jaws of Death he threw the foam.
Fury in stranger postures threw him,
And more, than ever Herald drew him.
He tore the Earth, which he had saved
From squelch of Knight, and stormed and raved;
And vexed the more, because the harms
He felt were against the Law of Arms:
For Men he always took to be
His friends, and Dogs the Enemy:
Who never so much hurt had done him,
As his own side did falling on him.
It grieved him to the Guts, that they
For whom he had faught so many a fray,
And served with loss of blood so long,
Should offer such inhumane wrong;
Wrong of unsouldier-like condition:
For which he flung down his Commission,
And laid about him, till his Nose
From thrall of Ring and Cord broke loose.
Soon as he felt himself enlarged,
Through thickest of his foes he charged,
And made way through the amazed crew,
Some he o're-ran, and some over threw.
But took none; for by hasty flight
He strove to avoid the conquering Knight,
From whom he fled with as much haste
And dread as he the Rabble chased.
In haste he fled, and so did they,
Each and his fear a several way.
Crowdero only kept the field,
Not stirring from the place he held,
Though beaten down and wounded sore
IN the Fiddle, and a Leg that bore
One side of him, not that of bone,
But mutch its betters, the wooden one.
He spying Hudibras lie strow'd
Upon the ground, like log of wood,
With fright of fall supposed wound,
And loss of Urine, in a swound,
In haste he snatched the wooden limb
That hurt in the anckle lay by him,
And fitting it for sudden fight,
Straight drew it up, to attack the Knight.
For getting up on stump and huckle,
He with the foe began to buckle,
Vowing to be revenged for breach
Of Crowd and Shin upon the wretch,
Sole author of all Detriment
He and his Fiddle underwent.
But Ralpho (who had now begun
TO adventure resurrection
From heavy squelch, and had got up
Upon his Legs with sprained Crup)
Looking about beheld the Bard
To charge the Knight intranc'd prepared,
He snatched his Whiniard up, that fled
When he was falling off his Steed,
(As Rats do from a falling house,)
To hide it self from rage of blows;
And winged with speed and fury, flew
To rescue Knight from black and blew.
Which e're he could atchieve, his Sconce
The Leg encountered twice and once;
And now 'twas raised, to smite again,
When Ralpho thrust himself between.
He took the blow upon his Arm,
To shield the Knight from further harm,
And joining wrath with force, bestowed
On the wooden member such a load,
That down it fell, and with it bore
Crowdero, whom it propp'd before.
To him the Squire right nimbly run,
And setting his bold foot upon
His trunk, thus spoke: What desperate Frenzi^
Made thee, (thou whelp of Sin) to fancy
Thy self and all that Coward Rabble
TO encounter us in battle able?
How durst the, I say, oppose thy Curship
Against Arms, Authority and Worship?
And Hudibras, or me provoke,
Though all thy Limbs were heart of Oak,
And the other half of thee as good
To bear out blows as that of Wood?
Could not the whipping-post prevail
With all its Rhet'rick, nor the Gaol,
To keep from flaying scourge thy skin,
And ankle free from Iron Gin?
Which now thou shall -- but first our care
Must see how Hudibras does fair.
This said, he gently raised the Knight,
And set him on his Bum upright:
To rouse him from Lethargick dump,
He tweak'd his Nose with gentle thump,
Knocked on his breast, as if 't had been
To raise the Spirits lodged within.
They wakened with the noise, did fly
From inward Room to Window eye,
And gently opening lid, the Casement,
Looked out, but yet with some amazement.
This gladded Ralpho much to see,
Who thus bespoke the Knight: quoth he,
Tweaking his noise, You are, great Sir,
A Self-denying Conqueror;
As high, victorious and great,
As ever fought for the Churches yet,
If you will give your self but leave
To make out what y' already have;
That Is Victory, the foe, for dread
Of your Nine-worthiness, is fled,
All save Crowdero, for whose sake
You did the espoused Cause undertake:
And he lies prisoner at your feet,
To be disposed as you think meet,
Either for Life, or Death, or Sale,
The Gallows, or perpetual Jayl.
For one wink of your powerful Eye
Must sentence him to live, or dye.
His Fiddle is your proper purchase,
Won in the Service of the Churches;
And by your doom must be allowed
To be, or be no more, a Crowd.
For though success did not confer
Just Title on the Conqueror;
Though dispensations were not strong
Conclusions whether right or wrong;
Although Out goings did not confirm,
And Owning were but a mere term:
Yet as the wicked have no right
To the Creature, though usurped by might,
The property is in the Saint,
From whom the injuriously detain't;
Of him they hold their Luxuries,
Their Dogs, their Horses, Whores and Dice,
Their Riots, Revels, Masks, Delights,
Pimps, Buffoons, Fiddlers, Parasites:
All which the Saints have Title to,
And ought to enjoy, if the had their due.
What we take from them is no more
Than what was ours by right before.
For we are their true Landlords still,
And they our Tenants but at will.
At this the Knight begun to rouse,
And by degrees grow valorous.
He star'd about, and seeing none
Of all his foes remain but one,
He snatched his weapon that lay near him,
And from the ground began to rear him;
Vowing to make Crowdero pay
For all the rest that ran away.
But Ralpho now in colder blood,
His fury mildly thus withstood:
Great Sir, quoth he, your mighty Spirit
Is raised too high, this S^ve does merit
To be the Hangman's business, sooner
Than from your hand to have the honor
Of his destruction. I that am
So much below in Deed and Name,
Did scorn to hurt his forfeit Carcass,
Or ill entreat his Fiddle or Case.
Will you, Great Sir, that Glory blot
In cold blood, which you gained in hot?
Will you employ your Conquering Sword,
To break a Fiddle and your Word?
For though I fought, and overcame,
And quarter gave, 'twas in your name.
For great Commanders always own
What Is prosperous by the Soldier done.
To save, where you have power to kill,
Argues your Power above your Will;
And that your Will and Power have less
Than both might have of selfishness.
This Power which now alive with dread
He trembles at, if he were dead,
Would no more keep the slave in awe
Than if you were a Knight of Straw:
For death would then be his Conqueror,
Not you, and free him from that terror.
If danger from his life accrue,
Or honor from his death to you;
'Twere Policy, and Honor too,
To do as you resolved to do,
But, Sir, 'twould wrong your valor much,
To say it needs or fears a Crutch.
Great Conquerors greater glory gain
By Foes in Triumph led, than slain:
The Laurels that adorn their brows
Are pulled from living, not dead boughs,
And living foes the greatest fame
Of Cripple slain can be but lame.
One half of him's already slain,
The other is not worth your pain,
The Honor can but on one side lighr,
As Worship did, when y' were dubbed Knight.
Wherefore I think it better far,
To keep him Prisoner of War;
And let him fast in bonds abide,
At Court of Justice to be tried:
Where if h'appear so bold or crafty,
There may be danger in his safety;
If any Member there dislike
His Face, or to his Beard have pike;
Or if his death will save, or yield,
Revenge, or fright, it is revealed,
Though he has quarter, ne'rtheless
Y' have power to hang him when you please.
This has been often done by some
Of our great Conquerors, you know whom:
And has by most of us been held
Wise Justice, and to some revealed.
For Words and Promises that yoke
The Conqueror, are quickly broke,
Like Sampson's Cuffs, though by his own
Direction and advice put on.
For if we should fight for the Cause
By rules of military Laws,
And only do what they call just,
The Cause would quickly fall to dust.
This we among our selves may speak,
But to the Wicked or the Weak
We must be cautious to declare
Perfection-truths, such as these are.
This said, the high outrageous mettle
Of Knight began to cool and settle.
He liked the Squire's advice, and soon
Resolved to see the business done:
And therefore charged him first to bind
Crowdero's hands on rump behind,
And to its former place and use
The Wooden member to reduce:
But force it take an Oath before,
Never to bear Arms against him more.
Ralpho dispatched with speedy haste,
And having tied Crowdero fast,
He gave Sir Knight the end of Cord,
To lead the Captive of his sword
In triumph while the Steeds he caught,
And them to further service brought.
The Squire in state rode on before,
And on his nut-brown Whiniard bore
The Trophee- Fiddle and the Case,
Placed on his shoulder like a Mace.
The Knight himself did after ride,
Leading Crowdero by his side,
And towed him, if he lagg'd behind,
Like Boat against the Tide and Wind.
Thus grave and solemn they march on,
Until quite through the Town the had gone
At further end of which their stands
An ancient Castle, that commands
The adjacent parts; in all the fabric,
You shall not see one stone nor a brick,
But all of Wood, by powr'ful Spell
Of Magic made impregnable;
There Is neither Iron-bar, nor Gate,
Port-cullis, Chain, nor Bolt, not Grate:
And yet men durance there abide,
In Dungeon scarce three inches wide;
With Roof so low, that under it
They never stand, but lie, or sit;
And yet so foul, that who so is in,
Is to the middle-leg in prison,
In Circle Magical confined,
With Walls of subtle Air and Wind,
Which none are able to break thorough,
Until the are freed by head of Borough.
Thither arrived the adventurous Knight
And bold Squire from their Steeds alight,
At the outward Wall, near which there stands
A Bastile, built to imprison hands;
By strange enchantment made to fetter
The lesser parts, and free the greater.
For though the Body may creep through,
The Hands in Grate are fast enough.
and when a Circle 'bout the Wrist
(...) made by Beadle Exorcist,
The Body feels the Spur and Switch,
As if 'twere ridden Post by 'Witch
At twenty miles an hour pace,
And yet never stirs out of the place.
On top of this there is a Spire,
On which Sir Knight first bids the Squire
The Fiddle, and its Spoils, the Case,
^n manner of a Trophee, place.
That done, they open the Trap-dore-gate,
And let Crowdero down thereat.
Crowd to making dolefule face,
Like Hermit poor in pensive place,
To Dungeon they the wretch commit,
And the survivor of his feet:
But the other that had broke the peace,
And head of Knighthood, they release,
Though a Delinquent false and forged,
Yet b'ing a stranger, he is enlarged;
While his Comrade that did no hurt,
Is clapped up fast in prison for it.
So Justice, while she winks at Crimes,
Stumbles on Innocence sometimes.
The ARGUMENT of The THIRD CANTO.
The scattered Rout return and rally,
Surround the Place; the Knight does sally,
And is made Prisoner: then they seize
The Enchanted Fort by storm, release
Crowdero, and put the Squire in's place.
I should have first said, Hudibras.
CANTO III.
AY me what perils do inviron
The man that medles with cold Iron!
What plaguey mischiefs and mishaps
Do dog him still with after-claps!
For though Dame Fortune seem to smile
And leer upon him for a while;
She Will after show him, in the nick
Of all his Glories, a Dog-trick.
This any man may sing or say
IN the Ditty called, What if a Day.
For Hudibras, who thought h' had won
The Field as certain as a Gun,
And having routed the whole Troop,
With Victory was Cock-a-hoop;
Think h' had done enough to purchase
Thanksgiving-day among the Churches,
Wherein his Mettle and brave Worth
Might be explained by Holder-forth,
And Registered by Fame eternal,
In Deathless Pages of Diurnal;
Found in few minutes to his Cost,
He did but Count without his Host;
And that a Turn-stile is more certain,
Than in events of War Dame Fortune.
For now the late faint-hearted Rout
Overthrown and scattered round about,
Chased by the horror of their fear
From bloody fray of Knight and Bear,
(All but the Dogs who in pursuit,
Of the Knight's victory stood to it,
And most ignobly sought to get
The Honor of his blood and sweat)
Seeing the coast was free and clear
OF the Conquered and the Conqueror,
Took heart again, and faced about,
As if they meant to stand it out:
For now the half-defeated Bear
Attacked by the Enemy in the rear,
Finding their number grew too great
For him to make a safe retreat,
Like a bold Chieftain faced about;
But wisely doubting to hold out,
Gave way to fortune, and with haste
Faced the proud foe, and fled, and faced,
Retiring still, until he found
He Had got the advantage of the Ground;
And then as valiantly made head,
To check the foe, and forthwith fled;
Leaving no Art untried, nor Trick
Of Warrior stout and Polyti^k.
Until in spite of hot pursuit,
He gained a Pass, to hold dispute
On better terms, and stop the course
Of the proud foe. With all his force
He bravely charged, and for a while
Forced their whole Body to recoil:
But still their numbers so increast
He found himself at length oppressed,
And all evasions so uncertain.
To save himself for better fortune,
That he resolved, rather than yield,
To die with honor in the field,
And sell his Hide and Carcass at
A price as high and desperate
As e're he could. This Resolution
He forthwith put in execution,
And bravely threw himself among
The Enemy in the greatest throng.
But what could single Valor do
Against so numerous a foe?
Yet much he did, indeed too much
To be believed, where the odds was such:
But one against a multitude,
^s more than mortal can make good.
^or while one party he opposed,
^is Rear was suddenly enclosed,
And no room left him for retreat,
Or fight against a foe so great.
For now the Mastives charging home
To blows and handy-gripes were come;
While manfully himself he bore,
And setting his right-foot before,
He raised himself, to show how tall
His Person was, above them all.
This equal shame and envy stirred
In the enemy, that one should beard
So many Warriors and so stout
As he had done, and stand it out,
Disdaining to lay down his Arms,
And yield on honorable terms.
Enraged thus some in the rear
Attacked him, and some every where
Till down he fell, yet falling fought,
And being down still laid about;
As Widdrington i^ doleful dumps
Is said to fight upon his stumps.
But all, alas! had been in vain,
And he inevitably slain,
If Trulla and Cerdon in the nick
To rescue him had not been quick.
For Trulla, who was light of foot,
As shafts which long-field Parthians shoot
(But not so light as to be born
Upon the Ears of standing Corn,
Or tript it over the Water quicker
Than Witches when their staves they liquor,
As some report) was got among
The foremost of the Martial throng;
Where pitying the vanquished Bear,
She called to Cerdon, who stood near
Viewing the bloody fight, to whom
Shall we (quoth she) stand still hum drum,
And see stout Bruin all alone
By numbers basely overthrown?
Such feats already h'has achieved,
In story not to be believed:
And 't would to us be shame enough,
Not to attempt to fetch him off.
I would (quoth he) venture a Limb
To second thee, and rescue him:
But then we must about it straight,
Or else our aid will come too late.
Quarter he scorns, he is so stout,
And therefore cannot long hold out.
This said they waved their weapons round
About their heads, to clear the ground;
And joining forces laid about
So fiercely, that the amazed rout
Turned tail again, and straight begun,
As if the Devil drove, to run.
Mean while the approached the place where Bruin
Was now engaged to mortal ruin:
The conquering foe they soon assailed;
First Trulla stav'd, and Cerdon tail'd,
Until their Mastives loosed their hold:
And yet, alas! do what they could,
The worsted Bear came off with store
Of bloody wounds, but all before.
For as Achilles dipped in Pond,
Was Anabaptiz'd free from wound,
Made proof against deed-doing steel
All over but the Pagan heel:
So did our Champion's Arms defend
All of him but the other end,
His Head and Ears, which in the Martial
Encounter lost a Leathern parcel,
For as an Austrian Archduke once
Had one ear (which in Ducatoons
Is half the Coin) in Battle pared
Close to his head; so Bruin fared:
But tugged and pulled on the other side,
Like Scrivener newly crucified;
Or like the late-corrected Leathern
Ears of the circumcised Brethren.
But gentle Trulla into the Ring
He wore in's Nose conveyed a string,
With which she marched before, and led
The Warrior to a grassy Bed,
As Authors write, in a cool shade,
Which Eglentine and Roses made,
Close by a softly-murm'ring stream
Where Lovers used to loll and dream.
There leaving him to his repose,
Secured from pursuit of foes,
And wanting nothing but a Song,
And a well-tuned Theorbo hung
Upon a Bough, to ease the pain
His tugged ears suffered, with a strain.
They both drew up, to march in quest
Of his great Leader, and the rest.
For Orsin (who was more renowned
For stout maintaining of his ground
In standing fights than for pursuit,
As being not so quick of foot)
Was not long able to keep pace
With others that pursued the Chase,
But found himself left far behind,
Both out of heart and out of wind;
Grieved to behold his Bear pursued
So basely by a multitude,
And like to fall, not by the prowess,
But numbers of his Coward foes.
He raged and kept as heavy a coil as
Stout Hercules for loss of Hylas,
Forcing the Valleys to repeat
The Accents of his sad regret.
He beat his Breast, and tore his Hair,
For loss of his dear Crony Bear:
That Echo from the hollow ground
His doleful wailings did resound
More wistfully, by many times,
Than in small Poets splay-foot rimes,
That make her, in their ruthful stories,
To answer to Inter'gatories,
And most unconscionably depose
To things of which she nothing knows:
And when she has said all she can say,
It Is wrested to the Lover's fancy.
Quoth he, O whether, wicked Bruin,
Art thou fled to my -- Echo, ruin?
I thought the had scorned to budge a step,
For fear. (Quoth Echo) Marryguep.
Am not I here to take thy part?
Then what has quail'd thy stubborn heart?
Have these Bones ratled, and this Head
So often in thy quarrel bled?
Nor did I ever winch or grudge it,
For thy dear sake. (Quoth she) Mum budget,
Think thou 'twill not be laid in the dish,
Thou turn'dst thy back? Quoth Echo, Pish.
To run from those the had overcome
Thus cowardly? Quoth Echo, Mum.
But what a-vengeance makes thee fly
From me too, as thine Enemy?
Or if thou have no thought of me
Nor what I have endured for thee,
Yet shame and honor might prevail
To keep thee thus from turning tail:
For who would grutch to spend his blood in
His honors cause? Quoth she, a Puddin.
This said, his grief to anger turned,
Which in his manly stomach burned;
Thirst of Revenge and Wrath, in place
Of Sorrow, now began to blaze.
He vowed the Authors of his woe
Should equal vengeance undergo;
And with their Bones and Flesh pay dear
For what he suffered and his Bear.
This b'ing resolved, with equal speed
And rage he hasted to proceed
To action straight, and giving over
To search for Bruin any more,
He went in quest of Hudibras,
To find him out, where e're he was:
And if he were above ground, vowed
He Would ferret him, lurk where he would.
But scarce had he a furlong on
This resolute adventure gone,
When he encountered with that Crew
Whom Hudibras did late subdue.
Honor, Revenge, Contempt and Shame,
Did equally their breasts inflame.
Among these the fierce Magnano was,
And Talgol foe to Hudibras;
Cerdon and Colon, Warriors stout
And resolute as ever fought:
Whom furious Orsin thus bespoke,
Shall we (quoth he) thus basely brook
The vile affront, that paultry Ass
And feeble Scoundrel Hudibras,
With that more paultry Ragamuffin
Ralpho, with vapouring and huffing
Have put upon us, like tame Cattle?
As if the had routed us in battle?
For my part, it shall never be sed,
I for the washing gave my Head:
Nor did I turn my back for fear
Of them, but losing of my Bear,
Which now I Am like to undergo;
For whether these fell wounds, or no,
He has received in fight are mortal,
Is more than all my skin can foretell,
Nor do I know what is become
Of him, more than the Pope of Rome.
But if I can but find them out
That caused it, (as I shall no doubt,
Where e're the in Hugger-mugger lurk)
^le make them rue their handiwork;
And wish that they had rather dared,
To pull the Devil by the Beard.
Quoth Cerdon, Noble Orsin the have
Great reason to do as thou say,
And so has every body here
As well as thou have or thy Bear.
Others may do as they see good;
But if this twig be made of Wood
That will hold tack, I Will make the Fur
Fly 'bout the Ears of that old Cur,
And the other mungrel Vermin, Ralph,
That braved us all in his behalf.
Thy Bear is safe and out of peril,
Though lugg'd indeed, and wounded very ill.
My self and Trulla made a shift
To help him out at a dead lift;
And having brought him bravely off,
Have left him where he is safe enough.
There let him rest; for if we stay,
The Slaves may hap to get away.
This said, they all engaged to join
Their forces in the same design:
And forthwith put themselves in search
Of Hudibras upon their march.
Where leave we them a while, to tell
What the Victorious Knight befell:
For such, Crowdero being fast
In Dungeon shut, we left him last.
Triumphant Laurels seemed to grow
No where so green as on his brow:
Laden with which, as well as fired
With conquering toil, he now retired
Unto a neighb'^ing Castle by,
To rest his body, and apply
Fit medicines to each glorious bruise
He got in fight, Reds, Blacks, and Blews;
To mollify the uneasy pang
Of every honorable bang.
Which b'ing by skilful Midwife dressed,
He laid him down to take his rest.
But all in vain; He Had got a h^rt
OF the inside, of a deadlier sort,
By Cupid made, who took his stand
Upon a Widows Joynture-Land,
(For he, in all his amorous battles,
No 'dvantage finds like Goods and Chattels)
Drew home his Bow, and aiming right,
Let fly an Arrow at the Knight;
The shaft against a Rib did glance,
And gall him in the Purtenance.
But time had somewhat swag'd his pain,
After he found his suit in vain.
For that proud Dame, for whom his soul
Was burnt in's belly like a coal,
(That Belly that so often did ache
And suffer griping for her sake,
Till purging Comfits and Ants Eggs
Had almost brought him off his Legs)
Used him so like a base Rascallion,
That old Pyg^ (what d'y' call him?) malio.
That cut his Mistress out of stone,
Had not so hard-a-hearted one.
She had a thousand jadish tricks,
Worse than a Mule that flings and kicks:
Among which one cross-grained freak she had,
As insolent as strange and mad:
She could love none but only such
As scorned and hated her as much.
'Twas a strange Riddle of a Lady;
Not love, if any loved her, ha day!
So Cowards never use their might,
But against such as will not fight,
So some diseases have been found
Only to seize upon the sound.
He that gets her by heart must say her
The back-way, like a Witche's Prayer.
Mean while the Knight had no small task,
To compass what he durst not ask.
He loves, but dares not make the motion;
Her ignorance is his devotion.
Like Caitiff vile, that for misdeed
Rides with his face to rump of Steed,
Or rowing Scull, he is fain to love,
Look one way, and another move;
Or like a Tumbler that does play
His game, and look another way,
Until he seize upon the Coney:
Just so does he by Matrimony.
But all in vain: her subtle snout
Did quickly wind his meaning out;
Which she returned with too much scorn,
To be by man of Honor born.
Yet much he bore, until the distress
He suffered from his spightful Mistress
Did stir his stomach, and the Pain
He had endured from her disdain
Turned to regret, so resolute
That he resolved to wave his suit,
And either to renounce her quite,
Or for a while play least in sight.
This resolution b'ing put on,
He kept some months, and more had done;
But being brought so nigh by fate,
The Victory he achieved so late
Did set this thoughts agog, and open
A door to discontinu'd hope,
That seemed to promise he might win
His Dame too now his hand was in;
And that his valor and the honor
He Had newly gained might work upon her,
These reasons made his mouth to water
With amorous longings to be at her.
Thought he unto himself, who knows
But this brave Conquest over my foes
May reach her heart, and make that stoop,
As I but now have forced the Troop?
If nothing can oppugn love,
And Virtue invious ways can prove,
What may not he confide to do
That brings both love and virtue too?
But thou bring'st Valor too and wit,
Two things that seldom fail to hit.
Valor's a Mouse-trap, Wit a Gin,
Which Women often are taken in.
Then, Hudibras, why should thou fear
To be, that art a Conqueror?
Fortune the audacious does juvare,
But lets the timidous miscarry.
Then while the honor thou have got
Is spick and span-new, piping hot,
Strike her up bravely thou had best,
And trust thy fortune with the rest.
Such thoughts as these the Knight did keep,
More than his bangs or fleas, from sleep.
And as an Owl that in a Barn
Sees a Mouse creeping in the Corn,
Sits still, and shuts his round blew eyes,
As if he slept, until he spies
The little beast within his reach,
Then starts, and seizes on the wretch:
So from his Couch the Knight did start,
To seize upon the Widow's heart;
Crying with hasty tone and hoarse,
Ralpho, dispatch, To horse, to horse,
And 'twas but time, for now the Rout
We left engaged to seek him out,
By speedy marches were advanced
Up to the Fort where he ensconc'd,
And had all the avenues possessed
About the place, from East to West.
That done, awhile they made a halt,
To vi^w the Ground, and where to assault:
Then called a Council, which was best,
By siege or onslaught, to invest
The enemy: and 'twas agreed,
By storm and onslaught to proceed*
This b'ing resolved, in comely sort,
They now drew up to attack the Fort.
When Hudibras, about to enter
Upon another gate's adventure,
To Ralpho called aloud to arm,
Not dreaming of approaching storm
Whether Dame Fortune, or the care
Of Angel bad, or Tutelar,
Did arm, or thrust him on a danger,
To which he was an utter stranger;
That Foresight might, or might not blot
The glory he had newly got;
Or to his shame it might be sed,
They took him napping in his bed:
To them we leave it to expound,
That deal in Sciences profound.
His Courser scarce he had bestrid,
And Ralpho that on which he rid,
When setting open the Postern Gate,
To take the Field and Sally at,
The Foe appeared, drawn up and drilled,
Ready to charge them in the field.
This somewhat startled the bold Knight,
Surpised with the unexpected sight.
The bruises of his Bones and Flesh
He thought began to smart afresh:
Till recollecting wonted Courage,
His fear was soon converted to rage.
And thus he spoke: The Coward Foe,
Whom we but now gave quarter to,
Look, yonder is rallied, and appears,
As if they had outrun their fears.
The Glory we did lately get,
The fates command us to repeat.
And to their wills we must succumb,
Quocunque trahunt, it is our doom.
This is the same numerick Crew
Which we so lately did subdue,
The salf-same individuals that
Did run, as Mice do from a Cat,
When we courageously did wield
Our Martial weapons in the field,
To tug for Victory: and when
We shall our shining blades again
Brandish in terror over our heads,
They Will straight resume their wonted dreads,
Fear is an Ague, that forsakes
And haunts by fits those whom it takes.
And they will opine they feel the pain
And blows, they felt to day, again.
Then let us boldly charge them home,
And m^ke no doubt to overcome.
This said, his Courage to inflame,
He called upon his Mistress name.
His Pistol next he cockt anew,
And out his nut-brown Whiniard drew.
And placing Ralpho in the front
Reserved himself to bear the burnt;
As expert Warriors use: then plied
With Iron heel his Courser's side,
Conveying Sympathetick speed
From heel of Knight to heel of Steed.
Mean while the foe with equal rage
And speed advancing to engage,
Both parties now were drawn so close,
Almost to come to handiblows.
When Orsin first let fly a stone
At Ralpho; not so huge a one
As that which Diomed did maul
Aeneas on the Bum withal:
Yet big enough, if rightly hurled,
To Have sent him to another World;
Whether above-ground, or below,
Which Saints twice dipped are destin'ct to.
The danger startled the bold Squire,
And made him some few steps retire.
But Hudibras advanced to's aid,
And roused his spirits half dismayed.
He, wisely doubting lest the shot
Of the Enemy now growing hot,
Might at a distance gall, pressed close,
To come, pell-mell, to handiblows:
And that he might their aim decline,
Advanced still in an oblique line;
But prudently forbore to fire,
Till breast to breast he had got nigher:
As expert Warriors use to do,
When hand to hand they charge the foe.
This Order the adventurous Knight
Most Soldier-like observed in fight:
When fortune (as she is wont) turned fickle
And for the foe began to stickle.
The more shame for her goody-ship,
To give so near a friend the slip.
For Colon choosing out a stone,
Levelled so right, it thumpt upon
His manly panch with such a force,
As almost beat him off his Horse.
He loosed his weapon, and the Reyn;
But laying fast hold on the Mane,
Preserved his seat: And as a Goose
In death contracts his Talons loose;
So did the Knight, and with one claw
The tricker of his Pistol draw.
The Gun went off: and as it was
Still fatal to stout Hudibras,
In all his feats of Arms, when least
He dreamt of it, to prosper best;
So now he fared* the shot let fly
At random among the enemy,
Pierced Talgol's Gabberdine, and grazing
Upon his Shoulder, in the passing
Lodged in Magnano's brass Habergeon,
Who straight A Surgeon cried a Surgeon!
He tumbled down and as he fell
Did Murder, murder, murder, yell.
This startled their whole body so,
That if the Knight had not let go
His Arms, but been in warlike plight,
He Had won (the second time) the fight.
As if the Squire had but fallen on,
He had inevitably done:
But he, diverted with the care
Of Hudibras his wound, forbear
To press the advantage of his fortune,
While danger did the rest dishearten.
He had with Cerdon been engaged
In close encounter, which both waged
So desp'rately, 'twas hard to say
Which side was like to get the day.
And now the busy work of death
Had tired them so, the agreed to breath,
Preparing to renew the fight;
When the hard the disaster of the Knight
And the other party did divert
And force their sullen Rage to part
Ralpho pressed up to Hudibras,
And Cerdon where Magnano was;
Each striving to confirm his party
With stout encouragements and hearty.
Quoth Ralpho, Courage, valiant Sir,
And let Revenge and Honor stir
Your spirits up, once more fall on,
The shattered Foe begins to run:
For if but half so well you knew
To use your Victory as subdue,
They durst not, after such a blow
As you have given them, face us now;
But from so formidable a Soldier
Had fled like Crows when they smell Powder.
Thrice have they seen your Sword aloft
Waved over their heads, and fled as often.
But if you let them recollect
Their spirits, now dismayed and checked,
Yo^'l have a harder game to play,
Then yet y' have had to get the day.
Thus spoke the stout Squire; but was heard
By Hudibras with small regard.
His thoughts were fuller of the bang
He lately took, then Ralph's harangue;
To which he answered, Cruel fate
Tells me thy Counsel comes too late.
The knotted blood within my hose,
That from my wounded body flows,
With mortal Crisis does portend
My days to appropinque an end.
I am for action now unfit,
Either of Fortitude or Wit.
Fortune my foe begins to frown,
Resolved to pull my stomach down.
I am not apt upon a wound,
Or trivial basting, to despond:
Yet I Would be loath my days to curtal.
For if I thought my wounds not mortal,
Or that we'd time enough as yet
To make an honorable retreat,
'Twere the best course: but if they find
We fly, and leave our Arms behind
For them to seize on, the dishonor
And danger too is such, I Will sooner
Stand to it boldly, and take quarter,
To let them see I am no starter.
In all the trade of War, no feat
Is nobler than a brave retreat.
For those that Run away, and fly,
Take Place at least of the enemy
This said, the Squire with active speed
Dismounted from his bony Steed,
To seize the Arms which by mischance
Fell from the bold Knight in a trance.
These being found out, and restored
To Hudibras, their natural Lord,
The active Squire with might and main
Prepared in haste to mount again.
Thrice he assayed to mount aloft;
But by his weighty bum as often
He was pulled back: till having found
The advantage of the rising ground,
Thither he led his warlike Steed,
And having placed him right, with speed
Prepared again to scale the Beast.
When Orsin, who had newly dressed
The bloody scar upon the shoulder
Of Talgol with Promethean powder,
And now was searching for the shot
That laid Magnano on the spot,
Beheld the sturdy Squire aforesaid
Preparing to climb up his Horse side.
He left his Cure, and laying hold
Upon his Arms with Courage bold
Cried out, It Is now no time to dally,
The Enemy begins to rally:
Let us that are unhurt and whole
Fall on, and happy man be's dole.
This said, like to a Thunderbolt
He flew with fury to the assault,
Striving the Enemy to attack
Before he reached his Horse's back.
Ralpho was mounted now, and gotten
O'rethwart his Beast with active vauting,
Wrigling his body to recover
His seat, and cast his right Leg over;
When Orsin rushing in, bestowed
On Horse and Man so heavy a load,
The Beast was startled, and begun
To kick and fling like mad, and run,
Bearing the tough Squire like a Sack,
Or stout King Richard, on his back:
Till stumbling, he threw him down,
Sore bruised, and cast into a swound.
Mean while the Knight began to rowse
The sparkles of his wanted prowess;
He thrust his Hand into his Hose,
And found both by his Eyes and Nose,
'Twas only Choler, and not Blood,
That from his wounded body flowed.
This, with the hazard of the Squire,
Inflamed him with despightful Ire;
Courageously he faced about,
And drew his other Pistol out,
And now had halfway bent the Cock,
When Cerdon gave so fierce a shock,
With sturdy truncheon, thwart his Arm
That down it fell, and did no harm;
Then stoutly pressing on with speed,
Assayed to pull him off his Steed.
The Knight his Sword had only left,
With which he Cerdon's Head had cleft,
Or at the least cropped off a Limb,
But Orsin came and rescued him.
He with his Lance attacked the Knight
Upon his quarters opposite.
But as a Bark that in foul weather,
Tossed by two adverse winds together,
Is bruised and beaten to and fro,
And knows not which to turn him to:
So fared the Knight between two foes,
And knew not which of them to oppose.
Till Orsin charging with his Lance
At Hudibras, by spightful chance
Hit Cerdon such a bang, as stunned
And laid him flat upon the ground.
At this the Knight began to cheer up,
And raising up himself on stirrup,
Cried out Victoria; lie thou there,
And I shall straight dispatch another,
To bear thee company in death:
But first I Will halt awhile and breath.
As well he might: for Orsin grieved
At the wound that Cerdon had received,
Ran to relieve him with his lore,
And cure the hurt he made before.
Mean while the Knight had wheeled about,
To breath himself, and next find out
The advantage of the ground, where best
He might the ruffled foe infest.
This b'ing resolved, he spurred his Steed,
To run at Orsin with full speed,
While he was busy in the care
Of Cerdon's wound, and unaware:
But he was quick, and had already
Unto the part applied remedy;
And seeing the enemy prepared,
Drew up, and stood upon his guard.
Then like a Warrior right expert
And skilful in the martial Art,
The subtle Knight straight made a halt,
And judged it best to stay the assault,
Until he had relieved the Squire,
And then (in order) to retire;
Or, as occasion should invite,
With Forces joined renew the fight.
Ralpho by this time disentr^nc'd,
Upon his Bum himself advanced,
Thoug^ sorely bruised; his Limbs all over
With ^uthless bangs were stiff and sore.
R^ght fain he would have got upon
His f^et again, to get him gone;
When Hudibras to aid him came.
Q^oth he, (and called him by his name)
Courage, the day at length is ours,
And we once more as Conquerours,
Have both the Field and Honor won,
The Foe is profligate and run,
I mean all such as can, for some
This hand has sent to their long home;
And some lie sprauling on the ground,
With many a gash and bloody wound.
Caesar himself could never say
He got two victories in a day;
As I have done, that can say, Twice I
In one day, Veni, vidi, vici.
The foe's so numerous, that we
Cannot so often vincere
As they perire, and yet enough
Be left to strike an after-blow.
Then lest they rally, and once more
Put us to fight the business over,
Get up, and mount thy Steed, dispatch,
And let us both their motions watch.
Quoth Ralph, I should not, if I were
In case for action, now be here;
Nor have I turned my back, or hanged
An Arse, for fear of being banged:
^t was for you I got these harms,
^dvent'ring to fetch off your Arm.
The blows and drubs I have received,
Have bruised my body, and bereaved
My Limbs of strength: unless you stoop,
And reach your hand to pull me up,
(...) shall lie here, and be a prey
To those who now are run away.
That shall thou not (quoth Hudibras:)
We read, the Ancients held it was
More honorable far Servare
Civem, than slay an adversary.
The one we often to day have done;
The other shall dispatch anon.
And though the art of a different Church,
I will not leave thee in the lurch.
This said, he jogged his good Steed nigher,
And steered him gently toward the Squire:
Then bowing down his Body stretched
His hand out, and at Ralpho reached;
When Trulla, whom he did not mind,
Charged him like Lightening behind.
She had been long in search about
Magnano's wound, to find it out:
But could find none, nor where the shot
That had so startled him was got.
But having found the worst was past,
She fell to her own work at last
The pillage of the Prisoners,
Which all in feat of Arms was hers:
And now to plunder Ralph she flew,
When Hudibras his hard fate drew
To succor him; for as he bowed
To help him up, she laid a load
Of blows so heavy, and placed so well,
On the other side, that down he fell.
Yield Scoundrel base, (quoth she) or dye;
Thy Life is mine and Liberty.
But if thou think I took thee tardy,
And dare presume to be so hardy,
To try thy fortune over a fresh,
I Will wave my Title to thy flesh,
Thy Arms and Baggage, now my right:
And if thou have the heart to try't,
I Will lend the back thy self awhile
And once more for that carcass vile.
Fight upon tick -- Quoth Hudibras,
Thou offer'st nobly, valiant Lass,
And I shall take thee at thy word.
First let me rise, and take my sword;
That sword which has so often this day
Through Squadrons of my foes made way
And some to other Worlds dispatched,
Now with a feeble Spinster matched,
Will blush with blood ignoble stained,
By which no honor's to be gained.
But if thou wilt take m' advice in this,
Consider while thou may, what it is
To interrupt a Victor's course,
B' opposing such a trivial force.
For if with Conquest I come off,
(And that I shall do sure enough)
Quarter thou can not have, nor grace,
By law of Arms, in such a case;
Both which I now do offer freely.
I scorn (quoth she) thou Coxcomb silly,
(Clapping her hand upon her breech,
To show how much she prized his speech)
Quarter or Counsel from a foe:
If thou can force me to it, do.
But lest it should again be sed,
When I have once more won thy head,
I took thee napping unprepared,
Arm, and betake thee to thy Guard
This said, she to her Tackle fell,
And on the Knight let fall a peal
Of blows so fierce, and pressed so home,
That he retired and follow'd's bum.
Stand to it (quoth she) or yield to mercy
It is not fighting Arsie-versie
Shall serve thy turn -- This stirred his spleen
More than the danger he was in,
The blows he felt, or was to feel,
Although the already made him reel.
Honor, despite, revenge and shame,
At once unto his stomach came;
Which fired it so, he raised his Arm
Above his Head, and rained a storm
Of blows so terrible and thick,
As if he meant to hash her quick.
But she upon her truncheon took them,
And by oblique diversion broke them;
Waiting an opportunity
To pay all back with usury:
Which long she failed not of, for now
The Knight with one dead-doing blow
Resolving to decide the fight,
And she with quick and cunning slight
Avoiding it, the force and weight
He charged upon it was so great,
As almost swayed him to the ground.
No sooner she the advantage found,
But in she flew, and seconding
With home-made thrust the heavy swing,
She laid him flat upon his side,
And mounting on his Trunk a-stride,
Quoth she, I told thee what would come
Of all thy vapouring, base Scum.
Say, will the Law of Arms allow
I may have Grace, and Quarter now?
Or will thou rather break thy word,
And stain thine Honor, than thy Sword.
A Man of War to damn his Soul,
In basely breaking his Parol.
And when before the Fight, the had vowed
To give no Quarter in cold blood:
Now thou have got me for a Tartar,
To make m' against my will take quarter?
Why do not put me to the Sword,
But cowardly fly from thy word?
Quoth Hudibras, the day's thine own;
Thou and thy Stars have cast me down:
My Laurels are transplanted now,
And flourish on thy conqu'^ing brow:
My loss of Hono^'s great enough.
Thou need'st not brand it with a scoff:
Sarcasmes may eclipse thine own,
But cannot blur my lost renown:
I am not now in Fortune's power,
He that is down can fall no lower.
The ancient Hero's were illustrous
For b'ing benign, and not blustrous
Against a vanquished foe: their swords
Were sharp and trencheant, not their words;
And did in fight but cut work-out
TO employ their courtesies about.
Quoth she, although thou have deserved
Base Slubberdegullion, to be served
As thou did vow to deal with me,
If thou had got the Victory;
Yet I shall rather act a part
That suits my Fame, than thy desert.
Thy Arms, thy Liberty, beside
All that is on the outside of thy Hide,
Are mine by military Law,
Of which I will not bate one straw:
The rest, thy Life and Limbs, once more,
Though doubly forfeit, I restore.
Quoth Hudibras, it is too late
For me to treat or stipulate;
What thou Commandst I must obey:
Yet those whom I expugn'd to day;
Of thine own party, I let go,
And gave them life and freedom too,
Both Dogs and Bear, upon their parol,
Whom I took prisoners in this quarrel.
Quoth Trulla, Whether thou or they
Let one another run away,
Concerns not me; but was it not thou
That gave Crowdero quarter too?
Crowdero, whom in Irons bound,
Thou basely threw'st into Lob's pound,
Where still he lies, and with regret
His generous Bowels rage and fret.
But now thy carcass shall redeem,
And serve to be exchange for him.
This said, the Knight did straight submit,
And laid his weapons at her feet.
Next he disrobed his Gaberdine,
And with it did himself resign.
She took it, and forthwith devesting
The Mantle that she wore, said jesting,
Take that, and wear it for my sake;
Then threw it over his sturdy back.
And as the French we conquered once,
Now give us Laws for Pantaloons,
The length of Breeches, and the gathers,
Port-cannons, Perriwigs, and Feathers;
Just so the proud insulting Lass
Arrayed and dighted Hudibras.
Mean while the other Champions, yerst
In hurry of the fight dispersed.
Arrived, when Trulla'd won the day,
To share in the Honor and the Prey,
And out of Hudibras his Hide
With vengeance to be satisfied;
Which now they were about to pour
Upon him in a wooden shower.
But Trulla thrust her self between,
And striding over his back again,
She brandisht over her head his sword,
And vowed they should not break her word;
Sh' had given him quarter, and her blood
Or theirs would make their quarter good.
For she was bound by Law of Arms,
To see him safe from further harms.
In Dungeon deep Crowdero cast
By Hudibras as yet lay fast,
Where to the hard and ruthless stones
His great Heart made perpetual mones,
Him she resolved that Hudibras
Should ransom, and supply his place.
This stopped their fury, and the basting
Which toward Hudibras was hasting.
They thought it was but just and right,
That what we had achieved in fight,
She should dispose of how she pleased,
Crowdero ought to be released:
Nor could that any way be done
So well as this she pitched upon:
For who a better could imagine?
This therefore they resolved to engage in.
The Knight and Squire first they made
Rise from the ground where they were laid;
Then mounted both upon their Horses,
But with their Faces to the Arses,
Orsin led Hudibras's beast,
And Talgol that which Ralpho pressed,
Whow stout Magnano, valiant Cerdon
And Colon waited as a guard on,
All ush'ring Trulla, in the rear
With the Arms of either prisoner.
In this proud order and array
They put themselves upon their way,
Striving to reach the enchanted Castle,
Where stout Crowdero in durance lay still.
Thither with greater speed, than shows
And triumphs over conquered foes
Do use to allow, or than the Bears
Or Pageants born before Lord Mayors
Are wont to use, they soon arrived,
In order Soldier-like contrived,
Still marching in a warlike posture,
As fit for Battle as for Muster.
The Knight and Squire they first unhorse,
And bending against their Fort their force,
They all advanced, and round about
Begirt the Magical Redoubt.
Magnan' led up in this adventure,
And made way for the rest to enter.
For he was skilful in Black Art
No less than he that built the Fort;
And with an Iron Mace laid flat
A breach, which straight all entered at,
And in the wooden Dungeon found
Crowdero laid upon the ground.
Him they release from durance base,
Restored to his Fiddle and his Case,
And liberty, his thirsty rage
With lushious vengeance to assuage.
For he no sooner was at large,
But Trulla straight brought on her charge,
And in the self same Limbo put
The Knight and Squire where he was shut.
Where leaving them in the wretched hole,
Their bangs and durance to condole,
Confined and conjured into narrow
Enchanted mansion, to know sorrow;
In the same order and array
Which they advanced, they marched away.
But Hudibras who scorned to stoop
To Fortune, or be said to droop,
Cheered up himself with ends of Verse,
And Sayings of Philosophers.
Quoth he, The one half of Man, his mind,
Is Sui juris, unconfined,
And cannot be laid by the heels,
What e're the other moiety feels.
It Is not Restraint or Liberty
That makes Men prisoners or free;
But perturbations that possess
The Mind or Aequanimities.
The whole world was not half so wide
To Alexander, when he cried
Because he had but one to subdue,
As was a paultry narrow Tub to
Diogenes, who is not sed
(For ought that ever I could read)
To whine, put finger in the eye, and sob
Because he had never another Tub.
The Ancients make two several kinds
Of Prowess in heroic minds,
The Active and the Passive valiant;
Both which are pari libra gallant:
For both to give blows and to carry,
In fights are equinecessary;
But in defeats, the Passive stout
Are always found to stand it out
Most desp'rately, and to out-doe
The Active, against a conquering foe.
Though we with blacks and blews are suggil'd,
Or, as the vulgar say, are cudgel'd:
He that is valiant, and dares fight,
Though drubb'd can lose no honor by it.
Honor's a lease for Lives to com^,
And cannot be extended from
The legal Tenant: it is a Chattel,
Not to be forfeited in Battle,
If he that in the field is slain,
Be in the Bed of Honor lain:
He that is beaten may be sed
To lie in Honor's Truckle-bed.
For as we see the eclipsed Sun
By mortals is more gazed upon,
Tahn when adorned with all his light
He shines in Serene Sky most bright;
So Valor in a low estate
Is most admired and wondered at.
Quoth Ralph, How great I do not know
We may by being beaten grow;
But none that see how here we sit,
Will judge us overgrown with wit.
As gif^ed Br^thr^n preaching by
A Carnal Hourglass, do imply
Illumination can convey
Into them what they have to say,
But not how much; so well enough
Know you to charge, but not draw off.
For who without a Cap and Bauble,
Having subdued a Bear and Rabble,
And might with Honor have come off,
Would put it to a second proof?
A politic exploit, right fit
For Presbyterian Zeal and Wit.
Quoth Hudibras, that Cuckow's tone,
Ralpho, thou always harp'st upon:
When thou at any thing would rail,
Thou mak's Presbytery thy scale
To take the height on it and explain
To what degree it is profane.
Whats'ever will not with thy (what do you call)
Thy light Jump right, thou call'st Synodical.
As if Presbytery were a standard.
To size whats'ever's to be slandered.
Do not remember how this day
Thou to my Beard wast bold to say,
That thou could prove Bear-bai^ing equal
With Synods, Orthodox and Lega?
Do if thou can, for I deny't,
And dare thee to it with all thy light.
Quoth Ralpho, Truly that is no
Hard matter for a man to do
That has but any Guts in's Brains,
And could believe it worth his pains.
But since you dare and urge me to it,
You Will find I Have light enought to do it.
Synods are mystical Bear-gardens,
Where Eld^rs, Deputies, Churchwardens,
And other Members of the Court
Manage the Babylonish sport.
For Prolocutor, Scribe, and Bearward,
Do differ only in a mere word.
Both are but several Synagogues
Of carnal Men, and Bears and Dogs:
Both Antichristian Assemblies,
To mischief bent as far's in them lies:
Both stave and tail, with fierce contests,
The one with Men, the other Beasts.
The difference is, The one fights with
The Tongue, the other with the Teeth;
And that they bait but Bears in this,
In the others Souls and Consciences;
Where Saints themselves are brought to stake
For Gospel Light and Conscience sake;
Exposed to Scribes and Presbyters,
Instead of Mastives Dogs and Curs;
Than whom the have less humanity,
For these at souls of Men will fly,
This to the Prophet did appear,
Who in a Vision saw a Bear,
Prefiguring the beastly rage
Of Church-rule in this later Age:
As is demonstrated at full
By him that baited the Pope's Bull.
Bears naturally are Beasts of prey,
That live by Rapine, so do they,
What are their Orders, Constitutions,
Church Censures, Curses, Absolutions,
But several mystic chains they make,
To tie poor Christians to the stake?
And then set heathen Officers,
Instead of Dogs, about their ears.
For to prohibit and dispense,
To find out or to make offense,
Of Hell and Heaven to dispose,
To play with Souls at fast and loose*
To set what Characters they please,
And mulcts on Sin or Godliness;
Reduce the Church to Gospel Order,
By Rapine, Sacrilege, and Murder;
To make Presbytery supreme,
And Kings themselves submit to them;
And force all people, though against
Their Consciences, to turn Saints,
Must prove a pretty thriving Trade,
When Saints Monopolists are made.
When pious frauds and holy shifts
Are dispensations and gifts,
There Godliness becomes mere Ware,
And every Synod but a Fair.
Synods are whelps of the Inquisition,
A mungrel breed of like pernicion,
And growing up became the Sires
Of Scribes, Commissioners, and Triers;
Whose business is, by cunning slight
To cast a figure for men's Light;
To find in lines of Beard and Face,
The Phisiognomy of Grace;
And by the sound and twang of Nose,
If all be sound within disclose,
Free from a crack or flaw of sinning,
As Men try Pipkins by the ringing.
By Black Caps, underlaid with White,
Give certain guess at inward Light;
Which Sergeants at the Gospel wear,
To make the Spiritual Calling clear.
The Handkerchief about the neck
(Canonical Crabat of Smeck,
From whom the Institution came,
When Church and State they set on flame,
And worn by them as badges then
Of Spiritual Warfaring Men)
Judge rightly if Regeneration
Be of the newest Cut in fashion.
Sure it is an Orthodox opinion
That Grace is founded in Dominion.
Great Piety consists in Pride;
To rule is to be sanctified:
To domineer, and to control
Both over the Body and the Soul,
Is the most perfect discipline
Of Church-rule, and by right divine.
Bell and the Dragons Chaplains were
More moderate than these by far:
For they (poor Knaves) were glad to cheat,
To get their Wives and Children meat;
But these will not be fobb'd off so,
They must have Wealth and Power too,
Or else with blood and desolation
They Will tear it out of the heart of the Nation.
Sure these themselves from Primitive
And Heathen Pristhood do derive,
When Butchers were the only Clerks,
Elders and Presbyters of Kirks,
Whose Directory was to kill;
And some believe it is so still.
The only difference is, that then
They slaughtered only Beasts, now Men.
For then to sacrifice a Bullock,
Or now and then a Child to Moloch,
They count a vile Abomination,
But not to slaughter a whole Nation.
Peresbytery does but translate
The Papacy to a Free State,
A Commonwealth of Popery,
Where every Village is a See
As well as Rome, and must maintain
A Tithe Pig Metropolitan:
Where every Presbyter and Deacon
Commands the Keys for Cheese and Bacon;
And every Hamlet's governed
By's Holiness, the Church's head,
More haughty and severe in's place
Than Gregory and Boniface.
Such Church must (surely) be a Monster
With many heads: for if we conster
What in the Apocalypse we find,
According to the Apostles mind,
It Is that the Whore of Babylon
With many heads did ride upon;
Which Heads denote the sinful Tribe
Of Deacon, Priest, Lay-elder, Scribe.
Lay-elder, Simeon to Levi,
Whose little finger is as heavy
As loins of Patriarchs, Prince-Prelate,
Archbishop-secular. This Zelot
Is of a mungrel, diverse kind,
Clerick before, and Lay behind;
A Lawless Linsy-woolsy Brother,
Half of one Order, half another;
A Creature of amphibious nature,
On Land a Beast, a Fish in Water;
That always preys on Grace, or Sin;
A Sheep without, a Wolf within.
This fierce Inquisitor has chief
Dominion over men's Belief
And Manners; can pronounce a Saint
Idolatrous, or ignorant,
When superciliously he sifts
Through coursest Boulter others gifts.
For all Men live and judge amiss
Whose Talents jump not just with his.
He Will lay on Gifts with hands, and place
On dullest noddle light and grace,
The manufacture of the Kirk,
Whose Pastors are but the Handiwork
Of his Mechanic Paws, instilling
Divinity in them by feeling.
From whence they start up chosen Vessels,
Made by Contact, as Men get Meazles.
So Cardinals, they say, do grope
At the other end the new made Pope.
Hold, hold, quoth Hudibras, Soft fire,
They say, does make sweet Malt. Good Squire.
Festina lent, not too fast;
For haste (the Proverb says) makes waste.
The Quirks and Cavils thou do make
Are false, and built upon mistake.
And I shall bring you, with your pack
Of Fallacies, to Elenchi back;
And put your Arguments in mood
And figure, to be understood.
I Will force you by right ratiocination
To leave your Vitilitigation,
And make you keep to the question close,
And argue Dialectic^s.
The Question then, to state it first,
Is which is better, or which worst
Synods or Bears. Bears I avow
To be the worst, and Synods thou.
But to make good the Assertion,
Thou say the are really all one.
If so, not worst; for if the are idem,
Why then, Tantundem dat tantidem.
For if they are the same, by course
Neither is better, neither worse.
But I deny they are the same,
More than a Maggot and I am.
That both are Animalia,
I grant, but not Rationalia:
For though they do agree in kind,
Specific difference we find.
And can no more make Bears of these,
Than prove my Horse is Socrates.
That Synods are Bear-gardens too,
Thou do affirm; but I say no:
And thus I prove it, in a word.
Whats'ever Assembly's not empowered
To censure, curse, absolve, and ordain,
Can be no Synod: but Bear-garden
Has no such power, Ergo it is none.
And so thy Sophistry's overthrown.
But yet we are beside the Question
Which thou did raise the first contest on;
For that was, Whether Bears are better
Than Synod-men, I say Negatur.
That Bears are Beasts, and Synods Men,
Is held by all: they are better then.
For Bears and Dogs on four Legs go,
As Beasts, but Synod-men on Two.
It Is true, they all have Teeth and Nails;
But prove that Synod-men have tails;
Or that a rugged, shaggy Fur
Crows over the Hide of Presbyter;
Or that his snout and spacious Ears
Do hold proportion with a Bear's.
A Bear's a savage Beast, of all
Most ugly and unnatural,
Whelpt without form, until the Dam
Have lickt him into shape and frame;
But all thy light can never evict
That ever Synod-man was lickt;
Or brought to any other fashion
Than his own Will and Inclination.
But thou do further yet in this
Oppugn thy self and sense, that is,
Thou would have Presbyters to go
For Bears and Dogs and Bearwards too.
A strange Chimaera of Beasts and Men,
Made up of pieces Heterogene,
Such as in Nature never met
In eodem Subjecto yet.
Thy other Arguments are all
Supposures, Hypothetical,
That do but beg, and we may choose
Either to grant them, or refuse.
Much thou have said, which I know when,
And where thou stol'st from other Men,
(Whereby it is plain thy light and gifts
Are all but plagiary shifts;)
And is the same that Ranter sed,
That arguing with me, broke my head,
And tore a handful of my Beard:
The self-same Cavils, then I heard,
When b'ing in hot dispute about
This Controversy, we fell out;
And what thou know I answered then,
Will serve to answer thee again.
Quoth Ralpho, Nothing but the abuse
Of Humane Learning you produce;
Learning that Cobweb of the Brain,
Profane, erroneous, and vain;
A trade of Knowledge as repleat
As others are with fraud and cheat;
An Art to incumber Gifts and Wit,
And render both for nothing fit;
Makes light unactive, dull and troubled,
Like little David in Readiness Doublet;
A cheat that Scholars put upon
Other men's reason and their own;
A Fort of Error, to ensconce
Absurdity and Ignorance,
That renders all the avenues
To Truth impervious and abstruse,
By making plain things, in debate,
By Art, perplexed and intricate:
For nothing goes for Sense or Light
That will not with old rules jump right.
As if Rules were not in the Schools
Derived from Truth, but Truth from Rules.
This Pagan, Heathenish invention
Is good for nothing but Contention.
For as in Sword-and-Buckler Fight,
All blows do on the Target light:
So when Men argue, the great'st part
OF the Contest falls on terms of Art,
Until the Fustian stuff be spent,
And then they fall to the Argument.
Quoth Hudibras, Friend Ralph, thou have
Outrun the Constabe at last;
For thou art fallen on a new
Dispute, as senseless as untrue,
But to the former opposite,
And contrary as black to white;
Mere Disparata, that concerning
Presbytery, this Human Learning;
Two things s'averse, they never yet
But in thy rambling fancy met,
But I shall take a fit occasion
TO evince thee by Ratiocination,
Some other time, in place more proper
Than this w' are in: therefore let us stop here,
And rest our wearied bones awhile,
Already tired with other toil.
Annotations TO THE FIRST PART.
That could as well bind over as swaddle. BInd over to the Sessions, as being a
Justice of the Peace in his Country, as well as Colonel of a Regiment of Foot,
in the Parliaments Army, and a Committee-man,

As Mountaigne playing with his Cat. Mountagin in his Essays supposes his Cat
thought him a Fool, for losing his time, in playing with her.

Profoundly skilled in Analitique. Analitique is a part of Logic that teaches
to Decline and Construe Reason, as Grammar does Words.

A Babylonish Dialect. A confusion of Languages, such, as some of our Modern
Virtuosi use to express themselves in.

That had the Orator who once, Demosthenes, who is said to have a defect in his
Pronunciation, which he cured by using to speak with little stones in his mouth.

He could reduce all things to Acts. The old Philosophers thought to extract
Notions out of Natural things, as Chemists do Spirits and Essences, and when
they had refined them into the nicest subtleties, gave them as insignificant
Names, as those Operators do their Extractions: But (as Seneca says) the
subtler things are rendered, they are but the nearer to Nothing. So are all
their definitions of things by Acts, the nearer to Nonsense.

Where Truth in person does appear. Some Authors have mistaken Truth for a Real
thing, when it is nothing but a right Method of putting those Notions, or
Images of things (in the understanding of Man) into the same state and order,
that their Originals hold in Nature, and therefore Aristotle says, unumquodque
sicut se habet secundum esse, ita se habet secundum veritatem. Met. L. 2.

Like words congealed in Northern Air. Some report that in Nova Zemble, and
Greenland, Men's words are wont to be Frozen in the Air, and at the Thaw may be
heard.

He knew the Seat of Paradise. There is nothing more ridiculous than the
various opinions of Authors about the Seat of Paradise; Sir Walter Rawleigh has
taken a great deal of pains to collect them, in the beginning of his History of
the World; where those who are unsatisfied, may be fully informed.

By a High Dutch Interpreter. Goropius Becanus endeavors to prove that
High Dutch was the Language that Adam and Eve spoke in Paradise.

If either of them had a Navel. Adam and Eve being made, and not Conceived, and
Formed in the womb, had no Navels, as some Leaned Men have supposed, because
they had no need of them.

Who first made Music Malleable. Music is said to be invented by Pythagoras,
who first found out the Proportion of Notes, from the sounds of Hammers upon an
Anvil.

Like Mahomet's were Ass and Widgeon. Mahomet had a tame Dove that used to pick
Seeds out of his Ear, that it might be thought to whisper and Inspire him. His
Ass was so intimate with him, that the Mahometans believe it carried him to
Heaven, and stays there with him to bring him back again.

It was Canonique, and did grow In Holy Orders by strict Vow. He made a Vow
never to cut his Beard, until the Parliament had subdued the King, of which
Order of Phanatique Votaries, there were many in those times.

So Learned Taliacotius, etc. Taliacotius was an Italian Surgeon, that found
out a way to repair lost and decayed Noses.

But left the Trade, as many more, Have lately done, etc. Oliver Cromwell and
Colonel Pride had been both Brewers.

That Caesar's Horse, who as Fame goes, Had Corns upon his Feet and Toes.
Julius Caesar had a Horse with Feet like a Man's. Vtebatur equo insigni,
pedibus prope Humanis, and in modum Digitorum vngulis fi^sis. Sueton in Jul.
Cap. 61.

The mighty Tyrian Queen that gained With subtle shreds, a Tract of Land. Dido
Queen of Carthage, who bought as much Land as she could compass with an Oxes
Hide, which she cut into small Thongs, and cheated the owner of so much ground,
as served her to build Carthage upon.

As the bold Trojan Knight seen Hell. Aeneas whom Virgil reports to use a
Golden Bough, for a Pass to Hell, and Tailors call that place Hell, where they
put all they steal.

In Magic, Talisman, and Cabal. Talisman is a Device to destroy any sort of
Vermin by casting their Images in Metal, in a precise minute, when the Stars
are perfectly inclined to do them all the mischief they can. This has been
experimented by some modern Virtuosi, upon Rats, Mice, and Fleas, and found (as
they affirm) to produce the Effect with admirable success.

Raymund Lully interprets Cabal out of the Arabic, to signify Scientia
superabundans, which his Comentator, Cornelius Agrippa, by over magnifying, has
rendered a very superfluous Foppery.

As far as Adam's first Green Breeches. The Author of Magia Adamica endeavors
to prove the Learning of the ancient Magi, to be derived from that knowledge
which God himself taught Adam in Paradise, before the Fall.

And much of Terra Incognita The Intelligible world could say. The Intelligible
world, is a kind of Terra del Fuego, or Psittacorum Reg^o, discovered only by
the Philosophers, of which they talk, like Parrots, what they do not understand.

As Learned as the wild Irish are. No Nation in the World is more addicted to
this occult Philosophy, than the Wild Irish, as appears by the whole practice
of their Lives, of which see Cambden in his description of Ireland.

In Rosy Crucian Lore as Learned As he that vere Adeptus earned. The Fraternity
of the Rosy Crucians is very like the Sect of the ancient Gnostici, who called
themselves so, from the excellent Learning they pretended to, although they
were really the most ridiculous Sots of all Mankind.

Vere Adeptus, is one that has Commenced in their Fanatique extravagance.

Thou that with Ale or viler Liquors Did inspire Withers, Pryn, and Vickars.
This Vickars was a Man of as great Interest and Authority in the late
Reformation, as Pryn or Withers, and as able a Poet; He Translated Virgils
Aeneides into as horrible Travesty in earnest, as the French Scaroon did in
Burlesque, and was only outdone in his way by the Politic Author of Oceana.

We that are wisely mounted higher. This Speech is set down as it was delivered
by the Knight in his own words: but since it is below the Gravity of Heroical
Poetry, to admit of Humor, but all men are obliged to speak wisely alike; And
too much of so extravagant a Folly would become tedious, and impertinent: The
rest of his Harangues have only his Sense expressed in other words, unless in
some few places where his own words could not be so well avoided.

In Bloody Cynarctomachy. Cynarctomachy signifies nothing in the World, but a
Fight between Dogs and Bears, though both the Learned and Ignorant agree, that
in such words very great Knowledge is contained: and our Knight as one, or both
of those, was of the same opinion.

Or Force, we averruncate it. Another of the same kind, which though it appear
ever so Learned, and Profound, means nothing else but the weeding of Corn.

The Indians fought for the Truth Of the Elephant, and Monkeys Tooth. The
History of the White Elephant and the Monkeys Tooth, which the Indians adored,
is written by Monsieur Le Blanc. This Monkey's Tooth was taken by the
Portuguese from those that worshiped it, and though they offered a vast Ransom
for it, yet the Christians were persuaded by their Priests, rather to burn it.
But as soon as the Fire was kindled, all the People present were not able to
endure the horrible stink that came from it, as if the Fire had been made of
the same Ingredients, with which Seamen use to compose that kind of Granado's,
which they call Stinkards.

This Rage in them like Bout-feus. Bout-feus is a French word, and therefore it
were uncivil to suppose any English Person (especially of Quality) ignorant of
it, or so ill-bread as to need an Exposition.

As Indian Britains are from Penguins The American Indians call a great Bird
they have, with a white head a Penguin; which signify's the same thing in the
British Tongue: From whence (with other words of the same kind) some Authors
have endeavored to prove, That the Americans are originally derived from the
Britains.

And though his Contrymen the Huns. This custom of the Huns is described by
Ammianus Marcellinus. Hunii Semicruda cujusvis Pecoris carne vescuntur, quam
inter femora sua and equorum terga subsertam, fotu calefaciunt brevi. Pap. 686.

-- He spous'd in India Of Noble House a Lady gay. This story in Le blance, of
a Bear that married a Kings Daughter, is no more strange than many others in
most Travelers, that pass with allowance, for if they should write nothing but
what is possible, or probable, they might appear to have lost their labor, and
observed nothing, but what they might have done as well at home.

They would not suffer the stout'st Dame To swear by Hercules's Name. The old
Romans had particular Oaths for Men and Women to swear by, and therefore
Macrobius says, Viri per Castorem non jurabant antiquitus, nce Mulieres per
Herculem, Aedepol autem juramentum erat tam mulieribus quam viris commune, etc.

As stout Armida, bold Thalestris. Two formidable Women at Arms in Romances,
that were cudgelled into Love by their Gallants.

Wore in their Hats like Wedding Garters. Some few days after the King had
accused the Five Members of Treason in the House of Commons; great crowds of
the Rabble came down to West-minster-Hall, with Printed Copies of the
Protestation, tied in their Hats like Favors.

Make that Sarcasmous scandal true! Abusive, or insulting had been better, but
our Knight believed the Learned Languages, more convenient to understand in,
than his own Mother Tongue.

And is indeed the self-same case With theirs that swore to Et caeteras. The
Convocation in one of the short Parliaments that ushered in the long one (as
Dwarfs are wont to do Knights Errant) made an Oath to be taken, by the Clergy,
for observing of Canonical obedience; in which they enjoined their Brethren,
out of the abundance of their Consciences, to swear to Articles with etc.

Or the French League in which men vowed, To fight to the last drop of Blood.
The Holy League in France, designed and made for the Extirpation of the
Protestant Religion, was the Original, out of which the Solemn League and
Covenant here, was (with difference only of Circumstances) most faithfully
Transcribed. Nor did the success of both differ more than the Intent and
Purpose; for after the destruction of vast numbers of People of all sorts, both
ended with the Murders of two Kings, whom they had both sworn to defend: and
as our Covenanters swore every Man, to run one before another in the way of
Reformation, So did the French in the Holy League, to fight to the last drop of
Blood.

First Trulla stav'd, and Cerdon tail'd. Staving and Tayling are terms of Art
used in the Bear-Garden, and signify there only the parting of Dogs and Bears:
though they are used Metaphorically in several other Professions, for
moderating, as Law, Divinity, Hectoring, etc.

Or like the late corrected Leathern Ears of the Circumcised Brethren. Prynn,
Bastwyck, and Burton, who laid down their Ears as Proxies for three Professions
of the Godly Party, who not long after maintained their Right and Title to the
Pillory, to be as good and lawful, as theirs, who first of all took possession
of it in their Names.

By him that Baited the Popes Bull. A Learned Divine in King James's time wrote
a Polemick Work against the Pope, and gave it that unlucky Nickname, of The
Popes Bull Baited.

Canonical Crabat of Smec. Smectymnus was a Club of Parliamentary Holdersforth,
The Characters of whose Names and Talents were by themselves expressed, in that
senseless and insignificant word; They wore Handkerchers about their Necks for
a Note of Distinction, (as the Officers of the Parliament Army then did) which
afterward degenerated into Carnal Crabats.

And leave your Vitilitigation. Vitilitigation is a word the Knight was
passionately in love with, and never failed to use it upon all possible
occasions, and therefore to omit it, when it fell in the way, had argued too
great a Neglect of his Learning, and Parts, though it means no more than a
perverse humor of wrangling.

FINIS.
HUDIBRAS. The SECOND PART.

By the Author of the First. CORRECTED and AMENDED, With Several Additions and
Annotations.

LONDON: Printed by T.H. for T. Sawbridge in Little-Britain, R. Bentley in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, and G. Wells in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

The SECOND PART of HUDIBRAS.
The Argument of the first CANTO.
The Knight being ^^^p'd by the heels in Prison,
The last unhappy Expedition,
Love brings his Action on the Case,
And lays it upon Hudibras.
How he receives the Ladies visit,
And cunningly sollicits his suit,
Which she defers: yet on Parole,
Redeems him from the Enchanted Hole.
CANTO I.
BUt now t'observe Romantic method,
Let rusty Steel a while be sheathed;
And all those harsh and rugged sounds
Of Bastinado's, Cuts, and Wounds
Exchanged to Love's more gentle style,
To let our Reader breathe a while:
In which, that we may be as brief as
Is possible, by way of Preface.
Is It not enough to make one strange,
That some men's fancies should never change?
But make all people do, and say,
The same things still the self-same way:
Some Writers make all Ladies purloin'd,
And Knights pursuing like a Whirlwind:
Others make all their Knights, in fits
Of Jealousy, to lose their wits;
Till drawing blood of the Dames, like Witches,
The are forthwith cured of their Capriches.
Some always thrive in their Amors,
By pulling Plasters off their Sores;
As Cripples do to get an Alms,
Just so do they, and win their Dames.
Some force whole Regions, in despite
OF Geography, to change their site:
Make former times shake hands with latter,
And that that was before, come after,
But those that write in Rhyme, still make
The one Verse for the others sake:
For, one for Sense, and one for Rhyme,
I think's sufficient at one time.
But we forget in what sad plight
We lately left the Captived Knight,
And pensive Squire both bruised in body,
And conjured into safe Custody:
Tired with Dispute, and speaking Latin,
As well as basting, and Bear-baiting;
And desperate of any course,
To free himself by wit or force.
His only Solace was, That now
His dog-bolt Fortune was so low:
That either it must quickly end,
Or turn about again, and mend:
In which he found the event, no less,
Than other times beside his guess;
There is a tall long-sided Dame,
(But wondrous light) ycleped Fame,
That like a thin Camelion boards
Her self on Air, and eats her words:
Upon her shoulders wings she wears,
Like Hanging-sleeves, lined through with Ears,
And Eyes, and Tongues, as Poets list,
Made good by deep Mythologist.
With these, she through the Welkin flies,
And sometimes carries Truth, often Lies;
With Letters hung like Eastern Pigeons;
And Mercuries of farthest Regions;
Diurnals writ for Regulation
Of Lying, to inform the Nation:
And by their public use to bring down
The rate of VVhetstones in the Kingdom.
About her neck a Packet- Male,
Fraught with Advice, some fresh, some stale,
Of Men that walked when they were dead,
And Cows of Monsters brought to bed:
Of Hailstones big as Pullets Eggs,
And Puppies whelp'd with twice two legs:
A Blazing-Star seen in the West,
By six or seven Men at least.
Two Trumpets she does sound at once,
But both of clean contrary tones.
But whether both with the same Wind,
Or one before, and one behind,
We know not; only this can tell,
The one sounds vilely, the other well.
And therefore vulgar Authors name
The one good, the other Evil Fame.
This tatling Gossip knew too well,
What mischief Hudibras befell;
And straight the spightful tidings bears,
Of all, to the unkind Widows Ears.
Democritus never laughed so loud
To see Bawds carted through the crowd,
Or Funerals with stately Pomp,
March slowly on in solemn dump;
As she laughed out, until her back
As well as sides, was like to crack.
She vowed she would go see the Sight,
And visit the distressed Knight,
To do the Office of a Neighbor,
And be a Gossip at his Labor:
And from his wooden Jail, the Stocks,
To set at large his Fetter-locks,
And by Exchange, Parole, or Ransom,
To free him from the Enchanted Mansion.
This b'ing resolved, she called for hood
And Usher, Implements abroad,
Which Ladies wear, beside a slender
Young waiting Damsel to attend her.
All which appearing, on she went,
To find the Knight in Limbo pent:
And 'twas not long before she found
Him, and his stout Squire in the Pound;
Both coupled in Enchanted Tether,
By further Leg behind together:
For as he sat upon his Rump,
His Head like one in doleful dump,
Between his knees, his hands applied
Unto his Ears on either side.
And by him, in another hole,
Afflicted Ralpho, Cheek by Joul;
She came upon him in his wooden
Magicians Circle, on the sudden,
As Spirits do, to a Conjurer,
When in their dreadful shapes the appear.
No sooner did the Knight perceive her,
But straight he fell into a Fever,
Inflamed all over with disgrace,
To be seen by her in such a place;
Which made him hang the head, and scowl,
And wink and goggle like an Owl;
He felt his Brains begin to swim,
When thus the Dame accosted him;
This place (quoth she) they says Enchanted,
And with Delinquent Spirits haunted;
That here are ty' d in Chains, and scourged,
Until their guilty Crimes be purged;
Look, there are two of them appear
Like Persons I have seen somewhere:
Some have mistaken Blocks and Posts,
For Specter, Apparations, Ghosts
With Sawcer-eyes, and Horns; and some
Have heard the Devil beat a Drum:
But if our Eyes are not false Glasses,
That give a wrong account of Faces;
That Beard and I should be acquainted,
Before 'twas conjured and enchanted.
For though it be disfigured somewhat,
As if it had lately been in Combat;
It did belong to a worthy Knight,
However this Goblin is come by it.
When Hudibras the Lady heard
To take kind notice of his Beard,
And speak with such respect and honor,
Both of the Beard, and the Beard's Owner,
He thought it best to set as good
A face upon it as he could,
And thus he spoke; Lady, your bright
And radiant Eyes are in the right:
The Beard's the Identique Beard you knew
The same numerically true:
Nor is it worn by Fiend or Elf,
But its Proprietor himself.
Oh Heavens! quoth she, can that be true?
I do begin to fear it is you:
Not by your individual Whiskers,
But by your Dialect and Discourse;
That never spoke to Man or Beast,
In notions vulgarly expressed.
But what malignant Star, alas,
Has brought you both to this sad pass?
Quoth he, the fortune of the War,
Which I am less afflicted for,
Than to be seen with Beard and Face,
By you in such a homely case.
Quoth she, those need not be ashamed,
For being honorably maimed;
If he that is in battle conquered,
Have any Title to his own Beard.
Though yours be sorely lugg'd and torn,
It does your visage more adorn,
Than if 'twere pruned, and starched, and lander'd,
And cut square by the Russian Standerd,
A torn Beard's like a tattered Ensign,
That Is bravest which there are most rents in.
That Petticoat about your Shoulders,
Does not so well become a Soldiers,
And I Am afraid they are worse handled,
Although in the rear your Beard the Van led.
And those uneasy bruises make
My heart for company to ache,
To see so worshipful a friend
^'th Pillory set, at the wrong end.
Quoth Hudibras, This thing called Pain,
^s (as the Learned Stoics maintain)
Not bad simpliciter, nor good,
^ut merely as it is understood,
Sense is deceitful, and may faign,
As well in counterfeiting pain,
As other gross Phaenomena's,
In which it often mistakes the Case.
But since the immortal Intellect
(That Is free from Error and Defect,
Whose objects still persist the same)
Is free from outward bruise or maim.
Which naught external can expose
To gross material bangs or blows:
It follows, we can never be sure,
Whether we pain or not endure:
And just so far are sore and grieved,
As by the Fancy is believed.
Some have been wounded with conceit,
And died of mere opinion straight.
Others, though wounded sore in reason,
Felt nor contusion nor discretion.
A Saxon Duke did grow so fat,
That Mice, (as Histories relate)
Eat Grots and Labyrinths to dwell in
His Postique parts, without his feeling;
Then how is it possible a kick,
Should ever reach that way to the quick?
Quoth she, I grant it is in vain
For one that is basted, to feel pain;
Because the Pangs his bones endure,
Contribute nothing to the Cure:
Yet Honor hurt is wont to rage
With Pain no Medicine can assuage.
Quoth he, That Honor's very squemish
That takes a basting for a blemish:
For what is more honorable then scars,
Or skin to tatters rent in Wars?
Some have been beaten till they know
What VVood a Cudgel's of by the blow;
Some kicked, until they can feel whether
A Shoe be Spanish or Neats-Leather:
And yet have met, after long running,
With some whom they have taught that cunning,
The furthest way about, to overcome,
IN the end does prove the nearest home;
By Laws of Learned Duellists,
They that are bruised with Wood, or Fists.
And think one beating may for once
Suffice, are Cowards, and Pultroons:
But if they dare engage to a second,
They Are stout and gallant fellows reckoned.
The old Romans, freedom did bestow;
Our Princes worship with a blow:
King Pyrrhus cured his splenetick
And testy Courtiers with a kick.
The Negus, when some mighty Lord,
Or Potentate's to be restored,
And Pardoned for some great offense
With which he is willing to dispense.
First has him laid upon his Belly,
Then beaten back, and side, to a Jelly;
That done, he rises, humbly bows,
And gives thanks for the gracious blows;
Departs not meanly proud, and boasting,
Of his magnificent Rib-Roasting.
The beaten Soldier, proves most manful,
That like his Sword, endures the Anvil:
And justly's held more formidable,
The more his Valor's malleable.
But he that fears a Bastinado,
Will run away from his own shadow.
And though I Am now in durance fast,
By our own Party basely cast,
Ransom, Exchange, Parole, refused,
And worse than by the Enemy used;
In close Catasta shut, past hope
Of Wit, or Valor, to elope,
As Beards, the nearer that they tend
To the Earth, still grow more reverend:
And Cannons shoot the higher pitches,
The lower we let down their Breeches:
I Will make this low dejected fate
Advance me to a greater height.
Quoth she, Y've almost made m' in Love
With that which did my pity move:
Great Wits, and Valors, like great States,
Do sometimes sink with their own weights:
The extremes of Glory, and of Shame,
Like East and West, become the same:
No Indian Prince has to his Palace
More follow'rs than a Theif to the Gallows.
But if a beating seem so brave,
What Glories must a whipping have?
Such great Atchievments cannot fail,
To cast salt on a Woman's Tail,
For if I thought your natural Talent
Of Passive Courage, were so Gallant;
As you strain hard to have it thought,
I could grow amorous, and dote.
When Hudibras this language heard,
He pricked up's ears, and strok'd his Beard:
Thought he, this is the Lucky hour,
Wines work, when Vines are in the flower;
This Crisis then I Will set my rest on,
And put her boldly to the Question.
Madam, what you would seem to doubt,
Shall be to all the world made out,
How I Have been Drubb'd, and with what Spirit,
And Magnanimity, I bear it;
And if you doubt it to be true,
I Will stake my self down against you:
And if I fail in Love or Troth,
Be you the VVinner, and take both
Quoth she, I Have heard old cunning Stagers
Say, Fools for Arguments use wagers.
And though I praised your Valor, yet
I Did not mean to baulk your Wit,
Which if you have, you must needs know
What, I have told you before now,
And you b' experiment have proved,
I cannot love where I Am beloved.
Quoth Hudibras, it is a ^^^rich
Beyond the infliction of a VVitch;
So Cheats to play with those still aim,
That do not understand the Game.
Love in your heart as idly burns,
As fire in antique Romans-Urns,
To warm the Dead, and vainly light
Those only, that see nothing by it.
Have you not power to entertain,
And render Love for Love again?
As no man can draw in his breath
At once, and force out Air beneath?
Or do you love your self so much,
To bear all Rivals else a Grutch?
What Fate can lay a greater Curse,
Than you upon your self would force;
For Wedlock without love, some say,
Is but a Lock without a Key.
It is a kind of Rape to Marry
One, that neglects, or cares not for ye:
For, what does make it Ravishment,
But b'ing against the the Mind's Consent?
A Rape, that is the more inhumane,
For being acted by a Woman:
Why are you fair, but to entice us
To love you, that you may despise us?
But though you cannot love, you say,
Out of your own Fanatique way,
Why should you not, at least, allow,
Those that love you, to do so too:
For, as you fly me, and pursue
Love more averse, so I do you;
And am by your own Doctrine taught,
To practice what you call a fault,
Quoth she, If what you say be true,
You must fly me, as I do you;
But it is not what we do, but say,
In Love and Preaching, that must sway.
Quoth he, to bid me not to love,
Is to forbid my Pulse to move;
My Beard to grow, my Ears to prick up,
Or (when I Am in a fit) to kick up:
Command me to piss out the Moon,
And 'twill as easily be done.
Loves powr's too great to be withstood
By feeble humane flesh and blood.
'Twas he, that brought upon his knees
The Hect'ring Kill-Cow Hercules;
Reduced his Leager-lions skin
TO a Pettecoat, and made him spin:
Seized on his Club, and made it dwindle
TO a feeble Distaff, and a Spindle.
'Twas he made Emperors Gallants
To their own Sisters, and their Aunts;
Set Popes, and Cardinals agog
To play with Pages at Leap frog;
'Twas he that gave our Senate purges,
And fluxt the House of many a Burgess;
Made those that represent the Nation
Submit and suffer amputation:
And all the Grandees of the the Cabal,
Adjourn to Tubs, at spring and fall.
He mounted Synod-men and rode 'em
To Durty-lane, and little Sodom;
Made 'em Corvett, like Spanish Jenets,
And take the Ring at Madam --
'Twas he that made Saint Francis do
More than the Devil could tempt him too;
In cold and frosty weather grow
Enamored of a Wife of Snow;
And though she were of rigid temper,
With melting flames accost and tempt her:
Which after in enjoyment quenching,
He hung a Garland on his Engine.
Quoth she, if Love have these effects,
Why is it not forbid our Sex?
Why is it not damned, and interdicted,
For Diabolical and wicked?
And song, as out of tune, against,
As Turk and Pope are by the Saints?
I find, I Have greater reason for it,
Than I believed before to abhor it.
Quoth Hudibras, These sad effects
Spring from your Heathenish neglects
Of Loves great power, which he returns
Upon your selves with equal scorns;
And those who worthy Lover's slight,
Plague's with prepost'rous appetite;
This made the beauteous Queen of Crete
To take a Town-Bull for her Sweet;
And from her greatness stoop so low,
To be the Rival of a Cow.
Others to prostitute their great Hearts,
To be Baboons, and Monkeys Sweet-hearts.
Some with the Devilish himself in League grow
By's Representative a Negro:
'Twas this made Vestal-Maids lovesick,
And venture to be buried Quick.
Some by their Fathers and their Brothers,
To be made Mistresses, and Mothers:
It Is this that Proudest Dames enamors
On Lacquies, and Varlets des-Chambres
Their haughty Stomachs overcomes,
And makes 'em stoop to Dirty Grooms,
To slight the World, and to disparage
Claps, Issue, Infamy, and Marriage.
Quoth she, these Judgments are severe,
Yet such, as I should rather bear,
Than trust men with their Oaths, or prove
Their faith, and secrecy in love.
Says he, their is a weighty reason,
For secrecy in Love as Treason.
Love is a Burglarer, a Felon,
That at the VVindore-eie does steal in,
To rob the the Heart, and with his prey
Steals out again a closer way,
Which whosoever can discover,
He Is sure (as he deserves) to suffer.
Love is a fire, that burns and sparkles,
In Men, as nat'rally as in Char-coals,
Which sooty Chemists stop in holes,
When out of Wood, they extract Coals;
So Lovers, should their Passions choke,
That though they burn, they may not smoke.
It Is like that sturdy Thief that stole,
And dragged Beasts backwards, into's hole:
So Love does Lovers; and us Men
Draws by the Tails into his Den;
That no impression may discover,
And trace to his Cave, the wary Lover.
But if you doubt I should reveal
What you entrust me under Seal,
I Will prove my self as close and virtuous,
As, your own Secretary, Albertus,
Quoth she, I grant you may be close
In hiding what your aims propose;
Love-Passions are like Parables,
By which men still mean something else:
Though Love be all the worlds pretense,
Mony's the My thologic fence,
The real substance of the shadow,
Which all Address and Courtship's made to.
Thought he, I understand your Play,
And how to quit you your own way;
He that will win his Dame, must do,
As Love does, when he bends his Bow:
With the one hand thrust the Lady from,
And with the other pull her home.
I grant, quoth he, Wealth is a great
Provocative, to amorous heat;
It is all Philters, and high diet
That makes Love Rampant, and to fly out:
It Is Beauty always in the Flower,
That buds and blossoms at fourscore:
It Is that by which the Sun and Moon,
At their own weapons are outdone;
That make Knights Errant fall in trances,
And lay about 'em in Romances.
It Is Virtue, Wit, and VVorth, and all,
That Men Divine and Sacred call.
For what is VVorth in any thing,
But so much Money as 'twill bring?
Or what but Riches is there known,
Which man can solely call his own;
In which, no Creatures goes his half,
Unless it be to squint and laugh?
I do confess, with Goods and Land,
I Would have a Wife, at second hand;
And such you are: Nor is it your person,
My stomach's set so sharp and sierce on,
But it is (your better part) your Riches,
That my enamored heart bewitches;
Let me your fortune but possess,
And settle your person how you please:
Or make it o'r in trust to the Devil,
You Will find me reasonable and Civil.
Quoth she, I like this plainess better
Than false Mock-Passion, Speech, or Letter,
Or any feat of qualm or sowning,
But hanging of your self, or drowning;
Your only way with me, to break,
Your mind, is breaking of your Neck:
For as when Merchants break, o'rthrown
Like Nine-pins, they strike others down;
So, that would break my heart, which done,
My tempting fortune is your own.
These are but trifles, every Lover
Will damn himself, over and over,
And greater matters undertake,
For a less worthy Mistress sake:
Yet the are the only ways to prove
The unfeigned realties of Love;
For he that hangs, or beats out's brains,
The Devils in him if he feigns.
Quoth Hudibras, this way's too rough,
For mere experiment, and proof;
It is no jesting trivial matter,
To swing in the Air, or plunge in Water,
And like a Water-witch, try love.
That Is to destroy, and not to prove:
As if a man should be dissected,
To find what part is disaffected:
Your better way is to make over,
In Trust, your fortune to your Lover;
Trust is a Trial, if it break,
It Is not so desperate as a Neck:
Beside, the experiment's more certain,
Men venture Necks to gain a Fortune;
The Soldier does it every day
(Eight to the week) for sixpence pay:
Your Pettifoggers damn their Souls,
To share with Knaves in Cheating Fools:
And Merchants vent'ring through the Main,
Slight Pirates, Rocks and Horns for gain.
This is the way I advise you to,
Trust me, and see what I will do.
Quoth she, I should be loath to run
My self all the hazard, and you none.
Which must be done, unless some deed
Of yours, aforesaid do precede;
Give but your self one gentle swing,
For trial, and I Will cut the string:
Or give that Reverend Head, a maul,
Or two, or three, against a Wall;
To show you are a man of Mettle,
And I Will engage my self, to settle.
Quoth he, my Head's not made of brass,
As Friar Bacon's noddle was:
Nor (like the Indian's scull) so tough,
That Authors say, 'twas Musket-proof:
As it had need to be to enter,
As yet, on any new Adventure;
You see what bangs it has endured,
That would, before new feats, be cured,
But if that is all you stand upon;
Here strike, me luck, it shall be done.
Quoth she, the matter's not so far gone
As you suppose, Two words to a Bargain,
That may be done, and time enough,
When you have given down right proof:
And yet it is no Fantastic pike,
I have to love, nor coy dislike;
It Is no implicit nice Aversion
TO your Conversation, Mien, or Person:
But a just fear, lest you should prove
False, and perfidious in Love;
For if I thought you could be true,
I could love twice as much as you.
Quoth he, My faith as Adamantine
As Chains of Destiny, I Will maintain;
True as Apollo ever spoke,
Or Oracle from heart of Oak.
And if you will give my flame but vent,
Now in close hugger-mugger pent,
And shine upon me but benignly,
With that one, and that other Pigsny,
The Sun and Day shall sooner part,
Than Love, or you, shake off my heart.
The Sun that shall no more dispense
His own, but your bright influence;
I Will carve your name on Barks of Trees.
With True-loves knots, and Flourishes;
That shall infuse eternal spring,
And everlasting flourishing:
Drink every Letter on it, in Stum;
And make it brisk Champaign become;
Where ever you tread, your foot shall set
The Primrose and the Violet;
All Spices, Perfumes, and sweet Powders,
Shall borrow from your breath their Odors;
Nature her Charter shall renew,
And take all lives of things from you;
The World depend upon your Eye,
And when you frown upon it, die;
Only our loves shall still survive,
New Worlds and Natures to outlive;
And, like Heralds Moons, remain
All Crescents, without change or wane.
Hold, hold, quoth she, no more of this
Sir Knight, you take your aim amiss;
For you will find it a hard Chapter,
To catch me with Poetique Rapture,
In which your Mastery of Art,
Does show it self and not your Heart;
Nor will you raise in mine Combustion,
By dint of high Heroic fustion:
She that with Poetry is won,
Is but a Desk to write upon;
And what men say of her, they mean,
No more than that on which they lean.
Some with Arabian Spices strive
To embalm her cruelly alive;
Or season her, as French Cooks use,
Their Haut-gusts, Buollies, or Ragusts;
Use her so barbarously ill*
To grind her Lips upon a Mill,
Until the Facet Doublet does
Fit their Rhimes rather than her mouth;
Her mouth compared to an Oyster's, with
A row of Pearl in it, stead of Teeth;
Others, make Posies of her Cheeks,
Where red, and whitest colors mix;
In which the Lilly, and the Rose
For Indian Lake, and Ceruse goes.
The Sun and Moon, by her bright eyes,
Eclisp'd, and darkn'd in the skies;
Are but Black-patches that she wears
Cut into Suns, and Moons and Stars,
By which Astrologers, as well
As those in Heaven above can tell
What strange Events they do foreshow
Unto her Under-world below.
Her Voice the Music of the Spheres,
So loud it deafens mortal ears;
As wise Philosophers have thought,
And that is the cause we hear it not.
This has been done by some, who those
The adored in Rhyme, would kick in Prose;
And in those Ribbins would have hung,
Of which melodiously they sung.
That have the hard fate, to write best
Of those still that deserve it least;
It matters not, how false, or forced,
So the best things be said of the worst;
It goes for nothing when it is sed,
Only the Arrow's drawn to the head,
Whether it be Swan or Goose
They level at: So Shepherds use
To set the same mark on the hip
Both of their sound and rotten Sheep.
For Wits that carry low or wide,
Must be aimed higher, or beside,
The mark which else they never come nigh,
But when they take their aim awry.
But I do wonder you should choose
This way to attaque me with your Muse,
As one cut out to pass your tricks on,
With Fulhams of Poetic fiction:
I rather hoped, I should no more
Hear from you, of the Gallanting score:
For hard dry-bastings use to prove
The readiest Remedies of Love,
Next a dry-diet; But if those fail,
Yet this uneasy Loop-hold Jail
In which y' are hampered by the fet-lock,
Cannot but put y' in mind of Wedlock:
Wedlock, that is worse than any hole here,
If that may serve you for a Cooler;
TO allay your Mettle, all agog
Upon a Wife, the heavi'r clog.
Nor rather thank your gentle Fate,
That, for a bruised or broken Pate,
Has freed you from those knobs, that grow
Much harder, on the Married Brow:
But if no dread can cool your Courage,
From vent'ring on that Dragon, Marriage;
Yet give me Quarter, and advance
To nobler aims, your Puissance:
Level at Beauty, and at Wit,
The fairest mark is easiest hit.
Quoth Hudibras, I Am before hand
In that already, with your command:
For where does Beauty, and high Wit,
But in your Constellation, meet?
Quoth she, What does a match imply,
But likeness and equality?
I know you cannot think me fit,
To be the Yoke Fellow of your Wit:
Nor take one of so mean Deserts,
To be the Partner of your Parts;
A Grace, which if I could believe,
I Have not the conscience to receive.
That Conscience, Quoth Hudibras,
Is mis-inform'd; I Will state the Case.
A man may be a Legal Donor
Of any thing whereof he is Owner;
And may confer it where he lists,
IN the Judgment of all Casuists:
Then Wit, and Parts, and Valor may
Be ali'nated, and made away,
By those that are Proprietors;
As I may give or sell my Horse.
Quoth she, I grant the Case is true,
And proper 'twixt your Horse and you;
But whether I may take, as well
As you may give away or sell?
Buyers you know are bid beware;
And worse than thieves Receivers are.
How shall I answer Hue and Cry,
For a Roan-Gelding, twelve hands high:
All spurred and switch'd, a Lock on's hoof,
A sorrel-mane? can I bring proof,
Where, when, by whom, and what you are sold for,
And in the open Market tolled for?
Or should I take you for a stray,
You must be kept a year and day
(Ere I can own you) here in the pound,
Where, if y' are sought, you may be found:
And in the mean time I must pay
For all your Provender and Hay.
Quoth he, It stands me much upon
TO enervate this Objection,
And prove my self, by Topic clear,
No Gelding, as you would infer.
Loss of Virilities averred
To be the cause of loss of Beard,
That does (like Embryo in the womb)
Abortive on the Chin become,
This first a Woman did invent,
In envy of Man's ornament.
Semiramis of Babylon,
Who first of all cut men of the stone:
To mar their Beards, and laid foundation
Of Sow-geldering operation.
Look on this Beard, and tell me whether,
Eunuchs were such, or Geldings either.
Next it appears, I am no Horse,
That I can argue, and discourse,
Have but two legs, and never a tail.
Quoth she, that nothing will avail;
For some Philosophers of late here,
Write, Men have four legs by Nature,
And that it is Custom makes them go
Erroneously upon but two;
As 'twas in Germany made good,
B' a Boy, that lost himself in a VVood;
And growing down to a man, was wont
With Wolves upon all sour to hunt.
As for your reasons drawn from tayls,
We cannot say, they 'are true or false,
Till you explain your self, and show,
B' experiment, it is so or no.
Quoth he, If you will join issue on it,
I Will give you satisfactory account;
So you will promise, if you lose,
To settle all, and be my Spouse.
That never would be done (quoth she)
To one that wants a Tail, by me:
For Tayls by Natures sure were meant,
As well as Beards, for ornament:
And though the Vulgar count them homely,
In man or beast, they are so comely,
So Genteel, Allamode, and handsome,
I Will never marry man that wants one:
And till you can demonstrate plain
You have one equal to your Mane,
I Will be torn piecemeal by a Horse,
Ere I Will take you for better or worse.
The Prince of Cambay's daily food,
Is Aspe, Basilisque, and Toad,
Which makes him have so strong a breath.
Each night he stinks a Queen to death;
Yet I shall rather lie in's Arms,
Than yours, on any other bearms.
Quoth he, What Nature can afford,
I shall produce upon my word;
And if she ever gave that boon
To man, I Will prove that I have one;
I mean, by postulate Illation,
When you shall offer just occasion;
But since y' have yet denied to give
My Heart, your Prisoner, a Reprieve,
But made it sink down to my heel,
Let that at least your pity feel,
And for the sufferings of your Martyr,
Give its poor Entertainer quarter;
And by Discharge, or Main-prise grant
Delivery from this base Restraint.
Quoth she, I grieve to see your Leg
Stuck in a hole here like a Peg,
And if I knew which way to do it,
(Your Honor safe) I Would let you out.
That Dames by Jail-delivery
Of Errant Knights have been set free,
When by Enchantment they have been,
And sometimes for it too, laid in;
Is that which Knights are bound to do
By Order, Oath, and Honor too:
For what are they renownd and famous else,
But aiding of distressed Damsels?
But for a Lady no ways Errant,
To free a Knight, we have no warrant
In any authentical Romance,
Or Classic Author yet of France:
And I Would be loath to have you break
An ancient Custom for a freak,
Or Innovation introduce
In place of things of antique use;
To free your heels by any course,
That might b' unwholesome to your Spurs:
Which if I should consent unto,
It is not in my power to do;
For it is a service must be done ye,
With solemn previous Cerermony.
Which always has been used to untie
The Charms of those who here do lie;
For as the Ancients heretofore
To Honor's Temple had no door,
But that which thorough Virtue's lay;
So, from this Dungeon, there is no way
To honored freedom, but by passing
That other Virtuous School of Lashing,
Where Knights are kept in narrow lists,
With wooden Lockets 'bout their wrists,
In which they for a while are Tenants,
And for their Ladies suffer Penance:
VV^^^p^^ng, that is Virtues Governess,
Tut^^^^ of Arts, and Sciences;
That mends the gross mistakes of Nature,
And puts new life into dull matter;
That lays foundation for Renown,
And all the honors of the Gown
Thus suffered, they are set at large,
And freed with honour'ble discharge;
Then in their Robes the Penitentials,
Are straight presented with Credentials,
And in their way attended on
By Magistrates of every Town;
And all respect and charges paid,
They Are to their ancient Seats conveyed.
Now if you will venture for my sake,
To try the toughness of your back,
And suffer (as the rest have done)
The laying of a Whipping on,
(And may you prosper in your suit,
As you with equal vigor do it)
I here engage to be your Bail,
And free you from the Unknightly Jail.
But since our Sex's modesty
Will not allow I should be by,
Bring me on Oath, a fair account,
And honor too, when you have don't;
And I Will admit you to the place,
You claim as due as in my good grace.
If Matrimony and Hanging go
By Dest'ny, why not Whipping too?
What Medicine else can cure the fits
Of Lovers when they lose their Wits?
Love is a Boy, by Poets styled,
Then spare the Rod, and spill the Child,
A Persian Emp'ror whipped his Grannum
The Sea, his Mother Venus came on;
And hence some Reverend men approve
Of Rosemary in making Love.
As skilful Coopers hoop their Tubs
With Lydian and with Phrygian Dubs;
Why may not Whipping have as good
A grace, performed in Time and Mood;
With comely movement, and by Art,
Raise Passion in a Lady's heart;
It is an easier way, to make
Love by, than that which many take.
Who would not rather suffer Whipping,
Than swallow Toasts of bits of Ribbin?
Make wicked Verses, Treats, and Faces,
And spell Names over, with Beer-glasses?
Be under Vows to hang and die
Loves Sacrifice, and all a lie?
With China-Oranges and Tarts,
And whining Plays, lay baits for Hearts?
Bride Chamber-maids with love and money
To break no Roguish jeasts upon ye;
For Lillies limn'd on Cheeks, and Roses,
With painted perfumes, hazard Noses?
Or vent'ring to be brisk and wanton,
Do Penance in a Paper Lanthorn?
All this you may compound for, now
By suffering what I offer you:
Which is no more than has been done,
By Knights for Ladies long agone:
Did not the Great La Mancha do so,
For the Infanta del Taboso?
Did not the Illustrious Bassa make
Himself a Slave for Misse's sake?
And with Bulls Pizle, for her love,
Was taw'd as gentle as a Glove?
Was not young Florio sent (to cool
His flame from Biancasiore) to School,
Where Pedant made his Pathick Bum
For her sake suffer Martyrdom?
Did not a certain Lady whip,
Of late her, Husband's own Lordship?
And though a Grandee of the House,
^lawd him with Fundamental blows,
Tied him start-naked to a Bed-post,
And firk'd his hide as if sh' had rid post;
And after in the Sessions-Court,
Where VVhipping's judged, had honor for it?
This swear you will perform, and then
I Will set you from the Enchanted Den,
And the Magician Circle clear.
Quoth he, I do profess and swear,
And will perform what you enjoin,
Or may I never see you mine.
Amen (quoth she) Then turned about,
And bid her Squire let him out.
But ere an Artist could be found
TO undo the Charms another bound,
The Sun grew low, and left the Skies,
Put down (some write) by Ladies eyes.
The Moon pulled off her veil of Light,
That hides her face by day from sight.
(Mysterious Veil, of brightness made,
That Is both her luster, and her shade)
And in the Night as freely shon,
As if her Rays had been her own:
For Darkness is the proper Sphere,
Where all false Glories use to appear.
The twinkling Stars began to muster,
And glitter with their borrowed luster,
While Sleep the wearied World relieved,
By counterfeiting Death revived.
Our Vot'ry thought it best to adjourn
His VVhipping-pennance till the morn,
And not to carry on a Work
Of such importance, in the Dark,
With erring haste, but rather stay,
And do it in the open face of Day;
And in the mean time, go in quest
Of next Retreat to take his Rest.
CANTO II.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Knight and Squire in hot Dispute,
Within an Ace of falling out;
Are parted with a sudden fright
Of strange Alarm, and stranger Sight;
With which adventuring to stickle,
They Are sent away in nasty pickle.
It Is strange how some men's Tempers suit
(Like Bawd and Brandee) with Dispute,
That for their own Opinions stand fast,
Only to have them clawed and canvast.
That kept their Consciences in Cases,
As Fiddlers do their Crowds and Bases,
Never to be used but when they are bent
To play a fit for Argument.
Make true and false, unjust and just,
Of no use but to be discust.
Dispute and set a Paradox,
Like a strait Boot upon the Stocks,
And stretch it more unmercifully,
Than Helmont, Mountaign, White, or Tully.
So the ancient Stoics in their Porch,
With sierce dispute maintained their Church,
Beat out their Brains in sight and study,
To prove that Virtue is a Body,
That Bonum is an Animal,
Made good with stout Polemique Braul:
In which, some hundreds on the place
Were slain outright, and many a face
Retrenched of Nose, and Eyes, and Beard,
To maintain what their Sect averred.
All which the Knight and Squire in wrath
Had like to have suffered for their faith;
Each striving to make good his own,
As by the sequel shall be shown.
The Sun had long since in the Lap
Of Thetis, taken out his Nap,
And like a Lobster boiled, the Morn
From black to red began to turn.
When Hudibras, whom thoughts and aching
Twixt sleeping kept all night, and waking,
Began to rouse his drousie eyes,
And from his Couch prepared to rise;
Resolving to dispatch the Deed
He vowed to do, with trusty speed.
But first, with knocking loud and bauling,
He roused the Squire, in Truckle lolling,
And, after many Circumstances,
Which vulgar Authors in Romances,
Do use to spend their time and wits on,
To make impertinent Description;
They got (with much ado) to Horse
And to the Castle bent their Course,
In which he to the Dame before
To suffer whipping Duty swore:
Where now arrived, and half unharnest,
To carry on the work in earnest,
He stopped and paused upon the sudden,
And with a serious forehead plodding,
Sprung a new Scruple in his head,
Which first he scratched and after sed;
Whether it be direct infringing
An Oath, if I should wave this swinging,
And what I Have sworn to bear, forbear,
And so b' Equivocation swear;
Or whether't be a lesser Sin,
To be forsworn, than act the thing,
Are deep and subtle points, which must,
TO inform my Conscience, be discust,
In which to err a little, may
To errors infinite make way:
And therefore I desire to know
Thy Judgment, ere we farther go.
Quoth Ralpho, since you do enjoyn't
I shall enlarge upon the Point;
And for my own part do not doubt
The Affirmative may be made out.
But first to state the Case aright,
For best advantage of our light:
And thus it is: VVhether't be a Sin,
To claw and curry your own skin
Greater, or less, than to forbear,
And that you are forsworn, forswear.
But first, of the first: The Inward man,
And Outward, like a Clan and Clan,
Have always been at Daggers-drawing,
And one another Clapper-clawing:
Not that they really cuff or fence,
But in a Spiritual Mystique sense,
Which to mistake, and make 'em squabble,
In literal fray, 's abominable;
It Is Heathenish, in frequent use,
With Pagans, and Apostate Jews,
To offer Sacrifice of Bridewels:
Like modern Indians to their Idols,
And mungrel Christians of our times,
That expiate less with greater Crimes,
And call the foul Abomination,
Contrition, and Mortification.
Is It not enough w're bruised and kicked,
With sinful members of the wicked;
Our Vessels, that are sanctified,
Profaned and curri'd, back and side;
But we must claw our selves, with shameful,
And Heathen stripes, by their example?
Which (were there nothing to forbid it)
Is impious because they did it.
This therefore may be justly reckoned
A henious sin. Now to the second,
That Saints may claim a Dispensation
To swear and forswear on occasion;
I doubt not, but it will appear,
With pregnant light. The point is clear.
Oaths are but words, and words but wind,
Too feeble implements to bind;
And hold with deeds proportion, so
As shadows to a substance do.
Then when they strive for place, it is fit
The weaker Vessel should submit:
Although your Church be opposite
To ours, as Black Friars are to White,
In Rule and Order: Yet I grant
You are a Reformado Saint;
And what the Saints do claim as due,
You may pretend a Title to:
But Saints, whom Oaths or Vows oblige,
Know little of their Privilege;
Farther (I mean) than carrying on
Some self-advantage of their own,
For if the Devilish, to serve his turn,
Can tell Truth; why the Saints should scorn
When it serves theirs, to swear and lie,
I think, there is little reason why:
Else h'has a greater power than they,
Which 'twere impiety to say.
W' are not commanded to forbear,
Indefinitely, at all to swear.
But to swear idly; and in vain,
Without self-interest or gain.
For breaking of an Oath, and Lying,
Is but a kind of Self-denying,
A Saint-like virtue, and from hence,
Some have broke Oaths by Providence:
Some, to the Glory of the Lord,
Perjured themselves, and broke their word:
And this, the constant Rule and Practice
Of all our late Apostles Acts is,
Was not the Cause at first begun
With Perjury, and carried on?
Was there an Oath the Godly took,
But, in due time and place, they broke?
Did we not bring our Oaths in first,
Before our plate, to have them burst,
And cast in fitter Models, for
The present use of Church and War?
Did not our Worthies of the House,
Before they broke the Peace, break Vows?
For having freed us, first, from both
The Allegiance and Supremacy Oath;
Did they not, next, compel the Nation,
To ^ake, and break the Protestation?
To swear, and after to recant,
The Solemn League and Covenant?
To take the Engagement, and disclaim it,
Enforced by those, who first did frame it?
Did they not swear at first, to fight
For the KING's Safety, and his Right?
And after marched to find him out,
And charged him home with Horse and Foot?
And yet still had the confidence,
To swear it was in his defense?
Did they not swear to live and die
With Essex, and straight laid him by?
If that were all, for some have swore
As false as they, if the did no more.
Did they not swear to maintain Law,
In which that swearing made a Flaw?
For Protestant Religion Vow,
That did that Vowing disallow?
For Privilege of Parliament,
In which that swearing made a Rent?
And, since, of all the three, not one
Is left in being, it is well known.
Did they not swear, in express words,
To prop and back the House of Lords?
And after turned out the whole House-ful
Of Peers, as dangerous, and unuseful?
So Cromwell with deep Oaths and Vows,
Swore all the Commons out of the House,
Vowed that the Red-coats would disband,
I marry would they at their Command.
And troul'd 'em on, and swore, and swore,
Till the Army turned 'em out of Door;
This tells us plainly, what they thought,
That Oaths and swearing goes for naught.
And that by them the were only meant,
To serve for an Expedient.
What was the Public Faith found out for,
But to slur men of what they fought for?
The Public Faith, which every one
Is bound to observe, yet kept by none;
And if that go for nothing, why
Should Private Faith have such a tie?
Oaths were not purposed more than Law,
To keep the Good and Just in aw,
But to confine the Bad and Sinful,
Like Moral Cattle in a Pinfold,
A Saint's of the heavenly Realm a Peer:
And as no Peer is bound to swear,
But on the Gospel of his Honor,
Of which he may dispose, as Owner;
It follows, though the thing be forgery,
And false, the affirm, it is no perjury,
But a mere Ceremony, and a breach
Of nothing, but a form of speech,
And goes for no more when it is took,
Than mere saluting of the Book.
Suppose the Scriptures are of force,
They Are but Commissions of Course,
And Saints have freedom to digress,
And vary from 'em as they please;
Or misinterpret them, by private
Instructions, to all Aims they drive at;
Then why should we our selves abridge
And Curtail our own Privilege?
Quakers (that like to Lanthorns, bear
Their light within 'em) will not swear.
Their Gospel is an Accidence,
By which they construe Conscience,
And hold no sin so deeply red,
As that of breaking Priscian's head;
(The Head and Founder of their Order,
That stirring Hats held worse than murder.)
These thinking the are obliged to Troth
In swearing, will not take an Oath;
Like Mules, who if the have not their will
To keep their own pace, stand stock still;
But they are weak, and little know
What Freeborn Consciences may do,
It Is the temptation of the Devil,
That makes all humane actions evil:
For Saints may do the same things by
The Spirit, in Syncerity,
Which other men are tempted to,
And at the Devils instance do;
And yet the Actions be contrary,
Just as the Saints and Wicked vary.
For as on land there is no Beast,
But in some Fish at Sea's expressed;
So in the Wicked there is no Vice,
Of which the Saints have not a spice;
And yet that thing that is pious in
The one, in the other is a Sin.
Is It not Ridiculous, and Nonsense,
A Saint should be a slave to Conscience?
That ought to be above such Fancies,
As far, as above Ordinances.
She Is of the Wicked, as I guess,
B' her lo^ks, her language, and her dress,
And though, like Constables, we search
For false Wares, one another Church:
Yet all of us hold this for true,
No Faith is to the wicked due;
For Truth is Precious and Divine,
Too rich a Pearl for Carnal Swine.
Quoth Hudibras, All this is true,
Yet it is not fit that all men knew
Those Mysteries and Revelations;
And therefore Topical Evasions
Of subtle Turns, and Shifts of sense,
Serve best with the Wicked for pretense,
Such as the learned Jesuits use,
And Presbyterians, for excuse,
Against the Protestants, when the happen
To find their Churches taken napping.
As thus: A breach of Oath is Duple,
And either way admits a scruple,
And may be ex part of the Maker,
More criminal, than the injured Taker.
For he that strains too far a Vow,
Will break it like an o'er-bent Bow:
And he that made, and forced it, broke it,
Not he that for convenience took it:
A broken Oath is, quatenus Oath,
As sound to all purposes of Troth,
As broken Laws are never the worse,
Nay till the are broken, have no force,
What Is Justice to a man, or Laws,
That never comes within their Claws?
They have no power, but to admonish,
Cannot control, coerce, or punish,
Until they are broken, and then touch
Those only that do make them such.
Beside, no Engagement is allowed,
By men in Prison made, for Good;
For when they are set at liberty,
They Are from the Engagement too, set free:
The Rabbis write, when any Jew
Did make to God, or Man, a Vow,
Which afterward he found untoward,
And stubborn to be kept, or too hard;
Any three other Jews of the Nation,
Might free him from the Obligation:
And have not two Saints power to use
A greater privilege than three Jews?
The Court of Conscience, which in Man
Should be supreme and Sovereign,
Is It fit, should be subordinate
To every petty Court in the State,
And have less Power than the lesser,
To deal with Perjury at pleasure?
Have it is proceedings disallowed, or
Allowed, at fancy of Py-powder?
Tell all it does, or does not know,
For swearing ex Officio?
Be forced to impeach a broken hedge,
And Pigs unring'd at Vis. Franc. Pledge.
Discover Thieves, and Bawds, Recusants,
Priests, Witches, Eves-droppers, and Nuisance;
Tell who did play at Games unlawful,
And who filled Pots of Ale but half full.
And have no power at all, nor shift,
To help it self at a dead lift?
Why should not Conscience have Vacation,
As well as other Courts of the Nation?
Have equal power to adjourn
Appoint Appearance and Retorn?
And make as nice distinctions serve
To split a Case; as those that carve
Invoking Cuckolds names, hit joints,
Why should not tricks as slight, do points?
Is not the High-Court of Justice sworn
To judge that Law that serves their turn?
Make their own Jealousies High Treason,
And fix 'em whomsoe'er they please on?
Cannot the Learned Council there,
Make Laws in any shape appear?
Mould 'em as Witches do their Clay,
When they make Pictures to destroy?
And vex 'em into any form,
That fits their purpose to do harm?
Rack 'em until they do confess,
Impeach of Treason, whom they please,
And most perfidiously condemn,
Those that engaged their Lives for them?
And yet do nothing in their own sense,
But what they ought by Oath and Conscience!
Can they not juggle, and, with slight
Conveyance, play with wrong and right;
And sell their blasts of wind as dear,
As Lapland Witches botl'd Air?
Will not Fear, Favor, Bribe, and Grutch,
The same Case several ways adjudge;
As Seamen with the self-same Gale
Will several different courses sail;
As when the Sea breaks over its bounds,
And overflows the level grounds;
Those Banks and Dams, that like a Screen,
Did keep it out, now keep it in:
So when Tyrannical Usurpation
Invades the freedom of a Nation,
The Laws of the Land that were intended
To keep it out, are made defend it.
Does not in Chanc'ry every man swear,
What makes best for him in his Answer?
Is not the winding up Witnesses,
And nicking more than half the business?
For Witnesses, like Watches, go
Just as they are set, too fast or slow.
And where in Conscience, the are strait laced;
It Is ten to one, that side is cast.
Do not your Juries give their Verdict
As if they felt the Cause, not heard it?
And as they please make Matter of Fact
Run all on one side, as the are packt?
Nature has made Man's breast no Windores,
To publish what he does within doors?
Nor what dark secrets there inhabit,
Unless his own rash folly blob it.
If Oaths can do a man no good,
In his own business, why they should
In other matters do him hurt,
I think there is little reason for it.
He that imposes an Oath, makes it,
Not he, that for convenience takes it:
Then how can any man be said
To break an Oath he never made?
These Reasons may perhaps look odly
To the Wicked, though they evince the Godly;
But if they will not serve to clear
My Honor, I am never the near.
Honor is like that glassy Bubble
That finds Philosophers such trouble,
Whose least part cracked, the whole does fly,
And Wits are cracked, to find out why.
Quoth Ralpho, Honor's but a Word,
To swear by only, in a Lord:
In other men it is but a Huff,
To vapor with, instead of Proof,
That like a Wen, looks big, and swells,
Is senseless, and just nothing else.
Let it (quoth he) be what it will,
It has the World's opinion still,
But as men are not Wise that run
The slightest hazard they may shun:
There may a Medium be found out
To clear to all the World the doubt;
And that is, if a man may do it
By Proxy whipped, or Substitute.
Though nice, and dark the Point appear,
(Quoth Ralph) it may hold up and clear.
That Sinners may supply the place
Of suffering Saints is a plain Case.
Justice gives Sentence, many times,
On one man for another's Crimes:
Our Brethren of New England use
Choice Malefactors to excuse,
And hang the Guiltless in their stead,
Of whom the Churches have less need.
As lately't happened: in a Town,
There lived a Cobbler, and but one,
That out of Doctrine could cut Use,
And mend men's Lives as well as Shoes:
This precious Brother having slain,
In times of Peace, an Indian;
(Not out of Malice, but mere Zeal,
Because he was an Infidel)
The mighty Tottipottymoy
Sent to our Elders an Envoy,
Complaining sorely of the Breach,
Of League, held forth by Brother Patch,
Against the Articles in force
Between both Churches, his, and ours:
For which he craved the Saints to render
Into his hands, or hang the Offender:
But they maturely having weighed,
They had no more but him of the Trade,
(A man, that served them in a double
Capacity, to Teach and Cobble)
Resolved to spare him, yet to do
The Indian Hoghan Moghan too
Impartial justice, in his stead did
Hang an old Weaver that was Bedridden.
Then wherefore may not you be skip'd,
And in your room another whipped:
For all Philosophers, but the Sceptick,
Hold Whipping may be Sympathetick.
It is enough, quoth Hudibras,
Thou have resolved, and cleared the Case,
And can in Conscience, not refuse,
From thy own Doctrine, to raise Use:
I know thou will not (for my sake)
Be tender-Conscienc'd of thy back:
Then strip thee of thy Carnal Jerkin,
And give thy outward-fellow a ferking:
For when thy Vessel, is new hoop'd,
All Leaks of sinning will be stopped.
Quoth Ralpho, You mistake the matter,
For in all Scruples of this Nature,
No man includes himself, nor turns
The Point upon his own Concerns.
As no man of his own self catches
The Itch, or amorous French Aches:
So no man does himself convince
By his own Doctrine of his Sins.
And though all cry down Self, none means
His own self in a literal Sense.
Beside, it is not only Foppish,
But Vile, Idolatrous, and Popish,
For one man, out of his own Skin,
To frisk and whip another's Sin:
As Pedants out of Schoolboys breeches,
Do claw and curry their own itches.
But in this Case it is profane,
And sinful too, because in vain:
For we must take our Oaths upon it,
You did the deed, when I have done it.
Quoth Hudibras, That Is answered soon;
Give us the Whip, we'll lay it on.
Quoth Ralpho, That we may swear true,
'Twere properer that I whipped you:
For when with your consent it is done,
The Act is really your own.
Quoth Hudibras, It is in vain
(I see) to argue against the grain;
Or, like the Stars, incline men to
What they are averse themselves to do,
For when Disputes are weari'd out,
It Is Interest still resolves the doubt.
But since no reason can confute ye,
I Will try to force you to your Duty;
For so it is, how ever you mince it,
As ere we part I shall evince it,
And curry (if you stand out) whether
You will or no, your stubborn Leather.
Can thou refuse to bear thy part,
IN the public Work, base as thou art?
To higgle thus, for a few blows,
To gain thy Knight an opulent Spouse,
Whose wealth his bowels yern to purchase,
Merely for the interest of the Churches;
And when he has it in his claws,
Will not be hide-bound to the Cause;
Nor shall thou find him a Curmudg in,
If thou dispatch it without grudging:
If not, resolve before we go,
That you and I must pull a Crow.
Y' had best (quoth Ralpho) as the Ancients
Say wisely, Have a care 'o the main chance,
And look before you ere you leap;
For, as you sow, you are like to reap.
And were y' as good as George a ^reen,
I shall make bold to turn again;
Nor am I doubtful of the Issue
In a just Quarrel; and mine is so.
Is It sitting for a man of Honor,
To whip the Saints like Bishop Bonner,
A Knight to usurp the Beadles Office,
For which y' are like to raise brave Trophies?
But I advise you (not for fear,
But for your own sake) to forbear,
And for the Churches, which may chance
From hence, to spring a variance;
And raise among themselves new Scruples,
Whom common danger hardly couples.
Remember how in Arms and Politics,
We still have worsted all your holy Tricks.
Trappan'd your party with Intregue,
And took your Grandees down a peg,
New-modell'd the Army, and cashiered
All that to Legion SMEC adhered,
Made a mere Utensil of your Church
And after left it in the lurch,
A Scaffold to build up our own,
And when w' done with 't, pulled it down,
Over reached your Rabbis of the Synod,
And snap'd their Cannons with a Why-not.
(Grave Synod-men that were revered
For sollid Face and depth of Beard)
Their Classique-model proved a Maggot,
Their Directory and Indian Pagod.
And drowned their Discipline like a Kitten,
On which the had been so long a fitting;
Decry'd it as a Holy Cheat,
Grown out of Date, and Obsolete,
And all the Saints of the first Grass,
As casting Foles of Balams Ass.
At this the Knight grew high in Chafe,
And staring furiously on Ralph,
He trembled and looked pale with ire,
Like Ashes first, then Red as Fire.
Have I (quoth he) been taken in fight,
And for so many Moons lay'n by it;
And when all other means did fail,
Have been exchanged for Tubs of Ale:
Not but they thought me worth a Ransom,
Much more considerable and handsome,
But for their own sakes, and for fear,
They were not safe, when I was there?
Now to be baffled by a Scoundrel,
An upstart Sect'ry and a Mungrel,
Such as breed out of peccant humors
Of our own Church, like VVens, and Tumors
And like a Maggot in a Sore,
Would that which gave it life, devour:
It never shall be done, nor said:
With that he seized upon his Blade.
And Ralpho too, as quick and bold,
Upon his Basket hilt laid hold,
With equal readiness prepared
To draw, and stand upon his Guard,
When both were parted on the sudden,
With hideous clamor, and a loud one,
As of all sorts of Noise had been
Contracted into one loud Din;
Or that some Member to be chosen,
Had got the Odds above a Thousand;
And by the greatness of his noise,
Proved fittest for his Countries choice.
This strange surprisal put the Knight,
And wrathful Squire into a fright;
And though they stood prepared, with fatal,
Impetious rancour, to join Battle;
Both though it was their wisest course,
To wave the Fight, and mount to Horse;
And to secure, by swift retreating,
Themselves from danger of worse beating.
Yet neither of them would disparage,
By utt'ring of his mind, his Courage,
Which made 'em stoutly keep their ground
With horror and disdain, wind-bound.
And now the cause of all their fear,
By slow degrees approached so near,
They might distinguish different noise
Of Horns, and Pans, and Dogs, and Boys,
And Kettle Drums, whose sullen Dub
Sounds like the hooping of a Tub:
But when the Sight appeared in view,
They found it was an antique Show,
A Triumph, that for Pomp, and State,
Did proudest Romans emulate;
For as the Aldermen of Rome
For foes at training overcome,
And not enlarging Territory,
(As some mistaken write in Story)
Being mounted in their best Array,
Upon a Carre, and who but they?
And followed with a a world of Tall Lads,
That merry Ditties trol'd, and Ballads;
Did ride, with many a good morrow,
Crying, hey for our Town through the Borough:
So when this Triumph drew so nigh,
They might particulars descry,
They never saw two things so Pat,
In all respects, as this, and that.
First he that led the Cavalcate,
Wore a Sowgelders Flagellate,
On which he blew so strong a Levet,
As well fee'd Lawyer on his Breviate.
When over one another's heads,
They charge (three Ranks at once) like Swedes
Next Pans, and Kettles of all keys,
From Trebles down to double-base,
And, after them upon a Nag,
That might pass for a forehand Stag,
A Cornet rode, and on his Staff,
A Smock displayed, did proudly wave,
Then Bagpipes of the loudest Drones,
With snuffing broken-winded tones;
Whose blasts of Air in Pockets shut,
Sound filthier than from the Gut,
And make a viler noise than Swine
In windy-weather, when they whine.
Next, one upon a pair of Panniers,
Full fraught with that, which for good manners
Shall here be nameless, mixed with Grains
Which he dispensed among the Swains,
And busily upon the Crowd,
At random round about bestowed.
Then mounted on a horned Horse,
One bore a Gauntlet and Gilt-spurs.
Tied to the Pummel of a long Swor
He held reverst the point turned downward.
Next after, on a raw-bon'd Steed,
The Conqueror's Standard Bearer rid,
And bore aloft before the Champion
A Petticoat displayed, and Rampant;
Near whom the Amazon triumphant,
Bestrid her Beast, and on the Rump on it
Sat face to Tail, and Bum to Bum,
The Warrier whilome overcome;
Armed with a Spindle and a Distaff,
Which as he rode, she made him twist off;
And when he loiter'd, over her Shoulder,
Chastised the Reformado Soldier.
Before the Dame, and round about,
Marched Whiflers, and Staffiers on foot,
With Lacquies, Grooms, Valets and Pages,
In fit and proper equipages;
Of whom, some Torches bore, some Links,
Before the proud Virago-Minx,
That was both Madam, and a Don,
Like Nero's Sporus, or Pope Joan;
And at fit Periods the whole Rout
Set up their throats with clamorous shout.
The Knight transported, and the Squire
Put up their Weapons, and their Ire;
And Hudibras, who used to ponder
On such Sights, with judicious wonder,
Could hold no longer to impart
His Animadversions, for his Heart.
Quoth he, In all my life till now,
I never saw so profane a Show.
It is a Paganish invention,
Which Heathen writers often mention:
And he, who made it, had read Goodwin
(I warrant him) and understood him:
With all the Grecians Speeds and Stows:
That best describe those Ancient Shows,
And has observed all fit Decorums,
We find described by old Historians.
For as a Roman Conqueror,
That put an end to foreign War,
Entering the Town in Triumph for it,
Bore a Slave with him, in his Chariot:
So this insulting Female Brave
Carries behind her here, a Slave,
And as the Ancients long ago,
When they in field defied the foe,
Hung out their Mantles della Guer;
So her proud Standard Bearer here,
Waves, on his Spear, in dreadful manner,
A Tyrian-Petticoat for a Banner:
Next Links, and Torches, heretofore
Still born before the Emperor:
And as in Antique Triumphs, Eggs
Were born for mystical intregues;
There Is one in Truncheon, like a Ladle,
That carries Eggs too, fresh or adle;
And still at random, as he goes,
Among the Rabble-rout bestows.
Quoth Ralpho, You mistake the matter;
For, all the Antiquity you smatter,
Is but a Riding, used of course,
When the Gray Mares the better Horse.
When over the Breeches greedy Women
Fight, to extend their vast Dominion,
And in the cause impatient Grizel
Has drubb'd her Husband with Bulls-Pizle,
And brought him under Covert-Baron,
To turn her Vassail with a Murrain;
When Wives their Sexes shift, like Hares
And ride their Husbands, like Night-Mares,
And they in mortal Battle vanquished,
Are of their Charter dis-enfranchis'd,
And by the right of War, like Gils,
Condemn, to Distaff, Horns, and Wheels;
For when men by their Wives are Cowed,
Their Horns of course are understood,
Quoth Hudibras, Thou still giv'st sentence
^mpertinently, and against sense.
It Is not the least disparagement,
To be defeated by the event:
Not to be beaten by main force,
That does not make a man the worse,
Although his shoulders, with Batoon,
Be clawed and cudgelled to some tune;
A Tailors Prentice has no hard
Measure, that is banged with a true yard:
But to turn Tail, or run away,
And without blows give up the Day;
Or to surrender ere the Assault,
That Is no man's fortune, but his fault:
And renders men of Honor less
Than all the Adversity of Success,
And only unto such this Show
Of Horns, and Petticoats, is due.
There is a lesser Profanation,
Like that the Romans called Ovation.
For as Ovation was allowed
For Conquest, purchased without blood,
So men decree those lesser Shows,
For Victory gotten without blows.
By dint of sharp hard words, which some
Give Battle with, and overcome;
These mounted in a Chair Curule,
Which Moderns call a Cucking-stool,
March proudly to the River's side,
And over the Waves in Triumph ride.
Like Dukes of Venice, who are sed
The Adriatique Sea to wed,
And have a gentler Wife, than those,
For whom the State decrees those Shows.
But both are Heathenish and come
From the Whores of Babylon and Rome,
And by the Saints should be withstood,
As Antichristian and Lewd,
And we, as such, should now contribute
Our utmost struglings to prohibit.
This said, they both advanced, and rod,
A Dog-trot through the bawling Crowd,
TO attack the Leader, and still pressed,
Till they approached him breast to breast.
Then Hudibras, with face and hand,
Made signs for Silence, which obtained:
What means (quoth he) this dev'ls Procession
With men of Orthodox profession?
It Is Ethnique and Idolatrous,
From Heathenism derived to us.
Does not the Whore of Babylon ride
Upon her Horned Beast astride,
Like this proud Dame, who either is
A Type of her, or she of this?
Are things of Superstitious function,
Fit to be used in Gospel Sunshine?
It is an Antichristian Opera,
Much used in midnight times of Popery;
A running after self-inventions
Of wicked and profane Intentions;
To scandalize that Sex, for scolding,
To whom the Saints are so beholding,
Women, who were our first Apostles,
Without whose aid w' had all been lost else;
Women, that left no stone unturned,
In which the Cause might be concerned:
Brought in their Childrens Spoons and Whistles,
To purchase Swords, Carbines, and Pistols:
Their Husbands, Cullies, and Sweet-hearts,
To take the Saints and Churches parts;
Drew several gifted Brethren in,
That for the Bishops would have been,
And fixed them constant to the Party,
With motives powerful and hearty:
Their Husbands robbed, and made hard shifts
TO administer unto their Gifts;
All they could rap, and run and pilfer,
To scraps, and ends of Gold and Silver;
Rubbed down the Teachers, tired and spent,
With holding forth for Parliament;
Pampered and edified their Zeal
With Marrow-puddings many a Meal;
Enabled them, with store of meat,
On controverted Points to eat;
And crammed them till their guts did ache,
With Cawdle, Custard, and Plum-cake.
What have they done, or what left undone,
That might advance the Cause at London?
Marched rank and file, with Drum and Ensign,
TO entrench the City, for defense, in;
Raised Rampires with their own soft hands,
To put the Enemy to stands;
From Ladies down to Oyster-Wenches,
Labored like Pioneers in Trenches,
Fell to their Pick-Axes and Tools,
And helped the men to dig like Moles?
Have not the Handmaids of the City,
Chosen of their Members a Committee?
For raising of a Common-Purse,
Out of their Wages, to raise Horse?
And do they not as Triers sit,
To judge what Officers are fit?
Have they --? At that at an Egg, let fly,
Hit him directly over the eye,
And running down his Cheek, besmeared,
With Orange-tawny-slime, his Beard:
But Beard, and slime being of one Hue,
The wound the less appeared in view.
Then he that on the Panniers rode,
Let fly of the other side a load;
And quickly charged again, gave fully
In Ralpho's face, another Volley.
The Knight was startled with the smell,
And for his Sword began to feel:
And Ralpho smothered with the stink,
Grasped his: when one that bore a Link,
OF the sudden, clapped his flaming Cudgel,
Like Linstock, to the Horse's touchhole;
And straight another with his Flambeaux,
Gave Ralpho's, over the eyes, a damned blow.
The Beasts began to kick, and fling,
And forced the Rout to make a Ring.
Through which they quickly broke their way,
And brought them off from further fray;
And though disordered in Retreat,
Each of them stoutly kept his seat:
For quitting both their Swords and Rains,
They grasped with all their strength the manes;
And to avoid the foes pursuit,
With spurring put their Cattle to it,
And till all four were out of wind,
And danger too, never looked behind.
After the had paused a while, supplying
Their spirits spent with fight and flying,
And Hudibras recruited force,
Of Lungs, for action or discourse:
Quoth he, that man is sure to lose,
That fouls his hands with durty foes:
For where no honor's to be gained,
It Is thrown away in being maintained,
'Twas ill for us we had to do
With so dishonorable a Foe:
For though the Law of Arms does bar
The use of venomed shot in War,
Yet by the nauseous smell, and noisome,
Their Case-shot favors strong of poison;
And doubtless have been chewed with teeth
Of some that had a stinking breath:
Else when we put it to the push,
They had not given us such a brush.
But as those Pultroons that fling dirt,
Do but defile, but cannot hurt;
So all the Honor they have won,
Or we have lost, is much at one.
'Twas well we made so resolute
A brave Retreat, without pursuit;
For if we had not, we had sped
Much worse, to be in Triumph led;
Than which, the Ancients held no state,
Of Man's life more unfortunate.
But if this bold Adventure ever
Do chance to reach the Widows ear,
It may, b'ing destined to assert
Her Sex's Honor, reach her heart.
And as such homely Treats (they say)
Portend good Fortune, so this may.
Vespasian being daubed with dirt,
Was destined to the Empire for it:
And from a Scavinger did come
To be a mighty Prince in Rome:
And why may not this foul Address
Presage in Love the same success?
Then let us straight to cleanse our wounds,
Advance in quest of nearest Ponds;
And after (as we first designed)
Swear I Have performed what she enjoined.
CANTO III.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Knight with various doubts possessed
To win the Lady, goes in Quest
Of Sidrophel the Rosy-crucian,
To know the Dest'nies Resolution;
With whom being met, they both chop Logic
About the Science Astrologick.
Till falling from Dispute, to Fight,
The Conjurer's worsted by the Knight.
DOubtless the pleasure is as great
Of being cheated, as to cheat.
As lookers-on feel most delight,
That least perceive a Juglers slight;
And still the less they understand,
The more the admire his slight of hand.
Some with a noise, and greasy light,
Are snapt, as men catch Larks by night;
Ensnared and hampered by the Soul,
As Noozes by the legs catch Foul.
Some with a Medicine, and Receipt,
Are drawn to nibble at the Bait;
And though it be a two-foot Trout,
It Is with a single hair pulled out.
Others believe no Voice to an Organ;
So sweet as Lawyer in his Bar-gown.
Until, with subtle Cobweb-cheats,
The are caught in knotted Law, like Nets:
In which, when once they are imbrangled,
The more they stir, the more th're tangled;
And while their Purses can dispute,
There Is no end of the immortal Suit.
Others still gape to anticipate
The Cabinet designs of Fate,
Apply to Wisards to foresee
What shall, and what shall never be:
And as those Vulturs do foreboad,
Believe Events prove bad, or good.
A flam more senseless than the Roguery
Of old Auruspicy and Augury.
That out of Garbages of Cattle,
Presaged the events of Truce, or Battle;
From flight of Birds, or Chickins pecking,
Success of great'st attempts would reckon,
Though Cheats, yet more intelligible,
Than those that with the Stars do fribble.
This Hudibras by proof found true,
As in due time and place we'll show.
For He, with Beard and Face made clean,
Being mounted on his Steed again,
(And Ralpho got a Cock-horse too
Upon his Beast, with much ado)
Advanced on for the Widows house,
TO acquit himself and pay his Vows;
When various thoughts began to bustle,
And with his inward man to justle.
He thought what danger might accrue,
If she should find he swore untrue:
Or, if his Squire, or he should fail,
And not be punctual in their Tale;
It might at once the ruin prove
Both of his Honor, Faith, and Love.
But if he should forbear to go,
She might conclude he had broke his Vow;
And that he durst not now for shame
Appear in Court to try his Claim.
This was the Pen'worth of his thought,
To pass time, and uneasy trot.
Quoth he, in all my past Adventures,
I never was set so on the Tenters,
Or taken tardy with Dilemma,
That, every way I turn, does hem me;
And with inextricable doubt,
Besets my puzzled Wits about:
For though the Dame has been my Bail,
To free me from enchanted Jail:
Yet as a Dog committed close
For some offense, by chance breaks loose,
And quits his Clog; but all in vain,
He still draws after him his Chain.
So though my Ankle she has quitted,
My Heart continues still committed.
And like a Bayl'd and Mainpriz'd Lover,
Although at large, I am bound over.
And when I shall appear in Court,
To plead my Cause, and answer for it
Unless the Judge do partial prove,
What will become of Me and Love?
For, if in our account we vary,
Or but in Circumstance miscarry,
Or if she put me to strict proof,
And make me pull my Doublet off,
To show by evident Record,
Writ on my skin, I Have kept my word:
How can I ever expect to have her,
Having demurred unto her favor?
But Faith, and Love, and Honor lost,
Shall be reduced to a Knight of the Post:
Beside, that Stripping may prevent
What I Am to prove by Argument;
And justify I have a Tail,
And that way too, my proof may fail.
Or that I could enucleate,
And solve the Problems of my Fate;
Or find by Necromantick Art,
How far the Dest'nies take my part;
For if I were not more than certain,
To win, and wear her, and her Fortune,
I Would go no farther in this Courtship,
To hazard Soul, Estate, and Worship.
For though an Oath obliges not,
Where any thing is to be got,
(As thou have proved,) yet it is profane
And sinful, when men swear in vain.
Quoth Ralph, Not far from hence does dwell
A cunning man, hight Sidrophel,
That deals in Destinies dark Counsels,
And sage Opinions of the Moon sells;
To whom all People far and near,
On deep importances repair.
When Brass and Pewter hap to stray,
And Linen slinkt out of the way;
When Geese and Pullen are seduced,
And Sows of sucking Pigs are chews'd;
When Cattle feel Indisposition,
And need the opinion of Physician;
When Murrain reigns in Hogs, or Sheep,
And Chickens languish of the Pip;
When Yeast, and outward means do fail,
And have no power to work on Ale;
When Butter does refuse to come,
And Love proves cross and humorsome:
To him with Questions, and with Urine,
They for discov'ry flock, or Curing.
Quoth Hudibras, This Sidrophel
I Have heard of, and should like it well,
If thou can prove the Saints, have freedom,
To go to Sorc'rers when they need 'em.
Says Ralpho, There Is no doubt of that:
Those Principles I quoted late,
Prove that the Godly may allege
For any thing their Privilege;
And to the Devilish himself may go,
If they have motives thereunto.
For as there is a War between
The Devilish and them, it is no Sin,
If they, by subtle Stratagem,
Make use of him, as he does them.
Has not this present Parliament
A Legar to the Devil sent,
Fully empowered to Treat about
Finding revolted Witches out:
And has not he, within a year,
Hanged Threescore of them in one Shire?
Some only for not being drowned,
And some for sitting above ground,
Whole days and Nights upon their breeches,
And feeling pain, were hanged for Witches.
And some for putting Knavish tricks
Upon Green-Geese, and Turkey Chicks,
Or Pigs, that suddenly deceast,
Of griefs unnat'ral, as he guest;
Who after proved himself a Witch,
And made a Rod for his own breech.
Did not the Devilish appear to Martin
Luther, in Germany, for certain;
And would have gulled him with a Trick,
But Mart. was too too Politic?
Did he not help the Dutch to purge,
At Antwerp, their Cathedral Church?
Sing catches to the Saints at Mascon,
And tell them all they came to ask him?
Appear in diverse shapes to Kelly?
And speak in the Nun at Londons Belly?
Meet with the Parliament's Committee
At Woodstock, on a Pars'nal Treaty?
At Sarum take a Cavalier
IN the Cause's service, Prisoner?
As Withers in immortal Rhyme
Has registered to after-time?
Do not our great Reformers use
This Sidrophel to foreboad News?
To write of Victories next Year,
And Castles taken yet in the Air;
Of Battles fought at Sea, and Ships
Sunk, two Years hence, the last Eclips?
A Total O'erthrow given the King
In Cornwall, Horse, and Foot, next Spring?
And has not he point blank foretold
Whats'er the close Committee would?
Made Mars and Saturn for the Cause,
The Moon for Fundamental Laws?
The Ram, and Bull, and Goat declare
Against the Book of Common Prayer?
The Scorpion take the Protestation,
And Bear engage for Reformation?
Made all the Royal Stars recant,
Compound, and take the Covenant.
Quoth Hudibras, The case is clear,
The Saints ma' employ a Conjurer,
As thou have proved it by their practice,
No Argument like matter of Fact is:
And we are best of all led to
Men's Principles by what they do.
Then let us strait advance in quest
Of this profound Gymnosophist:
And as the Fates, and He advise,
Pursue, or wave this Enterprise.
This said, he turned about his Steed,
And estsoons on the adventure rid,
Where, leave we Him and Ralph a while,
And to the Conj'rer turn our style:
To let our Reader understand
What Is useful of him, before hand,
He had been long toward Mathematics,
Optics, Philosophy, and Staticks,
Magic, Horoscopy, Astrology,
And was old Dog at Physiology;
But, as a Dog that turns the spit,
Bestirs himself, and plies his feet,
To climb the Wheel; but all in vain,
His own weight brings him down again:
And still he is in the self-same place,
Where at his setting out he was.
So in the Circle of the Arts,
Did he advance his natural Parts;
Till falling back still, for retreat,
He fell to Juggle, Cant, and Cheat;
For as those Fowls that live in Water
Are never wet, he did but smatter;
Whatever he labored to appear,
His Understanding still was clear.
Yet none a deeper knowledge boasted,
Since old Hodg Bacon, and Bod Grosted,
The Intelligible World he knew,
And all men, dream on it, to be true:
That in this World, there is not a Wart,
That has not there a Counterpart;
Nor can there on the face of Ground,
An Individual Beard be found,
That has not, in that foreign Nation,
A Fellow of the self-same fashion;
So cut, so color'd, and so curled,
As those are, in the Inferior World,
He Had read Dee's Prefaces before
The Devilish, and Euclide over and over.
And all the Intrigues, 'twixt him and Kelly,
Lescus, and the Emperor, would not tell ye.
But with the Moon was more familiar
Than ever was Almanac well-willer.
Her secrets understood so clear,
That some believed he had been there.
Knew when he was in fittest mood,
For cutting Corns, or letting blood:
When for anointing Scabs and Itches,
Or to the Bum applying Leeches;
When Sows and Bitches may be spade,
And in what Sign best Sider's made,
Whether the Wane be, or Increase,
Best to set Garlic, or sow Pease.
Who first found out the Man in the Moon,
That to the Ancients was unknown;
How many Dukes, and Earls, and Peers,
Are in the Planetary Spheres,
Their Airy Empire: and command
Their several strengths by Sea and Land;
What factions the have, and what they drive at
In public Vogue, and what in private;
With what Designs and Interests,
Each Party manages Contests,
He made an Instrument to know
If the Moon shine at Full or no,
That would as soon as ever she shon, strait
Whether 'twere Day or Night demonstrate;
Tell what her D'ameter to an Inch is,
And prove she is not made of Green-Cheese:
It would demonstrate, that the Man in
The Moon's a Sea Mediterranean.
And that it is no Dog, nor Bitch,
That stands behind him at his breech;
But a huge Caspian Sea, or Lake
With Arms which Men for Legs mistake,
How large a Gulf his Tail composes,
And what a goodly Bay his Nose is;
How many German Leagues by the scale,
Cape-Snout's from Promontory-Tayl:
He made a Planetary Gin,
Which Rats would run their own heads in,
And come of purpose to be taken,
Without the expense of Cheese or Bacon;
With Lute-strings he would counterfeit
Maggots, that crawl on dish of meat,
Quote Moles and Spots, on any place
OF the body, by the Index-face:
Detect lost Maidenheads, by sneezing,
Or breaking wind of Dames, or pissing.
Cure Warts and Corns, with application
Of Medicines, to the Imagination.
Fright Agues into Dogs, and scare
With Rimes the Toothache and Catarrh.
Chase evil spirits away by dint
Of Cickle Horseshooe, Hollow-flint.
Spit fire out of a Walnut-shell,
Which made the Roman Slaves rebel.
And fire a Mine in China, here,
With Sympathetick Gunpowder.
He knew whats'ever's to be known,
But much more than he knew, would own.
What Medicine 'twas that Paracelsus
Could make a man with, as he tells us.
What figured Slats are best to make,
On watery surface, Duck or Drake.
What Bowling-stones, in running race
Upon a Board, have swiftest pace.
Whether a Pulse beat in the black
List of a Dapl'd Louse's back.
If Systole or Diastole move
Quickest, when he is in wrath, or love:
When two of them do run a race,
Whether they Gallop, Trot, or Pace,
How many scores a Flea will jump,
Of his own length, from Head to Rump;
Which Socrates, and Chaerephon
In vain, essayed so long agon;
Whether his Snout a perfect Nose is,
And not an Elephant's Proboscis,
How many different Specieses
Of Maggots breed in rotten Cheese,
And which are next of kin to those
Engendered in a Chandler's Nose.
Or those not seen, but understood,
That live in Vinegar and Wood;
A paultry Wretch, he had, half-starv'd,
That him in place of Zany served;
Hight Whachum, bred to dash and draw,
Not Wine, but more unwholesome Law:
To make 'twixt words and lines, huge gaps,
Wide as Meridians in Maps.
To squander Paper, and spare Ink,
Or cheat men of their words, some think;
From this, by merited degrees,
He to more high Advancement rise:
To be an Under- Conjurer,
Or Journy-man Astrologer:
His business was to pump and wheedle,
And Men with their own keys unriddle.
To make them to themselves give answers,
For which they pay the Necromancers.
To fetch and carry Intelligence,
Of whom, and what, and where, and whence,
And all Discoveries disperse,
Among the whole pack of Conjurers;
What Cutpurses have left with them,
For the right owners to redeem;
And, what they dare not vend, find out,
To gain themselves, and the Art, repute.
Draw Figures, Schemes, and Horoscopes,
Of Newgate, Bridewell, Brokers Shops.
Of Thieves ascendent in the Cart,
And find out all by rules of Art.
Which way a Serving-man that is run
With Clothes or Money away, is gone:
Who picked a Fob, at Holding-forth,
And where a Watch, for half the worth,
May be redeemed; or Stolen Plate
Restored, at Conscionable rate.
Beside all this, he served his Master
In quality of Poetaster:
And Rimes appropriate could make,
To every month in the Almanac.
When Terms begin, and end, could tell,
With their Returns, in Doggerel.
When the Exchequer opes and shuts,
And Sowgelder, with safety cuts.
When Men may Eat and Drink their fill,
And when be temperate if they will.
When use, and when abstain from Vice,
Figs, Grapes, Phlebotomy, and Spice.
And as in Prisons, mean Rogues beat
Hemp, for the service of the Great;
So Whachum beat his durty brains,
TO advance his Masters Fame and Gains;
And like the Devil's Oracles,
Put into Dogrel-Rimes his Spells,
Which over every Months blank-page
IN the Almanac, strange Bilks presage.
He would an Elegy compose
On Maggots squeezed out of his Nose;
In Lyrick numbers write an Ode on
His Mistress, eating a Black-pudden:
And when imprisoned Air escaped her,
It puffed him with Poetic Rapture:
His Sonnets charmed the attentive Crowd,
By wide-mouthed Mortal troul'd aloud;
That, circl'd with his long-ear'd Guests,
Like Orpheus looked, among the Beasts,
A Carman's Horse could not pass by,
But stood tied up to Poetry,
No Porter's Burden past along,
But served for Burden to his Song.
Each Windore, like a Pill'ry appears,
With heads thrust through, nailed by the Ears:
All Trades run in as to the sight
Of Monsters, or their dear delight;
The Gallow-Tree, when cutting Purse,
Breeds business for Heroic Verse,
Which none does hear, but would have hung
I Have been the Theme of such a Song.
Those two together long had lived,
^n Mansion prudently contrived;
Where neither Tree, nor House could bar
The free detection of a Star;
And nigh an Ancient Obelisk
Was raised by him, found out by Fisk,
On which was written, not in words,
But Hieroglyphick Mute of Birds,
Many rare pithy Saws concerning
The worth of Astrologick Learning:
From top of this there hung a Rope,
To which he fastened Telescope;
The Spectacles, with which the Stars
He reads in smallest Characters.
It happened as a Boy, one night,
Did fly his Tarsel of a Kite,
The strangest long-wing'd Hauk that slies,
That like a Bird of Paradise.
Or Heralds Martlet, has no legs,
Nor hatches young ones, nor lay Eggs;
His Train was six yards long, milk-white,
At the end of which there hung a Light,
Enclosed in Lanthorn made of Paper,
That far off like a Star did appear.
This Sidrophel by chance espied,
And with Amazement staring wide,
Bless us, quoth he, What dreadful wonder
Is that, appears in Heaven yonder?
A Comet, and without a Beard?
Or Star, that never before appeared;
I Am certain, it is not in the Scrowl,
Of all those Beasts, and Fish and Fowl,
With which, like Indian Plantations,
The Learned stock the Constellations:
Nor those that drawn from Signs have bin,
To the Houses where the Planets Inn.
^t must be supernatural,
Uuless it be that Cannon-Ball,
That, shot in the Air, point blank, upright,
Was born to that prodigious height,
That learned Philosophers maintain,
It never came backwards, down again;
But in the Aerie Region yet,
Hangs like the Body of Mahomet.
For if it be above the Shade,
That by the Earths round bulk is made,
It Is probable, it may, from far,
Appear no Bullet but a Star.
This said, He to his Engine flew,
Placed near at hand, in open view,
And raised it, till it levelled right
Against the Glowworm Tail of Kite.
Then peeping through, ( bless us quoth he)
It is a Planet now I see;
And if I err not, by this proper
Figure, that is like Tobacco-stopper,
It should be Saturn: yes, it is clear
It Is Saturn, But what makes him there?
He Is got between the Dragon's Tail,
And farther Leg behind, of the Whale;
Pray Heaven, divert the fatal Omen,
For it is a Prodigy not common,
And can no less than the Worlds end,
Of Natures funeral portend.
With that he fell again to pry
Through Perspective more wistfully,
When by mischance, the fatal string
That kept the Towering Fowl on wing,
Breaking, down fell the Star: Well shot,
Quoth Whachum, who right wisely though^
He Had levelled at a Star, and hit it:
But Sidrophel more subtle-witted,
Cried out, What horrible and fearful,
Portent is this, to see a Star fall?
It threatens Nature, and the doom
Will not be long before it come.
When Stars do fall, it is plain enough,
The Day of Judgment's not far off:
As lately 'twas revealed to Sedgwick.
And some of us find out by Magic.
Then, since the time we have to live,
In this world's shortened, Let us strive,
To make our best advantage of it,
And pay our losses with our profit.
This feat fell out, not long before
The Knight upon the forenam'd score,
In quest of Sidrophel advancing,
Was now in prospect of the Mansion:
Whom he discovering, turned his Glass,
And found far off, 'twas Hudibrass.
Whachum (quoth he) look yonder; some
To try, or use our Art, are come:
The one's the Learned Knight; seek out,
And pump'em, what they come about.
Whachum advanced with all submissness,
TO accost 'em, but much more, their business.
He held the Stirrup, while the Knight,
From Leathern Bare-Bones did alight,
And taking from his hand, the Bridle,
Approached the dark Squire to unriddle.
He gave him first the time of the day,
And welcomed him, as he might say:
He asked them whence they came, and whither
Their business lay? Quoth Ralpho, hither;
Did you not lose -- Quoth Ralpho, Nay;
Quoth Whachum, Sir, I meant your way;
Your Knight -- Quoth Ralpho, is a Lover,
And pains intolerable does suffer,
For Lovers Hearts are not their own Hearts,
Nor Lights nor Lungs, and so forth downwards;
What time -- Quoth Ralpho, Sir too long,
Three years it off and on, has hung --
Quoth he, I meant what time of the day it is.
Quoth Ralpho, between seven and eight it is.
Why then (quoth Whachum) my small Art
Tells me, the Dame has a hard Heart,
Or great Estate -- Quoth Ralph, a Joynter,
Which makes him have so hot a mind to her.
Mean while the Knight was making water,
Before he fell upon the matter;
Which having done, the Wizard steps in,
To give him a suitable Reception;
But kept his business at a Bay,
Till Whachum put him in the way.
Who having now by Ralpho's light,
Expounded the Errand of the Knight,
And what he came to know, drew near,
To whisper in the Conj'rers ear.
Which he prevented thus: What was it,
Quoth he, that I was saying last,
Before these Gentlemen arrived?
Quoth Whachum, Venus you retriv'd,
In opposition with Mars,
And no benign friendly Stars
TO allay the effect. Quoth Wizard, So!
In Virgo? Ha! quoth Whachum, No.
Has Saturn nothing to do in it?
One tenth of's Circle to a minute.
It Is well, quoth he -- Sir you will excuse
This rudeness, I am forced to use,
It is a Scheme, and face of Heaven
As the Aspects are disposed, this Even,
I was contemplating upon,
When you arrived: but now I Have done.
Quoth Hudibras, If I appear
Unseasonable in coming here
At such a time, to interrupt
Your Speculations, which I hoped
Assistance from, and come to use,
It Is fit that I ask your excuse.
By no means, Sir, Quoth Sidrophel,
The Stars your coming did foretell:
I did expect you here, and know,
Before you speak your business too.
Quoth Hudibras, Make that appear,
And I shall credit whatsoever
You tell me after on your word,
However unlikely, or absurd.
You are in Love, Sir, with a Widow,
Quoth he, that does not greatly heed you;
And three years has rid your Wit
And Passion without drawing Bit:
And now your business is, to know
If you shall carry her, or no.
Quoth Hudibras, you're in the right,
But how the Devil you come by it,
I cannot imagine; for the Stars
I Am sure, can tell no more than a Horse,
Nor can their Aspects (though you pore
Your Eyes out on' em) tell you more
Than the Oracle of Sive and Sheers,
That turns as certain as the Spheres;
But if the Devil's of your Counsel,
Much may be done, my noble Donzel,
And it is on this account I come,
To know from you my fatal Doom.
Quoth Sidrophel, If you suppose,
Sir Knight, that I am one of those,
I might suspect and take the Alarm,
Your business is but to inform:
But if it be, it is never the near,
You have a wrong sow by the Ear,
For I assure you, for my part,
I only deal by Rules of Art,
Such as are lawful, and judge by
Conclusions of Astrology:
But for the Devil, know nothing by him,
But only this, that I defy him.
Quoth he, Whatever others deem ye
I understand your Metonymie;
Your words of second hand intention,
When things by wrongful names you mention;
The Mystic sense of all your Terms,
That are indeed but Magic Charms,
To raise the Devil, and mean one thing,
And that is, downright Conjuring:
And in its self more warrantable,
Than Cheat, or Canting to a Rabble,
Or putting Tricks upon the Moon,
Which by confederacy are done.
Your Ancient Conjurers were wont
To make her from her Sphere dismount,
And to their Incantations stoop,
They scorned to pore through Telescope,
Or idly play at bo-peep with her,
To find out cloudy, or fair weather,
Which every Almanac can tell,
Perhaps, as learnedly, and well,
As you your self -- Then friend I doubt
You go the farthest way about.
Your Modern Indian Magician
Makes but a hole in the Earth to piss in,
And streit resolves all Questions by it,
And seldom fails to be in the right.
The Rosy-crucian way's more sure,
To bring the Devil to the Lure;
Each of 'em has a several Gin,
To catch Intelligences in.
Some by the Nose with fumes trappan 'um,
As Dunstan did the Devil's Grannum.
Others with Characters and Words,
Catch'em as Men in Nets do Birds.
And some with Symbols, Signs and Tricks,
Engarv'd in Planetary Nicks,
With their own influences, will fetch 'em,
Down from their Orbs, arrest and catch'em;
Make'em depose, and answer to
All Questions ever they let him go.
Bumbastus, kept a Devil's Bird
Shut in the Pummel of his Sword,
That taught him all the cunning Pranks,
Of past and future Mountebanks.
Kelly did all his Feats upon
The Devil 's Looking-Glass, a Stone,
Where playing with him at Bo-peep,
He solved all Problems never so deep.
Agrippa kept a Stygian-pug,
IN the garb and habit of a Dog,
That was his Tutor; and the Curr
Read to the occult Philosopher,
And taught him subtly to maintain
All other Sciences are vain.
To this, quoth Sidrophello, Sir,
Agrippa was no Conjurer,
Nor Paracelsus, no nor Behman;
Nor was the Dog a Cacodoemon,
But a true Dog, that would show tricks
For the Emperor, and leap over sticks;
Would fetch and carry, was more civil,
Than other Dogs, but yet no Devil;
And whatsoever he is said to do,
He went the self-same way we go.
As for the Rosie-cross Philosophers,
Whom you will have to be but Sorcerers;
What they pretend to, is no more,
Than Trismegistus did before,
Pythagoras, old Zoroaster,
And Appollonius their Master;
To whom they do confess I ow,
All that they do, and all they know.
Quoth Hudibras, Alas what is it to us,
Whether 'twere said by Trismegistus:
If it be nonsense, false, or mystic,
Or not intelligible, or sophistick.
It Is not Antiquity, nor Author,
That makes truth truth, although time's daughter;
'Twas he that put her in the Pit,
Before he pulled her out of it.
And as he eats his Sons, just so
He feeds upon his Daughters too.
Nor does it follow, cause a Herald
Can make a Gentleman scarce a year old,
To be descended of a Race,
Of ancient Kings in a small space;
That we should all Opinion hold
Authentic, that we can make old.
Quoth Sidrophel, It is no part
Of prudence, to cry down an Art;
And what it may perform, deny
Because you understand not why.
(As Averrhois played but mean trick,
To damn our whole Art for Excentrick)
For who knows all that knowledge contains?
Men dwell not on the Tops of Mountains,
But on their sides, or rising's seat;
So it is with knowledge's vast height,
Do not the Hist'ries of all Ages
Relate miraculous presages,
Of strange turns in the World's affairs,
^oreseen b' Astrologers, Soothsayers,
^haldeans, Learned Genethliacks,
And some that have writ Almanacks?
The Median Emperor dreamed his Daughter,
Had pist all Asia under water,
And that a Vine, sprung from her hanches,
Overspread his Empire, with its branches;
And did not Soothsayers expound it,
As after by the event he found it?
When Caesar in the Senate fell,
Did not the Sun eclipsed foretell,
And in resentment of his slaughter,
Looked pale for almost a year after?
Augustus having, b' oversight,
Put on his left Shoe, before his right,
Had like to have been Slain that day,
By Soldiers mutining for pay.
Are there not myriads of this sort,
Which Stories of all times report?
Is it not ominous in all Countries,
When Crows and Ravens croak upon Trees?
The Roman Senate, when within
The City-walls an Owl was seen;
Did cause their Clergy with Lustrations;
(Our Synod calls Humiliations,)
The round-fac'd Prodigy to avert
From doing Town or Country hurt.
And if an Owl have so much power,
Why should not Planets have much more?
That in a Region, far above
Inferior Fowls of the Air, move,
And should see farther, and foreknow,
More then their Augury below:
Though that once served the Polity
Of mighty States to govern by;
And this is that we take in hand,
By powerful Art to understand.
Which, how we have performed, all Ages
Can speak the Events of our presages,
Have we not lately in the Moon
Found a new World to the Old unknown?
Discovered Sea and Land, Columbus
And Magell^n could never compass?
Made Mountains with our Tubes appear,
And Cattle gazing on 'em there?
Quoth Hudibrass, You lie so open,
That I, without a Telescope,
Can find your tricks out, and desery
Where you tell truth, and where you lie.
For Anaxagoras long agon,
Saw Hills, as well as you in the Moon;
And held the Sun was but a piece
Of Red-hot-Ir'n as big as Greece;
Believed the Heavens were made of Stone,
Because the Sun had voided one;
And rather than he would recant
The Opinion, suffered Banishment*
But what, alas, what is it to us,
Whether in the Moon, men thus or thus,
Do eat their Porridge, cut their Corns,
Or whether they have Tails or Horns?
What Trade from thence can you advance
But what we nearer have from France?
What can our Travelers bring home,
That is not to be learnt at Rome?
What Politics, or strange Opinions,
That are not in our own Dominions?
What Science can be brought from thence,
In which we do not here Commence?
What Revelations, or Religions,
That are not in our Native Regions?
Are sweating Lanthorns, or Screen-Fans
Made better there, than they are in France?
Or do they teach to sing and play
OF the Gittar there a newer way?
Can they make Plays there, that shall fit
The Public Humor with less Wit?
Write wittier Dances, quainter Shows,
Or fight with more ingenious Blows?
Or does the Man in the Moon look big,
And wear a huger Periwig,
Show in his Gate, or Face, more tricks
Than our own Native Lunaticks?
But if w' outdo him here at home,
What good of your design can come?
As wind in the Hypochondrias pent
Is but a blast if downward sent;
But if it upwards chance to fly,
Becomes new Light and Prophecy:
So when our Speculations tend,
Above their just and useful end,
Although they promise strange and great,
Discoveries of things far fet,
They are but idle Dreams and Fancies,
And savor strongly of the Ganzas,
Tell me but what is the natural cause,
Why on a Sign no Painter draws
The Full-Moon ever, but the Half,
Resolve that with your Jacobs-staff;
Or why Wolves raise a Hubbub at her,
And Dogs howl when she shines in water;
And I shall freely give my Vote,
You may know something more remote.
At this deep Sidrophel looked wise,
And staring round with Owl-like Eyes,
He put his face into a posture
Of Sapience, and began to bluster;
For having three times shook his head
To stir his wit up, thus he said.
Art has no mortal Enemies
Next Ignorance, but Owls and Geese;
Those Consecrated Geese in Orders,
That to the Capitol were Warders:
And being then upon Petrol,
With noise alone beat of the Gaul.
Or those Athenian Sceptick Owls,
That will not credit their own Souls;
Or any Science understand,
Beyond the reach of Eye, or Hand:
But meas'ring all things by their own
Knowledge, hold, Nothing's to be known.
Those wholesale Critics, that in Coffee-Houses,
cry down all Philosophy.
And will not know, upon what ground
In Nature, we our doctrine found;
Although with pregnant evidence,
We can demonstrate it to sense.
As I just now have done to you,
Foretelling what you came to know,
Were the Stars only made to light
Robbers and Burglaries by night?
To wait on Drunkards, Thieves, Gold-finders,
And Lovers solacing behind Doors?
Or giving one another Pledges?
Of Mrtrimony under Hedges?
Or Witches Simpling, and on Gibbets
Cutting from Malefactors snippets?
Or from the Pillory tips of Ears
Of Rebel-Saints, and Perjurers?
Only to stand by and look on,
But not know what is said or done?
Is there a Constellation there,
That was not born and bred up here?
And therefore cannot be to learn,
In any inferior Concern.
Were they not, during all their lives,
Most of'm Pirates, Whores, and Thieves?
And is it like they have not still
In their old Practices some skill?
Is there a Planet that by Birth
Does not derive its House from Earth?
And therefore probably must know
What is, and has been done below?
Who made the Balance, or whence came
The Bull, the Lion, and the Ram?
Did not we here, the Argo rigg
Make Berenice's Periwig?
Whose Liv'ry does the Coachman wear?
Or who made Cassiopoea's Chair?
And therefore as they came from hence,
With us may hold Intelligence.
Plato deyn'd, the World can be
Governed without Geometry,
(For Money b'ing the common Scale
Of things by measure, weight, and tale;
In all the affairs of Church and State,
It Is both the Balance and the Weight:)
Then much less can it be without
Divine Astrology made out,
That puts the other down in worth,
As far as Heaven's above Earth.
The reasons (quoth the Knight) I grant
Are something more significant
Than any that the Learned use,
Upon this subject to produce;
And yet, the are far from satisfactory
TO establish and keep up your Factory.
The Egyptians say, the Sun has twice
Shifted his setting and his rise;
Twice has he risen in the West,
As many times set in the East;
But whether that be true, or no,
The Devil any of you know.
Some hold, the Heavens, like a Top,
Are kept by Circulation up;
And 'twere not for their wheeling round,
They Would instantly fall to the ground:
As sage Empedocles of old,
And from him Modern Authors old.
Plato believed the Sun and Moon,
Below all other Planets run.
Some Mercury, some Venus seat
Above the Sun himself in height.
The learned Scaliger complained
Against what Copernicus maintained,
That in Twelve hundred years, and odd,
The Sun had left his ancient Road,
And nearer to the Earth, is come
'Bove Fifty thousand miles from home*
Swore 'twas a most notorious Flam,
And he that had so little Shame
To vent such Fopperies abroad,
Deserved to have his Rump well clawed;
Which Monsieur Bodin hearing: swore
That he deserved the Rod much more,
That durst upon a truth give doom,
He knew less then the Pope of Rome.
Cardan believed, Great States depend
Upon the tip of the Bears Tails end;
That as she whisk'd it toward the Sun,
Strow'd mighty Empires up and down;
Which others say must needs be false,
Because your true Bears have no Tails.
Some say, the Zodiack-Constellations
Have long since changed their antique Stations
Above a Sign; and prove the same,
^n Taurus now, once in the Ram;
Affirm the Trigon chopped and changed,
The Watery with the Fiery ranged;
Then how can their effects still hold
To be the same they were of old.
This, though the Art were true, would make
Our Modern Soothsayers mistake;
And is one cause they tell more lies,
In Figures and Nativities,
Than the old Chaldean Conjurers,
In so many hundred thousand years;
Beside their Nonsense in translating,
For want of Accidence and Latin.
Like Idus and Calendae Englisht
The Quarter-days, by skilful Linguist,
And yet with Canting, Slight, and Cheat
'Twill serve their turn to do the seat;
Make Fools believe in their foreseeing
Of things before they are in Being;
To swallow Gudgeons ere the are caught,
And count their Chickens ere the are hatched,
Make them the Constellations prompt,
and give 'em back their own account:
^ut still the best to him that gives
^he best price for it, or best believes.
^ome Towns and Cities, some, for brevity,
^ave cast the Versal World's Nativity;
and made the Infant-Stars confess,
^ike Fools or Children, what they please:
^ome calculate the hidden fates
^f Monkeys, Puppy-Dogs, and Cats,
^ome Running Nags, and Fighting-Cocks;
^ome Love, Trade, Lawsuits, and the Pox;
^ome take a measure of the lives
^f Fathers, Mothers, Husbands, Wives,
^ake Opposition, Trine, and Quartile;
^ell who is barren, and who fertile,
^s if the Planet's first aspect
^he tender Infant did infect
In Soul and Body, and instill
All future good, and future ill:
Which, in their dark fatalities lurking,
At destined Periods fall a working;
And break out like the hidden seeds
Of long diseases into deeds,
In Friendships, Enmities and strife,
And all the emergences of Life:
No sooner does he peep into,
The World, but he has done his do,
Caught all Diseases took all Physic,
That cures, or kills a man that is sick;
Married his punctual dose of Wives,
Is Cuckolded, and breaks or Thrives.
There Is but twinkling of a Star
Between a Man of Peace and War,
A Thief and Justice, Fool and Knave,
A huffing Officer and a Slave,
A crafty Lawyer and Pick-pocket,
(...) great Philosopher and a Block-head,
(...) formal Preacher and Player,
(...) learned Physician and Manslayer.
^s if Men from the Stars did suck
^ld-Age, Diseases, and ill-luck,
^it, Folly, Honor, Virtue, Vice,
^rade, Travel, Women, Claps, and Dice;
and draw with the first Air they breath,
Battle, and Murder, sudden Death,
^re not these fine Commodities,
^o be imported from the Skies?
and vended here among the Rabble,
^or staple Goods, and warrantable?
^ike Money by the Druids borrowed,
^ the other World to be restored.
Quoth Sidrophel, To let you know
You wrong the Art and Artists too:
Since Arguments are lost on those
That do our Principles oppose;
I will (althougth I Have don't before)
Demonstrate to your sense once more,
And draw a Figure that shall tell you
What you perhaps forget, befell you;
By way of Horary inspection,
Which some account our worst erection.
With that, He Circles draws, and Squares
With Ciphers, Astral Characters;
Then looks 'em over, to understand 'em,
Although set down Hab-nab, at random.
Quoth he, This Scheme of the Heavens set
Discovers how in fight you met
At Kingston with a Maypole Idol,
And that y'were banged both back and side well:
And though you overcame the Bear,
The Dogs beat you at Brentford Fair;
Where sturdy Butcher broke your Noddle,
And handled you like a Fop-doodle.
Quoth Hudibras, I now perceive
You are no Conj'rer, b' your leave,
That Paultry story is untrue,
And forged to cheat such Gulls as you.
Not true? quoth he, How ever you vapor,
I can, what I affirm, make appear;
Whachum shall justifie't to your face,
And prove he was upon the place:
He played the Saltintbanco's part,
Transformed to a Frenchman by my Art,
He stole your Cloak, and picked your Pocket,
Chews'd, and Caldes'd ye like a Block-head:
And what you lost I can produce
If you deny it, here in the house.
Quoth Hudibras, I do believe,
That Argument's Demonstrative;
Ralpho, bear witness, and go fetch us
A Constable to seize the Wretches:
For though the are both false Knaves and Cheats,
Impostors, Juglers, Counterfets,
I Will make them serve for perpendiculars,
As true, as ever were used by Brick-layers;
They Are guilty by their own Confessions,
Of Felony; and at the Sessions
Upon a Bench I will so handle 'em,
That the Vibration of this Pendulum
Shall make all Tailors Yards, of one
Unanimous opinion:
A thing he long has vapour'd of,
But now shall make out it by proof.
Quoth Sidrophel, I do not doubt,
To find friends, that will bear me out:
Nor have I hazarded my Art,
And Neck, so long on the States part,
To be exposed in the end to suffer,
By which a Braghadocio Huffer.
Huffer, quoth Hudibras, This Sword
Shall down thy false throat, Cram that word,
Ralpho, make haste, and call an Officer,
To apprehend this Stygian Sophister;
Mean while I Will hold 'em at a Bay,
Lest he and Whachum run away.
But Sidrophel, who from the Aspect
Of Hudibras, did now erect,
A Figure worse portending far,
Than that of most malignant Star:
Believed it now the fittest moment,
To shun the danger that might come on it,
While Hudibras was all alone,
And he and Whachum, two to one;
This being resolved, He spied by chance,
Behind the Door, an Iron Lance,
That many a sturdy Limb had gored,
And Legs, and Loins, and Shoulders board.
He snatched it up, and made a Pass,
To make his way through Hudibras.
Whachum had a Fire-Fork,
With which he vowed to do his Work.
But Hudibras was well prepared,
And stoutly stood upon his Guard.
He put by Sidrophello's thrust,
And in, right manfully, he rusht,
The weapon from his gripe he wrung,
And laid him on the earth along.
Whachum his Seacole-Prong threw by,
And basely turned his back to fly.
But Hudibras gave him a twitch
As quich as Lightning in the Breech.
Just in the place, where Honor's lodged,
As wise Philosophers have judged;
Because a kick in that part more
Hurts Honor, than deep wounds before.
Quoth Hudibras, the Stars determine.
You are my Prisoners, base Vermin.
Could they not tell you so, as well
As what I came to know, foretell?
By this, what Cheats you are, we find,
That in your own Concerns are blind:
Your Lives are now at my dispose,
To be redeemed by fine or blows:
But who his Honor would defile,
To take, or fell two lives so vile;
I Will give you Quarter, but your Pillage,
The Conquering Warrier's Crop and Tillage,
Which with his Sword he reaps, and plows;
That mine, the Law of Arms allows.
This said, in haste he fell
To romaging of Sidrophel.
First, He expounded both his Pockets,
And found a Watch with Rings and Lockets,
Which had been left with him, to erect
A Figure for, and so detect.
A Copper-Plate, with Almanacks
Engraved upon it, with other knacks,
Of Booker's, Lillie's, Sarah Jimmers;
And Blank-Schemes to discover Nimmers;
A Moon-Dial, with Napier's bones,
And several Constellation-stones,
Engraved in Planetary hours,
That over Mortals had strange powers
To make 'em thrive in Law, or Trade;
And stab, or poison, to evade;
In Wit, or Wisdom to improve,
And be victorious in Love.
Whachum had neither Cross nor Pile,
His Plunder was not worth the while;
All which the Conqu'ror did discompt,
To pay for curing of his Rump.
But Sidrophel, as fulls of tricks,
As Rota-men of Politics,
Straight cast about to overreach
The unwary Conqu'ror with a fetch,
And make him glad, (at least) to quit
His Victory, and fly the Pit,
Before the Secular Prince of Darkness
Arrived to seize upon his Carcass.
And, as a Fox, with hot pursuit,
Chased through a Warren, cast about
To save his credit, and among
Dead Vermin on a Gallows hung;
And while the Dogs ran underneath,
Escaped (by counterfeiting Death)
Not out of Cunning, but a Train
Of Atoms justling in his Brain,
As learned Philosophers give out:
So Sidrophello cast about,
And fell to's wonted Trade again,
To feign himself in earnest slain,
First* stretched out one leg, then another,
And seeming in his Breast to smother,
A broken Sigh; Quoth he, Where am I,
Alive or Dead? Or which way came I
Through so immense a space so soon?
But now, I thought my self in the Moon;
And that a Monster with huge Wiskers,
More formidable than a Switzers,
My body through and through had dril'd,
And Whachum by my side, had killed,
Had cross examined both our Hose,
And plundered all we had to lose;
Look there he is, I see him now,
And feel the place I am run through
And there lies Whachum by my side,
Stone-dead, and in his own blood died.
Oh! Oh! with that he fetched a Groan,
And fell again into a swoun.
Shut both his Eyes, and stopped his Breath,
And, to the Life, out acted- Death.
That Hadibras, to all appearing,
Believed him to be dead as Herring.
He held it now no longer safe,
To tarry the return of Ralph;
But rather leave him in the Lurch;
Thought he, he has abused our Church,
Refused to give himself one firk,
To carry on the Public work.
Despised our Synod-men like Dirt.
And made their Discipline his sport;
Divulged the secrets of their Classes,
And their Conventions proved High Places;
Disparaged their Tith-Pigs, as Pagan,
And set at naught their Cheese and Bacon;
Railed at their Covenant, and jear'd
Their reverend Parsons to my Beard,
For all which Scandals to be quit,
At once, this Juncture falls out fit,
I Will make him henceforth, to beware,
And tempt my fury, if he dare:
He must (at least) hold up his hand,
By twelve Freeholders to be scanned,
Who by their skill in Palmistry,
Will quickly read his Destiny;
And make him glad to read his Lesson,
Or take a turn for it at the Session:
Unless his Light and Gifts prove truer,
Than ever yet they did, I Am sure;
For if he escape with Whipping now,
It Is more than he can hope to do,
And that will disingage my Conscience,
Of the Obligation, in his own sense.
I Will make him now by force abide,
What he by gentle means denied,
To give my Honor satisfaction,
And right the Brethren in the Action.
This being resolved with equal speed,
And Conduct, he approached his Steed;
And with Activity unwont,
Essayed the lofty Beast to mount;
Which once achieved, he spurred his Palfrey,
To get from the Enemy, and Ralph, free;
Left Danger, Fears, and Foes behind,
And beat, at least three lengths, the Wind.
AN HEROICAL EPISTLE OF HUDIBRAS TO SIDROPHEL.
Ecce iterum Crispinus -- WEll Sidrophel, though it is in vain
To tamper with your Crazy Brain,
Without Trepanning of your Scull.
As often as the Moon's at Full:
It Is not amiss, ere y' are given over,
To try one desperate Medicine more:
For where your Case can be no worse,
The desp'rat'st is the wisest course.
I^'t possible, that you, whose Ears
Are of the Tribe of Issachars,
And might (with equal Reason) either
For Merit, or extent of Leather,
With William Pryn's, before they were
Retrenched, and Crucified compare,
Should you be deaf against a noise
So roaring as the Public Voice?
That speaks your virtues free and loud,
And openly in every crowd.
As loud as one that sings his part
TO a Wheel-barrow or Turnip Cart, --
Or your new Nicknam'd old Invention,
To cry Green Hastings with an Engine.
(As if the vehemence had stunned,
And torn your Drum-heads with the sound)
And 'cause your Folly's now no news,
But overgrown and out of use.
Persuade your self there is no such matter,
But that it is vanished out of Nature,
When Folly, as it grows in years,
The more extravagant appears.
For who but you could be possessed
With so much Ignorance, and Beast,
That neither all men's Scorn, and Hate,
Nor being Laughed and Pointed at,
Nor brayed so often in a Mortar,
Can teach you wholesome Sense, and Nurture?
But (like a Reprobate) what course
S'ever's used, grow worse and worse?
Can no Transfusion of the Blood,
That makes Fools Cattle, do you good?
Nor putting Pigs to a Bitch to Nurse,
To turn 'em into Mungrel-Curs,
Put you into a way, at least,
To make your self a better Beast;
Can all your critical Intrigues
Of trying sound from rotten Eggs;
Your several Newfound Remedies,
Of curing Wounds, and Scabs in Trees;
Your Arts of Fluxing them from Claps,
And Purging their infected Saps,
Recov'ring Shankers, Chrystallines,
And Nodes and Botches in their Rindes,
Have no effect to operate
Upon that duller Block, your Pate,
But still it must be lewdly bent
To tempt your own due Punishment --?
And like your whimsey'd Chariots draw
The Boys to course you without Law?
^s if the Art you have so long
^rofest, of making old Dogs young,
In you had Virtue to renew
Not only Youth, but Childhood too.
Can you, that understand all Books
By judging only with your Looks,
Resolve all Problems with your Face,
As others do with B's, and A's,
Unriddle all that Mankind knows
With solid bending of your Brows,
All Arts and Sciences advance,
With screwing of your Countenance,
And with a penetrating Eye,
Into the abstrusest Learning pry,
Know more of any Trade b' a hint,
Than those that have been bred up in it*
And yet have no Art true, or false
To help your own bad Naturals?
But still the more you strive to appear,
Are found to be the wretcheder.
For Fools are known by looking wise,
As Men find Woodcocks by their Eyes.
Hence it is, that 'cause you have gai'nd of the College,
A Quarter-share (at most) of Knowledge,
And brought in none, but spent Repute,
Y' assume a Power as absolute
To Judge and Censure, and Control,
As if you were the sole Sir Poll
And saucily pretend to know
More then your Dividend comes to,
You Will find the thing will not be done,
With Ignorance, and Face alone:
No though y' have purchased to your Name,
In History so great a Fame,
That now your Talent's so well known,
For having all belief outgrown;
That every strange Prodigious Tale
Is measured by your German Scale, --
By which the Virtuosi try
The Magnitude of every Ly,
Cast up to what it does amount:
And place the big'st to your account.
That all those stories that are laid
Too truly to you, and those made,
Are now still charged upon your score,
And lesser Authors named no more.
Alas that Faculty destroys
Those soonest, it designs to raise.
And all your vain Renown will spoil,
As Guns o're-charg'd the more recoyl.
Though he that has but Impudence
To all things has a fair Pretense
And put among his wants, but shame,
To all the World may lay his claim:
Though you have tried that nothing's born
With greater ease than Public Scorn;
That all affronts do still give Place
To your Impenetrable Face;
That makes your way through all affairs,
As Pigs through Hedges creep with theirs.
Yet as it is Counterfeit and Brass
You must not think 'twill always pass;
For all Impostors, when they are known,
Are past their Labor, and undone.
And all the best that can befall
An Artificial Natural,
Is that which Madmen find, as soon
As once the are broke loose from the Moon
And proof against her Influence,
Relapse to e're so little Sense
To turn stark Fools, and Subjects fit
For sport of Boys, and Rabble-wit.
Annotations TO THE SECOND PART.
But now to observe, etc. THe beginning of this Second Part may perhaps seem
strange and abrupt to those who do not know, that it was written of purpose, in
imitation of Virgil, who begins the IV Book of his Aeneides in the very same
manner, At Regina gravi, etc. And this is enough to satisfy the curiosity of
those who believe that Invention and Fancy ought to be measured (like Cases in
Law) by Precedents, or else they are in the power of the Critic.

A Saxon Duke did grow so fat. This History of the Duke of Saxony, is not
altogether so strange as that of a Bishop his Countryman, who was quite eaten
up with Rats and Mice.

King Pyrrhus cured his Splenetick, And testy Courtiers with a kick. Pyrrhus
King of Epirus, who as Pliny says, had this occult Quality in his Toe, Pollicis
in dextro Pede tactu Lienosis medebatur. L. 7. C. 11.

In close Catasta shut, etc. Catasta is but a pair of Stocks in English, But
Heroical Poetry must not admit of any vulgar word (especially of paultry
signification) and therefore some of our Modern Authors are fain to import
foraign words from abroad, that were never before heard of in our Language.

'Twas he that made St. Francis do, etc. The Ancient Writers of the Lives of
Saints, were of the same sort of People, who first writ of Knight-Errantry, and
as in the one, they rendered the brave Actions of some very great Persons
ridiculous, by their prodigious Lies, and sottish way of describing them: So
they have abused the Piety of some very devout Persons, by imposing such
stories upon them, as this upon St. Francis.

This made the beauteous Queen of Crete. The History of Pasiphae is common
enough, only this may be observed, That though she brought the Bull a Son and
Heir; yet the Husband was fain to father it, as appears by the Name, perhaps
because the Country being an Island, he was within the four Seas, when the
Infant was begotten.

As your own Secretary Albertus. Albertus Magnus was a Sweedish Bishop, who
wrote a very Learned Work, De Secretis Mulierum.

Unless it be to squint and laugh. Pliny in his Natural History affirms, That
Vni animalium homini oculi depravantur, unde Cognomina Strabonum and Paetorum.
Lib. 2.

As Friar Bacon's Noddle was. The Tradition of Friar Bacon and the Brazen-Head,
is very commonly known, and considering the times he lived in, is not much more
strange then what another great Philosopher of his Name, has since delivered up
of a Ring, that being tied in a string, and held like a Pendulum in the middle
of a Silver Bowl, will vibrate of it self, and tell exactly against the sides
of the Divining Cup, the same thing with, Time is, Time was, etc.

Or like some Indians Sculls so tough, That Authors say the are Musket proof.
American Indians, among whom (the same Authors affirm) that there are others,
whose Sculls are so soft, to use their own words, Vt Digito perforari possunt.

Or Oracle from Heart of Oak. Jupiters Oracle in Epirus, near the City of
Dodona. Vbi Nemus erat Jovi sacrum, Querneum totum in quo Jovis Dodonaei
Templum fuisse narratur.

Semiramis of Babylon. Semiramis, Queen of Assyria, is said to be the first
that invented Eunuchs. Semiramis teneros mares castravit omnium Prima. Am.
Marcel. L. 14. p. 22. Which is something strange in a Lady of her Constitution,
who is said to have received Horses into her embraces (as another Queen did a
Bull) But that perhaps may be the reason, why she after thought Men not worth
the while.

For some Philosophers of late here. S.K.D. in his Book of Bodies; who has this
story of the German-Boy, which he endeavors to make good by several Natural
reasons; By which those who have the Dexterity to believe what they please, may
be fully satisfied of the probability of it.

A Persian Emp'ror whipped his Granum. Xerxes who used to whip the Seas and
Winds. In Little, atque Eurum solitus sevire flagellis, Juven. Sat. 10.

So the ancient Stoics in their Porch. In Porticu (Stoicorum Schola Athenis)
Discipulorum seditionibus, mill Quadringenti triginta Cives interfecti sunt
Diog. Laert. in vita Zenonis p. 383. Those old Virtuoso's were better
Proficients in those Exercises, than the Modern, who seldom improve higher than
Cuffing, and Kicking.

That Bonum is an Animal. Bonum is such a kind of Animal, as our Modern
Virtuosi, from Don Quixot, will have Windmils under sail to be. The same
Authors are of opinion, That all Ships are Fishes while they are afloat, but
when they are run on ground, or laid up in the Dock, become Ships again.

-- In a Town There lived a Cobbler, and but one. This History of the Cobbler has
been attested by Persons of good credit, who were upon the place when it was
done.

Have been exchanged for Tubs of Ale. The Knight was kept Prisoner in Exeter,
and after several exchanges proposed, but none accepted of, was at last
released for a Barrel of Ale, as he often used, upon all occasions, to declare.

Bore a Slave with him in his Chariot. -- Et sibi Consul. Ne placeat, curru
servus portatur eodem Juven. Sat 10.

Hung out their Mantles Della Guer. Tunica Coccinea solebat pridie quam
dimicandum esset, supra Praetorium poni quasi admonitio and indicium futurae
Pugnae Lipsius in Tacit. p. 56.

Next Links and Torches, etc. That the Roman Emperors were wont to have Torches
born before them (by day) in public, appears by Herodion in Portinance. Lip.
in Tacit. p. 16.

Vespatian being daubed with Dirt. C. Caesr succensens, propter curam verrendis
viis non adhibitam, Luto jussit oppleri, congesto per milites in praetextae
sinum. Sueton in Vespas. Ca. 5.

Has not this present Parliament, A Ledger to the Devil sent? The Witchfinder
in Suffolk, who in the Presbyterian times had a Commission to discover Witches,
(of whom (right or wrong) he caused 60 to be hanged within the compass of one
year, and among the rest an old Minister, who had been a painful Preacher for
many years.

Did he not help the Dutch to purge. At Antwerp their Cathedral Church? In the
beginning of the Civil Wars of Flanders, the common people of Antwerp, in a
tumult, broke open the Cathedral Church; to demolish Images and Shrines: and
did so much mischief in a small time, that Strada writes, There were several
Devils seen very busy among them, otherwise it had been impossible.

Sing Catches to the Saints at Mascon. This Devil of Mascon delivered all his
Oracles, like his Forefathers, in Verse, which he sung to Tunes: He made
several Lampoons upon the Hugonots, and foretold them many things, which
afterward came to pass; as may be seen in his Memoires, written in French.

Appear in diverse shapes to Kelly, And speak in the Nun at London's Belly. The
History of Dr. Dee and the Devil, published by Mer. Causabon, Isac. Fill.
Prebend of Canterbury, has a large account of all those Passages; in which the
style of the true and false Angels appears to be penned by one and the same
person. The Nun of London in France, and all her tricks have been seen by many
Persons of Quality of this Nation, yet living, who have made very good
observations upon the French Book written upon that occasion.

Meet with the Parliaments Committee At Woodstock on a Pers'nal Treaty. A
Committee of the long Parliament sitting in the King^ House in Woodstock-Park,
were terrified with several Apparitions, the particulars whereof were then the
News of the whole Nation.

At Sarum took a Cavalier. Withers has a long story in Doggerel, of a Soldier
of the Kings Army, who being a Prisoner at Sali^bury, and drinking a health to
the Devil upon his knees, was carried away by him through a single pane of
Glass.

Since old Hodg-Bacon. Roger Bacon, commonly called Friar Bacon, lived in the
Reign of our Edward the I. and for some little skill he had in the
Mathematics, was, by the Rabble, accounted a Conjurer, and had the sottish
story of the Brazen Head fathered upon him, by the ignorant Monks of those
days. Robert Grosthead was Bishop of Lincoln in the Reign of Hen. III. He was a
Learned Man for those times, and for that reason suspected by the Clergy to be
a Conjurer, for which crime being degraded by Pope Innocent the IV. and
Summoned to appear at Rome, he appealed to the Tribunal of Christ; which our
Lawyers say is illegal, if not a Praemunire, for offering to sue in a Foreign
Court.

Which Socrates and Chaerephon In vain assayed so long agone. Aristophanes in
his Comedy of the Clouds brings in Socrates and Chaerephon, measuring the Leap
of a Flea, from the ones Beard to the others.

Was raised by him, found out by Fisk. This Fisk was a late famous Astrologer,
who flourished about the time of Subtle and Face, and was equally celebrated by
Ben. Johnson.

Unless it be that Cannon-ball. This experiment was tried by some Foreign
Virtuoso's who planted a Piece of Ordnance point-blanc against the Zenith, and
having fired it, the Bullet never rebounded back again, which made them all
conclude, that it sticks in the mark; but Des Carts was of opinion, That it
does but hang in the Air.

As lately was revealed to Sedgwyck. This Sedgwyck had many Persons (and some
of Quality) that believed in him, and prepared to keep the day of Judgment with
him, but were disappointed; for which the false Prophet was afterward called
by the name of Doomesday Sedgwyck.

Your Modern Indian Magician, Makes but a hole in the Earth to piss in. This
compendious new way of Magic is affirmed by Monsieur Le Blanc (in his Travels)
to be used in the East Indies.

Bumbastus kept a Devils Bird, etc. Paracelsus is said to have kept a small
Devil prisoner in the Pummel of his Sword, which was the reason, perhaps, why
he was so valiant in his Drink; Howsoever it was to better purpose than Annibal
carried poison in his, to dispatch himself, if he should happen to be surpised
in any great extremity, for the Sword would have done the Feat alone, much
better, and more Soldier-like. And it was below the Honor of so great a
Commander, to go out of the World like a Rat.

Agrippa kept a Stygian Pug. Cornelius Agrippa had a Dog, that was suspected to
be a Spirit, for some tricks he was wont to do, beyond the capacity of a Dog,
as it was thought; but the Author of Magia Adamica has taken a great deal of
pains to vindicate both the Doctor and the Dog, from that aspersion, in which
he has shown a very great respect and kindness for them both.

As Averrhois played but a mean trick. Averrhois Astronomiam propter
Excentricos contempsit. Phil. Melancton in Elem. Phys. p. 781.

The Median Emp'ror dreamt his Daughter. Astyages King of Media had this Dream
of his Daughter Mandane, and the Interpretation from the Magi, wherefore he
married her to a Persian of mean quality, by whom she had Cyrus, who conquered
all Asia, and translated the Empire from the Medes to the Persians. Herodot. L.
2.

When Caesar in the Senate fell. Fiunt aliquando Prodigiosi, and longiores
Solis Defectus, quales occiso Caesare Dictatore and Antoniano Bello, totius
Anni Pallore continuo, Plin.

Augustus having b' oversight, etc. Divus Augustus Laevum sibi prodidit calceum
praepostere indutum, quo die seditione Militum prope afflictus est, Idem. Lib.
2.

The Roman Senate when within, The City Walls an Owl was seen. Romani L. Crasso
and C. Maria Coss. Bubone viso orbem lustrabant.

For Anaxagoras long agone, Saw Hills, as well as you, in the Moon. Anaxagoras
affirmabat Solemn Candens Ferrum esse, and Peloponesso majorem: Lunam habitacula
in se habere, and Colles, and Valles. Fertur dixisse Caelum omne ex Lapidibus
esse Compositum; Damnatus and in exilium pulsus est, quod impie, Solemn
Candentem laminam esse dixisset. Diogen. Laert. in Anaxag. p. 11.13.

The Egyptians say, the Sun has twice Shifted his Setting and his Rise.
Aegyptii December millia Annorum, and amplius, recensent; and observatum est in
hoc tanto Spatio, bis mutata esse Loca Ortuum and Occasuum solis; ita ut Sol
bis ortus sit ubi nunc occidit, and bis descenderit ubi nunc oritur. Phil.
Melanct. Lib. 1. p. 60.

Some hold the Heavens like a Top, Are kept by Circulation up. Causa quare
Caelum non cadit, (secundum Empedoclem) est velocitas sui motus, Comment. in L.
2. Aristot. de Caelo.

Plato believed the Sun and Moon Below all other Planets run. Plato Solemn and
Lunam caeteris Planetis inferiores esse putavit, G. Cunning. in Cosmogr. L. 1.
p. 11.

The Learned Scaliger complained. Copernicus in Libris Revolutionum, deinde
Reinholdus, post etiam Stadius, Mathematici nobiles perspicuis
Demonstrationibus docuerunt, solis Apsida Terris esse propriorem, quam
Ptolomaei aetate duodecim partibus, i. e. uno and triginta terrae
semidiametris. Jo. Bod. Met. Hist. p. 455.

Cardan believed great States depend, etc. Putat Cardanus, ab extrema Cauda
Helices seu Majori^ ursae omne magnum Imperium pendere. Id. p. 325.

Than the old Chaldean Conjurers In so many hundred thousand years. Chaldaei
jactant se quadringinta septuaginta Annorum millia in periclitandis,
experiundisque Puerorum Animis posuisse. Cicero.

Like Money by the Druids borrowed, etc. Druidae pecuniam mutuo accipiebant in
Posteriore vita redituri. Patricius Tom. 2. p. 97.

That paultry story is untrue, And forged to cheat such Gulls as you. There was
a notorious Idiot (that is here described by the Name and Character of Whacum)
who counterfeited a Second Part of Hudibras, as untowardly as Captain Po, who
could not write himself, and yet made a shift to stand on the Pillory, for
Forging other Men's Hands, as his Fellow Whachum, no doubt deserved; in whose
abominable Doggerel This story of Hudibras and a French Mountebank at
Brentford. Fair is as properly described.

That the vibration of this Pendulum, Shall make all Tailors Yards, of one
Unanimous opinion. The device of the Vibration of a Pendulum, was intended to
settle a certain Measure of Else and Yards, etc. (that should have its
foundation in Nature) all the World over; For by swinging a weight at the end
of a string, and calculating (by the motion of the Sun, or any Star) how long
the Vibration would last, in proportion to the length of the String, and weight
of the Pendulum; they thought to reduce it back again, and from any part of
time, compute the exact length of any string, that must necessarily vibrate in
so much space of time: So that if a man should ask in China for a Quarter of an
Hour of Satin or Taffeta, they would know perfectly what it meant. And all
Mankind learn a new way to measure things no more by the Yard, Foot, or Inch,
but by the Hour, Quarter, and Minute.

Before the Secular Prince of Darkness. As the Devil is the spiritual Prince of
Darkness, so is the Constable the Secular, who governs in the night with as
great Authority as his Colleague, but far more imperiously.

FINIS.
HUDIBRAS. THE Third and Last PART.

Written by the AUTHOR OF THE FIRST and SECOND PARTS.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Horn, and are to be sold by Tho. Basset at the
George in Fleet Street. 1684.

Licensed and Entered according to the Act of Parliament for Printing.

HUDIBRAS. The Third and Last Part.
The ARGUMENT of the FIRST CANTO of the Third Part.
The Knight and Squire resolve at once,
The one the other to renounce.
They both approach the Lady's Bower,
The Squire to inform, the Knight to woo her.
She treats them with a Masquerade,
By Furies and Hobgoblins made:
From which the Squire conveys the Knight,
And steals him, from himself, by Night.
CANTO I.
IT IS true, no Lover has that Power
TO enforce a desperate Amor,
As he that has two Strings to's Bow,
And burns for Love and Money too:
For then he is brave and Resolute,
Disdains to render in his Suit,
Has all his Flames and Raptures double,
And hangs or drowns with half the trouble.
While those who sillily pursue
The simple downright way, and true,
Make as unlucky Applications,
And steer against the Stream their Passions.
Some forge their Mistresses of Stars,
And when the Ladies prove averse,
And more untoward to be won,
Than by Caligula the Moon,
Cry out upon the Stars for doing
Ill Offices to cross their wooing;
When only by themselves they are hindered,
For trusting those they made her Kindred:
And still the harsher and hide-bounder
The Damsels prove, become the fonder.
For what mad Lover ever died,
To gain a soft and gentle Bride?
Or for a Lady tenderhearted,
In purling Streams or Hemp departed?
Leaped headlong int' Elysium,
Through the Windows of a dazzling Room?
But for some cross ill-natured Dame,
The amo'rous Fly burnt in his flame.
This to the Knight could be no News,
With all Mankind so much in use;
Who therefore took the wiser course,
To make the most of his Amors,
Resolved to try all sorts of ways,
As follows in due Time and Place.
No sooner was the bloody Fight
Between the Wizard and the Knight
With all the Appurtenances over,
But he relapsed again to a Lover:
As he was always wont to do
When h' had discomfited a Foe,
And used the only Antic Philters
Derived from old Heroic Tilters.
But now Triumphant and Victorious,
He held the Achievement was too glorious
For such a Conqueror, to meddle
With Pettey Constable, or Beadle;
Or fly for Refuge to the Hostess
Of the Inns of Court and Chanc'ry, Justice:
Who might, perhaps, reduce his Cause
To the Ordeal Trial of the Laws;
Where none escape, but such as branded
With red-hot Irons have past Bare-handed;
And if they cannot read one Verse
In The Psalms, must sing it, and that is worse.
He therefore, judging it below him,
To tempt a shame the Devil might owe him,
Resolved to leave the Squire for Bail
And Mainprize for him, to the Gaol,
To answer, with his Vessel, all
That might disastrously befall.
He thought it now the fittest juncture,
To give the Lady a Rencounter;
TO acquaint her with his Expedition,
And Conquest over the fierce Magician;
Describe the manner of the Fray,
And show the spoils he brought away;
His bloody Scourging aggravate,
The Number of the Blows and Weight:
All which might probably succeed,
And gain belief h' had done the deed.
Which he resolved to enforce, and spare
No pawning of his Soul, to swear;
But, rather than produce his Back:
To set his Conscience on the Rack:
And, in pursuance of his urging
Of Articles performed, and scourging,
And all things else upon his part,
Demand deliv'ry of her Heart,
Her Goods, and Chattels, and good Graces,
And Person, up to his embraces.
Thought he, the ancient Errant Knights
Won all their Ladies Hearts in Fights,
And cut whole Giants into Fitters,
To put them into amorous twitters;
Whose stubborn Bowels scorned to yield
Until their Gallants were half killed:
But when their Bones were drubb'd so sore
They durst not woo one Combat more,
The Ladies Hearts began to melt,
Subdued with Blows their Lovers felt,
So Spanish Heroes with their Lances
At once wound Bulls and Ladies fancies:
And he acquires the noblest Spouse
That Widows greatest Herds of Cows.
Then what may I expect to do,
Wh' have quelled so vast a Buffalo?
Mean while the Squire was on his way,
The Knight's late Orders to obey;
Who sent him for a strong Detachment
Of Beadles, Constables, and Watchmen,
T'attack the Cunning-man for Plunder
Committed falsely on his Lumber,
When he, who had so lately sacked
The Enemy, had done the Fact,
Had rifled all his Pokes and Fobs
Of Gimcracks, Whims and Jiggumbobs,
Which he by hook or crook had gathered,
And for his own Inventions fathered:
And when they should, at Jail-deliver,
Unriddle one another's Thievery,
Both might have evidence enough
To render neither halter-proof.
He thought it desperate to tarry,
And venture to be Accessory:
But rather wisely slip his Fetters,
And leave them for the Knight, his Betters.
He called to mind the unjust foul play
He would have offered him that day,
To make him curry his own Hide,
Which no Beast ever did beside,
Without all possible evasion,
But of the Riding Dispensation.
And therefore much about the hour,
The Knight (for reasons told before)
Resolved to leave him to the Fury
Of Justice and an unpack'd Jury,
The Squire concurred to abandon him,
And serve him in the self-same Trim;
TO acquaint the Lady what h' had done,
And what he meant to carry on;
What Project 'twas he went about,
When Sidrophel and he fell out;
His firm and steadfast Resolution,
To swear her to an Execution;
To pawn his inward Ears, to marry her.
And Bribe the Devil himself to carry her.
In which both dealt, as if they meant
Their Party Saints to represent,
Who never failed, upon their sharing
In any Prosperous Arms-Bearing,
To lay themselves out, to supplant
Each other Cosin-German Saint.
But ever the Knight could do his Part,
The Squire had got so much the Start,
H' had to the Lady done his Errand,
And told her all his Tricks aforehand.
Just as he finished his Report,
The Knight alighted in the Court;
And having tied his Beast to a Pale,
And taken time for both to stale*
He put his Band and Beard in order,
The Sprucer to accost and board her;
And now began to approach the Door:
When she, wh' had spied him out before,
Conveyed the Informer out of sight,
And went to entertain the Knight.
With whom encountering after Longees
Of humble and submissive Congees,
And all due Ceremonies paid,
He stroak'd his Beard, and thus he said:
Madam, I do, as is my Duty,
Honor the Shadow of your Shoe-tye:
And now am come, to bring your Ear
A Present you will be glad to hear;
At least I hope so. The thing's done,
Or may I never see the Sun;
For which I humbly now demand
Performance at your gentle Hand:
And that you would please to do your part,
As I have done mine to my smart.
With that he shrugg'd his sturdy Back,
As if he felt his Shoulders ache.
But she, who well enough knew what
(Before he spoke) he would be at,
Pretended not to apprehend
The Mystery of what he mean'd:
And therefore wished him to expound
His dark expressions less profound.
Madam, quoth he, I come to prove
How much I Have suffered for your Love,
Which (like your Votary) to win,
I have not spared my tattered skin:
And, for those meritorious Lashes,
To claim your favor and good Graces,
Quoth she, I do remember once
I freed you from the enchanted Sconce;
And that you promised, for that favor,
To bind your Back to the good Behavior,
And for my Sake and Service vowed
To lay upon it a heavy Load,
And what 'twould bear to a scruple prove,
As other Knights do often make love.
Which, whether you have done or no,
Concerns your self, not me, to know.
But if you have, I shall Confess,
Y' are honester than I could guess.
Quoth he, If you suspect my troth,
I cannot prove it but by Oath;
And, if you make a question on it,
I Will pawn my Soul, that I have don't.
And he that makes his Soul his Surety,
I think, does give the best security.
Quoth she, Some say, the Soul's secure
Against Distress and Forfeiture;
Is free from Action, and exempt
From Execution and Contempt;
And to be summoned to appear
In the other World, s'illegal here:
And therefore few make any account,
Int' what encumbrances they run't.
For most men carry things so even
Between this World, and Hell and Heaven,
Without the least offense to either,
They freely deal in all together;
And equally abhor to quit
This World for both, or both for it.
And when they pawn and damn their Souls,
They are but Prisoners on Parols.
For that, quoth he, it is rational,
They may be accomptable in all.
For when there is that intercourse
Between Divine and Humane Powers,
That all that we determine here
Commands Obedience every where;
When Penalties may be commuted
For Fines, or Ears, and Executed;
It follows, nothing binds so fast
As Souls in Pawn and Mortgage past.
For Oaths are the only Tests and Scales
Of right and wrong, and true and false;
And there is no other way to try
The Doubts of Law and Justice by.
Quoth she, What is it you would swear?
There Is no believing till I hear:
For till the are understood, all Tales
(Like Nonsense) are not True, nor False.
Quoth he, When I resolved to obey
What you commanded the other day,
And to perform my Exercise,
(As Schools are wont) for your fair eyes;
TO avoid all Scruples in the Case,
I went to do it upon the Place.
But as the Castle is enchanted
By Sidrophel the Witch, and haunted
With evil Spirits, as you know,
Who took my Squire and me for two;
Before I Would hardly time to lay
My weapons by, and dis-array,
I heard a Formidable Noise,
Loud as the Stentrophonick Voice,
That Roared far off, Dispatch and Strip,
I Am ready with the Infernal Whip,
That shall divest thy Ribs of Skin,
To expiate thy lingering Sin.
The have broke perfidiously thy Oath,
And not performed thy plighted Troth;
But spared thy Renegado Back,
Where the had so great a Prize at Stake:
Which now the Fates have ordered me
For Penance, and Revenge to Flay,
Unless thou presently make haste.
Time is, Time was: and there it ceased.
With which though startled, I confess,
Yet the Horror of the thing was less
Than the other Dismal apprehension
Of Interruption or Prevention.
And therefore snatching up the Rod,
I laid upon my Back a load;
Resolved to spare no Flesh and Blood,
To make my Word and Honor good.
Till tired, and taking Truce at length,
For new Recruits of Breath and Strength,
I felt the Blows still plied as fast,
As if the had been by Lovers placed
In Raptures of Platonic Lashing,
And chaste Contemplative Bardashing.
When facing hastily about,
To stand upon my Guard and Scout,
I found the Infernal Cunning-man,
And the Vnder-witch, his Caliban,
With Scourges (like the Furies) armed,
That on my outward Quarters stormed.
In haste I snatched my Weapon up,
And gave their Hellish Rage a stop;
Called thrice upon your Name, and fell
Courageously on Sidrophel:
Who now transformed himself to a Bear,
Began to roar aloud and tear;
When I as furiously pressed on,
My Weapon down his Throat to run,
Laid hold on him: but he brok loose,
And turned himself into a Goose,
Dived under Water, in a Pond,
To hide himself from being found.
In vain I sought him, but as soon
As I perceived him fled and gone,
Prepared with equal Haste and Rage,
His Vnder-Sorcerer to engage.
But bravely Scorning to defile
My Sword with feeble blood and vile;
I judged it better from a Quick-Set-Hedge
to cut a knotted Stick,
With which I furiously laid on;
Till in a harsh and doleful tone
It roared, Oh hold for pity, Sir,
I am too great a Sufferer,
Abused, as you have been, b' a Witch,
But conjured int' a worse Caprich:
Who sends me out on many a Jaunt,
Old Houses in the Night to haunt,
For opportunities to improve
Designs of Thievery or Love;
With Drugs conveyed in Drink or Meat,
All Feats of Witches counterfeit;
Kill Pigs and Geese with poudred Glass,
And make it for Enchantments pass,
With Cow-itch meazle like a Leper,
And choke with Fumes of Guiny-Pepper;
Make Lechers and their Punks with Dewtry
Comm^t fantastical Advowtry;
Bewitch Hermetick-men to run
Stark staring mad with Manicon;
Believe Mechanic Virtuosi
Can raise 'em Mountains in Potosi;
And ^^llier than the Antic Fools,
Take Treasure for a Heap of Coals:
Seek out for Plants with Signatures,
To Quack of Universal Cures;
With Figures ground on pa^es of Glass,
Make People on their Heads to pass;
And mighty heaps of Coin increase,
Reflected from a single piece:
To draw in Fools, whose Natural Itches
Incline perpetually to Witches;
And keep me in continual Fears,
And Danger of my Neck and Ears:
When less Delinquent have been scourged,
And Hemp on wooden Anvils forged,
Which others for Cravats have worn
About their Necks, and took a Turn.
I pitied the sad Pu^ishment
The wretched Caitiff underwent,
And held my Drubbing of his Bones
Too great an Honor for Pultrones;
For Knights are bound to feel no Blows
From paltry and unequal Foes,
Who when they slash and cut to pieces,
Do all with civillest Addresses:
Their Horses never give a Blow,
But when they make a Leg and Bow.
I therefore spared his Flesh, and pressed him
About the Witch, with many a Question.
Quoth he, For many Years he drove
A kind of Broking-Trade in Love,
Employed in all the Intrigues and Trust
Of feeble Speculative Lust;
Procurer to the Extravagancy
And crazy Ribaldry of Fancy.
By those the Devil had forsook,
As things below to him, to provoke.
But b'ing a Vertuoso, able
To Smatter, Quack, and Cant, and Dabble,
He held his Talent most Adroit
For any Mystical Exploit;
As others of his Tribe had done,
And raised their Prizes Three to One.
For one Predicting Pimp has the Ods
Of Chauldrons of plain downright Bauds.
But as an Elf (the Devils Valet)
Is not so slight a thing to get,
For those that do his business best,
In Hell are used the ruggedest;
Before so meriting a Person
Could get a Grant, but in Reversion,
He served two Prentiships and longer
IN the Mystery of a Lady-Monger.
For (as some write) A Witche's Ghost,
As soon as from the Body loosed,
Becomes a Puiny-Imp it self,
And is another Witche's Elf.
He after searching far and near,
At length found one in Lancashire,
With whom he bargained beforehand,
And, after Hanging, entertained.
Since which h'has played a thousand Feats,
And practiced all Mechanic Cheats:
Transformed himself to the ugly Shapes
Of Wolves, and Bears, Baboons, and Apes;
Which he has varied more than Witches,
Or Pharaoh 's Wizards could their Switches;
And all with whom h'has had to do,
Turned to as Monstrous Figures too.
Witness my self, whom h' has abused,
And to this Beastly shape reduced,
By feeding me on Beans and Pease,
He crams in nasty Crevises,
And turns to Comfits by his Arts,
To make me relish for Disserts,
And one by one with Shame and Fear
Lick up the candid Provender.
Beside -- But as h'was running on,
To tell what other Feats he had done,
The Lady stopped his full Career,
And told him, now 'twas time to hear:
If half those things (said she) be true,
(The are all (quoth he) I swear by you:)
Why then (said she) that Sidrophel
Has damned himself to the Pit of Hell;
Who, mounted on a Broom, the Nag
And Hackney of a Lapland Hag,
In Quest of you came hither Post,
Within an Hour (I Am sure) at most;
Who told me all you swear and say,
Quite contrary another way;
Vowed, that you came to him to know
If you should carry me or no;
And would have hired him and his Imps,
To be your Match-makers and Pimps,
TO engage the Devil on your Side,
And steal (like Proserpine) your Bride.
But he disdaining to embrace
So filthy a Design, and base,
You fell to vapouring and huffing,
And drew upon him, like a Ruffin;
Surpised him meanly, unprepared,
Before he had time to mount his Guard;
And left him dead upon the Ground,
With many a Bruise, and desperate wound:
Swore you had broke and robbed his House,
And stole his Talismanique Louse,
And all his Newfound Old Inventions,
With flat Felonious Intentions;
Which he could bring out, where he had,
And what he bought 'em for and paid;
His Flea, his Morpion, and Punese,
He Had gotten for his proper ease,
And all in perfect Minutes made,
By the ablest Artists of the Trade;
Which (he could prove it) since he lost,
He has been eaten up almost;
And all together might amount
To many hundreds on account:
For which he had got sufficient warrant
To seize the Malefactors Errant,
Without capacity of Bail,
But of a Cart's or Horse's Tail;
And did not doubt to bring the Wretches,
To serve for Pendulums to Watches;
Which modern Virtuoso's say,
Incline to Hanging every way.
Beside he swore, and swore 'twas true,
That er'e he went in Quest of you,
He set a Figure to discover
If you were fled to Rye or Dover;
And found it clear, that, to betray
Your selves and me, you fled this way;
And that he was upon pursuit,
To take you somewhere hereabout.
He vowed he had had Intelligence
Of all that past before and since:
And found, that ere you came to him,
Y' had been engaging Life and Lim
About a case of tender Conscience,
Where both abounded in your own Sense;
Till Ralpho, by his Light and Grace,
Had cleared all Scruples in the Case;
And proved that you might swear, and own
Whatever's by the Wicked done.
For which, most basely to requite
The Service of his Gifts and Light,
You strove to oblige him by main force,
To Scourge his Ribs instead of yours,
But that he stood upon his Guard,
And all your vapouring out-dar'd:
For which, between you both, the Feat
Has never been performed as yet.
While thus the Lady talked, the Knight
Turned the outside of his eyes to white.
(As Men of Inward Light are wont
To turn their Optics in upon it.)
He wondered how she came to know
What he had done, and meant to do:
Held up his Affidavit hand,
As if he had been to be arraigned:
Cast toward the Door a ghastly Look,
In dread of Sidrophel, and spoke.
Madam, if but one Word be true
Of all the Wizard had told you,
Or but one single Circumstance
In all the Apocryphal Romance,
May dreadful Earthquakes swallow down
This Vessel, that is all your own;
Or may the Heavens fall, and cover
These Relics of your constant Lover.
You have provided well, quoth she,
(I thank you) for your self and me;
And shown your Presbyterian Wits
Jump punctual with the Jesuits.
A most compendious way and civil,
At once to cheat the World, the Devil,
And Heaven and Hell, your selves and those
On whom you vainly think to impose.
Why then ( quoth he) may Hell surprise.
That trick ( said she) will not pass twice:
I Have learned how far I Am to believe
Your pinning Oaths upon your Sleeve.
But there is a better way of Clearing
What you would prove, than downright Swearing;
For if you have performed the Feat,
The Blows are visible as yet
Enough to serve for satisfaction
Of nicest scruples in the Action.
And if you can produce those Knobs,
Although the are but the Witche's Drubs,
I Will pass them all upon account,
As if your natural self had don't.
Provided that they pass the Opinion
Of able Juries of old Women,
Who, used to judge all matt'r of Facts
For Bellies, may do so for Backs.
Madam, (quoth he) your Love's a Million,
To do is less than to be willing,
As I am, were it in my power,
TO obey what you command, and more.
But for performing what you bid,
I thank you as much as if I did.
You know I ought to have a care
To keep my Wounds from taking Air:
For Wounds in those that are all Heart
Are dangerous in any Part.
I find (quoth she) my Goods and Chattels
Are like to prove but mere drawn Battles;
For still the longer we contend,
We are but farther off the end.
But granting now we should agree,
What is it you expect from me?
Your plighted Faith (quoth he) and Word
You past in Heaven on Record,
Where all Contracts, to have and to hold,
Are everlastingly enrolled.
And if it is counted Treason, here
To race Records, it is much more there.
Quoth she, There are no Bargains driven
Nor Marriages clapped up in Heaven:
And that is the reason, as some guess,
There is no Heaven in Marriages;
Two things that naturally press
Too narrowly, to be at ease.
Their business there is only Love,
Which Marriage is not like to improve.
Love, that is too generous, to abide
To be against its Nature tied:
For where it is of it self inclined,
It breaks loose when it is confined;
And, like the Soul, its harbour^r,
Debarred the freedom of the Air,
Disdains against its will to stay,
But struggles out, and flies away:
And therefore never can comply,
TO endure the Matrimonial tie,
That binds the Female and the Male,
Where the one is but the other's Bail;
Like Roman Gaolers, when they slept,
Chained to the Prisoners they kept.
Of which the True and Faithfull'st Lover
Gives best security to suffer.
Marriage is but a Beast, some say,
That carries double in foul way;
And therefore it is not to b' admired
It should so suddenly be tired:
A Bargain at a venture made
Between two Part'ners in a Trade,
(For what is inferred by TO have and to hold,
But something past away, and sold?)
That as it makes but one of two,
Reduces all things else as low:
And at the best is but a Mart
Between the one and the other part,
That on the Marriage-day is paid,
Or hour of Death, the Bet it laid.
And all the rest of Bett'r or worse
Both are but losers out of Purse.
For when upon their ungot Heirs
The intail themselves, and all that is theirs,
What blinder Bargain e're was driven,
Or Wager laid at six and seven?
To pass themselves away, and turn
Their Children's Tenants e're the are born?
Beg one another Idiot
To Guardians, e're they are begot;
Or ever shall, perhaps, by the one,
Who Is bound to vouch 'em for his own,
Though got b' Implicit Generation,
And General Club of all the Nation:
For which she is fortified no less
Then all the Island, with four Seas
Exacts the Tribute of her Dower
In ready Insolence and Power;
And makes him pass away, to Have
And Hold, to her, himself, her slave,
More wretched then an Ancient Villain,
Condemned to Drudgery and Tilling;
While all he does upon the By,
She is not bound to justify,
Nor at her proper cost and charge
Maintain the Feats he does at large.
Such hideous Sots were those obedient
Old Vassals to their Ladies Regent;
To give the Cheats the Eldest hand
In Foul Play, by the Laws of the Land;
For which so many a legal Cuckold
Has been run down in Courts, and truckled.
A Law that most unjustly yokes
All John's of Styles to Joans of Nokes,
Without distinction of Degree,
Condition, Age, or Quality;
Admits no Power of Revocation,
Nor valuable Consideration,
Nor Writ of Error, nor Reverse
Of Judgment past For better or worse;
Will not allow the Privileges
That Beggars challenge under Hedges,
Who, when the are grieved, can make dead Horses
Their Spiritual Judges of Divorces;
While nothing else but Rem in Re,
Can set the proudest wretches free:
A Slavery beyond enduring,
But that it is of their own procuring.
As Spiders never seek the Fly,
But leave him, of himself to apply:
So men are by themselves betrayed,
To quit the freedom they enjoyed,
And run their Necks into a Nooze,
They'ld break 'em after, to break loose.
As some, whom Death would not depart,
Have done the Feat themselves by Art.
Like Indian-Widows, gone to bed
In flaming Curtains to the Dead:
And Men as often dangled for it,
And yet will never leave the Sport.
Nor do the Ladies want excuse
For all the Stratagems they use,
To gain the advantage of the Set,
And lurch the Amorous Rook and Cheat.
For, as a Pythagorean Soul
Runs through all Beasts, and Fish, and Fowl,
And has a smack of every one;
So Love does, and has ever done.
And therefore, though it is never so fond,
Takes strangely to the Vagabond.
It Is but an Ague that is reverst,
Whose hot fit takes the Patient first,
That after burns with cold as much
As Ir'n in Greenland does the touch;
Melts in the Furnace of desire,
Like Glass, that is but the Ice of Fire;
And when his heat of Fancy's over,
Becomes as hard and frail a Lover.
For when he is with Love-powder laden,
And Prim'd and Cocked by Miss, or Madam,
The smallest sparkle of an Eye
Gives Fire to his Artillery;
And off the loud Oaths go, but while
The are in the very Act, recoil.
Hence it is, so few dare take their chance
Without a separate maintenance:
And Widows, who have tried one Lover,
Trust none again, till the have made over.
Or if they do, before they marry,
The Foxes weigh the Geese they carry:
And e're they venture over a stream,
Know how to size themselves and them.
Whence witty'st Ladies aways choose
To undertake the heaviest Goose.
For now the World is grown so wary,
That few of either Sex dare marry,
But rather trust on tick to Amors,
The Cross and Pile for Bett'r or Worse:
A Mode that is held honorable,
As well as French and fashionable.
For when it falls out for the best,
Where both are incommoded least,
In Soul and Body two unite,
To make up one Hermaphrodite;
Still Amorous, and Fond, and Billing,
Like Philip and Mary on a Shilling,
The have more Punctilio's and Capriches
Between the Petticoat and Breeches,
More petulant Extravagancies,
Then Poets make 'em in Romances.
Though, when the Heroes 'spouse the Dames,
We here no more of Charms and Flames:
For then their late attracts decline,
And turn as eager as Pricked Wine;
And all their Catterwaulling tricks,
In earnest to as jealous Piques:
Which the Ancients wisely signified,
By the yellow Manto's of the Bride.
For Jealousy is but a kind
Of Clap and Grincam of the Mind,
The natural effect of Love,
As other Flames and Aches prove:
But all the mischief is, the doubt
On whose account they first broke out.
For though Chinese go to Bed,
And lie in in their Ladies stead,
And for the pains they took before,
Are nursed and pampered to do more:
Our Green-men do it worse, when the hap
To fall in labor of a Clap;
Both lay the Child to one another:
But who is the Father, who the Mother,
It Is hard to say in Multitudes,
Or who imported the French Goods.
But Health and Sickness b'ing all one,
Which both engaged before to own,
And are not with their Bodies bound
To Worship only when the are sound;
Both give and take their equal shares
Of all they suffer by false Wares:
A Fate no Lover can divert
With all his caution, Wit, and Art.
For it is in vain to think to guess
At Women by Appearances,
That Paint and Patch their Imperfections
Of Intellectual Complexions,
And daub their Tempers over with Washes
As artificial as their Faces;
Wear under Vizard-Masks their Talents
And Mother Wits before their Gallants;
Until the are hampered in the Nooze,
Too fast to dream of breaking loose:
When all the Flaws they strove to hide
Are made unready, with the Bride,
That with her Wedding-cloaths undresses
Her Complaisance and Gentilesses;
Tries all her Arts, to take upon her
The Government from the easy owner,
Until the Wretch is glad to wave
His lawful Right, and turn her Slave;
Finds all his Having, and his Holding,
Reduced to eternal Noise and Scolding,
The Conjugal Petard, that tears
Down all Portcullices of Ears,
And makes the Volly of one Tongue
For all their Leathern Shields too strong,
When only armed with Noise and Nails,
The Female Silkworms ride the Males,
Transformed 'em into Rams and Goats,
Like Sirens with their charming Notes,
Sweet as a Screech-Owl's Senerade,
Or those enchanting murmurs made
By the Husband Mandrake and the Wife,
Both buried (like themselves) alive.
Quoth he, these Reasons are but strains
Of wanton, overheated Brains,
Which Ralliers in their Wit or Drink
Do rather wheedle with, than think.
Man was not Man in Paradise,
Until he was Created twice,
And had his better half, His Bride,
Carved from the Original, his side,
TO amend his Natural defects,
And perfect his recruited Sex,
Enlarge his Breed, at once, and lessen
The Pains and Labor of increasing,
By changing them for other cares,
As by his dried up-Paps appears.
His Body, that stupendous Frame,
Of all the World the Anagram,
Is of two equal parts compact
In Shape and Symmetry exact.
Of which the Left and Female side
Is to the Manly Right a Bride;
Both joined together with such Art,
That nothing else but Death can part.
Those Heavenly attracts of yours, your Eyes,
And Face, that all the World surprise,
That dazzle all that look upon ye,
And scorch all other Ladies Tawny;
Those ravishing and charming Graces,
Are all made up of two Half Faces,
That in a Mathematick Line,
Like those in other Heavens, join.
Of which if either grew alone,
'Twould fright as much to look upon:
And so would that sweet Bud, your Lip,
Without the other's fellowship.
Our Noblest Senses act by Pairs,
Two Eyes to see, to hear two Ears;
The Intelligencers of the Mind,
To wait upon the Soul designed.
But those that serve the Body alone,
Are single and confined to one.
The World is but two Parts, that meet,
And close at the Aequinoctial, fit;
And so are all the Works of Nature,
Stamped with her signature on Matter;
Which all her Creatures, to a Leaf,
Or smallest Blade of Grass, receive.
All which sufficiently declare
How entirely Marriage is her care,
The only method that she uses,
In all the wonders she produces.
And those that take their rules from her,
Can never be deceived, nor err.
For what secures the Civil Life
But pawns of Children and a Wife;
That lie, like Hostages, at stake,
To pay for all Men undertake?
To whom it is as Necessary,
As to be born and breath, to marry;
So Universal, all Mankind
In nothing else is of one mind.
For in what stupid Age, or Nation,
Was Marriage ever out of Fashion?
Unless among the Amazons,
Or Vestal Friars, and Cloistered Nuns,
Or Stoics, who to bar the Freaks
And loose Excesses of the Sex,
Preposterously would have all Women
Turned up to all the World in common.
Though Men would find such mortal Fewds
In sharing of their public Goods,
'Twould put them to more charge of Lives,
Than the are supplied with now by Wives;
Until they Graze, and wear their Clothes,
As Beasts do, of their Native Growths:
For simple wearing of their Horns,
Will not suffice to serve their turns.
For what can we pretend to inherit,
Unless the Marriage-deed will bear it?
Could claim no Right to Lands or Rents,
But for our Parents settlements.
Had been but younger Sons of the Earth,
Debarred it all, but for our Birth.
What Honors, or Estates of Peers
Could be preserved but by their Heirs?
And what security maintains
Their Right and Title, but the Banes?
What Crowns could be Hereditary,
If greatest Monarchs did not marry,
And with their Consorts consummate
Their weightiest Interest of State?
For all the Amors of Princes are
But Guarranties of Peace or War.
Or what but Marriage has a Charm,
The Rage of Empires to disarm,
Make Blood and Desolation cease,
And Fire and Sword unite in Peace,
When all their fierce contests for Forage
Conclude in Articles of Marriage?
Nor does the Genial Bed provide
Less for the Interests of the Bride;
Who else had not the least Pretense
TO as much as Due Benevolence;
Could no more Title take upon her
To Virtue, Quality, and Honor,
Than Ladies Errant, unconfined,
And Feme-Coverts to all Mankind.
All Women would be of one piece,
The virtuous Matron, and the Miss;
The Nymphs of chaste Diana's Train,
The same with those in Lewkner's-lane;
But for the difference Marriage makes
'Twixt Wives, and Ladies of the Lakes.
Besides, the joys of Place and Birth,
The Sexes Paradise on Earth;
A privilege so sacred held,
That none will to their Mothers yield;
But rather than not go before,
Abandon Heaven at the Door.
And if the indulgent Law allows
A greater freedom to the Spouse;
The reason is, because the Wife
Runs greater hazards of her Life;
Is trusted with the Form and Matter
Of all Mankind by careful Nature.
Where Man brings nothing but the Stuff,
She frames the wondrous Fabric of:
Who therefore, in a straight, may freely
Demand the Clergy of her Belly,
And make it save her, the same way,
It seldom misses to betray.
Unless both Parties wisely enter
Into the Liturgy-Indenture.
And though some fits of small contest
Sometimes fall out among the Best,
That is no more than every Lover
Does from his Hackney-Lady suffer,
That makes no Breach of Faith and Love,
But rather (sometime) serves to improve.
For, as in Running, every Pace
Is but between two Legs a Race,
In which both do their uttermost
To get before, and win the Post;
Yet when the are at their race's ends,
The are still as kind and constant friends,
And to relieve their weariness,
By turns give one another ease:
So all those false Alarms of strife
Between the Husband and the Wife,
And little Quarrels, often prove
To be but new recruits of Love.
When those wh' are always kind or coy,
In time must either Tire, or Cloy.
Nor are their loudest Clamours more,
Than as the are relished, Sweet, or Sour:
Like Music, that proves bad, or good,
According as it is understood.
In all Amors a Lover burns,
With Frowns, as well as Smiles, by turns
And Hearts have been as often with sullen,
As charming looks, surpised and stolen.
Then why should more bewitching Clamor
Some Lovers not as much enamour?
For Discords make the sweetest Airs,
And Curses are a kind of Prayers,
Too slight Alloys for all those grand
Felicities by Marriage gained.
For nothing else has power to settle
The interests of Love perpetual.
An Act and Deed that makes one Heart
Become another's Counter-part,
And passes Fines on Faith and Love,
Enrolled and Registered above,
To seal the slippery knot of Vows,
Which nothing else but Death can loose.
And what Security's too strong
To guard that gentle Heart from wrong,
That to its Friend is glad to pass
It self away, and all it has;
And, like an Anchorite, gives over
This World, for the Heaven of a Lover?
I grant (quoth she) there are some few
Who take that course, and find it true:
But Millions, whom the same does sentence
To Heaven b' another way, Repentance.
Love's Arrows are but shot at Rovers,
Though all they hit they turn to Lovers.
And all the weighty consequents
Depend upon more blind events
Than Gamesters, when they play a Set
With greatest cunning at Piquet,
Put out with caution, but take in
They know not what, unsight-unseen.
For what do Lovers, when the are fast
In one another's Arms embraced,
But strive to plunder, and convey.
Each other, like a Prize, away?
To change the property of selves,
As sucking Children are by Elves?
And if they use their Persons so,
What will they to their Fortunes do?
Their Fortunes! the perpetual aims
Of all their Ecstasies and Flames.
For when the Money's on the Book,
And All my Worldly Goods -- but spoke;
(The Formal Livery and Seisin
That puts a Lover in possession)
To that alone the Bridegroom's wedded,
The Bride a Flam that is superseded.
To that their Faith is still made good,
And all the Oaths to us they vowed,
For when we once resign our Powers,
W' have nothing left we can call ours.
Our Money's now become the Miss,
Of all your Lives and Services;
And we forsaken, and Post-pon'd,
But Bawds to what before we owned.
Which as it made y' at first Gallant us,
So now hires others to supplant us,
Until it is all turned out of doors,
(As we had been) for new Amors.
For what did ever Heiress yet
By being born to Lordships get?
When the more Lady sh' is of Manors,
She Is but exposed to more Trepanners,
Pays for their Projects and Designs,
And for her own destruction Fines,
And does but tempt them with her Riches,
To use her as the Devilish does Witches;
Who takes it for a special Grace,
To be their Cully for a space,
That, when the time's expired, the Drazels
For ever may become his Vassals.
So she, bewitched by Rooks and Spirits,
Betrays her self, and all sh' inherits
Is bought and sold, like stolen Goods,
By Pimps, and Match-makers, and Bawds:
Until they force her to convey,
And steal the Thief himself away.
These are the everlasting Fruits
Of all your passionate Love-suits,
The effects of all your amorous Fancies
To Portions and Inheritances,
Your Lovesick Raptures for Fruition
Of Dowry, Jointure, and Tuition;
To which you make Address and Courtship,
And with your Bodies strive to Worship,
That the Infant's Fortunes may partake
Of Love too for the Mother's sake.
For these, you play at Purposes,
And love your Loves with A's and B's:
For these, at Beast and L'hombre woo,
And play for Love and Money too;
Strive who shall be the ablest Man
At right Gallanting of a Fan,
And who the most Gentilely bred
At sucking of a Vizard Bead,
How best to accost us in all Quarters
TO our question-and-command New Garters,
And solidly discourse upon
All sorts of Dresses Pro and Con.
For there is no Mystery nor Trade,
But in the Art of Love is made.
And when you have more Debts to pay
Than Michaelmas and Lady Day,
And no way possible to do it,
But Love and Oaths and restless Suit,
To us y' apply, to pay the Scores
Of all your cully'd past Amors;
Act over your Flames and Darts again,
And charge us with your wounds and pain,
Which others influences long since
Have charmed your Noses with, and Shins;
For which the Surgeon is unpaid,
And like to be, without our aid.
Lord! what an Amorous thing is Want!
How Debts and Mortgages inchant!
What Graces must that Lady have,
That can from Executions save!
What Charms, that can reverse Extent,
And null Decree and Exigent!
What Magical Attracts and Graces,
That can redeem from Scire facias;
From Bonds and Statutes can discharge,
And from Contempts of Courts enlarge!
These are the highest Excellencies
Of all our true or false Pretenses,
And you would damn your selves, and swear
As much to an Hostess Dowager,
Grown fat and pursy by Retail
Of Pots of Beer, and Bottled Ale;
And find her fitter for your turn,
For Fat is wondrous apt to burn;
Who at your Flames would soon take Fire,
Relent, and melt to your desire,
And, like a Candle in the Socket,
Dissolve her Graces int' your Pocket,
By this time 'twas grown dark and late,
When the heard a knocking at the Gate,
Laid on in haste with such a powder,
The blows grew louder still and louder.
Which Hudibras, as if the had been
Bestowed as freely on his Skin,
Expounding by his inward Light,
Or rather more Prophetic fright,
To be the Wisard, come to search,
And take him napping in the lurch,
Turned pale as Ashes, or a Clout;
But why, or wherefore, is a doubt:
For Men will tremble, and turn paler,
With too much, or too little Valor.
His Heart laid on, as if it tried
To force a passage through his side,
Impatient (as he vowed) to wait 'em,
But in a Fury to fly at 'em;
And therefore beat, and laid about,
To find a cranny to creep out.
But she, who saw in what a taking
The Knight was by his furious Quaking,
Undaunted, cried, Courage, Sir Knight,
Know I Am resolved to break no Rite
Of Hospitality to a Stranger,
But to secure you out of danger,
Will here my self stand Sentinel,
To guard this Pass against Sidrophel.
Women, you know, do seldom fail
To make the stoutest Men turn tail;
And bravely scorn to turn their Backs.
Upon the desperat'st Attacks.
At this the Knight grew resolute
As Iron-side or Hardy-knute;
His fortitude began to rally,
And out he cried aloud, to sally.
But she besought him to convey
His Courage rather out of the way,
And lodge in Ambush on the Floor,
Or fortified behind a Door,
That if the Enemy should enter,
He might relieve her in the Adventure.
Mean while, they knocked against the Door,
As fierce as at the Gate before;
Which made the Renegado Knight
Relapse again to his former fright.
He thought it desperate to stay
Till the Enemy had forced his way,
But rather post himself, to serve
The Lady, for a fresh Reserve.
His Duty was not to dispute,
But what sh' had ordered execute:
Which he resolved in haste to obey,
And therefore stoutly marched away;
And all h' encountered fell upon,
Though in the dark, and all alone.
Till Fear, that braver Feats performs
Than ever Courage dared in Arms,
Had drawn him up before a Pass,
To stand upon his Guard, and face.
This he courageously invaded,
And having entered, Barricado'd;
Insconc'd himself as formidable
As could be underneath a Table;
Where he lay down in Ambush close,
TO expect the arrival of his Foes.
Few minutes had he lain perdue,
To guard his desperate Avenue,
Before he heard a dreadful shout,
As loud as putting to the Rout;
With which impatiently alarmed,
He fansi'd the Enemy had stormed,
And after entering Sidrophel
Was fallen upon the Guards pell-mell.
He therefore sent out all his Senses,
To bring him in Intelligences.
Which Vulgars, out of ignorance,
Mistake for falling in a Trance:
But those that trade in Geomancy,
Affirm to be the strength of Fancy:
In which the Lapland-Magi deal,
And things incredible reveal.
Mean while the Foe beat up his Quarters,
And stormed the Outworks of his Fortress.
And as another of the same
Degree, and Party, in Arms and Fame,
That in the same Cause had engaged,
And War with equal conduct waged,
By vent'ring only but to thrust
His Head a Span beyond his Post,
B' a General of the Cavaliers
Was dragg*d through a Window by the Ears:
So he was served in his Redoubt,
And by the other end pulled out.
Soon as they had him at their mercy,
They put him to the Cudgel fiercely,
As if they scorned to trade and barter,
By giving or by taking Quarter:
They stoutly on his Quarters laid,
Until his Scouts came in to his aid.
For when a Man is past his Sense,
There Is no way to reduce him thence,
But twindging him by the Ears or Nose,
Or laying on of heavy Blows,
And if that will not do the Deed,
To burning with Hot Irons proceed.
No sooner was he come to himself,
But on his Neck a sturdy Elf
Clapped in a trice his cloven Hoof,
And thus attacked him with Reproof.
Mortal, thou art betrayed to us
B' our Friend, thy evil Genius,
Who for thy horrid Perjuries,
Thy Breach of Faith, and turning Lies,
The Brethrens Privilege (against
The Wicked) on themselves, the Saints,
Has here thy wretched Carcass sent
For just Revenge and punishment;
Which thou have now no way to lessen,
But by an open, free Confession.
For if we catch thee failing once,
Twill fall the heavier on thy Bones,
What made thee venture to betray,
And filch the Lady's Heart away?
To Spirit her to Matrimony --?
That which contracts all Matches, Money.
It was the enchantment of her Riches,
That made m' apply to your Croney Witches:
That in return would pay the expense,
The Wear-and-tear of Conscience;
Which I could have patched up, and turned,
For the hundredth part of what I earned.
Did thou not love her then? speak true.
No more (quoth he) than I love you.
How would the have used her, and her Money?
First, turned her up to Alimony;
And laid her Dowry out in Law,
To null her Jointure with a Flaw,
Which I beforehand had agreed
TO have put, of purpose, in the Deed;
And bar her Widow's-making-over
TO a Friend in Trust, or private Lover.
What made thee pick and choose her out,
TO employ their Sorceries about?
That which makes Gamesters play with those
Who have least Wit, and most to lose.
But did thou scourge thy Vessel thus,
As thou have damned thy self to us?
I see you take me for an Ass:
It Is true, I thought the Trick would pass
Upon a Woman well enough,
As 't has been often found by Proof;
Whose Humors are not to be won
But when they are imposed upon.
For Love approves of all they do
That stand for Candidates, and woo.
Why did thou forge those shameful Lies,
Of Bears and Witches in Disguise?
That is no more than Authors give
The Rabble credit to Believe;
A Trick of Following their Leaders,
To entertain their Gentle Readers.
And we have now no other way
Of passing all we do or say:
Which when it is natural and true,
Will be believed b' a very few.
Beside the danger of offense,
The fatal enemy of Sense.
Why did thou choose that cursed Sin,
Hypocrisy, to set up in?
Because it is the thriving'st calling,
The only Saints-Bell that rings all in,
In which all Church^s are concerned,
And is the easiest to be learned.
For no degrees, unless the imploy't,
Can ever gain much, or enjoy't.
A Gift that is not only able
To domineer among the Rabble,
But by the Law's empowered to rout
And aw the greatest that stand out.
Which few hold forth against, for fear
Their hands should slip, and come too near.
For no Sin else among the Saints
Is taught so tenderly against.
What made thee break thy Plighted Vows?
That which makes others break a House,
And hang, and scorn ye all, before
Endure the Plague of being poor.
Quoth he, I see you have more Tricks
Than all our doting Politics,
That are grown old, and out of Fashion,
Compared with your new Reformation:
That we must come to School to you,
To learn your more refined, and New.
Quoth he, If you will give me leave
To tell you what I now perceive,
You Would find your self an arrant Chouse,
If y' were but at a Meeting House.
It Is true, Quoth he, we never come there,
Because w' have let them out by the year.
Truly, quoth he, you cannot imagine
What wondrous things they will engage in:
That as your Fellow-Fiends in Hell
Were Angels all before they fell;
So you are like to be again
Compared with the Angels of us Men.
Quoth he, I am resolved to be
Thy Scholar in this Mystery;
And therefore first desire to know
Some Principles on which you go.
What makes a Knave a Child of God,
And one of us? -- A Livelihood.
What renders Beating out of Brains
And Murder Godliness? -- Great Gains.
What Is tender Conscience? -- It Is a Botch
That will not bear the gentlest touch,
But breaking out, dispatches more
Then the Epidemical'st Plague Sore.
What makes y' encroach upon our Trade,
And damn all others? -- To be paid.
What Is Orthodox and true Believing
Against a Conscience? -- A good Living.
What makes Rebelling against Kings
A Good Old Cause? Administrings.
What makes all Doctrines plain and clear?
About Two hundred pounds a year.
And that which was proved true before,
Prove false again? Two hundred more.
What makes the Breaking of all Oaths
A holy Duty? Food and Clothes.
What Laws and Freedom, Persecution?
B'ing out of Power, and Contribution.
What makes a Church a Den of Thieves?
A Dean and Chapter, and White Sleeves.
And what would serve, if those were gone,
To make it Orthodox? Our own.
What makes Morality a Crime,
The most notorious of the Time?
Morality, which both the Saints
And Wicked too cry out against?
'Cause Grace and Virtue are within
Prohibited Degrees of Kin:
And therefore no true Saint allows
They should be suffered to espouse.
For Saints can need no Conscience
That with Morality dispense;
As Virtue's impious, when it is rooted
In nature onel', and not imputed.
But why the Wicked should do so,
We neither know, nor care to do.
What Is Liberty of Conscience,
IN the Natural and Genuine Sense?
It Is to restore with more security
Rebellion to its ancient Purity;
And Christian Liberty reduce
To the elder Practice of the Jews.
For a Large Conscience is all one,
And signifies the same with None.
It is enough (quoth he) for once,
And has reprieved thy forfeit Bones,
Nick Machiavel had never a Trick,
(Though he gave's Name to our Old Nick)
But was below the least of these,
That pass in the World for Holiness.
This said, the Furies and the Light
In the instant vanished out of sight;
And left him in the dark alone,
With stinks of Brimstone, and his own.
The Queen of Night, whose large Command
Rules all the Sea and half the Land,
And over moist and crazy Brains
In high Spring-tides at Midnight reigns,
Was now declining to the West,
To go to Bed and take her rest.
When Hudibras, whose stubborn Blows
Denied his Bones that soft repose,
Lay still expecting worse and more,
Stretched out at length upon the Floor;
And though he shut his Eyes as fast
As if he had been to sleep his last,
Saw all the Shapes that Fear or Wizards
Do make the Devil wear for Vizards.
And pricking up his Ears, to hark
If he could hear too in the dark,
Was first invaded with a Groan,
And after, in a feeble Tone,
These trembling words. Unhappy Wretch!
What have thou gotten by this Fetch?
Or all thy Tricks in this New Trade,
The Holy Brotherhood of the Blade?
By Santring still on some Adventure,
And growing to thy Horse a Centaur,
To stuff thy Skin with swelling Knobs
Of cruel and hard-wooded Drubs?
For still the have had the worst on it yet,
As well in Conquest as defeat.
Night is the Sabbath of Mankind,
To rest the Body and the Mind:
Which now thou art denied to keep,
And cure thy labored Corpse with Sleep.
The Knight, who heard the words, explained
As meant to him this Reprimand,
Because the Character did hit
Point Blank upon his Case so fit;
Believed it was some drolling Sprite
That staid upon the Guards that Night,
And one of those he had seen, and felt
The Drubs he had so freely dealt.
When, after a short Pause and Groan,
The doleful Spirit thus went on.
This it is to engage with Dogs and Bears
Pelmell together by the Ears;
And after painful Bangs and Knocks,
To lie in Limbo in the Stocks;
And from the Pinnacle of Glory,
Fall headlong into Purgatory:
(Thought he, This Devil's full of Malice,
That on my late Disasters Rallies.)
Condemned to Whipping, but declined it,
By being more Heroick-minded;
And at a Riding handled worse,
With Treats more slovenly and course;
Engaged with Friends in stubborn Wars,
And hot Disputes with Conjurers;
And when the had bravely won the day,
Wast fain to steal thy self away.
(I see, thought he, this shameless Elf
Would fain steal me too from my self,
That impudently dares to own
What I have suffered for and done:)
And now but vent'ring to betray,
Have met with Vengeance the same way.
Thought he, How does the Devil know
What 'twas that I designed to do?
His Office of Intelligence,
His Oracles are ceased long since:
And he knows nothing of the Saints,
But what some treacherous Spy acquaints.
This is some Pettifogging Fiend,
Some Under-Door-keeper's Friend's Friend,
That undertakes to understand,
And juggles at the Second hand;
And now would pass for Spirit Po,
And all men's dark Concerns foreknow.
I think I need not fear him for it:
These Rallying Devils do no hurt.
With that he roused his drooping Heart,
And hastily cried out, What art?
A Wretch (quoth he) whom want of Grace
Has brought to this unhappy place.
I do believe thee, quoth the Knight,
Thus far I Am sure the art in the Right;
And know what it is that troubles thee,
Better than thou have ghess'd of me.
Thou art some paltry Black-guard Sprite,
Condemned to Drudg'ry in the Night,
That have no work to do in the House,
Nor Halfpenny to drop in Shoes:
Without the raising of which Sum,
You dare not be so troublesome,
To pinch the Slatterns black and blue,
For leaving you their Work to do.
This is your business, good Pug Robin,
And your Diversion dull Dry Bobbing;
TO entice Fanatics in the Dirt,
And wash 'em clean in Ditches for it.
Of which conceit you are so proud,
At every Jest you laugh aloud.
As now you would have done by me,
But that I barred your Rallery.
Sir, (quoth the Voice) y' are no such Sophy
As you would have the World judge of ye,
If you design to weigh our Talents
IN the Standard of your own false Balance,
Or think it possible to know
Us Ghosts as well as we do you:
We, who have been the everlasting
Companions of your Drubs and Basting,
And never left you in Contest
With Male or Female, Man or Beast,
But proved as true to ye and entire
In all adventures as your Squire,
Quoth he, That may be said as true
By the idlest Pug of all your Crew:
For none could have betrayed us worse
Than those Allies of ours and yours.
But I have sent him for a Token
To your Low Country Hogen Mogen,
To whose Infernal Shores I hope
He Will swing like Skippers in a Rope.
And if y' have been more just to me
(As I am apt to think) than he,
I am afraid it is as true,
What the Ill-affected say of you,
Y' have 'spous'd the Covenant and Cause,
By holding up your Cloven Paws.
Sir, quoth the Voice, it is true, I grant,
We made and took the Covenant.
But that no more concerns the Cause,
Then other Perj'ries do the Laws,
Which when they are proved in open Court,
Wear wooden Peccadillo's for it.
And that is the Reason Cov'nanters
Held up their Hands, like Rogues at Bars.
I see, quoth Hudibras, from whence
These Scandals of the Saints commence,
That are but natural Effects
Of Satan's Malice, and his Sects,
Those Spider-Saints, that hang by Threads
Spun out of the Entrals of their Heads.
Sir, quoth the Voice, that may as true
And properly be said of you;
Whose Talents may compare with either,
Or both the other put together.
For all the Independents do
Is only what you forced them to.
You, who are not content alone
With Tricks to put the Devil down,
But must have Armies raised, to back
The Gospel-work you undertake:
As if Artillery, and Edge-tools
Were the only Engines to save Souls.
While He, poor Devil, has no power
By force to run down and devour;
Has never a Classis, cannot sentence
To Stools or Poundage of Repentance;
Is ti'd up only to Design,
TO Entice, and Tempt, and Undermine:
In which you all his Arts outdo,
And prove your selves his Betters too.
Hence it is Possessions do less evil
Than mere Temptations of the Devil,
Which all the horrid'st Actions done,
Are charged in Courts of Law upon;
Because unless you help the Elf,
He can do little of himself:
And therefore where he is best Possessed,
Acts most against his Interest;
Surprises none but those wh' have Priests
To turn him out, and Exorcists,
Supplied with Spiritual Provision,
And Magazines of Ammunition,
With Crosses, Relics, Crucifixes,
Beads, Pictures, Rosaries, and Pixes,
The Tools of working out Salvation
By mere Mechanic Operation,
With Holy Water, like a Sluice,
To overflow all Avenues.
But those wh' are utterly unarmed
TO oppose his Entrance if he stormed,
He never offers to suprize;
Although his falsest Enemies;
But is content to be their Drudge,
And on their Errands glad to trudge.
For where are all your Forfeitures
Entrusted in safe hands, but ours?
Who are but Jailors of the Holes
And Dungeons where you clap up Souls;
Like Vnder-keepers, turn the Keys
TO your Mittimus Anathemaes;
And never boggle to restore
The Members you deliver over
Upon Demand, with fairer Justice
Than all your Covenanting Trustees:
Unless, to punish them the worse,
You put them in the Secular Powers,
And pass their Souls as some demise
The same Estate in Mortgage twice,
When to a Legal Vtlegation
You turn your Excommunication,
And for a Groat unpai'd that is due,
Distrain on Soul and Body too.
Thought he, It Is no mean part of civil
State-prudence to cajoul the Devil,
And not to handle him too rough,
When h'has us in his cloven Hoof.
It Is true, quoth he, that intercourse
Has past between your Friends and ours;
That as you trust us in our way,
To raise your Members, and to lay,
We send you others of our own,
Denounced to Hang themselves or Drown,
Or, frighted with our Oratory,
To leap down headlong many a story;
Have used all means to propagate
Your mighty interests of State,
Laid out our Spiritual Gifts to further
Your great designs of Rage and Murder.
For if the Saints are named from Blood,
We onel' have made that Title good:
And if it were but in our power,
We should not scruple to do more,
And not be half a Soul behind
Of all Dissenters of Mankind.
Right, quoth the Voice, and as I scorn
To be ungrateful in return
Of all those kind good Offices,
I Will free you out of this Distress,
And set you down in safety, where,
It is no time to tell you here.
The Cock crows and the Morn draws on,
When it is decreed I must be gone:
And if I leave you here till day,
You Will find it hard to get away.
With that the Spirit grop'd about,
To find the enchanted Hero out,
And tried with haste to lift him up;
But found his Forlorn Hope, his Croop,
Unserviceable with Kicks and Blows
Received from hardned-hearted Foes.
He thought to drag him by the Heels,
Like Gresham Carts, with Legs for Wheels.
But Fear, that soonest cures those Sores,
In danger of Relapse to worse,
Came in t'assist him with its Aid,
And up his sinking Vessel weighed.
No sooner was he fit to trudge,
But both made ready to dislodge.
The Spirit horsed him like a Sack,
Upon the Vehicle, his Back,
And bore him headlong into the Hall,
With some few Rubs against the Wall.
Where finding out the Postern locked,
And the Avenues as strongly blocked,
H'attack'd the Window, stormed the Glass,
And in a moment gained the Pass,
Through which he dragged the worsted Soldiers
Fore-quarters out by the Head and Shoulders;
And cautiously began to scout,
To find their Fellow-Cattel out.
Nor was it half a Minute's Quest,
E're he retrieved the Champion's Beast,
Tied to a Pale in stead of Rack,
But never a Saddle on his Back,
Nor Pistols at the Saddle-bow,
Conveyed away the Lord knows how.
He thought it was no time to stay,
And let the Night too steal away,
But in a trice advanced the Knight
Upon the Bare Ridge bolt upright.
And groping out for Ralpho 's Jade,
He found the Saddle too was straid,
And in the place a Lump of Soap,
On which he speedily leaped up;
And turning to the Gate the Rein,
He Kicked and Cudgelled on amain.
While Hudibras, with equal haste,
On both sides laid about as fast,
And spurred as Jockies use, to break,
Or Padders, to secure a Neck.
Where let us leave them for a time,
And to their Churches turn our Rhyme;
To hold forth their declining State,
Which now come near an Even Rate.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND CANTO Of the Third Part.
The Saints engage in fierce Contests
About their Carnal Interests;
To share their Sacrilegious Preys,
According to their Rates of Grace;
Their various Frenzies to Reform,
When Cromwell left them in a Storm:
Till, in the Effigy of RUMPS, the Rabble
Burns all their Grandees of the Cabal.
CANTO II.
THE Learned write, An Insect Breeze
Is but a Mungrel Prince of Bees,
That falls, before a Storm, on Cows,
And stings the Founders of his House;
From whose corrupted Flesh that Breed
Of Vermin did at first proceed.
So, ever the Storm of War broke out,
Religion spawned a various Rout,
Of Petulant Capricious Sects,
The Maggots of Corrupted Texts,
That first run all Religion down,
And after every Swarm its own.
For as the Persian Magi once
Upon their Mothers got their Sons,
Who were incapable to enjoy
That Empire any other way:
So Presbyter begot the other
Upon the Good Old Cause, his Mother,
That bore them like the Devil's Dam,
Whose Son and Husband are the same.
And yet no natural Tie of Blood,
Nor Intr'est for their common good,
Could, when their Profits interfear'd,
Get Quater for each other's Beard.
For when they thrived, they never fadg'd,
But only by the ears engaged:
Like Dogs that snarl about a Bone,
And play together when the have none.
As by their truest Characters,
Their constant Actions, plainly appears.
Rebellion now began for lack
Of Zeal and Plunder to grow slack;
The Cause and Covenant to lessen,
And Providence to b' out of Season:
For now there was no more to purchase,
OF the Kings Revenue and the Church's,
But all divided, shared and gone,
That used to urge the Brethren on.
Which forced the Stubborn'st for the Cause
To cross the Cudgels to the Laws;
That what by breaking them 't had gained,
By their Support might be maintained:
Like Thieves, that in a Hemp-plot lie,
Secured against the Hue-and-Cry.
For Presbyter and Independent
Were now turned Plaintiff Defendant,
Laid out their Apostolic Functions
On Carnal Orders and Injunctions,
And all their Precious Gifts and Graces
On Out-lawries and Scire facias;
At Michael' s Term had many a Trial,
Worse than the Dragon and St. Michael,
Where thousands fell, in shape of Fees,
Into the Bottomless Abyss.
For when like Brethren and Friends,
They came to share their Dividends,
And every part'ner to possess
His Church and State Joynt-Purchases,
In which the Ablest Saint and Best
Was named in Trust by all the rest,
To pay their Money, and, instead
Of every Brother, pass the Deed;
He straight converted all his Gifts
To pious Frauds and holy Shifts,
And settled all the others Shares
Upon his outward Man and's Heirs;
Held all they claimed as Forfeit Lands,
Delivered up into his hands,
And past upon his Conscience,
By Pre-intail of Providence;
Impeached the rest for Reprobates,
That had no Titles to Estates,
But by their Spiritual Attaints
Degraded from the Right of Saints.
This being revealed, they now begun
With Law and Conscience to fall on;
And laid about as hot and Brainsick
As the Utter Barrister of Swanswick;
Engaged with Money-bags, as bold
As men with Sand-bags did of old;
That brought the Lawyers in more Fees,
Than all unsanctifi'd Trustees:
Till he who had no more to show
IN the Case, received the overthrow;
Or both sides having had the worst,
They parted as they met at first.
Poor Presbyter was now Reduced,
Secluded, and Cashiered, and Chews'd,
Turned out and Excommunicate
From all Affairs of Church and State,
Reformed to a Reformado Saint,
And glad to turn Itinerant,
To strowl and teach from Town to Town,
And those he had taught up Teach down,
And make those Uses serve again
Against the New-inlight'ned men,
As fit as when at first they were
Revealed against the Cavalier;
Damn Anabaptist and Fanatic,
As pat as Popish and Prelatick;
And with as little variation,
To serve for any Sect in the Nation.
The Good Old Cause, which some believe
To be the Devilish that tempted Eve
With Knowledge, and does still invite
The World to Mischief with New Light,
Had store of Money in her Purse,
When he took her for bett'r or worse;
But now was grown Deformed and Poor,
And fit to be turned out of Door.
The Independents (whose first station
Was in the Rere of Reformation,
A Mungrel kind of Church-Dragoons,
That served for Horse and Foot at once,
And in the Saddle of one Steed
The Saracen and Christian rid,
Were Free of every Spiritual Order,
To Preach, and Fight, and Pray, and Murder)
No sooner got the Start to lurch
Both Disciplines, of War and Church,
And Providence enough to run
The chief Commanders of 'em down,
But carried on the War against
The Common Enemy of the Saints;
And in a while prevailed so far,
To win of them the Game of War,
And be at Liberty once more,
TO Attack themselves as the had before.
For now there was no Foe in Arms,
TO unite their Factions with Alarms,
But all reduced and overcome,
Except their worst, themselves at home,
Wh' had compast all they Praid, and Swore,
And Fought, and Preached, and Plundered for,
Subdued the Nation, Church and State,
And all things but their Laws and Hate,
But when they came to treat and transact,
And share the spoils of all the had ransackt,
To Botch up what the had torn and rent,
Religion and the Government,
They met no sooner, but prepared
To pull down all the War had spared;
Agreed in nothing but to Abolish,
Subvert, Extirpate, and Demolish.
For Knaves and Fools b'ing near of Kin,
As Dutch-Boors are to a Sooterkin,
Both Parties joined to do their best,
To Damn the Public Interest;
And Hearded only in Consults
To put by one another Bolts,
TO out-cant the Babylonian Laborers,
At all their Dialects of Jabberers,
And tug at both ends of the Saw,
To tear down Government and Law.
For, as two Cheats, that play one Game,
Are both defeated of their Aim:
So those who play a Game of State,
And only Cavil in Debate,
Although there is nothing lost nor won,
The Public Business is undone,
Which still the longer it is in doing,
Becomes the surer way to Ruin.
This when the Royalists perceived,
(Who to their Faith as firmly cleav'd,
And owned the Right they had paid down
So dearly for, The Church and Crown,)
The united constanter, and Sided
The more, the more their Foes divided.
For though out-number'd, overthrown,
And by the Fate of War run down;
Their Duty never was defeated,
Nor from their Oaths and Faith retreated.
For Loyalty is still the same,
Whether it win or lose the Game;
True as a Dial to the Sun,
Although it be not shined upon.
But when these Brethren in evil,
Their Adversaries and the Devil,
Began once more to show them Play,
And hopes, at least, to have a day,
They rallied in Parades of Woods,
And unfrequented Solitudes,
Convened at Midnight in Outhouses,
TO appoint New-rising Rendezvouzes,
And with a Pertinacy unmatched
For new Recruits of Danger watched:
No sooner was one Blow diverted,
But up another Party started.
And, as if Nature too in haste,
To furnish out Supplies as fast,
Before her time had turned Destruction
TO a new and numerous Production;
No sooner those were overcome,
But up rose others in their Room,
That like the Christian Faith, increast
The more, the more they were Suppressed:
Whom neither Chains nor Transportation,
Proscription, Sale, nor Confiscation,
Nor all the desperate events
Of former tried Experiments,
Nor Wounds could terrify, nor Mangling
To leave off Loyalty and Dangling,
Nor Death (with all his Bones) affright
From vent'ring to maintain the Right,
From staking Life and Fortune down
Against all together, for the Crown;
But kept the Title of their Cause
From Forfeiture, like Claims in Laws:
And proved no Prosperous Usurpation
Can ever settle on the Nation,
Until, in spite of Force and Treason,
They put their Loy'lty in Possession;
And by their Constancy and Faith,
Destroyed the Mighty men of Gath.
Tossed in a furious Hurricane,
Did Oliver give up his Reign;
And was believed, as well by Saints,
As Moral men and Miscreants,
To Founder in the Stygian Ferry,
Until he was retrieved by Sterry:
Who, in a false erroneous Dream,
Mistook the New Jerusalem,
Profanely, for the Apocryphal,
False Heaven at the End of the Hall;
Whether it was decreed by Fate,
His Precious Relics to Translate.
So Romulus was seen before
B' as Orthhodox a Senator;
From whose Divine Illumination
He stole the Pagan Revelation.
Next him his Son and Heir Apparent
Succeeded, though a Lame Vicegerent:
Who first laid by the Parliament,
The only Crutch on which he leant;
And then Sunk underneath the State,
That rode him above Horseman's Weight.
And now the Saints began their Reign,
For which the had yearn'd so long in vain,
And felt such Bowel-Hankerings,
To see an Empire all of Kings,
Delivered from the Egyptian Awe
Of Justice, Government, and Law,
And free to erect what Spiritual Cantons
Should be revealed, or Gospel Hans-Towns,
To Edify upon the Ruins
Of John of Leyden's old Outgoings,
Who for a Weathercock hung up
Upon their Mother-Churche's Top,
Was made a Type by Providence
Of all their Revelations since;
And now fulfilled by his Successors,
Who eqally mistook their Measures:
For when they came to shape the Model,
Not one could fit another's Noddle;
But found their Light and Gifts more wide
From Fadging then the Unsanctifi'd;
While every individual Brother
Strove hand to fist against another,
And still the Maddest and most Cracked,
Were found the Busiest to Transact.
For though most Hands dispatch apace
And make light work, (the Proverb says)
Yet many different Intellects
Are found to have contrary Effects;
And many Heads to obstruct Intrigues,
As slowest Insects have most Legs.
Some were for seting up a King,
But all the rest for no such thing,
Unless King Jesus: Others tampered
For Fleetwood, Desbrough, and Lambert;
Some for the Rump, and some more crafty,
For Agitatours and the Safety;
Some for the Gospel, and Massacres
Of Spiritual Affidavit-makers,
That swore to any Humane Regence
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
Yea though the Ablest swearing Saint,
That vouched the Bulls of the Covenant:
Others for pulling down the High places
Of Synods and Provincial Classes,
That used to make such hostile Inroads
Upon the Saints, like Bloody Nimrods:
Some for Fulfilling Prophecies,
And the Extirpation of Excise;
And some against the Egyptian Bondage
Of Holy days, and paying Poundage:
Some for the cutting down of Groves,
And rectifying Bakers Loaves;
And some for finding out Expedients
Against the Slavery of Obedience.
Some were for Gospel Ministers,
And some for Read-Coat Seculars,
As men most fit to hold forth the Word,
And wield the one and the other Sword,
Some were for carrying on the Work
Against the Pope, and some the Turk:
Some for engaging to suppress
The Camisado of Surplices,
The Gifts and Dispensations hindered,
And Turned to the Outward man the Inward;
More proper for the cloudy Night
Of Popery, then Gospel Light.
Others were for Abolishing
That Tool of Matrimony, a Ring,
With which the unsanctifi'd Bridegroom
Is married only to a Thumb;
(As wise as Ringing of a Pig.
That uses to break up Ground and Dig;)
The Bride to nothing but her Will,
That nulls the After-marriage still.
Some were for the utter Extirpation
Of Linsey-Woolsey in the Nation;
And some against all Idolizing
The Cross in Shop-Books, or Baptizing.
Others, to make all things recant
The Christian or Surname of Saint;
And force all Churches, Streets, and Towns,
The Holy Title to renounce.
Some against a Third Estate of Souls,
And bringing down the Price of Coals.
Some for Abolishing Black-pudding,
And eating nothing with the Blood in;
To abrogate them Roots and Branches;
While others were for eating Haunches
Of Warriors, and now and then
The Flesh of Kings and Mighty Men;
And some for Breaking of their Bones
With Rods of Ir'n by Secret ones;
For Thrashing Mountains, and with Spells
For Hallowing Carriers Packs and Bells.
Things that the Legend never heard of,
But made the Wicked sore afeard of.
The Quacks of Government (who sat
At the unregarded Helm of State,
And understood, this wild Confusion
Of fatal Madness and Delusion,
Must, sooner then a Prodigy,
Portend Destruction to be nigh)
Considered timely, how to withdraw
And save their Wind-pipes from the Law:
For one Rencounter at the Bar
Was worse then all the had escaped in War:
And therefore met in Consultation,
To Cant and Quack upon the Nation;
Not for the sickly Patient's sake,
Nor what to give, but what to take;
To feel the Pulses of their Fees,
More wise then fumbling Arteries;
Prolong the Snuff of Life in Pain,
And from the Grave recover -- Gain.
Among these there was a Politician,
With more Heads then a Beast in vision,
And more Intrigues in every one
Then all the Whores of Babylon.
So politic, as if one eye
Upon the other were a Spy;
That to trapan the one to think
The other Blind, both strove to blink:
And in his dark Pragmatick way
As busy as a Child at Play.
He Had seen three Governments Run down,
And had a hand in every one,
Was for 'em and against 'em all,
But Barbarous when they came to fall:
For by Trapanning the old to Ruin,
He made his Interest with the New one;
Played true and faithful, though against
His Conscience and was still advanced.
For by the Witchcraft of Rebellion
Transformed to a feeble State-Camelion,
By giving aim from side to side,
He never failed to save his Tide,
But got the Start of every State,
And at a Change never came too late:
Could turn his Word, and Oath, and Faith,
As many ways as in a Lath;
By turning, wriggle, like a Screw
Int' highest Trust, and out for New.
For when he had happily incurred,
In stead of Hemp, to be preferred,
And past upon a Government,
He played his trick and out he went:
But being out, and out of hopes
To mount his Ladder (more) of Ropes,
Would strive to raise himself upon
The Public Ruin and his own.
So little did he understand
The desperate Feats he took in hand.
For when he had got himself a Name.
For Fraud and Tricks; he spoiled his Game,
Had forced his Neck into a Nooze,
To show his play at Fast and Loose;
And when he chanced to escape, mistook
For Art and Subtlety, his Luck.
So right his Judgment was cut fit,
And made a Tally to his Wit,
And both together most Profound
At Deeds of Darkness under Ground:
As the Earth is easiest undermined
By Vermin Impotent and Blind.
By all these Arts, and many more
H' had practiced long and much before,
Our State-Artificer foresaw
Which way the World began to draw.
For as Old Sinners have all Points,
OF the Compass in their Bones and Joints,
Can by their Pangs and Aches find
All Turns and Changes of the Wind,
And better then by Napier 's Bones,
Feel in their own the Age of Moons:
So guilty Sinners in a State
Can by their Grimes prognosticate,
And in their Consciences feel Pain
Some days before a Shower of Rain.
He therefore wisely cast about
All ways he could, to insure his Throat;
And hither came to observe and smoke
What Courses other Riskers took;
And to the utmost do his best
To Save himself, and Hang the rest.
To match this Saint, there was another,
As busy and perverse a Brother,
An Haberdasher of Small-wares
In Politics and State Affairs;
More Jew then Rabbi Achitophel,
And better gifted to Rebel:
For when he had taught his Tribe to Spouse
The Cause, aloft, upon one House,
He scorned to set his own in Order,
But tried another, and went further;
So sullenly addicted still
To's only Principle, his Will,
That whatsoever it chanced to prove,
No force of Argument could move,
Nor Law, nor Cavalcade of Ho'born,
Could render half a grain less stubborn,
For he at any time would hang,
For the opportunity to harangue,
And rather on a Gibbet dangle,
Then miss his dear delight, to wrangle:
In which his Parts were so accomplished,
That, right or wrong, he never was non-plust;
But still his Tongue ran on, the less
Of weight it bore, with greater ease,
And with its Everlasting Clack
Set all men's Ears upon the Rack.
No sooner could a hint appear,
But up he started to Pickere,
And made the stoutest yield to mercy,
When he engaged in Controversy;
Not by the froce of Carnal Reason,
But indefatigable Teazing;
With Volleys of eternal Babble,
And Clamor more unanswerable.
For though his Topics, frail and weak,
Could near amount above a Freak:
He still maintained 'em, like his Faults,
Against the desperat'st Assaults;
And backed their feeble want of Sense
With greater Heat and Confidence:
As Bones of Hectors when they differ,
The more the are Cudgel'd, grow the Stiffer.
Yet when his Profit moderated,
The fury of his Heat abated:
For nothing but his Interest
Could lay his Devil of Contest.
It was his Choice, or Chance, or Curse,
TO espouse the Cause for Bett'r or worse;
And with his worldly Goods and Wit,
And Soul, and Body, worshipped it:
But when he found the sullen Trapes
Possessed with the Devil, Worms, and Claps,
The Trojan Mare in Fool with Greeks
Not half so full of Jadish Tricks,
Though Squeamish in her outward Woman,
As loose and rampant as Dol common;
He still resolved to mend the matter,
TO adhere and cleave the obstinater;
And still the skittisher and looser
Her Freaks appeared, to sit the closer.
For Fools are stuborn in their way;
As Coins are hardened by the Allay:
And Obstinacy's never so stiff,
As when it is in a wrong Belief.
These two, with others, being met,
And close in Consultation set;
After a discontented pause,
And not without sufficient cause,
The Orator we mentioned late,
Less troubled with the pangs of State,
Then with his own impatience,
To give himself first Audience,
After he had a while looked wise,
At last broke silence, and the Ice.
Quoth he, There Is nothing makes me doubt
Our last Outgoings brought about,
More then to see the Characters
Of real Jealousies and Fears,
Not feigned, as once, but sadly horrid,
Scor'd upon every Member's Forehead,
Who, 'cause the Clouds are drawn together,
And threaten sudden change of Weather,
Feel Pangs and Aches of State-turns,
And Revolutions in their Corns;
And, since our Workings-out are crossed,
Throw up the Cause before tis' lost.
Was it to run away, we meant,
When, taking of the Covenant,
The lamest Cripples of the Brothers
Took Oaths, to run before all others;
But, in their own sense, only swore
To strive to run away before?
And now would prove, the Words and Oath
Engage us to renounce them both?
It Is true, the Cause is in the lurch,
Between a right and Mungrel Church,
The Presbyter and Independent,
That stickle which shall make an end on it:
And 'twas made out to us the last
Expedient, -- (I mean, Margret's Fast)
When Providence had been suborned,
What answer was to be returned.
Else why should Tumults fright us now,
We have so many times gone through,
And understand as well to tame,
As, when they serve our turns, to inflame?
Have proved how inconsiderable
Are all Engagements of the Rabble,
Whose Frenzies must be reconciled
With Drums and Rattles like a Child;
But never proved so prosperous,
As when they were led on by us.
For all our Scouring of Religion
Began with Tumults and Sedition;
When Hurricanes of fierce Commotion
Became strong Motives to Devotion;
(As Carnal Seamen in a Storm
Turn pious Converts, and reform;)
When rusty Weapons with chalked Edges
Maintained our feeble Privileges,
And brown Bills levied in the City
Made Bills to pass the Grand Committee;
When Zeal with aged Clubs and Gleaves
Gave chase to Rochets and White Sleeves,
And made the Church and State and Laws
Submit to old Iron and the Cause,
And as we thrived by Tumults then,
So might we better now again,
If we know how, as then we did,
To use them rightly in our need.
Tumults by which the Mutinous
Betray themselves in stead of us;
The Hollow-hearted Disaffected,
And Close Malignant are detected;
Who lay their Lives and Fortunes down,
For Pledges to secure our own,
And freely sacrifice their Ears,
TO appease our Jealousies and Fears.
And yet for all these Providence
W' are offered, if we had our senses,
We idly sit, like stupid Block-heads,
Our hands committed to our Pockets,
And nothing but our Tongues at large,
To get the Wretches a discharge.
Like men condemned to Thunderbolts,
Who, ever the blow, become mere Dolts;
Or Fools besotted with their Crimes,
That know not how to shift betimes,
And neither have they hearts to stay,
Nor wit enough to run away.
Who, if we could resolve on either,
Might stand, or fall (at least) together:
No mean nor trivial solaces
To Partners in extreme distress,
Who use to lessen their Despairs,
By parting them int' equal shares;
As if the more there were to bear,
They felt the weight the easier;
And every one the gentler hung,
The more he took his turn among.
But it is not come to that as yet,
If we had Courage left or Wit;
Who, when our Fate can be no worse,
Are fitted for the bravest course;
Have time to Rally, and prepare
Our last and best defense, Despair;
Despair, by which the gallant'st Feats
Have been achieved in greatest streights,
And horrid'st dangers safely waved,
By b'ing courageously out-brav'd.
As Wounds by wider wounds are healed,
And Poisons by themselves expelled.
And so they might be now again,
If we were, what we should be, Men;
And not so dully desperate,
To side against our selves with Fate:
As Criminals condemned to suffer,
Are blinded first, and then turned over.
This comes of Breaking Covenants,
And setting up Exauns of Saints,
That Fine, like Aldermen, for Grace,
To be excused the Efficace,
For Spiritual men are too Transcendent,
That mount their Banks for Independent,
To hang like Mahomet in the Air,
Or St. Ignatius at his Prayer,
By pure Geometry, and hate
Dependency on Church or State;
Disdain the Pedantry of the Letter,
And since Obedience is better
(The Scripture says) than Sacrifice,
Presume the less on it will suffice;
And scorn to have the moderat'st stints
Prescribed their peremptory Hints,
Or any Opinion, true or false,
Declared as such, in Doctrinals,
But lest at large to make their best on,
Without b'ing called to account or question.
Interpret all the Spleen reveals,
As Whittington explained the Bells;
And bid themselves turn back again
Lord May'rs of New Jerusalem;
But look so big and overgrown,
They scorn their Edifiers to own,
Who taught them all their sprinkling Lessons,
Their Tones and sanctified expressions;
Bestowed their Gifts upon a Saint,
Like Charity on those that want,
And learned the Apocryphal Bigots,
TO inspire themselves with Shorthand Notes:
For which they scorn and hate them worse
Than Dogs and Cats do Sowgelders.
For who first bred them up to pray,
And teach, the House of Commons way?
Where had they all their Gifted Phrases,
But from our Calamies and Cases?
Without whose Sprinkling and Sowing,
Who ever had heard of Nigh or Owen?
Their dispensations had been stifled,
But for our Adoniram Bifield.
And had They not begun the War,
The had never been Sainted as they are.
For Saints in Peace degenerate,
And dwindle down to Reprobate:
Their Zeal corrupts like standing Water,
In the Intervals of War and slaughter;
Abates the sharpness of its Edge,
Without the Power of Sacrilege,
And though the have Tricks to cast their Sins,
As easy as Serpents do their Skins,
That in a while grow out again,
In Peace they turn mere Carnal men,
And from the most Refined of Saints,
As naturally grow Miscreants
As Barnacles turn Soland-Geese,
In the Islands of the Orcades.
Their Dispensation's but a Ticket,
For their conforming to the Wicked;
With whom their greatest difference
Lies more in words and show, than sense
For as the Pope, that keeps the Gate
Of Heaven, wears three Crowns in state;
So he that keeps the Gate of Hell,
Proud Cerberus, wears three Heads as well:
And, if the World has any troth,
Some have been Canonized in both,
But that which does them greatest harm,
Their Spiritual Gizzards are too warm,
Which puts the overheated Sots
In Fever still, like other Goats.
For though the Whore bends Heretics
With Flames of Fire, like crooked Sticks;
Our Schismatics so vastly differ,
The hotter the are they grow the stiffer;
Still setting off their spiritu^l goods,
With fierce and pertinacious fewds.
For Zeal's a dreadful Tarmagant,
That teaches Saints to tear and rant,
And Independents, to profess
The Doctrine of Dependences;
Turns meek and sneaking Secret ones,
To Raw-heads fierce and bloody Bones:
And not content with endless quarrels
Against the Wicked and their Morals,
The Gibellins, for want of Guelfs,
Divert their rage upon themselves.
For now the War is not between
The Brethren and the Men of sin;
But Saint and Saint, to spill the Blood
Of one another's Brotherhood;
Where neither side can lay pretense
To Liberty of Conscience,
Or zealous suffering for the Cause,
To gain one Groats-worth of Applause:
For though endured with Resolution,
^Twill never amount to Persecution.
Shall Precious Saints and Secret ones
Break one another's outward Bones?
And eat the Flesh of Brethren,
In stead of Kings and Mighty men?
When Fiends agree among themselves,
Shall they be found the greater Elves?
When Bel's at Union with the Dragon,
And Baal-Peor Friends with Dagon,
When Savage Bears agree with Bears,
Shall Secret ones lug Saints by the Ears,
And not alone their fatal wrath,
When common Danger threatens both?
Shall Mastiffs by the Collars pulled,
Engaged with Bulls, let go their hold?
And Saints, whose Necks are pawned at stake,
No notice of the Danger take?
But though no Power of Heaven or Hell
Can pacify Fanatic Zeal;
Who would not guess there might be hopes,
The fear of Gallowses and Ropes
Before their Eyes might reconcile
Their Animosities a while?
At least, until the had a clear Stage,
And equal Freedom to engage,
Without the danger of Surprise
By both our common Enemies?
This none but we alone could doubt,
Who understand their Workings-out,
And know 'em both in Soul and Conscience,
Given up to as Reprobate a Nonsense,
As Spiritual Outlaws whom the Power
Of Miracle can never restore.
We, whom at first they set up under,
In Revelation only of Plunder,
Who since have had so many Trials
Of their encroaching Self-denials,
That rook'd upon us with design
To Out-reform and Undermine;
Took all our Interests and Commands
Perfidiously out of our hands;
Involved us in the Guilt of Blood,
Without the Motive-gains allowed,
And made us serve as Ministerial,
Like younger Sons of Father Belial.
And yet for all the inhumane wrong
The had done us and the Cause so long,
We never failed to carry on
The Work still as we had begun:
But true and faithfully obeyed,
And neither preached them hurt, nor prayed;
Nor troubled them to crop our Ears,
Nor hang us like the Cavaliers;
Nor put them to the Charge of Gaols,
To find us Pillories and Carts-tails,
Or Hang-man's Wages, which the State
Was forced (before them) to be at,
That cut like Tallies to the Stumps
Our Ears for keeping true Accounts,
And burnt our Vessels, like a New-Seal'd
Peck or Bushel, for b'ing true.
But hand in hand, like faithful Brothers,
Held forth the Cause against all others,
Disdaining equally to yield
One Syllable of what we held.
And though we differed now and then
'Bout outward things, and outward Men:
Our inward Men and constant Frame
Of Spirit still were near the same.
And till they first began to Cant,
And Sprinkle down the Covenant,
We never had Call in any place,
Nor dreamed of Teaching down Free Grace;
But joined our Gifts perpetually
Against the Common Enemy:
Although 'twas our and their Opinion,
Each other's Church was but a Rimmon.
And yet for all this Gospel-Vnion,
And outward show of Church Communion,
They Will never admit us to our shares,
Of Ruling Church or State Affairs;
Nor give us leave to absolve, or sentence
TO our own Conditions of Repentance:
But shared our Dividend of the Crown
We had so painfully Preached down;
And forced us, though against the Grain,
TO have Calls to teach it up again.
For 'twas but Justice to Restore
The wrongs we had received before;
And then 'twas held forth in our way,
W' had been ungrateful not to pay:
Who for the Right w' have done the Nation,
Have earned our Temporal Salvation,
And put our Vessels in a way,
Once more to come again in Play.
For if the turning of us out,
Has brought this Providence about,
And that our only Suffering
Is able to bring in the King:
What would our Actions not have done,
Had we been suffered to go on?
And therefore may pretend to a share
At least in carrying on the Affair.
But whether that be so or not,
W' have done enough to have it thought;
And that is as good as if w' had don't,
And easier past upon account.
For if it be but half denied,
It Is half as good as justified.
The World is nat'rally averse
To all the truth it sees or hears,
But swallows Nonsense and a Lie
With greediness and gluttony;
And though it have the Pique, and long,
It Is still for something in the wrong:
As Women long, when the are with Child
For things extravagant and wild,
For Meats ridiculous, and fulsom,
But seldom any thing that is wholesome;
And, like the World, Men's Jobbernoles
Turn round upon their Ears, the Poles;
And what the are confidently told,
By no sense else can be controlled.
And this, perhaps, may prove the means,
Once more, to hedge in Providence.
For, as Relapses make Diseases
More disp'rate than their first Accesses;
If we but get again in Power,
Our Work is easier than before;
And we more ready and expert
In The Mystery, to do our Part.
We, who did rather undertake
The first War to create, than make:
And when of Nothing 'twas begun,
Raised Funds as strange, to carry't on;
Trepanned the State, and faced it down,
With Plots and Projects of our own:
And if we did such Feats at first,
What can we now w' are better versed?
Who have a freer Latitude
Then Sinners give themselves allowed?
And therefore likeliest to bring in
On fairest Terms, our Discipline.
To which it was revealed long since,
We were ordained by Providence:
When Three Saints Ears, our Predecessors,
The Cause's Primitive Confessors,
B'ing Crucified, the Nation stood
In just so many Years of Blood:
That multiplied by Six, expressed
The perfect Number of the Beast.
And proved that we must be the Men.
To bring this Work about again:
And those who laid the first Foundation,
Complete the through Reformation:
For who have Gifts to carry on
So great a Work, but we alone?
What Churches have such able Pastors?
And Precious, Powerful, Preaching-Masters?
Possessed with Absolute Dominions,
Over Brethren's Purses and Opinions?
And trusted with the Double Keys
Of Heaven, and their Warehouses:
Who, when the Cause is in Distress,
Can furnish out what Sums they please,
That Brooding lie in Bankers Hands,
To be disposed at their Commands:
And daily increase and multiply,
With Doctrine, Use and Usury.
Can fetch in Parties (as in War,
All other Heads of Cattle are;)
From the Enemy of all Religions,
As well as High and Low Conditions;
And share them from Blew Ribbands down.
To all Blew Aprons in the Town.
From Ladies hurried in Calleches,
With Cornets at their Footmen's Breeches,
To Bawds as fat as Mother Nab,
All Guts and Belly like a Crab.
Our Party's great, and better ti'd
With Oaths, and Trade, than any side:
Has one considerabl' Improvement,
To double fortify the Covenant;
I mean our Covenants to purchase
Delinquents Titles and the Churches:
That pass in Sale, from Hand, to Hand,
Among our selves, for Current Land.
And Rise or Fall, like Indian Actions,
According to the Rate of Factions:
Our best Reserve for Reformation,
When New-Out-goings give occasion:
That keeps the Loins of Brethren girt,
The Covenant (their Creed) to assert:
And when the have packed a Parliament,
Will once more try the Expedient,
Who can already muster Friends,
To serve for Members, to our Ends:
That represent no part of the Nation,
But Fisher's- Folly Congregation:
Are only Tools to our Intrigues,
And sit like Geese to hatch our Eggs:
Who, by their Precedents of Wit,
TO out-fast, out-leiter, and out-sit:
Can order matters under hand,
To put all Business to a stand:
Lay Public Bills aside, for Private,
And make 'em one another drive out;
Divert the Great and Necessary,
With Trifles to contest and vary;
And make the Nation represent,
And serve for us in Parliament;
Cut out more Work than can be done
On Plato's Year; but finish none,
Unless it be the Bulls of Lenthal,
That always past for Fundamental.
Can set up Grandee against Grandee,
To squander time away, and Bandy.
Make Lords and Commoners lay Sieges
To one another's Privileges;
And, rather than compound the Quarrel,
Engage to the inevitable peril
Of both their Ruins; the only Scope
And Consolation of our Hope:
Who, tho we do not play the Game,
Assist as much by giving Aim.
Can introduce our ancient Arts,
For Heads of Factions, to act their Parts.
Know what a Leading-Voice is worth;
A Seconding, a Third, or Fourth:
How much a Casting Vote comes to,
That turns up Trump, of I, or No;
And by Adjusting at the End,
Share every one his Dividend.
An Art that so much Study cost.
And now is in danger to be lost;
Unless our Ancient Virtuoso's,
That found it out, get into the Houses.
These are the Courses that we took
To carry things, by Hook, or Crook:
And parctic'd down from Forty Four,
Until they turned us out of Door;
Besides the Herds of Boutefeus,
We set on work, without the House.
When every Knight and Citizen
Kept Legislative Journey-men,
To bring them in Intelligence
From all Points of the Rabbles Sense;
And fill the Lobbies of both Houses
With Politic Important Buzzes:
Set up Committees of Cabals,
To pack Designs without the Walls.
Examine, and draw up all News,
And fit it to our present Use.
Agree upon the Plot in the Farce,
And every one his Part rehearse.
Make Q's of Answers, to way-lay
What the other Parties like to say,
What Repartees, and smart Reflections
Shall be returned to all Objections:
And who shall break the Master-Jest,
And what, and how, upon the rest:
Help Pamphlets out, with safe Editions,
Of Proper Slanders and Seditions:
And Treason for a Token send,
By Letter, to a Country Friend.
Disperse Lampoons, the only Wit,
That Men, like Burglary, commit:
Wit, falser than a Padder's Face,
That all its Owner does, betrays:
Who therefore dare not trust it, when
He Is in his Calling, to be seen.
Disperse the Dung on Barren Earth,
To bring new Weeds of Discord forth.
Be sure to keep up Congregations,
In spite of Laws and Proclamation^;
For Chiarlatans can do no good,
Until the are mounted in a Crowd:
And when the are punished, all the Hurt
Is but to fare the better for it*
As long as Confessors are sure
Of double Pay for all the endure:
And What they earn in Persecution,
Are paid to a Groat in Contribution.
Whence some Tub-holders-forth have made
In Powdring-Tubs, their richest Trade:
And while they keep their Shops in Prison,
Have found their Prices strangely risen,
Disdain to own the least Regret
For all the Christian Blood w' have let;
'Twill save our Credit, and maintain
Our Title, to do so again;
That needs not cost one Dram of Sense,
But Pertinacious Impudence:
Our Constancy to our Principles,
In time, will wear out all things else;
Like Marble Statues, rubbed to pieces,
With Gallantry of Pilgrim's Kisses;
While those who turn and wind their Oaths
Have swelled, and sunk like other Froths.
Prevailed a while, but 'twas not long,
Before from World to World they swung:
As they had turned from side, to side;
And as the Changelings lived they died.
This said; the impatient States-Monger
Could now contain himself no longer;
Who had not spared to show his Picques,
Against the Haranguers Piliticks?
With smart Remarks of Leering Faces,
And Annotations of Grimaeces,
After he had ministered a Dose
Of Snuff-Mundungus, to his Nose;
And powdered the inside of his Skull,
Instead of the outward Jobbernol:
He shook it, with a scornful Look
On the Adversary, and thus he spoke.
In Dressing a Calve's Head, although
The Tongue and Brains together go,
Both keep so great a distance here,
It Is strange, if ever they come near:
For, who did ever play his Gambols,
With such unsuff^rable Rambles?
To make the bringing in the King,
And keeping of him out, one thing?
Which none can do, but those who swore
T'as Point Blank Nonsense heretofore:
That to Defend was to Invade,
And to Assassinate, to Aid:
Unless because you drove him out,
(And that was never made a Doubt)
No Power is able to restore
And bring him in, but on your Score.
A Spiritual Doctine, that conduces
Most properly, to all your Uses
It Is true, a Scorpion's Oil is said
To cure the Wounds the Vermin made;
And Weapons dressed with Salves, restore
And heal the Hurts they gave before:
But whether Presbyterians have
So much Good Nature as the Salve,
Or Virtue in them as the Vermin,
Those who have tried 'em can determine.
Indeed, it is pity you should miss
The Arrears of all your Services,
And for the Eternal Obligation
Y' have laid upon the ungrateful Nation:
B'us'd so unconscionable hard,
As not to find a just Reward.
For letting Rapine loose, and Murder,
To rage just so far, but no further:
And setting all the Land on fire,
To burn to a Scanting, but no higher:
For vent'ring to assassinate,
And cut the Throats of Church and State:
And not be allowed the fittest Men
To take the Charge of both again.
Especially, that have the Grace
Of Self-denying, Gifted Face;
Who, when your Projects have miscarri'd,
Can lay them, with undaunted Forehead.
On those you painfully trepanned,
And sprinkled in at Second Hand.
As we have been, to share the Guilt
Of Christian Blood, devoutly spilt;
For so our Ignorance was flamed,
To damn our selves, to avoid being damned:
Till finding your old Foe, the Hangman,
Was like to lurch you at Back-Gammon;
And win your Necks upon the Set,
As well as ours, who did but Bet:
(For he had drawn your Ears before,
And nicked 'em on the self-same Score:)
We threw the Box and Dice away,
Before y' had lost us at foul Play:
And brought you down to Rook, and Lie,
And Fancy only, on the By.
Redeemed your forfeit Jobbernoles,
From pearching upon lofty Poles:
And rescued all your Outward Traitors
From hanging up like Allegators:
For which ingeniously y' have showed
Your Presbyterian Gratitude:
Would freely have paid us home in kind,
And not have been one Rope behind.
Those were your Motives to divide,
And scruple, on the other side,
To turn your Zealous Frauds, and Force,
To Fits of Conscience and Remorse.
To be convinced they were in vain,
And face about for New again:
For Truth no more unvailed your Eyes,
Than Maggots are convinced to Flies:
And therefore, all your Lights and Call*
Are but Apocryphal, and False*
To charge us with the Consequences
Of all your Native Insolences.
That to your own Imperious Wills,
Laid Law and Gospel Neck and Heels:
Corrupted the Old Testament,
To serve the New for Precedent:
TO amend its Errors and Defects,
With Murder and Rebellion-Texts:
Of which there is not any one
In all the Book, to sow upon:
And therefore (from your Tribe) the Jews
Held Christian Doctrine forth and Use:
As Mahomet (your Chief) began
To mix them in the Alchoran:
Denounced, and prayed with Fierce Devotion,
And bended Elbows on the Cushion:
Stole from the Beggars all your Tones,
And Gifted Mortifying Groans:
Had Lights where better Eyes were blind,
As Pigs are said to see the Wind:
Filled Bedlam with Predestination,
And Knights-Bridge with Illumination:
Made Children, with your Tones, to run for it,
As bad as Bloody Bones or Lunsford.
While Women, Great with Child, miscarri'd:
For being to Malignants married:
Transformed all Wives to Dalilahs,
Whose Husbands were not for the Cause:
And turned the Men to Ten-Horn'd Cattle,
Because they came not out to Battle:
Made Tailors Prentices turn Heroes,
For fear of being transformed to Meroz;
And rather forfeit their Indentures,
Than not espouse the Saints Adventures.
Could Transubstantiate, Metamorphose,
And charm whole Herds of Beasts, like Orpheus;
Inchant the King's and Churches Lands,
TO obey and follow your Commands:
And settle on a New Freehold,
As Marcly-Hill had done of Old.
Could turn the Covenant, and translate
The Gospel into Spoons and Plate:
Expound upon all Merchants Cashes,
And open the intricatest Places:
Could Catechize a Money Box,
And prove all Powches Orthodox;
Until the Cause became a Damon,
And Pythias, the wicked Mammon.
And yet, in spite of all your Charms,
To conjure Legion up, in Arms;
And raise more Devils in the Rout,
Than ever ywere able to cast out:
Y' have been reduced, and by those Fools,
Bred up (you say) in your own Schools:
Who, though but gifted at your feet,
Have made it plain, they have more Wit.
By whom you have been so often trepan'd,
And held forth out of all Command:
Out-gifted, Out-impuls'd, Outdone,
And Out-reveal'd at Carryings on.
Of all your Dispensations Worm'd,
Out-providenc'd, and Out-reform'd.
Ejected out of Church, and State,
And all things, but the People's Hate:
And spirited out of the Enjoyments
Of precious, edifying Employments;
By those who lodged their Gifts and Graces,
Like better Bowlers, in your Places.
All which you bore, with Resolution,
Charged on the Account of Persecution:
And though, most Righteously oppressed,
Against your Wills, still acquiest:
And never Hum'd and Hah'd Sedition,
Nor snuffled Treason, nor Misprision.
That is, because you never durst;
For had you preached and prayed your worst,
Alas, you were no longer able
To raise your Posse of the Rabble:
One single Red-Coat Sentinel
Out-charm'd the Magic of the Spell;
And with his Squirt-fire, could disperse
Whole Troops, with Chapter raised, and Verse:
We knew too well those tricks of yours,
To leave it ever in your Powers:
Or trust our Safeties, or Vndoings,
To your disposing of Outgoings;
Or to your Ordering Providence,
One Farthings-worth of Consequence
For had you Power to undermine,
Or Wit to carry a Design,
Or Correspondence to trepan,
Inveagle, or betray one Man;
There Is nothing else that intervenes,
And bars your Zeal to use the means.
And therefore wondrous like, no doubt,
To bring in Kings, or keep them out:
Brave undertakers to restore,
That could not keep your selves in power
TO advance the Intersts of the Crown,
That wanted Wit to keep your own.
It Is true, you have (for I Would be loath
To wrong ye) done your Parts, in Both;
To keep him out, and bring him in,
As Grace is introduced by Sin;
For 'twas your zealous want of Sense,
And sanctified Impertinence:
Your carrying business in a Huddle,
That forced our Rulers to New-Modle;
Obliged the State to tack about,
And turn you, Root and Branch, all out;
To Reformado, One and All,
TO your Great Croysado, General:
Your greedy slav'ring to devour
Before 'twas in your Clutches, Power.
That sprung the Game you were to set,
Before y' had time to draw the Net:
Your spite to see the Churches Lands
Divided into other Hands.
And all your Sacrilegious Ventures,
Laid out on Tickets and Debentures;
Your Envy to be sprinkled down,
By Under Churches in the Town.
And no Course used to stop their Mouths,
Nor the Independants spreading Growths
All which considered, it is most true,
None bring him in so much as you.
Who have prevailed, beyond their Plots,
Their Midnight Junto's, and sealed Knots;
That thrive more by your Zealous Piques,
Than all their own rash Politics.
And th^s way you may claim a share,
In carrying (as you brag) the Affair;
Else Frogs, and Toads, that croak'd the Jews,
From Pharo, and his Brick-kills-loose:
And Flies, and Mange, that set them free,
From Taskmasters, and Slavery:
Were likelier to do the Feat,
In any indifferent Man's Conceit;
For who ever heard of Restoratian,
Until your thorough Reformation:
That is, the King's and Churches Lands
Were sequestered int' other Hands?
For, only then, and not before,
Your Eyes were opened to restore.
And when the Work was carrying on,
Who crossed it, but your selves alone?
As, by a World of Hints, appears,
All plain, and extant, as your Ears.
But first of the first; the Isle of Wight
Will rise up, if you should deny't;
Where Hinderson, and the other Masses,
Were sent to cap Texts, and put Cases:
To pass for Deep and Learned Scholars;
Although but Paltry, Ob-and-Sollers:
As if the unseasonable Fools
Had been a Cursing in the Schools;
Until the had proved the Devil Author
OF the Covenant, and the Cause, his Daughter;
For, when they charged him with the Guilt
Of all the Blood that had been spilt;
They did not mean, he wrought the Effusion
In Person, like Sir Pride, or Hughson;
But only those, who first begun
The Quarrel, were by him set on.
And who could those be but the Saints,
Those Reformation-Termegants?
But ever this past, the wise Debate
Spent so much time, it grew too late;
For Oliver had gotten Ground,
TO enclose them, with his Warriers, round:
Had brought his Providence about,
And turned the untimely Sophists out.
Nor had the Uxbridge business less
Of Nonsense in it, and sottishness,
When from a Scoundrel Holder-forth,
The Scum, as well as Son of the Earth,
Your mighty Senators took Law
At his Command, were forced to withdraw;
And sacrifice the Peace of the Nation
To Doctrine, Use, and Application.
So when the Scots, your constant Cronies,
The Espousers of your Cause, and Moneys:
Who had so often, in your Aid,
So many ways been soundly paid;
Came in at last, for better Ends,
To prove themselves your trusty Friends,
You basely left them, and the Church,
The had trained you up to, in the Lurch,
And suffered your own Tribe of Christians
To fall before, as true Philistines.
This shows what Vtensils y' have been,
To bring the King's Concernments in
Which is so far from being true,
That none but He can bring in You.
And if he take you into trust,
Will find you most exactly just:
Such as will punctually repay
With double Interest, and betray.
Not that I think those Pantomimes,
Who vary Action with the Times;
Are less ingenious in their Art,
Than those who dully act one Part;
Or those who turn from Side to Side;
More guilty than the Wind and Tide.
All Countries are a Wise man's Home,
And so are Governments to some,
Who change them for the same Intrigues
That Statesmen use in breaking Leagues:
While others in Old Faiths and Troths,
Look od^, as in Out-of-fashion'd Clothes:
And nastier, in an old Opinion,
Than those who never shift their Linen.
For True and Faithful's sure to loose,
Which way soever the Game goes:
And whether Parties lose or win,
Is always nicked, or else hedged in.
While Power usurped like stolen delight,
Is more bewitching than the Right.
And when the Times begin to alter,
None rise so high as from the Halter.
And so may we, if w' have but Sense
To use the necessary Means,
And not your usual Stratagems
On one another, Lights and Dreams.
To stand on Terms as positive,
As if we did not take, but give:
Set up the Covenant on Crutches,
Against those who have us in their Clutches;
And dream of pulling Churches down,
Before w' are sure to prop our own:
Your constant Method of Proceeding,
Without the Carnal Means of Heeding:
Who, 'twixt your Inward Sense, and Outward,
Are worse, than if you had none, accoutred.
I grant, all Courses are in vain,
Unless we can get in again;
The only way that is left us now,
But all the difficulty's, How?
It Is true! w' have Money, the only Power
That all Mankind falls down before:
Money, that, like the Swords of Kings,
Is the last Reason of all things.
And therefore, need not doubt our Play
Has all advantages that way;
As long as Men have Faith to sell,
And meet with those that can pay well.
Whose half-starv'd Pride and Avarice,
One Church and State will not suffice,
TO expose to Sale; beside the Wages
Of storing Plagues to after Ages.
Nor is our Money less our own,
Than 'twas before we laid it down:
For 'twill return, and turn to Account,
If we are brought in Play upon it;
Or, but by Casting Knaves, get in,
What Power can hinder us to win?
We know the Arts we used before,
In Peace and War, and something more:
And by the unfortunate Events,
Can mend our next Experiments.
For, when w' are taken into Trust,
How easy are the Wisest choust?
Who see but the outsides of our Feats,
And not their secret Springs and Weights;
And while the are busy at their ease,
Can carry what Designs we please:
How easy is it to serve for Agents,
To prosecute our old Engagements?
To keep the Good Old Cause on Foot,
And present Power from taking Root?
Inflame them both with false Alarms,
Of Plots, and Parties, taking Arms;
To keep the Nation's Wounds too wide
For healing up of Side to Side.
Profess the passionat'st Concerns,
For both their Interests, by Turns.
The only way to improve our own,
By dealing faithfully with none;
(As Bowls run true, by being made
Of purpose false, and to be swayed)
For, if we should be true to either,
'Twould turn us out of both together:
And therefore have no other Means,
To stand upon our own Defense;
But keeping up our Ancient Party
In Vigor, Confident, and Hearty:
To reconcile our late Dissenters,
Our Brethren, though by other Venters,
Unite them and their different Maggots,
As long and short Sticks are in Faggots.
And make them join again as close,
As when they first began to Espouse;
Erect them into Separate
New Jewish Tribes, in Church and State;
To join in Marriage and Commerce,
And only among themselves Converse.
And all that are not of their Mind,
Make Enemies to all Mankind:
Take all Religions in and stickle,
From Conclave, down to Conventicle;
Agreeing still, or disagreeing,
According to the Light in Being.
Sometimes, for Liberty of Conscience,
And Spiritual miss-rule, in one Sense.
But in another quite contrary,
As Dispensations chance to vary:
And stand for, as the times will bear it,
All Contradictions of the Spirit:
Protect their Emessaries, empowered
To preach Sedition and the Word:
And when the are hampered by the Laws,
Release the Lab'rers for the Cause;
And turn the Persecution back,
On those that made the first Attack.
To keep them equally in awe,
From breaking or maintaining Law;
And when they have their Fits to soon,
Before the Full-Tides of the Moon:
Put off their Zeal to a fitter Season,
For sowing Faction in, and Treason;
And keep them hooded, and their Churches,
Like Hawks from bating on their Perches.
That when the Blessed Time shall come,
Of quitting Babylon and Rome,
They may be ready to restore
Their own Fifth-Monarchy, once more;
Mean while, be better Armed to Fence,
Against Revolts of Providence;
By watching narrowly, and snapping
All blind sides of it, as they happen:
For, if Success could make us Saints,
Our Ruin turned us Miscreants:
A Scandal that would fall too hard
Upon a Few, and unprepared.
These are the Courses we must run,
Spite of our Hearts, or be undone:
And not to stand on Terms and Freaks,
Before we have secured our Necks.
But do our Work, as out of sight,
As Stars by Day, and Suns by Night:
All License of the People own,
In opposition to the Crown.
And for the Crown as fiercely side,
The Head and Body to divide;
The end of all we first designed,
And all that yet remains behind:
Be sure to spare no public Rapine,
On all Emergencies that happen;
For it is as easy to supplant
Authority, as Men in want:
As some of us, in trusts, have made
The one hand with the other trade;
Gained vastly, by their Joynt-endeavour;
The right a Thief, the left Receiver.
And what the one, by tricks, forestalled,
The other, by as sly, Retail'd.
For Gain has wonderful Effects,
TO improve the Factory of Sects;
The Rule of Faith in all Professions,
And great Diana of the Ephesians:
Whence turning of Religion's made
The means to turn and wind a Trade.
And though some change it for the worse,
They put themselves into a Course;
And draw in store of Customers,
To thrive the better in Commerce:
For, all Religions flock together,
Like Tame, and Wild-Fowl of a Feather;
To nab the Itches of their Sects;
As Jades do one another's Necks.
Hence it is, Hypocrisy, as well,
Will serve to improve a Church, as Zeal;
As Persecution, or Promotion,
Do equally advance Devotion.
Let Business, like ill Watches, go,
Sometime too fast, sometime to slow:
For, things in order are put out
So easy, Ease it self will do it.
But when the Feat's designed and meant,
What Miracle can bar the event?
For it is more easy to betray,
Than ruin any other way.
All possible Occasions start,
The Weighty'st Matters to divert:
Obstruct, Perplex, Distract, Entangle,
And lay perpetual Trains to wrangle:
But in Affairs of less Import,
That neither do us Good nor Hurt,
And they receive as little by,
Out-fawn as much, and Out-comply:
And seem as scrupulously just,
To bait our Hooks for greater Trust.
But still be careful to cry down
All public Actions, though our own:
The least Miscarriage aggravate,
And charge it all upon the State:
Express the horrid'st Detestation,
And pity the distracted Nation.
Tell Stories, scandalous and false,
IN the proper Language of Cabals:
Where all a subtle Statesman says
Is half in Words, and half in Face:
(As Spaniards talk in Dialogues,
Of Heads and Shoulders, Nods and Shrugs)
Entrust it under solemn Vows
Of Mum and Silence, and the Rose,
To be retail'd again in Whispers,
For the easy credulous to disperse.
Thus far the Statesman. When a Shout,
Heard at a distance, put him out.
And strait another, all aghast,
Rushed in with equal Fear and Haste:
Who star'd about, as pale as Death,
And for a while, as out of Breath;
Till having gathered up his Wits;
He thus began his Tale by Fits.
That beastly Rabble, -- that came down,
From all the Garrets -- in the Town,
And Stalls, and Shop-boards -- in vast Swarms,
With new-chalk'd Bills, -- and rusty Arms,
To cry the Cause -- up, heretofore,
And bawl the Bishops -- out of Door;
Are now drawn up, -- in greater Shoals,
To Roast -- and Broil us on the Coals:
And all the Grandees -- of our Members
Are Carbonading on -- the Embers;
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses --
Held forth by Rumps -- of Pigs and Geese.
That serve for Characters -- and Badges,
To represent their Personages,
Each Bone-fire is a Funeral Pile,
In which they Roast, and Scorch, and Broil;
And every Representative
Have vowed to Roast -- and Broil alive;
And it is a Miracle, we are not
Already, sacrificed Incarnate.
For, while we wrangle here, and jar,
W' are Grylly'd all at Temple Bar:
Some, on the Sign-post of an Alehouse,
Hang in Effigy, on the Gallows,
Made up of Rags, to personate
Respective Officers of State;
That henceforth they may stand reputed,
Proscribed in Law, and Executed,
And while the Work is carrying on,
Be ready Listed under Dun;
That Worthy Patriot, once the Bellows,
And Tinder-box of all his Fellows.
The activ'st Member of the Five,
As well as the most Primitive:
Who, for his faithful Service then,
Is chosen for a Fifth again;
(For, since the State has made a Quint
Of Generals, he is listed in it.)
This Worthy, as the World will say,
Is paid in Specie, his own way;
For, molded to the Life in Clouts,
The have picked from Dung-hills hereabouts:
He Is mounted on a Hazel Bavin,
A crop'd Malignant Baker gave 'em:
And, to the largest Bonefire riding,
The have roasted Cook already, and Pride-m.
On whom, in Equipage, and State,
His Scarecrow Fellow Members wait;
And March in Order, two and two,
As at Thanksgivings the used to do:
Each in a tattered Talismane,
Like Vermin in Effigy slain.
But (what is more dreadful than the rest)
Those Rumps are but the Tail of the Beast;
Set up by Popish Engineers,
As by the Crackers plainly appears:
For, none but Jesuits have a Mission
To preach the Faith with Ammunition;
And propagate the Church with Powder,
Their Founder was a blown up Soldier.
These Spiritual Pioneers of the Whores,
That have the Charge of all her Stores;
Since first they failed in their Designs,
To take in Heaven by springing Mines;
And with unanswerable Barrels
Of Gunpowder, dispute their Quarrels:
Now take a Course more practicable,
By laying Trains to fire the Rabble,
And blow us up in the open Streets;
Disguised in Rumps, like Sambenites;
More like to Ruin, and Confound,
Than all their Doctrines underground.
Nor have they chosen Rumps amiss,
For Symbols of State-Mysteries;
Though some suppose, 'twas but to show
How much they scorned the Saints, The Few;
Who, 'cause the are wasted to the stumps,
Are represented best by Rumps,
But Jesuits have deeper Reaches
In all their Politic Far-fetches:
And from their Coptick Priest, Kirkerus,
Found out this Mystic way to jeer us.
For, as the Egyptians used, by Bees,
TO express their Antic Ptolomies;
And by their Stings, the Swords they wore,
Held forth Authority and Power:
Because these subtle Animals
Bear all their Interests in their Tails;
And when the are once impaired in that,
Are banished their Well-ordered State:
They thought all Governments were best,
By Hieroglyphick Rumps, expressed,
For, as in Bodies Natural,
The Rump's the Fundament of all;
So, in a Commomwealth, or Realm,
The Government is called the Helm:
With which, like Vessels under Sail,
The are turned and winded by the Tail.
The Tail, which Birds and Fishes steer
Their Courses with, through Sea and Air;
To whom the Rudder of the Rump is
The same thing with the Stern and Compass.
This shows how perfectly the Rump
And Commonwealth in Nature jump.
For, as a Fly, that goes to Bed,
Rests with his Tail above his Head;
So in this Mung^el State of ours,
The Rabble are the Supreme Powers.
That Horsed us on their Backs, to show us
A Jadish trick at last, and throw us.
The Learned Rabbis of the Jews
Write, there is a Bone which they call Luez,
In The Rump of Man, of such a Virtue,
No force in Nature can do hurt to;
And therefore, at the last Great Day,
All the other Members shall, they say,
Spring out of this, as from a Seed,
All sorts of Vegetals proceed:
From whence, the Learned Sons of Art,
Os Sacrum, justly style that Part.
Then what can better represent,
Than this Rump-bone, the Parliament?
That after several rude Ejections,
And as prodigious Resurrections;
With new Reversions of nine Lives,
Starts up, and like a Cat, revives?
But now, alas, the are all expired,
And the House, as well as Members fired;
Comsum'd in Kennels; by the Rout,
With which they other Fires put out:
Condemned to ungoverning Distress,
And Paultry, Private Wretchedness:
Worse than the Devil to Privation,
Beyond all hopes of Restoration;
And parted like the Body and Soul,
From all Dominion and Control.
We, who could lately, with a Look,
Enact, Establish, or Revoke;
Whose Arbitrary Nods gave Law,
And Frowns kept multitudes in Awe:
Before the Bluster of whose Huff,
All Hats, as in a Storm, flew off.
Adored and bowed to, by the Great,
Down to the Footman, and Valet.
Had more bent Knees than Chappel-Mats,
And Prayers, than the Crowns of Hats;
Shall now be scorned as wretchedly,
For Ruin's just as low as high;
Which might be suffered, were it all
The Horror, that attends our Fall:
For, some of us have Scores more large
Than Heads and Quarters can discharge.
And others who, by restless scraping
With Public Frauds, and private Rapine;
Have mighty Heaps of Wealth amassed,
Would gladly lay-down all at last:
And to be but undone, Entail
Their Vessels on perpetual Jail;
And bless the Devil to let them Farms
Of forfeit Souls, on no worse terms.
This said, A near and louder Shout
Put all the Assembly to the Rout:
Who now begun to outrun their fear,
As Horses do, from those that bear:
But crowded on, with so much haste,
Until the had blocked the Passage fast;
And Barricadoed it with Haunches
Of Outward Men, and Bulks, and Paunches:
That with their shoulders strove to squeeze,
And rather save a Cripled piece
Of all their crushed and broken Members,
Than have them Grillied on the Embers:
Still pressing on with heavy Packs,
Of one another, on their Backs:
The Vanguard could no longer bear
The Charges of the Forlorn Rere;
But born down headlong by the Rout,
Were trampled sorely under Foot.
Yet nothing proved so formidable,
As the horrid Cookery of the Rabble:
And Fear that keeps all Feeling out,
As lesser Pains are, by the Gout,
Relieved 'em with a fresh Supply
Of rallied Force, enough to fly;
And beat a Tuscan Running Horse,
Whose Jocky-Rider is all Spurs.
CANTO III.
The ARGUMENT.
The Knight and Squire's Prodigious Flight:
To quit the Enchanted Bower by Night:
He plods to turn his Amorous Suit
TO a Plea in Law, and prosecute:
Repairs to Counsel, to advise
'Bout managing the Enterprise:
But first resolves to try by Letter,
And once more, fair Address, to get her.
WHo would believe what strange Bugbears
Mankind creates it self, of Fears?
That spri^g like Fern, that Insect Weed,
Equivocally, without Seed;
And have no possible Foundation,
But merely in the Imagination:
And yet can do more dreadful Feats,
Than Hags, with all their Imps and Teats:
Make more bewitch and haunt themselves,
Than all their Nurseries of Elves.
For fear does things so like a Witch,
It Is hard to unriddle which is which.
Sets up Communities of Senses,
To chop and change Intelligences:
As Rosi-crusian Virtuoso's,
Can see with Ears, and hear with Noses:
And when they neither see nor hear,
Have more than both supplied by Fear;
That makes 'em in the dark see Visions,
And hag themselves with Apparitions.
And when their Eyes discover least,
Discern the subt'lest Objects best.
Do things not contrary alone
To the Course of Nature, but its own.
The Courage of the Bravest daunt,
And turn Pultroons as valiant;
For Men as resolute appear
With too much, as too little Fear.
And when the are out of hopes of flying,
Will run away from Death by dying:
Or turn again to stand it out,
And those that fled, like Lions Rout.
This Hudibras had proved too true,
Who, by the Furies, left Perdue:
And haunted with Detachments, sent
From Marshal-Legion's Regiment;
Was by a Fiend, as counterfeit,
Relieved and Rescued with a Cheat:
When nothing but himself and fear
Was both the Imps and Conjurer:
As by the Rules o'th Virtuosi,
It follows in due Form of Posie.
Disguised in all the Masks of Night,
We left our Champion on his flight:
At Blind-man's-buff, to grope his way,
In equal fear, of Night and Day:
Who took his dark and desperate Course,
He knew no better than his Horse;
And by an unknown Devil led,
(He knew as little whether) fled,
He never was in greater need,
Nor less Capacity of Speed:
Disabled both in Man and Beast,
To fly, and run away, his best;
To keep the Enemy, and Fear,
From equal falling on his Rere.
And tho with Kicks and bangs he plied
The further, and the nearer side:
(As Seamen ride with all their force,
And Tug as if they Rowed the Horse;
And when the Hackney Sails most swift,
Believe they lag, or run a-drift)
So though he posted ever so fast,
His Fear was greater than his Haste:
For Fear, though fleeter than the Wind,
Believes it is always left behind.
But when the Morn began to appear,
And shift to another Scene his Fear;
He found his new Officious Shade,
That came so timely to his Aid;
And forced him from the Foe to escape,
Had turned it self to Ralpho 's shape.
So like in Person, Garb, and Pitch,
'Twas hard to interpret which was which.
For Ralpho had no sooner told
The Lady all he had to unfold,
But she conveyed him out of sight.
To entertain the approaching Knight.
And while he gave himself Diversion,
TO accommodate his Beast and Person,
And put his Beard into a posture,
At best advantage to accost her:
She ordered the Antimasquerade,
(For his Reception) aforesaid:
But when the Ceremony was done,
The Lights put out, and Furies gone;
And Hudibras, amongst the rest,
Conveyed away, as Ralpho guest:
The wretched Caitiff all alone,
(As he believed) began to moan,
And tell his Story to himself;
The Knight mistook him for an Elf.
And did so still, till he began
To scruple at Ralph's Outward Man;
And thought, because they often agreed,
TO appear in one another's stead;
And act the Saint 's and Devil 's Part.
With undistinguishable Art;
They might have done so now perhaps,
And put on one another's Shapes;
And therefore, to resolve the doubt,
He star'd upon him, and cried out.
What art? My Squire, or that bold Sprite,
That took his Place and Shape to Night?
Some busy Independent Pug,
Retainer to his Synagogue?
Alas, quoth he, I Am none of those
Your Bosom-Friends, as you suppose;
But Ralph himself, your trusty Squire,
Wh' has dragged your Dunship out of the mire;
And from the Enchantments of a Widow,
Wh' had turned you int' a Beast, have freed you.
And though a Prisoner of War,
Have brought you safe, where now you are.
Which you would gratefully repay,
Your constant Presbyterian way.
That Is stranger (quoth the Knight) and stranger:
Who gave thee notice of my danger?
Quoth he, The Infernal Conjurer
Pursued, and took me Prisoner;
And knowing you were hereabout,
Brought me along, to find you out.
Where I, in Hugger-mugger hid,
Have noted all they said and did:
And though they lay to him the Pageant,
I did not see him, nor his Agent;
Who played their Sorceries out of sight,
TO avoid a fiercer, second Fight.
But, did thou see no Devils then?
Not one, quoth he, but Carnal Men.
A little worse than Fiends in Hell,
And that She-Devil, Jezabel;
That laughed and tee-he'd with derision,
To see them take your Deposition.
What then ( quoth Hudibras) was he
That played the Devilish, to examine me?
A Rallying Weaver in the Town,
That did it in a Parson's Gown:
Whom all the Parish takes for gifted;
But, for my part, I never believed it.
In which you told them all your Feats,
Your Conscientious Frauds and Cheats;
Denied your Whipping, and confessed
The naked Truth of all the rest:
More plainly than the Reverend Writer,
That to our Churches veiled his Mitre.
All which they took in Black and White,
And cudgel'd me to under-write.
What made thee, when they all were gone,
And none but thou and I alone;
To act the Devil, and forbear
To rid me of my Hellish Fear?
Quoth he, I knew your constant Rate,
And Frame of Sp'rite, too obstinate,
To be by me prevailed upon
With any Motives of my own:
And therefore strove to counterfeit
The Devilish a while, to Nick your Wit.
The Devil, that is your constant Crony,
That only can prevail upon ye;
Else we might still have been disputing,
And they with weighty Drubs confuting.
The Knight, who now began to find
The had left the Enemy behind;
And saw no farther harm remain,
But feeble Weariness and Pain,
Perceived, by losing of their Way,
The had gained the advantage of the Day;
And by declining of the Road,
They had by chance their Rere made good.
He ventured to dismiss his Fear,
That parting's wont to Rant and Tear.
And gives the desperat'st Attack
To danger, still behind its Back.
For, having paws'd to recollect,
And on his past Success reflect,
TO examine and consider why,
And whence, and how, he came to fly;
And when no Devil had appeared,
What else, it could be said, he feared?
It put him in so fierce a Rage;
He once resolved to re-engage;
Tossed like a Football back again,
With Shame, and Vengeance, and Disdain.
Quoth he, It was thy Cowardice
That made me from this Leaguer rise;
And when I had half reduced the place,
To quit it infamously base.
Was better covered by thy New
Arrived Detachment than I knew:
To slight my new Acquest, and run
Victoriously, from Battles won.
And reckoning all I gained or lost,
To sell them cheaper than they cost,
To make me put my self to flight;
And Conquering, run away by night.
To drag me out, which the haughty Foe,
Durst never have presumed to do.
To mount me in the dark by force,
Upon the bare Ridge of my Horse.
Exposed in Querpo to their Rage,
Without my Arms and Equipage;
Lest, if they ventured to pursue,
I might the unequal Fight renew.
And, to preserve thy Outward Man,
Assumed my Place, and led the Van.
All this, quoth Ralph, I did, it is true,
Not to preserve my self, but you.
You, who were damned to baser Drubs,
Than Wretches feel in Powd'ring Tubs;
To mount two wheeled Carroches, worse
Than mannaging a Wooden Horse:
Dragged out through straiter Holes, by the Ears,
Eras'd, or Coup'd for Perjurers.
Who, though the Attempt had proved in vain,
Had had no reason to complain:
But since it prosper'd, it is unhandsome
To blame the Hand that paid your Ransom:
And rescued your obnoxious Bones
From unavoidable Battoons.
The Enemy was reinforced,
And we disabled and unhors'd:
Disarmed, unqualifi'd for Fight;
And no way left, but hasty Flight.
Which, though as desperate in the Attempt,
Has given you freedom to condemn't.
But were our Bones in fit Condition
To reinforce the Expedition,
It Is now unseasonable, and vain,
To think of falling on again:
No Martial Project to surprise,
Can ever be attempted twice;
Nor cast design serve afterward,
As Gamesters tear their losing Cards.
Beside, our bangs of man and Beast
Are fit for nothing now but Rest.
And for a while will not be able
To rally, and prove serviceable.
And therefore I with reason chose
This Stratagem, to amuse our Foes.
To make an Honorable Retreat,
And wave a total sure Defeat:
For, those that fly, may fight again,
Which he can never do that is slain.
Hence timely Running's no mean part
Of Conduct, in the Martial Art,
By which some Glorious Feats atchieve
As Citizens, by breaking, thrive.
And Cannons conquer Armies, while
They seem to draw off and recoyl.
Is held the gallantest Course, and bravest,
To great Exploits, as well as safest:
That spares the Expense of Time and Pains,
And dangerous beating out of Brains.
And in the end prevails, as certain,
As those that never trust to Fortune;
But make their Fear do Execution,
Beyond the stoutest Resolution;
As Earthquakes kill, without a Blow,
And only trembling, overthrow.
If the Ancients Crowned their bravest men
That only saved a Citizen,
What Victory could ever be won,
If every one would save but one?
Or Fight endangered to be lost,
Where all resolve to save the most?
By this means, when a Battel's won,
The War's as far from being done:
For those that save themselves, and fly,
Go halves, at least, in the Victory:
And sometime, when their loss is small,
And danger great, they challenge all:
Print new additions to their Feats,
And Emendations in Gazets;
And when, for furious haste to run,
They durst not stay to fire a Gun:
Have don't with Bone-fires, and at home,
Make Squibs and Crackers overcome.
To set the Rabble on a Flame,
And keep their Governors from Blame,
Disperse the News, the Pulpit tells,
Confirmed with Fireworks, and with Bells:
And though reduced to that Extreme,
They have been forced to sing Te Deum;
Yet, with Religious Blasphemy,
By flattering Heaven with a Lie,
And for their Beating, giving Thanks,
The have raised Recruits, and filled their Banks;
For those who run from the Enemy,
Engage them equally to fly.
And when the Fight becomes a Chase,
Those win the Day, that win the Race;
And that which would not pass in Fights,
Has done the Feat with easy Slights.
Recovered many a desperate Campain,
With Bourdeaux, Burgundy and Champain.
Restored the fainting High and Mighty
With Brandy-Wine and Aqua-vitae.
And made them stoutly overcome,
With Bacrach, Hocamore and Mum:
Whom, the uncontrolled Decrees of Fate
To Victory necessitate;
With which, although they run or burn,
They unavoidably return:
Or else their Sultan-Populaces
Still stra^gle all their routed Bassa's.
Quoth Hudibras, I understand
What Fights thou mean at Sea and Land;
And who those were that run away,
And yet gave out the had won the day:
Although the Rabble souc'd them for it,
Over Head and Ears in Mud and Dirt.
It Is true, our Modern way of War
Is grown more politic by far;
But not so resolute and bold,
Nor tied to Honor, as the Old.
For, now they laugh at giving Battle,
Unless it be to Herds of Cattle:
Or fighting Convoys of Provision,
The whole design of the Expedition.
And not with downright blows to rout
The Enemy, but eat them out:
As Fighting in all Beasts of Prey,
And Eating are performed one way,
To give defiance to their teeth,
And fight their stubborn Guts to death,
And those atchieve the highest Renown,
That bring the other Stomachs down,
There Is now no fear of wounds nor maiming,
All dangers are reduced to Famine.
And Feats of Arms, to Plot, Design,
Surprise, and Stratagem, and Mine.
But have no need, nor use of Courage,
Unless it be for Glory, or Forage:
For if they fight, it is but by chance,
When one side vent'ring to advance,
And come uncivilly too near,
Are charged unmercifully in the Rere:
And forced with terrible resistance,
To keep hereafter at a distance;
To pick out Ground to incamp upon
Where store of largest Rivers run,
That serve instead of peaceful Barriers
To part the Engagements of their Warriers.
Where both from side to side may skip,
And only encounter at Bo-peep.
For Men are found the stouter hearted,
The certainer the are to be parted.
And therefore post themselves in Bogs,
As the ancient Mice attacked the Frogs:
And made their mortal Enemy,
The Water-Rat, their great Ally.
For it is not now, who is stout and bold;
But who bears Hunger best, and Cold:
And he is approved the most deserving,
Who longest can hold out at starving:
But he that routs most Pigs and Cows,
The formidablest Man of Prowess.
So, the Emperor Caligula,
That triumphed over the British Sea;
Took Crabs and Oysters Prisoners,
And Lobsters, 'stead of Curasiers;
Engaged his Legions in fierce Bustles,
With Periwinkles, Prawns and Muscles:
And led his Troops with furious Gallops,
To charge whole Regiments of Scallops.
Not like their ancient way of War,
To wait on his Triumphal Carr,
But when he went to Dine or Sup,
More bravely eat his Captives up;
And left all Wars by his Example,
Reduced to vict'ling of a Camp well.
Quoth Ralph, by all that you have said,
And twice as much that I could add,
It Is plain, you cannot now do worse,
Than take this out-of-fashion'd course:
To hope by stratagem to woo her,
Or waging Battle to subdue her.
Though some have done it in Romances,
And banged them into amorous Fancies,
As those who won the Amazons,
By wanton urubbing of their bones:
And stout Rinaldo gained his Bride
By Courting of her Back and Side.
But since those times and feats are over,
They are not for a Modern Lover:
When Mistresses are too cross-grained,
By such Addresses to be gained:
And if they were, would have it out,
With many other kind of Bout.
Therefore I hold no Course's infesible
As this of force to win the Jezabel,
To storm her heart, by the Antic Charms
Of Ladies Errant, force of Arms;
But rather strive by Law to win her,
And try the Title you have in her,
Your case is clear, you have her Word,
And me to witness the Accord.
Besides two more of her Retinue,
To testify what passed between you.
More probable, and like to hold,
Than Hand, or Seal, or breaking Gold
For which so many that renounced
Their plighted Contracts, have been trounc'd.
And Bills upon Record been found,
That forced the Ladies to compound:
And that, unless I miss the matter,
Is all the business you look after:
Besides, Encounters at the Bar,
Are braver now, than those in War,
In which the Law does Execution,
With less Disorder and Confusion:
Has more of Honor in it some hold,
Not like the New way, but the Old.
When those the Pen had drawn together,
Divided Quarrels with the Feather,
And winged Arrows killed as dead,
And more then Bullets now of Lead.
So all their Combats now, as then,
Are managed chiefly by the Pen.
That does ^he Feat, with braver Vigours,
In words a^ length, as well as Figures.
Is Judge of all the World performs,
In voluntary Feats of Arms.
And whatso'ere's achieved in Fight,
Determines which is wrong or right?
For whether you Prevail or Lose,
All must be tried there in the close.
And therefore it is not wise to shun,
What you must trust to, ere y' have done.
The Law, that settles all you do,
And marries where you did but woo.
That makes the most perfidious Lover,
A Lady, that is as false, recover:
And if it judge upon your side,
Will soon extend her for your Bride;
And put her Person, Goods, or Lands,
Or which you like best int' your hands;
For Law's the Wisdom of all Ages
And managed by the ablest Sages,
Who through their Business at the Bar.
Be but a kind of Civil War.
In which the engage with fiercer Dudgeons
Than e're the Grecians did and Trojans.
They never manage the Contest,
TO impair their public Interest;
Or by their Controversies, lessen
The dignity of their Profession:
Not like us Brethren, who divide
Our Commonwealth, the Cause and Side,
And though w' are all as near of Kindred
As the outward Man is to the Inward;
We agree in nothing but to wrangle
About the slightest fingle fangle,
While Lawyers have more sober sense,
Than to argue at their own expense.
But make their best Advantages,
Of other quarrels, like the Swiss,
And out of Foreign Controversies,
By aiding both sides, fill their Purses.
But have no interest in the Cause,
For which the engage, and wage the Laws:
Nor further Prospect than their Pay,
Whether they lose or win the Day.
And though the abounded in all Ages,
With sundry learned Clerks, and Sages;
Though all their business be Dispute,
With which they canvas every Suit;
The have no disputes about their Art,
Nor in Polemicks controvert.
While all Professions else are found,
With nothing but Disputes to abound;
Divines of all sorts, and Physicians,
Philosophers, Mathematicians;
The Gallenist, and Paracelsian,
Condemn the way each other deals in*
Anatomists dissect and mangle,
To cut themselves out Work to wrangle.
Astrologers dispute their Dreams;
That in their sleeps they talk of Scheme^.
And Heralds stickle, who got who,
So many hundred Years ago.
But Lawyers are too wise a Nation,
TO expose their Trade to Disputation:
Or make the busy Rabble Judges,
Of all their secret Piques, and Grudges:
In which whoever wins the day,
The whole Profession's sure to pay.
Beside, no Mountebanks, nor Cheats
Dare undertake to do their Feats;
When in all other Sciences,
They swarm, like Insects, and Increase:
For what Bigot durst ever draw,
By Inward Light, a Deed in Law?
Or could hold forth, by Revelation.
An Answer to a Declaration?
For those that meddle with their Tools
Will cut their Fingers, if the are Fools.
And if you follow their Advice,
In Bills and Answers, and Replies:
They Will write a Love-letter in Chancery
Shall bring her upon Oath to Answer ye.
And soon Reduce you to b' your Wife,
Or make her weary of her Life.
The Knight who used with Tricks and Shifts,
To Edify by Ralpho 's Gifts:
But in appearance cried him down,
To make them better seem his own,
( All Plagiary 's Constant Course
Of sinking, when they take a Purse)
Resolved to follow his Advice,
But kept it from him in disguise:
And after stubborn Contradiction,
To Counterfeit his own Conviction,
And by Transition, fall upon
The Resolution, as his own.
Quoth he; This Gambol thou advisest,
Is of all others, the unwisest;
For if I think by Law to gain her,
There Is nothing fillier nor vainer.
It Is but to hazard my Pretense,
Where nothing's certain but the Expense.
To act against my self, and traverse
My Suit and Title to her Favors.
And if she should, which Heaven forbid,
Overthrow me, as the Fiddler did,
What after-course have I to take,
Against losing all I have at Stake?
He that with injury is grieved,
And goes to Law to be relieved;
Is sillier than a scottish Chews.
Who when a Thief has Robbed his house;
Applies himself to Cunning-men
To help him to his Goods again.
When all he can expect to gain,
Is but to squander more in vain:
And yet I have no other way,
But is as difficult, to play.
For to reduce her, by main force,
Is now in vain, by fair means, worse:
But worst of all, to give her over,
Till she is as desperate to recover.
For bad Games are thrown up too soon,
Until the are never to be won.
But since I have no other Course,
But is as bad to attempt, or worse:
He that complies against his Will,
Is of his own Opinion still;
Which he may adhere to, yet disown,
For Reasons to himself best known:
But it is not to be avoided now,
For Sidrophel resolves to sue:
Whom I must answer, or begin
Inevitably, first with him.
For I Have received Advertisement,
By times, enough of his intent;
And knowing, he that first complains,
The advantage of the business gains.
For Courts of Justice understand
The Plaintiff to be eldest hand;
Who what he pleases may averr
The other nothing till he swear:
Is freely admitted to all Grace,
And Lawful Favor by his place;
And for his bringing Custom in,
Has all Advantages to win.
I, who resolve to oversee
No lucky Opportunity,
Will go to Counsel, to advise
Which way to encounter or surprise.
And after long consideration,
Have found out one to fit the occasion;
Most apt, for what I have to do,
As Counselor, and Justice too.
And truly so, no doubt, he was,
A Lawyer fit for such a Case.
An Old Dull Sot; wh' had told the Clock,
For many years at Bridewel-Dock.
At Westminster, and Hickses-Hall,
And Hiccius-Dockius played in all;
Where in all Governments, and Times,
H' had been both friend, and foe to Crimes,
And used two equal ways of gaining,
By hindering Justice, or maintaining:
To many a Whore gave Privilege,
And whipped for want of Quarteridge,
Cart-loads of Bawds, to Prison sent
For b'ing behind a Fortnights Rent.
And many a trusty Pimp and Croney,
To Puddle-dock, for want of money.
Engaged the Constable to seize
All those, that would not break the Peace.
Nor give him back his own foul words,
Though sometimes Commoners or Lords:
And kept 'em Prisoners, of Course,
For being sober at ill hours.
That in the Morning he might Free,
Or bind 'em over, for his Fee.
Made Monsters fine, and Puppet plays,
For leave to practice, in their ways:
Farmed out all Cheats, and went a share,
With the Headborough and Scavenger,
And made the Dirt in the Streets Compound,
For taking up the Public Ground:
The Kennel and the King's Highway,
For being unmolested, Pay.
Let out the Stocks, and Whipping-Post,
And Cage, to those that gave him most;
Imposed a Tax on Bakers Ears.
And for False Weights on Chandellers.
Made Victuallers, and Vintners Fine
For Arb^trary Ale and Wine.
But was a kind and constant Friend
To all that Regularly offend:
As Residentiary Bawds,
And Brokers that receive stoll'n Goods;
That cheat in Lawful Mysteries,
And pay Church-duties, and his Fees;
But was implacable and auker'd
To all that Interlop'd, and Hawker'd.
To this brave Man, the Knight repairs
For Counsel, in his Law-Affairs;
And found him mounted, in his Pew,
With Books, and Money placed, for show,
Like Nest-eggs, to make Clients lay,
And for his false Opinion pay:
To whom the Knight, with comely Grace,
Put off his Hat, to put his Case:
Which he as proudly entertained.
As the other courteously strained.
And to assure him, 'twas not that
He looked for; Bid him put on's Hat.
Quoth he, there is one Sidrophel
Whom I have cudgel'd -- Very well.
And now he brags, to have beaten me.
Better, and better still, quoth he.
And vows to stick me to a Wall
Where e're he meets me -- best of all.
It Is true, the Knave has taken's Oath
That I robbed him -- Well done in troth.
When h'has confessed he stole my Cloak,
And picked my Fob, and what he took,
Which was the cause that made me bang him,
And take my Goods again -- marry hang him:
Now whether I should, before hand
Swear he robbed me? I understand,
Or bring my Action of Conversion
And Trover for my Goods? Ah Whoreson.
Or if it is better to indite,
And bring him to his Trial? -- Right,
Prevent what he designs to do,
And swear for the State against him? -- True.
Or whether he that is Defendant
In this Case, has the better end on it;
Who putting in a new cross-bill,
May traverse the Action -- better still.
Then there is a Lady too. -- I marry,
That Is easily proved accessory.
A Widow, who by solemn Vows,
Contracted to me, for my Spouse,
Combined with him to break her word,
And has abetted all -- Good Lord,
Suborned the aforesaid Sidrophel,
To tamper with the Devilish of Hell.
Who put me into horrid fear,
Fear of my Life, -- Make that appear.
Made an assault, with Fiends and Men.
Upon my body. -- Good again.
And kept me in a deadly fright
And false Imprisonment all Night,
Mean while, they robbed me, and my Horse,
And stole my Saddle, -- worse and worse;
And made mount upon the bare-ridge,
TO avoid a wretcheder miscarriage.
Sir, quoth the Lawyer, not to flatter ye,
You have as Good, and Fair a Battery,
As heart can wish, and need not shame
The proudest Man alive to claim.
For if the have used you, as you say,
Marry, quoth I, God give you joy,
I would it were my Case, I Would give,
More than I Will say, or you will believe.
I would so trounce her, and her Purse,
I Would make her kneel for bett'r or worse;
For Matrimony, and Hanging here,
Both go by destiny so clear,
That you as sure, may Pick and Choose,
As Cross I win, and Pile you lose.
And if I durst, I would advance
As much, in Ready Maintenance;
As upon any Case I Have known:
But we that practice dare not own,
The Law severely contrabands,
Our taking Business off Men's hands;
It Is Common barratry, that bears
Point blank an Action against our Ears,
And crops them, till there is not Leather
To stick a Pin in, left of either;
For which, some do the Sommer-sault
And over the Bar, like Tumblers, vault.
But you may swear at any rate
Things not in Nature, for the State:
For in all Courts of Justice here
A Witness is not said to swear,
But make Oath, that is, in plain terms
To forge whatever he affirms:
(I thank you, quoth the Knight, for that,
Because it is to my purpose pat --)
For Justice, though she is painted blind,
Is to the weaker side inclined,
Like charity, else right, and wrong,
Could never hold it out so long,
And, like blind Fortune, with a slight,
Conveys Men's Interest, and Right,
From Stiles's Pocket, into Nokeses:
As easily as Hocus Pocus.
Plays fast and loose, makes Men Obnoxious,
And clear again, like Hiccius-Doctius.
Then whether you would take her life,
Or but recover, her for your Wife:
Or be content with what she has,
And let all others matters Pass,
The Business to the Law's alone,
The proof is all it look's upon.
And you can want no Witnesses,
To swear to any thing you please.
That hardly get their mere Expenses
By the Labor of their Consciences,
Or letting out to hire, their Ears,
To Affidavit Customers:
At inconsiderable values,
To serve for Jurymen, or Tales,
Although retained in the hardest matters,
Of Trustees, and Administrators:
For that, quoth he, let me alone,
W' have store of such, and all our own,
Bred up and tutored, by our Teachers,
The ablest of Conscience-stretchers.
That Is well! Quoth he, But I should Guess,
By weighing of Advantages.
Your surest way is first to Pitch
On Bougey, for a Water-witch:
And when y' have hanged the Conjurer,
Y' have time enough to deal with her.
In the Intrim; Spare for no Trepans,
To draw her Neck, into the Banes;
Ply her with Love Letters, and Billets,
And Bait'em well, for Quirks, and Quillets,
With Trains to inveigle and surprise,
Her Heedless Answers, and Reply's:
And if she miss the Moustrap-Lines,
They Will serve for other By-Designs:
And make an Artist understand,
To Copy out her Seal, or Hand:
Or find void Places in the Paper,
To steal in something to Entrap her.
'Till with her worldly Goods, and Body,
Spite of her heart, she has endowed ye
Retain all sorts of Witnesses,
That ply in the Temples, under Trees.
Or walk the Round, with Knights ot'h Posts:
About the Cross-leg'd Knights, their hosts,
Or wait for Customers, between
The Piller-Rows in Lincoln's Inn.
Where Vouchers, Forgers, Common-bayl,
And Affidavit-men, never fail
TO expose to Sale, all sorts of Oaths,
According to their Ears, and Clothes.
Their only Necessary Tools,
Besides the Gospel, and their Souls.
And when y' are furnished with all Purveys
I shall be ready at your service.
I would not give, quoth Hudibras,
A straw to understand a Case,
Without the admirabler skill
To Wind, and Manage it at Will:
To Vere, and Tack, and steer a Cause,
Against the Weather-gage of Laws;
And Ring the Changes upon Cases,
As plain, as Noses upon Faces.
As you have well instructed me,
For which you have earned (here it is) your Fee,
I long to practice your advice
And try the subtle Artifice:
To bait a Letter, as you bid,
As not long after, thus he did,
For having pumped up all his Wit,
And humm'd upon it, thus he writ.
An Heroical Epistle of Hudibras to his Lady.
I Who was once as great as Caesar,
Am now reduced to Nebuchadnezer.
And from as famed a Conqueror
As ever took degree in War,
Or did his Exercise in Battle,
By you turned out to Grass with Cattle.
For since I am denied access
To all my Earthly Happiness.
Am fallen from the Paradise
Of your good Graces, and fair Eyes.
Lost to the World, and you, I Am sent
To Everlasting Banishment,
Where all the Hopes I had, to have won
Your heart, being dashed, will break my own.
Yet if you were not so severe
To pass your doom, before you hear,
You Will find, upon my just defense,
How much y' have wronged my Innocence,
That once I made a Vow to you,
Which yet is unperform'd it is true;
But not, because it is unpaid,
It Is Violated, though delayed:
Or if it were, it is no fault
So heinous, as you would have it thought,
To undergo the loss of Ears,
Like vulgar Hackney Perjurers,
For there is a difference in the case
Between the Noble, and the Base:
Who always are observed to have don't,
Upon as different an account:
The one for great, and weighty Cause,
To salve in Honor ugly Flaws.
For none are like to do it sooner,
Than those, who are nicest of their Honor.
The other, for base Gain, and Pay,
Forswear, and Perjure, by the Day;
And make the exposing, and retailing
Their Souls, and Consciences, a Calling.
It is no Scandal, nor Aspersion,
Upon a Great and noble Person,
To say, he Nat'rally abhorred
The old fashioned trick, to keep his Word,
Though it is persidiousness, and shame,
In meaner Men, to do the same.
For to be able to Forget,
Is found more useful, to the Great:
Then Gout, or Deafness, or bad Eyes,
To make 'em pass for wondrous wise.
But though the Law, on Perjurers,
Inflicts the Forfeiture of Ears;
It is not just, that does exempt
The Guilty, and punish the innocent,
To make the Ears repair the wrong,
Committed by the ungoverned Tongue;
And when one Member is forsworn,
Another to be cropped or torn.
And if you should, as you design,
By course of Law recover mine.
You're like, if you consider right,
To gain but little Honor by it.
For he that for his Ladies sake
Lays down his Life, or Limbs at Stake,
Does not so much deserve her Favor,
As he that pawns his Soul to have her.
This y' have acknowledged I have done
Although you now disdain to own:
But sentence, what you rather ought
TO esteem good Service, than a Fault.
Besides, Oaths are not bound to bear
That Literal Sense, the words infer,
But by the practice of the Age,
Are to be judged how far the engage.
And where the Sense by Custom's checked,
Are found void, and of none effect.
For no Man takes, or keeps a Vow,
But just as he sees others do,
Nor are the obliged to be so brittle,
As not to yield, and bow a little,
For as best tempered Blades are found
Before they break, to bend quite round,
So truest Oaths are still most tough,
And though they bow, are breaking-proof.
Then wherefore shall they not b' allowed
In love a greater-Latitude?
For as the Law of Arms approves
All way^ to Conquests, so should Loves;
And not be tied to true or false,
But make that justest, that prevails,
For how can that which is above,
All Empire, High and Mighty Love,
Submit it is great Prerogative,
To any other power alive?
Shall Love, that to no Crown gives place
Become the subject of a Case?
The Fundamental Law of Nature,
Be overruled! by those made after?
Commit the censure of its Cause
To any, but it is own Great Laws?
Love, that is the Worlds preservative,
That keeps all Souls of things alive?
Controuls the Mighty power of Fate,
And gives Mankind a longer date.
The Life of Nature, that restores,
As fast as Time and Death devours,
To whose free gift, the World does ow
Not only Earth but Heaven too:
For Love's the only Trade that is driven
The Interest of State in Heaven,
Which nothing but the Soul of Man,
Is capable to entertain.
For what can Earth produce, but Love
To represent the Joys above?
Or who, but Lovers, can converse,
Like Angels: by the Eye Discourse?
Address, and complement by Vision,
Make Love, and Court by intuition?
And burn in amorous Flames as fierce,
As those Celestial Ministers?
Then how can any thing offend
In order, to so great an end?
Or Heaven it self a Sin resent,
That for its own supply was meant?
That merits in a kind mistake,
A Pardon for the offenses sake.
Or if it did not, but the Cause
Were left to the injury of Laws,
What tyranny can disapprove
There should be Equity in Love?
For Laws that are Inanimate,
And feel no sense of Love, or Hate:
That have no Passion of their own,
Not pity to be wrought upon,
Are only proper to inflict
Revenge, or Criminals, as strict
But to have Power to forgive,
Is Empire, and Prerogative;
And it is in Crowns, a nobler Jem,
To grant a Pardon, then condemn.
Then since so few do what they ought
It Is great to indulge a well-meant fault.
For why should he, who made address
All humble ways, without success,
And met with nothing in return,
But Insolence, Affronts, and Scorn,
Not strive by Wit to countermine,
And bravely carry his Design?
He who was used so unlike a Soldier,
Blown up with Philters of Love-Powder?
And after letting Blood and Purging,
Condemned to voluntary Scourging?
Alarmed with many a horrid Fright,
And clawed, by Goblins, in the Night?
Insulted on, Reviled and Jeered,
With rude Invasion of his Beard?
And when your Sex was foully scandal'd,
As foully by the Rabble handled?
Attacked by despicable Foes,
And drub'd with mean and vulgar blows;
And after all, to be debarred
So much as standing on his Gaurd?
When Horses being spurred and pricked,
Have leave to kick for being kicked,
Or why should you, whose Mother Wits
Are furnished with all Perquisits?
That with your Breeding Teeth begin,
And Nursing Babies, that Lie in?
B' allowed to put all tricks upon
Our Cully-Sex, and we use none?
We, who have nothing but frail Vows,
Against your Statagems to oppose?
Or Oaths, more feeble than your own,
By which, we are no less put down?
You wound, like Parthians, while you fly,
And kill with a Retreating Eye;
Retire the more, the more we press,
To draw us into Ambushes.
As Pirates all false Colors wear,
TO entrap the unwary Mariner:
So Women, to surprise us, spread
Their borrowed Flags, of White and Red.
Display 'em thicker on their Cheeks,
Than their old Grand-mothers, the Picts:
And raise more Devils with their Looks,
Than Conjurers less subtle Books,
Lay Trains of Amorous Intrigues,
In Towrs, and Curls, and Perriwigs.
With greater Art and cunning reared,
Than Philip Ny's Thanks-giving-beard,
Prepost'rously to entice, and Gain
Those to adore 'em they disdain:
And only draw 'em in, to clog
With idle Names, a Catalogue,
A Lover is, the more he is brave,
TO his Mistress, but the more a Slave,
And whatsoever she commands
Becomes a Favor from her hands;
Which he is obliged to obey, and must,
Whether it be unjust, or just.
Then when he is compelled by her
TO Adventures, he would else forbear,
Who, with his Honor, can withstand,
Since Force is greater than Command?
And when Necessity's obeyed
Nothing can be unjust or bad:
And therefore when the mighty Powers
Of Love, your great Ally, and yours;
Joined Forces, not to be withstood
By frail enamoured Flesh and Blood;
All I have done unjust or ill
Was in obedience to your Will:
And all the blame that can be due
Falls to your Cruelty and you.
Nor are those Scandals I confessed,
Against my Will, and Interest,
More than is daily done of course
By all men, when the are under force.
Whence some, upon the Rack, confess
What the Hangman and their Prompters please.
But are no sooner out of pain
Then they deny it all again.
But when the Devil turns Confessor,
Truth is a Crime, he takes no pleasure
To hear, or pardon, like the Founder
Of Liars, whom they all claim under.
And therefore, when I told him none,
I think it was the wiser done.
Nor am I without Precedent,
The first that on the Adventure, went:
All Mankind ever did of course,
And daily does the same, or worse.
For what Romance can show a Lover,
That had a Lady to recover,
And did not steer a nearer Course,
To fall aboard in his Amors?
And wha^ at first was held a Crime,
Has turn'^ to Honorable in time.
To what a height did Infant Rome,
By Ravishing of Women come?
When Men upon their Spouses seized,
And freely Married where they pleased:
They never Forswore themselves nor Ly'd,
Nor in the Minds they were in, Died
Nor took the pains to address and sue,
Nor played the Masquerade to woo.
Disdained to stay for Friends Consents
Nor juggled about Settlements:
Did need no License, nor no Priest,
Nor Friends, nor Kindred to assist;
Nor Lawyers, to join Land and Money,
In the Holy State of Matrimony:
Before they settled Hands and Hearts,
Till Alimony, or Death departs:
Nor would endure to stay, until
The had got the very Bride's Good Will
But took a wise and shorter Course,
To win the Lady's, Downright Force.
And justly made 'em Prisoners then,
As they have often since, us Men;
With Acting Plays, and Dancing Jiggs,
The luckiest of all Love's Intrigues:
And when they had them at their pleasure,
Then talked of Love, and Flames, at leisure
For, after Matrimony's over,
He that holds out but Half a Lover,
Deserves for every Minute, more
Than half a Year of Love before:
For which the Dames, in Contemplation
Of that best way of Application,
Proved Nobler Wives than ever were known,
By Suit, or Treaty, to be won:
And such as all Posterity
Could never equal, nor come nigh.
For Women first were made for Men,
Not Men for them. -- It follows then,
That Men have Right to every one,
And they no F^eedom of their own:
And therefore Men have power to choose,
But they no Charter to refuse.
Hence it is apparent, that what Course
So ever we take to your Amors,
Though by the indirectest way,
It Is no Injustice, nor Foul Play.
And that you ought to take that Course,
As we take you, for Bett'r or Worse;
And gratefully submit to those
Who you, before another chose:
For why should every savage Beast
Exceed his Great Lord's Interest?
Have freer Power, than he, in Grace,
And Nature, over the Creature has?
Because the Laws he since has made
Have cut off all the Power he had;
Retrenched the absolute Dominion,
That Nature gave him, over Women.
When all his Power will not extend*
One Law of Nature to suspend:
And but to offer to repeal
The smallest Clause, is to rebel.
This, if Men rightly understood
Their Privilege, they would make good;
And not, like Sots, permit their Wives
TO encroach on their Prerogatives.
For which Sin, they deserve to be
Kept, as they are, in Slavery.
And this, some precious Gifted Teachers
Unrev'rently reputed Leachers;
And disobeyed in making Love,
Have vowed to all the World, to prove
And make y^^^ffer, as ye ought,
For that uncharitable Fault.
But, I forget my self, and rove
Beyond the Instructions of my Love.
Forgive me (Fair) and only blame
The Extravagancy of my Flame,
Since it is too much, at once to show
Excess of Love, and Temper too.
All I have said that is bad, and true,
Was never meant to aim at you;
Who have so Sov'rain a Control
Over that poor Slave of yours, my Soul:
That, rather than to forfeit you,
Has ventured loss of Heaven too.
Both with an equal Power possessed,
To render all that serve you Blessed:
But none like him, who is destined, either
To have, or lose you, both together.
And if you will but this fault release,
(For so it must be, since you please,)
I Will pay down all that Vow, and more,
Which you commanded, and I swore,
And expiate upon my Skin,
The Arrears in full of all my Sin.
For, it is but just, that I should pay
The accruing Penance for Delay.
Which shall be done, until it move
Your equal pity, and your Love.
The Knight, perusing this Epistle,
Believed he had brought her to his Whistle;
And read it, like a jocund Lover,
With great applause to himself, twice over;
Subscribed his Name, but at a Fit,
And humble distance, to his wit;
And dated it with wondrous Art,
Given from the bottom of his heart:
Then sealed it with his Coat of Love
A smoking Faggot -- and above
Upon a Scroll -- I burn, and weep,
And near it -- For her Ladyship;
Of all her Sex, most excellent,
These to her gentle Hands present.
Then gave it to his Faithful Squire,
With Lessons how to observe and eye her.
She first considered which was better,
To send it back, or burn the Letter:
But, guessing that it might import,
Though nothing else, at least, her Sport.
She opened it, and read it out,
With many a smile, and learing Flout:
Resolved to answer it in kind,
And thus performed what she designed.
THE LADY'S ANSWER TO THE KNIGHT.
THat you are a Beast, and turned to Grass,
Is no strange News, nor ever was;
At least, to me, who once, you know,
Did from the Pound, Replevin you.
When both your Sword, and Spurs, were won
In Combat, by an Amazon;
That Sword, that did (like Fate) determine
The Inevitable Death of Vermin:
And never dealt its furious blows,
But cut the Threads of Pigs and Cows;
By Trulla was in single Fight,
Disarm'^ and wrested from its Knight.
Your Heels Degraded of your Spurs,
And in the Stocks, close Prisoners,
Where still the had Layn in base Restraint,
If I, in pity of your Complaint,
Had not on Honorable Conditions,
Releast'em from the worst of Prisons;
And what Return that favor met,
You cannot (though you would) forget;
When, being free, you strove to evade
The Oaths you had in Prison made:
Forswore your self, and first denied it;
But after owned, and justified it;
And when you had falsely broke one Vow,
Absolved your self by breaking two.
For while you sneakingly submit,
And beg for Pardon at our Feet:
Discouraged by your guilty Fears,
To hope for Quarter for your Ears.
And doubting 'twas in vain to sue,
You claim us boldly as your due.
Declare that Treachery and Force
To deal with us is the only Course.
Who have no Title nor Pretense,
To Body, Soul, or Conscience:
But ought to fall to that Man's share,
That claims us for his proper Ware.
These are the Motives, which to induce,
Or fright us into Love, you use,
A pretty new way of Gallanting,
Between Soliciting and Ranting;
Like sturdy Beggars, that entreat
For Charity at once, and threat.
But since you undertake to prove
Your own Propriety in Love,
As if we were but Lawful Prize
In War, between two Enemies;
Or Forfeitures, which every Lover
That would but sue for, might recover.
It is not hard to understand
The My^^'ry of his Bold Demand:
That cannot at our Persons aim,
But something capable of Claim.
It Is not those paultry counterfeit
French Stones, which in our Eyes you set:
But our Right Diamonds, that inspire,
And set your Amorous Heart on fire.
Nor can those false St. Martins Beads,
Which on our Lips you laid for Reds;
And make us wear, like Indian Dames,
Add Fuel to your Scorching Flames.
But those true Rubies of the Rock,
Which in our Cabinets we lock.
It Is not those Orient Pearls, our Teeth,
That you are so transported with:
But those we wear about our Necks,
Produce those Amorous Effects,
Nor is it those Threads of Gold, our Hair,
The Perewigs you make us wear:
But those bright Guinneys in our Chests,
That light the Wildfire in your Breasts.
These Love-tricks I Have been versed in so,
That all their sly Intrigues I know.
And can unriddle, by their Tones,
The Mystic Cabals, and Jargones.
Can tell what Passions, by their Sounds,
Pine for the Beauties of my Grounds:
What Raptures fond, and Amorous
OF the Charms and Graces of my House.
What Exstacy, and Scorching Flame
Burns for my Money, in my Name.
What from the unnatural desire
To Beasts and Cattle, take its fire.
What tender Sigh, and trickling Tear,
Longs for a thousand Pound a Year.
And Languishing Transports are fond
Of Statute, Mortgage, Bill and Bond.
These are the Attracts which most Men fall
Enamored, at first sight, withal.
To these the address with Serenades,
And Count with ^alls and Masquerades;
And yet, for all the yearning Pain
You Have suffered for their Loves, in vain:
I fear they will prove so nice and coy,
To have and to hold, and to enjoy;
That all your Oaths, and Labor lost,
They Will never turn Ladies of the post.
This is not meant to disapprove
Your Judgment in your Choice of Love;
Which is so wise, the greatest part
Of Mankind study't as an Art.
For Love should, like a Deodand,
Still fall to the owner of the Land:
And where there is Substance for its Ground
Cannot but be more firm, and sound,
Than that which has the slighten Basis
Of Airy Virtue, Wit and Graces:
Which is of such thin Subtilty,
It steals and creeps in at the Eye.
And, as it cannot endure to sta^
Steals out again as nice a way
But Love, that its Extraction owns
From soild Gold, and precious Stones;
Must, like its shining Parents prove
As Solid, and as Glorious Love.
Hence it is, you have no way to express
Our Charms and Graces, but by these:
For, what are Lips, and Eyes and Teeth,
Which Beauty invades, and conquers with?
But Rubies, Pearls and Diamonds;
With which a Philter Love commands?
This is the way all Parents prove,
In imagining their Children's Love;
That force 'em to inter-marry and wed,
As if the were Bur'ing of the Dead.
Cast Earth to Earth, as in the Grave,
To join in Wedlock all they have.
And when the Settlement's in force,
Take all the rest, For Better, or Worse;
For Money has a Power above
The Stars and Fate, to manage Love:
Whose Arrows, Learned Poets hold,
That never miss, are tipp'd with Gold.
And tho some say, the Parents claims
To make Love in their Children's Names.
Who, many times, at once, provide
The Nurse, the Husband, and the Bride.
Feel Darts and Charms, Attracts and Flames;
And woo, and contract, in their Names.
And as they Christen, use to marry 'em,
And, like their Gossips, answer for 'em:
Is not to give in Matrimony;
But sell and prostitute for Money.
It Is better than their own Betrothing;
Who often do it for worse than nothing.
And when the are at their own Dispose,
With greater disadvantage choose.
All this is right! But for the Course
You take to do it, by Fraud or Force:
It Is so ridiculous, as soon
As told, it is never to be done
No more than Setters can betray,
That tell what Tricks they are to play.
Marriage, at best, is but a Vow;
Which all Men either break, or bow:
Then what will those forbear to do,
Who perjure, when they do but woo?
Such as, beforehand, swear and lie,
For Earnest to their Treachery:
And, rather than a Crime confess,
With greater, strive to make it less.
Like Thieves, who, after Sentence past,
Maintain their Innocence to the last.
And when their Crimes were made appear
As plain as Witnesses can swear.
Yet, when the Wretches come to dye,
Will take upon their Deaths a Lie.
Nor are the Virtues, you confessed
TO your Ghostly Father, as you guest,
So slight, as to be justified,
By being, as shamefully, denied.
As if you thought your Word would pass
Point Blank, on both sides, of a Case,
Or Credit were not to be lost,
B' a Brave Knight Errant of the post.
That eats, perfidiously, his Word,
And swears his Ears through a two Inch Board:
Can own the same thing, and disown;
And perjure Booty, Pro and Con.
Can make the Gospel serve his turn,
And help him out to be forsworn;
When it is laid hands upon, and kissed,
To be betrayed, and sold, like Christ.
These are the Virtues, in whose Name
A Right to all the World you claim:
And boldly challenge a Dominion,
In Grace and Nature, over all Women.
Of whom, no less will satisfy,
Than all the Sex, your Tyranny.
Although you will find it a hard Province,
With all your crafty Frauds and Covins,
To govern such a numerous Crew,
Who, one by one, now govern you:
For if you all were Solomon's,
And Wise and Great as he was once,
You Will find The are able to subdue,
(As they did him) and baffle you.
And if you are imposed upon,
It Is by your own Temptation done:
That with your Ignorance invite,
And teach us how to use the slight.
For, when we find y' are still more taken
With false Attracts of our own making;
Swear that is a Rose, and that a Stone,
Like Sots to us that laid in on:
And what we did but slightly prime,
Most ignorantly daub in Rhyme:
You force us in our own Defenses,
To copy Beams and Influences;
To lay Perfections on the Graces,
And dr^w Attracts upon our Faces:
And, in compliance to your Wit,
Your own false Jewels counterfeit.
For, by the practice of those Arts,
We gain a greater share of Hearts:
And those deserve in reason most,
That greatest pains and study cost;
For, great Perfections are like Heaven,
Too rich a Present to be given.
Nor are those Master-strokes of Beauty
To be performed without hard Duty:
Which, when the are nobly done, and well,
The simple Natural excel.
How fair and sweet the planted Rose,
Beyond the Wild in Hedges grows?
For, without Art, the Noblest Seeds
Of Flowers degenerate to Weeds:
How dull and rugged ever it is Ground?
And Polished, looks a Diamond?
Though Paradise was ever so fair,
It was not kept so without Care.
The whole World, without Art and Dress,
Would be but one great Wilderness.
And Mankind but a Savage Herd,
For all that Nature has conferred.
This does but Rough-hew, and Design,
Leave Art to Polish, and Refine,
Though Women first were made for Men,
Yet Men were made for them again:
For when (out- witted by his Wife)
Man first turned Tenant, but, for Life.
If Women had not intervened,
How soon had Mankind had an end?
And that it is in Being yet,
To us alone, you are in Debt,
Then where is your liberty of Choice,
And our unnatural No-voice?
Since all the Privilege you boast,
And falsely usurped, or vainly lost,
Is now our Right; to whose Creation,
You owe your Happy Restoration.
And if we had not weighty Cause
To not appear in making Laws,
We could, in spite of all your Tricks,
And Shallow, Formal Politics;
Force you, our Managements to obey,
As we to yours (in show) give way.
Hence it is, that while you vainly strive
To Advance your high Prerogative,
You basely, after all your Braves,
Submit, and own yourselves our Slaves.
And 'cause we do not make it known
Nor Publicly our Interests own;
Like Sots, suppose we have no shares
In ord'ring you, and your Affairs:
When all your Empire and Command
You have from us at Second Hand,
As if a Pilot, that appears
To sit still only, while he steers:
And does not make a noise and stir.
Like every common Mariner
Knew nothing of the Card nor Star;
And did not guide the Man of War.
Nor we, because we don't appear
In Councels, do not govern there.
While like the Mighty Prester John,
Whose Person none dares look upon;
But is preserved in Close Disguise
From being made cheap to vulgar Eyes
W' enjoy as large a Power unseen,
To govern him, as he does Men:
And, in the Right of our Pope Joan,
Make Emp'rors at our feet fall down.
Or Joan the Pucel's braver Name,
Our Right to Arms and Conduct claim
Who, though a Spinster, yet was able,
To serve France for a Grand Constable.
We make and execute all Laws;
Can judge the Judges, and the Cause.
Prescribe all Rules of Right or VVrong,
To the Long Robe, and the Longer Tongue;
Against which the World has no defense,
But our more powerful Eloquence.
We manage things of greatest weight
In all the World's Affairs of State.
Are Ministers of War and Peace,
That sway all Nations how they please.
We rule all Churches, and their Flocks,
Heretical, and Orthodox.
And are the Heavenly Vehicles
OF the Spirit, in all Conventicles.
By us is all Commerce and Trade
Improved, and managed, and decayed.
For, nothing can go off so well,
Nor bears that Price, as what we sell.
We rule in every Public Meeting,
And make Men do what we judge fitting.
Are Magistrates in all great Towns;
Where Men do nothing but wear Gowns.
We make the Man of War strike S^il,
And to our braver Conduct vail*
And, when h'has chased his Enemies,
Submit to us upon his Knees.
Is there an Officer of State,
Untimely raised; or Magistrate,
That Is Haughty, and Imperious?
He Is but a Journey-man to us.
That, as he gives us cause to do it,
Can keep him in, or turn him out.
We are your Guardians, that increase,
Or Waste your Fortunes, how we please,
And, as you humor us, can deal
In all your Matters ill or well.
It Is we that can dispose alone,
Whether your Heirs shall be your own.
To whose Integrity you must,
In spite of all your Caution, trust,
And 'less you fly beyond the Seas,
Can fit you which what Heirs we please:
And force you^' own 'em, though begotten
By French Valets, or Irish Footmen.
Nor can the rigorousest Course
Prevail, unless to make us worse.
Who, still the harsher we are used,
Are further off from being reduced:
And scorn to abate, for any Ills,
The least Punctilio of our Wills.
Force does but whet our Wits to apply
Arts, born with us, for Remedy:
Which all your Politics, as yet,
Have never been able to defeat.
For, when y' have tried all sorts of ways,
What Fools d'we make of you in Plays?
While all the Favors we afford,
Are but to girt you with the Sword,
To fight our Battles in our steads,
And have your Brains beat out of your Heads:
Encounter in despite of Nature;
And fight at once with Fire and Water,
With Pirates, Rocks, and Storms and Seas,
Our Pride and Vanity to appease.
Kill one another, and cut Throats,
For our good Graces, and best Thoughts;
To do your Exercise for Honor,
And have your Brains beat out the sooner;
Or cracked, as Learnedly, upon
Things that are never to be known:
And still appear the more industrious,
The more your Projects are prepost'rous.
To square the Circle of the Arts;
And run stark mad to show your Parts,
Expound the Oracle of Laws,
And turn them which way we see Cause.
Be our Sollicitors, and Agents,
And stand for us in all Engagements.
And these are all the Mighty Powers,
You vainly boast, to cry down ours.
And what in real Value's wanting,
Supply with Vapouring and Ranting:
Because your selves are terrified,
And stoop to one another's Pride:
Believe we have as little Wit
To be Out-Hector'd, and Submit:
By your Example, lose that Right
In Treaties, which we gained in Fight:
And terrified into an Awe,
Pass on our selves a Salick Law,
Or, as some Nations use, give place,
And truckle to your Mighty Race.
Let Men usurp the unjust Dominion,
As if they were the better Women.
FINIS.

