THE Survey and Antiquity OF THE TOWN OF STAMFORD. In the County of LINCOLN.
With its ancient Foundation, Grants, Privileges, and several Donations
thereunto belonging. Also a List of the ALDERMENS names, and the time when they
were chosen. With the Names of 10 Lord Majors (of the Hon: City of London)
borne in the foresaid County of Lincoln.

Written By RICHARD BUTCHER Gent. Sometimes Towne-Clarke of the same Town.

Caput and membra sunt una persona.

Thom. Aquinas. LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET, dwelling in Old-Fishstreet in
Heydon-Court. 1646.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
(TO All the worthy Citizens of LONDON, Borne in the Town of STAMFORD in the
County of Lincoln, that have been or intend to be Benefactors to the same: And
more especially to those two worthy Brothers and members of that City, Mr.
Robert Bullack, and Mr. John Bullack, who have not only been Pious and
charitable Benefactors to their said Native town; but also liberal and
indulgent Incouragers to this present Survey thereof).
GEntlemen, I here present unto you for a New-yeares gift, the Survey of your
Cradle-places; a Work upon which I fixed my first thoughts by the motion which
some of you by letter made unto others, who either not at leisure, or not
willing; or hindered by some other impediment, I know not what, forbear the
enterprise: Which I perceiving (though the unfittest of many others) have
presumed to set my Pen on work, rather then your desires should be altogether
frustrate, or that I should conceal what I know; have heard, or read of my
Native town. As it is homely, so I hope it is harmless; if it appear not
worthy of your applause, yet I hope it will no way appear worthy of your
displeasures; take it therefore as it is meant, not as it might have been made
better by me, for it is the best that my poor Invention, observation, or
reading can afford, or the treasury of my Note-booke can render.

It had come to your viewes some Months before this, had not the troubles of
these Times hindered my intended speed: Yet glad I am I have finished it at the
end of the Old year, hoping it would have bin published at the beginning of
the new. If it be thought useful for the Public, I desire for the public
good it may be published, and that what Errors have escaped my Pen, may by the
Corrector be amended, by the Reader pardoned, and the whole substance of this
Survey be by you kindly accepted; From him who is and ever will be a lover of
you and your Native place whilst he is

Your Friend, Richard Butcher.
Stamford the 1. of January, 1646.
Viro doctrina, et pietate in Patriam eximio RICHARDO BUTCHER.
(...): qui Librum edis docteque pi^que,
Arteque pertingis, quo stimulavit Amor.
Qui negat alterutrum; non noverit ille, necesse est,
Scribendi causas: Patria nempe tua est.
Scribendive modum: parsisti nempe labori
Tu nulli; pietas quo tua docta foret:
Nec frustra sudasse liquet; quod quilibet alter
Agnoscet mecum, qui tua scripta lege^.
B. H. Med: Doctor.

ROBERT BULLACKE, Surgeon. In laudem Authoris, and contra Zoilum.
WHen first I moved in the terrestiall Sphere
Of your Sol's influence, I doubted not my dear
Friend, of your love, your care, pains and sincerity
Which Stamford must cognize to all posterity:
Of this our Authors book, I say but this
(For that is Praise enough) that it is his:
Nor all the Muses, nor Apollo's lays
Can sing his worth, be his own lines his praise
Against the Zoilus, who is fraught with spite,
I send this old Convoy on him to light:
Cum tua non edas carpis mea carmina Leli
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Sloth sits and censures, what the industrious teach;
Foxes dispraise the Grapes they cannot reach.
INto the little volume of this Book,
With Judgments eye who so shall please to look;
Such various Learning he therein shall find,
As shall express the Authors glorious mind:
The site of Stamford, in Rhetoric strain,
Set forth; demonstrateth unto us plain
His Eloquence; his knowing Antiquity,
The substance of this Book does testify:
Then for his Skill in ancient History,
And likewise in the art of Heraldry;
Such copious matter it to us affords,
As possible can be declared in words:
His Poetry like golden veins appear,
Throughout this Work, as scattered here and there:
This learned labor from his painful hands,
Shall last whilst Welland runs, and Stamford stands.
THO: SEAMER.

DARES and HOMER long ago did write
The Greeks and Troyans bloody dismal Fight;
Our Author seldom dippes his Pen in blood,
Yet by this Story may be understood,
How Stamford flourisht both in Art and Trade,
And then again, how she was wretched made
By bloody Mars; who all her sta^ely Towers
Erst in a moment, Fire and Sword devours:
Her various fortune, he here let us us know,
Which like the Ocean often did ebb and flow:
And this into our memory, fresh brings
Wo^lds frailty, and Vicessi^ude of things.
In wealth and glory much she once did thrive,
What time she was the sacred Muses hive;
And then her glory fell into decay,
When as those painful Bees did fly away.
But now again, me thinks she mend^ her state,
By that which here our Author does relate:
Then Stamford love the man that honors thee,
Or much unworthy thou will seem to be
Of such a Towne-Clarke: Who to thy great glory,
Sets forth herein thy true and ancient Story.
E. A.

THE Survey and Antiquity of the Town of STAMFORD.
CHAP. I.
The several Appellations, Foundation, Situation, and form^ of Stamford, with
the erection and dissolution of the University there.

THe Town of Stamford alias Stantford, alias Stampford, (for by so many
several names the same is called in diverse Records) is situated upon the
furthest point West in the County of Lincoln, on the confines of the Counties
of Rutland and Northampton: the same and Stamford-Baron adjoining, are placed
in a very healthful pleasant, and temperate air, which in the form thereof
does frame the figure of a Roman T. It is watered on the South parts with the
River of Welland, which has the original Spring in the County of Leicester,
toward the West not far from the Town of Harborow. From whence extending
her stream she devideth by her Channel in the beginning of her course the
Counties of Leicester and Northampton; and so gliding with her silver current
Eastward in her journey proves a fruitful Parent making her self the rich
Mother of Greene-Hew, and many several colored flowers which she brings forth
upon the fruitful Meadows enamelling the same therewith all along as she
passes de^iding before she come at Stamford the Counties of Rutland and
Northhampton, and then ariving there, with her fragrant stream she devideth
the same from the Town and Parish of Stamford-Baron, in the County of
Northampton; a place though not subject to the Mace of Stamfords government,
yet joined to the same in all Taxes, Subsidies, Fifteenes* and other payments
to the State amounting to a fifth part of a full mul^t, and so subjugating her
self to pass under the stony yoke of a Bridge of five Arches, she holds on
her constant travel toward the East, thence making a separation betwixt the
Counties of Lincoln and Northampton, till she comes to the Town of Crowland,
where she drowneth her self and name in the Fennes of Holland and pays the
tribute of her waves to the Monarch Neptune by delivering her waters toward
Lynne in the County of Norfolk into the grand Ocean.

This Town of Stamford is of great antiquity, and was built (as the tradition
goes) 863 years before the Incarnation of Christ by Bladud a King of the
Britains, who being himself a great Philosopher endeavored at this Town to
plant the study of Philosophy* in emulation or imitation of the ancient
Athenian Schools, and drawing hither the learned and gravest men of that
Science that were to be found in the whole World, it flourished in all manner
of Heathenish learning till the time of K. Lucius, who was the first that here
embraced the Christian Faith by the Preaching of Fugatius and Damianus, sent
hither into Britain by Eleutherus Bishop of Rome; and as before it was ^ery
famous through the world for the great proficiency of Ethnic learning* so in
that blessed time when England was first enlightened with the glorious beams
of the Gospel, it much more flourished with Learned* Holy and Religious men,
who very devoutly taught the Soule-saving knowledge of CHRIST; Insomuch that in
a short time (according to the Devotion of those times) in and about Stamford
eight Houses of Religion, thirteen Parish Churches, and three Chapels, all of
them in or near the same Town were erected, (as shall hereafter in the proper
place be more particularly named) the same being furnished with the Learnedest
and gra^est men of that Age: the fame of whose Piety and Learning caused many
of the Christian Princes and other Great men neighboring upon the Isles of
Britain, to send their Sons and Friends hither to be taught and educated by
those pious Masters* whereby it in those days attained to the name and honor
of an University. But as no glory is parmanent in this transitory life, so in
time the luster of this bright shining tapor of Fame began to wax d^mme and to
decline by the foggie and pestiferous mysts of Heresy and Errors; like
mortal Diseases breeding in a body long inured with Peace, health and
quietness, which caused the Stamford^an University to be dissolved by the
Decree and Power of Gregory then Bishop of Rome, about the year after the
Incarnation of Christ, 727.

CHAP. II.
Stamford ruinated by the Danes, re-edified and the Bridge over Welland builded
by Aliren the second King of Denmark, the Castle and Wa^^s built by Edmund
Jronside a Saxon King; with the names of the Gates, the names and uses of the
Watch-towers, the situation of the Castle, the number of the Streets and
Lanes, with the Conduits and Wells which water the same: Together with the
Churches and houses of Religion, in and about the same.

ABout the year after the Incarnation of Christ 116, Canu^us the heathen King
of Denmark invading England with a potent Army, amongst other of his spoils
and rapines laid wast the Town of Stamford, which not long after was by Aliren
the second his Successor, re-edified and a Bridge of Stone built over the
River of Welland leading into Stamford-Baron, it remained without Castle or
Walls till the time of Edmund Ironside a Saxon King, about 200 years before
the Norman Conquest, who built the Castle and compassed the Town with a wall
of Stone of an indifferent height, for the better defense against the Danes
invasion, garnishing the same with Five strong and stately Watch-towers, two
toward the Waterside for the discovery and defense against the Enemy toward
the South, the one called Beesfort, the other Holme-towes: The other three
Bulworkes or Watch-towers are toward the East, North, and West, for the
discovery and defense against the Enemy on those parts, called Carpe-tower,
White-tower, and North Bulworke.

The Walls have in them Five principal Gates or entries, Peter-gate on the
West St. Clements-gate on the North, Paul-gate, and St. Georges-gate toward the
East, and the Bridge gate toward the South: To these may be added a Sixth
standing Northeast called the Newgate, but made long since the ancient Gates
were erected all the rest appearing to have slippes of strong Portcullesses,
which Newgate wants. Besides there is toward the South, two ancient
Posterne-gates which seem as ancient as the Walls themselves, the one joining
to the Bridge-gate* the other not far from St. Georges-gate, leading into the
Tenter-Meadowes.

But as the length of time corrupts not only manners and good Government from
the ancient intent and integrity thereof but also Stone walls from their true
use and sufficiency, so has it brought to pass in these more modern Times,
that the manners of good and careful government of Majestrates becoming
corrupted, either by self-seeking Covetousness, or friendly partiality, have
so far corrupted these very walls of Stone that they have lost the true use
and strength of them contrary to the intent and wise meaning of the
first-Founders, by permitting the adjacent Inhabitants within them to make
back-doores out of them: ^o that one may say, so many Tenements as border upon
them so many new Posternes are made out of them, serving for no other purpose
then for the letting in and out at unlawful hours Night-walkers and suspected
persons, which fear to appear in the presence of a Watch, or to be seen in
the heart of a Town, or to come within the compass of the awful eye of the
public Majestrate, things of no small and dangerous consequence in the times
either of Peace or War, especially where they are permitted to the backsides
of Victualing-houses, as too many of them are.

The Castle was situated whilst it stood upon the side of an Hill (as indeed
all the Town stands upon the rising of an hill) but the Castle-hill appears
somewhat artificial, being cast up round and higher then the ordinary degree,
standing well toward the midst of the Town and somewhat South-west, facing
the River with a very pleasant prospect.

Cum Edwardus Senior ^ustrales fluminum ripas contra Danos et Aquilone
irruentes communi^et e regione etiam hujus i^ Australi ^ipa (que nun^
Stamford-Baron vocatur) firmissimam arcem construxisse. Nusquam tamen hodie
apparet nae^ quod intestino bello Stephanus contra Henricum Andegavensem
firmavit in ipso oppido fuisse et firma obtin^^ ipsius area etiamnum ostendit.
Camden Britt. in Com. Lincoln.
Mr. Camden makes mention of another Castle sometimes standing in
Stamford-Baron, built by Edward the Elder a Saxon King, as a Fortification
against the Danes, which was destroyed in the wars betwixt King Stephen and
Henry the second; and indeed the very ruins thereof are now come to ruin for
no place there appears to give evidence where it stood.

To manifest the profitable and pleasant situation of this Town, the Munkes,
Friars, and Nuns of those superstitious times (like so many Rats or Mice,
which make choice to reed of the daintie^^ Cheese) made choice of this place to
build here several receptacles, as one observes of them.

They plant themselves in fairest plots
For Pasture, Wood and spring:
No grief, nor care, comes to their lots,
When others sigh they sing.
For in and about this Town they had no less then Eight several Cells or
Monastories; as namely, the Gray-Fryers, the White-Fryers, the Blackfriars,
the Augustine-Fryers, St. Leonards (being a Cell belonging to the Abbey of
Durham) Newsted Monastory, the Hermitage (being the place where now the
Spittle-house stands) and a house of Nuns in Stamford-Baron.

Here has been likewise in former times (as I said before) thirteen Parish
Churches besides three Chapels, namely St Mary's, All Saints, St. Thomas, St.
Michaels, St John's, Trinity Church, Paul's Church, Peter Church, St. Georges,
St. Andrews, Clement Church, St. Stephens, and St. Martins, in Stamford-Baron.

Also Benet Chapel, St. Thomas Chapel, and Magdaline Chapel. These are
now all reduced into five Parishes within the liberties, and St. Martins
without, namely, St. Mary's, All Saints, St. Michaels, St. John's, and St.
Georges; and yet none of all these six Parishes (excepting All Saints) has so
much maintenance belonging to any of them as will competently maintain a
Minister in them, a thing which may seem very strange when sixteen several
Benefices are reduced to the number of five, or 6. But I conceive the reason to
be here as it is in the University of Cambridge, which has in it (as I take
it) 15 Parish Churches, and yet not any one of them of any competent
maintenance; because the fellows of the several Colleges do officiate in
those several cures for the better exercise and practice of their Ministry,
as having their chiefest maintenance from the Colleges: even so the Munks of
the several Monastories in this place (whilst those Monastories stood) did
officiate in the several Parishes here, having their principal maintenance
from the Monastories; which being dissolved most of these Parishes became
united (especially those that had any maintenance unto them) for the support of
the future Ministry, and those that had merely nothing were totally ruinated.

This Town has in it to the number of a Eleven indifferent fair Streets, and
10 small streets or Lanes, well replenished with houses, but in former times
(as appears by the ruins of many ancient buildings) it was much more populous
then now it is (the reason of which hereafter appears in the proper pl^^e).
The names of the Streets and Lanes are as follows Peter-hill Street St.
Mary's Street, Paul's Street, S. Michaels Street* S. Geo^ges Street,
Clement-hill (where the Friday Market-Crosse s^^nds) Clip^^ill St. Mary's
Market Street, All-Hallowes gate the Bridge-street the Market-street, Cle-ment
Lane, Star Lane Goldsmiths Lane, Manerly Lane, Chenie Lane, S. Thomas Lane, S.
John's Lane, S. Mary's Lane, Castle-dike, and Pillory-nooke, where the white
meat Market is kept.

The Town is watered by two common Conduits* as namely by St. Michaels and
Paul's Conduits, besides it has four common wheel-Wells belonging thereunto,
All-Hallowes Well, St* Georges Well Poule Well and Clement Well: the Conduits
are fed by pipes of lead which descend from a spring called the Conduit-head,
being twelve-score or thereabouts without the Walls, upon the North-east of the
Town in the common field, and has the Land next adjoining to it for the
benefit both of the Spring and Conduit.

CHAP. III.
The Antiquities, ancient Privileges and ancient owners of the Town of
Stamford.

MAster Cambden in his learned Britania in the County of Lincoln describes the
situation, Cambden Britta^ (...).
stctruure, and general Privileges, anciently used in this Town in these
words. In limite ad Wellandum fluminu^ Stamford sed et e Saxo structili unde et
nomen aedificatum oppi^um frequens et varijs immunitatibus (...), muroque
firmatum Geldum per duodecem hundredis, et dimidi^ dedit in exercitu navigio et
Dane-gelt, ibique fuerunt sex custodiae. With this in part agrees the Book of
Crowland which makes mention of Stamford and Stamford-shire.

Moreover John Stow in his Chronicle reports, Stow, page 131.
that in the time of King Athelstone before the conquest, there was a Mint for
the coining of Money in Stamford-Baron; so that without doubt the limits of the
Jurisdiction and liberties of Stamford have been far beyond what now they are.

The ancient owners of this Town have been many, but all holding from the Crown
in chief, the Tower roll makes mention that King John gave the Castle and Town
of Stamford to William Earl Warren, after the death of which Earl Warren,
Henry the third seized the Castle and Town, and gave the same to Edward his
son who held them, and when he came to be King he gave the same to John Earl
Warren; John Earl Warren ga^e amongst other things the said Castle and Town
again to the King after his death* the said John dyed the 21th of Edward the
third seized of the said Castle and Town for life, the remainder to the King as
appears by the inquisition upon the Tower Roll taken after the death of the
said John in the 21th year of the said King Edward the third. Edward the
third, after the death of the said John Earl Warren, gave the said Castle and
Town to William de B^hume Earl of Northampton, and to his Heirs males, and
in default of such issue, the remainder to the King.

The said William Earl of Northampton dyed without Heirs Males, whereupon the
reversion of the said Castle and Town did again return into the Crown and so
continued till the first of Edward the fourth, in which said first year by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 1. of June, the said King Edward the 4.th
granted the said Town and Castle to his Mother Sisley Duchess of York for the
term of her life, the remainer to the King and his Heirs, after the death of
the said Sisley Duchess of York, the same remained in the Crown till the time
of Queen Elizabeth, at what time William Cecell then newly made Lord Burleigh,
a man great in the State and also lately become great in possessions in and
about Stamford, being trusted by the Townsmen for the obtaining of the
Fee-farme thereof for the use of the Corporation, he obtained the same for
himself, in whose posterity it as yet remains to the great disadvantage of
the said Town.

CHAP. IIII.
The ancient Government of Stamford, the first Incorporating thereof by Letters
Patents; the reason why the Kings of this Land have from time to time nourished
and cherished Corporations, the Privileges and immunities of Stamford by the
new Grants and late Charters, the Power given them there to make Laws for the
better regulating the same, and the laws made particularly set down.

THe Government of Stamford was long before their written Charter held, and
used amongst themselves by an ancient Prescription, which was called the
Aldermanry of the Guild, as strong and as large (if not more strong then now
the same is settled by the Charters of the first and 15th of Edward the 4th, who
was the first that did incorporate the Town by Letters Patents). For it
appears upon the Tower-Roll in the third year of King Edward the first, Per
veredictum duodec^m minorum Ville de Stamford R^tul. hundred. Lincoln. ibi
fuerunt duodecem qui vocantur LEGEMANI qui sic vocabantur quia ab antiqu^
fuerunt Iudices legum in eadem Villam. Whereby it is manifest, that in those
days there were Twelve men in Stamford which were called Legemani, because
they were Judges of the Law, and had the law in their hands for the Government
of this Town.

Edward the 4th in the first year of his Reign Anno Dom. 1461. by his Charter
directed to George Chapman, the first incorporate Alderman, and others both of
the upper and lower Bench, then called the Comburgesses and Capitall-burgesses
(being then the first and second Twelve, as they are more particulerly named in
the said Charter, but since enlarged by a later Charter, To the Alderman and
twelve Comburgesses, and to the number of 24 Capital Burgesses) did
incorporate the said Town both in Name and Deed by the name of the Alderman
and Burgesses of Stamford, and thereby gave or rather confirmed unto the same
many great and profitable Privileges; as to be freed from the Sheriffs
jurisdiction, and from being put on Inquests out of the Town, to have the
return of all Writs, to be freed from all Lords Lieutenants; or their Deputies
in respect of taking of Musters; as touching the Militia of the said Town,
making the Alderman for the time being the Kings immediate Lieutenant within
his Liberties and Jurisdiction, and to be within the same the second man within
the Kingdom; to have one or more Mace or Maces of Gold or Silver at his choice
to be carried before him for his greater honor and dignity; to have a common
Seal at Arms, and for the more honor thereof, the same are allowed to be the
Arms of England, both in Field, color, and posture without difference,
impaled with the checkie Coat, Or and Azure of Earl Warren, the ancient Lord
(as has been said) of this Town; and further, to do and execute within the
same and Liberties thereof, Vt ab antiquo usu fuerunt, as of ancient time they
had been accustomed* which makes it evident that this Charter is but a new
Confirmation of more ancient Privileges.

The Naturalists report, that the Viperous brood are procreated by the
destruction of both the Parents; the Male destroyed in the act of generation,
the Female at the time of bringing forth: Such a generation of Vipers have from
time to time unfortunatly been gotten and brought forth in this Town, I mean,
men who have been begotten into prime O^fices by the votes and suffrages of
others, by which very act they have proved the ruin of those which begat them,
and being conceived in the womb of their Offices, to make themselves a Birth
to their better benefit and greater prefe^ment, have torn out the bowels of
this their nourishing Mother, by purloyning from her, her ancient Records.
Charters, and miniments, rending to the death and destruction of this
Corporation, only to advance their private designs, together with the designs
of the Towns common enemy; whereby our ancient Immunities appear no
otherwise, then scatteringly here and there upon the Tower Roll little better
then mere circumstances; yet pregnant Evidences of more ancient Privileges:
So that at this day we ca^ show none under any authentic warrant beyond the
first year of the Reign of King Edward the fourth.

But to proceed since the obtaining of this first Charter, the same has been
Confirmed by diverse Iuspeccimusses from all the succeeding Kings and Queens
that have been Sovereigns to the time of King CHARLES that now is, and diverse
new Grants added; as the Monday Market, the three Fayres of Simon and Jude,
Greene-goose Fair, and St. James Fair, having formerly but the Friday Market,
and the great Mid-lent Mart, the profits of which only belong to the Lord,
these later to the Corporation.

By a late Inspeccimus, there is granted to the Alderman and Burgesses, to hold
a Court of Pleas of all actions Real, personal or mixed, to the value of 40.
l. And to hold Sessions and Goal delivery, for all Criminal actions
perpetrated and done within the Liberty (high Treason and petty Treason only
excepted.)

This Town has (as many other ancient Boroughes of England have) a power to
send up two Burgesses to every Parliament: So that they have not only the power
to execute Laws, but also a share in making of laws: And here is to be
observed the reason, why the Princes and policy of England have had a regard,
as it were to the fencing and hedging about the Cities and ancient Boroughs of
this Land with Privileges and Immunities, for the stronger defense,
preservation and maintenance of the same, and that for diverse great and weighty
ends and purposes. In the time of William the Conqueror it is constitured by
the said King in these words; Item nullum Mercatum vel forum sit nec fieri
permittatur nisi in Civitatibus Regni nostri and in Burgis clausis and muto
vallatis and Castellis, and locis tutissimus ubi consuetudines Regni nostri and
jus nostrum commune and dignitates Coronae nostrae quae constitutae sunt a
bonis Praedecessoribus nostris deperire non possunt nec defraudari, nec
viol^ri, sed omnia rite and ^er judicium and justiciam fieri debent: Et ideo
Castella and Burgi and Civitates sunt and fundatae and edificata scilicet ad
tuitionem gentium and populorum Regni, and ad defencionem Regni and idcirco
observari debent cum omne liberate et integritate et ratione.

So as by this it appears, Lamb. fol. 125.
that Cities and ancient Boroughs (as this Town is) were instituted for three
purposes.

First, the conservation of the Customs of the Kingdom, and the common Right
and Dignity of the Crown. 2. For the defense of the Nation, and the people of
the Kingdom. 3. And as for the defense of the Kingdom, so for the
conservation of the Laws thereof, by which Laws every man injoyes his own in
Peace; for tuition and defense of the Kings subjects, and for the keeping of
the Kings peace in time of sudden uproares; and finally for the Defense of
the Realm against outward and inward hostility.
And indeed the Graunts of Kings and Sovereign Princes, either to Counties,
Cities, or Towns corporate, makes such Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate*
as it were small County Palatines within themselves, in giving them power for
the better Government of such places, to have Magistrates of their own
members; and for their more ample Authority and peculiar rule to make Laws,
constitutions and ordinances, to bind themselves and every member within their
Jurisdiction.

When the Conqueror created Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, he made that Shire a
County Palatine, upon which Creation Henry Bradshaw a Munk in Chester, about
the beginning of King Henry the 8. speaking of the manner of the Conquerours
grant to the said Hugh, has these following Verses, which in part do
resemble the free and large liberties and graunts to inferior Corporations.

Bradshaw in vitae Wirburg. cap. 16.
-- The King gave him for his Inheritance
The County of Chester, with the appurtenance;
Made a sure Charter to him and his succession:
By the sword of Dignity to hold it by might,
And to call a Parliament to his will and fight;
To order his Subjects after true Justice,
As a praeporent Prince, and statutes to devise.
This Hugh Lupus for the better ayding of him in his Government and for the
more completing of him in his Parliament, which should be the fountain of
his Laws to rule by, substituted and made under him these Eight Barons; That
is to say, -- 1 Robertus filius Hugonis, Baron de Malpas. 2 Richardus de
Vernon, Baron de Shibbrooke. 3 Willielm^^ Malbanc, Baron de Nampwich. 4
Willielmus filius Nig^lli, Baron de Halton. 5 Hamo de Mascy, Baron de Dunham. 6
Gilbertus de Venables, Baron de Kilb^rton. 7 Hugo filius Normandi, Baron de
Hawardin, 8 Nicholas de Stock-port, Baron de Stock-port.


In like manner, as this Earl and his Barons assembled in the great Hall in
his Castle of Chester, had the power to make Laws and Constitutions for the
government of that his County, so has this lesser body aggregate (the survey
of which I now write) a power within themselves in their common Hall assembled,
to make Laws as peculier and proper rules for their better Government, the
said assembly being a little Court of Parliament (if it be lawful for me to
compare small things with great, or like a Cosmographer to frame a model of
the great World in one small skin of Parchment; for in this small model is a
representation of the highest and greatest Government;) For here the Alderman
as the chiefest Magistrate represents the person of the King, his Brethren the
Comburgesses sitting round about him as so many Peers of the upper house, the
Capital Burgesses which we here call the 24* being Senatores minorum gentium,
are the representative Body of the whole Town, and in their place do
symbolize with the lower house of Parliament; The Recorder (being the mouth of
the Court) does represent the Speaker in this Michrocosme; the Town-clarke, the
Register or Clarke of the same; The gilded Mace-bearer, the Sergeant at Arms,
and the Iaylor (being the arresting Sergeant in the Liberty) the Knight of the
Black rod.

Now in pursuance of that power given to this Corporation for the making of
good and wholesome Laws for the better government of the same. Richard Wolphe
Gent. Alderman of the said Town, at a common Court or Hall there held the 15th
day of March, in the Sixth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES that now is, etc. With the advice and consent of the Comburgesses and
Capital Burgesses in the Common Hall assembled; Did ordain and constitute as
follows:

I.

THat no new Habitation shall be erected in the said Town, unless it be made
fit for the dwelling of such person or persons, as shall be Cessed or fit to be
cessed in the Subsidy at xx.s. in Land, or iij.l. in Goods at the least
(excepting Hospitals and houses of Correction) upon pain to forfeit to the
Alderman and Burgesses, or their successors the sum of x.s. for every Month,
that such Cottage or new building shall be used for habitation.

2 That no Barnes or other houses shall be converted into Tenements, and no
ancient Tenement shall be divided into sundry habitations (except the same so
divided shall be made fit for the dwelling of Subsidy men of xx.s. lands, or
iij.l. goods, the erecter to forfeit x.s. Monthly and the tenant v.s. monthly
to the use aforesaid.

3 That such who take in Inmates, shall forfeit x.s. monthly to the use
aforesaid.

4 That none shall let or assign any Tenement to any one not assessed or fit
to be assessed at xx.s. lands, or iij.l. goods (except to Freemen that have not
discontinued from the Town with their family by the space of one year before)
unless the Landlord become bound with the tenant or one other sufficient
suerty in 40. l. to save the town harmless, upon peine of five pound forfeit
for the contempt, and x.s. monthly for the continuance by the Landlord, and
v.s. monthly by the tenant, to the use aforesaid.

5 That these orders extend not to any that take in tenants of xx.s. land or
iij.l. goods in ye subsidy (except they be Inmates.)

6 That the Alderman for the time being with two of the (...) Camburgesses to
the place (not being offenders) shall be judges, whether such erections be meet
for the habitation of such Subsidy men.

7 That the Streets and Lanes in the said town be cleansed every Saturday by
the adjacent Inhabitants, or the parties delinquent to forfeit for every
offense vj.d. and the Constables in that precinct, to forfeit for not
presenting every offense at the next Sessions after the same is committed
ij.s.vj.d. to the use aforesaid.

8 That no Alderman shall presume to make any a Freeman out of the Town Hall,
unless the same be granted in the open Hall, and the fine for such Freedom
there assessed* upon pain to forfeit v.l. to the use aforesaid.

9 That no Tradesman whatsoever (except Freemen by birth or service) shall
presume to open any shop, or to sell any wares until they have agreed for
their Freedom, upon pain of forfeiting x.s. for every Month they shall so do,
to the use aforesaid.

10 That all the Conduits, common Wells, and Pumps about the said Town shall
from time to time be repaired, at the Town charge upon pain of forfiture of
vj.s.viij.d. a piece by the two Chamberlains, to the use aforesaid.

11 That so many of the Comburgesses, or Capital Burgesses as shall be
dwelling within the parish where the Alderman or his Deputy for the time being
shall dwell (having no lawful excuse to the contrary) shall attend upon the
said Alderman or his deputy to and from his parish Church upon every Lords day
both before noone and after noone* if there be any Sermon at the said Church*
upon pain for every one offending, to forfeit for every offense the sum of
iiij.d. to the use aforesaid.

12 That all such as have built upon the Town walls or upon the Rampire
thereof, or made any doors, or gates, out of the said walls within the space
of 40 years before these ordinances, shall take Leases from the Town, of the
said passages; or shall forfeit xij.d. for every Month they shall continue the
same without Leases, to the use aforesaid.

13 That the Pinder of the said Town shall impound and take i.d. for every
beast that he finds in the Town streets and in the liberties thereof, not put
before the common Heard.

14 That all the forfitures aforesaid, shall be paid to the Chamberlaines for
the time being, who in default of payment shall recover and leavie the same by
action or actions of debt, or by distress of the goods and chattels of the
offenders, which Distress being taken shall be impounded until the penalty
for which it was taken be fully paid, or else for non-payment by ye space of
six days after the taking, and not in the mean time repleavied, the same to
be apprized by two indifferent persons to be chosen by the Alderman for the
time being, and by the Chamberlaines sold for the satisfaction of the said
penalties, and the overplus to be delivered to the owner or owners of the said
goods.

15 That the several sums hereafter to be paid, recovered or levied by
virtue of these Ordinances or any of them, shall be from time to time employed
to and for the good of the Poor of the said Town of Stamford, and no
otherwise.

These Laws, Constitutions and Ordinances, were in the same year viewed,
approved and confirmed under the hands and Seals of Sir Richard Hutton Knight,
then one of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir George
Crook Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Court of King's Bench, being
the two Judges of Assizes for the County of Lincoln (in which County the said
Corporation of Stamford stands) and thereby made Laws according to the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided, 19 Hen. 7. cap 7.
and are set up in the Counsell-Chamber of the said Town fairly written in
Parchment and fixed in a wooden frame.

But these Laws how good soever in themselves remain but as so many linelesse
letters for want of that quickening spirit which the authority of the
Majestrate ought to put into them by the just and impartial execution of them.
For as in cases criminal* the Death of a malefactor is the life of the Law,
so in all offenses of a less nature the due punishment of the offender, shows
the instrument of the living Law in the hand of the Iusticer; and therefore
such Magistrates as have good rules prescribed, but in regard either of
negligence, idleness or ignorance, forbear to do their duties, are like to
counterfeit mankins set upon Corn lands, only to fright away the birds, and the
offender perceiving such a one what he is, is by him rather encouraged then
made afraid to offend* because he knows he may offend without control, having
for his Governor but Aesopes dead beam flung into the water, upon which every
base Frog, in contempt and derision will hop and trample on.

What shall I call such blockish Justices?

They are like round ciphers which have neither the figures of Justice,
Judgment, Equity, Courage, nor the fear of God before their eyes: or like the
picture of St. George on horseback, threatening with his Sword to kill the
Dragon, but never hits him; Therefore to finish the Character of this
Sin-suffering beast with this Chapter, the Poets definition fits him.

Mild Magistrates are Winters too to warm, Du-Bart^^

Which neither chill the Weed, nor kill the Worm.
CHAP. V.
The dignity and antiquity of the word and title Alderman described.

NOw since this Town has for her principal Magistrate an Alderman, I conceive
it will not be amiss nor out of order or method, before I set down the manner
of election and inaugeration of this prepotent Officer, somewhat to vindicate
the dignity and antiquity of the word Alderman it self, with the large extent
and ancient power thereof; here in England long before the Norman conquest,
far beyond that of Major or any other name of Magistrate at this time
appointed, for the rule or government of a City or Town incorporate, though the
conceit and opinion of these more modern times seem to be otherwise; Sed non
fuit sic ab initio: and I am sure the best Antiquities prefer an ancient
dignity though by time neglected, before new invented title though never so
much for the present adored; so likewise do the best Heralds prefer an
ancient family (retaining the old (...), though declined in estate) before a
new and upstart house though never so much glittering for the present in
wealth, pomp, and prosperity: for we know that though many times a black cloud
interposeth it self betwixt us and the Suns Brightness, yet the Sun still
remains to be the same both in heat and splendour though seeming darkened,
cooled, and obscured to dull conceits and thick capacities: So, though time and
use like an absco^ding vail or curtain, draws it self betwixt us and the
former ancient luster and extent of Government, appropriate unto the name and
dignity of the word Alderman, yet the same still remains as at the first
g^orious and splendidious in it self. For it is to be noted, that in all old
Saxon titles, the word Alderman or Duke (as Seldom observes) was one and the
same, for authority whereof, he cites an instrument made by Ethelread and
Ethelfled* The Aldermen, Dukes or Lords of Mercia, to Werfred Bishop of
Worcester, in the year 904 for the profit and benefit of that Church, and (as
the book of the Church of Worcester says) the name Alderman is sometimes
expressed by sub. Regulus and Regulus, Camden B^^tan. pa. 368.
sometimes by Patricius, Princeps, Dux, Comes and Consul, nor is this without
example, that they are called Reges. There was an old inscription at the Abbey
of R^^sey in ancient time, of one Alwin, who being of the blood Royal was
Alderman, of all England under King Athel^^on and founder of that Abbey, as
there appears by the Epi^aph upon his Tomb in these words: Ob^^^ anno Christi
9^2.

Col Ramsy in Ar^hi vi^ Scaccarij.

Hic requiescit Alwinu^ in^liti regis Edgari cognatu^ ^^tius Anglia Aldermanus
et huius sacri coe^^bij miraculos ^ fundatur.

Here lies Alwin kinsman to King Edgar Alderman of all England and the
miraculous founder of this sacred Cell.

The word Elderman (says Hovenden) in England is the same with Senior or
Senator in Latin, Hov^ndes page 607. Poly hron. Polidor. Virgill inter leg^^
(...).


not so much so called propter senectutem sed propter sapientiam* not so much
for their age as for their wisdom, and diverse others have it to the same
purpose in other words by way of notation, observing that those whom the Saxons
formerly called, and now we call Eldermen or Earls, the Romans called
Senators. Et similiter ^lim apud Britanes ^emporibus (...) in Reg^^ isto
Britania vocabantur (...) qui ^oste^ (...) Sax^num vocabantur Aldermani, non
propter aetat^m sed propter sapientiam and dignitatem, cum quidem adolecentes
essent Iurisp^riti tamen and super hoc experti. And likewise in times past
amongst the Britains, in the time of the Romans in this Kingdom of Britain,
they were called Senators which afterward in the time of the Saxons, were
called Aldermen, not so much for their age as for their wisdom, etc.


So that it appears hereby, that the Antiquity, dignity, and the extent of
authority of the name or title Alderman* surpasses that of Major, Provost,
Bayliffe, or Warden, by which several titles given to the chief Magistrates,
diverse* Cities and Corporate Towns are governed.

CHAP. VI.
The manner of the chosing the Alderman of Stamford, with other subordinate
Officers in that Corporation, as how the said body by the Charter is from time
to time kept in life and being.

IN the next place follows in order, the original grant and present practice
according to that grant in the election and choosing of this prime Magistrate,
and the other subordinate Officers under him; for (as I said before) King
Edward the 4th. in the first year of his Reign, directed his Letters patents
to George Chapman and others, by the name of the Alderman and Comburgesses of
Stamford, and to twelve more of an inferior rank, by the name of the Capital
Burgesses of Stamford, which second 12 have been by a later Charter augmented
to the number of 24: So as King Edward the 4th. creating this body by his
Princely power, by his wisdom and policy gave rules and directions to the
same, how it should from time to time be preserved in a perpetual life, and
being by a continued succession; and therefore when any of the first number do
decease or leave their place, the Alderman with the rest of his company (and
the second company in their common hall assembled) do elect and chose out of
the second number such a meet and able man as they shall think fi^ for the
supply of the vacant* the said election being only made in the private chamber
of the Council by the Alderman and those with him of the first number, and
this by the major number of voices (the Alderman having in this as in all other
votes a double or casting voice. And when any of the second number happen to
decease or to be displaced, both Companies joining together by the major number
of voyce^, chose out of the body of the whole Town such a descreet able and
sufficient man as shall be thought convenient to supply the then vacant place.

Both companies thus completely furnished being congregated in their common
Hall upon the first Thursday after the feast of St. Bartholmew the Apostle,
every year, do elect two out of the first number, who have not been Alderman by
the space of two years then past, to the end that one of these two, the first
Thursday in the clean week next after the feast of St. Michael the Archangel,
then following, may by the major suffrages of both the companies be chosen to
be Alderman for the year then to come, which party thus elected, is brought and
presented by his predecessor to the Steward of the Court Leete in the open
Court after Proclamation made in solemn manner to that purpose: The ceremony of
which day is as follows.

The former Alderman attended by the first and second companies, the first
company in their Robes of purple faced with Foynes (such as the second Robe of
London i^) and the second company in their decent gowns of black fit for such
an Assembly, do repair to the house of the new elected Alderman, where after a
short banqu^t, they all do pass in order to the Castle-yard where the Leet i^
kept, and there being presented, (as is aforesaid) he is solemnly sworn by the
Steward of the Leet, first taking the oath of supremacy and Allegance, next the
oath of Justice of the peace and Alderman of the Corporation, and having a
tippet of black velvet taken from the neck of his predecessor, and by the hands
of his said predecessor put upon his, he then is seated on the right hand of
the Steward, where he sits till the charge be given, and then attended by the
several Companies, they go to the Church of St Mary's in Stamford, where they
hear a Sermon, which being finished, the new Alderman passes to his house
with the two Maces, the one of Gold the other of Silver, born before him, and
attended by the several Companies as is aforesaid, with the loud music of the
Town, playing before them, and in diverse places as they pass the Scholars of
the free Grammar School do pronounce before them several Orations in Greek
and Latin.

After which the Alderman at his own house (for the most part) and at his own
cost and charges, does make a great Feast to the Town, and to as many of the
Gentry of the Country as upon solemn invitation think good to be present.

This solemnity being finished, presently after he keeps his first Court (which
is called a Hall) where he swears all his first company to be faithful unto
him, and truly to Counsel him in the execution of his Office, and likewise, he
then swears the second company to be ayding and assisting unto him in all
things that appertain to the Aldermanry, during the time of his Office, at the
hall; (...) likewise takes an oath of the Town Clark, for the true executing of
his Office, and likewise he then swears, the Coroner of the Town for the year
to come, (who is by custom) the same party that was Alderman the year before.

Also he then swears the two Chamberlaines and ten or twelve Constables, at
least, Searchers for the Corn, Flesh, and Fish Markets, sealers and searchers
of Lether, are at this time likewise sworn, and all other inferior Officers,
as the Bayliffe of the liberty, the Sergeant of the Mace, such as are needfu^l
and necessary for the aid and support of the Towns government, are at this Hall
chosen and sworn, well and faithfully to perform and execute their several
Offices during the year then next following.

CHAP. VII.
Memorable things happening at several times in and about Stamford.

Mr. Camden out of Cum ( ut habet Hunting donensu) Picti and Scoti, omnem
regionem ad Stamfordiam usque ^^ripuissent, ubi Hengistus noster cum sub
Saxonibus in (...) eximia fortitud^ne furentibu^ baba^is ita iter occusit ut
plurimis peremp^is, pluribus cap^i^, reliqua fugam und^que capesserunt. Camd.
in Brittan. i^ Com. Lincoln.
Huntington reports, that when the whole Nations of the Picts and Scots, had
invaded the North of England and were come Southwards as far as Stamford,
that Hengist (which was as I take it, the first Saxon King that here reigned)
came against them with his Saxons, with such unwearied great strength and
fortitude, that he there so stopped the journey of these barbarous invadors
that most of them were slain and taken, the rest which were put to flight were
drowned in the water.

I have read in the story of Ingulphus, that at what time the Danes invaded
England, Ingulphus.
had burnt the Abbey of Crowland, and put to the sword all the Monks in the
same, and marching toward Stamford, the then Baron of Easindine, with the men
of Stamford gave them Battle near unto the said Town and beat them back for
that time* though afterward they recruted to the destruction of the same, as
formerly has been related.

In anno Dom. 1153, King Stephen holding the Castle of Stamford against Henry
Fitz-Empris, that is Henry the second, the said Castle was besieged and won
by the said Henry.

In anno Dom. 1189. all the Jews that then repaired to the Midlent-Mart at
Stamford from all parts, were spoiled of their goods and murdered.

In Anno 1227. there was a great Meeting at Stamford of diverse Lords, about
plotting of the Rebellion against King Henry the 3. called the Barons wars.

In Anno 1293. 1300. 1311. general chapters called Itinere mino^^^ were held
at Stamford: Afterward in the reign of Richard the 2. anno Dom. 1392. there
was a meeting at Stamford called C^^silium Sta^fordiensem Prelatorum, at which
meeting King Richard himself was present by the Command of Pope Boniface the 9.
about the suppressing of Wicklifes opinions.

In anno Dom. 1334. by reason of a bloody Difference happening betwixt the
Southern and Northern Students in the University of Oxford, part of that
University being the whole Northern faction removed it self to Stamford,
whereby was accomplished a for^^^ ancient Prophecy which follows in these
wor^^^

Hoc magnum studium qui nunc est ad vada bonum
Tempore futuro celebrabitur ad vada Saxi.
As Oxford where Learning now does flourish,
In time to come the Stony ford shall nourish.
Mr. Camden in his learned Britannia, confirms this faction at Oxford and the
settling for a time of the Northern Students here ^ Stamford; For (says he)
Regnante Edwardo tertio caepta hic Academia and bonarum literarum professo
(quod sue gloriae imprimis ducunt cives. Cum enim Oxoniae inter studiosos
Boreales and Australes omnia litibus feruerent, magnus studiosorum numerus huc
concessit: But here they stayed not long, for says the same Camden, Paulo
ta^en post Oxoniam reversi Academiae huic orienti ut initium ita finem (...)
posuerunt. Yet this separation occasioned that ever since, that Uni^ersity when
any of their members are to take any Degree, they gi^e them an Oath never to
read Logic in Stamford, (strangely conceiving that either the foresaid
Prophecy is not yet fulfilled, or else that their policy can prevent the Decree
of eternity, when as we see that God when he pleases brings the same thing to
pass by the same means whereby fond man goes about to prevent it;) For says.
Camden further, Cautumque deinceps in revirando ne quis Oxoni^^sis public
Stamfordiae praelegeret.

This town of Stamford nevertheless flourished for some time afterward in
trade and Merchandise until the Wars happened unhappily, betwixt the two
families of York and Lancaster, in which intestin^ strife the Northern
Soldiers breaking into the Town, burnt down the houses, and so far destroyed
all things here, that never since this Town could fully recover her ancient
dignity; for says Cambden (speaking of the Town after the removal of the
Oxford Students,) Nihilominus illa Mercimonijs floruit, donce ardente inter
familiam Lancastrense^ and Eboracensem civili bello, Boreales milites
irrumpentes aedibus, and incendijs omnia miscuerint; nec inde vero dignitatem
pristinam plene recuperare potuit.

The Castle of Stamford was overthrown and quite demolished in the time of
Richard the third, the materials thereof taken away to repair the White-Friers
in Stamford.

Edward the 4th. came to Stamford in anno 1462 the year after he had
incorporated the Town by letters Patents.

Henry the 8th. came to Stamford at his progress into Lincolnshire in anno
Dom. 1532, where he was Royally welco^med by Henry Lacy Gentleman then
Alderman, as his predecessor Edward the 4th. was before received by John Brow^e
Esquire, then Alderman.

In anno 1469 Sir Thomas De-la-Band, and Sir Thomas Dimock were executed for
Treason at Stamford, Thomas Royston then being Alderman.

The Townhouse or Common Hall over the Bridge-gate in Stamford, was newly
built by John Haughton Alderman in Anno Dom. 1558.

In anno Dom. 1565. Queen Elizabeth passed through Stamford and dyned in the
White-Friers, in her progress into Lincolnshire, Godfrey Dawson then being
Alderman.

In anno Dom. 1594. Robert Meadows then being Alderman, a great tumult was
raised at the Inn called the Bull in Stamford, by Mullene^x of
Nottinghamshire, and Terwil of Lincolnshire of the one side, and one Rockwood a
Gentleman of Suffolk of the other party, the occasion began upon a trifle. A
footboy drying himself in the evening by the Kitchen fire, (where his Master
Ro^kwoods supper was making ready) Mollene^x and Terwil fitting at (...)
drinking near to the fire, took exceptions against the boy (...) him because he
did not stand uncovered before them, the (...) complaint thereof to other of
his Masters servants the^ (...), diverse of them came down to revenge the boys
wrong (...) with naked swords so affronted the foresaid Gentlemen, that at
(...) the Gentlemen and servants on both sides became to be (...).

Flumina magna vides parvis de fontibus ^rta. And a great stream of blood might
have issued from this small original had not the same been wisely prevented by
the valor and (...) o^ that honorable Soldier Peregrim, Lord Willoughby of
Grimsebory, who living then in Stamford and hearing that the said Alderman
(though he used his best endeavor for the appea^^ng of the said stir) could
not prevail. Armed himself and his followers, and on his warlike courser entered
himself into the midst of the throng, and like a right valiant person and wise
Commander pacified the uproare before any mortal wound was given; so serving
her Majesty by the procuring of her peace, and saving the lives of many, who
otherwise were in danger to have perished in that tumult, and by his wisdom
and discretion before he parted from them made them all friends.

In anno Dom. 1633 King Charles lay in Stamford-Baron one night as he passed
into Scotland there to receive the Crown of that Kingdom, and then passed
through the Corporation of Stamford in state, John Atton the then Alderm.
bearing the Mace before him, the said Alderman and all the first Company
mounted upon horse back and riding in their Robes upon their foot clothes.

In anno 1634. King Charles and his Queen in their progress Northward, lodged
two nights at the Earl of Westmerlands at Ap^thorpe five miles from Stamford,
but when they removed from thence they passed in State through the Town, Edward
Camocke then Alderman bearing the Mace before them.

In April 1641. by the means of great rain and the wind then being full West,
the River of Welland so far swelled above the banks* that the flood so far
prevailed as it went over the North end of Stamford Bridge* and flowed up St.
Maries-hill, the midway to St Mary's Church, drowning the lower rooms and
Sellers on both sides the Street, and on the South side it drowned the lower
rooms of the New-bead-house, and both the yard and the lower rooms of the Inn
called the George, insomuch that some horses were then, and there drowned in
the stables and the Walls and roof over one of the Stables thrown down by the
violence of the water the flood being so high all over the yard that a horse
might have swoom therein. It drowned all the lower rooms in the houses that
stand in the Water Street of Stamford-Baron: yet though this flood did rise so
high upon the sudden, upon the East and West of of the River of Welland,
flowing over all the lower rooms by which (...) passed, and carrying down the
^^ream both Cattle. Timber and all that lay within the compass thereof, yet
(thanks be to God) I could never hear of Man, Woman nor child, that perished
thereby,

CHAP. VIII.
Such Ancient Monuments as are to be seen in and about Stamford and
Stamford-Baron, as well without as within the said Town.

THere is an ancient dike appears here and there in diverse place; betwixt
Stamford and Lincoln, and (being obscured by ruinating time some miles from
Stamford) some part of it appears again upon the North side of the Town
betwixt Stamford and Brig^asterton, and comes almost to the Town Wall toward
Peter-gate but after it appears no more Southward (for as much as I could ever
perceive) this is vulgarly called the High-dike* but Camden in his Britania,
calls it, Via militaris Romanorum and brings it to Stamford in the same place
as I have here related it; Licet non nulla (says he) antiquitati^ judi^ia hic
supersint tractumque oli^ suisse Via militaris Romanorum, qua statim te ex
^ppid^ in Bore^m proficientem excipit satis declaret.

Not far from hence upon the North side of the Town near unto York highway,
and about twelvescore from the Town gate, which is called Clement-gate, stands
an ancient Cross of free stone of a (...) ^^^ious fabric, having many ancient
scutchions of Arms ^^s^ulped in the store, about it; as the Arms of Castil^
and L^^n, ^ua^^ered; being the paternall coat of the King of Spain, and diverse
other Hatchments belonging to that Crown, which envious time has so defaced,
that only the ruins appear to my eye, and therefore not to be described by my
pen.

This Cross is called the Queens-Crosse, and was erected in this place by King
Edward the first* about Anno Dom. 1293. The occasion of this erection was in
memory of El^nor daughter to Fardinand the third of that name King of Castil^,
and wife of the said King Edward the first, a most Religious, Chaste and
virtuous Lady, who (as the story goes) when her husband was wounded with an
invenomed arrow at the Wars in Palestine, with her own mouth she sucked the
poison out of the wound and so healed her Lord, when all his Chyrurgions and
Physicians had left the wound for mor^^ll. This Queen fal^ing sick at H^rdeley
beyond Lincoln, there dyed the 9th. of November 1290 and her Corpse being
brought from thence to be buried at Westminster, in every place whne the same
rested by the way, King Edward the first shortly after caused in memory of her
a most sumptuous Cross of stone to be erected near the place, some of which
are standing and remaining (if not lately destroyed) till this day as at
Lincoln, Grantham, Stamford, Waltham, and Charing-Crosse near unto Westminster
yet appears.

At the upper end of the middle quire of this Church of St. Mary's in Stamford,
St. Mryes.
there stands a monument more curious for the workmanship then for the matter
whereof it is framed having no superscription nor Arms, to de^ote unto us who
the party was that it was made for* He lies in Armor Cap^pe. The tradition is
that he was a Knight who went by the name of Sir Daniel Phillips, a great man
for Henry Earl of Richmond in the battle against the Tyrant Richard the
third. But I suppose he was one of a more higher rank and of the blood Royal,
for at his feet there is a Lion Co^chant and round about the Tomb Roses (the
culler not perceived) supported by a Grayhound and a Dragon, being hatchments
of honor appertayning to the Crown of England.

At the upper end of the middle quite in the glass window, did stand (before
they were lately defaced) three Scu^chions of Arms, the first Gules a ^esse
betwixt six cross Crossees de Or, being the coat Armor of B^^champ, sometimes
Earl of Warwick; likewise another coat viz^. Argent a Pesse, between three
Cressents Gules, which is the coat of Oagle of Pinchback in the County of
Lincoln, from which family as to me appears, the Baron Oagles of the North
are descended, because these Oagles of Lincolnshire bear the paternall coat
without difference* the third is Azure^ Cross fitched between 2. Eagles wing*
Or in the middle window on the South side of the said Church (before the same
was defaced) there stood the coat Armor of Shelton of Norfolk, viz^. Azure a
Cross Or.

Upon the North side of the golden Quire in this Church in the Wall of the
fame, there is a Monument lying in Armor Cap^pe, but having neither Scutchion
not superscription s^^ing that in the glass window near to the same there
sometimes (and but lately) their stood a shield of Arms Sable, three Lions
pawe^* cupped and erected Argent, armed Gules; which Coat belongs to the name
of Usher, and this makes me to conceive, that this party was of that Family.

In the midst of the flore of the said golden Quire lies buried under a fair
stone of blew Marble, plated very curiously with Brass work William Hi^km^n
sometimes Alderman of Stamford, who at hi^ own cost and ch^^ges did gild over
the roof of the said Quire; the full portrature both of him and his wife in
Brass, did lately lie fixed upon the same stone.

St. Georges
In the upper window of the quire of St. Georges Church* are portrayed kneeling
(as in St. Georges Chapel at Winsor before the picture of that Saint) Edward
the third, his Queen, the Prince of Wales, and Henry Duke of L^ncaster, all in
their Robes of the Order of the Garter, and in the windows on each side the
said Quire are portrayed, acco^ding to the first institution the first Knights
of that Order that were made kneeling in their Garter Robes upon their
Surcoates of Arms, which said Order was unded by the said Edward the third,
the names of the first Knights of this Order are set down in order.

Edward the third, Edward Prince of Wales, Henry Duke of Lancaster, (...) Earl
of Warwick, Cap^tain^ De Bouch^, ^aphe Earl of Stafford, William de
Mount^ac^te, Earl of Salisbury. Roger de Mortimor Earl of March. John de
I^sula, Bartholmew Burwash, John de-Belle Campo, John de Mohum. Hugh Courtney,
Thomas Holland, John Gray, Richard Fitz-Symon, Miles Stapleton, Thomas Wall,
Hugh Wrothesley, Nigellus Loring, John Chandos, James Audley, Otho Holland.
Henry Eme, Zachetus Dabridgcourt William Paganell.
In the Windows of the said Church in sundry places appears the Coat Armor of
diverse ancient and Noble Families; there is the Coat of Earl Warren the
ancient Lord and owner of Stamford, Checkie Or and Azure.

There is likewise the Arms of Sapcote, who bears Sable a Pidgion Coat erected
Argent.

The Arms of Le Gross, being Or a Ccheverne betwixt three Roses Gules, is
likewise placed in the lower Window of the said Church toward the South.

There is likewise in an other window on the same side, the Coat Armor of
Molene^x of Haughton in the County of Nottingham, who bears Azure, A Cross
Moly^e quarter pierced Argent. Which several Monuments of Arms were here
placed, either in regard the bearers of them were benefactors to this Church,
or had Lands and possessions in the same Parish.

In this Church of All Saints, I observe not any Monument of Stone worth the
noting, All Saints
and very few Monuments of Arms in the Windows.

The Arms of the Town of Stamford, Gules three Lions passant Or, impaled to
Earl Warren, Or and Azure Checky, stands on the North side of the lowest
window West, on the South side of the same window, stands the Arms of the
Merchants of the Staple being Nebile of six pieces Argent and Sable, a chief
Azure charged with a Lion passant Argent: my conjecturall reason is touching
the placing of these Arms in this window, that the said window was first built
at the joint charge of the Town and of William Brown, who was (as hereafter
shall appear) a great benefactor to this Church, and was a Merchant of the
Staple.

St. John's and St. Michaels.
For the parishes of St. John's and St. Michaels in Stamford, I do not observe
any Mon^ment worth the noting* neither in the quires, bodies or windows of the
said Churches.

S. Ma^tins in Stamford-Baro^
There is in the upper end of the middle Quire of this Church of S. Martins near
Stamford, a stately Mausolean Monument built in the memory of William Cecell
Lord Burley, standing just over the Vault in which his body lies interred, upon
the North side of the North quire of the said Church, up against the Wall is
erected a reasonable fair Monument in the memory of Richard ^ecel Esquire and
Jane his wife, the Father and Mother of the said William Lord Burley* though
the statue of the said Richard there stands yet his body lies buried in St.
Margarets Church in Westminster, but the body of the said Jane lies in the
Vault by her said Son William Lord Burley.

Both in the uppermost window of the Quire of this Church and in many of the
windows and Stone-work in the body of the same, stands the paternall Coat of
Trigg, viz. Azure two Chevernels Or, betwixt three Roses Argent, whereby it
seems that the Ancesters of that Family have been good benefactors, as well to
the windows as to the rest of the Fabric of this Church.

There is in the same windows, the Coat Armor of the Family of Vincents, who
were the ancient Lords of Barneck near Stamford being Azure three Gray-hounds
Heads cupped Or.

Also the Arms of Matthew Parker som^time Archbishop of Canterbury, being
Verte three Cunnyes Argent the same impaled to the Arms of the A^chbishoprick.

There is in the same windows* an ancient Coat of Arms attributed by some
Heralds, to be born by Egbert a Saxon King, the Field is Jupiter a Cross
patence Sol, which demonstrateth the Antiquity of this Church, and the charity
of the pious Benefactors to the same.

But Glass and Stone in time decay
Yet Virtues fame, shall lo^t always.
CHAP. IX.
The Names and pious Deeds of such as have been Benefactors to Stamford, either
to the Corporation in general, or to particular Parishes in the same, with the
several Uses of those good deeds described.

IT now follows, that I here set down the names of such as have from time to
time been Benefactors to the said Town of Stamford generally or particularly:
And in the first place I cannot but acknowledge that the Lord and giver of all
good gifts the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth, has not only inspired many
worthy and religeous persons who by their Charity and Almsdeeds have from
time to time, and till the end of ^ime given allowment, either to the general
or particular members thereof; but also by his provident care (whereby all
things do subsist) with a preventing knowledge did possess the first Founders
of this Town with such a foresight, that for the better preservation thereof
to all Posterity* they situated it in such a place that the most skillful
Engineers, which in these present civil Wars have surveyed the same on both
sides, nor the plots or practices of those who without judgment would have
Canonized it* could never find the way to make it a Town ren^ble either for
offense or defense* which yet hitherto has caused the same (though much
weakened by the free Quartering of passing and repassing of Companies) not to
suffer such miserable spoils as other neighbor Cities and Towns have
undergone, by the taking and retaking of them on both sides, to the utter ruin
and destruction of the harmless Inhabitants: In which regard it were impiety
in me, if J should not acknowledge our great and good God to be the prime and
best Benefactour to us at Stamford.

Our late Sovereign Lord K. Edward the 4th, upon the incorporating of this
Town, gave the Lands of Gowen Southerope (which were confiscated to the
Crown) to the Alderman and Burgesses of Stamford for ever.

The late most pious and gracious Prince King Edward the 6. gave the Lands and
Tenements formerly belonging to the dissolved Gild or Fraternity of Corpus
Christi in Stamford, to the Alderman and Burgesses and their Successors for
ever, which are worth to the Town at present 160. l. per annum, being the
greatest and chiefest revenue the Town has in lands at this time.

William Ratcliffe Esquire, having been Alderman of Stamford four times, in
anno Dom. 1530. gave all his Messuages, Lands and Tenements in Stamford, for
the perpetual maintenance of a Free Grammar-schoole in that Town, which Land
(as it stands) for the present improved, yields to the head Schoolmasters and
Usher 30. l. per annum or thereabouts: For the augmentation of which stipend
William Cecell late Lord Burleigh, gave (or pretended to give) 4. l. per annum,
to the said School for ever, issuing out of a depopulated Town near Stamford
called Pickworth, but in regard the heirs of the said Lord Burleigh when they
let the last Leases of the said Manor of Pickworth, for the better advancement
of the Fines, pretended to the Tenants that they should hold their Farms
tyth-free, but no sooner were their Leases made, sealed and delivered, when as
the said Heir presented a Chaplain of his own to the Parsonage thereof* the
same having neither Town nor Church standing* only the ruins of both
appearing: So that the Parson making good the Title and Tithes from the
Tenants, they have ever since refused to pay the said 4 l. per annum, to the
use of the said School.

William Brown Merchant of the Staple, and sometime Alderman of Stamford
erected in anno Dom. 1493. the old Bead-house there called Brownes Beadhouse
incorporating the same of a Warden, Confrater and 12 poor Old-men, and one
woman for a Nurse unto them: Gave to the same the Manor of Swayfield, 7. miles
from Stamford worth 400. l. per annum, besides diverse great Farms Messuages,
lands, and tenements in Stamford, Pil^gate, Eas^on, Northluffenham, and other
places of good value; a very pious and liberal gift, though (the more is the
pity, as many of the like nature are) much abused by the avarice and
misimployment of the Governors thereof.

Mrs. Jane Cecell Widow in anno Dom. 1561, at her own costs and charges leaded
and paved the Fryday-Market Cross in Stamford.

In anno Dom. 1570, the North end of the Town-Bridge in Stamford being born
down by the violence of a great Hood, was re-edified at the cost and charges of
William Cecell then Lord Burley, and good reason, for he and his heirs do
raise 100. l. per annum. for the ^ollage of the said Bridge, and out of the
Fayres and markets of Stamford.

Francis Trigg Clarke in anno Dom. 1585, gave 4. l. per (...) forever, to buy
Barley to make Bread for the poor of Stamford.

George Trigg Gentleman in anno Dom. 1586, gave 400. l. in Money to be lent out
for ever upon good security, to poor young Tradesmen and Artificers in
Stamford, without interest.

William Lord Burley in anno Dom. 1597, erected an Hospital at the South end
of Stamford Bridge, in a place where formerly stood a Religious house, the
Lands and Tenements to the same belonging he obtained of Queen Elizabeth, and
gave a perpetual (...) to the said Hospital, issuing out of Cliffe-Park^ near
Stamford, for the maintenance of a Warden and 12 poor men, the Warden
receiving 3. s. 4. d. weekly, and each poor man 2. s. 4. d. weekly, with yearly
allowance of wood, and blew Cloth to make each of them a Gown; and the said
Lord Burley did appoint the Alderman of Stamford for the time being, to have
the nomination of four of the said poor men, when any of the said places shall
happen to f^ll void.

In anno Dom. 1588, the foresaid Mrs. Jane Cecell by her last Will and
Testament, gave 50. l. to be lent out for ever without interest to poor
Tradesmen and Artificers in Stamford and Stamford-Baron, the same to be
disposed of by certain Feoffers nominated in hersaid Will.

Richard Sn^^de^ Clarke and Parson of St. John's in Stamford by his last will in
anno Dom. 1604, gave certain Lands and Tenements for ever in Stamford (after
the decease of his wife) for seven poor Widows of the age of 60 years and
upwards the profits whereof does afford each Widow 7. d a week and a house to
dwell in, and by the said will it is appointed that the Alderman of Stamford,
for the time being, shall appoint them to their places when any place shall
fall void.

Jane K^shey late of Stamford Widow, the same year by her last Will* gave 8.
l. for ever to be put forth to interest and the profits thereof to go to the
use of the poor of Stamford.

Sir Robert Wingfield late of Vpton in the County of Northampton Knight, being
one of the Comburgesses of Stamford, and likewise one of the Burgesses of the
Parliament, the same ye^re, obtained of King James the pardon and remittance of
two fifteenes for Stamford and Stamford-Baron, amounting to the sum of 84. l.
8. s. 4. d.

The same Sir Robert Wingfield in anno Dom. 1605, obtained pardon and
remittance of the said King James, for Stamford and Stamford-Baron of six
entire fifteenes, amounting to the sum of 254. l. 6. s.

Anno Dom. 1609, the right honorable Thomas late Earl of Ex^ter, a right
pious and charitable person, a man (as we of Stamford may say) fixed in his
generation* as our Savior Christ was in his passion, betwixt two, etc. gave a
perpetual ann^ety of 41. l. 1. s. 8. d. per annum* issuing out of certain
Lands in Lincolnshire, for the putting forth of poor children Apprentizes (such
as should be born in the Town of Stamford) and toward other charitable use^,
besides the Town did often receive from him (whilst it was blessed with his
life) many great and beneficial favors.

Hugh Allington late of Timwell in the County of Rutland Esqu. by his last will
gave 40. l. forever, to be lent to the poor artificers in Stamford and
Stamford-Baron, without interest, by certain Feoffers named in his said will.

Roger Manors of Vffington in the County of Lincoln Esquire, by his last will
gave to the use of the poor of Stamford 20. l. for ever to be put forth to
interest, the profit whereof to be bestowed in C^les amongst the said poor
yearly, by the dis^retion of the Alderman, for the time being.

The reverend and pious Prelate Robert Johnson of Northluffing^^, in the County
of Rutland, late Arch Deacon of L^icester amongst other his pious works to
Stamford whilst he lived, gave a Bible of the largest size to pass from
Alderman to Alderman and the ^id on the Aldermans cushion before him in the
Church, every Lords day or at other times when he goes to Church.

Antony Ash^^ Gentleman, by his last Will gave 5. l. per annum, for ever to the
use of the poor in Stamford.

Mr. Edward Wells gave a house which yields 3. l. 10. s. per annum and three
akers of Land, to be paid to a petty Schoolmaster in Stamford, to teach poor
Free-mens children of that Town to read English.

Anno Dom. 1638, William Beanell late of Chasterton in the County of
Huntingdon Esquire, by his last Will gave to the use of the poor of Stamford
80. l. the interest whereof to be distribut^d amongst the said poor by the
discretion of the Alderman for the time being.

St. Mary's.
William Hickham Alderman of Stamford, anno Dom. 1467 at his own cost and
charges built the gilded Quire on the North side of the Chancell of the said
Church, and both he and his wife lie buried under a fair stone of blew Marble
(as aforesaid) in the mistd of the same Quire.

Richard Banister late of the same parish Gentleman, erected at his own charges
in the South Quire of St. Mary's aforesaid, a p^^sique Library and gave some
Books to the same, as Gall^^s Works and some other Books both of Physic and
Chyrurgery, and at hi^ death gave 10. l. in Money, the interest of which sum
is yearly to be bestowed in Books for the increase of the said Library, such
as the Minister of that his Parish shall think most fit.

Mr. Robert Bullack sometime of this Parish, was a good benefactor to the same
in setting the poor children (not only of this parish, but of the town in
general) at work to the knitting of Iersey.

Mr. John West Citizen and Butcher of London born in this Parish, gave 4. l. to
the said Parish, the interest of which is yearly to be bestowed upon the Poor
of the same.

Robert Bullack^ of London Chyrurgion, gives 3. l. to be added to the 4. l.
his Uncle John West gives for the use of the poor, the interest to buy Bread
the Sabath a^ore and after Christ-t^d^ yearly for ever, to be distributed in
the Church to needful poor, by the Officers of the said Parish.

John Bullack of London Butcher, gives 3. l. to make the aforesaid 7. l. 10.
l. and the interest of the said 10. l. to be given monthly, or at the
discretions of the Elders or Churchwardens.

Edward Robinson Citizen and White-Baker of London gave 11. l. 6. s. 8. d. per
annum to the said Parish, during the term of certain years yet to come in a
lease which he had at the time of his death. of the Inn called the
White-Horse in Fetter-lane London, part of which said sum is to buy Books for
the said Library, and the rest to be for the repairing and adorning of the said
Curch.

John L^is^ one of the Comburgesses of Stamford, and ^re an inhabitant of this
Parish gave 20. l. the interest whereof, to be for the repayrers of the said
Church.

One Mr. Green who lately sojorned in this Parish, and here dyed gave very
liberally toward the building of a very fair Pulpit in this Church, and
toward a rich Velvet Pulpit-cloth for the same.

Mr. Marshall Citizen and White-Baker of London, gave 3. l. and Mr. Thomas
Harrison Citizen and Vintner of London, gave 2. l.

The said Master Harrison likewise, gave for the use of the said Parish two
pewter Flaggons (very fair ones) for Communion Wine* and a Pewter (...) to
carry the Bread from Communicant to Communicant, likewise he gave to the said
Parish, a gilt alcumy Basin to gather collection in the Church for the poor.

There is 6. s. 8. d. per annum* paid to St. Mary's for the repayrers of the
Church, being the small ^ene of a shop in Stamford-Baron but who gave the same
to the Church I cannot find.

All Saints.
Mr. Marshall Citizen and White-Baker of London gave 10. l. to this Parish the
interest of which sum to be to the use of the poor of this parish, also the
said Mr. Marshall gave 20 marks per annum for a weekly Lecture in this Parish,
which for a time was maintained, but the lecture ceasing, the Money was and
still is detained.

Mr. John D^^ham gave 5. l. to this Parish, the interest whereof yearly to be
to the use of the poor of the same.

Mr. Robert Warner gave 5. l. to the said Parish, the interest to be to the
use of the poor thereof.

Mrs. VVinifred Brown, the wife and Executrixe of John Brown late of this
parish Esquire, gave 10. l. the interest of which sum to be to the use of the
poor of the said Parish.

William Fisher late of Bourne in the County of Lincoln Gentleman, gave Six
pence a week for ever, to be given in br^ad for the use of the poor of this
Parish.

William Brown Merchant of the Staple, 200 years or there about^ now past,
at his own proper costs built the Steeple belonging to this Church, being a
very curious and excellent Fabric, likewise he built a great part of the
Church it self, and both he and his wife lie buried in a Chapel proper to his
Family, on the North side of the said Church toward the Quire.

The Lady Bu^^ gave the sum of 20. l. to this Parish, the interest of which
sum is yearly to be distributed to the poor of the same.

St. Georges.
Mrs. Jane Cecell Widow, Mother to William Lord Burley, ^ave 15. l. for ever,
the interest of which to be to the use of the poor ^f this Parish.

John Chir^^ late of Stamford-Baron, Gentlem^n gave 20. ^. per annum, for ever
to the use of the poor of ^^is Parish, the (...) to be paid to them every
quarter.

William C^^e Esquire now living at the Black-Fryer^, in the same Parish, has
given 40. s. per annum for ever to the said parish, to provide bread and Wine
for a Communion to be ministered upon the first Lords day of every Month in the
year.

The foresaid William Fisher, gave to this Parish 12. d. a week for ever, to
be distributed to the poor of the same in Bread.

There is belonging to this Parish 7. l. per annum, being the rent so diverse
Tenements in the same, but I can not learn who gave the same to this Church.

St. John's.
The foresaid Lady Bucke gave 20 l. to this Parish, the interest whereof to be
yearly distributed amongst the poor of the same.

There was a Tenement given to the Parson of this Parish and his successors for
ever by Mr. George Trigge, upon this condition, that the said Parson and his
successors should yearly distribute to the poor of this Parish the sum of
27. s.

St. Michaels.
I cannot learn that there ever was any Benefactor either to the Church or to
the poor of this Parish.

St. Martins in Stamford-Baron.
The Lady Dorothy Cecell gave Lands forever of the yearly value of 12. l. 6. s.
8. d. to this Parish to the uses following. That is to say, part thereof to be
paid to the putting forth of poor children of the said Parish, to be
Apprentizes, an other part to be weekly allowed to some honest person which
shall teach the poor children of this parish to read English; a^ other part
thereof for the buying of Wool, Flax and He^p to set both young and old poor
people of this Parish to work; an other part thereof to be allowed to some
honest person to teach the said poor people to work: and also 20* s. to be
yearly allowed out of the profits of the said Land to the Vicar and
Churchwardens of this Parish for them to join with the overseers for the poor
to see the said poor kept at work, and that the overplus (if any be) shall be
bestowed weekly upon the poorer sort who (though endeavoring themselves) are
not able to find themselves by their labors.

The foresaid Lady Bucke gave 20. l. to this Parish, the interest of the same
to be yearly distributed amongst the Poor of the said Parish.

Lord send us Mercy, Truth, and Peace,
That Benefactours may increase:
That when a new Edition's made,
More Pious people I may add.
CHAP. X.
The ancient and public sports of Stamford.

AS touching the ancient and public Sports used at this Town they are not
many; in all but two and to many by one. The one a sport savouring of Manhood
and Gentry, and of a ^oncourse of Noblemen and Gentlemen meeting together in
mirth* peace, and amity, for the exercise of their swift running Horses every
Thusday in March. The prize they run for is a silver and gilt Cup with a cover,
to the value of seven or eight pounds, provided by the care of the Alderman
for the time being, but the Money is raised out of the interest of a stock
formerly made up by the Nobility and Gentry which are neighbors or
well-wishers to the Town.

The second sport though more ancient then the former yet more Beast-like then
any: It is their Bull-running a sport of no pleasure except to such as take a
pleasure in beastliness and mischief. It is performed just the day six weeks
before Christmas. The Butchers of the Town at their own charge against the
time: provide the wildest Bull they can get, this Bull over night is had in to
some Stable or Barn belonging to the Alderman the next morning proclamation is
made by the common Bell-man of the Town, round about the same, that each one
shut up their shops-doo^es and gates, and that none upon pain of Imprisonment
offer to do any violence to Strangers, for the preventing whereof (the Town
being a great thorough-fare and then being in Terme-time) a Guard is appointed
for the passing of Travelers through the same (without hurt.) That none have
any ^ron upon their Bull-clubs or other ^^affe which they pursue the Bull with.
Which proclamation made and the Gates all shut up, the Bull is turned out of
the Aldermans house, and then hivie, skivi^, tag and rag, Men, Women and
children of all sorts and sizes, with all the Dogs in the Town promiscuously
running after him with their Bull-clubs spattering dirt in each others faces
that one would think them to be so many Furies started out of Hell for the
punishment of Cerbor^^. as when Thes^^^ and Perillus conquered the place (as
Ovid describes it.) A ragged troop of Boys and Girls
do pellow him with stones:
With Clubs, with whips, and many nips,
they part his skin from bones.
And (which is the greater shame) I have seen both Senatores majora^ gentiu^
and matr^^^ de eodem gradu, following this Bulling business.

I can say no more of it but only to set forth the Antiquity thereof, (as the
tradition goes) William Earl Warren, the first Lord of this Town in the time
of K. John, standing upon his Castle walls in Stamford, viewing the fair
prospe^^ of the River and Meadows under the same, saw two Bulls fighting for
one Cow, a Butcher of the Town the owner of one of th^se Bulls with a great
^asti^^e Dog accidentally coming by, set his Dog upon his own Bull, who
forced the same Bull up into the Town, which no sooner was come within the
same but all the Butchers Dogs both great and small followed in the pursuit of
the Bull, which by this time made stark mad with the noise of the people and
the fierceness of the Dogs, ran over Man, woman and child that stood in his
way, this caused all the Butchers and others in the Town to rise up as it were
in a tumult, making such an hideous noise that the sound thereof came into the
Castle into the ear^s of Earl Warren, who presently thereupon mounted on
Horseback, rid into the Town to see the business, which then appearing (to his
humor) very delightful, he gave all those Meadows in which the two Bulls were
at the first found fighting (which we now call the Castle Meadows) perpetually
as a Common to the Butchers of the Town (after the first grass is eaten) to
keep their Ca^tle in till the time of slaughter: Upon this Condition, that as
upon that Day on which this sport first began, which was (as J said before)
that day Six weeks before Christmas) the Butchers of the town should from
time to time yearly for ever, find a mad Bull for the continuance of that sport.

An ominous thing to the Town, for some of the Lords of the same of his
succession (though not of his Descent) have since upon their horns of
greatness, tossed the best of the Burgesses out of their gowns, and why?
Because the Burgesses were no^ Foxes, otherwise they would not have suffered
themselves to have been so abused by such Bulls, whose eare^ were longer then
their horns.

And so much for the sports of Stamford.

CHAP. XI.
A list of the Names and Succession of the Aldermen of Stamford, since the time
of the first incorporation of that Town by Letters Patents in order, according
to the Year of our Lord in which each of them governed.

Anno 1 1461 George Chapman. 1462 John Brown Esquire. 1 1463 John Gregory. 1
1464 William Hickman. 1 1465 Robert Haunce. 1 1466 William Brown Esquire. 2
1467 William Hickman. 2 1468 George Chapman. 1469 Thomas Rayston. 2 1470
William Brown Esquire. 2 1471 John Gregory. 2 1472 Robert Haunce. 1473 John
Neale. 1474 Alexander Dye^. 1475 John Gibbes. 1 1476 John Dick^ns Esquire. 1
1477 Henry Cook Esquire. 1478 Robert Skinner. 3 1479 William Hickman. 3 1480
George Chapman. 3 1481 Robert Haunce. 1 1482 Christopher Brown Esquire. 2 1483
John Dick^ns Esquire. 1484 David Malpas. 1485 John Steed. 1486 Thomas Keyston.
2 1487 Henry Cook Esquire. 1488 John Freebarne. 1 1489 Thomas Phillip. 1490
William Gaywood. 2 1491 Christopher Brown Esquire. 1 1492 Nicholas Bilsden. 3 1493
John Dickons Esquire. 1 1494 Thomas Edwards Esquire. 1495 William Ratcliffe Esquire.
1496 John Cleypoole, 1497 Richard Cannell. 1498 Robert Crant. 2 1499 Thomas
Phillip. 2 1500 Ieffery Hampton. 3 1501 Nicholas Bilsden. 2 1502 Christopher
Brown Esquire. 1 1503 William Ratcliffe Esquire. 1504 David Cecell Esquire. 1505
Nicholas Trigge Gent. 1 1506 Thomas La^y Gent. 1 1507 John Cobbe. 1508 John
Hardgrave. 1509 John Tyard. 1510 Richard Wastling Esquire. 1511 Robert Martingdale.
3 1512 William Ratcliffe Esquire. 1 1513 John Lea: Gent. 1514 William Rankell. 2
1515 David Cecell Esquire. 2 1516 John Cobbe. 1 1517 Maurice Johnson. 1 1518
Thomas Cross. 1519 John Thomas. 2 1520 John Hardgrave Esquire 1 1521 Henry
Lacy Gent. 4 1522 William Ratcliffe Esquire. 2 1523 John Lea Gent. 1 1524 Andrew
Can. 1525 Edward Brown Esquire. 3 1526 David Cecell Esquire. 2 1527 Maurice
Johnson. 3 1528 John Hardgrave Esquire. 2 1529 Thomas Cross. 3 1530 John Lea Gent.
2 1531 Henry Lacy Gent. 1 1532 Thomas Watson. 1533 Richard Engham. 1 1534 Roger
Beale. 1535 Thomas Gedney. 1536 Robert Hand. 2 1537 Andrew Can. 3 1538
Maurice Johnson. 2 1539 Henry Lacy Gent. 2 1540 Thomas Watson. 1541 John
Fenton. 1 1542 John Allen. 2 1543 Roger Beale. 1544 William Button. 1545 Robert
Winwick 1 1546 Nicholas Wiles. 1547 Henry Lea Gent. 1548 William Wiles. 3 1549
Thomas Watson. 1550 Andrew S^arre. 1551 William Fenton. 1 1552 William
Camponet. 2 1553 John Allen. 1 1554 Raph Harrup. 1555 Henry Ta^pian. 2 1556
Nicholas Wiles, 1557 Francis Thorney, 1 1558 John Haughton, 1559 John Ryder.
1560 William Bagget, 1 1561 Henry Inman, 1562 Thomas Ball, 2 1563 Raph Harrup,
2 1564 William Camponet, 1 1565 Godfrey Dawson, 2 1566 John Haughton, 1567
Gregory Burton, 1568 Alexander Antony, 1 1569 Reynold Harrison, 2 1570 Henry
Inman, 1571 John Backhouse, 1572 Richard Barton, 1573 William Lacy Gent. 1574
John Hawkins, 3 1575 John Haughton, 3 1576 William Camponet, 2 1577 Godfrey
Dawson, 1 1578 John Elmes Gent. 1579 Richard Eveley, 1580 John Wimblesby, 4
1581 John Haughton, 2 1582 Reynald Harrison, 1 1583 Richard Shute Gent. 1 1584
Robert Meadows, 1 1585 William Clarke, 1586 Lawrence Wilsbey, 1 1587 Toby
Loveday, 1588 Anthony Gu^son, 1589 Robert Langton, 1 1590 Robert Ramsden, 2
1591 Richard Shute Gent. 3 1592 Richard Shute Gent. ib. 1593 William Watson, 2
1594 Robert Mead^wes, 1595 Cutb^rt Greenbury, 2 1596 William Clarke, 1 1597
Lyonel Fetherston, 1598 Nicholas Lamb, 2 1599 John Elmes Gent. 3 1600 Robert
Meadows, 2 1601 Toby Loveday, 1 1602 William Salter Gent. 1603 Reynald Waters
Gent. 2 1604 William Salter Gent. 3 1605 William Clarke, 1606 John Loveday, 2
1607 Robert Ramsden, 1 1608 John Brown Esquire. 2 1609 Lyonell Fetherston, 1
1610 Thomas Iack-son, 1 1611 Robert Whatton, 1612 Francis Cole, 1613 Robert
Fawcet, 3 1614 Toby Loveday, 1615 Thomas Watson Gent. 1616 Toby Aslocke, 1 1617
Edmund Corker. 3 1618 William Salter Gent. 2 1619 John Brown Esquire. 2 1620
Thomas Grason. 2 1621 Thomas Iackson. 2 1622 Robert Whatton. 1 1623 Peter
Fullwood, 1 1624 Henry Rastell Gent. 1625 Vincent Hall, 1626 Henry D^the Gent.
2 1627 Nicholas Lamb, 2 1628 Peter Fullwood, 2 1629 Edmund Corker. 2 1630
Richard Wolphe, 1631 Vincent Hall, 1632 John Atton, 1633 Edward Cammocke, 1634
Thomas Palmer, 1635 Abraham Fdlkener. 2 1636 Henry Eldred 2 1637 Henry Rastell
Gent. 1638 Richard Wolphe, 1639 Leonard Cole, 1640 Jeremy Cole, 1641 Richard
Langton Gent. 2 1642 Robert Cammocke, 3 1643 Edward Cammocke. 1644 Vincent Hall
1645 Richard Damalt^*

CHAP. XII-
The Names of such Lincolnshire-men as have borne the honorable Office of Lord
Majors of the City of London, since the time of the Norman Conquest till Anno
Dom. 1633. And here is to be noted, that no one County of England can say so
much as this County, in regard of the number of L. Majors of London as have
descended out of the same, as hereafter appears.

IT will be no great digression nor much from the purpose, if I now walk a
little out of Stamford into the County of Lincoln, in which County this town
stands, and since I have in their order and succession set down the Names of
ye prime Majestrates as they have successively borne Office in this Town: give
me leave in the next place to set forth such as this County of Lincoln^ has
from time to time sent up to London, who have borne the head Office in that
mighty City. It is true this County has received back as it were by way of
exchange, two Families of Gentry which are descended from Majors of London* and
have planted their houses in this County.

In the first place I find the Family of the Granthams* which from John
Grantham Grocer, Major of London in the third year of the reign of K. Edward
the 3. (which was in Anno Dom. 1328.) are descended and ever since settled in
the County of Lincoln, as appears by the Arms of that John Grantham* borne
by the Granthams of this County at this day.

The next Family which London has lent to this County to garnish the same with
the flowers of her Gentry, is the illustrious Family of the Askewes of
Lincolnshire, which from Sir Christopher Askew Draper the Son of John Askew of
Edmunton in the County of Middlesex, being Major of London in anno Dom. 1534
(being in the 26 year of the reign of K. Henry the 8.) are descended as
appears by the same Coat Armor borne by the Askewes of Lincolnshire at this
day.

It is true, this Town of Stamford has never been so fortunate as to have
any Major of London descended out of the same, but what this place has been
defective in, the County has given a larger supply then any one County of
England, having sent up Tenn^ Majors besides other Aldermen and Sheriffs to
that City.

I.

First, in Anno Dom. 1470. which was in the 10.th year of King Edward the
4.th, Sir John Stockdon Mercer, the Son of Richard Stockdon of Bratoft in the
County of Lincoln, was Major of London at what time the Bastard Falconbridge
assaulted the City at Algate, and at the Bridge-gate, who for his Valor in the
defense of the same, with a XI. more of his Brethren the Aldermen, and Vrswicke
the then Recorder of London, were then Knighted in the field by the said King
Edward the fourth.

II. Sir Nicholas Alwin Mercer, son to Richard Alwin of Spalding in the
County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1500, in the 15.th year
of King Henry the 7.th, He gave xij.d. a piece to 3000, poor people in and
about Spaulding, and to as many more in and about London.

III. William R^mington Fishmonger, son of Robert Remington of Boston in the
County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1501. which was in the
16.th year of King Henry the 7.th.

IV. William Foreman Haberdasher, son to William Foreman of Gainsborough in
the County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1539, which was in the
31.th year of ^ing Henry the 8.th.

V. Sir Henry Hubberthorne Marchant-Taylo^ son to ^^^^stopher Hubberthorne of
Wadingsworth i^ the County o^ Lincoln, was Major of London, anno Dom. 154^.
which was in (...) of K. Henry the 8.

VI. Henry A^coles Fishmonger, son of William A^coles of Astrap, in the
County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1549, which was in the
second year of Edward the 6th.

VII. Sir John Langley Goldsmith, son to Robert Langley of Althorpe, in the
County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1577, which was in the
19.th year of Queen Elizabeth.

VIII. Sir Nicholas Moseley Clothworker, son to Edward Moseley of Hough, in
the County of Lincoln, was Major of London in anno Dom. 1600, which was the
42.th year of Queen Elizabeth.

IX. Sir George Bowls Grocer, son of Thomas Bowls of Newbold, in the County
of Leicester, descended from the Bowls of Lincolnshire, (as by his Coat of
Arms agreeable with those appears) was Major of London in anno Dom. 1618,
which was in the 16.th year of King James.

X. Sir Nicholas Raynton Haberdasher, son of Robert Raynton of Highinton, in
the County of Lincoln, was Major of London in Anno Dom. 1633, which was in the
9.th year of King CHARLES.

The Conclusion.
Thus have I at the length brought this Survey to the wished end according to
my poor ability.

THrough times of trouble, Prisonment and all
Distractions, which can wretched man befall:
I have at length (through my Creators aid)
The Town of Stamford, seriously Surveyed.
And by the pain of my now wearied Pen,
It lies apparent to the view of Men:
Who first the building of the same contrived,
And when in time it grew more longer lived,
With what disasters it was then turmoyl'd
By Heretics undone, by Danes much sacked and spoiled.
Yet at the length her Ruins were redrest
By Kings and Friends, her enemies suppressed:
In strength and state with walls and Castle proud,
With Grants and Privileges great endowed,
She flourished under Governors discreet
Till the whole Land with Civil wars did meet:
When York and Lancaster their Swords out drew,
And like mad Lions keen their kindred slew:
The Northern soldiers all with rage incenst,
With quenchlesse flames they Stamford glory quenched,
Who never since her Towring-crest could raise
To former greatness, as in former days;
Though our fourth Edward by his Charter kind,
Did show his Princely love, his royal mind
For Stamfords good; and his Posterity
Confirmed and added What was necessary:
Yet what is the Cause as yet I cannot tell,
Great odds there is 'twixt us, and being well.
God send the Kingdom better for to fare,
And then I hope Stamford will have a share
In that Well being: Let us all repent,
Then God no doubt in mercy will relent,
And make our Cities and our Towns to shine
Again in glory, Earthly and Divine*
Heaven grant the same (...) the (...) day,
That Stamford and the rest may rest in Joy. Amen.
FINIS.

