Hudibras.

THE Second Part.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

The first Canto.
Argument.
We sing no further oth' disputes
'Twixt Knight, and Squire, nor their confutes;
Nor how by Puissant trick, or Chance,
From Chanted Castle they advance;
Since skilled Magicians know as well
How to undo, as make the spell:
Nor yet of Talgol, Bruin, Orson,
Whom Writers say was but a Whoreson:
But Hudibras more strange Adventures,
That hitherto have hung on Tenters.
The May Pole.
IT happened at the time when Oysters
'Gan loose their Operative moystures,
When Sol with heat did fill his Car,
And that the Month did want an R;
Which was before, or June, or July,
When Country Placquets grow unruly:
For, as the Wise say, in August
If One will not do it, another must.
When Cherries hardly ripened, Nod,
And Children for 'em venture Rod;
When Mother Nature does disperse
Her help to Man, (that Universe)
When fresh blood empty veins supply,
Which suffered by Phlebotomy;
That he who can the Hill get over,
In hope to live is, scarce before,
When Midwife Flora's newly seen
In Meadows gay, and Gardens green,
The Pink, the Primrose, Tulip-flowre,
(Offsprings of a quondam shower,)
With Lily, Violet and Dazy,
The Merry-milk pales deck, which praise I,
When Barnes are freed from Mice and Rats,
By Madam Owl, better then Cats;
When with a Garland to be Crowned,
The sweaty hoofs do tare the ground;
And Fidilero and Pipero
In every Village peep, and peer ho!
When Mortals feed on Sage and Butter,
Drink Whey by quarts to make 'em squtt --
And for the Ladies of the season,
Prepared are green Cheese and Peason,
With Macquerels brought up in Shoals,
Colon to fill of hungry souls;
And Silla-bub, with lip-lov'd Tanzy
For Roger, is prepared by Nancy.
When, as in Landskips we discover
In every shade, a lolling Lover,
With head on lap, of female wight,
Hand underneath her garment white,
And she turns up her womanhood,
Whilst Pego forrages for food;
And Surgeons put up in sheath
Cleans'd syringes for fall of leaf:
At the same time I must not vary,
Jack met with Gill, and Mat with Mary;
Which was soon after, (as it is said)
Mars had laid by his Tool, and Trade,
And All was ready to bring in
The Maid with dimpled Cheeks, and Chin:
When that the people might be free
TO enjoy their (Juggl'd) liberty,
As then the Bells at Westminster
Did clapper-claw the Countries ear;
And every creeping thing on earth
From Cricket did incline to mirth;
Nay, the grand Hectorian-Olivero
Left Ranting, and fell to Primero,
A Game, he had long studied, but
As some do say, was hard put to it,
For others knew't as well as he,
And stickl'd for the Mastery,
All Hectors of his only breeding,
For they could pray, and lie exceeding,
And such as now remain, do claim
From those the vigor of that Name:
And follow all their ways of Plunder,
Only to hear, they pray, is wonder;
But for their lying are expert,
And swearing they have got by heart;
There let it lie, like fatal dagger
In peaceful sheath, until they swagger.
And now to what we were about,
Which all this while we have left out.
A jolly crew of Lads well fitted,
And Buxome Lasses, Mother witty'd,
Met on a day, no matter what,
In the same month it was, that is flat;
And that it might not loose its Name,
They all prepared were for Game;
Which though the learned could not scan
To be the Isthmean, or Nemean,
Yet it a title had, and good,
For, Hocktide, may be understood;
And does as clear construction carry
As Bess take Tom, and Joan take Harry;
Or Tom take Bess, and Harry Jone
Leap over sword, and it is done;
So the Inducted Market place
Clapped up at once, two Babes of Grace
Which never Issue had, but what
The Peaceful -- Justice -- Parson got,
For they all Functions did supply,
And into every hole could pry,
Had an Instinctive Art to Strole
If that the she-heast were with fool,
Were the States Midwives, and could strain,
More then could Doctor Chamberlain;
Though he could dip, and pray, and preach,
And fiery-pated Squibb did teach,
Until he grew as quaint as he
In their Occult Idolatry.
And't may be now and then could bite
The Buttock of a Prosolite.
But what was this? a Game at Whist,
Unto our Plowden-Canonist,
Bewitched into a power, by some
That never loved Kent nor Christendom,
And hating all things Orthodox
Did send Religion to the Stocks.
In Church refused to take the pains,
But in the streets would ask the Banes,
And Ceremonies, long allowed,
Laid by, when they grew Pint -- proud,
That Master Justice was declared
The Viccar to Dog and Bitch-yard,
Which brought in Tithes as fast as Hops,
Cerberus must be fed with Sops;
And as the Ancients have defined,
So these were duly paid, in kind.
Without a Suit in the Exchequer,
Complaining they to Noll were Debtor.
They took a surer course and way,
Peter knew how to make 'em pay,
And thus these holy men of Orders
Did ferk the fry of Sodom Borders:
Though Tom want Tool, and Nell a Nose,
Yet reconciled are in the Close.
There let 'em stink, to sweeten (then)
My lines, pray whistle to my Pen;
To mind me of the former matter,
Though not Incongruent to the latter.
Then first to show you what they were
That met, observe each Character,
For, it is requisite we strew
The way with flowers as they go:
Bushero height the Twisters led,
To whom he was both Cap, and Head,
For Neatness he was held the best,
Good reason, he could Trim the rest.
And in his Calling was so rare,
He fitted 'em unto a hair;
And er'e they for their Progress met
Had given his Shirt the Somerset;
(A Tumbling word, and used much
By Men, Professors to be such:)
In all things he was Cap a pe,
Only his hose was out at knee,
And doublet-elbow wanted clout,
But there, you know, love will break out,
And therefore time is vainly spent
To patch up what must needs be rent:
If any ding'd him on the lip,
With that, quoth he, you may go snip:
Of person he was something squat,
With Ribbons Hat-ban-neding-Hat,
He had some judgment in the Gyttern,
And Master was of Kitt and Cyttern,
Which Cythera sung to first,
When she her God-babe Cupid nursed.
To follow him did Shanco roame
From ladies service newly come;
As finical for life as he,
If that Comparisons may be!
Was dressed with Muffe and Pantaloon,
And in Pocketto silver Spoon,
Which slept secure, till Cream and Cake
Did waken it, for Masters sake:
He was of person pleasing Tall,
As straight as Wand, but slimm withal;
He walked as though he trod on Eggs;
And Cat-sticks were supposed his Legs:
His body burdened was with points,
Which tied together all his Joints;
His eyes and legs kept time together,
They danced, and moved you would wonder whither.
Such as never understood the firk
Took him for piece of dutch Clockwork;
He was the least beholding to
The flesh, of any man you know.
Though he to it was mainly given,
With him it never made Reckoning even;
Perhaps it may by some be thought
He had as good returned, as brought:
But in that Sense there is Nicity,
Which in this must avoided be,
Only it is confessed he was
His Ladies Limbeck; his own Ass.
In breech of him, Butlero came,
With Coquo, eager for the Game.
Butlero did in Napkin neat
Bring salt, and bread, and Coquo meat:
The one Comptroller was oth' Bin,
The other of the good Kitchen;
The only Overruling Pair
That had to do below the stair:
The one the merry Bottles brought,
The Other with Limbs of Capons fraught.
Which newly had (without denial)
On Gridiron past the fiery Trial,
The Parties equal-parted were,
Each did of eithers office share
So Lawyers never fall out for fee
Among themselves, ka me, ka thee.
Butlero may be thought of Kin
To him that played oth' Vyolin,
And famous was for Clownery,
Which City-wits call Drollery:
He could Arthur of Bradley do,
The Countryman, and Courtier too,
And had an insight in the City,
Inspired by those that then were witty;
From whom the thrifty-Poet steals,
To furnish Beardw -- for his Meals.
Ours played to what he could not sing.
An Instrument without a string;
But let me not his judgment wrong,
The Tool did carry with it a Tongue;
And by the Hebrews was allowed,
As well as Cymbal, or the Crowd;
And by Amphion played upon,
If ever he did play on One:
Now our Butlero in good Sooth
Could play on two from hand to mouth.
Coquo the Tongs could finger well,
And had a Key for what I tell,
The Invention was no easy Task,
It took its birth from the Crand Mask:
The Teacher had the happy fate
To live in Street called Byshopsgate,
And pity 'twas (he did so thrive)
He had not left his like alive.
Thus they to please their Lasses do
Bring hither Meat, and Music too:
These were the Heads, and now advances
The Gathers, or the appurtenances,
The first with hand, or tongue could sway
The pampered d^^^des of Asia,
I mean not Tamberlaine's the Great,
Nor he that fell out of his Seat,
But Masters His, of better blood,
That fed not upon others food.
Sartoro brisk as body-lowse
Forsook his Stall, annexed to house,
And though he was not worth a Dodkin,
Wenches called him their Standing Bodkin.
Trituratoro good at Flayl.
As Orsin erst at Staff and Tail,
His skill in that did keep him safe,
He Could distinguish Corn from Chafe.
Then Molindario furled up Sail,
The scornful Wind had turned Tail,
H' was held a Man of judgment strong,
Or else his Neighbors did him wrong;
He could into a Millstone see,
As far ('it is said) as any He.
Lanio, and Tergo near allied,
As Calf to Cow, or Skin to Hide,
Were next enranck'd; Pistoro stout
As ever Crab-tree threw about,
Not far behind; his legs were small,
But sure as Bandy at the Ball,
The Ancient Poet Heywood draws
From Ancestors of These his Laws
Of Dramma, to fill up each Scene
With Soldiers good, to please Plebe'ne,
And in those famous Stories told
The Grecian Wars, and Beauchamps bold.
At distance some, Thatchero came,
Approved Martial to the Game,
In one hand Dudgeon-knife he bore,
The other Gantlet-Mittin wore,
The Hyroglyphick of bad Music
Did follow him, which made me Spue-sick;
Yet the beloved malicious noise
Attracted had whole scores of Boys
Armed with Clubs and hideous sounds,
As when they go to view the bounds
Of Parish theirs, Or as I Have known
The Pan-cake Prentices come down
On Fritter-day, Vice to abollish,
And Reverend-Matron-Baud demollish.
Then with Majestic pace came on
Cartero, like Diego-Don,
Whistling forth Rhetoric to the Beast, his,
Which drew, of this discourse, the Thesis,
In Wagon, Anglice, Dung-Cart,
Lay Pole so good, cut out by Art,
And ornamented with no less
Then Ribbons given by Doll, and Bess,
And others of the Fairy-crew,
Of Colors red, white, black, and blew,
Yellow, cinnamon, and green,
Here, and there, Nose-gay between,
Likewise many a Wedding Garter,
Tickling Lasses into laughter,
For the Thing above the knee
Seldome's seen, though felt it be:
But no more of this, it is fit
That hereafter come not yet.
On either side this early Triumph
Attended, Tony, Row- and Ry-Umph-
Sowgeldero Ratratchero,
Cummultis aliis, sause fear ho!
The Lasses, like Dyanae's Troopers,
Came in the Rear with Main and Cruppers:
Meg, and Kate, and Doll, and Joan,
Buxome Lasses every one;
With Pegs, and Let. and Luce, and Betty,
For her face and foot called pretty;
Moll, and Sall, and Nan, and Frank,
Wenches free, and fat in the flank:
On Agnes Eve they would strictly fast,
And dream of those had kissed 'em last;
Or on Sr. Quintius watch all Night,
With Smock hung up, for Lovers sight:
Some of the Lawndry were (no flashing)
That would not give their heads for washing;
Others oth' Chamber, and the Dairy,
All kept their Arms free from the Fairy:
Thus they pass through Marketplace,
And to Town-green hye apace,
Highly fumed for Hooktide Games,
Yclip'd Kingston super Thames,
Where Sir Hudibras, invited
To dinner was, but newly lighted:
Quoth he to self, I had before
A Stomach good, this stirs it more:
Had I best charge 'em before dinner?
No, quoth he, as I Am a Sinner:
Let 'em wait till I do come,
Charity begins at home:
Serve self first, the Commonweal
May stay till I have made my Meal.
And so he enters House, while Rout
To set up May Pole went about.
The Lasses too put helping hand
To make the merry business stand.
There let 'em rest a while, and now
To Hudibras the great kill-Cow,
Who having on the Creature fed,
And drank far more then he had bled,
He in a fury flung from Table,
And bid his Man fetch Steed from Stable:
Some business of the State, quoth he,
Does retrograde to Manners me:
However Friend, and Cosen Narsey,
For entertainment God-a-mercy.
But er'e I go, a word or two
With you Bro. Knight, and eke with you,
For pairs of Sirs, there were in sight,
That had but little maw to fight;
Of Stomachs good, and had been able
To serve King Arthur at his Table.
One did Command the Cheshire Forces,
And had a face as Round as Horses;
His teeth were grown to the same length,
And wanted nothing but in strength
To pass for one, Beasts know not theirs,
And he was robbed of his by fears;
His Name did Rumble like to Thun-
Der -Guilielmo Knight Sir B -- ton.
The other was of last Edition,
A Justice too upon Petition:
He pretty well could understand
The Penal Laws at second hand,
For he a Clerk had that might pass
For an Intelligible Ass.
After Sir Hud. discovered had
By Whispers Consequences bad.
So Brother Knights, they straight Array
Themselves, and Horses, and away:
Each trusty Twible ties to side,
Fury Conducter was and Guide.
They Course on with might and main.
'Till they came in sight of Train,
Who had newly fixed their Pole,
Which vexed 'em to their very soul,
Round about it some were frisking,
Others on the Grass as brisking;
Most in Mirth, set hand to labor,
Tongs, and Gridiron, Trump, and Tabor,
Cytern, with a Voice as lewd,
Rhimes too were but lately stewd
In Brain-pan, and set to Tune
The Cuckoo rants in May and June,
For Lovers sake, while thus they sport,
Sir Hudibras does call a Court
Consisting of three Knights, three Squires,
That long before had left their Sires,
To seek Adventures, and attended
The Sequel now, which is not ended.
Quoth Hudibras, what is best to do?
Six heads is better far then two.
The Romans did more glory gain,
By living Citizens, then slain,
And brave Cyneus with a word
Did Conquer more then Perhus Sword.
Shall we with smooth Caresses go
And soften flinty hearted foe?
Or if then bow, had rather break,
Defy 'em, and not poorly sneak?
But try what fortune will allow
To edge of Sword, and potent blow,
For Points in fights Knight-Errantry
Were still rebated, that you will see
In Writs of yore; let rumors cease
Dissension breeds, I Am of the Peace.
Quoth Justice then, and of the Town
Else I Would not value a cracked Crown:
More then pins head, I think it meet
With wisdoms lore the crew to greet,
The safter weapon of the two
And will not make so much ado;
Then quoth Sir Hudibras I Will spare
Your brains the labor to ensnare
Their wits and wills, quoth then Sir Guill --
Were my Troop here I Would not stand still,
Courage quoth Hudibras, and now
Wit show thy self, or weapon, thou;
Then Cicero my tongue adapt
Or strenthen arm thou mighty Capt --
So on they jog, and with an eye
Well read in modern Policy
The numerous crew they do behold
With patience strong and courage bold.
And soon Sir Hud. does them Accost
But all in vain, his labors lost,
He moves to them with sober speech,
And strokes his beard while they turn breech;
Quoth he, you Males, for to the She Is,
I Will offer nothing shall displease,
How durst you set up (Sans advice)
A May Pole of ungodly size
For height it may amaze the people,
And streighter is then Grantham Steeple;
Which Statesmen do conclude upon
Might ferk the whore of Babylon;
Have you to scour a scurvy Cliffe
Brought Giants Tool from Teneriffe
Ossa or Pelion? No, quoth Tergo,
It Is for the Sisters, Ruth and Pergo
And such as follow Covinticle,
No brother has a Tool so mickle,
Monstra morendum quoth Sir Hud --
What are you men of flesh, or Wood?
Will you in spite of Ordinance,
A whorish Stallion thus advance?
Where are your Scences, pray look to it,
Have we not struck at Branch and Root?
And taken the Smock from off the Whore,
Yet will you aggravate us more?
Quoth Lanio, hence thou Weasel, Rat,
That scarce durst look in face a Cat,
Who sent for thee? what make thou here?
And these thy Chitterlings so near?
Whence come thou, from what nasty Sinck
Did thou creep forth, to prate and stink?
Depart in peace, or by this Truncheon,
Thy Beastly back I Will raise a Bunch on,
Bigger then that thou bear, never grudge it,
'T shall taken be for Tinkers Budget.
Can Nature Monsters such afford,
That will not hear from Man a word?
Quoth Hudibras, more deaf then Adder
To common Sense, to make me madder?
And in the face of Justice too!
Sword keep to me, as I Will to you,
Quoth then Sir Jus. my Brothers both,
To agravate the Case I Am loath,
Because these all my Neighbors are,
And you my worthy Friends, and dear,
An even hand I mean to carry,
In Weighty matters must be wary.
He spit, and then he spoke, quoth he,
My Friends, as many as there be,
I hope it is no bad advice,
To bid all be merry and wise;
I need no farther learning borrow,
Then saucy Mirth will bring, or Sorrow:
And though for number we seem fools,
It Is dangerous meddling with Edge tools:
And here are mighty Men and strong,
Whose Arts are in the Army sung.
Root up your Pole, remove it hence,
And let your own homes be your fence.
For I Am empowered by Commission,
To force you from this lewd Condition.
Quoth Shanco (quaintly) Mr. Justice,
Upon our Strength, not you, our Trust is,
With Wit, or Weapon, choose you whether,
Or one, or both, or altogether;
We are resolved, and so have at ye,
If words will not do it, by Jove we will pat ye.
I am the Lasses Champion, then
Be safe, and get you back again.
Well said Core Shanco, quoth Tonsore,
I Will second thee upon that score.
Awake, quoth Hudibras, thou Fox:
Hold, quoth Sir Guill. I hate these Knocks:
The People will be mollifi'd
If that the Lord be on our fide.
Scarce had he spoke, er'e Stratagem
(By Shanco laid) surrounded them,
But by stout Molindario led,
Whose very looks did speak 'em dead.
What mean you then, quoth Hudibras?
Fie on it, this it is to be an Ass,
And leave my Instruments of danger
At six and sevens, Rack and Manger:
But Tom, (speaking to doughty Squire)
This is thy fault, or I Am a liar.
Now Valor must be brought on knees
To Rascal Rout, and their Pedees.
Down with that Maggot quoth the Boys:
Children to School, and leave your noise.
Quoth Justice good, how comes it thus
you hem us in, may not we untruss?
My little Body cannot contain,
Quoth Hudibras, my Spirit main,
I Will run the hazard: knock him down
Cries one, as soon as said it is done.
Sir Guill. did show his Teeth, but durst
Not bite, though he had Mastiffs nursed.
The ground was burdened with the Groans
Of Knights, and Squires, these pitions ones;
And how to rid 'em thence was thought,
Coltstaffes with quick dispatch were brought,
On which they hoysted were, and so
Conveyed to Town, who durst say no?
Where they were met with mocks and laughter,
Their Horses, as rank Beasts, sent after.
The second Canto.
Argument.
The Knights retired their Case Condole,
Big with Revenge as Mare with Fool,
Consult the means, but cannot agree,
Part, and put up the Indignity.
Knights two, to wit, Sir Hudibras,
And Guill. leave Town and further pass,
Their Squires attend; Encounters meet
In Journeys-Road, Yclipped Street.
Where on thae next day kept was Fair,
Then does ensue what happened there.
SIR Hudibras (though Fortune had
With wry-mouth flouted him) grew mad,
And nothing else would serve his turn
To quench the Rage in him did burn,
But a full Goblet of French Wine
Was dulcifi'd with Sugar fine;
Which having guzzell'd down Gullet,
He thought on speech, and then he spet
The clear preserver of his Wit
For that, being Salt did season it.
Quoth he, I was a thirst indeed,
Now Brothers, pray do you proceed:
I Am sure you shared in blows and beating,
A Julip's good after a heating.
He wipes, and then he hulminates,
Words that through Ear late penetrates,
Shall we, quoth he, sit down with loss,
And faintly go by weeping Cross?
Shall we with Patience take their frumps,
And Heads revengeless go for bumps?
Given by the hand of wreaking Foe,
What er'e you think, I think not so.
Shall Triumph revel in their smiles,
Our Courage pinioned all the whiles?
Shall we besotted be with beating,
And bury Honor by retreating?
Honor that is not so cheaply bought
As Eggs that to your Markets brought.
But is the purchase of the daring,
That will not of their blood be sparing.
Rally for shame then, let 'em know,
We scorn to flinch for knock or two.
And now (good Omen) I have got
My Pistols, that I then had not,
Which careless Squire did leave behind,
I would he had been beaten blind.
Quoth Justice, you want Charity,
Bro. Knight, Sir Hud. assuredly,
For true it is (or else blame me)
When Men are blind they cannot see.
Quoth Hudibras, is there no way
To put a period to this day
By Conquest ours? where art thou Pate?
Or thus -- or thus -- no, now I have't:
To the Parliament with speed I Will send,
Where I have got a special Friend.
Hold, quoth Sir Guill. Bro. Hudibras,
I have it here, and it shall pass;
Bring Ink and Paper, I Will dispatch
Letters to Nantwich, where my Match-
Less Troop does quarter; come they hither,
They Would tear these Rogues ears, though of leather
Quoth Hudibras, it is trick of Clown,
To take one up before he is down;
Yours is the work of half a year,
And my Design does lie but here
A stones throw off, but twenty mile,
And may be done while one does pile
A load of Wood. I think not so,
Quoth Justice then, though much I know.
Yes upon Motion of my Friend,
Quoth Hudibras, I know they will send,
Either a Company, or Troop,
Shall make these stubborn Rascals stoop,
But good Sir Bro. quoth Justice, Sir,
What will their coming here infer?
It Is true, that after Beef comes Musterd,
When Belly's full, then Bring in Custerd:
In plain, the Proverb's good I swear,
They Will come a day after the fair;
Or as (of yore) the learned Clerk it,
Will come at the end of a bad Market;
At end of Feast I cannot say;
But after fray I justly may.
Then (undet favor) Brother Knights,
Yout Reasons are not in the rights;
You from Nantwich do draw Design,
And you fetch yours beyond the Line,
For here, or there, it is called all one,
The Line of Communication.
And the wise Parliament thought fit
We should be Neighbors to their Wit.
Sir Guill. I cannot reach your sense,
Nantwich is many miles from hence,
And yours I Am sure does lie as far
As Kingstone is from Westminster,
You say they will come, I ask you when?
You say to Morrow. And what then?
I do Respond, before they come
The Foe is gone, each Wight's at home,
So that your Council is no more,
"Then Steed being stolen, shut Stable door.
The Red-coats come, and simply see
A goodly Field, and long Pole-tree:
Perhaps they will reak Revenge on Wood,
But what will that do out Heads good?
That ache with blows, and our bones more,
Will that be Salve for every Sore?
Did Paracelsus ever make
Plasters of Chips for Valors sake?
Or will (by simpathy) the blows
And hacks on Pole be felt by Foes?
You may as well say, strike me Brother
Here, and at York 't shall lite on the other.
I need not further wrack my Brains,
(And't may he little thank for pains)
To bring Comparisons, save this
Which was said of Diogenes,
When he was told that one spoke ill
Of him behind his back, It will,
Quoth he, not hurt me if he do,
When I Am not present beat me too.
So to as little purpose were
These men thought on, should combat air,
And like the King of France his Men,
March up the Hill, and down again.
More I could say, but let it rest,
The Birds at night will fly to Nest:
What that infers your selves may judge,
I have too long been Reasons Drudge.
Quoth Hudibras, must we pass by
So grand an open Injury?
Rendered the scorn and sport of Clown,
And Table-talk for all the Town?
We that have seen Death in the Field,
And made the surly Fellow yield;
We that through dangers mouth have met
The Foe, and never the worse for it yet,
I mean the common Enemy,
The bold and daring Cavalry.
We cannot deny but the base Clubs
Of this rude Rout have given us Rubs,
Which will remain a day or two
On sides, in Colors black and blew;
And against our wills are forced to wear 'um,
Those that did give 'um, Old Nick take 'um,
Can you, Sir Jus. so tamely take
This Cudgel-Combat, and not make
The very Basis of the Town
To tremble at your awful frown?
Is Justice lame as well as blind,
Crippl'd in Power as well as Mind?
Can you send Beggar to the Stocks,
And have no Punishment for Knocks?
Knocks in a most Malign sense,
That will admit of no Pretense?
Were you Commissionated Harry,
Or are you Supernumerary,
To wit, one that may be employed
When others are with service cloyed?
If you the thing it self assume,
In your own strength you may presume,
And by attractive Virtue draw
Obedience to you, Brat oth' Law:
Pitchforks and Prongs will soon appear.
When that Sir Justice is in fear.
Oblige your Interest, Neighbors raise,
My honor then will bear the Bays:
And that you may not want a Man
Resolved, know I Will head the Van,
You and Sir Guill, bring up the Rear,
I hope you are not ill placed there.
Sir Hud. and Bro. I must confess,
Not willingly I Would Aqui-ess.
Quoth Justice, Sir, but as I perch
At Reason, and her Intrails search,
I know there is no good to be done,
Either with Father, or with Son:
The Case is altered now, quoth Ployden,
Which is asserted by each Hoyden:
When danger did attend our Gates
We did not fear to venture Pates,
But now we have no Enemy,
Unless among our selves they be,
Pray who do they then Impeach,
If you into the sense will reach?
They plead to have their Sports restored,
For which they had the Senates word,
And trusted to it as much, Jack says,
As Tom did to the Public Faith.
Now they instead of being protected
In their Pastimes, are detected,
Disturbed, molested, put in fear,
Which is a Sessions matter, hear
Me Brother Knights, it is counted pacem
Terrorem too, if you will trace 'em,
To wit, the Cynicks of the Law,
Who in this Case will find a flaw
For Palm of fist, without good Friends,
Or Money, which makes all amends.
But I digress; of this no more,
To what I should have said before
My puupose is; the promise Root
To all their hopes laid under foot;
By whom? who did it violate,
One that is a Servant to the State,
Quoth pro and con; that Justice I,
My Conscience speaks it, which will not lie;
And so for service yours, unsought,
I Am into a Priminure brought.
Excuse me Brother Knights, God knows
I Am well contented with my blows,
If you be so, for said my Sire,
The burnt Child ever dreads the fire,
And I was but an Ass, some hint,
At first to have a finger in it.
Send Mittimus, then quoth Sir Guill.
As I would do, had I my will.
A Mittimus, quoth Justice then,
For what, wherefore, for whom, and when?
Exponere. And who shall serve it?
Let such have beating that deserve it.
The Constable, nor Tything-man
Will do it, if they avoid it can:
Besides, did Justice er'e obtrude
A Mittimus on Multitude?
And your own Eyes have seen that I,
Who am above it, they defy;
For all conclude, (or else they are Fools)
The Workman's better then his tools.
In brief, (for Brevity's the best
To such will not here out the rest)
I Am confident, and dare aver,
Not one man on our side will stir.
The Remedy we have is this,
Bought Wit is best; Nor is it miss
Applied here, which bids be wary
Of such who are Ubiquitary.
Quoth Hudibras, why Brother Jus.
I wonder you should Cackel thus:
Has the Hen trod you? Is your Comb
Cut, and no Cock at dunghil-home?
Prevaricate, turn Cat in Pan,
Be less then Beast, yet seem a Man.
Do you wear Beard, and want a Face
To add a Credit to your Place?
Too much, the Proverb now should hit
In you, to have more hair then wit:
The Romans shaved themselves so clean,
The face of Justice might be seen;
But you obscure it with a Grove,
Where Maggots Nest in Neighbour-love:
Or like the Creeping Syrian King,
When he with Beasts went a Banqueting.
What strange Coherence does bewitch
Your Worships Nose to Plow-mans breech?
I do request your learned Noddle,
Tell me what is that in Pan you coddle;
For Brains you have not (I suppose)
Unless they drop out of your Nose.
Are you a Magistrate per se,
Or insufficientem te!
To which oth' Nounes do you incline?
Your Gender sure's not Masculine:
Rather the Doubtful, like long Megs,
And scarce can stand on your own legs:
The Sword on Shoulder was mis-laid,
When kneel down Gent. rise Knight was said:
And he that made thee Justice-dasher
Did spoil (Sir Reverence) a good Thrasher.
Nay, quoth Sir Guill. I promise you,
Bro. Hud. something he said was true,
And now for Council well may pass,
Though one would take him for an Ass,
Not to run farther into the Briers,
Is all that his advice requires:
And truly, unless we were stronger,
I think it not safe to stay here longer.
Quoth then Sir Justice, it is all one
To me, to stay, or to be gone;
But I think packing is the the best,
For beating this, is but Earnest
To after Payments that will follow,
When as the Rout Triumphs; and hollow,
If you at good advice will rave,
Abuse your Friends when none you have:
Take Pepper in Nostrello when
You want a Box to put it in;
I care not a Fleas-biting for
All your great din, pudder, and stir;
And as a wiser then you all
Did speak in house beyond the Hall,
If without cause you angry be,
Be pleased without amends for me:
And since all words are held but wind,
Your Girdles buckle turn behind:
I Will not be bug beard at the word
Of Colonel Cramp, or wise Sir Turd,
I Have seen a Knight ere I saw you
Quoth Hudibras, scarce one so true;
Mine current and of older stamped
Then thine that is but lately vampt,
Mine will be lasting, thine decay,
The More's your shame, as I may say.
Quoth Justice then, for one may see
You're Cobbler but in Heraldry;
And If I don't mistake my Note,
You basely have abac'd your Coat;
For he can be no Child of Honor,
That shall for favors spurn at the Donor:
As for my part (though mine were latter)
I shall stick still to the first matter,
I will obedient be to Powers
That are above me, not to yours;
And in my Neighbors love will die,
I value not wherefore, nor why.
Quoth Hudibras, to horse, a Curse
Upon this Town, Malignants Nurse,
And does derive part of its name
From whom (at first) Tyranny came.
May darkness seize upon your dwellings,
That have eclipsed my high Excellings;
May all your Wives be leapt by Clown,
And your fine Bread be turned to Brown;
May all your Cattle dye oth' Rot,
And not a piece be had for Pot,
Or Spit; and may your Children mutter,
When Kine want Milk, and they want Butter.
Quoth Justice then, thou art no Christian,
A Turk, or Jew, or Tribe Philistian:
Get to thy Crew, from hence for shame,
Least on thy back light all the blame.
So part they did with Anger eager
As frowns on Brows, and Visage meager:
The Squires were called from Tipling-Cell,
Not dreaming of what had befell;
Armed with Liquor Male they stride
Their sturdy Steeds, and on they ride;
leaving Sir Justice out of Peace,
Fretting, and melting in's own grease;
And unto Town, famous for Hogs,
Butchers, and their like, Mastiffe-dogs;
And for a Witch that once lived there,
Not unlike Falstaff in Shakespeare;
But more for fight, when Londoneers
In Thames were dipped over head and ears,
And some Limbless in Carts were sent,
As Presents unto Parliament,
Which made a foul House, and no doubt
Was ill Resented when smelt out;
Thither they haste, but in their way,
Latet in anguis; some rubslay.
At distance mile from Town there stood
An Amphitheatre of Wood,
Backed pretty strong, a Form or Bench,
Where sat Sir Capon and his Wench;
A Plank for Stage some five yards high,
(With Curtain most conveniently.)
On which Sir Hud. whose eyes were walking,
Perceived a fellow gape, or talking,
Sometimes expanding arms, then clutch
His fists, or point to thumb, as much,
His head was in perpetual motion,
His eyes the same, to put off lotion,
And tongue he had more swift then Jack,
Which always ran knick knack, knick, knack,
For through his teeth such jangling went,
As one would think his gums were wrent:
Spectators many stood before
To see the Knacks he had in store,
With Algate-Mouths, Saracens Ear,
They gape to taste, as mad to hear.
On either side of Theater
Were placed two Tubs of sturdy Beer,
And Wenches, that for Novelties,
Sold Ginger-bread, and Pudding-pies,
Which fodder was unto the Cattle,
As when Train-band do enter battle:
This made the Knights and Squires to pawse
A while, and sift into the cause:
What can this mean, quoth Hudibras
To Knight Sir Guill. must we not pass?
Does Courage so adapt my blade,
That Multitudes do Ambuscade?
Day thou art fatal, yet bright Honor
Shall say I still will wait upon her;
Be bold, troop up, defy the Foe;
Hold, quoth Sir Guill. I say not so;
Observe you not you' man of Zeal,
A blessed Tipe oth' Commonweal,
With held up hands, and devout eyes,
He doubtless is at Exercise,
His Faculties in labor are,
To feed the Soul even through the Ear,
A Work of Grace he is a doing,
Then soberly let us be going;
Curb in the Reins of wicked Horse,
And pace like men that have remorse,
For ah, alack no blows control
As words, that cudgel do the Soul,
For they, like to Achilles Spear,
Both wound and heal, or I Am not here.
So on they amble to the place,
Where Monsieur spoke with a boon grace;
Begar me kill you all, an den
Presan make you alive again;
Wi dis me do all de gran Cure,
De Pock, de Scab. de Calenture;
Me make de Man strong, pour de Wench.
(Then rises Capon from the Bench)
Look you me now, do you no see
Dead yesterday, now live day be,
Four boon, dey leap, dey dance, dey sing,
May foy, an do de toder ting:
Begar good Medicine do all dis.
Capon makes legs, and Wench does kiss,
Take hands, and throw their legs about.
Then Hudibras disturbs the Rout:
Quoth he, what do you come to see,
A Pandor show his Harlotry?
Then forth of Holster does he take
His fatal Engine, to awake
His long slept anger; amongst 'em them
(With Courage would serve twenty Men)
He rusheth, makes the Rabble fly;
Monsieur does Quarter, Quarter cry;
And Capon (but for Wenches Teathers)
Had been hung up in his own Feathers:
The Suttlers lay as they were dead,
To see their Drink so murdered;
Hot Custard, piping-Pudding-pie,
On Gods cold Earth at distance lie;
The Knights and Ladies sunder'd are,
In Ginger-bread united were:
But the Squires did in Pocketto put
Some Pudding-pies, as good for Gut.
The Rout dispersed, quoth Hudibras,
Brother Sir Guill. and Squires, the face
Of Fortune now is wheeled about,
She does assist the bold and stout;
I knew er'e Evening did close in
We should be Conqnerours, and win;
Perseverance does make the Man
Inclined to War a Champion;
Diffidence and distrust confound,
And bury Honor under ground:
To take one Wound, and fear another,
Makes Man but Valors bastard-brother;
In all brave Fights with courage born,
Ev'nings prove better then the Morn:
In triumph Squires lead on to Town,
We have recovered our Renown.
The third Canto.
Argument.
The Victors all their Prisoners carry
Through Town to Castle, and there tarry,
Which Pilgrims used in times of yore
To call an Inn, and showed wherefore;
There they in Council sit, and do
Examine Quack, Capono too,
Nor does the Wench escape their reach,
They in her Cote do find a breach.
But in the Close (without control)
They Prisoners pass on their Paroul.
Then new Adventures they do seek
Among Butchers rude, and Puppets meek.
UNhappy is the Wight that has
To do with mighty Hudibras,
Whose Courage no rebating knows,
For he drives on, and calls for blows,
And like the daring Scithian Shepherd,
Keeps Sword from Rust, till all are peppered,
Or in the Sanguine liquour stewed
Issuing from Pagan Multitude,
Though Fortune on his side may frown
At first, at last her Pride comes down,
Which he takes up, and swells his Sails
With glorious Nihils, empty Gales:
So have I known some Courtiers want
Bread, more then ever did pesant,
Upon the turning of the Wheel,
Preferment made their Reason reel,
And slight those from whom helps they had;
Success, and Money make Men mad;
Money that Loyalty out-braves,
Keeps back the honest, brings in knaves,
Puts fellows Principl'd in Treason
In Power and trust against sense and reason,
Replies to all things, Rhimes to Honey,
Ask what is a Clock, it is answered Money.
Go to 'em but to speak about,
Some business, straight the hand's held out,
Which signifies you must prepare,
Before your matter meet their Ear;
Like half-starv'd Wretches (come to meat)
Do covet more then they can eat:
Or as the Proverb bids you mark,
The Priest forgets he er'e was Clark.
Sir Hudibras, whose great Prowess
Aims at the more, forgets the less,
Troops on with all his Captived train
In state, much like to Tamberlain,
For he, his Conquest to complete,
Chains Monsieur Quack like Bagazet,
And at Horse tail he does attend,
Like one made for no other end;
With head on side of neck, he goes,
His Vessels leaking, Eyes and Nose,
His antic Motions are forgot,
He moves as though he moved not;
Nor can you blame him thus to faulter,
No Dog but would abandon halter;
And he well knew there was no trick
In reading, or practice Chymick,
After a hanging to cure Gullet,
And set it right to swallow Pullet:
Capono and his Damsel brought
Up Rear, with Sorrow fully fraught,
His Countenance betrayed him loath
To be disht up amidst white Broth,
And doubted much to have his Book,
He knew he had a hanging look.
The Damsel looked like one near dead,
But comforted by Ginger-bread,
And now and then with Pudding-Pie,
Tendered by Squires (some Reason why)
For as Tailors preserve their Cabbage,
So Squires take care of Bag and Baggage.
Vesper appeared, and Sol was down,
When Hudibras did enter Town:
Quoth he, Bro. Guill. observe the Sun,
Envying the Glories we have won,
Is gone to bed, and in mere spite
Shadows our Trophies with the Night;
But er'e he has taken Nap or two
We Will rouse him with Achievements new,
Bleeding like Herrings in their Gills,
And fresh too, or we will want our wills:
So over Lake, Anglice Kennel
(Which had a stronger scent then Fennel)
They unto Gate (beyond it) past,
Famous (when shut) for being fast.
Quoth Knight to Squires, go one of you,
No matter which, you are but two,
And ask who keeps this Garrison,
I mean the house, but it is all one.
Your words, quoth Squire, shall be obeyed
Great Hudibras, (just so he said)
Before the turning of a Teaster,
Or bate me of an Egg at Easter.
Whoop, quoth the Squire, where are you ho?
A Language he was verst into,
For he had traveled many a mile,
And was not now to seek his style.
At last Ostlero did appear,
Whose Nose did scent the Beasts were near:
Quoth he, why bring you not down lights
For Squires so good, and eke for Knights?
Quoth Squire, first take in care our Horses,
And then you may Rally your Forces.
With hand as useful Quacks Sirrops,
Ostlero straight takes hold on Stirrops,
And leads the Palfryes to the Stable,
Where he did do what he was able
To beasts, for he and they were Kin,
However they were now drawn in.
Mean while was Chamberlano called;
He came, and asked for what they bawled,
For he was ready for all Squabbles,
Having been beat (it seems) at Tables.
Quoth Hudibras, where were thou bred?
Will thou not stand us now in sted?
Wearied with doing mighty things,
Spent the whole day in Bickerings,
These are the Guordeons of our toil,
Our purchase and our lawful spoil.
Quoth then Sir Guill. oh fie, good Brother,
Let us like Christians love each other.
But every like is not the same,
Quoth Hudibras, you are to blame,
You will be twittering like the Drill,
Yet insignificant be still.
Quoth he, these are mere Infidels.
Begar you lie (quoth Monsieur) else,
Softly to self, as who should say,
He would speak more were he away.
Quoth Hudibras, show up to room,
For they shall soon receive their Doom.
Quoth Chamberlano, after banging
I think them hardly worth the hanging;
Yet I presume they may be tried well,
And sent to place yclipsed Bridewell.
Thou hitt'st it right, quoth Hudibras,
And so they unto Chamber pass,
The fairest in the place, you may
Believe whatever others say;
In length it was full fourteen Yards,
In breadth some twelve, measure, Richaurds;
The Floor, for Comers, strewn with Rushes;
Chimney set out with Boughs and Bushes;
The Walls, instead of Tapistry,
Were hung about with History,
As those of the Prodigal Son,
And Judgment just of Solomon,
In Capitals most fairly writ,
To take the Eye, and help the Wit;
Upon the Ceiling one might see
Clouds of Men's names in Candlery,
Who had been Patrons to the place,
And penny spent in putting Case;
In Window laid was Lavendare,
Of which the Cushions smell most rare,
With pots of Flowers very pleasing
To put a Man into a sneezing:
In midst of Room a Table stood,
Which certainly was made of Wood;
The Superfices of it was
A Carpet, which for green may pass
TO avoid disputes, but to say true,
It might as well be taken for blew,
Or any color else, or none
At all, hower'e 't shall pass for one,
Richly stripped over with dregs of Ale,
Which from o're-charg'd Cups seldom fail,
And here and there you might discry
A breach made by the Enemy,
Who from Mundungoes took its name,
And wastes it self in smoke and flame,
Whose ashes fatal are to Cloth,
Linen, or Woolen, all, or both:
On each side Table placed were
Stools joynted, and at end a Chair,
Which was for Worshipful, so please,
But all was for the Buttocks ease:
And lights in Sticks some place did fill there,
Some say were Tin, but bright as Silver:
At end of Room a Bed did stand,
Whose Posts were carved by cunning hand,
Faces good store, but never a Nose,
And Legs too, without Feet, or Toes,
Which either came by some disaster,
Or else he was not his Arts Master;
And yet perhaps he did express
The Art he had in ugliness;
For to do things exactly ill
Must needs show (though not Judgment) Skill:
About the Teaster of the Bed,
And so on that they call the Head,
Were painted Batts (like Cherubs) flying,
To comfort Souls when they are dying.
But rouse my Muse, you have been too long
Upon the Bed, pursue your Song;
For Clio (as some Authors ken)
Does sing the worthy Deeds of Men;
So all this while, it may be sed,
We have been singing Knights to bed:
Therefore no harm to Ears that have
No mind to hear, nor those that crave.
And now we come unto the Point,
By this time Squires had truckt for Joint
Of Mutton, or some wholesome food,
Which they knew was for body good,
And brought up word unto the Knights,
Who bid withdraw awhile yon' Wights,
Pointing to Prisoners, who stood gaping,
As Damsel did, who longed for Japing,
A word the Gipseys much affect,
And held by These in like respect;
Eor they have traveled North, and South,
With it, and tenant is to mouth,
Which though they throw out now, and then,
They entertain with joy again;
But er'e the Creature was brought up;
Or that the Knights had taken a sup,
On these main words, put case, and whether,
The Knights condogg'd, knocked Jolls together,
At last for private Reasons they
Did think it fit the Wights should stay;
For held it was a point of State,
That Prisoners should on table wait.
After a hem, Sir Hudibras
Bespake and said, alas, alas!
Begar, quoth Monsieur, here be none,
Me scorn your vards begone.
There Is no such haste, then quoth Sir Guill.
Our Enmity is not so ill
To have you loose part of the Supper,
And therefore stay: Marry come up here;
Quoth Hudibras, must you be treated,
Whom we but lately have defeated?
Begar (quoth Quack) vid all mine heart
Me take de Supper in good part;
Me be no angry vid dat,
Dough me be mad at me know vat.
Then Chamberlano Cloth did lay,
Which had not seen Sun many a day,
And Salt sat down with little loss,
Its Cell. was part of Charing-Crosse,
In equipage most formidable
All things were fitted for the Table.
Then Hudibras bid all be bare,
Lend Ear to Grace (but none was there)
His eyes and hands did make dumb shows,
His tongue (too) and his very nose;
But this fume did not last him long,
His stomach to the Meat was strong:
Quoth he, give Trenchers to the Wretches,
Let them attend while Colon stretches.
Ma foy, me understand no dis,
Quoth Quack, trencher in hand a, pis
Bougra Shack-dog, me serving Man,
Dat in de Pock have de Largent.
Oh have you so, quoth Hudibras,
We Will see anon if it will pass;
Sit down, and let your Servants eat
With Squires so good, we will leave 'em meat.
Four boon begar, it is all a mode,
Quoth Quack, poor Men travel de Rode.
So they fall to it with teeth and knives,
And throw about 'em for their lives,
They little leisure had to prate,
And so avoided all debate,
To wit, had stomachs like to horse,
And had not time to find discourse;
They did so pay shoulder a Mutton,
That morsel scarce was left there upon
For Squires, and Charge, whose looks so meager
Declared that they to eat were eager
Quoth Hudibras, Squires take away,
Victual your Camps, but do not stay
Long by it; and hear me, send up Pease,
They will our appetites appease;
Dispatch, for business great (you know)
Effect we must er'e sleep we do:
So down go Squires, and into Room,
Where Hogo did from Stable come;
They put Capono and his Wench
Where neither stool was, nor yet bench,
But forms a couple by good hap,
And table too, (to take a snap)
Some four foot high, and two yards long,
With legs of wood supported strong:
And therefore Authors say the word
Implies (in very truth) a board:
There used Tapstero, and Ostlero,
To play at Putt for Cans of Beer, ho;
On board, or table, was set down
The burdened dish with meatless bone;
And straight out of the Kitchen popt
A Wench, that had in dripping sopt;
It Is true, her hands were not so white
As theirs that lie in gloves all night;
No matter though some speak 'em foul,
She was a good conditioned Soul,
And merely in good will did bring
A clout, sh'ad newly been wrinsing,
After it served had dish and pot,
And came from dresser reaking hot:
Oh fie (quoth she) are you without
A cloth, then down she dropped her clout,
And spreaded it to best advantage
(In cloth sometimes there may be scantage)
And so they fell to picking bone,
Which was snatched at by every one,
With many a Wink-contrived-slip,
And happy he could get a snip,
Only for Damsel carved was Knuckle,
And she as stoutly with it did buckle;
Quoth Squires, are there no Peason left
For us, who are with hunger cleft?
Hunger you know is very keen,
Or (as some have it) sharp, which e'ne
Will break stone walls through; then what has
Man to defend him, who is but lath?
Quoth Squire, come bring us (and then drinks)
Onions and Cheese to fill up chinks;
Which they chop down with far more ease
Then Dogs (in Summer) snap up Fleas.
I might say something of the becks,
The winckings, and their counter-checks,
Simprings, and treading on the toes,
Excuses (too) to pluck a Rose,
Which (for Squires sake) distressed Dam-
Sell used to make, when loose in the Ham;
But I conceive they will advance
Matter enough for some Romance;
So I acquit my self the pains
That do attend those busie-brains;
And unto Hudibras, who now
Summons his Wits, and knits his brow,
Crosses the Proverb (like a Gull)
Grows angry when his Belly's full,
Strokes up his forehead with a Grace,
And looks hat-lining in the face,
Mutters a word or two to self,
Then calls, where is Chamberlain that Elf?
To clear the board, or Tapster, he
May do the office if need be:
And so about the Room he struts,
Like him that newly filled had guts;
Or as it is said of Crow in gutter;
His arms like wings about did flutter:
He rubs his elbow, then his pate,
Calls up the Squires, quoth he, it is late,
And bid 'em bring with them their Charge,
My word is a Mandamus large
Enough; all Consultations are
Ripest at Night, as the Romans were;
The Mornings dew the Poets suck,
That makes 'em poor (the worser luck)
Their friend Aurora does inspire
Their Fancies but with early fire,
Not well grown up, a fainting light,
When weighty matters require night,
And in the States-mans Cabinet,
We therefore will in Council set.
But here Sir Hudibras mistook,
And went a mile beside his Book,
For he that is a Poet right
Does court the Morn, and weds the Night:
And such as have the happy fate
To steer a Stage, can steer a State.
The Squires at Call obedient were,
And to their Arms did soon repair;
The Prisoners were conducted up,
After they would taken a lusty sup
Of knocking Ale, though liquor muddy,
It in their Cheeks raised colors ruddy.
Quoth Hudibras, drawneerer you,
And you Jack-daw get to your Crew,
Speaking to Quack. Be me Shack-daw?
(Quoth he) you be Shack-nape, pishaw --
Me no care dis -- begar me be
A Gentlehome in mine Country,
Me tell you dat, better den you,
Vat den? may foy me speak de true.
Quoth Hudibras, thou saucy Wight,
Compare how dare thou with Sir Knight?
Him, into whose more powerful hands
Confiscate are thy life and lands,
As thou shall see, soon after Trial
Sentence shall pass without denial.
So he surveighs the Room, and where
Solomon painted was sets Chair,
And seats self in it; quoth he, before
We handle the matter shut the door,
And snuff the Candles, they burn dim:
The Squire with haste obeyed him.
Then Hudibras bid'em sit down
At Tables end, and mind their own,
Which was their Arms; then frown he threw
At Prisoners, might have made them spew
Their Suppers up, but when he saw
It had no power upon their Maw,
He finds another way, and blisters
Sir Guillielmo's Ears with whispers;
At fingers ends he pleads their Cases,
(The ancient way used by Arbaces:)
And as his head and fingers played,
Quoth Capon, sure he is of our Traid;
Mark, Master, if he can refrain
To show in part Legerdemain;
I, now again; he do with ease,
And has more Roguish tricks then these;
Fear not, I warrant we are quit,
Hang him, he has a pestilent Wit,
Sudden as Thunder (that soures Beer)
As loud too; he bids Wretches hear,
For now his anger is grown hot,
And a Fools bolt is soonest shot;)
Are you ashamed to show your Faces?
Then to the brown Cow turn your Arses,
(A Military word much used
In Scotland, though by some abused,
And signifies to face about,
True, we might here have left it out:)
He rises from his Chair, and straight
Fills it again, to show his State;
Supports his whiskers with forefinger,
Bites thumb, instead of candi'd Ginger,
Which, if you dare to take my word,
At that time house could not afford,
But Don de Fogo (by relation)
Speaks it a sign of indignation,
A menacement unto the Foe,
And it may well be taken so,
From hence the ancient Proverb comes,
The angry Man will eat his Thumbs:
But in another sense we find
The matter of a different kind,
As when over Coward one prevails,
He swears he will make him eat his Nails,
Yet seriously considered, we
Find not the sense to disagree,
For nail to thumb's a noted friend,
And holds out to the very end,
So that if nail a sufferer be,
The thumb must share by simpathy:
So much for that, and now to him
Ycliped Hudibras the Grim,
And yet he will smile, but then beware,
For sure it is against the hair;
Quoth he, it is fit we should take care
(Imprimis) to know what you are,
From whence you came, and what you do
In England, not a place for you,
We have no vagrant People here,
But what are punished most severe,
And if you do transgress our Laws,
You are condemned for the same Cause.
Your Lex (quoth Quack) me no concern,
Vat's dat to dee ver me vas born,
Me be no esham'd of mi Country,
Me be a Frenshman de Parree,
It Is no four boon to use me dus,
Ven Anglond be in League vid us.
That makes not for you a bare word,
Quoth Hudibras, so thumpt the board
with fist as hard, as who should say,
What mischief's this, would it were day,
For Arguments grew on apace,
And so did Night, put Case to Case;
If theft or murder you commit,
Quoth he, pray, who shall pardon it?
The Offense done here? Good Mr. Blus-
Ter, must not the mercy come from us?
Begar (quoth Quack) me be no sush Man,
Me traveled Swed. Ital. and Dushland,
Nay par ma foy all de Varld over,
And me never vas served dus before.
Quoth Hudibras, what made you to
About you call so base a Crew
Of Tag and Rag, lewd hair-brained fellows,
Many of them deserving Gallows?
This will be found an Insurrection,
To which the Law denies protection;
In time of Peace to raise a rude
And giddy-headed multitude,
To break the Peace -- No, no, begar
(Quoth Quack) you break a de Peace vid Var,
You draw de Sword, and cock de Pistall,
Come down sa, sa, ven dey ver whist all,
Begar you break a de Peace me say.
Quoth Hudibras, an Ass will bray,
And so do thou; I tell thee, this
Crime is Indictable, that it is.
Ditable! vat be dat? quoth he,
Me no it understand, fi, fi.
Quoth Hudibras, what do we know
But you come here to stir up Foe;
To set the needy Cavaleers
And us together by the Ears,
That Money have, which they do want,
And for it will fight like Tarmagant,
And so our Valors be upbraided,
And every Road be Ambuscaded;
This we interpret may a Plot
To raise a new War, is it not,
Bro. Guill.? Now he of speech was slow,
Because he would not his teeth show,
And to avoid the carping might
Upon his words and judgment light,
Which showed his wisdom, and intent,
By silence still to give consent;
For the best way to shun dispute,
Is to say nothing, or be mute.
So on Sir Hudibras proceeds,
And agravates Quack's foul misdeeds,
So high, and with so strong a sense,
You Would wonder it should come from thence.
Begar (quoth Quack) you be strange
Man in de Varl, your vit do range;
Me tell you one, two, tree, fore times,
Me be no born here in your Climes,
Me be de Frenchman, profess Phissick,
Me cure de Pock, de Cough, de Tissick,
De Ish, de Gout, the Ash in bones,
And me begar can cut your Stones.
How Is that? quoth wrathful Hudibras,
That word shall not unrevenged pass:
A Purse (too) can you cut? quoth he,
And pick a Pocket if need be?
Or are employed by those that do,
To draw the main end up, the Crew?
Me no endure dis ting, nor dat,
Quoth Quack, come hedder, show de Pat.
Capon, vid hands of approbation
From de College, pour, tolleration,
From Potentates, and mighty Princes,
Dat in de Varld de like not sure is.
Quoth Hudibras, oh is it so,
You kill, Cum privilegie;
Ensnared you are by this account,
And Crimes on Crimes super amount,
For Murder, or the like, there is
No help left for you saving this,
Show something signed by Parliament,
Or Oliver, to that intent,
And we will acquit you, give you over,
Else we proceed must as before:
What say you for your self? Dis be
(Quoth Quack) may foy very pretty;
Vat do me need hands from fush tings,
Ven me have got de hands of Kings?
Me never did seek after them.
Your words (quoth Hudibras) condemn
Your self; but e're we sentence pass,
Come hither fellow with your Lass:
What Trade art thou? (Quoth Capon) none,
I thank my Parents, I Am but one
Of thirteen that is left alive,
The rest Grigg. did of breath deprive.
It Is fit thou make up Bakers dozen,
(Quoth Hudibras) not Hangman cozen.
And what are you, there, Mistress Minks?
With Cheeks that look like drooping Pinks?
What trade do you drive among these fellows?
Are you Whore-ripe (too) for the Gallows?
At which the Squires looked very sad.
Fearing her Case would prove but bad.
Quoth she, I must confess I am
(And't please your Worship) what I am,
And have a long time followed this
French Doctor here for Had-I -wiss.
Art thou a Man, or art thou Womau,
Quoth Hudibras, for both are common.
Quoth she, I Am of the weaker Sex,
God bless your Worship, Vivat Rex.
What Is that, quoth he, you muttered last?
I doubt you are Male beneath the Waste,
For as some Authors well have noted,
Youths have been sometimes petticoated;
If so, there must be danger in it,
Statutes against it live in Print:
Search her, examine all the nicks,
For I do hate those Players tricks.
Glad of the Office, Squires begin
To strip her to the very skin.
Quoth Capon, hold, to end the strife,
And't please you (Sir) she is my Wife,
A Woman right. Yes (Sir) quoth she,
Your Men know that as well as he.
She had a quick and piercing sight,
And found they Servants were to Knight.
Nay then (quoth Hudibras) if she
Be leefull lawful Wife to thee,
Enquire no further; Squires forbear,
And touch not the forbidden Ware.
Quoth she, I thank your love for that,
Your Men I knew would harm me not.
Quoth Hudibras, Friend, take her to thee,
And many a good turn may she do thee:
His Passion (now) left to be wild,
As sleep came on, so he grew mild,
He found the Night look monsterous grim,
And Morpheus had surprised him,
He gapes, and yawnes, and nods his head,
(Summons that call Mortals to bed)
What is it a Clock (quoth he) do you think?
(One would have thought he'ad been in drink)
Sure it draws near to break of day,
And I have something more to say:
Oh Brother, that you could me help,
But you are better skilled in Kelp
(For which he was about to get
A Patent, but was choused of it:)
Since then (quoth he) the Charge is mine,
To quicken Spirits fill some Wine;
And having taken a glass or two,
As Cicero did use to do,
When he in Council sat up late,
For benefit of Roman State;
He Temples rub to whet his Wits,
And gravely down again he sits:
Quoth he, your Crimes are great I know;
But we to anger (now) are slow;
Justice is pictured blind, and the
Reason is, 'cause she will not see,
And though some say she is Impartial,
It Is found contrary in each Martial,
Or that she should not lend an Ear
To this, or that, for love, or fear.
Now that we fear you not, you know,
And love you cannot, what Snake in Bo*
Some? for you are our Enemies,
'Twixt these Extremes (then) your Case lies;
So that a moderate way we must
Find out, or you are all but dust;
And that must full of Honor be,
Or else we loose the Glory, We
By Conquest won; and now I hit it,
(This it is to be so ready witted)
By laws of Arms we are to give
Quarter to him desires to live;
What he is Master of is Ours,
Excepting life, all is in our Powers;
For such never Valor understood,
That kills his Enemy in cool blood;
It Murder is conceived by some,
Of which we will wash our hands, come, come;
Now one would think he called for Water,
But mark, I pray, what followed after;
We made you Prisoners by our Might,
And all you have is ours by right;
But as the truly generous Spirit
Minds nothing more then Honors merit,
So all the Plunder is our due
We gratis do restore to you,
And as you are part per pale,,
But half soul'd things, and therefore frail,
We Will grant you so your liberty,
As may with Honor best agree;
There Is several ways, which are not strange,
Upon Parol, or in Exchange:
Now Fortune was so just a Guide,
That all the loss was on your side,
And there the Case does differ much,
Prisoners you are, you have none such;
Others have left a Guage behind
'Till their return, which is to bind;
But we will direct a nearer way
For you to walk, without more stay,
You Have plentifully fed on food,
And therefore it is but reason good,
Without more words, or further beckoning,
You presently discharge the Reckoning,
Then cast your Caps up all, and cry,
Long live our Noble Enemy.
Begar me vill do no sush ting,
Quoth Quack, me say, Viva de King,
Of mine Country; vat me to do
To make sush Preachament pour you?
Me no deny to pay mine share,
Pour mine self, and mine Servants dear,
And me vill pay no more begar,
Pour all you be de Man of War.
I tell you once again, you are dust,
If you deny a thing so just,
Quoth Hudibras; if we once fly on,
You Will find what it is to wake a Lion;
Have we you treated more like Friends
Then Enemies, and's this the mends?
Squires to your Arms, seize all they have,
Only their dirty Vitals save:
Now Hudibras begins to rant,
Lo what it is for Man to want
Sleep; Man but two eyes has in's head,
Must they be ever opened?
What serves lids for, who (like Watch-cases)
Should close eyes up safe in their places?
But when the brains boil over pot,
Then are the lids made fiery hot,
And stiff, they cannot shut the eyes,
And there it is thought the reason lies.
The Squires the Fod do hunch and justle,
But 'twas in vain for Quack to bussle,
His party was to weak: Quoth he,
Me vill pay de reck'nen jesvous pres;
All, quoth the Squires, or none: Me vill
Pay all, quoth he, but hold you still;
It be no boon fashion to pay,
Me tink, till me do go avay,
Me do not at de reckonen grush,
Dough me do tink it very mush,
De Jentlehome, de Traveller,
Pishaw, do no such ting begar,
Dey stay in Inn pershanse two, tree
Days, four boon, but pay no penny
Till dey do mount Chivall, and den
Dey call mine Host take de Recknen,
Me now loge here dis night, Alles,
In de morning me cry ver be ye,
And discharge house vid all mine Soul.
Quoth Hudibras, upon parole
Depart you may, that is to bed,
Be sure you keep to what you have said,
And e're your Journey, in the Morn
Bring me a Plaster for my Corn.
We, We, quoth Quack, me cure you all
Be sis a Clock, or Diablo sall:
Which reached not Hudibras his Ears,
'Twas muttered as they went down stairs.
Quoth Squires, we will toss a Cup or two
(When Knights are safe in bed) with you.
Vid all mine heart, (quoth Quack) me'l stay
One, two, tree ours pour you ma foy.
The Knights hasten to bed apace:
And Squires their Armor do unbrace,
(Yclyped Doublets) Ostler call
To pull off Boots, clean 'em withal;
Then down in Bed, not Bed of Down,
But such as served (when came to Town)
Tom Carrier, Knights their Bodies lay,
And bid the Squires take lights away,
Dispatch to bed, and special care
Take of Portmantua that was there;
For Truckling there was none in Room,
Unless on Rushes they would strome
(Which some call stretch) themselves, and so
Take key, shut door, and down they go
To seek a roosting place, and spend
Some time with Damosel their Friend,
And Quack, whose Gibberish pleased 'em much,
Capono (too) for wit, none such,
With little search they find 'em out,
In a ground-Chamber, hung about
With Cobwebs of the finest thread,
Truckle there was, but never a Bed,
A decent Matt there was indeed,
Of Sheets or Rugg they had no need,
The weather was insulting hot,
And Fleas would vex where they would not
Have 'em; and so to mend the matter
They drink about, and no words scatter.
At last (as if 't had been allotted)
The Squires ('it was said) were shrewdly potted,
And sleep they must, then down on Mat
They threw themselves, left Cloak and Hat;
But Subtle Quack, and's crafty Crew
Slept not, they would something else to do.
By this time day began to peep,
And fellows heard cry, Chimney sweep,
Which serves as Clock to call up Bess,
Harry, or Will, to mind Bus'nes,
Especially the Kitchin-maid,
To make fires that over night she laid:
In the mean while Quack was not idle
(Cunning as Horse had bit oth' Bridle:)
The Damsel (one that would be thriving)
In the Squires Pockets fell to diving:
Their Cloaks were packt up amongst the luggage,
Thus Men are served when they are sluggish:)
The Gates but newly opened were,
All things were hushed, and Coast was clear,
And so unseen they huddle out
Into the Street, then wheel about,
Some Minutes after folks 'gan rowze
From Beds, and show heads out of house,
To be in readiness for Fair,
Some to show Tricks, some sell their Ware,
And some to see, and some to buy,
That in Purse had but a penny;
And now the Streets began to fill,
While Knights and Squires lie dormant still,
Regardless of their late mishap,
Nor dreaming of an after clap.
But as things strangely come to pass.
So happened it with Hudibras;
Right underneath his Window, there
Was placed a Show, and Trumpeter,
Who to entice the People in,
Did make a most Prodigious din,
And as the knack on it is, another
Did answer him, whom he called Brother,
So that by Repercusions they
Were got a Note beyond Ela,
Echoed by others in the Fair,
As though they meant to rend the air,
This startled Hudibras, who flew
(Like Lightning) out of Bed, and drew
(In shirt) his Whynniard, what are we
Betrayed? Rise Brother Guill. quoth he;
Hark, the whole Town is up in Arms;
On every side we have Alarms,
Let Us dye like Men, and not be slain
In Bed, or like tame Pigeons taken
Out of our Roost, but dare the Foe,
^^ke Horse, and boldly amongst 'em go.
Quoth then Sir Guill. this cannot be
Our late defeated Enemy,
For they securely sleep in house,
As sure as Gournets do in sowse,
^^ rather must be some old Plot
Newly broak forth, say, is it not?
Quoth Hudibras, it may be so,
^et up, and we shall better know.
Quoth then Sir Guill, this is a base,
(And to our side) a cursed place;
Move not fighting so near the Water,
Doubting the danger may come after.
Quoth Hudibras, it is but a sound,
^f born to be hanged, you will never be drowned;
Besides, we will make our peace with these
Prisoners we have; the Wench will please,
That was well thought on, quoth Sir Guill,
I will get up, I that I will.
Where are our Squires, they come not near:
Sure they are half struck dead with fear.
The Chamberlain is called, to call
The Squires, to bind the Prisoners all:
Unwillingly they rise from Mats,
And shake their heads like two drowned Rats,
They mist the Monsieur and his Mates,
Their Cloaks and Hats too, scratched their Pate^
For madness they should be served so;
(But there is no truth in fawning Foe.)
After strict search the Squires fell to weeping,
Must we then pay so dear for sleeping?
Quoth they, the worse luck: Oh thou she Fiend
We thought thou would have proved our friend
Knights called above (in fume no doubt)
To bring up boots, and be let out;
The Squires in haste thrust hands in Pockets
(Their Wits were quite out of the sockets)
To feel for Key, and miss their Money,
Their Watches (too) oh C -- C --
How basely do thou deal with Man?
(But all the mischief that it can)
If ever we meet thee again,
For this trick we will show thee ten:
So up they went, in pitious plights,
And told all to their Masters, Knights.
How, how (in rage) quoth Hudibras,
Durst they depart without my Pass?
Or bringing Medicine for my Corn,
I Will make 'em rue they e're were born,
If I do find 'em amongst the Foe;
For forth I will, and forth I Will go.
Ask Chamberlain if they have paid
The Reckoning, of which I Am afraid:
No Sir, quoth they, they never thought on it,
Our Cloaks and Hats too marched upon it,
(Money, nor Watches, durst not name,
They better should have watched the same.)
How, robbed, and cheated too (oh Gull!)
This it is to be so merciful,
Quoth Hudibras, can none discry
Where, and how strong's the Enemy?
Quoth Squire (one) here is kept a Fair,
To which all Comers welcome are,
No greater Foe assure dly,
Then Hobbyhorse, and Puppet-try.
The greatest Foe of all, and they
Shall dearly for your losses pay,
Quoth Hudibras; among that Rout
The others sculke, we will find 'em out.
First, there is shown the deadly sins,
Which with the Box keeper begins;
Jane Shores disgrace, and lamentation,
(A Concubine not now in fashion.)
Then David, and Uriah's Wife,
And Doctor Faustus to the life;
With many trifles more, which do
Allude unto Profaneness too;
Abomination amongst 'em dwells,
Of which I mean to rid their Cells,
And clear the Streets of Superstition,
And its Idolatrous condition.
Then Knights mount Steeds, and at a word
(In one hand Pistol, the other Sword)
The Squires on foot the Horse attend,
(The readier to find out false-friend.)
They star'd about, folk thought 'em mad,
(For neither Cloak nor Hat they had:)
As soon as they were got in Street,
The People ran (as it was meet)
And at next door their malice lights,
(Which lately had disturbed the Knights.)
Quoth Hudibras, fall on, fall on,
And spare not there a Mothers Son:
At which the folk forsook the Sight,
And left the Puppets in sad plight;
Some lost a Cloak, and some a Hat,
Which to the Squires came very pat;
The Box with Money flew about,
For which they were not grown so stout
As not to stoop; they thought on Quack,
And then the Puppets went to wrack;
They cut what er'e they hit upon,
Down comes the Tower of Babylon.
Quoth Fellow, Pox upon you, Sir,
For spoiling Nabuchadnezer,
His Nose was cut out ill before,
But now you have abused it more,
How think you after this disgrace
He Is able to look Beast in face?
They mind him not, but out they bring,
As Captive bound, Babylons King:
And in their havoc grow more bold,
They pull down Rag, which Story told,
And as a Trophee bear't before
Sir Hudibras, and one Knight more,
To wit, Sir Guill. so on they trot,
With all the Pillage they had got,
Greedy of more, but were prevented
By Butchers stout, that Fair frequented,
Who seeing Squires a quoyle to keep,
And Men to run faster then Sheep,
Quoth they (to People) what do you fear?
There Is neither Bull got loose, nor Bear,
And will you seem to make escape
From fencing fools, and Jack-a-nape
On horseback? Clad in Coat of Plush?
Yet looks but like a Sloe on bush:
Keep, keep your ground, we will force 'em back,
Or may -- we never Money lack.
Then out they Snap, and Towser call,
Two cunning Currs,, that would not bawl,
But slily fly at throat, or tail,
And in their Course would seldom fail:
The Butchers hoot, the Dogs fall on,
The Horses kick, and wince, anon,
Down comes spruce Valor to the ground,
And both Sir Knights laid in a swound,
They like stout Horsemen kept the Saddle,
As long as ever they were able;
But such as Honor forward pricks.
Must now and then expect Horse-tricks.
The Squires with grief ran hom to Quarters
To hang themselves, had they found Garters:
Man should not trust to Fortune more
Then to a Sodometick-Whore,
Whose best of Actions are by night,
So, as she is blind, she hates the light.
This Hudibras (who not long since
Did think himself a petty Prince)
Does sorely find, on sides and guts,
(Oh out upon such fickle Sluts.)
So out oth' Bowels of Compassion,
Knights were led home in an odd fashion,
Where we will leave 'em for Recovery,
And then set forth a new Discovery.
FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
THe Author having not time to attend the Press, some Mistakes have happened
(but not any very gross) which is desired, thou will either pass by, or amend
with thy Pen.

Farewell.

