A Just and True REMONSTRANCE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MJNES-ROYALL IN THE PRINCIPALITY
OF WALES. Presented By Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmor of the said Mines-Royall
to his Majesty.

Printed at London by E.G. 1641. Cum pri^ilegio.

Most high and mighty Sovereign,
WHereas Your Majesty was graciously pleased not only to command my service to
be employed in your Highness Mines Royal, upon occasion of some discourse of
them at Enston-Rock, when your Majesty vouchsafed to honor that place with
your presence: but also to give your Majesty a true relation, what they were
when I entered upon them, what they are since at present, and of what hope for
the future, if diligently pursued and cherisht by your Royal aspect. In
obedience whereunto, I do in all humility affirm, that the Mines at my first
entrance were drowned with water, and consequently not worth the working as by
several certificates hereunto annexed appears, which did then much
disencourage my undertakings: but considering my deep engagements for your
Majesty's, many favors extended to me, the meanest of your Subjects, I
conceaved my self obliged to adventure upon the undermining of the adjacent
Mountains, thereby forthwith to make trial, whether those Mines (if once
discov^red at the surface of the earth) would not prove richer in their deeper
search, for experimenting whereof, having received several opinions from the
best Mineral-masters of our age, as Sir Francis Godolphin, M. Alexander
Roberts, M. Joseph Hexsteter, and M. Walter Barksby, with diverse others well
practiced in that way, encouraging me therein; I then resolved to hazard my
fortune on them, assuring my self that all Minerals were to be discovered by
some one or other. Because originally created for man's use, and Gods glory: and
thus having settled my former irresolute thoughts, I began with a cheerful
heart to cut through the maine Rocks of five several mountains, at their
lowest level, appearing by the Art of Dialling to be some sixty, some
eighty, and some an hundred fathomes perpendicular, and so continued these
battery-workes four years, night and day, before my hopes could give me any
happy assurance that the Minerall-beds of the earths riches, lay fast locked
in those barren Rocks, until my charge grew so great, that I became pitied of
my friends, and insulted over by my enemies, which did anew perplex my mind;
yet when I considered that I was not borne for my self, but for the service of
God, your Majesty, and my Country, and that I had not only that heavenly
guider to direct me, but also your sacred Majesty to encourage me, I then
began to cast off these my former justly conceived fears, and (notwithstanding
any opposition or seeming diswasive arguments or experiments by any other) to
pitch on this resolution, that better it were for me to suffer shipwreck in
my poor estate and credit, then that such treasures should lie buried in the
BOWELS of those vast mountains, and not be made both known, and beneficial
to your gracious Majesty, being inherent to your prerogative, as by the
declaration under the hands of learned Council hereunto annexed appears,
which hills although large in extent, yet are not considerable in herbage, nor
fit for any other plough, then the Miners sledge, gad, and twybill.

That which first wrought in me a desire to try and fathom those mines was a
sensible discourse delivered me, by a Portugal in presence of Sir Francis
Godolphin (by whose death I lost the hope of a most knowing partner) who had
been for many years employed under the King of Spain in his West Indian Mines
purporting that if his Master were Sovereign Lord of those British hills, as is
your Majesty, he would not doubt but to make them a second Indies, and
affirming with deep protestations, that the greatest riches in those
Mountains lay in their lowest levels, which I find to be true by laborious
experiment, in those five mountains. For by this way of working, and driving
through the depth of Rocks, we are not only freed from the danger and deluge of
waters, but also have discovered an increase of rich veins in quantity and
quality, some containing twenty pound, some fifteen, some ten, and some
six in Silver, in the Tun of Lead upon the great Test, which are answerable
to most of the Mines, of the King of Spain, the Emperor of Germany, and the
Duke of Saxony; moreover we find that by mixing and smelting these several
veins together, the one proves a good additament to the other, and becomes
thereby a means to advance the Mines Royal, and in them the good of your
kingdom and Subjects.

We have many gracious testimonies how much the Almighty is pleased with these
our innocent labors; by his continual preservation, of the workmen amidst
their hourly dangers, especially in one accident, which lately befell, upon
occasion of driving an Addit into one of those mountains called Tallybont, but
because I was no eyewitness of it, I humbly desire your majesty's perusal of
the narration thereof (as I received it) being then in London, from a minister
resident Preacher to the Mineral men, hereunto annexed.

And as I am bound to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, I must further
humbly acknowledge your Majesty's large addition to your former Royal favors
in granting me (the meanest of your Creatures) liberty to give your Majesty's
impression to such Silver as the Mole-like Miners cast out of the Earth, for
their speedier payment, for they are the men who make the rocks their resting
place, and expect no other reward or benefit for their sweaty brows then what
they gain from out of the dark Cavernes of the earth by harmless and
importunate labor.

And for declaration of part of my poor endeavors, your humblest suppliant
begs a perusal of the annexed remonstrance, presented by your honorable and
grave ministers of Justice, and other noble Gentlemen of quality, residing
within your Principality of Wales, whose eyes have been spectatators, as your
servant, a diligent labourer in those Mineral Vineyards. And having thus far
traced out, and dived into the secrets of natures treasures, and by the
influence of your majesty's favors, overcome those amazing difficulties, which
hindered the entrance of these great adventures, (I then for better improvement
of the works, caused a meeting of Miners, Monyers, smelters and refiners, to
consult debate and try, whether fuel of turfe would not separate the Oar,
extract the silver, and reduce the Litharge, as well as the vast expense of
whose Forests of Woods formerly consumed for that purpose; and upon an exact
trial made thereof, by altering the earthy substance of urfe into charkie
cyndars, we found by infallible experience, that Your Majesty's Turffaries will
furnish Your Mines Royal with Fuel to all future ages. So that there
remains nothing more to make the inside of these barren Mountains, produce an
addition of gems to your Crown, but to finish the building of your Princely
foundation by your Royal recommendation thereof to your High Court of
Parliament, whose judgments, will quickly discern how much these Mines would
redound to the general good; Your Majesty's gracious letters having already
caused sundry Merchants, and Gentlemen of quality, to take a personal view of
the harmless gain, which accrewes from this public work of the Mines Royal,
as a maenes to enrich Your subjects the ancient Britains of those parts, with
the free trade, and vent of their Home-made-Cloth, and to employ and enable
them to become Merchant-adventurers, as well by land as Sea. And for manifest
proof of my proceedings in this business, I shall with Your Royal assent,
humbly desire a commission from the High Court of Parliament* to examine the
former and present state of the Mines Royal, and Your Majesty's riches that
are buried under the most inconsiderable herbage, of these vast Mountains,
which in time may alter the name of Welsh Rocks into Welsh Indies, and make it
plainly appear to any (who is not merely of an earthly, and avaritious
temper, and can in any measure resent the nourisher and true support of a
flourishing State, that they* (if followed) cannot but prove flowers to the
Crown, a glory to the kingdom, and a rich blessing to the subject.

Be pleased therefore most gracious Sovereign, to vouchsafe that the beams of
Your Royal favor, may cherish the growth of this hopeful design, so as it
be not blasted in the bud, and then my affectionate endeavors prove as
fruitless to this Common wealth, as was the neglected tender of Columbus his
discovery of the West-Indian-Mines in the reign of Henry the seventh.

And to make it in some measure appear to your Majesty, how desirous I am to
advance your revenew in an employment so much conducing to the public good, I
do in all humbleness offer (as an increase of rent after the expiration of
the Lady Middletons Lease assigned to me and yet in being) one thousand pounds
by the year for and during the continuance of another lease thereof granted to
me in reversion, for confirmation of which leases by your Majesty, and your
High Court of Parliament, I do further humbly present 1000 Marks as a prefine
to your Majesty's Privy Purse; over and above the benefit of your Majesty's
Mintage, the increase of shiping, and the importation of necessary commodities,
occasioned hereby, which as I am informed by Merchants of good worth that drive
the trade, will amount to 4000 li. per annum. And for grant of the custom of
exportation of such Lead only, out of which the silver is refined, I will (so
it please your Majesty) be bound to double the yearly Revenew of the Farmers
book, according to a medium, of seven years cast up for that Port of Dovy:
your Majesty having not from any former undertaker, or Farmour of those Mines,
ever received either fine or penny of rent, all which I submissively propose,
and desire the rather, to encourage my Coadventurers, who as they were first
invited by Your Princely letters of assurance, so will they now (things being
thus honorably settled) be most willing to expose their fortunes, for the
consummating of so advantageous, so honorable, and so public a good work.

Having thus made to your Majesty a true relation of the state of your Mines
Royal in Wales, and a faithful explication of my loyal intendments and of
other Mineral men's opinions conceived of those Mines, I profess before God
and your sacred Majesty, that I therein, have no other ends, then the glory of
my Maker, the honor of your Majesty, and the good of my Country. Let me
therefore on a bended knee humbly implore your Sovereign goodness, not only
to peruse these Petitions, and Certificats annexed, but also to pardon the
constrained prolixity of

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted servant Thomas Bushel.

The declaration of learned Lawyers what a MINE-ROYALL is, according to former
presidents.
ALthough the Gold or Silver contained in the base metal of a mine, in the
lands of a Subject, be of less value then the baser Metal, yet if the Gold or
Silver do countervaile the charge of the refining, or be of more worth then
the base Metal spent in refining it, this is a Mine-Royall, and as well the
base Metal, as the Gold and Silver in it, belong by prerogative to the Crown,

Sir. Ralph Whitfeld. His Majesty's Sergeant at Law Sir Ed. Harbert. At. Genesis
Oliver Saint John's. Sollic. John Glandvill. Sergeant. John Wild. Sejeant.
Rich. Creswell. Sergeant. Or. Bridgman the Pr. Sol. Robert Holborne. Esquire. John
Herne, Esquire. Edward Bagshaw. Esquire. Thomas Lane. Esquire. Richard King. Esquire. Edmond
Prideaux. Esquire. John Maynard. Esquire. Edward Hide. Esquire. Esquiers. John Glyn.
Charles Fulwood. Harbottle Grimston. John White. George Peard. John Francklin.
Richard Weston. John Glover. William Ellis. Thomas Culpeper. John Goodwin.
William Sanford. John George. James Haward.



To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of THOMAS BVSHELI
Your Majesty's servant.
Most humbly shows,
THAT whereas your Royal ^^^her of ever blessed memory, (...) was truly styled
the King of Peace, and mirror of mercy to the sparing of life and blood, was
graciously pleased for saving the lives of such malefactors, as were condemned
to death by the Law for petty fellonies, being such as were not any scandal to
the Church or State, nor had imbrewed their hands in blood, to admit their
transportation to the East India, and Virginia Companies, for furtherance of
their plantations. In which action doubtless he did also cast his eyes upon
the warrantable proceedings and presidents of other most famous Princes in the
like kind, as the late Queen ELIZABETH, who built certain Galleys of purpose
for employment of such kind of offenders, of strong and able bodies, as might
attend her memorable designs at Sea, especially upon all sudden and resolute
enterprises; it being the usual course of other Christian Princes, as the King
of Spain, both for the supply of his Galleys against the Turks, and Moors,
and especially for the enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver,
Quicksilver, and the like, and his conquests of Mollocco, Goa, Ormus, and other
rich and populous Islands. The King of France for his Galleys at Marsellis. The
State of Venice. The Duke of Florence, who by such kind of saved offenders
built Legorne (one of the most famous Seaports within the Straits.) In all
which States and services, diverse of these malefactors by good encouragements
have sought not so much by surviving, as by their incredible labors, effecting
matters, otherwise held invincible, to obliterate their former ignominies by
merit of rewards. And whereas in this your Majesty's populous Kingdom, too
many such offenders are most untimely cut off in their best abilities of
service, so is there within the pale of this Your Kingdom, and without any
occasion of Sea, or foreign service, means of employment for such persons, to
redeem their lost reputation, by endeavoring to do faithful service for
their Countries honor, and the Kingdoms good, in that happy work, begun by
Your Sacred Majesty, for the better discovery of Your Silver Mines. His most
humble suite therefore is that you would be pleased out of all these weighty
considerations and beneficial consequences, tending so much to your Honor,
Crown and Dignity, and good of the Commonwealth, to grant Your Majesty's
Commission, (if it may be thought fit by the advice of Your High and
Honorable Court of Parliament) for the choosing of such several persons out
of the prisons in this your Kingdom, as are, and shall be condemned for small
offenses, and of able serviceable bodies, by the approbation of Your Judges,
and shall implore Your Majesty's mercy to be employed by your said subject in
the Works of your Mines-Royall, they giving security for their good behavior,
with such limitation of time, and allowance for their sustentation; as to Your
Majesty's said High Court of Parliament shall be thought fit, that by their
dutiful and laborious performance therein, they may afterward come into the
happiness of your Majesty's pardon of Grace for their former offenses,

And your Petitioner shall ever rest, etc.

To the Kings most excellent MAJESTY.
Most Gracious SOVEREIGN,
THE Loyalty of my faithful service, will not suffer me to conceal a
bequeathed Legacy to your Majesty by the last Will and Testament of your most
Loyal Subject JOHN Bishop of Worcester lately deceased of a treasure
discovered by him, and committed to my trust, for the revealing thereof to your
Majesty.

Who perceiving the inclination, and affection I had to Mines, and Mineralls*
much commending it, as the most honest gain, and greatest good to a
Commonwealth, began this ensuing discourse unto me.

Mr. BVSHELL,
YOur own eyes see how near I am to the dwelling of death, by my gray hayres
which are the true Records of fourscore and fourteen years of age, next my
limbs which have no more strength, then those that are lap't in the Sepulcher
of their winding sheet, only my intellectual parts are yet preserved, to
ascribe God the glory, and to disclose the secrets of two rich Mines, the one
holding some quantity of Gold, worth the Extracting, the other in Silver worth
the Refining; to your trust and fidelity, with a confidence that your charity
cannot conceive me guilty, of betraying your judgment with an imaginary
treasure, when my soul and body are so near the approach of death, as I must
suddenly give an account in the other world, besides I have taken upon me, the
calling of a spiritual profession, And have this day, received the Sacrament,
as a pledge of my redemption, which I trust are sufficient motives, to believe
truth from a dying man's tongue, who has no other end, then that the
hopefullnes of such riches, may not be buried by my dissolution, but that the
honor and profit thereof might redownd to his Majesty, and his Royal
posterity, as a living and loyal remembrance of his Princely favors to me and
mine.

And thereupon he did enjoin me upon the integrity of my allegiance, to
consecrate the first fruits of my labors therein, as his discovery and service
to your sacred self: and thus having made a true relation of his discourse to
me, I leave it to your Majesty's wisdom to approve or dislike.

Your MAJESTY'S most humble Servant THOMAS BVSHELL

To the most Illustrious PRINCE CHARLES Prince of Wales.
Most High and Mighty PRINCE,
AS the smaller Rivulets by their natural motions make haste to pay their
tribute unto the vast Ocean, as well as do the greatest rivers: So come I with
humble assurance, that your Highness will not despise this poor present,
extracted out of your Welsh Mines, wishing the coin could speak that language
of Ophir, as it does this of Cardigan, wherein I trust by Divine Providence,
and your Princely prevailing with the most honorable Court of Parliament, for
the confirmation thereof; I doubt not but that in process of time, I shall be
able with the assistance of my Coadventurers, and help of their greater purse
and fortunes: to make these British hills, as in situation, so in esteem
too, resemble the West Indies, or at least wise those renowned mines of Saxony.

Thus I most humbly take leave of your Highness, hoping your Princely
goodness will pardon my presuming to present so great a Prince, with so poor
a present, as does in all humbleness.

Your Highness devoted Be^dsman, THOMAS BVSHELL.

To our dread Sovereign Lord The KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
WE do most humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that by Your Majesty's
vouchsafing to this your Principality the trust of a branch of Your Royal
Mint, is an honor that neither our Ancestors nor our selves durst wish for;
and we do as humbly and as thankfully acknowledge and confess, that by it you
have not only honored us more, then any of Your Royal predecessors; but you
have thereby offered us the means to enrich our selves, to the making of us
happier then our fathers, in freeing us from the cares and fears that hindered
us from driving into these Mountains that promise a mass of treasure. For be
pleased to know, that before Your Majesty vouchsafed unto us this great favor,
we were fearful to adventure far into the mountains, because we had far to
send before we could make the silver current, that we should at charge
recover. Nor was our care of carriage and recarriage the least hinderance to
our proceedings, from all which by Your Majesty's goodness, and the endeavors
of Your industrious and faithful servant Thomas Bushel, we are happily freed;
for which favor, we whose names are hereunto subscribed in the behalf of all
the inhabitants of this your Principality of WALES, do render all humble and
hearty thanks, and for them, and our selves, do hereby promise to Your sacred
Majesty, that we will do our utmost endeavors, to find out that measure,
which we believe God and Nature from the Creation has preserved for Your
Majesty's use; that thereby we may approve our selves Your Majesty's loyal
and most obedient Subjects and humble Servants,

Thomas Milward Knight, Chief Justice of Chester. Marmaduke LLoyd Knight.
Richard Price K. Baronet. James Price Knight. Sampson Eure Knight. John Lewis
Knight. Timothy Turnor Esquire. I. Littleton Esquire. Walter LLoyd Esquire. Thomas
Price Esquire. Robert Corbet Esquire. Evan Gwin Esquire. Morgan Herbert Esquire. John Vaughan
Esquire. Vincent Corbet Esquire. Humfrey Green Esquire. John LLoyd Esquire. David LLoyd ap
Reighnald Esquire. Thomas Phillips Esquire. John Edmund Esquire. Hugh LLoyd Gentlem. David
Rees Gent. John Bowen Gent. William Watkin Gent. John Meredith Gent. James
Kegitt Gent.


A Certificate from the Miners, presented to the Right Honorable, the Lords
and other of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
May it please your Lordships,
ACCORDING to your commands, We whose names are under written, being Miners,
Smelters, Refiners, Carryers, Washers, and Monyers belonging to his Majesty's
Mines Royal, in the County of Cardigan, in all humility do certify of our
certain knowledge and experience, concerning the new works lately discovered
by Gods providence to Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmer of his Majesty's
Mines-Royall in these parts, that the said Master Bushel at his inestimable
charge, having cut six hundred Fathom through the Rock at the lowest levels,
North and South, for discovering the lost vein of Cum-sum lock, lying East and
West, two hundred Fathom through the Mountain of Tallybont, at sixty Fathom
perpendicular, three several Addits at Koginean, one above another, twenty,
and thirty Fathom center, another at the Darren, to come under the Romans
work, at an hundred Fathom center, another at Bryn-LLoyd fifty Fathom in
length, and thirty Fathom Center, working day and night for the Drayning of
the water, which formerly in the time of Customer Smith, and Sr. Hugh Middleton
in their working of the Mines-royal was never used, they only working upon the
Superficies of the Earth, the works being drowned with water before they could
sink to the best of the vein, both for quantity and quality, and so the
charge made to exceed the benefit, which danger is pevented by the aforesaid*
Addits, and the Royal Mines become more hopeful, especially by the assistance
of his Majesty's mint, for the speedy payment of all those that are employed in
the said works, and Mr. Bushels own invention to save Wood, by reducing the Ore
into Lead, and Silver, with Turffe and Sea-cole Charked, which happy invention
had it not been found out, the works must needs have been left unwrought, the
Country not able to have supplied necessary Fuel. And further by the
prohibition of transporting Ore unwrought, that holds silver worth the
refining, which uncontrol'd liberty of transporting formerly, His Majesty in
his Princely wisdom saw to be very prejudicial, even to the utter overthrow
of his Mines Royal.

We have therefore great reason to be confident that his way of working, with
the restraint of transporting Ore, will in short time greatly increase the
Bullion of this Kingdom, for the honor of the King, and good of the
Commonwealth, together with the employment of many hundred poor people, which
would be otherwise an unsupportable burden to this barren Country, who by
their present labor in these Mines are able to subsist with their Famiand
thousands more might be daily set on work if Mr. Bushells undertakings in the
Mines Royal may be confirmed for a certain time by this present High Court of
Parliament.

Miners.
David Fowls. William Rashly. Henry Co^kler. David Bebb. Joseph Jefferies.
George Turner. Robert Lowning. Thomas Fletcher. David Evans. George Dixon. Hugh
Mason. David ap Richard. David Loyd. David Williams. Henry Emblin. Maurice
Tailor. John Emblin. Edward Reece. Hugh Reece. William David's. George Scotsmer.
Thomas Brickhead Will. Griffith. Peter Baltiser. Francis Pierce. Maurice Lewis.
Peter Edriser. Edward Blewys. Rob. Emblin. Rob. Tailor. David Iinkins. Joseph
Acherson. Tho. Blewys. Michael Sanders. Morgan Williams. Tho Clocker. Tho.
Green. Barthol. Clocker. Francis Fisher. Hugh Benn. John Mason. George Tickle.
John Mason. John Fish^r. Edmund Poole. Edw. Bebb. John Mason sen. Will.
Ficharett. Evan Thomas. John Harris. Will. Tyson. Watkin Reece. John Smith.
Morgan Pritchet. Griffith John. Will. Reece. John Tuddar. John Huson. Phillip
Benn. Thomas James.
With two Hundred more, whom for brevity we omit to name. Moniers.
Henry Such. John Corbet. Richard Arnold.
Refiners.
John Estopp. David Estopp. Samuel Johnson. William Sturgeon. Thomas Parker.
Arthur Elissa.
Smelters.
Thomas Botham. Hugh James. Griffith Evans. John Watkin. Iinkin Owen. John
Epslie. John Evans. John Jews. James Meredith.
Washers.
John Wringe. Morgan John Lewis. Davy John. John Iinkins. Morgan Griff. John
Edmund Symons. Reece Morgan. Charles Williams. Thomas Adams.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS and others of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable
Privy Council.
ACcording to Your Honors command we have enquired and considered how the
Mines-Royall were left to Master Bushel by the Lady Middleton, and do in all
humility declare, that the silver mines were not worth the working, until
Master Bushel at his great charge discovered Rich Ore in the adjacent
mountains, which in all likelihood will both increase the Bullion and by his
way of working, in short time give his Majesty a true trial what the
invaluable riches of these His Welsh mountains are: for whereas the Mines in
these parts were formerly wrought by Pumpes, and so growing deep were left
drowned with water, M. Bushel cuts through the maine Rocks, at the lowest
level, to an hundred fathom perpendicular, according to the German manner of
working, which though chargeable, yet certain, having four several Addits
which he continues driving day and night into four several mountains, his
industry also has outstript former times, for by melting the poor fusible
Ore, with the Rich, he produces a third part more of silver with the same
charge: and for accommodating the works with all materials fit for Mines
Royal, he has spared no cost about repairing the milles, has also built in
his Majesty's Castle of Aberystwith a fair mint, has contracted with
merchants of our own and other Nations to supply the peoples necessity with
Corn and other provisions, and pays the miners and carriers at the Scales,
and doubts not to make them able Pyoners, and fit soldiers to do His
Majesty and their Country service upon any assault of an enemy. All which we
commend to Your Honorable consideration, praying, etc.

Your Lordships humbly to be commanded, Joseph Hexsteter, chief Steward of the
Mines. Samuel Reynish, Assay Masters of the Mint. Water Barkesby, Assay Masters
of the Mint. Humphrey Owen, Clarke of the Mines.


DIE SABBATI 14. Aug. 1641.
WHereas this House has been informed, that Thomas Bushel Esquire,
undertaker of His MAJESTY'S Mines-Royall in the County of Cardigan, by his
great charge and industry in cutting Addits has gained His MAJESTY'S old
drowned and forsaken works of Tallybont, and other works. And made new
discoveries of Royal mines there, which are already very considerable. And
whereas diverse persons of quality encouraged by His MAJESTY'S Letters to them
directed, do intend to adventure great sums of money in the said works,
which in time (if well encouraged) may prove of great Consequence, both for
Honor and Profit to His MAJESTY and the Kingdom. And whereas also it
appears unto this House by diverse Affidavits and Certificats of credit that
some persons ill affected to these Honorable and Public services who in time
may receive deserved punishments, have disturbed the possession of the said
Thomas Bushel in some of His MAJESTY'S Mines-Royall, and Edifices appertaining
to the Royal works. And have plucked up diverse plumps cast in the Rubbish,
drowned, and (so much as in them did lie) destroyed the said works, so as it
has been a labor of four years night and day to recover the same. And that
also the said Thomas Bushel has been disturbed in the getting of Turfe and
Peate for the service of His MAJESTY'S works, being an invention of his own,
very commendable and commodious for the preserving of Wood, which has been
heretofore by the former undertakers much wasted in those parts. Now for the
remedy of the said mischiefs, and that the said Thomas Bushel and his
Assigns, and such persons as are or shall be Undertakers and Adventurers with
him in the said Services, may receive all due Encouragement and Assistance in
those Chargeable undertakings. It is ordered by the LORDS in the Upper House of
Parliament now assembled. That the Speaker of this House, in the Name, and by
the Authority of the same, shall direct His Letters unto the Judges of Assize,
and Justices of the Peace of the said County of Cardigan: Requiring them, that
they do in all lawful things endeavor to advance, and encourage the said
service in His MAJESTY'S Royal Mines, and assist the said Thomas Bushel and
other Undertakers, in all things so far as lawfully they may, both for the
continuance of his lawful Possessions, and the quiet and peaceable working of
the said mines, until he shall be evicted by due course of Law, as also for
getting and working of Turfe and Peate, according to his Legal right upon his
MAJESTY'S Wastes, and other places lawful, and all other lawful accommodations
of necessary passages, and other Legal things, which may any ways advance His
MAJESTY'S service in the said Royal mines.

JO. BROWN, Cler. Parliament.

A letter from the L. KEEPER to the Justices of Assise, etc.
AFter my very hearty Commendations, I have here enclosed sent you an Order
made in the House of the Lords now assembled in Parliament, which you are
carefully to observe and perform according to the directions thereof in all
things, so far as Lawfully you may. So not doubting of your readiness therein,
J bid you heartily farewell, and rest

Excester-house 26. Aug. 1641. Your very loving friend ED. LITTLETON Cust. Sig.

A letter to Mr. Bushel, relating some strange accidents, which happened in
the MINES.
Honored Sir,
SVffer my congratulations of your late success at Tallibont, to be admitted
amongst the rest who have represented the same to your imagination: not so much
for the historical report of it, as for speculation on it; So it becomes my
quality, for the rest are interessed, I a looker on Your Addit or great drift
of Talybont, after above 200 fathom in four years driving to come at the
chief shaft of the old drowned work of 38 fathom deep, being pierced by the
water of the old work, June 27. at midnight there befell two memorable
accidents. The four workmen about one in the night (as their manner was)
withdrew to take Tobaco within ten fathom of the Addits mouth, lest in the
forefield it should damp the air, which was conveyed to them by your leaden
pipes with bellows. Their smoakie banquet was not yet at an end, when they
heard a mighty and fearful noise, which some of them said was thunder. But
old Bartholmew Clocker (a well experienced Miner) although he left the work
without any suspicion of so near an approach, resolved suddenly, the work is
holed, come let us away. No sooner had they gotten the free air, but out
gusheth the torrent of water with an incredible fury, such a breach it made in
the solid Rock, that it arose a full yards height at the Addits mouth and
drove away above 100 Tun of the rockie deads, affrighting the people of
Talybont, who heard the noise and felt the water in their houses. I do not
remember that I was ever more astonished at the prodigiousnesse of any
spectacle, to see what perdition was threatened to the poor men, and they so to
escape it. About four hours after, the violence of water being past, Fisher
one other of the Miners went in with more curiosity than wit, to see what
effect it had wrought there: and being some sixty fathom in creeping very low,
his candle enkindled a vapor, which came on him with three or four flashes,
and he suddenly returning had his hair burnt off, and his clothes scorched,
in which conclusion it gave a crack like the report of a piece, and in a fierce
gust of wind blew out the Candles of three more coming after him. To omit the
Philosophical inquisition of natural causes, I account his preservation in as
high a degree of wonder as the first. Thus happy are you here when least you
think of it, for I find the subterranean spirits, the supposed guardians of
concealed treasure, as officious for you as if they were in pay with you. But
in a style more proper to my pen, Behold Sir, how dear you are to providence,
which for your sake has vouchsafed to digress into a miracle, and such a one
as is able to convert the most Sophistical Atheist, whence your piety will
infer, that the gracious Author of this incomparable bounty, expects from
you some grateful service, as high above ordinary (according to mortal
capacity) as this favor has been extraordinary We are all deeply in the same
engagement, and have learned by this experiment, that these Addits or
approaches (for that's the sense of the name of old deluge works) are attempts
of desperate hazard. Me thinks these Mountains are as so many pregnant wombs,
and now in labor call for your fortunate hands to deliver them, to the honor
of your Royal Master, and perpetuated glory of the Nation.

What should you doubt in an employment so serenely smiled upon, by the highest
both of Heaven and Earth? You use no enchantment or magneticall Rod to discover
the veins; your only magic, is an ingenuous conjecture of probabilities,
with a cheerful and indefatigable industry, which has hitherto succeeded
beyond expectation of most, and (peradventure) the desires of some. But who (as
Agricola makes the question) that is not of a nature impoyson'd with envy, and
malitiousnesse, Lib. 1. do R.M.
can bear unfriendly thoughts to him, whose substance is in a manner presented
by the hand of God.

I know it would be a motive of very feeble operation to tell you how Princes
and States have raised their Crowns, by descending into such abyssesses as
these; with some of whom wanton antiquity has been pleased to sport her self,
and to play upon the simplicity of many, as Midas, Gyges the Argonauts,
Croesus, with the States of Athens, over whose Minerals was that renowned
Thucydides a Prefect, as you are here. Of which Pliny delivers what may be
worthy your attention, when he says of them, that they were in a fruitless
soil, and on the hills, (as these with us.) And wheresoever one vein was
found, it was not far from another; among which was one called Bebelo, that
afforded him 300. pound weight of Silver a day.

These were then the veins which conveyed the blood and spirit of life through
all the limbs of his victorious Host. And have you not here our Britains
Asturia before you? Who knows whether it may not yield a Bebelo? at least a
Sneberg or Anneberg, who has heretofore dreamed of a Mine at Comsomloch, or of
the happy lot you lately drew from the Mountains of Keginian, Talybont, the
Darren, Broom-Floyd and Cum-mervin? What did the outside of these promise you
mere then the countenances of their neighbors? But the complaint of learned
Dr. Jurdan may here take place, that much silver was lost, for want of taking
it out of Lead-Oares. For whereas those Oars which are rich in silver are
commonly hard of fusion our mineral men neglect those Oars. No doubt many are
concealed by reason they are Mines Royal.

Where had been the Woods and Forests yet undestroyed on these bald-headed
Promontories that might suffice had you not taught the earth to afford you all,
and the worthless valley, to meet the barren hill, by sending in fuel, to
give form to the matter: so that here is a rich bequest you leave to
posterity, I mean your Eternizing the works, by preventing the excess of
water, and defect of fire. I have no more, but to signify my confidence, that
as your desires are set on the material Rocks of Wales and Enstone, so will
your better affections be firmly grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus, that no
tempest may be able to shake you, when the Sandy projects of other will be
laved to nothing by the floods they are built upon. Which will give more
comfort and satisfaction to you then can be expressed by your

True Friend and Servant, THO. BRODWAY.
Julii 4. 1641.
An answer to Mr. Broadwaies LETTER.
M. Broadway,
YOur true relation, and lively expression of the miraculous delivery of the
poor Miners from the deluge of Waters, which issued forth, upon the cutting
through of Tallybont mountain, seems by the contents of your Letter to
promise no other reward, to the first discoverers, then imminent danger of
present death, in which, as in all things, we must ascribe the glory to God
alone, and as the children of Israel were to meet with many hard accidents in
those deserts, so must we resolve to encounter with many bitter storms before
we can discover Natures riches hidden in those mountains, and who can express
my sufferings, prising my reputation above life or fortunes? For fame flying
with the wings of malice, desirous to put a period to these my harmless
endeavors, has made as you partly know, my supposed friends, to become my
professed Foes, and my nearest in blood, my greatest sorrow, leaving me as
naked, as was Job in his greatest affliction, some construing these my Mineral
adventures to be but the fabric of a fantastic brain, others alleging
that the greatness of my charge would ruin both me, and those who gave me
credit, whereby those friends that conferred on me timely courtesies, instead of
increasing, or continuing them, were moved to press me for more speedy
payment, then my present abilities were able to make good. What throes of
sorrow perplexed my midnight thoughts in these deep engagements, I leave to you
to judge. I will therefore hasten my coming down, to settle the affairs of
this great work, that I might redeem the misspent time of my youth by some
memorable design in my age, the hopefulnesse whereof you are pleased so to
amplify, which I trust will give livelihood to many, injury to none, and be of
much honor to our Nation, which was ever the height of my ambition, resolving
to rest content with whatsoever the wise disposer of all should confer upon
me, and hereafter to leave those friends in trust, whom I found firmest,
thereby both to pay themselves, and satisfy others, to whom I stand engaged.
And thus with many thanks for your kind letter, and good counsel, I shall ever
remain

Your faithful friend, THO. BUSHEL.


