HUDIBRAS. THE FIRST PART. Written in the time of the late Wars.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Imprimatur.

TO: BERKENHEAD.

November. 11 1662.

HUDIBRAS.
THE ARGUMENT OF The FIRST CANTO.
Sir Hudibras his passing worth,
The manner how he sallied farth:
His Arms and Equi age are shown;
His Horse's Virtues, and his own.
The Adventure of the Bear and Fiddle
Is sung, but breaks off in the middle.
CANTO 1.
WHen civil Dudgeon first grew
(high,
And men fell out they knew not
(why;
When hard words, Jealousies and Fears,
Set Folks together by the ears,
And made them fight, like mad or drunk,
For Dame Religion as for Punk,
Whose honesty they all durst swear for,
Though not a man of them knew wherefore:
When Gospel-trumpeter, surrounded
With long-ear'd rout, to Batrel sounded,
And Pulpit, Drum Ecclesiastic,
Was beat with s^t, instead of a stick:
Then did Sir Knight abandon dwelling,
And out Le rode Colonelling.
A wight he was, whose very sight would
Entitle him Mirror of Knighthood;
That never bowed his stubborn knee
To any thing but Chivalry,
Nor put up blow, but that which laid
Right Worshipful on shoulder blade:
Chief of Domestic Knights and Errant,
Either for Chartel or for Warrant:
Great on the Bench, Great in the Saddle,
That could as well bind over, as swaddle:
Mighty he was at both of these,
And styled of War as well as Peace.
(So some Rats of amphibious nature,
Are either for the Land or Water.)
But here our Authors make a doubt,
Whether he were more wise, or stout.
Some hold the one, and some the other:
But howsoever they make a pother,
The difference was so small, his Brain
Outweigh'd his Rage but half a grain:
Which made some take him for a tool
That Knaves do work with, called a Fool.
For It has been held by many, that
As Mountaigne, playing with his Cat,
Complains she thought him but an Ass,
Much more she would Sir Hudibras.
But they are mistaken very much,
It Is plain enough he was no such.
We grant, although he had much wit,
H' was very shie of using it,
As being loath to wear it out,
And therefore bore it not about,
Unless on Holidays, or so,
As men their best Apparel do.
Beside it is known he could speak Greek,
As naturally as Pigs squeek:
That Latin was no more difficile,
Than to a Blackbird it is to whistle.
Being rich in both he never scanted
His Bounty unto such as wanted;
But much of either would afford
To many that had not one word.
For Hebrew Roots, although they are found
To flourish most in barren ground,
He had such plenty, as sufficed
To make some think him circumcised:
And truly so he was perhaps,
Not as a Proselyte, but for Claps.
He was in Logic a great Critic,
Profoundly skilled in Analytick.
He could distinguish, and divide
A hair 'twixt South and South-west side:
On either which he would dispute,
Confute, change hands, and still confute.
He Would undertake to prove by force
Of Argument, a Man's no Horse.
He Would prove a Buzzard is no Fowl,
And that a Lord may be an Owl;
A Calf an Alderman, a Goose a Justice,
And Rooks Committee Men and Trustees.
He Would run in Debt by Disputation,
And pay with Ratiocination.
All this by Syllogism, true
In mood and figure, he would do.
For Rhetoric, he could not open
His mouth, but out there flew a Trope:
And when he happened to break off
In The middle of his speech, or cough,
H' had hard words ready, to show why,
And tell what Rules he did it by.
Else when with greatest Art he spoke,
You Would think he talked like other foke.
But when he pleased to shew't, his speech
In loftiness of sound was rich,
A Babylonish dialect,
Which learned Pedants much affect.
It was a part colored dress
Of patched and pyball'd Languages:
'T was English cut on Greek and Latin,
Like Fustian heretofore on Satin.
It had an odd promiscuous Tone,
As if he had talked three parts in one.
Which made some think when he did gabble,
The had heard three Laborers of Babel;
Or Cerberus himself pronounce
A Leash of Languages at once.
This he as volubly would vent,
As if his stock would never be spent.
And truly to support that charge
He had supplies as vast and large.
For he could coin or counterfeit
New words, with little or no wit:
Words so debased and hard, no stone
Was hard enough to touch them on.
And when with hasty noise he spoke 'em,
The Ignorant for current took 'em.
In Mathematics he was greater
Then Tycho Brahe or Erra Pater:
For he by Geometrick scale.
Could take the size of Pots of Ale;
Resolve by Sines and Tangents straight,
If Bread or Butter wanted weight;
And wisely tell what hour of the day
The Clock does strike, by Algebra.
Beside he was a shrewd Philosopher,
And had read every Text and gloss over:
What every Sceptick could inquere for;
For every why he had a wherefore:
Knew more than forty of them do,
As far as words and terms could go.
All which he understood by Rote,
And as occasion served, would quote;
No matter whether right or wrong:
They might be either said or sung.
His Notions fitted things so well,
That which was which he could not tell;
But oftentimes mistook the one
For the other, as Great Clerks have done.
He Would tell wl ere Entity and Quiddity,
The Ghosts of defunct Bodies, fly;
Where Truth in Person does appear,
Like words congealed in Northern Air.
He knew what is what, and that is as high
As Met aphysick wit can fly.
In School Divinity as able
As he that hight Irrefragable;
A second Thomas, or, at once
To name them all, another Dunce.
For he a Rope of sand could twist,
As tough as Learned Sorbonist;
And weave fine Cobwebs, fit for; skull
That Is empty when the Moon is full;
Such as take lodgings in a Head
That Is to be let unfurnished.
He could raise Scruples dark and nice,
And after solve 'em in a trice:
As if Divinity had caught
The Itch, of purpose to be scratched:
Or, like a Mountebank, did wound
And stab her self with doubts profound,
Only to show with how small pain
The sores of faith are cured again;
Although by woeful proof we find,
They always leave a Scar behind.
He knew the seat of Paradise,
Could tell in what degree it lies:
What Adam dreamt of when his Bride
Came from her Closet in his side:
Whether the Devil tempted her
By a High Dutch Interpreter:
If either of them had a Navel;
Who first made Music malleable:
Whether the Serpent at the Fall
Had cloven Feet, or none at all.
All this, without a Gloss o^ Comment,
He would unriddle in a moment
In proper terms, such as men smatter
When they throw out and miss the matter.
For his Religion it was fit
To match his Learning and his Wit:
It Was Presbyterian true blew,
For he was of that stubborn Crew
Of Errant Saints, whom all men grant
To be the true Church Militant:
Such as do build their Faith upon
The holy Text of Pike and Gun;
Decide all Controversies by
Infallible Artillery;
And prove their Doctrine Orthodox
By Apostolic Blows and Knocks;
Call Fire, and Sword, and Desolation,
A Godly-thorough-Reformation,
Which always must be carried on,
And still be doing, never done:
As if Religion were intended
For nothing else but to be mended.
A Sect, whose chief Devotion lies
In odd perverse Antipathies;
In falling out with that or this,
And finding somewhat still amiss:
More peevish, cross, and spleenatick,
Then Dog distract, or Monky sick:
That with more care keep holy day
The wrong, then others the right way:
Still so perverse and opposite,
As if they worshipped God for spite,
The self-same thing they will abhor
One way, and long another for.
Free Will they one way disavow.
Another, nothing else allow.
All Piety consists therein
In them, in other men all Sin.
Rather then fail, they will defy
That which they love most tenderly;
Quarrel with minced Pyes, and disparrage
Their best and dearest friend, Plum-porredge;
Fat Pig and Goose it self oppose,
And blaspheme Custard through the Nose.
The Apostles of this fierce Religion,
Like Mahomet's, were Ass and Wigeon,
To whom out Knight by fast instinct
Of wit and temper was so linkt,
As if Hypocrisy and nonsense,
Had got the Advouson of his Conscience.
Thus was he gifted and accouter'd,
We mean on the inside, not the outward:
That next of all we shall discuss;
Then listen Sits, It follows thus.
His tawny Beard was the equal grace
Both of his wisdom and his face;
In Cut and Die so like a ^e,
A sudden view it would beguile:
The upper part thereof was Whey,
The nether Orange mixed with Gray.
This hairy Meteor did denounce
The fall of Scepters and of Crowns;
With grizly type did represent
Declining Age of Government;
And tell with Hieroglyphick Spade,
Its own grave and the State's were made.
Like Sampson's Heart-breakers, it grew
In time to make a Nation rue;
Though it contributed its own fall,
To wait upon the public downfall.
It was Monastic, and did grow
In holy Orders, by strict vow;
Of Rule as sullen and severe,
As that of rigid Cordeliere.
'Twas bound to suffer Persecution
And Marryrdom with resolution;
TO oppose it self against the hate
And vengeance of the incensed State.
In whose defiance it was worn,
Still ready to be pulled and torn,
With red-hot Irons to be tortured,
Reviled, and spit upon, and martyred.
Maugre all which, 'twas to stand fast
As long as Monarchy should last.
But when the (...) should hap to reel,
'Twas to submit to fatal steel,
And fall, as it was consecrate
A sacrifice to fall of State;
Whose ^hred of life fatal Sisters
Did (...) together with its whiskers,
And twine so close, that time should never,
In life or death, their fortunes sever;
But with his rusty Sickle mow
Both down together at a blow.
So learned Taliacotius from
The brawny part of Porter's Bum,
Cut supplemental Noses, which
Would last as long as Parent breech:
But when the Date of Nock was out,
Off dropped the Sympathetick Snout.
His Back, or rather Burden, showed
As if it stooped with its own load.
For as Aene as bore his Sire
Upon his shoulders through the fire:
Our Knight did bear no less a Pack
Of his own Buttocks on his back:
Which now had almost got the upper-
Hand of his Head, for want of Crupper,
To poize this equally, he bore
A Paunch of the same bulk before:
Which still he had a special care
To keep well crammed with thrifty fare;
As White-pot, Butter-milk, and Curds,
Such as a Country house affords;
With other Victual, which anon
We further shall dilate upon,
When of his Hose we come to treat,
The Cup-bord where he kept his meat.
His Doublet was of sturdy Buff,
And though not Sword-yet Cudgel-proof:
Whereby 'twas fitter for his use,
That seared no blows but such as bruise.
His Breeches were of rugged woolen,
And had been at the siege of Bullen;
To old King Harry so well known,
Some writers held they were his own.
Through they were lined with many a piece
Of Ammunition-Bread and Cheese,
And fat Black-puddings, proper food
For Warriers that delight in blood,
For, as we said, He always chose
To carry Vittle in his hose.
And though Knights Errant, as some think,
Of old did neither eat nor drink,
Because when thorough Deserts vast
And Regions desolate they past,
Where Belly-^imber above ground
O^ under was not to be found,
Unless they g^az'd, there is not one word
Of their Provision on Record:
Which made some confidently write,
They had no stomachs, but to fight.
It Is false: For Arthur wore in Hall
Round-Table like a Farthingal,
On which, with shirt pulled out behind;
And eke before, his good Knights dined.
Though 'twas no Table, some suppose,
But a huge pair of round Trunk-hose;
In which he carried as much meat
As he and all his Knights could eat,
When laying by their swords and truncheons,
They took their Breakfasts and their Nuncheons.
But let that pass at present, lest
We should forget where we dig rest:
As learned Authors use, to whom
We leave it, and to the purpose come.
His puissant Sword unto his side
Near his undaunted heart was tied,
With Basket-hilt, that would hold broth.
And serve for fight and dinner both.
In it he melted lead for Bullets,
To shoot at Foes; and sometimes Pullets,
To whom he bore so fell a Grutch,
He never gave quarter t'any such.
The trenchant blade, Toledo trusty,
For want of fighting was grown rusty,
And ate into it self for lack
Of somebody to hew and hack.
The peaceful Scabbard where it dwelt,
The Rancour of its Edge had felt:
For of the lower end two handful
It had devoured, 'twas so manful;
And so much scorned to lurk in case,
As if it durst not show its face.
In many desperate Attempts,
Of Warrants, Exigents, Contempts,
It had appeared with Courage bolder
Then Sergeant Bum, invading shoulder.
Often had it taken possession,
And Prisoners too, or made them run.
This Sword a Dagger had his Page,
That was but little for his age:
And therefore waited on him so,
As Dwarfs upon Knights Errant do.
It was a serviceable Dudgeon,
Either for fighting or for drudging.
When it had stabbed, or broke a head,
It would scrape Trenchers, or chip Bread,
Toast Cheese or Bacon, though it were
To bait a Mouse-trap, 'twould not care.
'T would make clean shoes, and in the earth
Set Leeks and Onions, and so forth.
It had been Prentice to a Brewer,
Where this and more it did endure.
But left the Trade, as many more
Have lately done on the same score.
In the Holsters at his saddle-bow,
Two aged Pistolls he did stow,
Among the surplus of such meat
As in his hose he could not get.
These would inveigle Rats with the scent,
To forage when the Cocks were bent,
And sometime catch 'em with a snap
As cleverly as the ablest trap.
They were upon hard Duty still,
And every night stood Sentinel,
To guard the magazine in the hose
From two-legg'd and from four-legg'd foes.
Thus clad and fortified, Sir Knight
From peaceful home set forth to fight,
But first with nimble active force
He got on the outside of his Horse.
For having but one stirrup tied
TO his saddle, on the further side,
It was so short, h' had much ado
To reach it with his desperate roe,
But after many strains and heaves,
He got up to the saddle eaves.
From whence he vaulted into the seat
With so much vigor, strength, and heat,
That he had almost tumbled over
With his own weight, but did recover,
By laying hold on tail and mane,
Which often he used instead of reyn,
But now we talk of mounting Steed,
Before we further do proceed,
It does he hove us to say something,
Of that which bore our valiant Bunkin.
The Beast was sturdy; large and tall,
With mouth of mea^ and eyes of wall:
I would say eye, for h' had but one,
As most agree, though some say none
He was well stayed, and in his Gate
Preserved a grave, majestic state.
At Spur or Switch no more he skipt,
O^ mended pace, than Spaniard whipped:
And yet so fiery, he would bound,
As if he grieved to touch the ground.
That Caesar's Horse, who, as fame goes,
Had Corns upon his feet and toes,
Was not by half so tender-hooft,
Nor trod upon the ground so soft.
And as that Beast would kneel and stoop,
(Some write) to take his Rider up:
So Hudibras his ('it is well known)
Would often do, to set him down.
We shall not need to say what lack
Of Leather was upon his back:
For that was hidden under pad,
And breech of Knight galled full as bad.
His strutting Ribs on both sides showed
Like furrows he himself had plowed:
For underneath the skirt of Panel,
'Twixt every two there was a Channel.
His dragling Tail hung in the Dirt,
Which on his Rider he would flurt
Still as his tender side he pricked,
With armed heel, or with unarmed kicked:
For Hudibras wore but one Spur,
As wisely knowing, could he stir
To active tror one side of's Horse,
The other would not hang an-Arse.
A Squire he had whose name was Ralph,
That in the adventure went his half.
(Though Writers, for more stately tone,
Do call him Ralpho; it is all one:
And when we can with Meeter safe,
We Will call him so, if not plain Raph.
For Rhyme the Rudder is of Verses,
With which like Ships they stea their courses.
An equal stock of Wit and Valor
He had laid in, by birth a Tailor.
The mighty Tyrian Queen that gained
With subtle shreds a Tract of Land,
Did leave it with a Castle fair
To his great Ancestor, her Heir:
From him descended cross-legg'd Knights,
Famed for their faith, and warlike fights
Against the bloody Canibal,
Whom they destroyed both great and small.
This sturdy Squire had as well
As the bold Trojan Knight, seen Hell,
Not with a counterseited Pass
Of golden bough, but true gold-lace.
His Knowledge was not far behind
The Knight's, but of another kind,
And he another way came by it:
Some call it Gifts, and some New light;
A Liberal Art, that costs no pains
Of Study, Industry, or Brains.
His wits were sent him for a Token,
But in the Carriage cracked and broken,
Like Commendation Nine-pence, crookt
With to and from my Love, it looked.
He never considered it, as loath
To look a gift-horse in the mouth;
And very wisely would lay forth
No more upon it then 'twas worth.
But as he got it freely, so
He spent it frank and freely too.
For Saints themselves will sometimes be
Of Gifts that cost them nothing free.
By means of this, with hem and cough,
Prolongers to enlightened Snuff,
He could deep Mysteries unriddle,
As easily as thread a Needle:
For as of Vagabonds we say,
That they are never beside their way:
Whatever men speak by this new Light,
Still they are sure to bei'th' right.
It Is a dark Lanthorn of the Spirit,
Which none see by but those that hear it:
A Light that falls down from on high,
For Spiritual Trades to cosen by:
An Ignis Fatuus, that bewitches,
And leads men into Pools and Ditches,
To make them dip themselves, and sound
For Christendom in Dirty pond;
To dive like Wild-fowle for Salvation,
And fish to catch Regeneration.
This Light inspires, and plays upon
The nose of Saint, like Bag-pipe-drone,
And speaks through hollow empty soul,
As through a Trunk, or whispering hole,
Such language as no mortal ear
But spiritual Eaves-droppers can hear.
So Phoebus or some friendly Muse
Into small Poets Song infuse;
Which they at second-hand rehearse
Through reed or bag-pipe, verse for verse.
Thus Ralph became infallible,
As three or four-legg'd Oracle,
The ancient Cup, or modern Chair;
Spoke truth point blank, though unaware:
For mystic Learning, wondrous able
In Magic, Talisman, and Cabal,
Whose Primitive tradition reaches
As far as Adam's first green breeches:
Deep-sighted in Intelligences,
Idea's, Atoms, Influences;
And much of Terra Incognita;
The Intelligible world could say:
A deep occult Philosopher,
As learned as the Wild Irish are,
Or Sir Agrippa; for profound
And solid Lying much renowned:
He Anthroposophus, and Flood,
And Jacob Behmen understood;
Knew many an Amulet and Charm;
That would do neither good nor harm:
In Rosy-Crucian Lore as learned,
As he that Vere adeptus earned.
He understood the speech of Birds,
As well as they themselves do words:
Could tell what subtlest Parrots mean,
That speak and think contrary clean;
What Member it is of whom they talk,
When they cry Rope, and Walk, Knave, Walk.
He Would extract numbers out of matter,
And keep them in a Glass, like water,
Of sovereign power to make men wise;
For dropped in blere, thick-sighted eyes,
They Would make them see in darkest night,
Like Owls, though pur-blind in the light.
By help of these (as he professed)
He had First Matter seen undrest:
He took her naked all alone,
Before one Rag of Form was on.
The Chaos too he had descried,
And seen quite through, or else he ly'd;
Not that of Past-board which men show
For Groats at Fair of Bartholmew.
But its great Grandsire, first of the name,
Whence that and Reformation came:
Both Cousin-germans, and right able
TO inveigle and draw in the Rabble.
But Reformation was, some say,
Of The younger house to Puppet-play.
He could foretell whats'oever was
By consequence to come to pass.
As Death of Great men, Alterations,
Diseases, Battles, Inundations.
All this without the eclipse of Sur,
Ordreadfull Corner, he has done,
By inward light, a way as good,
And easy to be understood.
But with more luckie hit then those
That use to make the Stars depose,
Like Knights of the Post, and falsely charge
Upon themselves what others forge:
As if they were consenting to
All Mischief in the World mendo;
Or like the Devilish, did tempt and sway'em
To Rogueries, and then betray 'em.
They Will search a Planet's house, to know
Who broke and robbed a house below:
Examine Venus, and the Moon,
Who stole a thimble, or a spoon:
And though they nothing will confess,
Yet by their very looks can gresse,
And tell what guilty Aspect bodes,
Who stole, and who received the goods.
They Will question Mars, and by his look
Detect who 'twas that nimm'd a Cloak:
Make Mercury consess and peach
Those thieves which he himself did teach.
They Will find in the Physiognomies
Of The Planets all men's destinies:
Like him that took the Doctor's Bill,
And swallowed it instead of the Piil.
Cast the nativity o'th Question,
And from Positions to be guest on,
As sure as if they knew the moment
Of Natives birth, rell what will come on it.
They Will feel the Pulses of the Stars,
To find out Agues, Coughs, Catarrhs;
And tell what Crisis does divine
The Rot in Sheep, or Mange in Swine:
In Men what gives or cures the Itch,
What makes them Cuckolds, poor or rich:
What gains or loses, hangs or saves;
What makes men great, what fools or knaves;
But not what wife, for only of those
The Stars (they say) cannot dispose,
No more then can the Astrologians.
There they say right, and like true Trojans.
This Ralpho knew, and therefore took,
The other course, of which we spoke.
Thus was the accomplished Squire endu'd
With Gifts and Knowledge, per'lous shrewd,
Never did trusty Squire with Knight,
Or Knight with Squire jump more right.
Their Arms and Equipage did fit,
As well as Virtues, parts, and wit.
Their Valors too were of a Rate,
And out they sallied at the Gate,
Few miles on horseback had they jogged,
But fortune unto them turned dogged.
For they a sad Adventure met,
Of which anon we mean to treat:
But ever we venture to unfold
Achievements so resolved and bold,
We should, as learned Poets use,
Invoke the assistance of some Muse;
However Critics count it sillier
Then Juglers talking to Familiar,
We think it is no great matter which:
They Are all alike: yet we shall pitch
On one that fits our purpose most,
Whom therefore thus we do accost.
Thou that with Ale, or viler liquors,
Did inspire Withers, Pryn, and Vickars
And force them, though it were in spite
Of nature and their stars to write;
Who, as we find in sullen Writs,
And cross-grained works of modern wits,
With vanity, opinion, want,
The wonder of the Ignorant,
The praises of the Author, penned
By himself, or wit-ensuring friend,
The Itch of Picture in the Front,
With Bays, and wicked Rhyme upon it,
All that is left of the forked Hill
To make men scribble without skill,
Can make a Poet, spite of fate,
And teach all people to translate;
Though out of Languages in which
They understand no part of speech:
Assist me but this once, I'mplore,
And I shall trouble thee no more.
In Western Clime there is a Town
To those that dwell therein well known;
Therefore there needs no more be sed here,
We unto them refer our Reader:
For brevity is very good,
When we are, or are not understood.
To this Town People did repair
On days of Market, or of Fair,
And to cracked Fiddle, and hoarse Tabor
In merriment did drudge and labor:
But now a sport more formidable,
Had raked together Village rabble.
'I was an old way of Recreating,
Which learned Butchers call Bearbailing:
A bold adventurous exercise,
With ancient Hero's in high prize;
For Authors ^o affirm it came
From Isthmian or Nemean game.
Others derive it from the Bear
That Is fixed in Northern Hemisphere,
And round about the Pole does make
A circle, like a Bear at stake,
That at the Chain's end wheels about,
And overturns the Rabble-ront.
For after solemn proclamation
In the Beat's name (as is the fashion,
According to the Law of Arms,
To keep men from inglorious harms)
That none presume to come so near
As forty foot of stake of Bear;
If any yet be so foolhardy,
TO expose themselves to vain Jeopardy;
If they come wounded off and lame,
No honors got by such a maim.
Although the Bear gain much, b'ing bound
In honor to make good his ground,
When he is engaged, and take no notice,
If any press upon him, who it is,
But let them know at their own cost
That he intends to keep his post.
This to prevent, and other harms,
Which always waits on feats of Arms,
(For in the hurry of a Fray
It Is hard to keep out of harm's way)
Thither the Knight his course did stear,
To keep the peace 'twixt Dog and Bear;
As he believed h'was bound to do
In Conscience and Commission too.
And therefore thus bespoke the Squire;
We that are wisely mounted higher
Then Constables, in Curule wit,
When on Tribunal bench we sit,
Like Speculators, should foresee,
From Pharos of Authority,
Portended Mischiefs farther then
Low Proletarian Tithing-men.
And therefore being informed by bruit,
That Dog and Bear are to dispute;
For so of late men fighting name,
Because they often prove the same;
(For where the first does hap to be,
The last does coincidere)
Quantum in nobis, have thought good,
To save the expense of Christian blood,
And try if we by meditation
Of Treaty and accommodation
Can end the Quarrel, and compose
The bloody Duel without blows.
Are not our Liberties, our Lives,
The Laws, Religion, and our Wives
Enough at once to lie at stake,
For Covenant and the Cause's sake;
But in that quarrel Dogs and Bears,
As well as we, must venture theirs?
This Feud by Jesuits invented,
By evil Counsel is fomented.
There is a Machiavillian Plot,
(Though every nave olfact it not)
A deep design in it, to divide
The well-affected that confide,
By setting Brother against Brother,
To claw and curry one another.
Have we not enemies plus satis,
That Cane and angue pejus hate us?
And (...) all we turn our fangs and claws
Upon our own selves, without cause?
That some occult design dothly
In bloody Cynarctomachy,
Is plain enough to him that knows
How Saints sead brothers by the nose.
I wish myself a Pseudo-prophet,
But (...) (...) mischief will come of it:
Unless by providential wit
Or force we averruncate it.
For what design, what interest
Can Beast have to encounter Beast?
They fight for no espoused Cause,
Frail Privilege, Fundamental Laws;
Nor for a thorough Reformation,
Nor Covenant, nor Protestation;
Nor for free Liberty of Conscience,
Nor Lords and Commons Ordinances;
Nor for the Church, nor for Church Lands,
To get them in their own no hands;
Nor evil Counselors to bring
To Justice that seduce the King;
Nor for the worship of us men,
Though we have done as much for them.
The Egyptians worshipped Dogs, and for
Their Faith made internecine war.
Others adored a Rat, and some
For that Church suffered martyrdom.
The Indians fought for the truth
Of the Elephant, and Monkey's tooth;
And many, to defend that faith,
Fought it out mordicus to death.
But no Beast ever was so slight,
For man, as for his God, to fight.
They have more wit, alas! and know
Themselves and us better then so.
But we, we only do infuse
The Rage in them like Boute-feus.
It Is our example that instills
In them the infection of our ills,
For, as some late Philosophers
Have well observed, Beasts that converse
With Man, take after him, as Hogs
Get Pigs all th'year, and Bitches Dogs.
Just so by our example Cattle
Learn to give one another Battle.
We read in Nero's time, the Heathen,
When they destroyed the Christian brethren,
They sowed them in the skins of Bears,
And then set Dogs about their ears:
From whence, no doubt, th'invention came
Of this lewd, Antichristian Game.
To this, quoth Ralpho, Verily,
The point seems very plain to me.
It is an Antichristian Game,
Unlawful both in thing and name.
First for the name, The word Bear-baiting
Is carnal, and of man's creating:
For certainly there is no such word
In all the Scripture on record.
Therefore unlawful and a sin.
And so is (secondly) the thing.
A vile Assembly it is, that can
No more be proved by Scripture than
Provincial, Classick, National;
Mere humane Creature-cobwebs all.
Thirdly, it is Idolatrous.
For when men run a-whoring thus
With their Inventions, whatsoever
The thing be, whether Dog or Bear,
It is Idolatrous and Pagan,
No less then worshipping of Dagon.
Quoth Hudibras, I smell a Rat;
Ralpho, thou do prevaricate,
For though the Thesis which thou lay'st
Be true ad amussim as thou say:
(For that Bear-baiting should appear
Jure Divino lawfuller
Then Synods are, thou do deny,
Totidem verbis so do I)
Yet there is a fallacy in this:
For if by sly Homoeosis,
(Tussis pro crepitu, an Art
Under a Cough to slur a Fart)
Thou would Sophistically imply
Both are unlawful, I deny.
And I (quoth Ralpho) do not doubt
But Bear-baiting may be made out
In Gospel Times, as lawful as is
Provincial or Parochial Classis:
And that both are so near of kin,
And like in all, as well as sin,
that put them in a bag and shake 'em,
Yourself of the sudden would mistake 'em,
And not know which is which, unless
You measure by their Wickedness:
For it is not hard t'imagine whether
O'th two is worst, though I name neither.
Quoth Hudibras, Thou offer'st much,
But art not able to keep touch.
Mira de lent, as it is in the Adage,
Id est, to make a Leek a Cabbage.
Thou wise at best but suck a Bull,
Or shear Swine, All Cry, and no Wool.
For what can Synods have at all
With Bears that is analogicall?
Or what relation has debating
Of Church Affairs with Bear-baiting?
A just comparison still is,
Of things ejusdem generis.
And then what Genus ^ightly does
Compr'hend them inclusive both?
If Animal, both of us may
As likely pass for Bears as they,
For we are Animals no less,
Although of different Speciese^.
But Ralpho, this is no fit place
Nor time to argue our the Case.
For (...) the Field is not far off,
Where we must give the world a proof
Of Deeds, not Words, and such as suit
Another manner of Dispute.
A Controversy that affords
Actions for Arguments, not Words:
Which we must manage at a rate
Of Prowess and Conduct adaequate
To what our place and fame does promise,
And all the Godly expect from us.
Nor shall they be deceived, unless
We Are slutr'd and outed by success:
Success, the mark no mortal wit,
Or surest hand, can always hit:
For whatsoever we perpetrate,
We do but row, we are stear'd by fate,
Which in success often disinherits,
For spurious causes, noblest merits.
Great Actions are not always true sons
Of great and mighty Resolutions:
Nor do the bolo'rt attempts bring forth
Events still equal to their worth;
But sometimes fail, and in their stead
Fortune and Cowardice succeed.
Yet we have no great cause to doubt,
Our actions still have born us out.
Which though they are known to be so ample,
We need not copy from example,
We Are not the only person durst,
Attempt this Province, nor the first.
In Northern Clime a val'rous Knight
Did whilom kill his Bear in fight,
And wound a Fiddler: we have both
Of these the objects of our wroth,
And equal fame and glory from
The Attempt or Victory to come.
It Is sung, There is a valiant Mamaluke
In foraign Land, yclep'd --
To whom we have been often compared,
For Person, Parts, Address, and Beard;
Both equally reputed sto^,
And in the same Cause both have sought.
He often an such Attempt, as these
Came off with glory and success.
Nor will we fail in the execution,
For want of equal Resolution.
Honor is like a Widow, won
With bri^k Attempt and putting on;
With entering manfully, and urging;
Not slow approaches, like a Virgin.
This said, as yerst the Phrygian Knight,
So ours with rusty steel did smite
His Trojan Horse, and just as much
He mended pace upon the touch;
But from his empty stomach groaned,
Just as that hollow beast did sound,
And angry answered from behind,
With brandished Tail and blast of wind.
So have I seen with armed heel,
A Wight bestride a Common weal;
While still the more he kicked and spurred,
The less the sullen Jade has stirred,
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND CANTO.
The Catalogue and Character
Of the Enemy's best men of War;
To whom the Knight does make a speech,
And they defy him: after which
He fights with Talgol, routs the Bear,
And takes the Fiddler Prisoner;
Conveys him to enchanted Castle,
Their shuts him fast in Wooden Bastile.
CANTO II.
THere was an ancient sage Philosopher,
That had read Alexander Ross over,
And swore the world as he could prove,
Was made of Fighting and of Love:
Just so Romances are, for what else
Is in them all, but Love and Battles?
Of The first of these we have no great matter
To treat of, but a world of the latter:
In which to do the Injured Right
We mean, in what concerns just fight.
Certes our Authors are to blame,
For to make some well-sounding name
A Pattern fit for (...) (...),
To copy out in Frays and Fights,
(Like those that a whole (...) do raze^
To build a Palace in the place.)
They never care how many others
They kill without regard of mothers,
Or wives, or children, so they can
Make up some fierce, dead-doing man,
Composed of many ingredient Valors,
Just like the manhood of nine Tailors.
So a wild Tartar when he spies
A man that is handsome, valiant, wise,
If he can kill him, thinks to inherit
His Wit, his Beauty and his Spirit:
As if just so much he enjoyed
As in another is destroyed.
For when a Gyant's slain in fight,
And mowed orethwart, or cleft downright,
It is a heavy case, no doubt,
A man should have his Brains beat out,
Because he is tall, and has large Bones;
As men kill Beavers for their stones.
But as for our part, we shall tell
The naked truth of what befell;
And as an equal friend to both.
The Knight and Bear, but more to Troth,
With neither faction shall take part,
But give to cach his due desert:
And never coin a formal lie on it,
To make the Knight overcome the Giant.
This b'ing professed, we hope's enough,
And now go on where we left off.
They rode, but Authors having not
Determined whether Pace or Trot,
(That is to say, whether Tollutation,
As they do tearm't, or Succussation)
We leave it, and go on, as now
Suppose they did, no matter how.
Yet some from subtle hints have got
Mysterious light, it was a Trot.
But let that pass: they now begun
To spur their living Engines on.
For as whipped Tops and bandy'd Balls,
The learned hold are Animals:
So Horses they affirm to be
Mere Engines, made by Geometry,
And were invented first from Engines,
As Indian Britans were from Penguins.
So let them be; and, as I was saying,
They their live Engines plied, not staying
Until they reached the fatal champain,
Which the Enemy did then incamp on,
The dire Pharsalian Plain, where Battle
Was to be waged 'twixt puissant Cattle,
And fierce Auxiliary men,
That came to aid their Brethren:
Who now began to draw in field,
As Knight from ridge of Steed beheld.
For as our modern wits behold,
Mounted a Pick-back on the Old,
Much further off; much further he
From off his aged Beast could see:
Yet not sufficient to descry
All postures of the enemy.
Wherefore he bids the Squire ride further,
T'observe their numbers, and their order;
That when their motions he had known,
He might know how to fit his own.
Meanwhile he stopped his willing Steed,
To fit himself for martial deed:
Both kinds of mettle he prepared,
Either to give blows, or to ward,
Courage and steel, both of great force,
Prepared for better or for worse.
His Death-charg'd Pistols be did fit well,
Drawn out from life-preserving vittle.
These being prim'd, with force he labored
To free sword from retentive Scabbard:
And after many a painful pluck,
From rusty durance he bayl'd Tuck.
Then shook himself, to see that Prowess
In Scabbard of his Arms sat loose;
And raised upon his desperate foot
On stirrup side he gazed about,
Portending Blood, like Blazing Star,
The Beacon of approaching War.
Ralpho rode on with no less speed,
Then Hugo in the Forest did;
But with a great deal more returned,
For now the Foe he had discerned,
Ranged, as to him they did appear,
With Van, main Battle, Wings, and Rear.
In the head of all this Warlike Rabble
Crowdero marched, expert and able:
Instead of Trumpet and of Drum,
That makes the Warrier's stomach come,
Whose noise whets Valor sharp, like Beer
By thunder turned to Vinegar,
(For if a Trumpet sound or Drum beat,
Who has not a (...) mind to combat?)
A squeaking Engine he applied
Unto his neck, on North-east side,
Just where the Hangman does dispose
To special friends the Knot of Noose:
For it is great Grace when Statesmen straight
Dispatch a friend, let others wait.
His warped Ear hung over the strings,
Which was but Souce to Chitterlings:
For Guts, some write, e're they are sodden,
Are fit for Music, or for Pudden:
From whence men borrow every kind
Of Minstrelsy, by string or wind.
His grizly Beard was long and thick,
With which he strung his Fiddle-stick:
For he to Horse-tail scorned to owe,
For what on his own chin did grow.
Chiron, the four-legg'd Bard, had both
A Beard and Tail of his own growth;
And yet by Authors it is averred,
He made use only of his Beard.
In Stassordshire, where Virtuous worch
Does raise the Minstrelsy, not Birth;
Where Bulls do choose the boldest King
And Ruler, over the men of string;
(...) once in Persia, it is said,
Kings were proclaimed by a Horse that neigh'd)
He bravely vent'ring at a Crown,
By chance of War was beaten down,
And wounded sore: his Leg then broke,
Had got a Deputy of Oak:
For when a shin in fight is cropped,
The knee with one of timoer's propt;
Esteemed more honorable then the other,
And takes place, though the younger Brother.
Next followed Orsin, famous for
Wise Conduct, and success in War:
A skillful Leader, stout, severe,
Now Marshall to the Champion Bear.
With Truncheon tipp'd with Iron-head,
The Warrior to the lists he led;
With solemn march and stately pace,
But far more grave and solemn face:
Grave as the Emperor of Pegu,
Or Spanish Potentate Don Diego.
This Leader was of knowledge great,
Either for Charge, or for Retreat.
He knew when to fall on pell-mell,
To fall back and retreat as well.
So Lawyers, lest the Bear Defendant,
And Plaintiff Dog, should make an end on it,
Do stave and tail with Writs of Error,
Reverse of Judgment, and Demurrer,
To let them breath a while, and then
Cry whoop, and set them on again.
As Romuius a Wolf did rear.
So he was dry-nurs'd by a Bear,
That fed him with the purchased prey
Of many a fierce and bloody fray;
Bred up, where Discipline most rare is,
In Military Garden-Paris.
For Soldiers heretofore did grow
In Gardens, just as Weeds to now;
Until some splay foot Politicians
TO Apollo offered up Petitions,
For licensing a new invention
The had found out, of an antique engine
To root out all the Weeds that grow
In Public Garden at a blow,
And leave the Herbs standing. Quoth Sir Sun,
My friends, that is not to be done.
Not done? quoth Statesmen; yes, an't please ye,
When it is once known you will say 'cis easy.
Why then let us know it, quoth Apollo.
We Will beat a Drum, and they will all follow.
A Drum (quoth Phoebus) troth that is true,
A pretty invention, quaint and new.
But though of Voice and Instrument
We are the undoubted President;
We such loud Music do not profess,
The Devil's Master of that office,
Where it must pass, if it be a Drum,
He Will sign it with Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
To him apply your selves, and he
Will soon dispatch you for his fee.
They did so, but it proved so ill,
The had better have let them grow there still.
But to resume what we discoursing
Were on before, that is stout Orsin:
That which so often by sundry Writers
Has been applied to almost all fighters,
More justly may be ascribed to this,
Then any other Warrior (viz.)
None ever acted both parts bolder,
Both of a Chieftain, and a Soldier.
He was of great descent, and high,
For Splendour and Antiquity,
And from Celestial origin
Derived himself in a right line.
Not as the ancient Heroes did,
Who, that their base births might be hid,
(Knowing they were of doubtful gender,
And that they came in at a Windore)
Made Jupiter himself, and others
OF the Gods Gallants to their own Mothers,
To get on them a race of Champions,
Of which old Homer first made Lampoons.)
Arctophylax in Northern Sphere
Was ^as undoubted Ancestor:
From him his great Forefathers came,
And in all ages bore his name.
Learned he was in Medc'nal Lore,
For by his side a Pouch he wore
Replete with strange Hermetick Powder,
That Wounds nine miles point blank would
By skilful Chemist with great cost (solder.
Extracted from a rotten Post;
But of a heav'nlier influence
Than that which Mountebanks dispense;
Though by Promethean fire made,
As they do quack that drive that trade,
For as when Slovens do amiss
At others doors by stool or piss,
The Learned write, a red-hot spit,
B'ing prudently applied to it,
Will convey mischief from the Dung
Unto the Breech that did the wrong:
So this did healing, andas sure
As that did mischief, this would cure.
Thus virtuous Orsin was endu'd,
With Learning, Conduct, Fortitude,
Incomparable: and as the Prince
Of Poets, Homer, sung long since,
A skilful Leech is better far
Than half a hundred men of Wa^;
So he appeared, and by his skill,
No less than Dint of Sword, could kill.
The Gallant Bruin marched next him,
With Visage formidably grim,
And rugged as a Saracen,
Or Turk of Mahomet's own king
Clad in a Mantle della Guer
Of rough impenetrable Fur;
And in his Nose, like Indian King,
He wore for ornament a Ring;
About his Neck a threefold Gorget,
As tough as trebled leathren Target;
Armed, as Heralds cant, and langued,
Or, as the Vulgar say, sharp-fanged.
For as the Teeth in Beasts of Prey
Are Swords, with which they fight in Fray;
So Swords in men of War are teeth,
Which they do eat their Vittle with.
He was by birth, some Authors write,
A Russian, some a Muscovite,
And among the Cossacks had been bred,
Of whom we in Diurnals read,
That serve to fill up Pages here,
As with their bodies ditches there.
Scrimansky was his Cousin-german,
With whom he served, and fed on Vermin:
And when they failed he would suck his claws,
And quarter himself upon his paws.
And though his Countrymen, the Huns,
Did stew their meat between their Bums,
And the Horses backs over which they straddle,
And every man eat up his Saddle:
He was not half so nice as they,
But eat it raw, when it came in's way.
He had traced Countries far and near,
More then Le Blane the Traveller;
Who writes, He Spous'd in India
Of Noble house a Lady gay,
And got on her a race of Worthies,
As stout as any upon earth is.
Full many a fight for him between
Talgol and Orsin often had been;
Each striving to deserve the Crown
Of a saved Citizen: the one
To guard his Bear, the other fought
To aid his Dog; both made more stout
By several spurs of Neighborhood,
Church-fellow-membership, and blood;
But Talgol, mortal so to Cows,
Never got ought of him but blows;
Blows hard and heavy, such as he
Had lent, repaid with Usury.
Yet Talgol was of Courage stour,
And vanquished oftener then he fought
Inured to labor, sweat, and toil,
And, like a Champion, shone with Oil.
Right many a Widow his keen blade,
And many Fatherless, had made.
He many a Boar and huge Dun Cow
Did, like another Guy, overthrow.
But Guy with him in fight compared,
Had like the Boar or Dun Cow fared.
With greater Troops of sheep he had fought
Then Ajax, or bold Don Quixot:
And many a Serpent of fell kind,
With wings before and stings behind,
Subdued; as Poets say, long agon
Bold Sir George, St. George did the Dragon.
Nor Engine, nor Device Polemick,
Disease, nor Doctor Epidemick,
Though stored with Deletary Medicines,
(Which whosoever took is dead since)
E're sent so vast a Colony
To both the under worlds as he.
For he was of that noble Trade
That Demigods and Heroes made,
Slaughter, and knocking on the head;
The Trade to which they all were bred;
And is, like others, glorious when
It Is great and large, but base if mean.
The former rides in Triumph for it;
The latter in a two-wheel'd Chariot,
For daring to profane a thing
So sacred, with vile bungleing,
Next these the brave Magnano came,
Magnano great in martial ^ame.
Yet when with Orsin he waged fight,
It Is sung he got but little by it.
Yet he was fierce as forrest-Bore,
Whose spoils upon his back he wore,
As thick as Ajax sev'n-sold Shield,
Which over his brazen Arms he held,
But Brass was seeble to resist
The sury of his armed fist,
Nor could the hardest Ir'n hold out
Against his blows, but they would through't
In Magic he was deeply read,
As he that made the Brazen-head;
Profoundly skilled in the black Art,
As English Merlin for his heart;
But far more skilful in the Spheres,
Than he was at the Sieve and Shears.
He could transform himself in color
As like the Devil as a Collier:
As like as Hypocrites in show
Are to true Saints, or Crow to Crow.
Of warlike Engines he was Author,
Devised for quick dispatch of slaughter;
The Cannon, Blunderbuss, and Saker,
He was the Inventer of, and Maker:
The Trumpet, and the Kettle Drum,
Did both from his invention come.
He was the first that (...) did teach
To make, and how to stop a breach.
A Lance he bo^ with Iron. pike,
The one half would thrust, the other strike:
And when their forces h^ had joined,
He scorned to turn his Parts behind.
He Trulla loved, Trulla more bright
Then burnished Armor of her Knight:
A bold Virago, stout and tall
As Joan of France, or English Mall.
Through (...) both of Wind and Limb,
Through thick and thin she followed him,
In every Adventure h' undertook,
And never him or it forsook.
At breach of Wall, or Hedge-surprize,
She shared in th'hazard, and the prize:
At beating quarters up, or forage,
Behaved her self with matchless courage;
And laid about in fight more busily,
Thenth' Amazo^in Dame, Penthesile.
And though some Critics here cry shame,
And say our Authors are to blame,
That (spite of (...) Philosophers,
Who hold no females sto^, but Bears.)
Make feeble Ladies, in their works,
To fight like Ter^gants and Turks;
To lay their native Arms aside.
Their modesty, and ride a-stride;
To run a (...) at men, and wield
Their naked tools in open field;
As stout Armida, bold Thalestris,
And she that would have been the Mistress
Of Gundibert, but he had grace,
And rather took a Country Lass:
They say'tis salse, without all sense,
But of petnicious consequence
To Government, which they suppose
Can never be upheld in prose:
Strip Nature naked to the skin,
You Are find about her no such thing.
It may be so, yet what we tell
Of Trulla; that is improbable,
Shall be deposed by those have seen 't,
Or, what 's as good, produced in print
And if they will not take our word,
We Will prove it true upon record.
The upright Cerdon next advanced,
Of all his Race the Valiant'st;
Cerdon the Great, renowned in Song,
Like Herc'les, for repair of wrong:
He raised the low, and fortisy'd
The weak against the strongest side.
Ill has he read; that never hit
On him in Muses deathless writ.
He had a weapon keen and fierce,
That through a Bull-hide-shield would pierce,
And (...) (...) (...) (...) pieces,
Though (...) than (...) Knight of Greece his;
With when his black thumb'd Ancestor
(...) (...) (...) in the ten years war:
For (...) (...) (...) Greeks, sare down
(...) (...) (...) before Troy sown,
And (...) ^nown'd, as Homer writes,
For (...) Boots, no less than sights:
They owed that glo^ only to
His Ancestor that made them so.
(...) (...) he was to Reformation,
(...) 'twas worn quite out of fashion.
(...) (...) of Wry Law,
And would make (...), to c^re one flaw.
Learned he was, and could take note,
Transcribe, collect, (...) (...) and quote,
But Preaching was his chiefest Talent,
(...) (...), in which ^ng valiant,
He (...) (...) (...) about, and (...),
Like Run or Bulls at (...)
^,
Do (...) with (...) (...) from Skulls.
^,
^
^.
^,
^
^
Some other Knights, was true of this,
He and his Horse were of a piece,
One Spirit did inform them both,
The self-same vigor, fury, wroth:
Yet he was much the rougher part,
And always had a harder heart;
Although his Horse had been of those
That fed on man's flesh, as fame goes.
Strange food for horse! and yet, alas!
It may be true, for flesh is grass.
Sturdy he was, and no less able,
Then Hercules to cleanse a Stable;
As great: Drover, and as great
A Critic too in Hog or Neat,
He ripp'd the womb up of his Mother,
Dune Tellus, 'cause she wanted Fother.
And Provender, wherewith to feed
Himself, and his less cruel Steed.
It was a question, whether He,
Or 's Horse were of a Family
More Worshipful: till Antiquaries,
(After they had almost por'd out their eyes,)
Did very learnedly decide
The business on the Horse's side,
And proved not only Horse, bur Cows,
Nay Pigs, were of the elder house:
For beasts, when man was but a piece
Of ea^h himself, did the earth possess.
These Worthies were the Chief that led
The Combatants, each in the head
Of his Command, with Arms, and Rage,
Ready, and longing to engage.
The numerous Rabble was drawn out
Of several Countries round about;
From Villages remote, and Shires,
Of East and Western Hemispheres:
From foraign Parishes, and Regions,
Of different manners, speech, Religions,
Came men and mastives; some to fight
For fame and honor, some for sight
And now the field of death, the lists,
Were entered by Antagonists,
And blood was ready to be broached;
When Hudibras in haste approached,
With Squire, and weapons to attack them:
But first thus from his Horse bespake them.
What Rage O Citizens, what fury
Does you to these dire actions hurry;
What Oestrum, what phrenetick mood,
Makes you thus lavish of your blood,
While the proud Vies your Trophies boast,
And unrevenged walks -- ghost?
What Towns, what Garrisons might you
With hazard of this blood subdue,
Which now you are bent to throw away
In vain, untriumphable fray?
Shall Saints in Civil bloodshed wallow
Of Saints, and let the Cause lie fallow?
The Cause, for which we fought, and swore
So boldly, shall we now give over?
Then because Quarrels still are seen
With Oaths and Sweating to begin,
The Solemn League and Covenant,
Will seem a meet God-dam-me Rant;
And we that took it, and have fought,
As lewd as Drunkards that fall out.
For, as we make War for the King,
Against himself, the self-same thing,
Some will not stick to swear we do
For God, and for Religion too.
For if Bear-baiting we allow,
What good can Reformation do;
The blood and treasure that is laid out,
Is thrown away, and goes for naught.
Are these the fruits of the Protestation,
The Prototype of Reformation,
Which all the Saints, and some since Martyr,
Wore in their hats like wedding-garters,
When 'twas resolved by either House
Six Members quarrel to espouse?
Did they for this draw down the Rabble,
With zeal, and noises formidable;
And make all Cries about the Town
Join throats to cry the Bishops down?
Who having round begirt the Palace,
(As once a month they do the Gallows)
As Members gave the sign about,
Set up their throats with hideous shout,
When Tinkers baw'd aloud, to settle
Church Discipline, or patching Kettle
No Sow gelder did blow his horn
To get a ^a^, but cried Reform.
The Oyster-women locked their fish up,
And trudged away to cry No Bishop.
The Mouse-trap men laid Save-alls by,
And against Ev'l Counselors did cry.
B^^chers left old clothes in the lurch.
And fell to turn and patch the Church.
Some cried the Covenant instead
Of Pudding Pics, and Ginger-Bread
And some for Broom, old Boots and Shoes,
Cried out to purge the Commons House:
Instead of Kitchin-s^uff, some(...),
A (...) preaching-Ministry;
And (...) Old s^i^^ Coats, or Cloak,
No ^uplicer, nor Service book;
A (...) harmoni^^ in^^^^^^on
O ^all dog (...) in (...)
And (...) this All (...)
(...) these ^
(...)
(...)
A (...)
(...)
D^^ (...) b^i^g in their Pla^e,
And (...) they (...)?
For when they thought the Cause had need on it,
Happy was he that could be rid on'r.
Did they coin Piss-pots, Bowls, and Flaggons,
Int' Officers of Horse and Dragoons;
And into Pikes and Musketeers
Stamp Beakers, Cups, and Porringers?
A Thimble, Bodkin, and a Spoon
Did start up living men, as soon
As in the Furnace they were thrown,
Just like the Dragons teeth b'ing sown.
Then was the Cause all Gold and Plate,
The Brethrens off'tings, consecrate
Like the Hebrew-calf, and down before it
The Saints sell prostrate, to adore it.
So say the Wicked -- and will you
Make that Sarcasmous Scandal true,
By running after Dogs and Bears,
Beasts more unclean then Calves or Steers?
Have Powerful Preachers plied their tongues,
And laid themselves out and their lungs;
Used all means, both direct and sinister,
In The power of Gospel-preaching Minister,
Have they invented Tones, to win
The Women, and make them draw in
The men, as Indians with a female
(...) Elephant, inveigle the male?
Have they told Prov'dence what it must do,
Whom to avoid, and whom to trust to?
Disc^r'd the Enemy's design,
And which way best to countermine;
Prescribed what way is it has to work,
Or it will never advance the Kirk;
Told it the News of the last express,
And after good or bad success
Made Prayers, not so like Petitions,
As Overtures and Propositions,
(Such as the Army did present
To their Creator the Parliament)
In which they freely will confess,
They will not, cannot acquiesce,
Unless the Work be carried on
In the same way they have begun,
By setting Church and Commonweal
All on a flame, bright as their zeal,
On which the Saints were all a-gog,
And all this for a Bear and Dog?
The Parliament drew up Petitions
To It self, and sent them, like Commissions,
To Well-affected Persons, down
In every City and great Town;
With power to levy Horse and Men,
Only to bring them back again:
For this did many, many a mile,
Ride manfully in Rank and File,
With Papers in their hats, that showed
As if they to the Pillory rode.
Have all these courses, these efforts,
Been tried by people of all sorts,
Velis and Remis, omnibus Nervis,
And all to advance the Cause's service?
And shall all now be thrown away
In petulant intestine fray?
Shall we that in the Covenant swore,
Each man of us to run before
Another still in Reformation,
Give Dogs and Bears a Dispensation?
How will dissenting Brethren relish it?
What will Malignants say? Videlicet,
That each man swore to do his best,
To damn and periure all the rest;
And bid the Devil take the hinmost,
Which at this Race is like to win most.
They Will say our business to reform
The Church and State, is but a worm;
For to transcribe a Church invisible,
As we have sworn to do, it is a bull:
For when we swore to do it after
The best reformed Churches that are,
What did we else but make a vow
To do we know not what, nor how?
For no three of us will agree
Where, or what Churches these should be.
And is indeed the self-same case
With theirs that swore Et caeteras;
Or the French League, in which men vowed
To fight to the last drop of blood.
These slanders will be thrown upon
The Cause and Work we carry on,
If we per^t men to run headlong
TO (...) (...) fit for Bedlam,
Rather then Gospel-walking times,
When (...) sins are greatest Crimes,
But we the matter so shall handle,
As to remove that odious scandal.
In name of King and Parliament,
I charge ve all, no more soment
This seud, but keep the peace between
Your (...), and your Countryman;
And to those places straight repair,
Where your respective dwellings are,
But to that purpose first surrender
The Fidle, as the prime offender,
The incen^y vile, that is chief
Author and Engineer of mischief;
That makes division between friends,
For pro^ and meligliant ends.
He and that Engine of vile noise,
On which illegally he plays,
Shall (did (...)) both be brought
To (...) (...), as the ought.
This must be done, and I would (...) see
Mortal (...) (...) as to gun-say:
For (...) (...) another course,
And soon Reduce you all by force.
The said, (...) (...) his hand on Sword,
To show (...) to keep his word.
But Talgol, who had long suppressed
Enflamed wrath in glowing breast,
Which now began to rage and burn as
Implacably as flame in Furnace,
Thus answered him. Thou Vermin wretched,
As e're in Meazel'd Pork was hatched;
Thou Tail of Worship, that do grow
On Rump of Justice, as of Cow;
How dat'st thoy with that sullen Luggage
O'thy self, old (...), and other Baggage,
With which thy Steed of Bones and Leather,
Is lamed and tired in halting hither;
How durst the, I say, adventure thus
To Oppose thy Lumber against us?
Could thin^ Impertinence find out
No work ^employ it self about,
Where thou secure from wooden blow
Thy busy vanity might show?
Was no dispute afoot between
The Catterwauling Brethren?
No subtle Question raised among
Those out-o-their-wits, and those i'ch' wrong?
No prize between those Combatants
O'th times, the Land and Water- Saints;
Where thou might stickle without hazard
Of outrage to thy hide and mazzard,
And not for want of business come
To us to be thus troublesome,
To interrupt our better (...)
Of Disputants, and spoil our sport?
Was there no Felony, no Bawd,
Cutpurse, nor Burglary abroad?
No Stolen Pig, nor Plundered Goose,
To tie thee up from breaking loose?
No Ale unlicen'd, broken hedge,
For which thou Statute might allege,
To keep thee busy from foul evil,
And shame due to thee from the Devil?
Did no Committee sit, where he
Might cut out Journey-work for thee;
And set th'a task, with subornation,
To stitch up sale and sequestration;
To cheat with Holiness and Zeal
All Parties, and the Commonweal?
Much better had it been for thee,
He Had kept thee where thou art used to be;
Or sent the on business any whither,
So he had never brought thee hither.
But if the have Brain enough in Skull
To keep it self in lodging whole,
And not provoke the rage of Stores,
And Cudgels to thy Hide and Bones;
Tremble, and vanish while thou may,
Which I Will not promise if thou stay'st.
At this the Knight grew high in wroth,
And lifting hands and eyes up both,
Three times he smore on stomach stour,
From whence at length these words broke out.
Was I for this entitled Sir,
And girt with trusty Sword and Spur,
For fame and honor to wage Battle,
Thus to be braved by foe to Cattle?
Not all the Pride that makes thee swell
As big as thou do blown-up Veal;
Nor all thy tricks and slights to cheat,
And sell thy Carrion for good meat;
Not all thy Magic to repair
Decayed old age in rough lean ware,
Turn Death of Nature to thy work,
And stop the Gangrene in stale Pork;
Not all that force that makes thee proud,
Because by Bullock never withstood;
Though armed with all thy Clevers, Knives,
And Axe^, made to hew down lives;
Shall save or help thee to evade
The hand of Justice, or this blade
Which I her Sword Bearer do carry,
For civil deed and military.
Nor shall these words of Venom base,
Which thou have from their native place,
Thy stomach, pumped to sling on me,
Go unteverg'd, though I am free.
Thou down the same throat shall devour 'em,
Like tainted Beef, and pay dear sor 'em.
Nor shall it e're be said, that wight
With Gantlet blew, and Bases white,
And round blunt Dudgeon by his side,
So great a man at Arms defied
With words far bi^er then wormwood,
That would in Job or Grizel stir mood.
Dogs with their tongues their wounds do heal;
But men with hands, as thou shall feel.
This said, with hasty rage he snatched
His Gunshot, that in Holsters watched;
And bending Cock, he levelled full
Against the outside of Talgol's Skull;
Vowing that he should never stir further,
Not henceforth Cow or Bullock murder.
But Pallas came in shape of Rust,
And 'twixt the Spring and Hammer thrnst
Her Gorgon-shield, which made the Cock
Stand stiff as 'twere transformed to stock.
Mean while fierce Talgol garh'ring might,
With rugged Trunche on smote at Knight.
But he with Petronel up-heav'd,
Instead of shield, the blow received,
The Gun recoyl'd, as well it might,
Not used to such a kind of sight,
And shrunk from its great Masters gripe,
Knocked down and st^'d with mortal stripe,
Then Hudibras with furious haste
Drew out his Sword; yet not so fast,
But Telgol first with hardy thwack,
Twice b^iz'd his head, and twice his back.
But when his rugge (...) was out
With stomach (...) he (...) (...),
Imprinting many a wound (...) (...)
His mortal (...) the (...)
The trusty Cudgel did oppose
It self against dead-doing blows,
To guard its Leader from fell bane,
And then revenged it self again.
And though the sword (some understood)
In force had much the odds of wood;
'Twas nothing so, both sides were ballanc't
So equal, none knew which was valiant'st,
For wood with honor b'ing engaged,
Is so implacably enraged,
Though Iron hew and mangle sore,
Wood wounds and bruises honor more.
And now both Knights were out of breath,
Tired in the hot pursuit of death;
While all the rest amazed stood still,
Expecting which should take or kill.
This Hudibras observed, and fretting,
Conquest should be so long a getting,
He drew up all his force into
One body, and that into one blow.
But Talgol wisely avoided it
^y cunning slight; for had it hit
The upper part of him, the blow
Had slit, as sure as that below.
But now fierce Colon 'gan draw on,
To aid the distressed Champion.
Him Ralph encountered, and straight grew
A dismal Combat 'twixt them two:
The one armed with mettle, the other wood;
This fit for bruise, and that for blood.
With many a stiff thwack, many a bang,
Hard Crab-tree, and old Iron rang;
While none that saw them cold divine
To which side conquest would incline:
Until Magnano, who did envy
That two should with so many men vye,
By subtle s^ratagem of brain,
Performed what force could never attain.
For he, by soul hap having found
Where Thistle grew on barren ground,
Her (...) (...) underneath the Tail
Of (...) (...) as sharp as nail.
The angry beast did straight esent,
And feel regret on fundament,
(...) to kick, and fling, and wince,
As if h' had been beside his sense,
Striving to dis-engage from thistle,
That galled him sorely under his tail.
Instead of which he threw the pack
Of Squire, and baggage from his back;
And blundring still, with smarting rump,
He gave the Knight's Steed such a thump,
As made him feel. The Knight did stoop,
And sat on further side a slope.
This Talgol viewing, who had now
By slight ^eap'd the fatal blow,
He rallied, and again fell to it;
(...) catching ice by nearer foot,
He lifted with such might and strength,
As would have hurled him thrice his length,
And dashed his brains (if any) out.
But Mars, that still protects the stout,
In pudding-time came to his aid,
And under him the Bear conveyed;
The Bear, upon whose soft fur-gown,
The Knight with all his weight fell down.
The friendly rug preserved the ground,
And headlong Knight from bruise or wound:
Like feather-bed betwixt a wall,
And heavy brunt of Cannon-ball.
As Sancho on a blanket fell,
And had no hurt; ours fat'd as well
In body, though his mighty spirit,
B'ing heavy, did not so well bear it.
The Bear was in a greater fright,
Beat down and worsted by the Knight.
He roared, and raged, and flung about,
To shake of bondage from his snour.
His wrath enflamed, boiled over, and from
His jaws of death he threw the foam.
Fury in stranger postures threw him,
And more, than ever He rauld drew him.
He tore the earth, which he had saved
From squelch of Knight, and stormed, and raved;
And vexed the more, because the harms
He felt were against the Law of Arms:
For men he always took to be
His friends, and Dogs the enemy:
Who never so much hurt had done him,
As his own side did falling on him.
It grieved him to the guts, that they
For whom h' had fought so many a fray,
And served with loss of blood so long,
Should offer such inhumane wrong;
Wrong of unsouldier-like condition:
For which he flung down his Commission,
And laid about him, till his nose,
From thrall of ring and cord broke loose.
Soon as he sell himself enlarged,
Through thickest of his foes he charged,
And made way through the amazed crew.
Some he o'reran, and some o'rethrew,
But took none, for by hasty flight
He strove to escape pursu'e of Knight,
From whom he fled with as much haste,
And dread, as he the Rabble chased.
In have he fled, and so did they,
Each and his fear a several way.
Crowdero only kept the field,
Not stir^g from the place he held,
Though beaten down, and wounded sore,
In The Fiddle, and a Leg that bore
One side of him, not that of bone,
But, much its betters, the wooden one.
He spying Hudibras lie strow'd
Upon the ground, like log of wood,
With fright of fall, supposed wound,
And loss of Urine, cast in swound;
In haste he snatched the wooden limb
That hurt in the ankle lay by him,
And listing it for sudden fight,
Straight drew it up, to fall on Knight.
For getting up on stump and huckle,
He with the foe began to buckle,
Vowing to be revenged for breach
Of Crowd, and skin upon the wretch,
Sole Author of all Detriment
He and his Fiddle underwent.
But Ralpho (who had now begun
TO adventure resurrection
From heavy squelch, and had got up
Upon his legs, with sprained Crup)
Looking about, beheld pernicion
Approaching Knight from fell Musician.
He snatched his Whiniard up, that fled
When he was falling off his Steed,
(As Rats do from a falling house,)
To hide it self from rage of blows;
And winged with speed and fury, flew
To rescue Knight from black and blew.
Which e're he could atchieve, his Sconce
The Skin encountered twice and once;
And now 'twas raised to smite again,
When Ralpho thrust himself between,
He took the blow on side and arm,
To shield the Knight entra^nc'd from harm;
(...) (...) w^h force, bestowed
O^ the wooden (...) such a load,
That (...) (...) with (...) bore
Crowdero whom it propp'd be^re.
To him the Squire right (...) run,
And seeing conquering ^oor upon
His (...), thus (...): What desperate frenzy
Made the (thou whelp of sin) to fancy
Thy self and all that coward Rabble
TO encounter us in battle able?
How (...) the, I say, oppose thy Curship
Against Arms, Authority and Worship?
And Hudibras, or me provoke,
Though all thy limbs were heart of Oak,
And the other half of thee as good
(...) our blows as that of wood?
Could ot the whipping post prevail
With all its Rhet'rick, (...) the Gaol,
To keep from flaying (...) thy skin,
(...) ^nkle free from Iron gin?
Which (...) thou shall -- but first our care
(...) see how Hudibras does ^re
This (...) gently raised the Knight,
And (...) him on hi^ (...) upright:
(...) (...) from (...) dump,
(...) weak'd nose with gentle thump,
(...) on his breast, as if it had been
(...) (...) the (...) lodged within.
(...) (...) with the noise, did slye
From (...) ^oom to window eye,
And gently opening (...), ^he ca^ment,
Looked out, but yet with some amazement.
This gladded Ralpho much to see,
Who thus bespoke the Knight: quoth he,
Tweaking his nose, You are, great Sir,
A self-denying Conquerout;
As high, victorious, and great,
As e're fought for the Churches yet,
If you will give your self but leave,
To make out what y' already have;
That Is Victory. The foe, for dread
Of your Nine-worthiness is fled,
All save Crowdero, for whose sake
You did the espoused Cause undertake:
And he lies prisoner at your feet,
To be disposed as you think meet,
Either for life, or death, or sale,
The Gallows, or perpetual Goal.
For one wink of your powerful eye
Must sentence him to live or dye.
His Fiddle is your proper purchase,
Wone in the service of the Churches;
And by your doom must be allowed
To be, or be no more a Crowd.
For though success did not confer
Just Title on the Conqueror;
Though dispensations were not strong
Conclusions whether right or wrong;
Although Outgoings did not confirm,
And Owning were but a mere term:
Yet as the wicked have no right
To the Creature, though usurped by might,
The property is in the Saint,
From whom the injuriously detain't;
Of him they hold their Luxuries,
Their Dogs, their Horses, Whores, and Dice,
Their Riots, Revels, Masks, Delights,
Pimps, Buffoons, Fiddlers, Parasites:
All which the Saints have title to,
And ought to enjoy, if the had their due.
What we take from them is no more
Then what was ours by right before.
For we are their true Landlords still,
And they our Tenants but at will.
At this the Knight begnn to rouse,
And by degrees grow valorous.
He stat'd about, and seeing none,
Of all his foes remain but one,
He snatched his weapon that lay near him,
And from the ground began to rear him;
Vowing to make Crowdero pay
For all the rest that ran away.
But Ralpho now in colder blood,
His fury mildly thus withstood:
Great Sir, quoth he, your mighty spirit
Is raised too high, this Slave does merit
To be the Hangmans business, sooner
Then from your hand to have the honor
Of his Destruction. I that am
A Nothingnesse in deed and name,
Did scorn to hurt his forfeit Carcass,
Or ill entreat his Fiddle or Case.
Will you, Great Sir, that glory blot
In cold blood which you gained in hot?
Will you employ your Conquering Sword,
To break a Fiddle and your word?
For though I fought, and overcame,
And Quarter gave, 'twas in your name.
For great Commanders always own
What Is prosperous by the Soldier done.
To save, where you have power to kill,
Argues your Power above your Will;
And that your will and power have less
Then both might have of selfishnesse.
This power which now alive with dread
He trembles at, if he were dead,
Would no more keep the slave in awe,
Then if you were a Knight of Straw:
For Death would then be his Conqueror,
Not you, and free him from that terror.
If danger from his life accrue,
Or honor from his death to you;
'Twere policy, and honor too,
To do as you resolved to do.
But, Sir, 'twould wrong your Valor much,
To say it needs or fears a Crutch.
Great Conquerors greater glory gain
By foes in Triumph led, then slain:
The Law^s that adorn their brows
Are pulled from living, not dead boughs,
And living foes the greatest fame
Of Cripple slain, can be but lame.
One half of him's already slain,
The other is not worth your pain.
The Honor can but on one side light.
As Worship did, when y'were dubbed Knight.
Wherefore I think it better far,
To keep him Prisoner of War;
And let him fast in bonds abide,
At Court of Justice to be tried:
Where if h'appear so bold or crafty,
There may be danger in his safety;
If any Member there dislike
His Face, or to his Beard have pike;
Or if his death will save, or yield,
Revenge, or fright, it is revealed,
Though he has Quarter, ne'rethelesse
Y' have power to hang him when you please.
This has been often done by some
Of our great Conquerors, you know whom:
(...) has by most of us been held
Wise Justice, and to some revealed.
For and promises that yoke
The Conqueror, are quickly broke,
Like Sampson's Cu^, though by his own
Direction and advice put on.
For if we should fight for the Cause
By rules of military Laws,
And only do what they call just,
The Cause would quickly fall to dust.
This we among our selves may speak;
But to the Wicked, or the Weak
We must be cautious to declare
Perfection-truths, such as these are.
This said, the high out ragious mettle
Of Knight began to cool and settle.
He liked the Squire's advice, and soon
Resolved to see the business done:
And therefore charged him first to bind
Crowdero's hands on rump behind,
And to its sormer place and use
The Wooden member to reduce:
But force it take an Oath before,
Never to bear arms against him more.
Ralpho dispatched with speedy have,
And having tied Crowdero fast,
He gave Sir Knight the end of Cord,
To lead the Captive of his Sword
In triumph, while the Steeds he caught,
And them to further service brought.
The Squire in state rode on before,
And on his nut-brown Whyniard bore
The Trophee- Fiddle, and the Case,
Leaning on shoulder like a Mace.
The Knight himself did after ride,
Leading Crowdero by his side,
And towed him, if he lagg'd behind,
Like Boat against the Tide and Wind.
Thus grave and solemn they march on,
Until quite through the Town the had gone.
At further end of which there stands
An ancient Castle, that commands
The adjacent parts; in all the fabric
You shall not see one stone nor a brick,
But all of wood, by powerful Spell
Of Magic made impregnable.
There Is neither Iron-bat, nor Gate,
Port-cullis, Chain, or Bolt, or Grate
And yet men durance there abide,
In Dungeon scarce three inches wide;
With Roof so low, that under it
They never stand, but lie, or sit,
And yet so foul, that whosoever is in,
Is to the middle-leg in Prison,
In Circle Magical confined,
With walls of subtle Air and Wind,
Which none are able to break thorough,
Until they are freed by head of Borough.
Thither arrived, the adventurous Knight
And bold Squire from their Steeds alight,
At the outward wall, near which there stands
A Bastile, built t'imprison hands;
By strange enchantment made to fetter
The lesser parts, and free the greater.
For though the Body may creep through,
The Hands in Grate are fast enough.
And when a circle 'bout the wrist
Is made by Beadle Exorcist,
The Body feels the Spur and Switch,
As if 'twere ridden Post by 'witch,
At twenty miles an hour pace,
And yet never stirs out of the place.
On top of this there is a Spire,
On which Sir Knight first bids the Squire
The Fiddle, and its Spoils, the Case,
In manner of a Trophee, place.
That done, they open the Trap-door-gate,
And let Crowdero down thereat.
Crowdero making doleful face,
Like Hermit poor in pensive place,
To Dungeon they the wretch commit,
And the survivor of his feet:
But the other, that had broke the peace,
And head of Knight hood, they release,
Though a Delinquent false and forged,
Yet b'ing a Stranger, he is enlarged;
While his Comrade, that did no hurt,
Is clapped up fast in Prison for it.
So Justice, while she winks at Crimes,
Stumbles on Innocence sometimes.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD CANTO.
The scattered Rout return and rally,
Surround the Place; the Knight does sally,
And is made Prisoner: then they seize
The Enchanted Fort by storm, release
Crowdero, and put the Squire in's place.
I should have first said, Hudibras.
CANTO III.
AY me! what perils do inviron
The man that meddles with cold Iron!
What plaguey mischiefs and mishaps
Do (...) him still with after-claps!
For though Dame Fortune seem to smile
And leer upon him for a while;
She Will after show him, in the nick
Of all his Glories, a Dog-trick.
This any man may sing or say,
In The Ditty called, What if a day.
For Hudibras, who thought he had won
The field as suer as a Gun,
And having routed the whole Troop,
With Victory was Cock-a-hoop;
Thinking he had done enough to purchase
Thanks giving-day among the Churches,
Wherein his Mettle and brave Worth
Might be explained by Holder-forth,
And registered by fame eternal,
In Deathlesse Pages of Diurnal;
Found in few minutes, to his cost,
He did but Count without his Host;
And that a Turn-stile is more certain,
Then in events of War Dame Fortune.
For now, the late-faint-hearted Rout,
Over thrown and scattered round about,
Chased by the horror of their fear
From bloody fray of Knight and Bear,
(All but the Dogs, who in pursuit
Of the Knight's Victory stood to it,
And most ignobly sought to get
The Honor of his blood and sweat)
Seeing the coast was free and clear
Of The Conquered and the Conqueror,
Took heart of grace, and faced about,
As if they meant to stand it out:
For by this time, the routed Bear
Attaqu'd by the Enemy in the Rear,
Finding their number grew too great
For him to make a safe retreat,
Like a bold Chieftain faced about,
But wisely doubting to hold out,
Gave way to Fortune, and with have
Faced the proud so, and fled, and faced,
Retiring still, until he found
H' had got the advantage of the Ground,
And then as valiantly made head,
To check the foe, and forthwith fled;
Leaving no Art untried, nor Trick
Of Warrior stout and politic.
Until in spite of hot pursuit,
He gained a pass to hold dispute
On better terms, and stop the course
Of the proud foe. With all his force
He bravely charged, and for a while
Forced their whole Body to recoil:
But still their numbers so encreast,
He found himself at length oppressed,
And all evasions so uncertain,
To save himself for better fortune,
That he resolved, rather then yield,
To die with honor in the field,
And sell his hyde and carkase at
A price as high and desperate
As e're he could. This resolution
He forthwith put in execution,
And bravely threw himself among
The enemy in the greatest throng.
But what could single valor do
Against so numerous a foe?
Yet much he did, indeed too much
To be believed, where th'odds was such:
But one against a multitude,
Is more than mortal can make good,
For while one party he opposed,
His Rear was suddenly enclosed,
And no room left him for retreat,
Or fight against a foe so great.
For now the Mastives charging home
To blows and handy-gripes were come;
While manfully himself he bore,
And setting his right-foot before,
He raised himself, to show how tall
His Person was, above them all.
This equal shame and envy stirred
In the enemy, that one should beard
So many Warriors and so stout
As he had done, and stav'd it out,
Disdaining to lay down his Arms,
And yield on honorable terms.
Enraged thus some in the rear
Attacked him, and some every where;
Till down he fell, yet falling fought,
And being down still laid about;
As Widdrington in doleful Dumps
^s said to fight upon his stumps.
But all, alas! had been in vain,
And he inevitably slain,
(...) (...) and (...) in the nick
To (...) him had not been quick,
For (...) who was ^ight of foot.
(...) which long-field (...) shoot,
(But not so light as to be born
Upon the ears of standing Corn,
Or trip it over the Water quicker
Then Witches when their staves they liquor,
As some report) was got among
The foremost of the Martial throng;
Where pitrying the vanquished Bear,
She called to Cerdon, who stood near
Viewing the bloody fight, to whom
Shall we (quoth she) stand still hum drum,
And see stout Bruin all alone
By numbers basely overthrown?
Such sears already h'has achieved,
In story not to be believed:
And twould to us be shame enough
Not to attempt to fetch him off.
I would (quoth he) venture a Limb
To second thee, and rescue him:
But then we must about it straight,
Or else our aid will come too late.
Quarter he scorns, he is so stout,
And therefore cannot long hold our.
This said, they waved their weapons round
About their heads, to clear the ground:
And joining forces laid about
So fiercely, that the amazed rout
Turned tail again, and straight begun,
As if the Devil drove, to run.
Mean while the approached the place where
Was now engaged to mortal ruin: (Bruin
The conquering foe they soon assailed;
First Trulla stav'd, and Cerdon tail'd,
Until the Mastives loosed their hold:
And yet, alas! do what they could,
The worsted Bear came off with store
Of bloody wounds, but all before.
For as Achilles dipped in Pond,
Was anabaptiz'd free from wound,
Made proof against dead-doing steel
All over but the Pagan heel:
So did our Champion's Arms desend
All of him but the other end,
His head and ears, which in the martial
Encounter lost a leathern parcel.
For as an Ausirian Archduke once
Had one ear (which in Ducatoons
Is half the Coin) in battle pared
Close to his head; so Bruin fared:
But tugged and pulled on the other side,
Like Scrivener newly crucified;
Or like the late corrected Leathern
Ea^ of the circumeised brethren.
But gentle Trulla into the ring
He wore in^s nose conveyed a string,
With which she mareht before, and led
The Warrior to a grassy Bed,
As ^uthors write, in a cool shade,
Which (...) glentine and Roses made,
Close by a softly-murm'ring stream
Where Lovers used to loll and dream.
There leaving him to his repose,
Secured from pursuit of foes,
And wanting nothing but a Song,
And a well-tuned Theorbo bung
Upon a bough, to ease the pain
His tugged ears suffered, with a strain.
They both drew up, to march in quest
Of his great Leader, and the rest.
For Orsin (who was more renowned
For stout maintaining of his ground
In standing fights then for pursuit,
As being not so quick of foot)
Was not long able to keep pace
With others that pursued the Chase,
But found himself left far behind,
Both out of heart and out of wind;
Grieved to behold his Bear pursued
So basely by a multitude,
And like to fall, not by the prowess,
But numbers of his Coward foes.
He raged and kept as heavy a coil as
Stout Hercules for loss of Hylas,
Foreing the Valleys to repeat
The Accents of his sad regret.
He beat his breast, and tore his hair,
For loss of his dear Crony Bear:
That Echo from the hollow ground
His dolesull wailings did resound
More wistfully, by many times,
Then in small Poets splay-foot ^es,
That make her, in their ruthful stories,
To answer to inter'gatories,
And most unconscionably depose
To things of which she nothing knows:
And when she has said all she can say,
It Is wrested to the Lover's fancy.
Quoth he, O whether, wicked Bruin,
A^t thou fled to my -- Echo, ruin?
I thought thou had scorned to budge a step,
For fear. (Quoth Echo) Marry guep.
Am not I here to take thy part?
Then what has quail'd thy stubborn heart?
Have these bones rattled, and this head
So often in thy quarrel bled?
Nor did I ever winch or grudge it,
For thy dear sake. (Quoth she) Mum budget.
Think thou 'twill not be laid in the dish,
Thou turn'dst thy back? Quoth Echo, Pish.
To run from those thou had overcome
Thus cowardly? Quoth Echo, Mum.
But what a-vengeance makes thee sly
From me too, as thine enemy?
Or if thou have no thought of me,
Nor what I have endured for thee,
Yet shame and honor might prevail
To keep thee thus from turning rail:
For who would'grutch to spend his blood in
His honor's cause? Quoth she, a Puddin.
This said, his grief to anger turned,
Which in his manly stomach burned;
Thirst of Revenge and Wrath, in place
Of Sorrow, now began to blaze.
He vowed the Authors of his woe
Should equal vengeance undergo;
And with his bones and (...) pay dear
For what he suffered and his Bear.
This b'ing resolved, with equal speed
And rage he hasted to proceed
To action straight, and giving ore
To search for Bruin any more,
He went in quest of Hudibras,
To find him out, where e're he was:
And if he were above ground, vowed
He Would ferret him, lurk where he would.
But scarce had he a furlong on
This resolute adventure gone,
When he encountered with that Crew
Whom Hudibras did late subdue.
Honor, Revenge, Contempt and Shame,
Did equally their breasts inflame.
Among these the fierce Magnano was,
And Talgol foe to Hudibras;
Cerdon and Colon, Warriors stout
And resolute as ever fought:
Whom furious Orsin thus bespoke,
Shall we (quoth he) thus basely brook
The vile affront, that paultry Ass,
And feeble Scoundrel Hudibras,
With that more paultry Ragamuffin
Ralpho, with vapouring and huffing
Have put upon us, like tame cattle,
As if the had routed us in battle?
For my part, it shall never be sed,
I for the washing gave my head:
Nor did I turn my back for fear
Of The Rascals, but loss of my Bear,
Which now I Am like to undergo;
For whether these fell wounds, or no,
He has received in fight are mortal,
Is more then all my skill can foretell.
Nor do I know what is become
Of him, more then the Pope of Rome.
But if I can but find them out
That caused it, (as I shall no doubt,
Where e're th'in Hugger-mugger lurk)
^e make them rue their handiwork;
And wish that they had rather dared
To pull the Devil by the Beard.
Quoth Cerdon, Noble Orsia, thou have
Great reason to do as thou say;
And so has every body here
As well as thou have or thy Bear,
Others may do as they see good;
But if this Twig he made of wood
That will hold tack, l'se make the fur
Fly 'bout the ears of the old Cut,
And the other mungrel Vermin, Ralph,
That braved us all in his behalf.
Thy Bear is safe, and out of peril,
Though lugg'd indeed, and wounded very ill.
My self, and Trulla made a shift
To help him out at a dead lift;
And having brought him bravely off,
Have left him where he is safe enough.
There let him rest; for if we stay,
The Slaves may hap to get away.
This said, they all engaged to join
Their forces in the same design:
And forthwith put themselves in search
Of Hudibras upon their march.
Where leave we them a while, to tell
What the Victorious Knight befell:
For such, Crowdero being fast
In Dangeon shut, we left him last.
Triumphant Laurels seemed to grow
No where so green as on his brow:
Laden with which, as well as tit'd
With conquering toil, he now retired
Unto a neighboring Castle by,
To rest his body, and apply
Fit medicines to each glorious bruise
He got in fight, Reds, Blacks, and Blews;
To mossifie the uneasy pang
Of every honorable bang.
Which b'ing by skilful Midwife dressed,
He said him down to take his rest.
But all in vain. H' had got a hurt
Of The inside, of a deadlier sort,
By Cupid made, who took his stand
Upon a widows joynture-land,
(For he, in all his amorous battles,
No 'dvantage finds like goods and chattels)
As now he did, and aiming right,
An arrow he let fly at Knight;
The shast against a rib did glance,
And gall him in the Purtenance.
But time had somewhat swag'd his pain,
After he found his suit in vain.
For that proud Dame, for whom his soul
Was burnt in's belly like a coal,
(That belly, that so often did ache,
And suffer griping for her sake,
Till purging Comfits, and Ants eggs,
Had almost brought him off his legs)
Ha'd him so like a base Rascallion,
That Old Prg- (what d' y' call him?) malion,
That cut his Mistress out of stone,
Had not so hard-a-hearted one.
She had a thousand jadish tricks,
Worse than a Mule that flings and kicks:
M^g which one cross-grained freak she had,
As insolent, as strange, and mad:
She could love none but only such
As scorned and hated her as much.
'T was a strange Riddle of a Lady;
Not love, if any loved her? ha day!
So Cowards never use their might,
But against such as will not fight.
So some diseases have been found
Only to seize upon the sound.
He that gets her by heart, must say her
The back-way, like a Witch's Prayer.
Meanwhile the Knight had no small task,
To compass what he durst not ask.
He loves, but dares not make the motion;
Her ignorance is his devotion.
Like Caitiff vile, that for misdeed
Rides with his face to rump of steed,
Or rowing Scull, he is fain to love,
Look one way, and another move;
Or like a Tumbler that does play
His game, and look another way,
Until he seize upon the Coney:
Just so does he by Matrimony.
But all in vain: her subtle snout
Did quickly wind his meaning out;
Which she returned with too much scorn,
To be by man of honor born.
Yet much he bore, until the distress
He suffered from his spightfull Mistress
Did stir his stomach, and the pain
He had endured from her disdain
Turned to regret, so resolute,
That he resolved to wave his suit,
And either to renounce her quite,
Or for a while play least in sight.
This resolution being put on,
He kept some months, and more had done;
But being brought so nigh by fate,
The Victory he achieved so late,
Did set his thoughts agog, and hope
A door to discontinu'd hope.
That seemed to promise he might win
His Dame too now his hand was in;
And that his valor, and the honor
H' had newly gair'd might work upon her.
These reasons made his mouth to water
With amorous longings to be at her.
Quoth he unto himself, Who knows
But this brave Conquest over my soes
May reach her heart, and make that stoop,
As I but now have forced the Troop?
If nothing can oppugn love,
And virtue envious ways can prove,
What may not he confide to do,
That brings both love and virtue too?
But thou bring'st valor too and wit,
Two things that seldom sa^l to hit.
Valor's a Mouse-trap, wit a gin,
Which women often are taken in.
Then, Hudibras, why should thou fear
To be, that art a Conqueror?
Fortune the audacious does juvare
But let the timidous miscarry.
Then while the honor thou have got
Is spick and span-new, piping hot,
Strike her up bravely thou had best,
And trust thy fortune with the rest.
Such thoughts as these the Knight did keep,
More than his bangs, or fleas, from sleep.
And as an Owl that in a Barn
Sees a Mouse creeping in the Corn,
Sits still, and shuts his round blew eyes,
As it he slept, until he spies,
The little beast within his reach,
Then starts, and seizes on the wretch:
So from his Couch the Knight did start,
To seize upon the widows heart;
Crying with hasty tone, and hoarse,
Ralpho, dispatch, to horse, to horse.
And 'twas but time, for now the Rout,
We lest engaged to seek him our,
By speedy marches were advanced
Up to the for where he ensconc'd,
And had all the avenues postest
About the place, from East to West.
That done, a while they made a halt,
To view the ground, etc where t'assault:
Then called a Council, which was best,
By fi^e or onslaught, to invest
The enemy: and 'twas agreed.
By storm and onslaught to preceed.
This being resolved, in comely sort,
They now drew up t'attack the fort.
When Hudibras, about to enter
Upon another gate's adventure,
To Ralpho called aloud to arm,
Not dreaming of approaching storm.
Whether Dame Fortune, or the care
Of Angel bad, of Tutelar,
Did aim, or thrust him on a danger,
To which he was an utter stranger;
That Foresight might, or might not blor
The glory he had newly got;
Or to his shame it might be sed,
They took him napping in his bed:
To them we leave it to expound,
That deal in Sciences profound.
His Courser scarce he had bestrid,
And Ralpho that on which he rid;
When setting open the Postern gate,
Which they thought best to sally at,
The Foe appeat'd, drawn up and drilled,
Ready to charge them in the field.
This somewhat startled the bold Knight,
Surpised with th'unexpected sight,
The bruises of his bones and flesh
He thought began to smart afresh;
Till recollecting wonted Courage,
His fear was soon converted to rage,
And those he spoke: The Coward Foe,
Whom we but now gave quarter to,
Look, yonder is rallied, and appears,
As if they had outrun their fears.
The Glory we did lately get,
The fares command us to repeat.
And to their wills we must succumb,
Quocunque trahunt, it is our doom,
This is the same numerick Crew
Which we so lately did subdue,
The sel-same individuals that
Did run, as Mice do from a Cat,
When we courageously did wield
Our martial weapons in the field,
To tug for Victory: and when
We shall our shining blades again
Brandish in terror over our heads,
They Will straight resume their wonted dreads.
Fear is an Ague, that forsakes
And haunts by turns those whom it takes.
And they will opine they feel the pain
And blows, they felt to day, again.
Then let us boldly charge them home,
And make no doubt to overcome.
This said, his Courage to inflame,
He called upon his Mistress name.
His Pistol next he cock^ anew,
And out his nut-brown whiniard drew,
And placing Ralpho in the front,
Resolved himself to be bear the brunt;
As expert Warriors use: then plied
With Iron-heel his Courser's side,
Conveying Sympathetick speed
From heel of Knight to heel of Steed.
Meanwhile the so with equal rage
And speed advancing to engage,
Both Parties now were drawn so close,
Almost to come to handiblows.
When Orsin first let fly a stone
A Ralpho: not so huge a one
As that which Diomed did maul
Aeneas on the Bum withal:
Yet big enough, if rightly hurled,
To Have sent him to another world:
Whether above-ground, or below,
Which Saints twice dipped are destined to,
The danger startled the bold Squire,
And made him some few steps re^e.
But Hudibras advanced to's aid,
And roused his spirits half dismayed.
He, wisely doubting lest the shot
Of the enemy, now growing hot,
Might at a distance gali, pressed close,
To come, pell-mell, to handiblows:
And that he might their aim decline,
Advanced still in an oblique line;
But prudently forbore to sire,
Till breast to breast he had got nigher.
As expert Warriors use to do,
When hand to hand they charge the foe.
This order the adventurous Knight,
Most Souldier-like observed in fight:
When Fortune (as she is wont) turned fickle,
And for the foe began to stickle.
The more shame for her Goody-ship,
To give so near a friend the slip.
For Colon choosing out a stone,
Levelled so right, it thumpt upon
His manly panch with such a force,
As almost beat him off his horse.
He loosed his whiniard, and the rein;
But laying fast hold on the mane,
Preserved his seat: And as a Goose
In death contracts his talons close;
So did the Knight, and with one claw
The tricker of his Pistol draw.
The Gun went off: and as it was
Still fatal to stout Hudibras,
In all his feats of Arms, when least
He dreamt of it, to prosper best;
So now he fared: the shot let fly
At random among the enemy,
Pierced Talgol's Gabberdine, and grazing
Upon his shoulder, in the passing
Lodged in Magnano's brass Habergeon,
Who straight a Surgeon cried, a Surgeon.
He tumbled down, and as he fell,
Did Murder, murder, murder yell.
This startled their whole body so,
That if the Knight had not let go
His Arms, but been in warlike plight,
He Had won (the second time) the fight.
As Ralpho might; but he with care
Of Hudibras his hurt forbear,
To press the advantage of his fortune,
While danger did the rest dishearten.
For he with Cerdon b'ing engaged
In close encounter, they both waged
The fight so well, 'twas hard to say
Which side was like to get the day.
And now the busy work of death
Had tired them so, the agreed to breath,
Preparing to renew the fight;
When the disaster of the Knight
And the other party did divert
Their fell intent, and forced them part.
Ralpho pressed up to Hudibras,
And Cerdon where Magnano was;
Each striving to confirm his party
With stour encouragements and hearty.
Quoth Ralpho, Courage, valiant Sir,
And ler revenge and honor stir
Your spirits up, once more fall on,
The shattered so begins to run:
For if but half so well you knew
To use your Victory as subdue,
They durst not, after such a blow
As you have given them, face us now;
But from so formidable a Soldier
Had fled like Crows when they smell powder.
Thrice have they seen your Sword aloft
Waved over their heads, and fled as often.
But if you let them recollect
Their spirits, now dismayed and checked,
You Will have a harder game to play,
Then yet you have had to get the day.
Thus spoke the stout Squire; but was heard
Of Hudibras with small regard.
His thoughts were fuller of the bang
He lately took, then Ralph's harangue;
To which he answered, Cruel fate
Tells me thy counsel comes too late.
The knotted blood within my hose,
That from my wounded body flows,
With mortal Crisis does portend
My days to appropinque an end.
I am for action now unfit,
Either of fortitude or wit.
Fortune my foe begins to frown,
Resolved to pull my stomach down.
I am not apt upon a wound,
Or trivial basting, to despond:
Yet I Would be loath my days to curtal.
For if I thought my wounds not mortal,
Or that we'd time enough as yet
To make an honorable retreat,
Twere the best course: but if they find
We fly, and leave our Arms behind,
For them to seize on, the dishonor
And danger too is such, I Will sooner
Stand to it boldly, and take quarter,
To let them see I am no starter.
In all the trade of War, no feat
Is nobler than a brave retreat.
This said, the Squire with active speed
Dismounted from his bonny Steed,
To seize the Arms which by mischance
F^ll from the bold Knight in a ^rance.
These being found out, and restored
To Hudibras, their natural Lord,
As a man may say, with might and main
He hasted to get up again.
Thrice he assayed to mount aloft,
But by his weighty bum as often
He was pulled back: till having found
The advantage of the rising ground,
Thither he led his warlike steed,
And having placed him right, with speed
Prepared again to scale the beast.
Whom Orsin, who had newly dressed
The bloody scarupon the shoulder
Of Talgol with Promethean powder,
And now was searching for the shot
That said Magnano on the spot,
Beheld the sturdy Squire aforesaid
Preparing to climb up his horse-side.
He left his Cure, and laying hold
Upon his Arms, with courage bold
Cried out, It Is now no time to dally,
The enemy begins to rally:
Let us that are unhurt and whole
Fall on, and happy man be's dole.
This said, like to a thunderbolt
He flew, with fury, to the assault,
Striving the enemy to attack,
Before he reached his horse's back.
Ralpho was mounted now, and gotten
O'rethwart his Beast with active vaut-
Wrigling his body to recover (ing,
His seat, and cast his right leg over;
When Orsin rushing in, bestowed
On horse and man so heavy a load,
The Beast was startled, and begun
To kick and fling like mad, and run,
Bearing the tough Squire like a Sack,
Or stout King Richard, on his back:
Till stumbling he threw him down,
Sore bruised, and cast into a sown.
Meanwhile the Knight began to rouse
The sparkles of his wonted prowess;
He thrust his hand into his hose,
And found both by his eyes and nose,
'Twas only Choler, and not blood,
That from his wounded body flowed.
This, with the hazard of the Squire,
Inflamed him with despightful ire;
Courageously he faced about,
And drew his other Pistol out,
And now had halfway bent the cock
When Cerdon gave so fierce a shock,
With sturdy truncheon, thwart his arm,
That down it fell, and did no harm;
Then stoutly pressing on with speed,
Assayed to pull him off his steed.
The Knight his Sword had only left,
With which he Cerdon's head had clest,
Or at the least cropped off a limb,
But Orsin came and rescued him.
He with his Lance attacked the Knight
Upon his quarters opposite.
But as a Bark that in foul weather,
Tossed by two adverse winds together,
Is bruised, and beaten to and fro,
And knows not which to turn him to:
So fared the Knight between two foes,
And knew not which of them to oppose.
Till Orsin charging with his Lance
At Hudibras, by spightful chance
H^t Cerdon such a bang, as stunned
And laid him flat upon the ground.
At this the Knight began to cheer up,
And raising up himself on stirrup,
Cried out Victoria; lie thou there,
And I shall straight dispatch another,
To bear thee company in death:
But first I Will halt a while and breath.
As well he might: for Orsin grieved
At th'wound that Cerdon had received
Ran to relieve him with his lore,
And cure the hurt he made before.
Meanwhile the Knight had wheeled about,
To breath himself, and next find out
The advantage of the ground, where best
He might the ruffled foe infest.
This b'ing resolved, he spurred his steed,
To run at Orsin with full speed,
While he was busy in the care
Of Cerdon's wound, and unaware:
But he was quick, and had already
Unto the part applied remedy;
And seeing the enemy prepared,
Drew up, and stood upon his guard.
Then like a Warrior right expert
And skilful in the martial Art,
The subtle Knight straight made a halt,
And judged it best to stay the assault,
Until he had relieved the Squire,
And then (in order) to retire;
Or, as occasion should invite,
With forces joined renew the sight.
Ralpho by this time disentranc'd,
Upon his Bum himself advanced,
Though sorely bruised; his limbs all over
With ruthless bangs were stiff and sore.
Right fain he would have got upon
His feet again, to get him gone;
When Hudibras to aid him came.
Quoth he (and called him by his name)
Courage, the day at length is ours,
And we once more as Conquerours,
Have both the field and honor won,
The Foe is profligate and run:
I mean all such as can, for some
This hand has sent to their long home;
And some lie sprawling on the ground,
With many a gash, and bloody wound.
Caesar himself could never say
He got two Victories in a day,
As I have done, that can say, twice I,
In one day, Veni, vidi, vici.
The Foe's so numerous, that we
Cannot so often vincere
As they perire, and yet enough
Be left to strike an after-blow.
Then lest they rally, and once more
Put us to fight the business over,
Get up, and mount thy Steed, dispatch,
And let us both their motions watch.
Quoth Ralph, I should not, if I were
In case for action, now be her^;
Nor have I turned my back, or hanged
An arse for fear of being banged:
It was for you I got these harms,
Advent'ring to setch off your Arms.
The blows and drubs I have received,
Have bruised my body, and bereaved
My limbs of strength: unless you stoop,
And reach your hand to pull me up,
I shall lie here, and be a prey
To those who now are run away.
That thou shall not (quoth Hudibras:)
We read, the Ancients held it was
More honorable far Servare
Civem, then slay an adversary.
The one we often to day have done;
The other shall dispatch anon.
And though the art of a different Church,
I will not leave thee in the lurch.
This said, he jogged his good Steed nigher,
And steered him gently toward the Squire:
Then bowing down his body, stretched
His hand out, and at Ralpho reached;
When Trulla, whom he did not mind,
Charged him like Lightening behind.
She had been long in search about
Magnano's wound, to find it out:
But could find none, nor where the shot
That had so startled him was got.
But having found the worst was past,
She fell to her own work at last,
The Pillage of the Prisoners,
Which in all feats of Arms was hers:
And now to plunder Ralph she flew,
When Hudibras his hard fate drew
To succor him; for as he bo'wd
To help him up, she laid a load
Of blows so heavy, and placed so well,
On the other side, that down he fell.
Yield, Scoundrel base (quoth she) or die;
Thy life is mine, and liberty.
But if thou think I took thee tardy,
And dare presume to be so hardy,
To try thy fortune over afresh,
I Will wave my title to thy flesh,
Thy Arms and baggage, now my right:
And if thou have the heart to try'r,
I Will lend thee back thy self a while,
And once more for that Carcass vile
Fight upo^tick -- Quoth Hudibras,
Thou offer'st nobly valiant Lass,
And I shall take thee at thy word.
First let me rise, and take my sword;
That sword, which has so often this day,
Through Squadrons of my foes made way,
And some to other worlds dispatched,
Now with a feeble Spinster matched,
Will blush with blood ignoble stained,
By which no her^ ur's to be gained.
But if thou wilt take m' advice in this,
Consider while thou may, what it is
To interrupt a Victor's course,
B' opposing such a trivial force.
For if with Conquest I come off,
(And that I shall do sure enough)
Quarter thou can not have, nor grace;
By Law of Arms, in such a case;
Both which I now do offer freely.
I scorn (quoth she) thou Coxcomb silly,
(Clapping her hand upon her breech,
To show how much she prized his speech)
Quarter or counsel from a so:
If thou can force me to it, do.
But lest it should again be sed,
When I have once more wore thy head,
I took thee napping, unprepared,
Arm, and betake thee to thy guard.
This said, she to her tackle fell,
And on the Knight let fall a peal
Of blows so fierce, and pressed so home,
That he retired, and follow'd's bum.
Stand to it, quoth she, or yield to mercy,
It is not fighting Arsie-versie
Shall serve thy turn -- This stirred his spleen
More than the danger he was in,
The blows he felt or was to feel,
Although the already made him reel.
Honor, despite, revenge, and shame,
At once unto his stomach came;
Which fired it so, he raised his arm
Above his head, and rained a storm
Of blows so terrible and thick,
As if be meant to hash her quick.
But she upon her truncheon took them,
And by oblique diversion broke them;
Waiting an opportunity
To pay all back with usury.
Which long she failed not of, for now
The Knight with one dead-doing blow,
Resolving to deside the fight,
And she with quick and cunning slight
Avoiding it, the force and weight
He charged upon it was so great,
As almost swayed him to the ground.
No sooner she the advantage found,
But in she flew, and seconding
With home-made thrust the heavy swing,
She said him flat upon his side,
And mounting on his trunk a-stride,
Quoth she, I told thee what would come
Of all thy vapouring, base Scum.
Shall I have quarrer now? you Ruffin;
Or will thou be worse than thy huffing? (thou:
Thou said the would kill me, marry woud'it
Why do thou not, thou Jack-a-Nods thou?
Why do not put me to the sword?
But cowardly fly from thy word?
Quoth Hudibras, the day's thine own;
Thou and thy stars have cast me down:
My Laurels are transplanted now,
And flourish on thy conquering brow:
My loss of honor's great enough,
Thou need'st not brand it with a scoff:
Sarcasmes may eclipse thine own,
But cannot blur my lost renown:
I am not now in Fortunes power,
He that is down can fall no lower.
The ancient Heroes were illustrious
For being benign, and not blustrous,
Against a vanquished foe: their swords
Were sharp and trencheant, not their words;
And did in fight but cut work out
TO employ their courtesies about.
Quoth she, Although thou have deserved,
Base Slubberdegullion, to be served
As thou did vow to deal with me,
If thou had got the Victory,
Yet I shall rather act a part
That suits my fame, than thy desert.
Thy Arms, thy liberty, beside
All that is on the outside of thy hide,
Are mine by military law,
Of which I will not bate one straw:
The rest, thy life and limbs, once more,
Though doubly forfeit, I restore.
Quoth Hudibras, it is to late
For me to treat, or stipulate;
What thou command'st I must obey:
Yet those whom I expugn'd to day.
Of thine own party, I let go,
And gave them life, and freedom too,
Both Dogs and Bear, upon their parol,
Whom I took prisoners in this quarrel.
Quoth Trulla, Whether thou or they
Let one another run away,
Concerns not me: but was it not thou
That gave Crowdero quarter too?
Crowdero, whom in Irons bound,
Thou basely threw'st into Lob's pound:
Where still he lies, and with regret
His generous bowels rage and fret.
But now thy Carcass shall redeem,
And serve to be exchange for him.
This said, the Knight did straight submit,
And laid his weapons at her feet.
Next he disrobed his Gaberdine,
And with it did himself resign.
She took it, and forthwith divesting
The mantle that she wore, said jesting,
Take that, and wear it for my sake;
Then threw it over his sturdy back.
And as the French we conquered once,
Now give us Laws for Pantaloons,
The length of Breeches, and the gathers,
Port-canons, Perriwigs, and Feathers,
Just so the proud insulting Lass
Arrayed, and dighted Hudibras.
Mean while the other Champions, yerst
In hurry of the fight dispersed,
Arrived, when Trulla'd won the day,
To share in the honor, and the prey,
And out of Hudibras his hide,
With vengeance to be satisfied;
Which now they were about to pour
Upon him in a wooden shower.
But Trulla thrust her self between,
And striding over his back again,
She brandisht over her head his sword,
And vowed they should not break her word;
Sh'had given him quarter, and her blood
Or theirs, should make that quarter good.
For she was bound by Law of Arms,
To see him safe from further harms,
In Dungeon deep Crowdero cast
By Hudibras, as yet lay fast,
Where, to the hard and ruthless stones,
His great heart made perpetual mones.
Him she resolved that Hudibras
Should ransom, and supply, his place.
This stopped their fury, and the basting
Which toward Hudibras was hasting.
They thought it was but just and right.
That what she had achieved in fight,
She should dispose of how she pleased;
Crowdero ought to be released;
Nor could that any way be done
So well as this she pitched upon:
For who a better could imagine?
This therefore they resolved t'engage in.
The Knight and Squier first they made
Rise from the ground where they were laid;
Then mounted both upon their Horses,
But with their faces to the Arses,
Orsin led Hudibras his beast,
And Talgol that which Ralpho pressed,
Whom stout Magnano, valiant Cerdon,
And Colon waited as a Guard on.
All ush'ring Trnlla, in the Rear,
With the Arms of either Prisoner.
In this proud order and array
They put themselves upon their way,
Striving to reach the enchanted Castle,
Where stout Crowdero in durance lay still,
Thither with greater speed, then shows
And triumphs over conquered foes
Do use to allow, or then the Bears,
Or Pageants born before Lord Mayors
Are wont to use, they soon arrived,
In order Souldier-like contrived,
Still marching in a warlike posture,
As fit for Battle as for Muster.
The Knight and Squire they first unhorse,
And bending against the Fort their force,
They all advanced, and round about,
Begirt the Magical Redoubt,
Magnan' led up in this adventure,
And made way for the rest to enter.
For he was skilful in Black Art,
No less than he that built the Fort;
And with an Iron Mace laid flat
A breach, which straight all entered at,
And in the wooden Dungeon found
Crowdero laid upon the ground.
Him they release from durance base,
Restored to his Fiddle, and his Case,
And liberty, his thirsty rage
With lushious vengeance to assuage.
For he no sooner was at large,
But Trulla straight brought on her charge,
And in the self-same Limbo put
The Knight and Squire, where he was shut.
Where leaving them in Hockly in the hole,
Their bangs and durance to condole,
Confined and conjured into narrow
Enchanted Mansion, to know sorrow;
In the same order and array
Which they advanced, they marched away.
But Hudibras, who scorned to stoop
To Fortune, or be said to droop,
Cheered up himself with ends of verse,
And sayings of Philosophers.
Quoth he, The one half of man, his mind,
Is Sui juris, unconfined,
And cannot be laid by the heels,
What e're the other moity feels.
It Is not restraint or liberty
That makes men prisoners or free;
But perturbations that possess
The mind or Aequanimities.
The whole world was not half so wide
To Alexander, when he cried
Because he had but one to subdue,
As was a paultry narrow tub to
Diogenes, who is not sed
(For ought that ever I could read)
To whine, put finger in the eye, and sob
Because h' had never another Tub.
The Ancients make two several kinds
Of Prowess in heroic minds,
The Active, and the Passive valiant;
Both which are pari libra gallant:
For both to give blows, and to carry,
In fights are equenecessary,
But in defeats, the passive stout,
Are always found to stand it out
Most desp^rately, and to outdo
The active, against a conquering foe.
Though we with blacks and blews are suggill'd,
Or, as the Vulgar say, are cudgelled:
He that is valant, and dares fight,
Though drub'd, can lose no honor by it.
Honor's a leaf for time to come,
And cannot be extended from
The legal Tenant: it is a Chattel,
Not to be forfeited in battle.
If he that is in battle slain,
Be in the Bed of Honor lain;
He that is beaten may be sed
To lie in Honor's Truckle-bed.
For as we see the eclipsed Sun.
By mortals is more gazed upon,
Than when adorned with all his light,
He shines in serene sky most bright:
So Valor in a low estate
Is most admired, and wondered at.
Quoth Ralph, How great I do not know
We may by being beaten grow;
But none that see how here we sit,
Will judge us overgrown with wit.
As gifted Brethren preaching by
A Carnal Hourglass, do imply
Illumination can convey
Into them what they have to say,
But not how much: so well enough
Know you ^o charge, but not draw off.
For who without a Cap and Bauble,
Having subdued a Bear, and Rabble,
And might with honor have come off,
Would put it to a second proof;
A politic exploir, tight fit,
For Presbyterian zeal and wit.
Quoth Hudibras, That Cuckow's tone,
Ralpho, thou always harp'st upon:
(...) (...) (...) any thing would rail,
(...) (...) Presbytery thy scale
(...) (...) height over, and explain
To what degree it is profane.
Whats' ever will not with thy (what d' y' call)
Thy light jump right, thou call'st Synodical.
(...) Presbytery were a standard
(...) what is ever's to be slandered.
(...) not remember, how this day,
Thou to my beard wast bold to say,
That thou could prove Bear-baiting equal
With Synods, orthodox and legal?
Do if thou can, for I deny't,
And dare thee to it with all thy light.
Quoth Ralpho, Truly that is no
Hard matter for a man to do
That has but any guts in's brains,
And could believe it worth his pains.
But since you dare and urge me to it,
You Will find l've light enough to do it.
Synods are mystical Bear-gardens,
Where Elders, Deputies, Churchwardens,
And other Members of the Court,
Manage the Babylonish sport.
For Prolocutor, Scribe, and Bearward,
Do differ only in a meet word.
Both are but several Synagogues
Of carnal Men, and Bears and Dogs:
Both Antichristian Assemblies,
To mischief bent as far's in them lies:
Both stave and tail, with fierce contests,
The one with men, the other beasts.
The dist'rence is, the one fights with
The tongue, the other with the teeth:
And that they b^it but Bears in this,
In the other Souls and Consciences;
Where Saints themselves are brought to stake,
For Gospel Light, and Conscience sake;
Exposed to Scribes and Presbyters,
Instead of Mastive-Dogs and Curs;
Then whom the have less humanity,
For these at souls of men will fly.
This to the Prophet did appear,
Who in a Vision saw a Bear,
Prefiguring the beastly rage
Of Church-rule in this latter age:
As is demonstrated at full
By him that baited the Pope's Bull,
Bears naturally are beasts of Prey,
That live by rapine so do they.
What are their Orders, Constitutions,
Church censures, Curses, Absolutions,
But several mystic chains they make,
To tie poor Christians to the stake?
And then set heathen Officers,
Instead of Dogs, about their ears,
For to prohibit and dispense,
To find out or to make offense,
Of hell and heaven to dispose,
To play with souls at fast and loose;
To set what Characters they please,
And mulcts on sin or godliness;
Reduce the Church to Gospel Order,
By Rapi^, Sacrilege, and Marther:
To make Presbytery sup^am,
And Kings themselves submit to them;
And force all people, though against
Their Consciences, to turn Saints,
Must prove a pretty thriving trade,
When Saints Monopolists are made.
When pious frauds, and holy shifts,
Are dispensations and gifts,
There godliness becomes mere ware,
And every Synod but a Fair.
Synods are whelps of the Inquisition,
A mungrel breed of like petnicion,
And growing up became the Sires
Of Scribes, Commissioners, and Triers:
Whose business is, by cunning slight,
To cast a figure for men's Light:
To find in lines of beard and face,
The Physiognomy of grace;
And by the sound and twang of Nose,
If all be sound within disclose,
Free from a crack, or flaw of sinning,
As men try Pipkins by the ringing.
By black caps, underlaid with white,
Give certain guess at inward Light;
Which Sergeants at the Gospel wear,
To make their spiritual calling clear.
The hand kercher about the neck,
(Canonical Crabat of Smeck,
From whom the institution came,
When Church and State they set on flame,
And worn by them as badges then
Of spiritual warfaring men)
Judge rightly if Regeneration
Be of the newest cut in fashion.
Sure it is an Orthodox opinion,
That grace is founded in dominion.
Great piety consists in pride;
To rule, is to be sanctified:
To domineer, and to control,
Both over the body, and the soul,
Is the most perfect Discipline
Of Church-rule, and by right divine.
Bell, and the Dragon's Chaplains were
More moderate than these by far:
For they (poor knaves) were glad to cheat,
To get their Wives and Children meat;
But these will not be fobb'd off so,
They must have wealth and power too,
Or else with blood and desolation,
They Will tear it out of the heart of the Nation.
Sure these themselves from Primitive
And Heathen Priesthood do derive,
When Butchers were the only Clerks,
Elders and Presbrters of Kirks,
Whose Directory was to kill;
And some believe it is so still.
The only difference is, that then
They slaughtered only beasts, now men,
For then to sacrifice a bullock,
Or now and then a child to Molock,
They count a vile Abomination,
But not to slaughter a whole Nation.
Presbytery does but translate
The Papacy to a Free State,
A Commonwealth of Popery,
Where every Village is a See
As well as Rome, and must maintain
A Tithe-pig-Metropolitan:
Where every Presbyter and Deacon
Commands the Keys for Cheese and Bacon;
And every Hamlet's governed
By's Holiness, the Church's head,
More haughty and severe in's place
Then Gregory and Boniface.
Such Charch must (surely) be a Monster
With many heads: for if we conster
What in the Apocalypse we find,
According to the Apostle's mind,
It Is that the Whore of Babylon
With many heads did ride upon;
Which heads denote the sinful tribe
Of Deacon, Priest, Lay-elder, Scribe.
Lay-elder, Simeon to Levi,
Whose little finger is as heavy
As loins of Patriarchs, Prince-Prelate,
And Bishop-secular. This Zealot
Is of a mungrel, diverse kind,
Clerick before, and Lay behind;
A lawless linsie-wolsie Brother,
Half of one Order, half another;
A Creature of amphibious nature,
On land a Beast, a Fish in water;
That always preys on Grace, or Sin;
A Sheep without, a Wolf within.
This fieroe Inquisitor has chief
Dominion over men's Belief
And Manners; can pronounce a Saint
Idolatrous, or ignorant,
When superciliously he sifts
Through coursest boulter others gifts.
For all men live and judge amiss,
Whose Talents jump not just with his.
He Will lay on Gifts with hands, and place
On dullest noddle light and grace,
The manufacture of the Kirk,
Whose Pastors are but the Handiwork
Of his Mechanic Paws, instilling
Divinity in them by feeling,
From whence they start up chosen vessel:,
Made by Contract, as men get Meazels.
So Cardinals, they say, do groan
At the other end the new-made Pope.
Hold, hold, quoth Hudibras, Soft fire
They say, does make sweet Malt. Good Squire,
Festina lent, not too fast,
For haste (the Proverb says) makes waste.
The Quicks and Cavils thou do make
Are false, and built upon mistake.
And I shall bring you, with your pack
Of Fallacies, to Elenchi back;
And put your Arguments in mood
And figure, to be understood.
I Will force you by right ratiocination
To leave your Vitilitigation,
And make you keep to the question close,
And argue Dialectic (...).
The Question then, to state it first,
Is which is better, or which worst,
Synods or Bears. Bears I avow
To be the worst, and Synods thou.
But to make good the Assertion,
Thou say they are really all one.
If so, not worst; for if the are idem,
Why that Tantundem dat tantidem.
For if they are the same, by course
Neither is better, neither worse.
But I deny they are the same,
More then a Maggot and I am.
That both are Animalia,
I grant, but not Rationalia:
For though they do agree in kind,
Specific difference we find,
And can no more make Bears of these,
Then prove my Horse is Socrates.
That Synods are Bear-gardens too,
Thou do affirm; but I say no.
And thus I prove it, in a word,
Whats'ever Assembly's not impow'rd
To censure, curse, absolve, and ordain,
Can be no Synod: but Bear-garden
Has no such power, Ergo it is none.
And so thy Sophistry's overthrown.
But yet we are beside the Question
Which thou did raise the first Contest on;
For that was, Whether Bears are better
Then Synod-men; I say, Negatur.
That Bears are Beasts, and Synods Men,
Is held by all: They Are better then.
For Bears and Dogs on four legs go,
As Beasts, but Synod-men on two.
It Is true, they all have teeth and nails;
But prove that Synod-men have tails;
Or that a rugged, shaggy fur
Crows over the hide of Presbyter;
Or that his snout and spacious cars,
Do hold proportion with a Bear's.
A Bear's a savage Beast, of all
Most ugly and unnatural,
Whelpt without form, until the Dam
Have lickt him into shape and frame:
But all thy light can never evict
That ever Synod-man was licki;
Or brough to any other fashion
Then his own will and inclination.
But thou do further yer in this
Oppugn thy self, and sense, that is,
Thou would have Presbyters to go
For Bears, and Dogs, and Bearwards too.
A strange Chimara of beasts and men,
Made up of pieces Heterogene,
Such as in Nature never met
In eodem subjecto yet.
Thy other Arguments are all
Supposures, hypothetical,
That do but beg, and we may choose
Either to grant them, or refuse.
Much thou have said, which I know when,
And where, thou stol'st from other men,
(Whereby it is plain, thy light and gifts,
Are all but plagiary shifts;)
And is the same that Ranter sed,
That arguing with me, broke my head,
And tore a handful of my beard:
The self-same cavils then I heard,
When b'ing in hot dispute about
This controversy, we fell out;
And what thou know I answered then,
Will serve to answer thee again.
Quoth Ralpho, Nothing but the abuse
Of humane learning you produce;
Learning, that cobweb of the brain,
Profane, erroneous, and vain;
A trade of knowledge as repreat
As others are with fraud and cheat;
An Art t'incumber Gifts and wit,
And render both sor nothing fit;
Makes light unactive, dull and troubled,
Like little David in Readiness doublet;
A cheat that Scholars put upon
Other men's reason and their own;
A fort of Error, to ensconce
Absurdity and ignorance;
That renders all the avenues
To Truth impervious and abstruse,
By making plain things, in debate,
By Art, perplexed and intricate:
For nothing goes for sense or Light
That will not with old rules jump right.
As if Rules were not in the Schools
Derived from Truth, but Truth from Rules.
This Pagaen, Heathenish invention
Is good for nothing but Contention,
For as in Sword-and-Buckler fight,
All blows do on the Target light:
So when men argue, the great'st part
Of The Contest falls on terms of Art,
Until the sustian stuff be spent,
And then they fall to the Argument.
Quoth Hudibras, Friend Ralph, thou have
Outrun the Constable at last;
For thou art fallen on a new
Dispute, as senseless and untrue,
But to the former opposite,
And contrary as black to white;
Mere Disparata, that concerning
Presbytery, this, Humane Learning;
Two things s'averse, they never yet
But in thy rambling fancy met.
But I shall take a fit occasion
TO evince thee by Ratiocination,
Some other time, in place more proper
Then this we are in: Therefore let us stop here,
And rest our weari'd bones a while,
Already tired with other toil.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 7. for po read do. ibid. line 16. for Beat's read Bear's. page
28. for nave olfact read nare olfact.


