KING Edward the Third, WITH THE FALL OF MORTIMER EARL OF MARCH.

An Historical Play, As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL, By their Majesty's
Servants.

London, Printed for I. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball against the
Royal Exchange. R. Bently in Russell-street in Covent Garden. A. Reper in
Fleet Street near Temple-Barr, and Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall in
Ludgate Street. 1691.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord Viscount SYDNEY of Sheppey, one of the
Lords of their Majesty's most Honorable Trivy-Council, Principal Secretary of
State in this Kingdom, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland, and Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Kent.
My Lord,
WEre not your goodness Equal with your Greatness, I durst not presume to lay
this humble offering before you; But as in distress, the Poorer the object, the
Nobler the Charity; so in my Circumstances, the meaner the Dedicator, the more
worthy and esteemed will be the Condescending Patronage of your Lordship. Nor
ought I to doubt your Generous favors, since your Predecessors were always
great Encouragers of Poetry.

I must not omit the Renowned Sr. Philip Sidney (whose Father was thrice Lord
Deputy of Ireland) which was not only an Admirable Writer (besides his vast
Accomplishments in other things) But so Indulgent a Patron to the Sons of the
Muses, that the famous Spencer Dedicated his Works to him as the only Person
Capable of Espousing 'em. But this Illustrious Worthy was at last taken from us
(though to the Eternal honor of the English in that Glorious and never to be
forgotten Action in the Low Countries, the battle of Zutphen in Gelderland.

But I go too far from my purpose;

My Lord, I could not help my presumption in begging your Protection of this
Play, it being a Present to me, and an English Story so famed for the Reign of
its Monarch, and the management of those few good Men about him, who with great
difficulty preserved this Prince from the evil Machinations of Mortimer and
his Faction, from the Potent Enemies of an Interested State; and the unnatural
Connivance of a Mother (who designed as much to usurp his Right as she really
did destroy his Fathers) and the delivering their Country from the Tyranny and
Oppression it had been long afflicted with, and which in all probability
threatened the total overthrow of the Established Liberties of the Subject. I
say, these weighty Motives induced me to Consecrate this Piece to your
Lordship, as a true bred Son of the Country, and a Person who has always valued
the freedom of his Native Brethren, above the Temptations of a prejudiced and
designing Court.

If Preferment could have drawn you from your esteem to the Public, never bait
was better managed then that which was offered to decoy your Lordship: But you
stood it out with the Resolution of Sr. Robert Holland, went on with the
sincerity and Prudence of Sr. Tho. Delamore, and maintained it with the spirit
of Lord Mountacute.

The World cannot be insensible of the unalterable esteem the Family of the
Sydneys have constantly shown both in their Endeavors and Sufferings for the
benefit of the Commonweal. And sure (if we are honest to our selves) we must
thrive since those who always opposed the Enemies of our Country have with much
Patience and Diligence overcome their Industrious Mischiefs, and have now the
care of what they have so hard tugged for.

We have a King who thinks his Life no longer useful then when employed for
the service of his People; We have a Parliament steadfast and generous, the
Public Employments in the hands of Men of Worth, Fortunes, and Honor: (not
liable to be bribed from abroad) The necessary part of the Nation satisfied and
United with a Providence that has proved (by its care of our Monarch, both
abroad and at home) how our choice is esteemed above.

That these blessings may not be withdrawn is surely the hearty Prayer of all
the Well-Affected; and that the Country may never want a Friend like your
Lordship is the zealous wish of him who shall always beg the Honor of
subscribing himself,

Your Lordships most Obedient, Obliged and Dutiful Servant. Will. Mountfort.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Powell.

I Can but think how many here are come,
Prepared to give the Ensuing i lay i'ts Doom:
But like the Gordian-^^ not this Play was made,
By one who Brought it us in Masquerade;
Plays were at first designed to Lash the age,
By showing all its Vices on the Stage,
As in a Glass there each might see his own,
And being Conscious bl^sht at what he would done;
The Fool, the Knave, the Villain they exposed
And the Blood-thirsty Politician nooz'd;
But Virtue, though she suffered long at last,
Was Crowned with a reward for what was past;
The honest-thinking Heathen showed the way,
And handed Down the Moral called a Play:
Old Ben. and Shakespeare copied what they writ,
Then Downright Satyr was accounted wit;
The Fox, and Alchymist exposed the Times,
The Persons then was loaded with their Crimes;
But for the space of Twenty years and more,
You Have hissed this way of Writing out of door,
And kick and winch when we but touch the sore.
But as some Fashions long since useless grown,
Are now Revived and all the Mode of the Town.
Why may not the Ancient way of Writing please,
And in its turn meet with the same Success?
The Story's true if you will believe Record,
Edward the Third has stamped it on his word:
Here Englishmen with pleasure may behold,
How much their Liberties were priz d of old.
How hard this Prince for's Countries freedom strove,
And how both Prosper'd in each others Love.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle.

IT is the Custom of all City-Feasts,
By Printed Tickets to Invite the Guests;
The Price is known, and who the Stewards are;
And nothing's Private but the Bill of Fare,
Which we expose the fall of Mortimer.
For Plays are Feasts, and every Scene should be,
A Different Course, still fresh variety:
But few obtain that Masterpiece of Wit,
He Is a rare Cook that can all Pallats hit;
For Ways of Eating alter with the Age,
And such a Peuking stomach haunts the Stage;
Although the best of Artists strive to please,
It Is very seldom that they meet succe'ss,
You set aside the most substantial Food,
Beef's Gross, and breeds the Scurvy in the Blood,
Naught but Ragoo's and Kickshaws now are good;
Broken Remains tosst by the Mounseirs hand
Are grown the Darling Viand of the Land,
Therefore our friend lest you should think it strange
To Iump from an Extreme into a change,
With Satyr raises up his M^sses high,
And Interlards his Tale with Comedy:
But should he fail, we doubt not but to find,
You to the Waiters always will be Kind;
And since The Author who did this Prepare
Only expects your Liking for his share,
Do not Withdraw the Profit from the Player.
Dramatis Personae.
KIng Edward the Third. Mr. Powell. Mortimer Earl of March. Mr. Williams. Lord
Mountacute. Mr. Mountfort. Sir Tho. Delamore. Mr. Kynaston. Sir Robert Holland
Mr. Hodgson. Tarleton Bishop of Hereford and Chanecllour of England. Mr. Lee.
Sergeant Eitherside Mr. Nokes. Turrington Mr. Bridges. Nevill. Mr. Freeman.
Sly. Mr. Bright. Secret. Mr. Trafuse. Earl of Leicester. Mr. Bowman. Earl of
Exeter. Mr. Sandford.
WOMEN.
Isabella Queen Mother. Mrs. Barry. Maria, Neice to Sergeant Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Eitherside, in Love with Mrs. Bracegirdle. Mountacute. Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Lords, Attendants, Guards, Lawyers.

SCENE Nottingham.

ACT I. SCENE I. Nottingham. The Court of King Edward.
Enter Lord Mountacute, Sir Tho. Delamore, and Sir Robert Holland. Lord Mount.
IT much disturbs me Delamore, that thou
Of all Mankind should think my temper frail;
What have thou ever seen in Montacute,
Or read in the Annals of his Ancestors,
To fear him or suspect his Resolution?
Proclaim me Bastard if my blood proves base,
I tell thee good old Friend;
I Will banish sleep and Pleasure till I Have found
A means to set my bleeding Country free;
And in the fury of this Noble heat,
Plunge through a Sea of blood for her deliverance.

Sr. T. Dela. I Question not your Spirit, But --

L Mont. What?

Sr. T. Dela. Pray give me leave:
Nay, I must chide you, for you give the Reins
To such a Passion may undo us all;
Are there not sharp observers placed about us,
Who if'twere possible would search our Souls?
This eager Fire will quite forestall our purpose.

L. Mount. Well! I am hushed.
But pray propose some means may please my thoughts,
Since you will confine my tongue.

Sr. T. Dela. Nay, I Am for urging of our wrongs, but calmly,
There is a time
When Heaven will do us Right for all our Woes,
And if the Orphans cries or Widows tears,
The Blood of Innocents which stains the Land,
Can hasten Vengeance, sure it is drawing nigh.

L. Mount. It Is full three years since Mortimer began
To Lord it over us by the Queens vile favor;
He stalks as on a Mountain by himself,
Whilst we creep humbly in the Vale below,
And Eye, and Curse, what we are afraid to reach at

Sr. Rob. Holl. In this short space, he and his Brother-Devil
Have made, undone, new framed, shuffled and tossed
The Ancient Customs of our Native Soil
So very often, that the Kingdom staggers
Under the heavy Burden of her change.

L. Mount. What are our Princes? what the Nobles now?
Are they not Vassals to this upstart's State?
No more the same of our Nobility
Be called in mind; who when Usurping Powers
Did but attempt to Innovate, our Laws
With their keen Swords like Guardian Angels stood
And kept the Harpy's from the Sacred Fruit.

Sr. Rob. Holl. Is it not fatal to resist his Will?
Nay none must smile if Mortimer be sullen;
Curse on his Pride: why should we brook it longer?
Why don't we boldly tell the King our thoughts,
And make him Great in spite of evil Counsel?

Sr. Tho. Dela. There will be Mortimer in every State;
Some Favorite Villain to oppress the Subject,
Who fell to Knaves what honest Men should have,
Which loose their Right only for being poor;
The largest bribe is still his dearest Friend,
And values not the Credit of his Prince,
Therefore it is just
The King should know how much he is Ecclips't,
Who it is that grasps the Scepter in his stead,
And how his Mother lavishly does waste
The best of his Revenue on this March.

L. Mount. It rests not there, she Prostitutes her self,
Pardon me, for I will not giv't no better name;
Is she not grown the Common tale of all?
One Palace holds 'em both, one Table feeds 'em,
Nay, I will speak it, Sir, one Bed contains 'em:
The Brawny Minion's dieted on purpose
To do the Drudgery of Royal Lewdness.

Sr. Rob. Holl. How are we managed by a pair of Knaves:
March rides the Privilege of all the Peers;
For who in Parliament speaks not his thoughts
Must never have a good look from the Court:
Whilst Hereford the Reverend Chancellor,
Persuades the Queen she may dispense with Laws,
And renders 'em according to her purpose.

Sr. Tho. Del. If as sometimes he meets a knotty point
Which will not stretch to what his need requires,
He Summons the most Learned of the Robe,
Begging their kind Interpretation of it,
Telling how necessary, nay how Loyal it is
When the Prerogative of the Crown is pinched
Within the Clutches of the Griping Law
To ease the Royal Power, and give it freedom
If they Comply not, then his Greatness Culls
From out the Scum of the Inns of Chancery,
A Set of Poor necessitated Rogues,
Who Have Run through all the Judgments of each Court:
And these he makes his Learned Expositors,
These as they steadily perform their task,
He puts into their Places who refused him:
Some have the fortune to ascend the Bench,
But then they are such Profficients in their Art
They Would bafflle truth though never so well backed,
And dare the Devil in his own Profession.

Sr. Rob. Ho. Justice and Honesty have left the Robe,
For since the Prelate Hereford is chosen,
(Under pretense that Piety best suits
To adorn the Person of a Chancellor)
Because on Conscience Equity depends:
The Ancient Practicers refuse to Plead
Balkt with his overruling Clamorous tongue;
They tell you with a heavy heart and look,
That after many years of constant Practice
They must to School again and learn the Law.

L. Mount. Come, come, it never was a prosperous World,
Since Priests were Judges made of Temporal matters:
Why should we wonder People grow Profane,
When Mitred-Heads lead 'em the way to Hell;
The Customs of their Ancestors they slight,
Have changed their Shirts of hair for Robes of Gold:
Thus Luxury and Interest Rules the Church,
Whilst Piety and Conscience dwells in Caves.
Let Us stem the Current of this furious tide,
Our Country is the Parent of us all;
And shall we talk away the precious hours
Whilst these vile hangmen stretch her on the Rack?
Let Us force young Edwards safety by our Swords,
And cut off all the holds which bar his Glory.

Sr. Tho. Del. Blessings upon thee for this generous heat,
From hence my fears and Jealousies, be gone;
Thou art the Soul of Honor new revived,
Which for some years, as once the Romans did,
Withdrew thy self into a willing Exile
Action, there will be fuel for thy Fire,
Great as thy Spirit Courts and worthy of thee,
The matters ready and the Engines fixed,
Many prepared and eager for the work,
But Place and time forbid the telling more:
The Darling Comes.
Enter Guards, Gentlemen, Turrington, and Nevill; followed by the Earl of
March.
Waiters. Make way there --

Guards. Room for his Lordship:

L. Mount. See how the Toad swells with his own applause:

Sr. Tho. Del. My Lord you do forget.

L. Mount. I Am silent:


Mortim. Turrington:


Turring. Your pleasure: Petitioners kneeling with Papers.

Mort. What are those Men which bend their knees to us?
They seem as Supplyants.

Turring. So they are indeed from several Towns,
Cities and Buroughs they are come,
Humbly Imploring you would Intercede
For their lost Charters to the Incensed Queen.

Mortim. That is the Chancellours business.

Turr. They know your Interest greater and entreat it;
The Judges have annul'd 'em; and unless
Your Goodness can prevail, many a Town
By their own faults Incurred will fall to ruin,
And be a Wilderness; Thousand of Families
Now in the way of Life must starve and Perish.

Mortim. Their Ancient Cha^^ers by the Law are forfeited,
But I will Study how to get 'em new ones:
Our time is spent in telling things aright,
This Kingdom wants it, and I am its Friend.

L. Mount. Was ever Pride or Arrogance like this?

Mortim. Nevill, what would those People have?

Nevill. May it please your Honor,
They are Inhabitants of the adjacent Corporations
They all of them have voices at Elections,
And promise for the Parliaments to come,
They will choose none but what the Court shall like.

Mortim. It Is well, and we take notice of their Wisdom,
See that you give 'em welcome as becomes us;
Such Subjects must not want Encouragement,
And March be Living.

L. Mount. Unheard of Impudence.

Dela. My Lord, we are observed, see how he eyes us;
Nor are we safe whilst we stand trifling here.

L. Mount Why let him eye us till his balls grow stiff.
His looks may fright those have dependence on him,
I slight the worst and best of 'em:

Mortim. Ha! what said he?

Turr. Sir;

Mort. Lead on. As he moves is met by Montacute who fronts him, they stare at
each other, and jostle.
Ha, Jostled!

Mount. I find the man is greater then the Room;
Sure else he might have strutted clear of me.

Mort. Thou art a froward Peer;

Mount. Thou art a vain one; Nay, frown not March
Thy terrour's lost on me:
Look big upon those bastard Englishmen
Who tamely yield their Rights and Charters up,
And swear to pick a Parliament
Shall sell our Freedoms, Persons and Estates,
To gain a short-lived smile --
They probably may dread thee.

Mort. Rash youth, no more, lest thou provoke my anger,
Till I forget the Palace that Protects thee;
But the Eagle seldom condescends, I think,
To Combat with the Passion of a Wren.

L. Mount. I tell thee Boaster, that my veins do hold
A Nobler, Richer, Purer blood then thine.

Mortim. Thy word's are air which no Impression make,
So boys hurl stones in Water and so lost:

L. Mount. So Men shun Provocations under Proverbs:

Mort. Shun thee, poor Wretch, I pity thee:

L. Mount. I scorn thy pity, and contemn thy hate.

Dela. Nay Mountacute.

L. Mount. Rot his proud Spirit -- oh that I had thee forth
On some wide Plain to Hunt thy haughty Soul,
Distant from all Protection but thy Swords,
There thou should find --

Mort. A Pratler;
Thy Mother's folly dwells upon thy tongue,
Thou came from School too early,
Fie Boy, fie:

L. Mount. Statesman, Statesman, thou Engineer of hell:

Mort. Rail on, and spend thy Gall, malicious thing,
Whose Nurses Milk still hangs upon thy Lips,
You should be scourged to manners.

L. Mount. The King shall know thee,

Mort. Then he will know himself:

L. Mount. Arrogance, I shall meet thee;

Mort. Beware the Thunder Child, it is dangerous.

Mount. If thou art so, like Lightning, I Will fore-run thee,
And if thy self thou dare a Thunder Prove,
Follow me Mortimer and I Will think thee Jove.

Exeunt Mount. Dela. and Holland. Turring. Had you not Patience as you have the
Power
Of an offended Deity, this language sure had been his last;
I watched, my Lord, your eyes,
And ready for the Signal of dispatch,
Had laid his Reaking heart beneath your feet.

Nevill. You are too merciful, too full of goodness,
Such high Indignities call for Resentments
No less then Death; Pardon my plainness Sir,
For here I Prophecy, unless you break
This Serpents Egg before the Monster's hatched,
'T will bring Destruction on your self and friends

Mort. I thank ye, and am happy in your service;
The Babbler I despise, he shall be punished,
The Envy that his Cankered breast is big with,
By Preying on its self shall work his Ruin:
So Dogs behold the Luster of the Moon,
And so run yelping backward into madness.

Nevill. The Queen:

Mort. Retire, meet me anon, and we will consult what is best.
Enter Queen Isabella. All retire but Mortimer. My Lovely Queen, my charming
Isabella,
The Empress of my Soul, and balm of Life,
Ten thousand Cupids play within those Circles,
And dart the Rays of Love so quick and fast,
That all my Spirits leap to meet thy Glories.

Queen. I find my Soul so near resemble thine,
That when you speak it hasts to catch thy words;
So when some Curious Artist strikes the Lute,
The Harmony excites the Astonished Sense,
And to the Face conveys the sudden Transport
When thou do offer up this Sacrifice;
Like Cynthia to her Loved Endymion,
I must descend and thus Caress my Charmer.

Mort. To you alone I own my Second being,
And can I pay my life to other use
Then the adoring of my saving Goddess?
Well I remember when Carnarvex, Edward,
By Spencers Art lodged me within the Tower,
Where every minute boaded still my last,
'Midst of despair; 'twas thou my better Genius;
Contrived the means to save thy Vassal's Life:
A sleepy mixture artfully conveyed
Into the Wine, the greedy Warders Drank.
While by a Friend that thou had made with Gold
I past the Guards and fled the hated Place.

Queen. Could I do less then that for him I loved,
He who in Steel had fought my Battles over
Against the false Spencers, and worse Gavestone;
He who all danger in my ^^use defied,
Was my best Friend against a Host of Foes:
Oh Mortimer how happy had I been
If'stead of Edward thou had been my Lord,
Then Innocent and Pure as Vestall flames
I had come unspotted to thy wishing Arms,
And left no stain upon my Memory.

Mort. Beauty like yours was ever absolute,
Crowns should not Awe, nor should the Throne Command,
But he that is bravest best deserves the blessing;
Was Edward fit to reap such joys as these?
Ungrateful Edward who received a Prize,
Heaven could not match in all its wondrous store,
And for return instead of Prayers and Incense
Slighted the Giver and the glorious Present:
A Minion Spencer must supply the Place,
A Ganemede, a Hylas, senseless Prince,
The Gods Reprisall gave for the Contempt,
And for reward of all my Cares and Toyls
Decreed this slighted Beauty should be mine.

Queen. You Men are skillfull in the Trade of Love,
You found our Souls and Catch our Weaknesses,
Apting your words still to the Theme we are fond of,
And we believe 'em to our own undoing.

Mort. Whilst thus I press, I feel a kindly heat
Glow in my heart, urging to eager Bliss:
Sweets let me sip from these Immortal Springs;
Youth we will renew, and humane nature change,
Making the Extacy a Paradise.

Queen. May thou for ever feel this Pleasing Fire,
May fears never cool it, time or Age decay it,
Desire for ever wait upon our Joys,
And may the last be ever thought the best.

Mort. What Brainsick Priests do in their Raptures tell
Of the Elysium endless happiness
Falls short of what each minute I enjoy;
But oh my Care, our Paths of Love are strewn
With Briers which Thwart and Cross us in our Pleasures:
Young Mountacute with Delamore and Holland,
Those subtle Bellous which keep in his fire,
And raise and calm it as their Work requires
Must be removed, Their Interest is great,
Their Prudence strict, Mountacutes Courage firm,
Their Fortunes able to maintain their measures,
Which strikes for thy Sons Greatness and our Ruin.

Queen. The Boy is Pliable to all my wishes,
It Is a half Soul bred in the Lag of Love,
And Spiritless as the Desire which got him;
We Will think of them at Leisure.

Mort. No more then now.
Let us Retire to our Delights, unutterable Joys,
Oh! why should Death for ever part such Lovers
Fate; when your pleasure comes that we must fall,
Let us together mount the Etheriall Region:
But oh I fear my Soul's too poor for thine,
Qeens have peculiar stations sure above;
I tossed and shattered must remain below,
Ever Imploring for my heaven in view.

Queen. No, if the Powers despise my Mortimer,
Their Care of me alone's not worth my Thanks.
Single a Paradise I could not bear,
Heaven would be Hell were Mortimer not there.

Exeunt. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Scene Opens and Discovers King Edward on a Couch, after some struggling
Rises. King. WHere have I been, or what is it I have seen?
It Is said the Soul while the Tired body sleeps,
Her Mansion often leaves and Roves abroad,
Sometimes to Groves and Solitary Cells,
Sometimes to Courts, to Cities, and to Camps;
Mingling with Crowds, then strangely left alone:
But mine has fallen down dreadful Precipices,
Walked in the Charnell-Houses of the dead:
My Fathers Ghost stalked thus before my eyes,
Cried out Revenge, then shreik'd and disappeared,
With so much have, as if it seemed to dread
The hand of Murder did pursue it still;
Yet, as it fled it forced the yielding Air,
To Echo back, beware of Mortimer,

Enter a Messenger. Mes. Lord Mountacute, Sir Robert Holland, with Sir Thomas
Delamore,
Wait for admittance to your Majesty.

King. They Are welcome, bring 'em in; Exit Messenger.
Then headless Kent my once beloved Uncle,
Led on a Train of miserable Shades,
Who seemed bewailing their untimely deaths.
With uplift hands they begged as for releif,
And in sad postures told their several Fates:
Then Mortimer Led in my wicked Mother,
Who Snatched the Crown from me and gave it him,
At which the numerous Crowds of Ghosts looked paler,
Their mangled Limbs broke out afresh with blood,
And the Surprising horror shook off sleep;
What is it, oh ye Powers, that ye decree?
Am I designed to fall a Sacrifice
To the Ambitious Lust of this fell Monster?
If Dreams Presage, Or Visions can forebode
The Fate of Edward, Edward must succeed,
If so you have fixed it, yet I Will face this storm,
Stand like a King against my Rellious Doom;
And Perish worthy of my Dignity.

Enter Lord Mountacute. Sr. Thomas Delamore, and Sr. Robert Holland All. Health
to your Majesty:

King. The like to all of You, ye are good men;
My Worthy Uncle Edmond when alive
Bad me select and value ye as Jewels,
When Dying, as a Legacy Bequeathed
Your Faiths and Service;
I am too Young to know the Arts of Men,
But by my hopes I think ye mighty honest.

L. Moun. Our happiness Lies only in that thought:

King. Tell me my Friends, and with that honest Plainness
As suits the Character I have of you:
Why is it that with folded Arms of Late,
And heavy Eyes which speak distempered minds,
Ye measure out your steps?
Seeming like Statues more then Counselors,
As mourners wait upon the Dead remains
Of some loved friend to his eternal home.

S. Tho. Del. Most Royal Prince, my honored Liege and Master.

King. Honored, my Liege, my Prince and Royal Master.
How Like this sounds to Mortimer;
I find he is grown the President o'th Court,
The Star by which each Courtier guides his hopes.

S. Rob, Holl: Rather a Meteor or some Exhalation
Raised by the Sulphurous vapors of the Earth,
Which borrowing of a Blaze from Real Lights
Attracts the eyes of Fools to Gaze on it.

King. No more on your Allegiance, to the Point:

L. Moun. You have touched us home Sir now, and we obey
The Secrets of our hearts shall be unlocked,
Where you may read yours and the Nations doom;
It is the Man you have named which rides our Spirits
Oh my Loved Lord!
Why is this Viper harbored in your Bosom,
Which (...) insensibly upon your honor?
Why p^^pher'd with the Worship of men's Knees?
You are our King, Ro^se sleeping Majesty,
Awake and view the Souls which wait your rising,
To pay their Long kept Homage where it is due.

S. Tho. Del. Where now is Right? to whom shall we Appeal?
The Queen has placed her Power on Mortimer:
Whilst the Laws edge is Ground but on one side,
Nor that employed unless to Lop your Friends:
The man who dare reflect on his Proceedings,
Or pity but the Circumstances of Edward,
Is straight beset and sworn into some Plot:
His Life or Fortune's seized, it may be both
Jurys and Witnesses are kept in pay,
Which have agreed his Ruin e're he is heard.

S. Rob Holl. Thus your good Subjects daily are Oppressed,
Which Perish by Consent of Perjury.

S. Tho Del. Thus whilst these vile Possessors wrack the Land,
Your Worth decays and Glory runs to Ruin:
It cannot last long they think, so make the most on it,
Assume your Right, or we must all submit,
Our Country Like Estates held in dispute,
Fertile in Woods and Parks the Pride of Wealth.
If he that is in possession thinks it short,
He Cuts down all the Pomp of's Ancestors,
Which many years their Diligence Improved
So Worthy men the prop of future hopes,
By this Usurper Mortimer are Lopped,
Their Fortunes torn by 'th' Roots form long Succession;
And scattered to maintain Voluptuousness.

King. Is It Possible! I always thought him ill,
But you Decypher him a very Devil:
Filling my thoughts with horror of his Crime.

Sr Tho. Del. Each Magistrate which should administer
Justice Impartial, why all are made by him
Which Ruin others to preserve themselves;
The Clergy and the Law are both his Creatures,
The Bishop Chancellor takes Care of that;
Places of Trust and Profit are all Sold:
It Is Practiced from the Mitre'd holy head
To The Needy Starving Verger of the Church:
You cannot serve Heaven on Cushions but you pay for 't,
Or Blister your Numbed Knees upon the Marble;
Then from the Scarlet and the Purple Gown,
Down to the very Crier of the Court.

Lo. Mount. Well may the Nation Groan while such as these
Sit at the helm, and what expect but shipwreck.

King. Now by my Honor I Will no Longer bear
The Ignominious hand of a Control;
I find my self enlarged, Each Artery
Beats double time, as if my Spirits strove
To be in Action; My Fathers Soul
Shoots in my blood, and Prompts to Resolution:
Thus I Cast from me
The Name of Duty and the Tie of Son,
Since thou art dead to shame, be so to me.

Sr. Tho. Del. Ay, now my Lord you speak your self a King:
Do but appear with that Authority,
The Praise of Edward Every tongue will sing,
While Ravished heaven does echo back the sound;
You cannot want hands for such a Noble Work,
A Cause like yours would summon the Just Gods
With all their Thunder to the Royal Aid:
Oh let me Kiss your Sacred feet dear Prince;
These Words have added years to my sick Life. Kneels

King. He Weeps, indeed the honest man
Does weep; Rise Delamore for I will be my self,
And this Usurper March shall down to Hell,
All spare the Tree whose Branches serve as shade,
Till the spread mischiefs kill the under-Plants,
Then every Man assists to fell it down,
So this Colossus of the English Isle,
Under whose Legs the Tallest Ships must Pass,
E're they gain harbor shall to Seas be hurled,
And in their Bottom find a Monument:
My Dream comes on apace, and I foretell
This meeting Ominous to March for it Portends;
The Wardship of the Queen, and he expires,
He seeks my Life, and Crown: ha! is it not so?

Sr Tho, Del. Right Sir, that must be surely the design
By his removing you to his Residence:
Why was not Salisbury as good a place,
Oh! there you Lived surrounded by the Peers
And Loyal Commons, 'twas a place too safe:

Lo. Mount: Possibly he did it Sir to show the State
Your Royal Mother keeps -- But then
Why was not his fair Castle made your Palace?
No, your eyes would Pierce too deep in his design,
For there he Lives in Grandeur,
In Masks and Revells every night he reigns
While alls Barred up as if he feared a spy.

Sr Rob Holl. You now are open to each Traitors shaft,
And in the very midst I dare avouch it,
Of those who long to taste your Royal Life.

King. Thanks my Good Angel, thou have turned my fears,
The Chilness of my Blond now Ebbs apace,
My shivering Nerves shake their Convulsion off,
And ye have Roused the youthful Lion up;
Oh that I had the hearts of these Bloud-hunters,
This Pious Chancellor and Treacherous March;
Like young Alcides would I Gripe the Snakes;
My worthy friends be still about my Person,
Send Instantly to Berkly, Salisbury, Exit Holland.

Leicester and Mordant: You withdraw with me;
Business I have requires your best advice,
For like the Mariner I see from far
A Storm is gathering in the distant Sky;
But with these Vessels I can fear no Sea,
The utmost Rigor of the Clouds I Will stand
Safe as the Souls which pity us from Land. Exeunt.

SCENE II. The Chancellours Apartment.
Enter Sly, and Secret Assurance with Papers in their hands; Then the Mace and
Purse, The Chancellor. On each side of him Judges who Complement him, and then
take their leave: Then the Chanceliour sits in a Chairs of State while the
Lawyers present him with New Years Gifts. I. Law. I beg your Lordship would
accept of this poor offering,
I have had but a bad Term; as the times mend
My Acknowledgments shall grow greater. Exit Law.

Chan. Three broad Pieces counts the money

This fellow will come to nothing, I remember him an Attorney, you know him
Secret.


Sec. Yes, and Please you, he was once of the house of which I Am President, he
always shunned coming into Commons, and used to Dine at a three-penny Celler,
always went to bed by daylight, Stole Paper and Pens, and begged Ink, he had
but one Band which he washed himself at the Pump, and then dried it by the
Hall-fire.


2d Law. If your Lordship be at Leisure -- gives him money


Chan. Councellor Dunderpate, I am glad to see you, I hope your family is well:


2d. Law. At your Lordships Service:


Chan. You're a sensible man, 10 Pieces -- well I never forget my friends.


2d. Law. There is a Cause will come before your Lordship between Pluckat and
Holdfast -- now I am for the the Defendant -- Holdfast and the Case is thus --


Chan. Why you rascal, are you going to Corrupt me with prepossession of the
Cause e're I Have heard --


2d. Law. With your Lordships permission --

Chan. Sirrah, I will have nothing to do with it till it Lies before me; Why
you Jackanapes because I indulge your Presents d'yon think I take 'em as Bribes
-- ha!


2d. Law. I beg your Lordships pardon, thus I confess my Error.


gives more money. Chan. This makes some atonement, but d'hear, if ever I
catch you at the like, as opening the merrits of the Cause in Private again --
I Will make you such an Example, that that -- Sly take Councellor Dunderpate into
the Buttery, and give him a bottle of Sack.


2. Law. Your Lordships Devoted Slave. Ex. Sly and Dun.


Several Law. If it please your gracious Lordship.


Chan. Why, lay down what you have, I cannot look over it now.


They lay down their Presents, he smiles on some, nods upon others, more or
less; as he likes their Gifts, they go off. Enter Sergeant Eitherside. Chan.
Sergeant Eitherside, how do you? I hope your Brother-in-Law Sergeant
Huddle-Cause is well: I am glad to see you, you are my old Friend and
Acquaintance, (let me see) above 20 years standing: ha is it not so?


Serj. Your Lordship hits the mark of time Exactly, and I Protest the Honor
you have done me requires Acknowledgment beyond the Talent I am endowed withal;
Let me therefore, avoiding Prolixity, Profoundly Celebrate your Lordships
Praises, and acquaint the World, the favors you have placed on me your
Creature, Exhalts me to the Pinnacle of Ambition, and as an Incumbent duty
obliges me to Consecrate my self and Posterity to your Lordships Pleasure: Give
me admittance therefore most humbly to pay this Tribute of Duty, and with it
the Orizons of many happy years.


Chan. The Man speaks well ( weighs the purse) there is weight in his words; a
great sign of an able Pleader -- how does your Neice?


Serj. My Lord.


Chan. How does your Neice, I say, what art thou deaf?


Serj. She Is well my gracious Lord, and happy that your Emminence takes notice
of her.


Chan. I never saw her, but am told she is a notable baggage, a tite Lass and a
pretty one:


Secret. Fetch her whilst his bloud's warm, I see it glow through his Praises.
Exit Sergeant Eitherside.


Enter more who give money. Chan. Lay it down I say, why I will not forget ye.

They all bow mighty low and retire. If this trade were to last the year round,
I should have a fine time on it, Gold in abundance, without which (as Anthony
said) the world's not worth my Care: it is great Pity the first of January
comes but once in a twelvemonth. Every one of these Crouching Fawning Sniveling
Sons of Perdition expect I should do wonders for 'em, but I know none of 'em;
as I Lock up their Presents I bury their memories: -- nor can I recolled 'em
under under fresh ones -- Secret. I am but a man, yet am glad to do good in my
Function when the Persons are truly sensible.


Secret. It Is a great goodness in you then.


Chan. Why there is that old spawn of the Serpent; Eitherside, a fellow of rare
parts, eminent Practice; I have known him undo twenty People, and they never
the wiser -- a very wicked fellow -- but then on the other hand his Repentance
is always so hearty, so Substantial and feeling, that my nature is overcome
with his Penitence, and I can no more chide him then I can refuse his Oblation.


Secret. Such men are wanting to fill the Bench withal, and I hope he may
stand fair in your Lordships opinion in the next remove, he would perform his part
rarely, he is no Charitable Conscientious Timorous Fellow, but a Thorough-pac'd
Lawyer, and mighty hearty in the Cause --


Chan. Say 'it thou so man, and by my Troth it was well thought on; if these
Peuking velvet-hearted Wary Knaves that pretend to Scruples and seem averse to
comply with the Queens desires hang an Arse any longer, they shall make room
for more deserving Persons -- I do admire they can have so little Grace as to
receive a Plentiful Salary and make no return for it.


Secret. I Will pawn my Soul for him -- his temper may be molded to what use
occasion shall require; besides his wants will prompt him to comply, his Gains
are not sufficient to maintain his family as his Wife would have it, for she
loves to go fine as most of 'em do; and for a new gown would make him give away
the Justest Cause in the world; his Estate too is morgag'd past recovery, to
maintain her pride.


Chan. But his Neice Seeret his Neice.


Secret. Oh she is the Prettiest Creature, my eyes e're looked on, such a
Composition of flesh and blood, so Witty, so Modest, so Alluring --


Chan. And such a Servant I want, for I am grown of late so melancholy, I am
not what I was -- we are all flesh and blood Secret, if she is of a
coming-nature she is made for ever, I grow aged, this Turmoyling in the
Government, what with my affairs o'th State, and bustling on the Bench,
bandying about Equity and one thing or other, wearys me out strangely -- I want
like the Heathen Monarchs, my Saraglio, to refresh me after the business of the
day, but I must keep that to my self -- and is she tractable?


Secret. Easy as Innocence it self; he is gone to fetch her.


Chan. Say thou?


Secret. He Is gone to fetch her:


Chan. Hither.


Secret. Hither to your Lordship


Chan. He shall be a Judge, let him bring her instantly; I am much refreshed
with the thoughts that I can serve the Nation and my self so Luckily -- go and
bid the Sergeant prepare for his advancement.


Sly. I shall my Lord Exit Sly


Secret. Will it please your Lordship to peruse these Papers?


Chan. No Sir, I design to peruse something else I thank you, I will not have
my Imagination disturbed, nor my fancy palled; tell me of Papers when I Am to
give my Judgment upon flesh and blood: what do you take me for nothing but
hurry-durry all my life long: thou think my brains are taken up like thine
who is to be fined next: no, thou half-skin of Parchment, I hate the Sin of
being Covetous, though I love Gold Extremly, not altogether in regard as it is
money, but because Physicians have told me it is a great Restorative, you Varlet.


Secret. I beg your Lordships pardon.


Chan. Pardon, why you Jack-Call to the Law, did think I was angry, angry on
a New Years day, angry when Riches and Love is toward me, no, no -- but hark
you Sirrah:


Secret. What is your Pleasure?


Chan. That shall be nameless -- Sirrah, was ever such a Question asked a man
in my office? why, you Saucy Impertinent --

Enter Sly. Ha! is she coming rogue, say you? you little sucking Devil, by the
Mass I Am strangely altered within this half hour -- Look you, I am not angry
Secret, as I said before -- but, is she such a pretty sweet dapper Piece of
beauty? I will make thee a great man shortly by the Mass.


Sly. My Lord, she is whatsoever you can fancy, nor can you stretch your
thoughts into Imagination, but she Exceeds it in substance; her Uncle overjoyed
at the Good Office brings her himself.


Chan. He shall be a Judge -- shall -- he is already.


Sly. See, they are here my Lord.


Enter Sergeant Eitherside and his Neice Maria. Chan. Leave us. Exit Secret and
Sly.

A glorious Woman: how her eyes sparkle, and how the blood juts in and out upon
her cheecks, as if it hoped some good were coming toward her -- come, sweet
one, kisses

Her lips are made of Velvet, smooth, soft, and pliable, I Will lip her and eye
her, and every thing her. -- Sergeant, as I told you before, I have a great
kindness for you, and hearing that you had a Neice of worthy Education, whose
merits spoke her praise (oh you little baggage) I can do no less, having your
Preferment in my eye, then while I was doing good for you in some measure, to
advance your Neices fortune, my House wants such a sober discreet young Woman
to manage it, and by the way I must call you my Lord.


Ser. Oh Sir!


Chan. Indeed I must -- the Queen upon my Request does conferr the office of
Judge on you, as you deserve; that for ought I know you may be in a little time
Chief Justice -- This I have done my friend to serve you: But to the matter,
what say you Mr. Sergeant (my Lord, I beg your pardon) are you willing to put
your Neice under my care and Protection? ha!


Ser. My Lord you so highly oblige me, I am struck silent with the manner of it
-- a Judge, Chief Justice, I am confounded with the honor -- My Lord, the Maid
is whatever you please to make her.


Chan. Then I Will make a Woman of her speedily: What say you pretty Lady, are
you free to take the trouble upon you? I am a weak man and have but few
Relations -- If I do well I Will make your fortunes: If I dye, you shall have no
Cause to repent.


Mari. Would thou were dead already; must I then be the Sacrifice to my Uncles
Ambition? be steady Virtue, and assist me Heaven, though poor, I Will not be base
-- Oh Mountacute.


Chan. What say your fair one?


Mari. In any honest way I should be proud to serve your Lordship, and obey my
Uncle.


Chan. Pretty Innocence, I am but twenty -- not so much I believe, I know not
what I am.


Ser. He may in time make her his Heir, at least her fortunes made, and I am
freed of a Burden -- My worthy Lord, her mind and mine are all one, she is the
Creature of your Pleasure, and will take any Impression your Lordship shall
stamp on her (a Judge --) Wife be of Comfort, thy Chariot shall be turned into
a Coach; Thy Pew at Church be stripped of Baise, and lined with Velvet, and thou
shall take place of my Lady Mayoress Neice; you were born under a happy Planet,
fortune throws her self into your Lap, make use on it while it is offered, a Lord
-- oh lack a day, I cannot contain my ecstasy.


Chan. Have you considered little one of the offer? you shall Command in Chief,
and be esteemed as if my Sister:

No harm shall come to you.


Mar. I hope not.


Chan. Fear it not.


Mar. I trust in your honor, your Robe's too worthy sure to harbor ill.


Ser. Neice, you must not talk so Impertinently: Incline your mind and body as
his Chancellorship and holiness shall think fit.


Mar. Hold there, good Uncle.


Chan. I am mightily o'rejoy'd it should fall out so pat that I can serve my
old Friend: It Is an Angelical Jade, and I grow very warm: well Child, I will
take care of you: My Lord, within two days your Patent shall be ready; I would
discourse a little with your Neice in Private -- I protest things fall out so
lucky.


Ser. I Will leave her with your Lordship.


Chan. Pray call me Brother-Lord, we are both Judges now and Lords alike.


Ser. Then Brother-Lord -- oh pretty -- I Will leave her with your Brother
Lordship.


Chan. Do, do.


Mar. How will you leave me alone with a man Uncle?


Serj. Peace baggage -- Uncle -- I Am a Judge.


Chan. Why are you afraid of an old man?


Serj. I Will make the Knaves that brought the extent against me smoke -- a Judge
-- I Will feague the Rogues -- Brother, I am your Lordships most humble and
eternally engaged servant and Judge.


Chan. Oh my Lord Judge your friend: goes to the door with the Sergeant and
Locks it.

Mar. Ha! What now! I find here will be sport,
But Mountacute I will not wrong my love to thee,
I have kept it Pure unsullied hitherto,
And will, spite of this mighty man,
And mightyer Villain Uncle.

Chan. My Dear Child I shall respect thy Uncle infinitely for thy sake, thou
have the Inticing'st Look with thee -- I must peep in thy face and admire thy
features -- nay, be not bashful, I am thy friend, thy Governor, and thou art
become my particular Care.


Mar. Nay, fie my Lord;


Chan. By the Mass I have a greater kindness for thee then I can express; why
you little Cherubim, what a pair of pretty swelling powting bubbies have thou
got, they play in and out as they were at bo-peep. I must initiate 'em into my
favor.


Mar. Nay, my Lord for Shame.


Chan. Sweeter then Iessamin or Honey-Suckles, she has called my heart up to my
Lips, but I Will make her draw it down to its place: come child.


he pulls her. Mar. Nay, pray my Lord, do no Violence;


Chan. Why you baggage, if to look Babys in your eyes, to play with those Lilly
white snow-Balls, and to smother thee with kisses be to use violence, I cannot
forbear it.


Mar. Does this become your Coat my Lord?


Chan. No matter for my Coat child, it agrees with my body, nay, I must Plunder.


Mar. Help, help, within there.


Chan. Hush huswife, here here is Gold for thee, thou shall have more then thou
can carry.


Mar. I never can deserve this bounty, nor can I guess why it is you bribe your
Servant thus, indeed you make me blush.


(...). (...) me again, such another Glance and I am a dead (...) a bribe, a
paw-word: Why I have given thee my heart al(...)nd going to put my body into
thy Possession.


Mar. For Heaven's sake are you Pious?


Chan. I am not Pious, nay, hang not back, for I will rifte thy sweets, and
bury my self in thy bosom, I will, I will.


Mar. Help, Murder, Uncle, what shall I do?


Mortimer within. Mort. My Lord, Lord Chancellor, ha! are you at it?


Enter Sly. Sly. Sir, Sir, My Lord the Earl of March is coming.


Chan. Let him go to the Devil, could he find no other time but now, I never
disturbed him at his Recreations.


Sly. What shall I say my Lord?


Chan. Say any thing, and be damned: Why, you Rascal, you a Lawyer, and to seek
for a Lie.


Mort. within. When Priest, when come you?


Mar. This is lucky.


Chan. I must to him, the Devil fetch him, go, go, into that Room, I Will be
with you presently; nay, go, all shall be well, and I Will be civil. puts her
off and locks her in. You dog could you not deny me, had you no sooner done the
Office of bringing us together, but you must break off the bargain before we
had Signed and Sealed.


Sly. It Is some earnest business in the Law he says.

Mort Why Chancellor?

Chan. Well, well, I Am coming,
And when I have dispatched him I Will withdraw,
And read another Lesson then the Law.
Exeunt.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The Castle.
Enter Turrington and Nevill. Tur. AFFairs seem veering, and the Fane of Edward
Which hitherto has pointed to our wishes,
Is turned against us; out of what corner
Comes this blast of change? It Is sudden,
All are as hush as Murderers when escaping.
Privacy the waiting-womans Virtue is in use,
And the young Prince has left his darling Sports
For closer Studies.

Nevill. It Is odd, and we must arm against it, just now
I would have passed the Antichamber,
And a Starched fellow grimly stopped my Passage;
I asked the Knave by whose Authority
He barred my Entrance, he replied morosly
'Twas by my betters, and he would obey 'em;
Then I demanded if the Rascal knew me.

Tur. What said he then?

Nevil. He answered better then I knew my self,
Bid me return, there was no room for Scouts;
The ill-bred Dog had stood corrected,
Had not old Leicester, Berkley, Salisbury,
With buisy faces come into the Room;
To these he turned the Key, said they were staid for.

Tur. These froward Peers Envy our Masters fortune,
Some of' em have been faulty against the Queen,
For which they were forbid her Royal Presence,
And with a sulliness withdrew from Court:
What brings 'em hither now is worth enquiry,
Unsent for I am sure they did not come:
For March and they, like jarring Elements
Have Constant Enmity and must keep distance:
But see he comes, with him the Chancellor,
He glows, the Prelate made him wait,
And we shall hear how he resents his State. Exit.

Enter Mortimer and Chancellor. Mort. Must I attend your leisure, wait your
hour,
And herd among your slaves, thou clod of earth,
Whom I have work't and molded up to form,
And breathed a Soul into?

Chan. Why, my Lord, my Lord,

Mort. Thou have forgotten thy Original;
When Pensive in a poor thatched homely Cell,
Lonely and Destitute as want could make thee;
No Wine nor Flesh to Nurse a loose desire;
Thy lust was more to food then woman then,
The Suns hot season scarce could taint thy blood,
Or if it did thou crep'st to thy Turf-bed,
Which quickly damped the Carnal Exhalation.

Chan. What will become of me?

Mort. How wou'd'st thou bless the founder of a Loaf,
So needy thou would plunge the deep mired road,
To hold the Stirrup of a Passenger,
While with expecting eyes you watched his hand,
And with a face of sorrow begged relief.

Chan. Do but hear me.

Mort. Pitying thy abject State I took thee hence,
Clothed, fed and raised thy drooping Spirits up,
Placed thee where thou grew'st fat with saying Prayers,
But quickly found that Virtue was thy Burden,
Thy Piety grew faint with Nourishment,
Thy Carcass was the hoard of Luxury,
Where each variety came tumbling in;
The profits of the Church thou still would glean,
But never did a moments duty for it,
Picked up a Mendicant of thy old Trade,
He was sufficient for the work of Heaven:
Your Clergy's grown so lazy with their wealth,
It Is Drudgery if they Preach 'bove once a Year;
And if you are Chose in Lent you call it thrashing,
Because you think there is nothing to be got;
Like Sheriffs then you had rather fine then stand.

Chan. Your Lordship is pleased to be somewhat free with the Church, If it knew
you so sharp an observer, the Members of it would Contribute toward your
Removal.


Mort. I raised thee, I preferred thee,
And as thou did improve in serving me
From all the vile necessities I Have mentioned,
Advanced thee to the highest place of trust,
Exhalted thee from the Meager dregs of man,
To be a Saucy, Proud, Lacivious Prelate.

Chan. Nay my Lord, I must confess you have done me many signal favors, but I
beseech you, however you Load my Person, have a regard to my Function,
Lacivious -- revile me at your Pleasure, but forbear Scandalizing the Gown, you
may talk of what you please, and my Gleaning the Profits of the Church, but
what can be Gleaned out of him that fasts four days a week, and when he does
eat, takes no more then what will Just keep Life and Soul together?


Mort. It Is false:
You pamper your varatious Appetites,
Indulge Praedominance to that degree,
You exceed the very Sultan of the East;
But with this Difference, he at vast expense
Keeps his Seraglio: you have all in Common,
Under the holy Covert of Confession:
You shroud the Priest and Sanctify the Whore,
Did I not holt upon your Rank Devotion:
And caught you acting Tarquin on Lucretia.

Chan. I could give him a rub of Majesty if I durst. aside What A Censorious
Age do we live in, that a man of my Clothing cannot press a Case of Conscience
home to a Gentlewoman, but it must look like force? But suppose I was doing
what your Lordship said: I say, suppose, why all flesh is frail -- because we
ought to be above temptation: do you think it possible to be so? We that are
given to fasting Eat Fish, and fish is of a Provoking Disgestion, and make the
worst of what you were saying, 'twas but venial.

As the Casuists says, -- I confess to Ravish is a heinous Crime in the Sex
that puts us to it, But if it raises their affections the more, then it may be
palliated; but as for simple Fornication, there is not a Novice in any
University or College in Europe but is allowed it, provided it be used as the
Cannon expresses -- medicinally, and for healths sake.


Mort. Leave guilding Vices with the Cant of Virtue,
The time calls on for business; for the offense
You have committed merit the forgiveness.
Read that, and as you love your safety see it done. gives a Paper.

The Chancellor mumbles as reading the Paper, Eyes Mortimer, at last speaks the
supposed end. Chan. -- By formal process.
Let Mountacute be speedily dispatched say you -- is it thereabouts, I perceive
who has nettled him, and I must smart for't-but I have a fetch -- dispatched:
ha dispatched!


Mort. Why do you hesitate, I say dispatched,
Are you so squeamish you cannot digest the term?

Chan. No my Lord, not I, but you ferrit me out of the few senses I have --
dispatched -- murdered -- it is not my profession -- I will not turn Cutthroat
for any man's pleasure, if the lodging him in a Jayl for his Life will serve so,
if not --


Mort. Away Trifler:

Chan. I am confounded; why, you have no sooner done Chiding me for a little
humane frailty, but you hurry me on to a Crime with a Vengeance.


Mort. Do you make Scruples, let me but hear Another Syllable that contradicts
what I Have decreed, and thou art lost for ever -- I will divest thee of thy
Pageant-Greatness, expose thee as a Sacrifice to the Rabble, and how they will use
thee thy Conscience best can tell.


Chan. The Devill's in him, I must submit, I have run my self like Thieves, so
far into ill company, that now I would reform, my associates will not let me; my
Lord I beseech you be not angry: I did this only to found the depth of your
Lordships intentions, and since you are resolved, he shall be dispatched -- I
have light on the rarest fellow, one that will go through-stich in the Law, he
must be a Judge.


Mort. Who is it?

Chan. Why Sergeant Either-side.

Mort. That Is a dull wretch;

Chan. Never the worse for a Judge, they sleep half their Lives out -- but he
has a vast assurance and tho'he cannot speak much to the purpose he has rare
lungs, and will let no man he heard but himself.


Mort. Well, work him, and make him what you will:

Chan. I was born to serve your honor, I will retrieve your favor, though it be
by turning executioner my self, and for this fellow he will prove the miracle of
the Bench as to your use, and will truss up your enemies with as little regret
as a Farmer does the Moles which molest his Ground -- it shall be done my Lord.
Exit


Mort. This fellow came from Proteus, the Caemelion change not faster.
Enter Turrington and Nevill. How now, your business:

Turr. It Is of Importance, stand upon your guard,
For Berkly, Salisbury, and many others
Who not long since were banished from the Court,
Are now with Edward close Locked up with him.

Mor. Ha!

Nev. By heavens it is true, we saw 'em enter:
We would have followed 'em, but were denied,
Nay ordered to retire -- and the out-Courts
Are filled with rough-hew'd slaves who guard the Lords.

Mort. Withdraw to my Apartment, I Will come presently;
How Is this, so Cunning Boy, Damnation: Ex. Tur. Nev
Salisbury, Berkly and Exeter, I warrant too are there:
Are ye upon the Catch my Politicians?
That Exeter's the Devil for a Statesman, and
Must be the Guide o'th Council too or nothing:
The subtle fiend has Left and sought more parties
Then all the Cabinet Pack shuffled together:
He was for us but faulter'd when he found
My Interest Greater in the Queen then his;
He had rather be the foreman of a Jury
Then second in the Council of four hundred:
Why Salisbury and he were ever foes,
Constantly Jealous of each others greatness,
And though they both have liked each others measures,
Still Contradiction was their practiced spite.
But in this Cause it is probable they will Join,
And to secure it give their spleen Cessation:
What Is to be thought on?

Enter Queen. Queen. What always musing, ever melancholy,
Beware of the infection, none so wretched
As those whom Jealousy and Doubts possess:

Mort. But Madam, mine is a subject calls for thought,
No vain Chymaera but a just occasion,
Nevill and Turrington have brought advice,
And I am sorry I must tell it you;
Those saucy Peers who villifyed your Crown
Not sparing Censure of your private Actions,
Are giving vile instructions to your Son;
Learning the Plyant Youth how he may shake
The fetters of Obedience off betimes,
While eagerly he listens to the Charm,
And smiles to hear himself saluted King.

Queen. Is It possible?

Mort. Be you the Judge, for you it most concerns,
Since Delamore has whistled to this Sterlin,
All his Apartments have been closely kept,
New waiters placed, those you put in discharged;
Left they might do their duty and inform,
Tell me (my Royal Mistress) can you bear
The hand of Limitation, or Control,
Can you with ease resign the Glorious Throne
Into the hands of Salisbury and Leicester?

Queen. Distraction's in the Thought --

Mort. Can she Obey who allways did Command?
Can she Retire who ever lived in splendor?
Nay thought the world too scanty for her Greatness,
Accept a Private Pension, small attendance,
And live by him whose Soul from hers took being,
Whilst I must to their long-grown malice bow,
Which their believing Life must be a plague,
Will give it me on Scandalous Conditions;
Nay blush not Madam, this must all be done,
And more when these be Edwards Governors:

Queen. That never shall be, and Isabella Living:
Be thou as once when Spencer Gaveston
The minions of my husband did attempt,
To Curb my Will, and I defy 'em all,
No March, If I for Love could give him death,
Think thou this Feeble spawn his slender offspring
(Bred when I wished a Barrenness upon me
So Irksome and insipid was the Pleasure)
That he shall baulk the measures of my Soul.

Mort. She fires:

Queen Can the froward Chitt believe because my Son
I Would still him with a play thing called my Crown,
And live my self on Curtesy of state:
The Fragments of the Grandeur I had left
Perish ten Sons e're such a fit possess me.

Mort. There spoke a Queen; this is true Majesty,
Appear and like the Planet of the day,
Disperse these sullen Fogs which Cloud your Luster,
Since Delamore and Holland, Exeter, and the rest
Have Soared like Iearus beyond their bounds,
Their waxen wings shall melt in thy Bright beams,
Finding in the floods reward for their Ambition.

Queen. They fall my Mortimer, they sink for ever,
I Will visit straight these close Conspirators,
Who think themselves so hushed in their designs;
As for this Rebell-Son he is a disease,
And I will purge the venom from my blood,
As if a Leprosy had compas'd me;
I will have no Competitors in Power,
If in the Fathers time I ruled alone,
I Will never yield that honor to the Son:
Hard shall he tugg if he will have the sway,
And if at last it is forced and Racked away,
As I shall scorn the Conquest to outlive,
This shall a Period to his Triumph give. Shows a Dagger

Exit Queen. SCENE The Chancellours House.
Enter Serj. Eitherside and his Neice Maria, be pulling her in. Sorj. Come,
come in, come in you baggage, you runaway Theif; It Is well I met you, I would
not have had you gone home for 5000 l. gads my life I had been Unjudg'd before
my Tailor had finished my Robes, I should not have had the Satisfaction of
seeing how scarlet becomes me, and your Aunt would have turned you out of doors.


Mari. Why would you leave me then alone with him?

Ser. Chamber-practice like that of Confession admits of no ears, but the
Parties concerned -- therefore be ruled, I have not seen my wife since, but had
you gone home as I said, and she had known the occasion, and my preferment had
fallen upon it, she had turned you out to have got a Livelihood by the same
means you shunned, which would not have turned to so good account.


Mar. But Sir, he would have forced me --

Ser. To have pleased your self, come, come, no more words, away with your
buts, your ifs, and your yets, and joyu Issue immediately, or you are nonsuited;
mnst I be forced to use my Authority? do not provoke me, lest you sink under
the weight of a Judges Displeasure, we are dreadful fellows in Power,
therefore have a care.


Mar. This new honor has certainly crazed my Uncle: In my conscience rather
then be degraded he would stand himself by this Devil of a Chancellor till he
performed the deed of Darkness; Pray Sir let me go home:


Ser. If you will go to the place from whence you came, you shall thence to the
Place of Execution, where you shall be hanged till you're half-dead, and then
be cut into four Quarters, and your bowels burnt for high swinging
High Treason in rebelling against the Sovereign Authority of my unspotted Ermin.


Mar. This Crime will make it foul:
Black as hells Practice or the trade of perjury:
What to do I know not; if I refuse I loose his favor, and that is my bread; if
I comply, then farewell Reputation, let me be never so innocent the living with
this Goat is sufficient Scandal to any honest Person.


Serj. What again at a stand? why you perplex the Cause worse then an Evidence
that is deaf and dumb, and is only to be under stood by signs -- Go to, and know
your duty, for I expect an obedience as if I were your father, you are my adopted
Child, and are bound to submit to my Commands; if the Ancient Measures of
Divine and humane Laws are of any Force, and if they are not, I Will make new
ones on this Occasion.


Mar. Command my Life and I will freely give it: But this is such a task I
cannot think upon it, but horror seizes me.


Serj. Whence comes these fits in the Devils name, they are not of the Mother
i am sure, she would have swallowed such an offer and have made no bones on it.


Mar. Dispose of me any ways but this, though it be to my Death I Will thank you
for it, but to give my self up to the Lewd Embraces of a person I mortally hate
is far more terrible, and I had rather starve then gain a fortune on such base
conditions.


Serj. Conditions -- why thou perverse chit of a wanton Generation, how came
thou thus bastardiz'd? huswife, huswife, if you will not Lie with him you will
with somebody you like better, and I Will make you accept of my choice, or turn
you out of doors with your Load of virtue instead of a Portion, and see how the
starving your Spirit will agree with the Pride of your flesh.


Mar. What shall I do? what Courses shall I steer?

Serj. Those which tend to the making you rich and happy.

Mar. I shall be ruined:

Serj. You shall be made,

Mar. A Whore:

Serj. Why you peremptory Carrion who thrives that are otherwise? is there any
pleasure like that of a long Mace and a Purse, when you have the Broad-Seal for
your Vindication? he is a wise man and will be careful of your honor, in
regard of his own, and to my knowledge it is safer Trusting your virtue in his
hands, then money in a Bankers -- true, he is a little waggish or so; alas
child that is nothing, Learned men are of opinion, that warming the blood by
being now and then Facetious is very conducing to health, possibly he follows
the Maxim: aside Gads, my Life, he is here now Neice, if you have any respect
for your self and me, play the part of an understanding Woman, and make use of
the time: I Will step aside and watch your behavior, have a care. Exit.


Enter Chancellor reading. Mar. He Is gone and left me:
What shall I choose to save my honor?
There is no scaping, hea'ven Inspire me best:

Chan. I am strangely discomposed, I shall hardly be settled these two ^ours,
what a damnable fright has this termagant Lord put me in; he is ^s faucy with me
now he has got me in his net as a servant-maid to her Master when she has lain
with him: A Disappointment on both sides with a vengeance, had I but enjoyed
the little rogue, I should not have mattered, but not only miss the opportunity
but also loose the Person; I must send for the Pimp her Uncle, a Pox of these
papers: flings 'em down would they were burning in the Guts of him that drew
'em -- I was too hasty, I was too Rash; we old men are so seldom visited with
the effects of Love; we make too much of the Guest, because we know it is short.
Ha! What do I see? Discovers Maria.


Mar. I am discovered, now fortune stand my friend -- Dissimulation help me,
and all the Cunning of my Sex attend me.


Chan. What my little wandering Jew, are you here? you had like to have made
fine work, it is well you came back as you did, you had lost a lover else; my
heart was just breaking, I was sending in have for a Master in Chancery to make
my Will -- I designed to have given all I had in the World to a certain Person
that shall be nameless, but one so very like thee, that a man might safely
swear you were twins.


Mar. I should be sorry if I should any way discompose your Lordship in my
leaving you so Abruptly, for which I beg your Pardon:


Chan. Say thou so? 'gad child, and I am very good-natured and heartily
forgive thee, but you shall give bond to perform Covenant for the future, you
shall: kisses her What a notable twang she has -- I protest my dainty, piece of
Marmalete, I have a strange Inclination for thee, and I cannot but think thou
have of the quality of the Loadstone about thee; turn thee which way thou will
I have such a grudging after thee Sympathy, In Faith, mere Sympathy; thou art my
Compass, and whilst thou art in being, the needle will be always pointing to
the North, and I shall never be well but in thy Arms.


Mar. It can be only your opinion Sir, I know no quality I am endowed with
unless your favor.


Chan. You cogg, you cogg, what? not know where your Magic Circle lies, no
Quality; why thou have beauty enough to merit an Empire: I am thy vassal, I
who command this Nation am Commanded by thee: Come hither and answer me a
question, will thou my Damsel? ha!


Mar. To any thing as may become your Servant.

Chan. Good, very good, do thou love me child? answer me quickly, I am under
an Agony of suspicion, and must be resolved, or I Am a dead man.


Mar. My ready Services shall always demonstrate the high respect I have for
you.


Chan. Respect, Twist a Whip, tell not me of respect, I hate the expression,
it is like giving the Cheek instead of the Lip upon a Salute -- torture me not
with Delay, but give me a cordial of thy kindness or I sink, I perish, I Am no
man:


Mar. My Lord, indeed I honor you, indeed respect you, and I have often heard
it said, respects the younger brother sure to love:


Chan. I desire none of his company, if the elder be present come near me, I
must look on my Care, my Jewel, how those eyes sparkle, why they out-lustre
this; let me see, place it before those white little Panting, pouting, swelling
throbbing, heaving -- ah Rogue!


Puts a Jewel on her Bosom. Mar. My Lord, you throw your favors so very fast
upon me, I sink under the Consideration of my Gratitude.


Chan. A good child, a very good child, why they are trifles to what I design
thee, thou shall be covered all over with Gold and Jewels; such things I have
bespoke for thee, thou shall outshine an Indian Queen: say, can thou love
me? speak, my honey suckle, and make me happy and thy self Illustrious, speak
my blossom of a Colly-flower, my cherry-colour'd-bean with a black eye.


Mar. However furious my Gallants Inclinations are, I find my beauty awes him,
I am Master of his heart, and may be of all he has (oh Mountacute should thou
do thus I fear my Chastity) however I Will seemingly comply, but nothing more.


Chan. What, another eye shot, She looks languishingly on him and puts her fan
to her face.
come out with it Lamb, never mince
the matter, my doom, my doom.

Mar. Good Sir, spare the trouble, and let my blushes speak my heart.


Chan. What! must I then be forced to bribe my Judge e're she will give her
opinion: here, here is Gold for thee -- nay, nay, take it -- she has nick't me
'faith, my way exactly, the method I use to follow to a tittle: my Sentence --


Mar. I am not as I was, yet cannot tell my ailing; since I have seen you Sir,
my heart does throb and beat as if it 'twould have liberty.


Chan. Caught by St. Winifred: she s in.

Mar. And when you speak of Love your words pierce through me, I find a
pleasing shivering seize on me, yet covet still to hear you, and when you catch
me in your arms, I am like one half waking from a sleep; I know not how to term
it, a pleasant fleeting transport comes upon me, my eyes are doz'd and I grow
giddy with the unusual joy.


Chan. In Love, the Experience of 30 could not have demonstrated better: come
child, I will repay it with double interest, I have a thousand fine
Curiosities within my closet which thou shall be Lady of Immediately.


Mar. Oh Heavens! what have I done? I have fooled my self into the spare.

Enter Sergeant Either-side. Blessed deliverance my Uncle,

Ser. My most Illustrious prop of preferment:

Chan. A Plague of this Rascally Sergeant, I perceive the fellow has forgot all
manners since I have made him a Judge, but I Will send him packing -- oh! brother
Judge, you are Welcome, never more welcome, rare news, rare news; The Queen
and the Earl of March have by me put an opportunity into your hands of being
suddenly a great man.


Serj. How does her Majesty think upon her lowest of her Subjects, I shall
never be able to repay the Goodness: can I serve her my Lord?


Chan. Why no body else, she has tried the Judges already, and they are wresty
like so many tired horses, they will not budge a Jot.


Serj What is it my Lord, what is it? -- how does your Lordship like my Neice?
is she courteous?


Chan. Charmingly, charmingly -- but to our business: there are a Parcel of
froward persons that stand upon their Privileges because they are Peers, and
between you and me brother, are very unmannerly, both to the Queen and the
Earl: now they were ordered to be prosecuted, and the Knaves in Scarlet
refused, pretending they were above their Cognizance.


Serj. How! above their Cognizance, who are they? let me know 'em, and their
Crimes, and if I do not case 'em up, uncase me, -- but what will become of me
if a Parliament should be Summoned?


Chan. O fear it not, the Queen will never call a Parliament, lest they might
question her as well as you, therefore be stanch.


Serj. Twist a whip as your Lordship says, I Will go through-stich.

Chan. There Is that Prating fellow Mountacute, and Whispers.

Mar. Ha! what said he? oh how my fears comes thick on me:

Chan. But I Will tell you as I go here; my Charge, take these Keys, they will open
the doors of my Cabinets; there, there, feast thy eyes, and take what thou will, I Will but speak a word with thy Uncle, and come and settle some Jewels
and precious Stones upon thee.


Enter Gentleman. Gent. My Lord the Earl of March desires your speedy Presence
at his Apartment.


Chan. The Devil boil him, again, what shall I do?

Serj. My Lord, I find you are uneasy at your being so open to business, nor
indeed can you be private here as Love requires -- what thinks your Lordship of
my house? there you may be secure.


Chan. A Pimp of a thousand; you say worthyly, nothing better, go, get you in,
and take what you find on the Squab under the window, and go home to your
Uncles, where I Will come and sup, as soon as I Have Dispatched this business, I
must talk with you as I go, nay, a Kiss, a kiss at parting: I Am in Paradise:
Come, come along brother, or I shall, oh! -- (...) along, come: Ex. Chan. and
Serj


^ar. They Are gone, and left me wretched, the darling of my soul, my virgin
Love, my Dear-priz'd Mountacute they have in chase, eager as bloodhounds when
upon full scent: could I but Interpose 'twixt him and fate, I should be blessed
in Dying, pitty'd by him: ha! what paper's this, takes 'em off the Ground. my
Curiosity was never saucy yet, Love makes it now: Good heaven, what have I
found, the very Scrole of Death. Directions in what manner to proceed against
Mountacute and others -- be but Propitious Stars, and I will make this
Instrument of Villainy the Guide by which I Will steer this almost sinking bark
through all the Rocks which threaten his Destruction, 'twill bring me to his
sight -- blessed accident.

And though my fortunes cannot expect his Love,
My Generous care of him he must approve. Ex.

End of the 3d. Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Mountacute's House.
Enter Mountacute and Holland. Mount. ALL things move forward with a Prosperous
Breeze
And we shall reach the Harbor of Success
Sooner then we believed, it is now in veiw,
Heaven seems as if it took Peculiar Care,
Promising safety to the Royal Cause,
Inspires the King who steers the mighty Bark,
Keeping him steady in his Resolution:
This night but over we have gained the Bay,
Safely we Ride Contemning future Storms.

Sr. Rob. Holl. It Is Wonderful indeed, it shows the hand
Of Providence is with us, never Prince
Was Graced with so much Knowledge as young Edward;
Considering his years it is wonderful,
He weighs with all the Gravity and thought
Of an Experienced Statesman what is proposed;
Still as he speaks, the Accent of each Word
Keeps proper time, and points to his Revenge.

Lo. Mount Ay! there it Centers, nothing is more sweet,
It is the Choicest Dainty of the Gods,
With which they feast themselves on Solemn days;
And it is but Just their Representative
Sold Diet on the same when injured with 'em.
He Credits now the Baseness of his Mother
Her Rank familiarity with March:
Oh Murdered Edward -- Doubly Massacr'd,
Whose Honor suffered with thy Innocence,
While thy Adulterers thrive in the Eye of Heaven
They magnify their mischiefs by Success
And Cuckold every hour thy memory.

Sr. Rob. Holl Tax not the Powers above left we are forsaken,
They often suffer what they do not like:
Their Vengeance makes us think why we are punished,
Such visitations whets our Penitence:
Creates reflections on the inward Cause,
For Conscience is the mirror of our Souls,
Which represents the Errors of our Lives
In their full shape.

Lo. Mount. But tell me friend, what message is returned
From Exeter and Berkly, will they come,
Or choose they rather tamely to be nooz'd?

Sr. To. Holl. Be not too rash for they are men of Worth,
Do not believe because they left the Court,
Retreating to their Quiet Rural Seats
Where they might gorge the Vulture of their minds;
They are cold or stupid when their honor calls;
No Mountacute, believe me they have heard
That in the Roll of Fame there yet remains
One Chance, one Glorious Lot that is worthy hazard
Whereby the Kingdoms fate may be retrieved,
Roused with the Summons they have winged their have,
Vying who shall become the second Curtius.

Mount Why so 'twas with Salisbury when first
I told the Glorious Action now in hand,
He like some Lion almost stiff with ease,
Loiling at length within his Antic Cave,
Takes the Alarm of the Huntsmans found,
At which he stretches out his well-grown Limbs,
Brustles his horrid Main and furls his Tail,
Whetting his Crooked Talons on the Rock,
Staulks to the Field, and swells to meet the Foe.

Sr. Rob. Holl. They meet this Night at Council, where they will find
Matter prepared sufficient to inspire 'em.

Mount. All join the Nobles, Gentry and the Commons,
The Chain is Rivetted, the wresty People
Whose Rights and Privileges are usurped
No longer free, but all in Vassalage
Are ripe for Mischief, ready for Rebellion;
They wait from us the Signal when to Dole
The Act of Justice; would the cry were up
That I might see these Manglers of the Realm
Drove to the Shambles, and exposed as Beasts.

Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord a Gentlewoman waits to speak with you.

Sr. Rob Holl. I'te take my leave, at six we meet again. Exit.

Mount. I shall not fail -- Conduct her in.
Enter Maria. Your business fair one;

Mar. When I shall tell the Subject of my errand,
Possibly it may deserve attention;
But I must request your Privacy.

Mount. You are obeyed, by Heaven a charming Creature; Mount. nods to the
Servant, who exits.
Now, speak your pleasure, Madam;

Mar. I come, my Lord, a Supplyant from a Maid,
Who for some years has eyed your noble worth,
And though her birth, nor Fortune can pretend,
To merit that return she long has sighed for,
Yet so her Partial Destiny has ordered,
She still admires your Person and your Virtues.

Mount. Well, my fair suitress, whither does this tend?
Lovely deportment, and Enticing Innocence. aside,

Mar. With silence hitherto she has concealed
The saucy flame often strove to stifle it
While in its Infant-Growth; but 'twas in vain,
For daily it increased to such a strength,
As did o're-power the weakness of her Sex;
Maintained the Conquest spite of Resolution;
Yet rather then her folly should be known,
She let it Prey upon the Vital Parts,
Hoping at last 'twould end the uneasy days,
And her Ambitious Love dye unreveal'd.

Mount. That was unkindly done, she could not doubt success
When she had one so fair to plead her Cause.

Mar. The disproportion is so vast between ye,
That she must still despair and still Love on:
Fortune has placed her where you most abhor
Diseases, Infamy, or Death it self:
You would not shun with more precipit have
If I should name the Person, yet even there
'Midst of the Toil and Anguish of her life,
A happy moment did present it self
To make her be the lucky Messenger
Of health to you, though she must linguer ever.

Mount. I Will spare the trouble of your Blushes, Lady,
For I Have a Soul so tender of the Sex,
(Skilled in the little Niceties of Love)
As shall prevent the torture of Confession, he takes her by the hands she
pulls it from him.
And do you Justice.

Mar. You wrong your Judgment, and you censure ill,
I came not hither, Sir, on that Account,
No loose desires the Product of ill blood
Can blast the Reputation of my Life;
My Honor guards me from that Infamy;
But I am hurryed hither by my Fate,
And bring a secret of that great Importance,
The service possibly may merit pity;
Which if I meet with, I am well rewarded.

Mount. I do believe it, and accept the offer;
Come, wave this woman's method to allure us,
You're safe and secret here, none can disturb us;
And I will give you such returns of Love,
Such hearty Proofs thou shall be soon convinced:
Though it be Infant-born it Rivalls thine.

Mar. Away, How have I erred? Are all Men thus,
Thus full of Guilt, my senses do recover,
And I begin to loath the Tempters charms:
Read that gives a Paper.
For I must leave you, -- oh my heart!
If thou would be my friend, beat faster on,
And force thy Passage through these feeble walls.

Mount. Yet stay -- What have I here Proscribed?
By all that is Sacred, Peremptory Orders
For my Destruction; March's hand is to 't:
How came she by this? now I recollect,
She told me that her fate had fixed her where
I should deteit the naming, if I knew it.
It must be so, well my Deliverer
I thank you -- by my honor I Am sincere,
This Scrole which thou have given speaks thy kindness,
And says, thou art all Goodness, though the Place
Of thy abode be with the worst of Men;
Nay, though it were the Chancellor himself;
Nor will I lag in making a return, Offers a Purse of Gold. She puts it back.
Though at the present I am lost in thought.

Mar. I am rewarded Sir, and have my end,
If you apply this Caution
To the right use, you may escape the snare,
But if you slight it, then I know the worst;
And though I am no suitable Companion
In Life, yet in the Grave, we undistinguished
May mingle ashes, though our souls are distant.

Mount. You must not leave me, I have much to say;
The Injury I have done you by suspicion,
When my rude thoughts led me into an error,
I must atone.

Mar. Fie, it is too gross!
This Language does not suit my humble Character,
Nor is it Noble to despise my sufferings.

Mount. By all my hopes of Credit I am real,
There Is something from my eyes have shot my Soul,
And I could gaze for ever on such Goodness;
Thy Tempers worthy, if thy Birth be not,
Distinction never had a Power over Love;
Cause Nature placed me in the Womb of Honor
She has adorned thy humbler Clay with Graces,
Which seldom go with Greatness with Wealth;
And it is but common Justice I repay,
A Love where love has merrited so far:

Mar. It cannot be:
Your Dignity and Honor intervene
Which bar the Banes for ever.

Mount. What, will not Gratitude with Love conjoined
Remove? tell me no more of Honor, Dignity;
When charms like thine appear all must give place.

Mar. My Lord, I had a Father and a noble one,
Whose memory yet lives though he is dead
Men spoke him Brave if Loyallty can plead In his behalf;
'Twas Collonell Stapleton:
The unhappy Brother of the Bishop of Exeter,
Who by the Citizens was put to death
For favoring the Cause of Carnarvan, Edward.
But oh, when Royal Edmond
The Uncle and the Guardian of the King
Was taken off, under pretense of Treason,
Mine suffered with him, what he had of Honors
Or of Estate the Law has since made forfeit,
And mean Orphan, given into the hands
Of a time-serving Family.
Alas! I blame my self, Condemn my madness,
My ill-match'd passion, and I Will strive
To Curb it is Power. I only Crave your Pity,
Nor dare I hope for more, and yet I swear,
Your Flattery, though known, is grateful to me.

Mount. Thou charm'st me still, why Loyallty's a Jem
Fit for a Princes Crown,
I knew thy Father, a Gallant and a worthy man he was,
His suffering was remarkable and noble,
And thou art Richer
Sprung from that, then had a Traitor
Blessed with millions got the e:
Thou do increase the fire within my Breast,
Pouring in Oil instead of Quenching it,
Let me upon this Bosom print my vows,
And swear my self thy Beautys Votary.

Mar. I know not where I am, the thrilling Joy
Creeps through each part and extacies my Soul:
If this be true, what Queen is half so happy?

Mount. Give not Distrust to the Reins because you find
The Change is sudden, The effects are true;
By Heaven I have more Pleasure in this Chance,
Then e're I tasted since I first viewed Light.

Mar. I know not what to say my joy's so great,
My senses are Confused, all Crow'd to meet you,
The welcome Guest for whom so much they wished,
But little thought it was so near at hand.

Mount. Believe me, oh thou Star whose Influence
Has made me happy, that my vows are true:
I Will to the King, Acquaint him with thy goodness,
His safety is procured by this Precaution,
And sure he will recompense thy Loyalty;
With his Consent we will for ever join:
Thy Virtues will in future Ages shine,
While untir'd Fame her matchless worth shall sing,
Who saved her Country, Lover, and her King. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter Mortimer and Chancellor. Chan. To Night will it be done?

Mort. This Night; The Queen's gone to her Son,
Who is in Council with these Men we have mentioned;
At Dead of Night the Guards shall seize 'em,
And when they once are Prisoners, see you take care
That nothing frees 'em but an Ax or Gibbet.

Chan. But pray, what Evidence has your Lordship against 'em?

Mort. Dull Wretch, have I against 'em?
Law and Religion sure are useless grown,
When Priests want Vouchers, or a Judge Informer,
Think of the management in Edmonds Trial,
And give these Lords his Fate.

Chan Well, well, my Lord, their business shall be done.

Mort. Or they will do ours, I know their Subtleties,
They Are silent setters all, and close,
Not apt to quest and give their quarry notice:
It Is then the ^et draws certain to destruction.

Chan. But, my Lord, Judge Either side must be the Man,
And you must make him Chief Justice to go through it.

Mort. Could not thou do it?

Chan. I, why I Am a Priest, besides Lord Chancellor, and Equity ^^ never used
in Cases of Life and Death.


Mort. Well, loose no time, but instantly prepare for it.

Chan. Fear not my Diligence in dispatching an enemy, But 'twould do well to
get the Queen to pass an order under the Broad-Seal for the speedy removing 'em
to London, and let her Son be kept here till they are dispatched.


Mort. It shall be done, is there ought else?

Chan. That Is all, and I Will send up my Creatures beforehand to purchase a Jury
for 'em: As for Evidence, there are Poor Rogues in abundance, and the larger
the Bribe: the stronger the Oath; Adieu, my Lord, I Will give you an account how
my Emissarys Fadge Exit.


Mort. This is a true Compound of Justice and Piety,
For one's guided by Interest, and the other by Ambition:
This fellow hopes to be the head o'th Church,
As much as I hope to be King of England,
And whilst he serves my Ends, Perferment's his:
A Crown, oh the Delightful sound!
If Isabella Thou would keep me thine,
Thy Son must wait upon thy sleeping Husband:
She Is fond and Languishes; why should I doubt?
Oh Love, thy Power has Compassed wondrous things,
Drove out, Restored, Destroyed, and set up Kings. Exit.

SCENE III.
Discovers the King, Leicester, Mountacute, Berkly, Sir Tho. Delamore, Holland,
and Exeter, as at Council. King. WHat will ye further? This Scrole of
Mountacutes,
Fully expresses the dire Fiends designs:

Sals. Time must suit the Rest --
Nor may we trifle Dangerous Distempers,
If they not meet a sudden opposition,
O'repower the applycation when too late,
Rendering Art useless:

Exe. It Is thoroughly advised, pursue it Sir.

Sir Tho Dell. Your Father whom we often admonished,
Nay told him plainly what has since ensued,
Laughed at our Cautions; Sir, you must be careful,
Or all is lost beyond recovery.

Exe. If you Persist in what you seem to like,
Safety and Glory you will find attend it;
But if your Mother change you, farewell Power:
Let Mortimer the place of Edward fill,
We are content to fall if you are so.

King. I will observe Directions, weigh each word,
Not vary from a tittle; my safety
Is with yours as yours with mine;
Sure, never Prince was saved from greater hazzards:
What must I call you, friends, that name's too poor,
But yet a friend will venture wondrous things,
When what he Loves is compassed round with danger;
Let me embrace ye all, and tell the world,
No Prince can match the Council I am blessed with:

Within. I must acquaint the Prince e're I admit your Majesty.

Queen. Traitor:

Enter a Waiter Driven in by the Queen. King. What means this noise?

They all rise, she walks round 'em comes to the front and speaks. Queen. The
Rumor then is true, I find it now,
But I much wonder ye Audacious men,
That ye Assemble here without my leave;
You who had fell and Justly for your crimes,
Had not my Clemency excused your Lives,
Has mercy hardened your Presumptious hearts,
Or are ye past reproof?

Sr Tho. Dell. Madam, what we have done --

Queen. There is a better man to answer me
Then Delamore thou Usher to these Schoolmen,
Which in their absence sets my Son such lessons.

Mount. Then since your Majesty --

Queen. Boys I could never listen to,
Go Prattle with my Pages.

Leice. If I may speak --

Queen. Thou Driblest on thy beard, Age is a Changeling,
And Languishes for Hospitals: You Sirs, I speak
To Salisbury and Exeter, who draw together
In the Team of Politics, Who sent for you?
Be brief and answer Justly, as you love your Lives.

Sals. That we esteem our Lives is very plain,
Our Care of the King's confirms it:
It is by his Command we here are met,
To Argue his Proposalls, solve his Questions,
And to the utmost of our thoughts and Duty
Preserve the King in Grandeur, Peace, and Safety.

Queen. The King.

Exe. The King, your Majesty can be no stranger
Being so near related.

Queen. Unheard of Insolence, Why who am I?

Exe. His Mother:

Queen. Traitor, there is another name and title due to me.

Exet. None that we know of.

Queen. Thou lie, and I will stamp the falsehood down thy Throat --
Unthankful Boy, how can thou suffer this, and hear thy Mother talked so to
by Slaves?


King. Madam, your passion makes their duty stagger,
You use 'em not like Noblemen but Pedants;
Though Subjects, they have no dependence on us,
And Majesty's adorned and served by them,
Much more then is at all times fit to own;
It Is true they are not safe, but under Kings,
Nor Kings cannot flourish but by such assistance.

Queen. Indeed Sir, are you grown a Disputant,
And Jabber Politics so Learnedly?
Thou Tool, thou Instrument of self destruction,
Do think these State-worms mean thee further good
Then what may serve to Introduce their own?
I ^ell thee, Counselors are all alike,
And Princes know no more then they think fitting;
So whilst his Glory does not injure theirs,
They are content, they may grow great together.

Sals. Madam, this Doctrine may be Proved elsewhere
Where Powers unjustly used by sad Permission:
We have no Ends nor Aim but the Kings safety,
It Is true so far our own depends upon it;
The King's our Shepherd, born to protect his People,
And as the Lamb flys from the Wolf to him
That Guards the Flock, so we seek refuge here:
Life's all we hope for; indeed Life's all in all;
And it is so sweet that all are fond to save it.

King. Mother, in short, I am of Age to Govern,
And here assume the Right my Father left me:
These I have chose to be my Worthy Guides,
I have resolved this and will make it good.

Queen. Have I no place? am I a Cipher grown?
Will none afford a place for Dignity?

King. Accept of mine:

Queen. No, this may serve your Mother, Sits down a the end of the Table by
Leic.
I will sit here with this good man's allowance:
Come l'e be Governed too -- Pray be my friends
As well as his for once.

Exe. Nay Madam, this we must not suffer neither:

Queen. What am I left alone? They all retire from the Table
Am I infectious? dare none sit near the Plague?
Ungracious Boy is this thy filial Love?
This the return for all the Pangs and Throws
I suffered at thy Birth? this the reward Weeps
For all my Sorrows, Cares, Anxieties,
Which through thy sickly Infancy possessed me,
When many a weary night bereft of Rest,
I Have slumber'd over thy Cradle, and bemoaned
My own hard fate? now it proves so indeed:
I Have nursed a Viper, given an Adder warmth;
Which having grown to strength forgets its parent,
And Covets Preying on her Entrails; oh! monstrous Crime.

King. Nay Mother, mother --

Exe. Be not caught Sir, these tears like those of Sirens
Entice you but to Leap to sure Destruction.

Queen. Must he alone have credit? am I nothing?
Return e're it is too late, I do conjure thee,
By all the Comforts thou have e're received,
By all thy Duty due, which heaven Commands,
Attend my Prayers, and throw the Envenomed Robe
Off from thy Person ere the Poison fix,
Or else thou art lost for ever:

Sr. Tho. Del. Oh Sir, be steady, or you ruin all:

King. I must retire or I shall melt to folly, Madam,
I Am Indisposed and must withdraw:

Queen. Come hither Child, and rest upon my bosom,
I Will hush thy Cares and quiet thy Disturbers,
As when I lulled thee first:

Exe. Away Sir,

Queen. My Son,

Sals. Be Deaf Sir,

Queen. Edward my only Edward hear thy Mother:

King. Force me away if you regard my Glory.

Mount. That shall not be wanting: They force him off

Queen. My Child, my Comfort, darling, Ex. all but Queen.
Prop of my Life,
I shall grow mad, I find the fury seize me;
My Gall boyls up, and I am all on fire,
Come then, revenge, thou Banquet of the Gods,
And let me Gorge my Ravenous Appetite;
Inspire me Nemisis thou subtlest fury,
Drive from my Soul the Weakness of my Sex,
And make me Masculine in my Attempts:
Some women have done Wonders in their Rage,
Why should not I, for I have cause Prodigious?
Nature for ever here I banish thee:
Remorse and Conscience, Pity, all farewell,
Instruct me Malice, and assist me Hell. Exit.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Mortimer. Mor. MY Fears are Past, the noble Treasons signed,
And Edward I will mount into thy Throne;
By Heaven she was so eager in her Vengeance,
She never read the mischief she has Granted:
Oh how she Raved! Cursing her Son and Peers,
Resolving not to rest, till she had Revenge:
Now Chancellor be Staunch in this main Cause,
And thou shall thrive for thy dear wickedness,
Who waits?
Enter Turrington Wait on the Chancellor with this, and let it
Pass the Seal, with his utmost Speed:
I Will Instantly be with him too my self,
My Glories are in view, Fate be my Friend,
In their behalf some kind assistance lend,
'Twere hard my hopes should fail so near their end. Ex. Turr.

Enter Queen. Queen. Have you dispatched the Paper which I signed?

Mort. I have, and these couched Lions who shrink their Claws
Till they may Grasp our Lives with firm security,
Fall in our Toil this night:
I have Intelligence your Son has Summoned
His Trusty Loyal Lords to Sup with him,
And when they are careless in their Luxury,
We Will bolt upon 'em with such sure Destruction,
Nor Edward, nor the World shall rescue 'em

Queen. Sure when their busy Souls are sent abroad,
Their harmless bodies will let ours alone.

Mort. Hold but this noble Resolution, you are secure:
The Rebel Lords have printed and dispersed,
A formal Proclamation in your Sons name,
In which he does Convene a Parliament,
To meet the following month at Salisbury,
There to dabate on proper means and ways,
How to secure the Nations future peace;

Queen. A Parliament, oh Insolence!
He shall be whipped to manners: foolish Boy:
His Learned Council too shall be rewarded:
If Axes, Gibbits. Racks, severest Tortures,
Can be produced sufficient for their number.

Mort. Ay: now we are right, be firm and we will be great,
Else we must fall a public spectacle,
To every vulgar villainy:
For Princes like the Sun when in Eclips:
Call up the eyes of many to behold 'em,
Who should have none in their full noon of Glory:
Shine out, and you will be too bright for
The low Crowd to gaze at.

Queen. Thy pleasing Accent thrills into my breast,
Not the parched Earth when the hot Dog Star reigns,
Sucks up refreshing showers,
With half the eagerness as I thy well-tuned speech:
Oh had thou seen their Insolence my March,
To thy soft Queen, thy tender Isabella,
I Am sure thy Zeal had sent 'em from the world
Though every heart thou had struck had been a Kings.

Mort. By all thy mercies and thy dearer favors,
So much I am a slave to thy Desires,
I should not spare a Saint that wronged my Love:
Stars let me but enjoy this heaven on earth,
Keep yours above, for Creatures lesser blessed.

Isab. Thou art the Utmost limits of my Wishes,
And oh how dull would seem the Pomp of Crowns,
If mightyer Love make not Ambition easy
So hear my Soul, so rooted in my heart,
That were my Son and Mortimer Condemned,
And I should have the choice of saving one,
I know not where my Nature would plead stronger.

Mort. Most condescending Brightness how thou charm'st me,
Why was not I a match for such a prize?
Oh Partial heaven, unjust distributer,
That giv'st us Monarchs Souls so poorly clothed,
Why have thou made distinction in the blood,
And none at all in the mind?

Isab. It is enough that we concur in Soul:
I think thee worthy to partake my Love,
And thou may think thy self a King in that.

Mort. Thus Blessed then I am one, and envy none,
And to remove all fears that Curb my Joys,
I Will instantly dispatch thy Sons Instructers;
Then when our enemies to Love are hushed
We Will pay our thanks to Love in Love,
Thou shall the Alter of the offering be
And I the Sacrifice which here shall dye. Exeunt.

Enter Chancellor and Maria. Chan. Ay my Charmer, these Clothes become thee,
Now thou look like what thou art; but what thou
Shall be the Event must tell.

Mar. I know what you design me, my Reverend
Equity; but I think I shall be armed against it.

Chan. This night but over child, we will Revell without Measure, no interrupting
business shall torment us; the authors of that Plague shall be removed, and
then my little armfull of comfort.


Mar. What then Sir.

Chan. Nay, would thou have me tell thee, what then child, no, guess Love,
guess, and tickle thy self with the thoughts on it; such things I will do for
thee, thou shall be the Darling of the Nation, all hands shall honor thee, and
all eyes admire thee.


Mar. Shall I be this, Sir?

Chan. More child, more, whoever has ought to beg of Tarleton, shall come to
thee; thou shall prefer, take down, do as thou will; have a greater Court then
the Queen -- and be more thronged then a Country Church, when a Bishop
preaches: In short I will set thee against the Proudest Minx that is kept either
by Lord Spiritual or Temporal.


Mar. But Sir --

Chan. Not a word more, I expect the Earl of March each minute, and when this
night is over, all the rest of my nights and days shall be at thy Devotion;
give thy Uncle this; it is a Commission to take the Lives of six Rank, Stubborn,
Loyal Rogues, which when dispatched --


Mar. Are they your Lordships Enemies?

Chan. I know not what prejudice they have to my Person, but they are Enemies to
my Interest, and that is a Statesmans Cause at all times: Their's Mountacute,
and Delamore, Holland, and others: what faces the Knaves will make at the
Gallows when they are Bowels are burnt under their own noses? go Love, go, if
thou stayst thou wilt set me so a-gog for thee; and I shall be baffled: as I
always have been by this troublesome March.


Mar. Mountacute's Death, no Villain, no,
His fate shall be reverst if this can plead,
And fall cursed Chancellor on thy own head. Exit.

Chan. It Is a sweet little Rogue, in what a comfortable manner shall I spend
the latter part of my Life, my pieth grows cold for want of a bedfellow: what
though I am a Father of the Church; as to that point the world will say, I am
debarred from the Sex; But then again, I am a Father of the Law, and I never
read of a Judge or a Chancellor that was ever deprived, or suspended for
satisfying the curiosity of Nature, and according to the Rules of Equity, ergo,
I ought to have the same Privilege as the best of the long Robe: In short, I
will enjoy this Woman as I am Chancellor, and those days wherein I cannot
behave my self to her as a Chancellor, I will dedicate to devotion and
Sanctity. Enter Mortimer. My Lord of March, your Lordships most diligent and
sincere humble Servant.


Mort. Is It signed;

Chan. It is, and these wise Counselors shall rue they are Politics.

Mort. Where is it?

Chan. I have dispatched it to Judge Eitherside, he will make 'em smoke, I
warrant you.


Mort. Hell and the Devil; did thou read it?

Chan. No, for I concluded what it was.

Mort. Shame on thy negligence; why 'twas an order for the Kings Confinement,
his Mothers hand to make him a Close Prisoner.


Chan. There Is no harm done, I warrant you, were it an Order for his head, this
fellow would put it in Execution.


Mort. Send for it, he must not be concerned in it,

Chan. I will, I will.

Mort. But hark you my Lord Chancellor;
Suppose, when we have lop'd these Branches off,
The Trunk remains from whence will grow fresh mischiefs;
I find the Boy is fond of Sovereign Sway,
Fond of the lofty sound of Majesty;
His Soul is tuned to absolute Prerogative,
And all his Consort Strike that pleasing air.

Chan. Look you, my Lord, let us deliver him out of this Evil, and I Will take
care he falls into temptation no more.


Mort. Thou know him not,
He has a weyward Soul, and Stubborn temper,
The Pride and Spirit of the mother swells him,
With all his Fathers positive revenge:
He affects a mildness for the want of Power,
But when he once has conquered his restraint
We must expect to pay for these men's Lives.

Chan. Nay, it is good to be sure my Lord, that is certain, and if I thought his
Reign would put an end to ours, Charity begins at home, and I beg the young
Princes pardon, I would not tamely resign I tell him that.


Mort. This Parliament that is summoned will be dangerous,
The Commons hate the Nobles, envy Us,
And if we find not means to Curb these Measures,
We shall too late repent our follys, Tarleton,
Our heads, our heads, must answer for our actions.

Chan. Our heads! I Will send him to his Father first.

Mort. Ay, there you are right, what say thou to another Edvardum, Occidere
nollite tumere bonum est.


Chan. Say to it, why if he persists he must have it: I Will consider it my Lord,
I Will weigh it maturely, and if it be requisite --


Mort. If it be requisite dull thing it is, he once removed, the Queen we Rule
at Pleasure,

And Mortimer and Tarleton will have both
The power of Kings though not the Glorious Title.

Chan. Well, well, my Lord, these Knaves dispatched, we shall not boggle at a
greater matter, I Will to the Judge and we will consult the best.

A decayed Statesman is a wretched thing,
It Is flattery and ill actions which prefers us
And we have flatterers too which thrive by us;
For the same reason we do by our Prince,
Power makes us Knaves we are honest out of Service,
But when our Princes favors fall away,
Nothing so despicable or so unregarded,
Therefore it is Policy when once we are in,
To finish by those Rules we did begin. Exit.

Mort. Nature which gav'st me Soul so long for Power,
Accomplish what is promised by this night,
And whilst my Creatures act this Murdering Scene,
I Will Revell in the Arms of the fond Queen.
A Crown thou Center of Ambition, Lust,
You Are the reward o'th brave as well as Just,
And let the Factions against my Title roar,
I Will quickly quell Disputes when once I Have Power. Exit.

Scene King Edward, Mountacute, Bishop of Salisbury, Delamore and Holland.
King. Was ever Treason so unnatural?
A mothers hand to sign her Sons Destruction,
Now I Am convinced who set my father going.

Dela. Fate Sir, has put your Life in your own hands,
And shows by this discovery how it is prized,
Neglect not such a blessing but improve it,
Strike Early or you may repent your sloth.

King. Good heaven! how much I owe you for this safety,
And the kind Instrument you choose to work it;
Oh Mountacute I stand so much indebted,
I fear I want rewards to recompense,
Yet I Will consider till I Have tired thought
To gratify thy Love and Loyalty.

Moun. The Virgin who preserved you Sir, you owe it to,
Make her amends, my Duty is my payment;
But Sir, resolve apace, each moment is Important.

King. I will, we will force the Castle.

Dela. Hold Sir,
When I was Governor I found a Place,
Which now may be of admirable use,
There is a Private, deep, but narrow Vault,
Whose Dismal rough unshapen way,
Was surely torn only with hands by a dark guess,
For it is so strange no light could guide the making,
'Twas worked by Prisoners sure for Liberty,
For in the lowest Dungeon it begins,
And has a passage out just by the River,
There we must enter, and when we have reached the Jayl,
The part o'th Palace over it is Mortimers.

King. What follows?

Dela. In The Caeling is a place with rusty bolts,
Which formerly no doubt was a trap-door,
But for what use they best must know who made it,
This we may force, and so surprise the Villain.

Moun. It Is a good Stratagem.

King. Let Us Instantly about it.

Holl. I think 'twere better that your Majesty
With some of the Lords, and me, secure the City,
While Mountacute and Delamore with a good guard
Pass this same Vault. my Lord of Leicester with a party force the Guards of
the Queens side

Dela. It Is Prudently advised.

King. Each to his Task then, Mortimer we come,
This Night begins my Reign and Seals thy doom.

SCENE The Queens Apartment.
Enter Isabella and Mortimer. Mort. Thus soft and secure we taste the Joys of
Love,
Whilst buisy Politicians plot for Interest,
Whose akeing Brains Dances the Rounds of State,
And all to get the Title of a Knave:
The Soldier now lies hard for Gaudy honor,
Endures the raw rough blast of Winters Season,
With all the harsh necessities of Camps;
And for the name of Gallantry and Great,
After a long escape Provokes his Fate:
But Love.

Queen. Ay, that my Mortimer's above 'em all,
Who envys honor that is rich in Love,
Mercy which is the Attribute of Heaven,
The first Creator of it sure was Love,
And pity is the Instinct of its passion.
Love makes the Vulgar proud, the Noble Gods,
The Gods themselves if Strangers to Love's Joys,
Their much admired Elysium is Imperfect.

Mort. Some Music for my Charmer, let us indulge
And gratify our Souls Luxuriously:
Raptures unknown the harmony shall raise,
Our hearts shall beat the measures of the time,
And tender sighs echo each artfull note,
Till our soft murmurs fall by soft degrees,
And dye like o're-charg'd Flutes with too much playing.

Queen. I cannot answer as I ought but thus. Embraces.

A Song After the Song Mountacute, Delamore, and Attendants come from under the
Stage. Mort. Now let us to our Repose my softest Love,
This Night ends all our fears, and I have those
Whose ^ands before the Moon has gone her Race,
Will have our Enemies all in Possession;
Young (...) Montacute, that hot-bred boy
With his old Councellor, close Delamore shall
Smart, my Isabella. A Clashing of Swords.
Ha! what means this noise my Guards: what ho --
Death, it grows louder, are they all engaged?
Treason, Treason.
Enter Turrington bloody. Why that dismal object?

Tur. Shift for your self, Sir, all is betrayed and lost
The King and Leicester have cut off your Guards,
The City's at the Gates and shout him King.
Burn Mortimer, fire the Queen -- I can no more,
But that I ever loved you, let this witness. dies.

Queen. Oh Heavens! what shall we do?
Here, my best life, there is a Vault
That will convey thee.

Mount. We will convey him, Madam, to a place
As safe as he designed us!

Mort. Horror and Hell!

Queen. Oh spare my Mortimer, my gentle Son.

Mount. Madam, you are deceived, he is not come yet.

Del. Well, haughty E. of March, what think you now?

Mort. That I shall dye, thou'st answered to thy mind.

Queen. O, ye malicious Powers!

Moun. Sir Tho. let us withdraw:
No doubt these Lovers have a leave to take,
We will not separate 'em too abruptly;
Call when you're teady, Sir, I shall not be out o'th way:
You Sirs, secure the Vault.

Mort. I scorn thy Insolence,
And Mountacute, I Will fall so nobly Ex. Moun. Dela.
That thou shall loose thy ends in my calm sufferance.

Queen. Oh Mortimer!

Mort. Oh Isabella!

Queen. I know not how to look or speak,
For I have brought this on thee,
My Love has tempted thee to taste Ambition,
And thou have followed me in all thy actions.

Mort. Thus the first pair their miseries surveigh'd,
When from their blessed Eden they were driven;
Their eyes seemed to accuse 'em of the fact:
But Love in each pitied the Crime in both:
She tempted him to make him blessed like her.
And when he found her Ruin, urged his own:
But oh much happyer was their Punishment,
Their both were cursed, but they were cursed together,
And suffering both alike, neither were wretched.

Queen. I will not long outlive thee, for I cannot,
Thou were the prop on which my hopes did hang,
Like curious Buildings wrought by wondrous Art,
Where the vast frame's supported by one Pinn,
But that struck out I shatter all to ruin.

Mort. No, live my Queen, thou may be happy long,
It Is only I must bleed, my bloud's the cure,
And it is Impossible it can be spared;
But Isabella when thou shall retire,
For oh I fear too much they will confine thee,
Think on thy March, and pardon his Ambition,
For nothing but my fondness has betrayed thee,
A vast excess of Love to make thee great,
To set thee out of the reach of thy Sons Power,
Lest he might slight thee as his Father did.

Queen. Oh angry heavens you have punished us severely,
The prospect of our greatness has undone us;
The Glittering show has drawn us out too far,
And we are surpised just as we thought to grasp it,
Like Voyagers seduced by a fair Sea,
A temperate Air, the Sky Serene and clear,
Just as they have their wished for shore in view,
By sudden Storms the tattered Bark is tossed,
And all within the sight of Land are lost.

Mort. He comes, thy Son approaches;
Farewell to all that is dear,
I leave a certain Heaven to go I know not where.

Enter King, Mountacute, Delamore, Holland, Chancellor, and Sergeant. King.
Seize the vile Traitor, hurry him down the dungeon,
There let him groan till day, and then he dies.

Queen. Oh spare him, spare him, banish us together,
But do not take his life, thy Mother pleads.

King. Thou Scandal of my blood -- remove the Queen.

Queen. The Queen, am I not thy Mother?
Oh hear me.

King. I Am deaf, away.

Queen. May heaven forget thy Prayers when thou shall plead,
And may thy Mothers Curse hang on thy head. Exit.

King. Now Chancellor for thee.
Thou shame of Church and Justice,
What can thou say?

Chan. Nothing but beg for Mercy; for if your Majesty considers I have been
but a Tool, and am not the first Statesman that has been Compelled to be a
Knave by Court-Minions.


King. No Hereford, my Fathers blood requires thine;
Away with him, unfurnish him of all those Robes,
And give him such as fit his wickedness:
The Nation must be satisfied, and thou must dye.
Prepare for it, Prelate^

Chan. This it is to be too Eminent in State mischiefs,
Others that wished as well to the Cause as I,
Will escape for not acting so publicly Exit.

Serj. Ay! that Chancellor I Am afraid will not dye alone; I am Damnably afraid
his Grace to make up his Equipage must have a Chief Justice that we may Swing
in Figure.


Mountacute brings in Maria. Mount. Now Sir, I claim your promise,
This Virgin is what we owe our Lives to,
Her birth you have been acquainted with,
And by what means she was compelled to live with the Chancellor;
And sure 'twas Providence which placed her here for all our Benefits:
I beg her for my Wife.

King. She Is Yours, and to make her welcome,
I Invest her with all the Chancellor's Estate,
And Viscount Mountacute be Earl of Salsbury.

Mount. Thus let us thank your Majesty Kneels

King. Rise both;

Mari. No Royal Sir, I have one boon to beg,
That old man's Life my Uncle, though an ill one,
Nor has he Acted ought what e're was purposed,
And since my being has made me the Instrument,
Of what is discover d: I humbly would Entreat --

King Thou shall not plead in vain, he is safe, and if he can be honest we may
in time take Care of him.


Serj. I humbly thank your Majesty, and will study to deserve this Mercy; I am
not the first Knave that has turned honest man when he found his Roguery would
do him no good.


King. My Lord of Leicester, Delamore, Exeter and
Holland, and all shall share our favors:
May you continue as you have begun,
The Parliament's at hand: If they Encourage me
As I Expect; they shall be satisfied how (...) love 'em.

Del. Doubt not their Duty Sir.

King. To Scotland first I will an Army Lead,
And Check the Growing Mischeifs which are spread;
That done to France I will in Person go,
The Flower D'Luce shall to the Lion bow,
If my kind Commoners are just and F^^e
I Will loose my own or fix their (...)
Long have they suffered by their Foreign Foes;
And Evil Kings I fear has been the Cause,
Heaven Guide my Steps that our Records may tell,
How Edward did the Insulting French Repel,
How Englishmen with Glory did Return,
Whilst Gallick Ruins did our Conquests Mourn.

Errata.
Page 2. line 31. for who, read which. line 32. for which, read who. Page 12.
line 15. for which, read who. line 17. which, read who. Page 46. line 35. for
Villainy, read Villain. line 38 for should, read would. Page 48. line 34. for
Pieth, read Piety.

FINIS.

