(...). OR, The most Sacred and Divine SCIENCE OF Astrology.

1. ASSERTED, In three PROPOSITIONS; Showing the Excellency and great Benefit
thereof, where it is rightly understood, and religiously observed.

2. VINDICATED, Against the Calumnies of the Reverend Dr. More, in his
[Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness.]

3. EXCUSED, Concerning Pacts with Evil Spirits, as not guilty, in humble
Considerations upon the Pious and Learned Discourse upon that Subject, by the
Right Reverend Father in God, Joseph sometimes Lord Bishop of Norwich.

By J. B. B. D. A Protestant Minister of the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith of the Church of ENGLAND.

London, Printed for the Author; And are to be Sold by William Bromwich, at the
Three Bibles in Ludgate Street. M.CD.LXXX.

(...). OR, ASTROLOGY A Sacred SCIENCE. SHOWING, The Excellency and great
Benefit thereof, where it is rightly understood, and Religiously observed.

As it is handled in the Display of Three PROPOSITIONS:

I. That there is an Astrology in the Heavens.

II. That this Astrology, Man (in this state of Corruption) may attain in some
measure to understand.

III. That this Understanding may be lawfully and fairly compassed by Natural
means, without any Diabolical Helps.

By J. B. B. D. A Protestant Minister of the true Ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Faith of the Church of ENGLAND.

London, Printed M.DC.LXXX.

To the Honorable, Sir THOMAS DOLEMAN, Knight. One of the Clerks of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
Worthy Sir,
WHen the Fisherman in his Net, took up the Golden Tripod, out of the Ionian
Sea, with this Inscription thereon [To the Wisest Man of Greece.] He sent it,
as his own wisdom directed him, to Bias of Priene, one of the Seven Famous
Sages: who, though He sent it away again to another, whom he esteemed wiser
than himself; yet was this no disparagement, either to Bias, or the Fisherman;
The one showing himself, by his Modesty to be the Wiser man; and the Other, by
his Obedience, according to the Inscription, to the best of his Skill approving
himself to be the honester man.

Good Sir, I have taken up a Tripod too, and I wish it were of Gold for your
sake, that with a truly rich Present, worthy of your Noble and Candid Virtues,
I might be able to present you. True it is, that Learning is a Jewel of a worth
beyond the price of Gold, where the value of it is well understood. But alas,
such is the fond humoursomness of this our Age, that Learning is too much
neglected, but especially this sort of Learning wherewith I here present you;
and though it be a Jewel, yet I see it may lie long enough in the Field, as it
were a common Pebble stone, and many and many an one, and that especially among
the Rich and great Ones, and more especially such as are conceitedly wise, may
go by, and see, and tread on it; and yet not think it worth the Taking up. Mat.
13.45, 46.
But Merchantmen (God be thanked) who know by Experience the Worth of Jewels,
will sell Land and Houses, to buy that which Fools despise. Of the number of
these Merchants, Sir, my duty leads me to esteem your self in the foremost rank
of mine Experienced Acquaintance. And though I am sensible your Modesty is apt
enough to put by my Appellation, yet I humbly beg your Pardon, wherein my duty
engages me.

But among those who perhaps may have Esteem for Learning of another quality,
(...) many of them will put in exceptions to this of Astrology; as if either it
were a Discourse unworthy to be called Science, or if not so, yet such at
least, as they are apt to say we come not honestly by. Now true it is, Sir,
that this sort of Learning, having been more unhappily, than deservedly laid
aside, by some Learned men, and as unworthily sullied and defiled, by many rude
and ignorant ones, who have too rashly and saucily meddled with what they bad
not abilities either enough to understand, or to make the best Use of: It is
come to pass that this Excellent Pearl of sublime Science has appeared, not
without a Rust upon it, that makes it seem, as if it were not true Gold. And
truly there may happen as much of hard fortune to the richest Treasure that
carries his Majesty's Image and Superscription in its face, when it falls
into the hands of Clowuish Usurers, who out of a sordid Love of money had
rather lay up their talents under ground in mire and dirt, than put them into
honest Exercise. But good Sir, I have this Confidence in your great Worth, that
however your excellency may lodge in other sorts of Learning in a degree above
this; yet it is not a little Rust can hide true Gold from your understanding
skill, or undervalue it in your eye. And hence this little Tripod, of
Astrological discourse humbly begs your favorable Protection.

You have here, Sir, Three Propositions, or a sacred Stool on three feet, each
of them carrying their several weight, and you may sit safely thereon. The
first Leg bears this Position, That there is An Astrology certainly written
in the Heavens. And this Leg stands fast. The second bears up What Skill in
some measure may be attained, in the Understanding of the same. And the third
upholds the Legitimacy of the means; and shows how by true Art, and without
infernal help, it may be lawfully compassed.

If Sir, I may add Light to a Lawful and honest Science, I hope I have done my
God, and my Country good Service, especially in an Age where true Treasure is
a scarce Commodity; And as God shall bless mine Endeavors, my hearty Prayers
and good Wishes are, That mine Honorable Patron, may have an Honor worthy of
his Name and Fame; And that, worthy Sir, the good Blessing of God may crown
with Honor and Felicity, the whole Work of your Virtuous Life, is the
continual Prayer and Wish of,

SIR, Your most humbly devoted, John Butler.

A Preface to the Reader.
KNown unto God are all his Works, from the beginning of the World, (says St.
James.) This Knowledge of God, before the Creation, was no where written, but in
his own Eternal Mind; but after, it was printed in a certain Book, called
Nature, wherein, all the Works of God, that were to come to pass in Time, were
expressly written down, as they were to follow in Order. This Book of Nature,
was a certain Frame or Model of the World, wherein, what by Creation, and
Generation, all Persons, Things, and Actions, were to take their several
courses and turns, so as to come to pass in time, from the Beginning unto the
Ending of the World. And so infinitely and wonderfully Well was this Model of
the World contrived; that though the Rise and Fall of Persons, Towns, and
Countries, do depend upon the Virtues and Vices of the Men there inhabiting;
and those Virtues and Vices, do depend upon the Free agency of those Men: Yet
such was the Contrivance, that neither the Fall of the first Man, and the
Corruption, and the Crush which the World endured thereupon; nor the infinite
Sins of after-Mankind, and the Desolations that do continually follow
thereupon, did necessarily require, any correction or amendment, of that first
Frame. But such was the infinitely to be admired, and never enough to be adored
Forecast and Providence of God; that at one View, appearing unto him, all the
several Turnings and Windings of all men's Wills, and the total Sum and Upshot
of of all Virtue and Vice; He did at once, so contrive, that all Fates of
Prosperity and Adversity, of Reward and Punishment, should so fall out and come
to pass, as to answer the Virtues and Prayers of the Righteous, and the Vices
and Villainies of the Wicked, each according to their Works, in due and fit
suiting times.

Now the Substance of this great and glorious Frame, which the Almighty has
made, is that which we call the World. And this World consists of the
Heavens, Genesis 1.1.
and the Earth. And the Form of it is (as the Prophet Ezekiel has described
it) after the manner of a Wheel; Ezekiel. 1.15, 16.
and that so as One Wheel has many Wheels within the same, involved one within
another. And as the Prophet says, so we find it by Mathematical Demonstration,
that the Earth is indeed a round Globe of Sea, and Land, and this Globe is
circumscribed by the Air, as within a greater Wheel, which is globous too: and
the Heavens are, as it were, a great Workmanship of many Wheels, wrapped up
together, one within another; and the Earth, and the Air wrapped up in the
innermost of them all. Such are the Subjects of Nature. The Forms informing
this Natural Substance, Ezekiel. 1.10.
(as the Prophet also describes them) are four Living Creatures immeasurably
endued with Wisdom and Courage, and Agility, and Strength, as they are
described unto us Hieroglyphically in the shapes of a Man, an Eagle, a Lion,
and an Ox, and all of them with Wings, for our better Understanding of the
same. And that work, which the Prophet ascribes unto These, seems to be the
same which Plato attributed unto the Soul of the World. By These are all the
Wheels of Nature put into Motion, and actuated, and hence comes Life, and
spirit, and power, and virtue into the Heavens; and from the Heavens into the
Earth; and from the Earth into Man and Beast: so as one Wheel moves another,
and all of them do move one within another; and these in and through all of
them: and hence come the Magnetical Wonders in Nature, and all Virtues of
Sympathy and Antipathy, which work by invisible concoction of sucking and
expelling. Now beyond and above these four Angels (as the Prophet says) is
Fire and Light, Chapter 1.22, 26, 27, 28.
and dreadful Majesty of the Father and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Romans
11.36.
Of whom, and for whom, and to whom are all things; To whom be glory, and
honor, and praise for evermore.

The great and chief Subjects of this World are Angels and Men, the one in
Heaven, and the other upon Earth. The Angels are either Good or Bad, and do
know their Reward or Doom. But Men's Works are yet upon the Anvil, and Time with
them is still going on. Alas, we Mankind are very miserable by Nature, as we
may thank our selves for it; but yet is there an happiness in store for us, may
we be so wise as to lay hold of it: Alas, we are utterly lost in our selves,
and no strength remains either to will or to do ought that is good: Only in
Civil Affairs we have a Will to do a little, weak as it is, and free to do
evil: But thanks be to our God, who has sent a Savior; and with him, Grace,
that loosens the Fetters of Will, and puts strength into us, that we may be
able to accept of good things that are offered. He forces no man's Will, only
by Grace infuses power, and so leaves us to choose or refuse; and hence some do
embrace Life, and others oppose. Hence follows Virtue and Vice, and after that
Prosperity and Adversity; Sickness and Health; Life and Death, and all the
Vicissitudes of Nature. And though the Accidents Good and Bad, of one man's Life
are innumerable; and though the men, who are the Subjects of those Accidents,
in One Age are also innumerable; and though the ages of men since the Creation,
are innumerable too, Yet all these Accidents which do befall all the men, of all
Ages, do come to pass according to a certain Scheme or Method, as God by Nature
has appointed. And in this Method, Men do live by the Earth, and the Earth
sucks, Hos. 2.21, 22.
and draws all its Virtue from the Heavens, and they from the four Angels, and
they from the Holy Ghost, and He receives from Christ, and Christ from God the
Father.

Now all Mankind have every one of them a certain portion of Wisdom, Power, and
Wealth, Wherewith they occupy in this World, and operate their Contrivances.
And many men do take courage, grow mighty, and purpose, as if they would do
what they list upon Earth: And yet there are two things, we do see, overtop the
wisest, greatest, and proudest of men in all their enterprises; and these are
Time and Chance, two mighty Lords upon Earth, that do strange things. Time, is
that Motion of Space which proceeded out of Eternity, that was before the World
began, and holds on unto Eternity, which is to succeed at the Worlds end. And
out of this one long Time, are engendered infinite spaces of Time of great
variety of sorts, And these are either general or special; and both of these
sorts are either fortunate or unfortunate Times: Eccl. 3.1, 2, etc.
There is a Time of Pleasure, and another Time of Pain and Grief; a time to
rise and a Time to fall; a Time to be born and a Time to die. There is a lucky
Time of man's life, wherein if he go out to battle, though with but few men,
Chap. 9.11.
yet he carries the day; and there is another Time wherein, though he go out
with forces never so great, yet shall he be so unlucky, as to lose all that he
fights for. So also is there a Time when Overtures of Marriage shall come
luckily, but a man's desires answer not: and there is a Time when desires of
Marriage shall strongly prompt, but Overtures will prove unlucky: but there is
a Time too, when desires and Overtures shall suit together. And so also there
is a Time when Riches shall offer themselves, whether a man sleep or wake; and
anon again though a man pursue them with wings, yet so unlucky a Time occurrs,
as shall render all his Endeavors fruitless. Some men do come into the World
in a lucky hour, so as whether they be wise or foolish, yet shall they be
buoyed up upon the wings of fate, for matter of Wealth or Honor or Pleasure,
in all that they take to: while wiser and better men, smitten by an unlucky
Time of Birth, shall be as unworthily disparaged, and in all Purposes shall be
as unhappy. Some shall be lucky in the Van of their Contrivances, and as
unfortunate in the Rear: and others again contrarily. And thus time seeems to
mock and make sport with the men of this life, and to scoff at all their Skill,
and Courage, and Agility, as if they were but mere idle Stories. Now Time of it
self is but a dead thing, and a mere Instrument; but the Wheels of Heaven
turning upon it, do print riddles in its face, and carve and cut out the
various shapes of Prosperity and Adversity upon every shred thereof. And pretty
it is to observe, how a Child, as soon as it draws breath, becomes Time-smitten
by the Face of Heaven; and recieves an impression from all the parts of Heaven,
and the Stars therein, which taking Rise from the Ascendent Sun and Moon, and
other significant places, does operate as the Impressors stand in distance,
nearer or farther off: and this seems to be a concatenation of many knots which
untie by course, and by distant turns, and as every knot unties, different
times seem to fly out, and to do their errands; and of these sometimes you
shall have two or three or more lucky knots opening together, and otherwhiles
as many bad ones. Chapter 3.11.
All Times are beautiful in their seasons, if men could hit them; but by reason
of Sin, it pleases God, that the world in our hearts blinds our wisdom, that we
miss of our desired Aims, and of Grace to rest contented in our States.

The second Great Lord of the World is Chance. And these Chances are nothing
else, but the most admirable Curiosities of Nature, which occurring from
variety of rare and secret operations of Heaven, do throw into our Contrivances
many strange Hits, which we could never have imagined to have met with in our
own foresight. And hence there is really no such thing as Chance in Nature;
Much less can there be any thing that comes by chance in respect of God. But
with us, all those Curious Hits that Heaven sends, which strike in between the
Cause and its Effect, we call Chances; as if things blindly hitting in upon us:
for so they seem to us, because of the unfathomable Reasons thereof. Thus in
shuffling of a Pack of Cards, or in casting of the Dice, it seems to us a mere
Chance, what Cast shall happen uppermost, or what Card shall be nethermost, for
a man shaking the Dice at all Adventures, and delivering his hand at all
Adventures, and the Dice trindling away at all Adventure, who can say with any
reason what side of the square Dice shall be uppermost? And yet it appears
plainly by experience, that there is a certain Luck in Nature, that in all
these Adventures secretly guides both the hand, and the elbow, and the Dice,
into such steady Casts as do make a man either win or lose in a methodical
course. And so also it happens in case of Battle, that Chances do come; and
in case of Getting Wealth, Chances do come; and by a secret kind of Fate do
turn the Scales beyond all that reasonably could have been expected. Now as a
man by blowing of coals, raises sparks of fire that fly upwards, so do the
Heavens breath into humane actions multitudes of such Chances, that overturn
the wisdom, and Power, and all the greatness of man. These Chances are always
managed by a certain Luck either good or bad, that drives the nail: and this by
some Heavenly influence, that either infuses some secret Virtue or Poison into
the designed actions, as Courage into their hearts on one side, or Dismay into
their minds on the other side, and Skill into some men's head to hit upon the
right course to be rich, or folly into other men's, whereby they run headlong
next way to be beggars: or else fortunateth or infortunateth by mistakes of
words, signs, or acts, that turn to the best or worst, by strange Hits or
miscarriages; and thus many times mistakes in battle beget an utter Rout, after
a victory almost made sure, by mere utterance of a wrong word, or steering a
wrong course. But which way soever it happens, the whole mat- is carried on by
a good or ill Luck, and the hand of God is at bottom of that Luck, and that
hand of God, is not put to by any new contrived act, but follows on course in
the motion of nature, even as from the beginning it was contrived from all
Eternity.

Thus both Time and Chance are the Servants of Nature, under whose Commands
they sway the World, and worldly men: yet by her laws are both of them
disposed. Time measures out the extent of men's lives, and sets bounds how long
a man may live by strength of Nature, and how much of that Time shall be
extenuated by means of the interruption of Sin; and it also carves out Limits
unto all particular Fates, as of single life and Marriage, of Blessings and
Crosses, of Sickness and Health, and all such like matters. And Chance acts in
observance of those Limits, in bringing about the good and bad Successes of
every Fate. This operates all manner of Surfeits of body, and losses in Goods
that come to pass by reason of exorbitant manners; and this introduces the
power and acts of Nature, in sucking and drawing, blowing and driveing,
alluring and affrighting. For as a man has power by his breath to draw water
upwards against its Nature through a narrow Pipe; and by the same breath to blow
away sand or dust even as the winds do. So the Powers of Heaven also: But as
they are greater bodies, and endued with greater virtue, so can they act their
part with infinitely more curiosity and strength: as for instance in the
Magnet-stone: We see it has such a virtue, that it can draw Iron, and attract
it by a sucking force, that is so very curiously lodged within its teeth, that
the act thereof is altogether imperceptible: Yea more we see that this Stone
has power to communited cate its virtue, so as a Knife whetted thereon, has
also a Magnetical Virtue to draw a Needle, Now the Magnet it self, has all this
virtue communica-to it, from the very North point of the Heaven, or some Star
there situate, which so affects the Needle touched by such a Stone, that
where ever it is, though never so many degrees distant therefrom, and though
Rocks and Mountains, and some part of the Earths Body interpose, Yet this
virtue of the North Pole sucks and draws through all, at the utmost distance,
and pulls the Needle point always Northward, unless violence be used to the
contrary. And thus the Sympathetical Powder has its Virtue from the Heavens;
and thus all manner of Herbs have theirs, and thus all manner of Salves and
Plasters have their virtue to draw and heal. But as the Heavens can give this
Power, so have they it in themselves exceedingly more Curious and Powerful; by
which all Chances in Nature do come to pass. And thus by the service of Time
and Chance, Nature operates all her great Intrigues with much Secrecy and
Curiosity, whether it be upon single or Collective Bodies, and Persons. It may
be thought somewhat strange, how Nature brings forth Men and Women at much
distance of years, hours and places, all destinated to die at one time and
place, and all of one manner of death, by War, Plague, or Shipwreck; and how
Time and Chance do pick them all up, and draw them together by great
Curiosities of Fate to partake of the same: And yet is it as true as strange,
that such things do happen, and that by Curious Acts of Heaven and the Stars
therein, Judge. 5.20.
which in their Courses fought against Sisera. And after the same rate on the
other side, as many men and women by the same force and virtue are gathered
together to enjoy great and good success.

But perhaps will the Reader say, How shall these things stand with the Free
agency of Man's Will? And he says well, but then withal is he to consider; That
God, who made Man, and ordained the Course of Fate, did certainly foresee and
know, the several and various turnings and windings of every man's will from all
Eternity; and having all these at once in his Eye, did so order all manner of
Fates as to suit and stand in with every man's free acts of Will, and to answer
the utmost of his final choice. And though true it is, 1 King. 22.20.
God said, Who will tempt Ahab to go to War, and to die at Ramoth Gilead? as if
it had been some project upon him for his sin; corrective to what was said from
the beginning; yet it could not be so: For God knew before, that Ahab would go,
and by what means he would be persuaded so to do, though for some reason, his
way of speech was, as though he did not. And this was usual with him, Genesis
18.20, 21.
as in the case of the Sin of Sodom, I will go down and see (said God) whether
it be so or no. And yet God Omniscient, Prove. 15.3.
whose Eyes are every where, knew as much, without going down. Without doubt
the Will of Man in many cases does make great wrestling, and much opposition,
against the Starry Influences, and prevails over them exceedingly in many
things. And this especially where the Will is fortified by Wisdom, and strength
of habit, to command over the allurements of Sense and Appetite; and most of
all where Grace is added, that restores Man's Will, unto much of what it lost by
Sin. Now in these cases, the Will of Man prevails over the attractions and
allurements and threatenings of Nature, and all its instruments, and turns the
edge of Time from evil to good, and repels the force of Chance that it fails of
it is effects, and in many cases lengthens days, and receives the direful darts
of ^ate, either shot-free, or else escapes with slight Wounds: and all this
while other men, whose Wills are not thus fortified, do perish once and again,
under the very same strokes of Nature, which their Brethren, born under the
same moments, endured and outlived with much ease. And thus far Sapiens
dominabitur astris, the Wise man, above the Fool, may rule his Stars. But we
must consider, that in these operations of Fate, there are some influences so
mighty, as no power of man can oppose; Such as are the fatal Wounds of Death,
when Natures Glass is run out, and the violent Blows of strong distempers of
Sickness, and the high Tides of Prosperity and Adversity. And yet in these
cases also, Grace and Wisdom have their employments exceedingly worth the
while, and infinitely distinguishing the Saints from Sinners. For the Saint
though he must die, whether naturally or violently, by Water or by the Gallows,
yet so prepares himself, that he dies with comfort, while the other perishes in
anguish; he dies a Martyr, while the other perishes in his Sin. And sometimes
Prayers and Tears in such a case have wrought Miracles in stop to the course of
Nature; as in the cases of Hezekiah, Isa. 38. Dan. 3.
and of the Three Children. And as for great Sicknesses, the Wise and Holy Men,
by Sober and Virtuous life, may extenuate, though not pass and escape them. And
though they cannot overturn Prosperities and Adversities, yet they may cause
them to work for the best, so as to do more good than hurt; while Vice shall
extenuate Prosperity, and heighten the Mountains of Adversity. But however,
again, astra regunt homines, the Stars do rule and overpower men. But yet in
all these cases, such is the never-enough to be admired Providence of God, that
foreseeing all Holy and Wise men in their several Ages and Times, He has laid
also their Fates suiting to their actions: Genesis 37. Chapter 41.40. Psalm. 105.18,
19, 20. 1 Samuel 1.10, 11, etc. unto 20.
He foresaw Joseph's prayers and tears in his captivity, and accordingly
provided and contrived his advance in Nature to correspond therewith: He
foresaw Hannah's Fasting and strong cries in Prayer, and laid in her opening
Womb, to bud forth in course of Nature exactly answering thereto. And herein
lies the thing, that while we study Astrology, and feel by experience the
operations of Grace upon us; It shows us so plainly the Wonderful Contrivance
of God in Nature, that we see it with our Eyes, as it were, written in great
and plain Characters upon fair Paper, saying, Romans 11.33, 36.
[Oh the depth of the Riches of the Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness of God; Of
him, and for him, and through him, are all things, to him be glory for ever!]
The Will and Wisdom of Man has its free full work, and that without any
Control: Grace and Virtue come from Heaven immediately, and act by their own
Principles, even as they are led by the Holy Ghost: And yet Nature, as it was
laid from all Eternity, acts freely too; And all these agree, and suit, as it
were of one Contrivance. So says Gods Word, so says our own Experience and
Reason, and so Teaches Astrology.

Astrology is an holy, and most excellent Science, that by well digested and
experienced Rules, teaches us to know the Heavenly Bodies, and their Motions
and Aspects, and from thence to be able to foreknow much of future events, in
natural operations. This Science has been gained partly by verified Traditions,
but especially by diligent and constant Observations. Ios. Ant. Book 1.
It is asserted by good Authority, That much of this Learning came out of
Paradise, and that our Father Adam after the Fall did communicate the same unto
his Son Seth, out of his Memoirs of the state of Innocence: and that Seth made
impressions of the same in certain permanent Pillars, which were able to
withstand both Fire and Water; and that hence Enoch had it, and Noah, and from
him Shem, and so it came to Abraham, who increased the knowledge by Divine
helps; and taught the Chaldeans, and Egyptians the principal Rudiments of what
they knew herein. But this Learning was chiefly attained by diligent and
constant Observation: whereby the Art of Astronomy became in great measure
perfected, and by means of Arithmetic, Geometry, and the Art of Trigonometry,
the several Planets and Constellations in the Heavens were distinguished, and
the parts of Heaven were divided, and the motion thereof, and of all the
several Bodies therein contained, together with their Conjunctions and Aspects,
were very nearly well discovered. And after these things thus far attained,
Certain most excellently well Learned men of all Ages did curiously observe,
compare and put together, the Accidents that continually followed upon the
various Motions, Conjunctions and Aspects of the Heavens; and hence compiled
the sum of their Experiments into a body of Rules and Maxims, which do make up
the frame of that Learning, which we call the Science of Astrology.

Now that our Heavenly Father is well pleased with this sort of Study, does
very fully appear; by that Message which he sent us by the hands of the most
Wise King Solomon, saying, Eccl. 8.5.
[The Wise man discovers both Time and Judgment.] This Judgment can be
nothing less, than the Success good or bad, which out of every natural Affair
needs to be understood: and the Time must needs be that Extent of Space,
wherein it shall come to pass. And though there were many ways in those times
of Solomon to come by this piece of Wisdom, yet none of them all, that had
either a stamp of truly Divine, or honest Natural Skill upon them, were ever
excepted or excluded out of the Quest of these seize. Now the Wise men
who are here accepted of, unto the enjoyment of this knowledge, are of two
sorts. Either they are the Worldly, or the Heavenly Wise. The Worldly Wise are
such as gain knowledge by Pains, Cost, and Study. Of this sort were the
Pharisees in our Savior's time: Of whom the holy Jesus gives this Character,
Mal. 16.2, 3. Luke 12.55, 56.
that they could discern the face of the Sky, and of the Earth. And such also
were the Issacharians, 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
who came to David in his distress, and were men of Understanding in the Times,
whether lucky or unlucky, and thereby able to direct their brethren the
Israelites, what was good for them to do, or follow. And to this purpose says
the Holy Ghost, He that has Understanding let him count the number of the
Beast. Rev. 13.18.
As who would say, it is a matter to be attained by Skill and Diligence; and
therefore they who have Skill, let them take pains, and they may accomplish to
understand it. And thus Moses among the Egyptians, and Daniel among the
Caldeans, were Men of Skill in this Science; who besides their Divine knowledge,
which they had by supernatural Inspiration, and Revelation, had also another
sort of Skill, which by Reading and Study they had gained, wherein by natural
Rules they could foreknow Natural Events. Act. 7.21.
For such was the Study in Egypt and Caldea, that was taught in their Schools,
and in all lawful Studies in those Schools learned, these, Moses and Daniel,
Dan. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.
were most famous.

This Knowledge especially consists, in discerning the Motions of Natural
Times; and the Curiosities of Chance and Natural Accidents; and the Courses of
Luck that do manage both of them; and the order of Fate unto which all of them
are subservient, together with the most curious Acts of Sucking and Attraction,
Driving and Expulsion, Alluring and Threatening, Encouraging and Disheartening,
and of all such like acts, most secretly, and curiously performed, beyond the
strength of imagination. And such is the sum and order of Worldly Wisdom: and
it is conversant either in Genethliacal, Meteorological, or State-Astrology. Of
these, the last sort is a piece of Learning that consists much in Conjecture,
and is but partly understood; and because much of it depends upon great
Conjunctions which bestride some Ages of men between them, wants much of
perfection. The second is a crabbed sort of Learning, that requires much of
Time and Study, and yet the Ingenious have gained great Knowledge therein; and
miss but little of a thorow-pac't Skill in the Weather: In which knowledge the
Learned Dr. Goad, does much excel. But the Genethliacal, is the most certain
Science, and the Masterpiece of Astrology. Here are many very infallible Rules
lodged, whereby many things of great Concern are certainly foreseen. And yet
the Indexes of this knowledge being many, (as many out of the Radical Figure of
a Nativity, many out of a Revolutional figure for every new year, some things
out of Transits of the Planets, and others to be learned from Eclipses, and
general and great Conjunctions;) It is very easy for an Artist to drop into
mistakes, in his general Judgment of a man's particular Fate. Isa. 47.13.
And besides all this, at some times the most Excellent Artist shall perceive
the good hand of God upon him, confounding his skill, as if there were some
Nativities, and some passages in a Nativity, which the All-wise God is not
willing should be known. And to this purpose, the Artist oftentimes finds
himself mistaken in his greatest Proficiencies; sometimes by misreckoning in
his Arithmetic; otherwhiles by a miscarriage in his Astronomical operation;
and sometimes great harm falls by a Lapse of his Pen. And none but the veriest
Fools in Astrology will pretend to perfection. But however failings or mistakes
arise, yet plain is it beyond all control; That Great is the Excellency of
Skill, that lodges in the Noble and Sacred Science of Astrology, and
contributeth exceedingly to the Understanding of the Time and the Judgment that
the Wise man may know. Eccl. 8.5.


Such is the work of Worldly or Natural Wisdom in the attainment of
Astrological knowledge. But together with this is also required the Heavenly or
Supernatural Wisdom, which makes the Science Sacred. And this consists in
the mingling of Grace with the works of Nature, as it strikes in, and seasons
the operations of our skill, with an holy Wisdom and Virtue, that renders unto
God the Glory, and communicates unto our selves and Neighbor the Benefit
thereof. Now this Heavenly Wisdom is such, that without it, all our Natural
skill will do us more harm than good. This teaches us to honor Divinity or
Theology in the first place, and Astrology in the second, as an handmaid unto
the other. And were it not for this Lesson, our Astrological Skill would become
rank Poison to us; as such a thing that would lead us to the Devil, sooner than
to God, and draw us into Sorcery, and other evil Arts, whereby we should be
entangled with Diabolical familiarity, e're we are aware, even as are Witches
and Conjurers. These work by a way of art quite different from Astrology, they
having all their knowledge by inspiration of evil spirits, and it comes easily
to them; but we have ours from Natural Causes and Rules gained by painful
observation, and hard study, and it comes not without great diligence and
labor. But then here lies the mischief, that if the Astrologer has not the
more Grace of God, sanctifying his studies; it comes to pass, that, either
because he cannot by Astrology attain unto such perfection of knowledge as his
ambition greedily urges him to pursue, or he cannot have it so easily as he
would; he leaves Astrology, and falls in with the Devil, to become a Sorcerer.
But Grace teaches better things: and opens our Eyes by our Astrological
Studies, to see and adore the infinite Prescience, and Providence of God, in
the laying the frame of Nature in such an Order, as all things do come to pass
in time so suitably well, even unto the utmost of admiration, that Grace, and
Nature, and Man's free agency, do all of them work together in the same Subject,
seemingly contrary one to another, and yet do so elegantly comply, by virtue of
this Frame of Nature, in such a Wise and most Excellent manner laid, as every
one of them has room enough to act its proper work, and that without any thing
of hindrance, of the one to the other, in the least measure. And such is the
excellent Use of Astrology in this matter, as Divinity it self, (though
undoubtedly the more worthy Science, yet,) cannot give such a plain
Demonstration of these things, as does the experience of Astrological
Operation: For what that teaches us to believe, this makes us by experience
to see and know. Again, it is a great Use of sanctified Astrology, to observe
the overruling Work of God, even in the Astrologers very Mistakes. I remember,
that when with most greediness of knowledge, I did at any time pursue my
Studies, though with indefatigable pains, yet have I thrown away whole Weeks
and Months pains to no purpose; My whole Operation having been rendered
fruitless, though tried upon several new foundations, and all by reason of
heedless mistakes in the bottom thereof, lurking imperceptibly, until my
finished work showed the deficiency. And yet at other times, and in other
Operations, I have found my work to be true and good in two days space. So as
I was constrained to confess with my self these two things: First, That where
it pleases God to oppose, Man labors in vain. So it is with the Husbandman,
and as much with the Physician: And therefore no wonder that the Astrologer
errs, when God confounds him. And secondly, where our Passions are most
vehemently earnest to know, there it pleases God mostly to oppose; Moderation
carrying the Virtue, while excess breeds displeasure. God Almighty can, and
does confound, (many times, Isa. 47.13.
) the utmost skill of the most proficient Artists of all sorts, and thus he did
by the Chaldean Star-gazers. Isa. 47.13.
when they failed in their Prognostications of the success of Babylon, and it
proved quite contrary: And thus it pleases God to deal by our days at some
times: But Heavenly Wisdom remedies this disturbance, and sets the Astrologer
well to rights. Also great is the holy Use of Astrology in demonstrations of
Virtue and Wisdom, how they do in many things prevail against the natural Works
of Heaven, and rejoice against them, and yet without any disparagement unto
those Heavens or their Natural acts, though they be in a sense vanquished. And
lastly, this Heavenly Wisdom teaches us to know our ends, and the number of
our days, Psalm. 39.4, 5.
that we may be certified how long we have to live; with comfort and
contentment, and to be most advantagiously prepared, for all states of
Prosperity and Adversity, of Life and Death, and that exceedingly the better,
for our better knowledge thereof. And no man so fit to foreknow these, as He,
who is able to say, Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.

HAGIASTROLOGIA; OR, ASTROLOGY A Sacred Science: SHOWING The Excellency and
great Benefit thereof, where it is rightly understood, and Religiously observed.
The Introduction.
The Introduction.
in this Censorious Age, that the Pen of a Divine should be found writing in
vindication of Judicial Astrology; but be it so, yet blush we not, nor know I
why I should be ashamed. True it is indeed, that through mistake, this Noble
Science has greatly suffered in its reputation, and that from the Tongues and
Pens of the Pious and Learned, as well as Ignorant and Envious Adversaries; in
so much as many young Students, however sufficiently well qualified with the
endowments of Nature, to read the Sacred Lessons of Heaven, yet have feared to
employ their Talents that way, merely because of the Ill Name. But God forbid
that all the World should be pusillanimous; Showing the occasion how this Noble
Science has been misunderstood by many learned and good men.
for it is not evident, that it is not the Blame, but the Ill luck rather of
this Celestial Science, that here and there a Wise man has despised it. First,
it has fallen into the hands of many Chimney-sweeping Fellows, who have so
besmutch'd it with their unclean and sooty fingers, that many times it looks
not like it self. And next, being in this case, it has happened upon the fists
of many such angry Zealots, whose hair-brained wisdom having no leisure to
examine the reason of the abused disguise, have persecuted in their chafe they
knew not who, nor what. And now if a wise and good man has sometimes met with
a Prince in his Exile, clothed in rags, and beaten all over black and blue,
and besmeared with blood and dirt; is it not so much the more a case to be
pitied, if he also has gone by with scorn, and despised even Virtue it self,
because under the clouds of its persecution he could not know its face?

How the Author, from an Enemy became a Well-willer to the Study of Astrology.
My self also must needs acknowledge, that some years since, I also was one of
those Enemies to this Noble Science, who buffetted in the dark I knew not what;
until soberly tempted to taste a few Lines reading of this Subject, although it
was with a serious purpose; to take up the apter occasion to throw dirt at it;
yet by this means attaining to understand who it was I spoke to, it begat in me
a reverence to those Gray Hairs, which as unjustly as ignorantly I had
despised. My Study of Duty is Theology, and they are not the Tithe of my
Meditations, which by Astrology are claimed. Wherefore counting it a kind of
Treason to my Function, to rob it of so much leisure, as would carry me
thorow-stitch with the acquaintance of the Arabian, Chaldean, and all other
Foreign Authors of this Subject; I contented my self only to peruse such
English Books as came ready to my hand, (for it was but merely a divertisement,
and, And of what great and good use he finds by it; how it it serves him as an
handmaid to Divinity.
as it were, an Handmaid to Divinity, all whatsoever I have meddled or dealt
with in this kind, and no more than what the most Learned and Famousest of our
modern reformed Writers have done before me.) Wherefore I am none of those who
pretend to be read in State-Astrology, or to be versed in the curious tracks of
Meteorology: Nor am I any professed Artist either in the understanding of
Hororary Questions, or in scanning the abstruse paths of Genethliacal
Predictions. And how it shows him the great Glory of Gods works.
Only so much have I learned, as shows me the great glory of my Creator,
written in the Sacred frame of the Heavens; while I behold their admirable
operations and productions, and how the frame of Nature hangs upon them, and is
contrived from the beginning, continuing and going on, as if all things came to
pass by Chance; and yet is there a dependence of all things one upon another,
and of all sublunary things upon the Heavens, and of the Heavens upon God; as
if Nature it self were nothing else but an Artificial Fabric, made by God from
the beginning. And now Astrology is nothing else, but that Study, whereby a man
perceives the secret Virtue of the Heavens, and the shining Bodies therein
contained, and is induced, by the more he knows of his handiwork, to spend the
more time in wondering at the most immense and infinite Wisdom and Power of
God. For the more a man attains to know of these Heavenly Virtues, the more he
sees of the reason and manner of Natures Operation in things that are past: and
the more he sees of this reason, the more it makes him to admire him that made
and laid the frame of it. And as he attains to see the reason of things past,
by the same skill he attains to see things to come; and by the Birth of a
Native, And profitably serves him in prediction of future Events.
he reads in the Heavens most part of that Natives whole life, and the Story
thereof, as, his Blessings and Crosses, Gains and Losses, Honor and Dishonor,
Sickness and Health, and all the years of his Life, and the time of Death, even
as if he had seen them acted in their several times and seasons. Eccles. 1.5.
For this God has given unto the wise man to know the time and the judgment.

The reason of the Author in publishing this Treatise
But many men do not believe, that by Natural skill, all or any of this can
fairly and lawfully be procured. And because amongst the many who believe us
not, and are therefore enemies to Astrology, I have so much charity as to
believe, are some good and godly, as well as wise men, who more out of mistake
than malice, have taken up their prejudice. And because amongst these also are
many most Learned Astronomers, And for whole sake he has done it.
unto whose names the Astrologer is greatly obliged for much of his skill; and
especially because amongst these two may be found some, whose prejudice to
Astrology has rendered them so unhappy, as not to have read that excellent piece
of Art, called, [The Doctrine of Nativities] published by Mr. Gadbury, (a
Person famous as well for Astronomy as Astrology) or any other Learned Treatise
of this nature, and yet perhaps out of some curiosity may be drawn in to taste
of these few Lines. Therefore for satisfaction of all such I humbly offer these
three Propositions.

1. That there is an Astrology in the Heavens. The sum of what he undertakes to
prove consists in three Propositions.


2. That this Astrology, Man (in the state of Corruption) may attain in some
measure to understand.

3. That this understanding may be lawfully and fairly compassed by Natural
means, without any Diabolical helps.

The first Proposition.
THat there is an Astrology in the Heavens; that is, The Proposition explained.
The Heavenly Bodies have all their Influences, wherewith they operate upon all
Earthly Subjects, and that upon the Intellectual and Sensitive, as well as the
Vegetative, to incline and lead them here and there, and more or less, in the
constitution of their Qualities, and Contingencies of their Destinies, (though
not absolutely to force their Wills) according to the power and virtues of that
place of Heaven, and that band of Stars, unto whose charge every of those
Subjects are committed.

Sun, Moon, and Stars, (which, The first Proof by Scripture shows, that the Sun
and Moon have as much to do with the sway of earthly affairs, as has a King
amongst his Subjects.
to such as know their Dimensions, are known to move in their Orbs as so many
other Worlds in the Heavens) for mere Signs, like Beacons on an Hill; nor yet
for mere Seasons or Landmarks of Time, so as to be no more but mere Boundments
unto Days, Months, and Years: Yea, there is infinitely more in them than so;
for unto every one of them has he committed an Authority and Power, Genesis 1.16.
as it were a King upon his Throne, to Sway and Rule over all things subject
unto Day and Night. The Sun is the Fountain of heat, and that Heat is the Nurse
of Life; and thence therefore find we every living Creature waiting upon this
Sun for its life, as it were so many Servants upon the Master of the House; and
this is palpable. Now the Moon seems to be as much the Fountain of Moisture, as
the Sun is of Heat, and Moisture being an Handmaid unto Life; hence also may it
seem requisite therefore, that where the Sun is honored as Master of the
House, the Moon may challenge the Title of Mistress; and this also is palpable,
though not in that degree of it to the heat of the Sun: For though the Moon
does not sensibly distill Dews of Moisture, as does the Sun his Beams of Heat,
it is because she is the weaker Vessel, and wants of him so exceedingly in
comparison of Power: Yet that she is the Mistress of this Moisture, as well as
of the Night, is apparent by the Tides, which constantly attend her Motion, and
that with increase and diminution of force, as she appears in strength or want
of Aspect; and by the Eyes of Cats, which sensibly swell and fall, as the Moon
is strong or weak.

And that the Stars also have their sway, and that by day as well as by Night.
But besides these Seigniories of the Sun and Moon, the Stars also it seems
have their Principalities in the Heavens: The Lord, who gives the Sun for a
Light by day, gives also the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars for a Light by
night. Jer. 31.35.
And to these Stars also has God committed a certain Rule or Dominion over the
Day and Night, Gen 1.18.
and that promiscuously. Now the Stars have no sensible operation upon us,
besides that little light they administer unto our eyes, and that is so very
small, that all the Stars in Heaven, besides the Sun and Moon, are not able to
compare with the smallest Wax-candle: And this little Light too being only by
night, and that also only when there be no Clouds to hide them; what shall we
say now? Did God make all these glorious Bodies (many of which are bigger than
the whole Earth) merely for a Twinkle of the Night, and that at certain choice
Times and Seasons only? What make they then in the Daytime? and what have
they to do in the dark and obscure Nights? Were they made to ride the Heavens
for Ciphers only, think we, at such times? Lo, every little Dasie that grows
upon the cold ground, has a secret and insensible virtue wrapped in its Leaves
and Flowers; and have these Celestial Spangles no Influences, but what we catch
with our eyes, as they are now and then, once in a week or month, to be found
sparkling their dim glances upon us? Nay, they cannot be such mean and empty
Tubs; no, they are as so many Kings and great Lords, and all of them have their
Commands, Genesis 1.18.
and that as well by day as by night, and in the clowdy as well as the clear
nights. And now seeing this their Lordship is not managed by sensible and
palpable acts and agitation, it must needs follow, that they have a secret and
an hidden way of Rule, whereby they operate imperceptibly in all their
agitations of their Dominion. And as these, And finally, that the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, besides their sensitive operations have their secret and
imperceptible Influences.
so also the Sun and Moon, besides their sensible operations, have also their
imperceptible actions. For it is not the mere Heat which gives Life, nor the
mere Moisture that helps to live; for if so, then might Man make living
Creatures artificially, but this we see he cannot do; the Heat may hatch the
Eggs, but all the Art of Man cannot make an Egg that can be hatched: No, for
there is a secret Act of Sun and Moon, besides the mere putting to of Heat and
Moisture, which produces Life both in Sensitive and Vegetive Animals. And in
these secret and insensible Operations or Influences, besides the Light which
they give, consists that Rule, which the Sun, Moon, and Stars do exercise over
all the Sons of Day and Night: And herein are written all those Ordinances of
the Moon and Stars, which are to be a Law unto Mankind, and to the whole Body
of Mortality, so long as the World endures. Jer. 31.35, 36.
And this mystery of these secret Operations, is that which we call the
Astrology of the Heavens.

The second proof by Scripture shows, That the Constellation of the Pleiades
and of Orion, have their Astrological Influences.
Now have the Stars all of them their natural Influences, and such natural
Influences as touch upon all things, as far as Day and Night extend their
limits? then must Mankind also come under the touch of this Influence, as well
as Brutes and Vegetives. But what authority can they pretend to over Man? speak
to him they cannot to commnd him ought, for they are not intelligent Bodies, no
more than is the Earth; their Authority therefore can be nothing else, but the
execution of their secret Influences, which in a certain course or order they
pour upon Mankind, and these, Man being unable to avoid, the Stars are said to
give Law to him, Genesis 1.26, 17, 18. Job 38.21, 32, 33.
(Astra regunt homines) and to have their Ordinances, unto which Man also must
submit. Thus the Stars called the Pleiades have their Ordinances, (that is)
their sweet Influences or Virtues, See Argol: Astr. ante Ephem. lib. sec. cap.
8. Stellae tempestuosae sunt Orion, Ar^urus, etc. pluriosae Pleiades.
which no power of Man is able to restrain. And the Stars of Orion have also
their Ordinances, (that is) their binding faculty, by Frost in Winter, or by
Showers in Summer, bringing to pass such an hard and tough Coat of Armor upon
the ground, as all the Art of Man is not able to prevent. Thus Mazeroth and
Arcturus with his Sons have also their Ordinances: and the whole Host of Heaven
has its course, and its Rules in that course, which though a man cannot see,
nor perfectly attain to know, yet some track thereof may he apprehend. These
names of Pleiades and Orion (it is true) are not found in the Hebrew
Translation, but only in the Septuagint; but it seems, those LXX Interpreters
were acquainted with those Constellations, and understanding both Languages,
converted the Hebrew words into such Names, as the Greeks called those
Constellations by.

Debora the Prophetess, that they fought from Heaven, The third proof by
Scripture shows, that Sisera and his Host were worsted and overthrown in Battle
by influences of the Stars. Judge. 5.20.
The Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. Now this was not by Sword
nor Pistol, nor yet by Thunder and Lightning, (for that Bullets fall from no
higher than the Air only, but the Stars are infinitely in the Heavens above
and beyond all Air) and therefore could it be no other ways but by some secret,
yet fatal Influences, whereby Sisera and all his Host were blasted from their
Cradles with unlucky Aspects of these Stars, which were so contrived in Nature,
as to fall out, all of them together, end so wrought, as many thousands of them
fell in Battle, all on one day. For though these men might have been born
under as many several hours, as they were men; yet met each man that fatal
wound at his several hour of birth, the force of which, as it fell from various
evil Stars, and from variety of envious Aspects, on each man's pate, so gave it
each man his bane, with such variety of limitation, as both old men and young
encountered their dooms together; and the limitation of many thousand Fates, and
it may be of as many thousand different lengths, met all upon one day. And yet
infortunated each Star so variously, each according to its proper nature,
course, and method, as every Star slew his man or men, and, it might be, by
different kind of deaths. But as the Stars fought against Sisera, so sought
they as much for Barak and his Host, fortunating the several times of each man's
birth in that Army; and here each Star stuck to his man, and all in such an
harmonious contrivance, as though there were as many several minutes of Births,
as there were several Men, yet were there as many benevolent Aspects of the
Stars to fortunate those Births; and that so, and with such different force, as
though each man's Birth bare date assunder, yet the younger Births, by the
nearer speed, overtaking the less half of those which were elder, all men's good
fortunes in that Army jumped together at one and the same time.

The fourth proof by Scripture shows, that the Meteors of the Air are lodged,
by the Influences of Heaven, against appointed times. Job 38.22, 23, 24, 25,
etc.
After the same manner as these Stars against Sisera, so also discourses the
Almighty unto Job, of the treasures of the Snow and Hail, which he has hid
against the time of trouble, and the day of War and Battle. Now what can be the
meaning of this biding, but the order of those Meteors, so providently lodged
and laid up in the arms of the Stars, and withheld by their Influences, as that
they shall fall by course of Nature, in such precise notches of time, as the
time of the punishment of God's Enemies, (such as was Sisera) shall be just
ripe to comply with those falls, so as these shall fall down to be the
punishment of those: And yet so come these things to pass without Miracle,
merely by order of the frame of Nature, as from the beginning it was contrived.
And here lies the glory, that God has so laid his great frame of Nature, that
all things in Nature do strangely suit and jump together, in ten thousand
thousand several passages and purposes, and yet all in a certain course and
order as was laid down from the beginning, without any the least amendment or
addition of new contrivance. After the same rate also the Light, and the Winds,
and the Rain, and the Thunder, and the Lightning, and the Dew, and the Frost,
and the Ice, are all of them so neatly laid up in the position of the Heavens,
as all come to pass in their order, and that so, as to make the grass to grow,
even in the Wilderness, where no man dwells. Now were it so, Job 38.26, 27.
that these things were all ordered by a Virtue immediately issuing from the
bosom of the Deity, then would the Rain, and the Thunder, and the rest, fall
only where Men or Beasts do dwell, who may see and taste of the same, and to
acknowledge him who sends them: But seeing they fall where neither are Men nor
Beasts, it follows therefore, that they fall by virtue of Means, and that in a
continued order, as those Means lead them, making the Grass also to grow where
no Eaters are not to be found, as well as where they are.

Arguments by Reason, showing that there are Influences in the Heavens, drawn
from,
and to all such who have tried it, Experience speaks as much. But there are
some who have not tried, and, being obstinate, will not essay, and therefore
knowing nothing of this Experience, refuse to believe them who do. Yet
methinks they might believe the Scriptures; but if neither that will satisfy,
yet they might observe, First, 1. The Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; there is no imaginable reason can be
produced how this is wrought, unless it be by some secret operation of the
Moon, 2. The healing power of the Weapon-salve.
beyond all what we understand. 2. They may take notice of the strange sympathy
in the healing of the Weapon-salve, and Sympathetical Powder. Here also remains
not any the least room for reason to say, how this may be effected, unless some
Celestial or Starry virtue secretly carry between. 3. The virtue of the
Lodestone, and the Needle in the Compass.
3. They may behold the admirable power of the Lodestone, how it attracts Iron
at a distance; and the wonderful carriage of the Needle in the Compass, how
that dead Body, as if it were alive, is always looking toward one of the Poles
unless by violence you keep it off. Now it is not the Stone of its own virtue
can possibly do this, without the communication of some higher Power affecting
of it: Nor is it possible ever the Needle could do thus, unless something from
the Celestial Matter about the Poles do attract it by some invisible Virtue, or
else the Pole Star or some other of those Heavenly Bodies do endue it secretly
with that strange kind of quality. 4. The Natural Work of Life.
4. They may consider the Natural work of Life, how it starts up, grows and
continues in the lap of Heat and Moisture proportionably conjoined, beyond all
the utmost that we are able to imagine how, whence it comes, or which way it is
maintained. Now be there not this secret Influence in the Heavens, which we are
treating of, I would fain know where or whence the Rose growing on a Dunghill
got its fragrant smell? or how the Plantane growing on the hard pathway side,
got its virtue to heal raw sores? or which way the Lily, standing in the mud
and mire up to the middle, got its fine coat of so many colors, and so
artificially wrought, as many times we see it is? Or how the Wheat-corn,
dropping only into cold earth, came to multiply into an Ear of 20, or 30, or
40 for one? Or I would as fain know, how the water or thick slime in the Egg,
by the sitting of an Hen, or by baking in an Oven, in a few weeks time converts
into a Chicken, and learns to peep? Or how the Seed in the Womb, without any
art or skill, or knowledge of the Mother, how, coagulates, and turns into blood
and bones, and forms it self into a living Child, and learns to cry, and speak,
and call? You Will say perhaps, Argumentation about the Natural Work of Life:
God does all these things; but that we know well enough, only the question
is, how he does them? whether with Means or without? If without Means, then
every Child that is born, and every Seed that grows out of the ground, comes to
pass by a new Creation, as well as by Generation: For to bring things to pass
without Means, is all one as to produce them without Matter, it being no more
but to say, Let there be Men, or, Let there be Leaves and Flowers; and, as the
word says, they come to pass. But we know there was never above one Creation,
and ever since that, all things have come to pass by Nature, and therefore must
there be some kind of Natural means for the production of all things: And now
if with Means these things come to pass, it is either by Earthly Means alone,
or by the help of some Celestial Powers also, aiding and assisting, that they
come to pass. But by the Earthly Means alone it is plain they cannot come to
pass, for it is not either Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, or all together, that
can of themselves bestow that goodly sweet savor unto the Rose. There must
therefore be for certain some other Supernatural Power aiding and assisting, or
else out of the mere Earth could never come to pass such a thing so far
expelling Earth, and all its adherents, as Fire, Air, and Water: And if so,
then came this Virtue either from some Spiritual or Material Substance
exceeding all the Terrestrial Powers and Faculties. If from some Spiritual
Substance, the^ was it effected either by Angels, or by the So^^ of the World.
By Angels it could not be, for 1. They have their peculiar Offices other waye^
and 2. Though they are Subjects of Nature, (...) we are, Showing how it is
wrought by means, and that either by the Soul of the World, or however by the
Heavenly Influences.
yet are they no part of the frame (...) Nature, whereout all things in their
order an^ formed. Now were it by the Soul of the World, then for certain must
there be such a Soul which as yet we are not sufficiently informed of; and then
must that Soul have its spec^^ seat in the World worthy of it self where t^
dwell, and from whence to inform all the whole Earth; and if so, then dwells it
undoubtedly amongst the Celestial Matter, and from thence supplies the Earth
with such sto^ of Virtue from the Heavens and Stars therein, as brings to pass
all that Shape, Color, Smell, Life, and Increase which we see com^ to pass. Or
if you deny this, then must the Earth be supplied with all her wonderful
Virtues from some Supernatural Material Substances; and if so, then name any
thing besides the Heavenly Matter, and the Stars of Heaven, that can be that
Substance, and I have done. Now either way will there be at Heavenly Astrology,
or an Astrology in the Heavens. Only the question is, whether these Celestial
Influences create the Earth immediately by God's blessing, or whether there be
a general Soul of the World between, yea or not? Vtrum horum mavis accipe; I
ask no more. Genesis 1.1, 2, 3.
In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth; and the Earth was
without form, and void, and darkness was upon the Deep, and the Spirit of God
moved upon the face of the waters. Here, when there was nothing but Earth, and
Water, and Darkness over all, yet the Spirit of God maintained that rude lump,
the Earth did he manage by the Water, and the Water in the Dark by himself. But
now both the Earth and Water are under the face of Heaven, and the Light is
upon this Heaven, and the Spirit of God moves upon the face of the Heavens in
that Light; and as he actuateth the Earth and the Waters by the Heavens, so
does he actuate the Heavens by himself.

Reason complieth with Holy Writ, More proofs of Scripture, confirming our
Rational Arguments to be true.
and both Scripture and Reason are Witnesses with our Experience, That there is
an Astrology for certain lodged in Heaven. And yet ^arther, the Scriptures also
do confirm all that I have brought for Reason, to be both truly Rational and
Divine. Deuteronomy. 33.13.
Concerning Joseph it is said by Moses, that his blessing shall be of the
precious things of the Sun and Moon. Now it is well known, that amongst other
of these precious things by that Tribe enjoyed, was the Kingdom of the Ten
Tribes; whence follows it, that it is in the power of the Sun and Moon, amongst
other precious blessings under God, to influence a man unto the Dignity of a
Crown, and so to fortunate his affairs, as to bring about the enjoyment of it.
Hos. 2.21.
God promises by the Prophet Hosea, how he will hear the Heavens, and they
shall hear the Earth, and be Earth the Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and they
Israel. Wherein he shows us, that as Man lives by Corn and Wine, so they by the
Earth, and so the Earth by the Heavens. And if so, then from the Heavens is it
that the Earth receives that virtue, whereby it brings forth all Smell, Color,
Deuteronomy. 28.12.
and Virtue. Moses tells us, God shall open his good Treasure, the Heaven, and
that not only to give rain unto the Land, but also to bless all the work of
the hand. Whence it is evident, that there lodges in the Celestial Bodies a
Faculty of fortunating Civil Affairs, as well as of managing natural things,
and that the root of all Earthly Blessings is from Heaven. Moses says again,
Deuteronomy 4.19.
that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, God has distributed to all Nations under
Heaven. And the Psalmist speaking of the Sun and Heavens, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
says, They declare the glory of God, and show forth his handiwork: Day and
night do continually tell of them, and that their voice is heard into all
Languages, and their words are gone into the ends of the world. By which it
appears, that the Heavens, and all the Stars therein, are full of such Virtues,
as the whole World has need of: And these Virtues God has given unto the
Heavens for this purpose. His Spirit (says Job) has garnished the Heavens.
Job 26.13.
And by the Spirit of his mouth (says the Psalmist) was the whole Army of
Heaven made. Psalm. 33.16.


Argumentation from Gods Eternal Prescience. Acts 15.18.
Known unto God (says St. James) are all his works from the beginning of the
world. These Works are either Natural or Miraculous. The Natural Works of God
are that whole frame of the Creation, together with all Circumstances and
Concerns relating thereunto, in times past, present, and future, which, as a
most curious piece of Art, The frame of Nature compared to a Watch. Ezekiel. 1.2,
2, 3, etc. to the end.
consists of all the Story of the whole World, and yet is all set together in
one only entire piece of Workmanship; it is like unto a Watch, made up of a
world of small Wheels wrapped up together, one within another, and yet all taking
one from another, and working one by and under another, until you come unto the
Master-wheel, or first Mover, which being wound up at the Creation with the
Line of Time, How God foresees all passages of the World by a certain order, as
a Watch-maker knows the Wheels of his Watch. 2 Pet. 3.
of a seeming infinite length of Thread wreathed up together upon the Wheel,
has ever since the beginning been winding off unto this present Age; and yet is
there still more Line upon the Wheel, but how much remains, is kept only in
the breast of the Almighty; but when this Line shall be utterly wound off, then
will this frame of Nature find its period, and all Wheels must cease their
motion. Now in the mean time, as the Watch-maker knows all the Wheels, Pullies,
and little Pins in the Watch, as perfectly as a man knows the Clothes on his
back, or how to put them on or off; so knows the Great and Almighty God the
whole World, and all the Wheels, Pullies, and Pins contained in every part
thereof; and this infinitely better than we know the Fingers of our Hands, or
Toes of our Feet. To every man that is born of a Woman, there is a certain
order or course of his life, how he runs through Health and Sickness, Honor and
Dishonor, and all the passages of his Life, from his Cradle to the Grave. For
Man is of himself, as it were, a little World within himself; How every man is
compared to one Wheel of the great Worlds frame, and a Work of many Wheels
within that one.
and though he stand, as it were, but one Wheel in the frame of the great
World, yet within this One seem there to be many thousands of Wheels operating,
and thousands more within every one of those first thousands, and more still
within them, and every of them almost ad infinitum, especially in long-lived
people, and persons of great undertakings, and all these moving within, and one
under another, as they are carried by the Thread twined on the outmost and
greatest Wheel, do run on in their order until that Thread break, or else be
wound off, and there they make a stop. All these things, God, who made Man at
the first, perfectly knows, and fore-knew from the beginning of the World; and
by this order of Man's life he perfectly knows, and fore-knew exactly all
passages of our lives, yea, even all the thoughts of our hearts, both sleeping
and waking, Joh. 2.24, 25.
and how one thought drives off, and brings in another, and continues on in so
doing until the last minute of life, whereat the breath fails. Now every man
being, as it were, a particular Wheel of the great World, it must needs follow,
that all men move in a certain Frame or Wheel above themselves, by virtue of
which, the Master-wheel of every man's life is is set a going. And this Wheel
also is subordinate unto others, and they also are the same unto still higher
than they, until we come at last unto the Master-wheel of the whole World,
which is the high and mighty Wheel of Heaven, wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars
are set, as so many Notches, carrying on the great works of Nature unto the
end. How man's Will is an independent Wheel within the World. 1 Cor. 9 26, 27.
Hence come the Originals of all Natural Qualities, Passions, and Accidents of
our lives, (the motion of the Will and Reason only excepted, which, as an
independent Wheel, within the Wheel of Nature, has a kind of motion of its own,
and therefore however it may be inclined or allured by the Works of Nature, How
the Heavens are the great Wheel of Nature.
yet cannot be forced by them.) But now above and beyond this great Wheel of
Nature, there is yet one Wheel more, within which the Heavens themselves are
turned. And here is it, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4
wherein is hid that great Line of Time, whereby the whole World is made to
hold on and continue its motion; And how God rules over all. Isa. 40.22, 23,
etc.
and this Wheel is God himself, who draws out the Line of Time, and sitting
upon the Circles of the Earth, he stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and
beholds all the Inhabitants of the World as Grasshoppers under his feet; and
hence sees he, as it were, with one view, all the World naked before him, both
past, present, and to come.

Platonists, Of the Soul of the World. That there is such a Soul,
and many of the wisest Philosophers in old time, That there was as well one
General Soul of the Whole World, as there is one Soul informing every man's
Body, so is it still the opinion of many very learned Christians; and it seems
with a great deal of reason, that the World has such a Soul. For were there not
one and the same general living Virtue, comprehending the whole Natural World,
from the outmost Circumference of the Heavens, unto the innermost Center of the
Earth, how possibly could the Sympathies and Antipathies of Nature work such
compliances and differences at such distances as we see they do, and that as
far as it is from Heaven unto the Earth, and too, without any visible or
imaginable contaction, unless some such Animal Virtue be in the World, to carry
such an invisible correspondency between Creature and Creature? Now where Life
is, these things are aptly effected: Thus the Infant in the womb is nourished
by the meat which the Mother eats. Now be it so, that there is such an
Universal Soul, yet is it questionable whether this Soul be Intellectual, or
merely Vegetive. That there is an Intellectual Power informing the whole World,
as the Soul does the Body, is not to be doubted; for otherwise would the frame
of Nature be no more but a huge blind lump. But Nature being led by good eyes,
such an Intellect must there be somewhere, And that it is not an Intellectual,
but a Vegetive Soul only. Jer. 23.23, 24.
that either gives or lends such Eyes to Nature. But then should the Soul of
the World carry this Intellect in its own Brain, it would follow, that this
Soul is a God. For to be an Intellectual Being, filling Heaven and Earth with
its presence, is an Attribute of Gods. And therefore I conclude, that there is
an Universal Soul in the World, but it is only Vegetive, and not Intellectual;
yet in this Soul dwells the Spirit of Almighty God, Acts 17.28.
who fills Heaven and Earth with his presence, and from hence garnisheth the
Heavens, Job 26.1^. Deuteronomy. 4.19.
and causes the precious Virtues of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to be carried
and distributed into all parts of the World. Job 38.33.
And thus immediately God rules in the Heavens, and rules all the World
mediately by the Heavens. How Gods Spirit informs the World in this Vegetive
Soul, not without means, but by means Job 38.26.
It Is true indeed, that God is as well able to govern and maintain all things
without means, as he was at first to constitute and create the frame of Nature;
but such is his pleasure, that he does work by means, and not immediately in
all things. It is a common and a true Maxim, that God and Nature have made
nothing in vain; and yet it is as true, that Grass grows where nothing lives to
eat it. Now were the World governed by Gods immediate presence only, then is
this Grass growing a work in vain, because God's presence brings forth all
things at list, and with stints and increase as he lists; Romans 11.36.
and therefore his list being at all times, and in all places, able to cease
its operation, might have prevented this plenty in a desolate Country. But
Nature running her course in a constant track, has no power to cease her work
without a miracle; and therefore however the Grass may grow in vain, yet
Natures operation is not in vain, which by virtue of one and the same act
produces the Grass in all places, and that as well in the populous as desolate
Countries.

Gods miraculous works, Of Gods miraculous works, and how they are foreseen by
God in the frame of Nature from Eternity. Josh. 10.12, 13. 2 King. 20.11. Joh.
11.53, 44. Chapter 9.6, 7, etc.
which also from the beginning were known unto him. These are such as have been
contrary, or at least diverse, to the course of Nature, or other Supernatural:
Such a work was it when he made the Sun stand still, and at another time when
he made it Retrograde. Such also were the Works of Christ, when he raised the
dead, and gave sight to men born blind, by his Divine power. Such also was the
Work of God, Exodus 14.21, 22. Dan. 3.27.
when the Sea made a lane for men to pass through it on dry ground; and when the
Fire had no power to scorch, or once to harm men walking in the midst of it.
These miraculous Works ('it is true) had no immediate dependency upon the work of
Nature; and yet from the beginning these also God foresaw: And how so? He
foresaw by the frame of Nature the occasion that required them, and by that
foresight set down in his eternal mind the contrivance of all Miracles too, as
they were in time to keep company with his frame of Nature. And now may thus
far be granted. What is it which we call Astrology? but the summary of all that
skill and knowledge, which, by times, the observation and experience of the
whole World of Ages hitherto has collected, and communicated down from hand to
hand unto us of this present Age, as to what may be understood concerning the
nature and operations of the great Wheels of Nature, how they work upon us, and
what they work out of us, and what accidents, according to their usual track,
may like enough befall us? Such is our Astrology, and the All we count such;
and by this Astrology we attain to see into the great works of God, and to be
able to say unto his great Glory, how truly great they are.

Answers to Objections.
And now by this time, I hope, it will be adjudged past dispute, that Astrology
does in no wise limit Gods eternal providence, but is so far from it, as no
Science, except Divinity, can declare half so much, whereby God's Sacred
Contrivance of the Affairs of Nature may be truly magnified as they deserve. It
seems greatly to trouble many people, because, say they, be there such a thing
as Astrology to be allowed, then must necessarily follow a fatal Destiny not to
be avoided; and if so, what room is left for Gods Providence? or what for
exercise of humane Virtues or Vices? It Is true indeed, that there is a Fate in
the frame of Nature; but then it is Gods eternal Providence, which has
contrived that Fate, and laid the whole platform of it; Showing how Astrology
impedes not, but manifests Gods eternal Providence.
and that so, and accompanied with such an incomprehensible forecast, as in no
case can betide or happen unto any man, either of good luck or bad, or of
prosperity or adversity, but matters fall out so suitable to his prayers and
conditions, as if God had quite altered the scene of affairs at his request,
and yet has nothing fallen out but what was so ordered from all eternity: For
God Almighty foresaw all men, and all their cases, and their prayers, and
thoughts, from the beginning; and laid his frame of Nature so, as to answer all
prayers, cases, and thoughts as was fit, all from the beginning. But these
eternal contrivances opening in time, and answering so exactly to the purpose,
many shallow-brain'd people are apt to cry out, as if the Almighty had altered
his purposes, changed the course of Nature, and made new contrivances upon
their prayers, and for their sakes, as if there could be no such thing as
Divine Providence, without disparaging the Deity, to make it seem of changeable
and new contrived counsels. But what though there be such a thing as Fate, yet
does it not follow, And how it hinders neither Virtue nor Vice; but is an help
to virtuous actions.
that there must be therefore an absolute fatal Necessity, for there is no such
thing, neither the Stars, nor Heavens, nor course of Nature, any ways
pretending to force man's will, they only incline in their courses. And here
lies the exercise of Virtue, in striving and fighting against corrupt
inclinations. The Heathens could say, Sapiens dominabitur astris; and our
Savior proclaims, Matthew. 11.12. Luke 16.16.
that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and violent men take it by force.
Yea, so effectual have been the fervent prayers of faithful and good men, that
they have not only turned the edge of malignant inclinations to bad qualities,
but have also utterly overturned the force of hard Fates. Had an Astrologer
known King Hezekiah's Nativity, Isa. 38. How King Hezekiah by his prayers
overturned the force of an hard fate.
no doubt but he would have read his Destiny to be death, by a violent Fever
in the 14 year of his Reign; and yet would the King have outlived that date 15
years farther, without any disparagement to the Astrologer, for he would have
said no more but what was truly written in Heaven: But then, the virtue of the
good King prevailing, God Almighty wrought for him, and thrust by the violence
of Fate for that time, and so lived he on until the next deadly blow overtook
him. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14
So also in case of ill qualities, St. Paul seems by his rugged nature to have
had Stars and Aspects swaying his Geniture as the late Usurper Cromwell had in
his; And how St. Paul overcame his natural ill dispositions. 1 Cor. 9.26, 27
but by his virtue he overcame Nature, and so brought his body into subjection,
and by that means made use of all his violent passions of Nature, to stir up
the more zeal and fervency in Gods service; whereas the other, for want of that
Virtue, became so much the greater Villain. Such another pattern as this seems
to have been the famous Heathen Socrates. Thus wise men rule the Stars, but
fools are ruled by them unto their own destruction. The works of Grace and
Nature how they act, each in their own paths.
And thus Grace and Will have no bar by Astrology either of freedom or fullness
of roomth for their exercise, and yet keep on the Stars their courses too. For
the works of Grace and Nature follow each their own track; Nature necessitates
no man's wickedness, and Grace destroys nothing of Nature, only it amends
Nature, and farther meddles not; and Astrology makes both friends, by giving
light to the paths of each, and showing both how they may make each for other,
and all for the praise and glory of God. Now such is the wonder of Gods eternal
contrivance, Of universal desolations, and particularly of Noah's Flood, and
how a reason for every man's death in that desolation was written in the Heavens.
that never any universal desolation happens at any time, whether by Fire, or
Water, or War, or Plague, but every man's particular Fate in that desolation has
a natural reason for it written in Heaven. Every man who perished in Noah's
Flood, had a particular influence from Heaven upon him, and such as might be
seen by his Nativity, which led on his Destiny to fall in that very hour as the
Flood came, and to die by that very kind of death, as in that Flood they
perished all of them by Water. And herein lay the glory of that contrivance
from the beginning, that without any alteration or amendment of Fate since the
first frame of it at the Creation. 1. All Births happened against that Flood,
under such moments of time as threatened death by Water. 2. In that all Natives
took up their natural breath, though at different times, yet with such
different lengths of the stint of Fate affected, as aptly invited Nature to
deliver them all up to die together. And 3. That these Fates notwithstanding,
yet had every man's Will free liberty (saving what chains sin had laid upon it)
as none the least force of necessity constrained any thing upon it.

Answer to more Objections.
Gods works are secret, and who can find them out? So say we too; but yet these
secrets have also an outside, and that is all we pretend to be skilled in. But
God works above Nature, says another, and that without any the least track, and
why should the Astrologer tie him to a method; Because (say we) we know God to
be a God of order, and one who delights to keep to that order. But as for his
pathless ways objected, we do not well understand the meaning, unless they
would have the Almighty allowed the liberty to change his mind; and then what
shall that argue, but as if there had been some deficiency in his eternal
purpose, and so his after-thoughts came up to mend it. And where then was his
eternal Omnisciency? which yet every true Child of God must steadfastly believe,
or else woe be to all the world: But if by these supernatural, they mean only
his miraculous works; know then, that such are never without some special
occasion, and that depending upon the work of Nature, the Astrologer is not
without his guess there too; but however, The Conclusion.
he does in no wise debar or deny these miracles. And when he has all done, and
gained his utmost skill concerning any future contingencies, yet concludes he
all he is able to say, with submission to the secrets of God, which are beyond
all the utmost that our imperfect skill can possibly extend unto; and ever with
this reserve we say, unless it please God to work to the contrary by a miracle.
And thus is it evident, both from Holy Writ and Scripture Reason, the Heavens
have their Influences, and by consequence, that there is such a thing as
Astrology in the Stars above. Hence therefore I proceed unto my second
Proposition.

The second Proposition.
That this Astrology, Man, (in this estate of Corruption) may attain in some
measure to understand.

The Proposition proved by the testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ.
WE have it by experience, and are very sure, by abundan^e of verification,
that something of this Astrology we do know; and so says our Savior, that it
is so for certain: When it is evening, ye say (says he) it will be fair
weather, Matthew. 16.2, 3. Luke 12.24, 55
because the sky is red. And in the morning it will be foul weather, because
the sky is red and louring. And when a cloud arises out of the West,
straightway ye say, A shower comes, and (says he) it is so. And when ye see
the South Wind blow, ye say, there will be heat, and so it comes to pass. And
then he concludes, speaking of the Pharisaical Jews, Matthew. 16.3. Luke 12.56.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but the signs of the times
can ye not discern. Now if Hypocrites could be true Astrologers, what hinders
but Christians may be as much, and as good Astrologers as they? and if such as
could not discern the signs of the times, yet could understand an Astrology by
the Heavens; how much more famous in the Heavenly skill may those men become,
who can discern both Christ and the Heavens too?

Astrologer was Moses, By the example of Moses, who understood Astrology. Acts
7.22.
that great Man of God, who was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. In
Moses days, the Egyptians were as famous for Literature as any Nation in the
World; and amongst other things, they were great Astrologers. Jos. Ant. lib. 1.
chap. 8, 12.
Josephus the Historian tells us, (and he quotes ancient Authors for what he
says) that the Egyptians were well versed in Astrology, and that the first
knowledge of that Celestial skill they learned from the Patriarch Abraham,
whilst he was in Egypt. Now the Egyptians, it is confessed, studied more Arts
than were good, Exodus 7.11, 12
such as were Sorcery, and Enchantments, and a Diabolical sort of Magic: But
Moses was learned only in the lawful Arts, and such was Astrology, when it was
clean sifted from the Diabolical Tares mingled with it by the enchanting
Sorcerers. And now that Moses did particularly understand Astrology, Deuteronomy. 33.
is apparent by his predictions of the Tribes as to what should betide them for
the time to come; for it was not by Revelation, nor Dream, nor Vision, that he
spoke those things; for when it was so, the Scripture was wont to say how it
was so; and no such thing being alleged now, it follows, that he spoke merely
of his natural knowledge; and besides, the phrase savours of mere natural
Prophecy.

Josephus, a learned, and generally well approved Author, By the example of
Adam and most of the Patriarchs. Joseph. Antiq: B. 1. Chapter 4, 8, etc. Genesis chapter
48, 49. Orig. Tom. in Genesis
that Adam, Seth, Enos, and most o^ the Patriarchs, were all great Astrologers;
and after them, Abraham, who taught both the Chaldeans and Egyptians; and as
seems by hi^ Predictions to his Sons, Jacob was so too; and such was the
opinion of the Learned Origin, that he was so indeed. Of Joseph also very much
may be said to the same purpose, he w^ a man famous for interpreting of Dreams;
and this is a faculty commonly accompanying, Astrology, and such as by Rules of
Art may be aptly known, Genesis 40.41. And by the example of Joseph, called Hermes
Trismegistus by the Grecians. Diod. Sic. lib. 1. chap. 2.
without Divine Inspirations Of this, Joseph, the ancient Historian, Di^dorus
Siculus, has said much, how he contributed not a little to the Art of the Plow
which was taught by Osiris and Isis, and how he taught them very many learned
matters both concerning Religion, and the State, and concerning things to come:
He calls him Hermes Trismegistos indeed, but that Joseph was the same Hermes he
spoke of, is very plain to be understood, both by the time and age wherein
Hermes lived, and also by his Religion, of which Diodore says, That he taught
a Religion by himself, and contrary to all the ways of Worship as were ever
known amongst the Egyptians before him; and he says, that he was the most
honored of the King above all men, for that he had found out, and counseled
unto many things, conducing to the benefit of man's life; which is the very
character of Joseph in holy Writ, how he was in favor with Pharaoh there. Now
of this man, says Diodore, he was one of the first who was skilled in the
Stars. And the Aphorisms of Hermes the Egyptian are extant unto this day; which
although I do not believe they were taught by Moses, who was the greatest
Hermes of Egypt, yet being fathered upon him, it argues that he was a famous
Astrologer esteemed of old; for that those ancient things wanting a certain
Father, were fathered upon him, as if he had been the Fountain of that Learning.

Astrologers seems also to have been those men of Issachar, And by the example
of the Issacharians, who were men skilled to know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12.32
who came to David when he was at Hebron, and are styled in holy Writ, Men who
had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. Now consider
we what the business was in hand, and in dispute, namely, whether Israel should
follow the House of Saul, or go over to David? To resolve this question, it
seems those Issacharians were well skilled, and they could tell that David
should rise, and the Saulites should fall; they could tell, that Readiness turn
was served, and David's coming up. But how did they know this? not by
Prophecy, nor skill in the Law or Prophets, for they were neither Priests nor
Levites whose business it was to study the Law; nor were they Divinely
inspired, for then would they have been called Prophets; nor were they Scribes
of the people, for those were mostly of the Tribe of Simeon, and these were
Issacharians: It follows therefore, that with any ease or smooth
interpretation, these could not be any thing else but learned Astrologers, or
men well read in the Heavens, so as to be able to answer an Horory Question in
such a case as was now depending: for after this manner were the Persian
Astrologers wont to be called Mages, or Wise men, Est. 1.13.
who were skilled in the times. And so also the Chaldeans termed their young
Students in Astrology, Dan. 1.4.
Men skilled in wisdom, and cunning in science, to learn the learning of the
Chaldeans.

And lastly, by the example of Daniel and his fellows. Dan. 1.4, 5.
Such an Astrologer was Daniel, and such were his Companions, Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego; these were educated according to the Chaldean way of the
study of Astrology, and what other Magic Arts could be thought a lawful study;
verse 11.
and one Melzar was their Tutor: And according to their education, they
profited by Gods blessing, verse 17:
in knowledge and skill of all manner of learning and wisdom, as was lawful for
them to study. And Daniel had particularly a notable faculty in understanding
the meaning of all Visions and Dreams. verse 18, 19, 20
And at the end of three years time, when Daniel and his Fellows were brought
before the King, upon the trial by a communication of hard Questions, it was
found, that these men were ten times more learned in all matters of wisdom and
understanding, than all the Magicians and Astrologers in the Realm. Now it is
plain, that this great wisdom of theirs consisted principally in the
Astrological Art, for that was it which they were appointed to study, about
that were all the hard questions of the communication, and therein was it that
they excelled all the Chaldeans; and ever after this, amongst the Chaldean
Astrologers, Jos. Ant. lib. 1. chap. 8.
were they accounted as Members of some Schools at Babylon, which were
maintained for that very purpose. This Science was here once taught by Abraham,
and after that Belus, Diod. Sic. lib. 1. chap. 8.
the Father of Nimrod, built the School-house of Learning, and much propagated
the Art: Dan. 2.13.
And from those days to these, the Chaldeans had ever been great Astrologers;
and in these Schools studied the learned Daniel. And when the Wise men, and
Astrologers, Diod. Sic. lib.
and Sorcerers destinated to die, Daniel and his Fellows were sought for to be
executed amongst the rest; the reason of this danger was, for that none of all
the Astrologers and Sorcerers could tell the Kings Dream, which himself had
forgotten: Now had he proposed his Dream, there wanted not for Artists, verse. 7.
who would have undertook the Interpretation; but, as the case stood, Daniel
himself did acknowledge, verse. 27.
that neither Astrologer or Soothsayer could possibly answer the demand, verse 28
and that the knowledge he had gained of it was not by Art, but by Divine
Inspiration. But however, it is past dispute, that Daniel had a real skill in
Astrology, and the Art of Interpretation of Dreams, and that by virtue of
reading and study, besides what he had by inspiration, only as for Sorcery and
Soothsying, and all such black Arts, we cannot imagine he ever meddled with. It
must necessarily follow, that amongst the Chaldean Learning, something there
was lawful and good, which made Daniol and his Fellows so famous above all the
Chaldeans. And now if we consider, that Sorcery and Soothsayings were
Diabolical Studies, and that the Art Magical is a doubtful thing, either what
was really understood by it, or whether it might be good or bad; however it
must needs be, that Astrology was both a lawful and a famous study, as Daniel
used it at least, (purged from the Chaldean fopperies) and therein was it, that
Daniel and his Fellows so much out-did all the Chaldeans, even in their Kings
presence.

Objection, That we cannot know the weather truly, answered.
you cannot tell the Weather truly, how much less then can you be able to
foretell Humane Fates? Now the truth is, we do acknowledge, that it is but
little that we acknowledge perfectly; and as for skill in the weather, we count
it a great deal more ticklish to be understood, (especially some years before
the time) than humane businesses. For first, we have but little of any Nativity
to judge therein, (the vernal and other quarter Figures being the principal
Rules of that nature) the Transits are our greatest arguments. And 2. The
Weather depending much upon the airy operations, is swayed by meaner aspects
than are humane matters, and therefore is by so much the more of various and
uncertain events. Also 3. Unless it were possible to understand the exact
quantity and proportion of Weather, whether fair or foul, that is like to fall,
and to say expressly in what special Climate and Place it shall begin to fall,
it is utterly unpossible to please all people in all places with any
predictions of this nature; For should it be prognosticated of Rain, and that
Rain come, yet if the stock of showery drops any whit fail of the due
proportion expected, and begin to pour down some four or five Climates breadth
of space ere it arrive at the place of expectation, then will that whole cloud
be utterly expended upon those Climates where it first dropped, and a fair day
must needs succeed in the expected situation. And thus the Prognosticator,
though never so ingenious, for want of some drams of perfection in some certain
predictions, shall be whoop'd at by a company of Clowns, as if he were a mere
Impostor. Besides, the Winds are exceeding ticklish in turning here and there,
so as who can perfectly know them? and yet the failure of the least skill in
the turn of the Winds, turns off a glut of Rain or Snow a quite contrary way.
And lastly, (which is not the least of the Impediments unto a truer attainment
in Meteorology) is the want of the Writers encouragement, either by recompense
of reward from the Company of Stationers, who are the Sellers of their pains,
or of good words from the Company of Buyers, who are the enjoyers of them. On
the one side, they are not so much for an elaborate as a cheap Almanac, for
one they can get by, rather than to have thanks for: And on the other side,
these are so sordid, that never once considering the ingenuity of the Author,
if they find him but once or twice in a day or two's error of the Weather, he
must ever be accounted with them for a common Liar. So that these things
considered, what encouragement has any man (think we) to spend two or three
months study upon writing of the Weather? Whence comes it to pass, that few
write who have skill; and secondly, many who have skill, yet write according to
their encouragement rather than skill, more slightly than warily. But yet, that
there is a real skill in foreknowledge of the Weather, and of the turning of
the Winds too, as to gluts of Weather or Wind, and as to the succession of
Weathers; whosoever shall peruse Mr. Gadbury's or Swallow's annual Predictions
to that purpose, will say as much. But besides, were it so, that the Weather
could not be any thing near certainly predicted, yet that there is a real skill
in it in part, almost every Shepherd and Husbandman can tell you, who are able
to verify abundance of Aphorisms of their tried experiences concerning
Weather, both by the riding of the Clouds, color of the Skies, and looks of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars. And that they are certainly in the right on it, as to
these their Experiments, our Savior brings in his Sacred Test, instancing in
certain of these particulars, that it is so, as they use to say. And now be it
so, that Observation and Experience can make us Weather-wise, what shall
hinder, but that they may say as much as to the foreknowledge of our own
Fates, if not a great deal more, (there being abundantly more reason for
certainty in Predictions o^ this nature, than for those of that nature,) What
is Astrology, but the finding out a skil^ of future Fates, by the very same
means as the Jews attained to know, that a red evening boded the morrow's fair
weather? For the experience of this know we to be every way a punctually true,
as possibly could be in that unto which our Savior dained to give his Te^ that
it is so. But what need we any further arguments? it is evident by daily and
multitude of experiments, that skilful men d^ certainly understand very much of
future contingencies by this harmless use of Astrology and this any candid
Objector may behold verified as often as he desires it. And in the mean time
please he but to peruse the Boo^ called, [ A Collection of Genitures, printed
b^ that ingenious Artist, Mr. John Gadbury, Physician in Ordinary to the Queens
Majesty, i^ the year 1662.] and he shall there find him prognosticating to the
very year wherein many eminent Natives then living should leav^ this world,
several of which are since dead according to the precise predicted time, as the
late Pope Alexander, and the late Philip King (...) Spain, and the little
Prince his Son, and many others; he published as much also by the late Usurper
Cromwell while he was alive, an^ by the late King of Sweden while he was alive
and both found him a true Prophet in his prediction of their deaths. To this
the Carpe^ commonly (do object, that they do as of^ fail, but this is very
false, for a good Artist very rarely misseth his mark, be but a Nativity
rightly timed to him, or near the time given with good accidents. But be a man
beguiled with a false time, or false accidents, never count that an error.

Sect. Now Astrology is either Meteorological, or Genethliacal. Of the
Divisions of Astrology into Meteorological and Genethliacal.
Of the Meteorological I have said already; the Genethliacal Astrology is
depending either upon the Birth of some Question, or of some Native Person or
Thing. Questionary Astrology depends upon the precise point of time when a
serious Question is asked, either by Letter or word of mouth; and this is
called Astrology by way of Hororary Questions. Of this way of Astrologizing (I
must confess) I am not so well skilled, nor am I, of the truth and worth of it,
And of Genethliacal Astrology, divided into Questionary, and Real or Personal
Astrology.
half so confident as of the other way by the Birth of Persons or Things; yet
so much have I tried and practiced of it, and perceived of the truth and
benefit of it by my practice, that I do believe it to be a lawful, true, and
beneficial study, although I am still seeking more and farther into the reason
of its truth, in order to attain a satisfaction beyond what I have yet gotten.
But in order that I may be the better understood, when I go about to justify
this way of Astrologizing, who they are, and practices they are which I
undertake to justify, I would have the Reader to know, that all men who
profess Astrology, are not Astrologers in good earnest, but that there are many
pretenders to this Art, who understand it not, or not sufficiently at least as
they pretend; or else if they do understand it, yet under color of Astrology,
do practice other Diabolical Arts of Magic or Sorcery, which are quite quite
different things, and of no kin to Astrology.

Of Questionary Astrology, how there are many pretenders to it, who abuse the
Science, either for want of skill, or sophistication of other studies mingled
there.
There are, who go under the name of Astrologers, many pretenders so very
ignorant, that they understand nothing of Arithmetic, or Astronomy, and yet
are able to answer Questions by way of Prognostication, so strangely quick and
readily, and yet falling out so punctually right, and truly agreeing to the
purpose, even unto admiration. Now this is a sort of Astrologizing beyond my
Reading or Experience. And be it so, that such a skill may be compassed, and
that lawfully, without either sleathy Cheat, or Diabolical Inspiration in it, I
am utterly a stranger to it; and much may be (I confess) beyond my skill: But
yet I am jealous, that many of these illiterate Fortune Tellers have more
understanding in Sigils, Charms or Spells, than in true Astrology, and are
better read in the juggling Art of Geomancy, than in the famous Art of Celestial
Observations.

Of the lucky Prognosticator, and the abuses happening to Astrology by means of
his
It is very certain, that some men are naturally constituted of such a kind of
Divining fancy, that by a kind of Luck, more than out of any real skill, they
are able to foretell, and tell of many things strangely true. And hence comes
it to pass, that many a man drives a Trade of discovering lost and stolen
goods, and speaks directly where they are, by a mere headlong kind of Chance,
with help of very small or no skill. And this Luck holds him some space of
time, by fits at least, during the predominancy of prosperous Aspects of Stars
favoring. But then in time, those worn out, and as evil Stars succeeding them,
this luck changes, and skill being wanting to supply the loss of that change,
all he says for another while proves as utterly false and erroneous. And hence
fails the man's eredit, and with him Astrology is brought into scorn; whereas in
truth, the man was little or no Astrologer, and never had any quantity of
Astrological skill in him. After this sort we daily see many sorts of Trades
men and Artists, buoyed up by their mere luck, to become famous, who never were
bred up to any thing of what they profess; thus have I known Bone-setters,
Midwives, Surgeons, and Physicians, who never were bred up to any of these
things, or any thing like them, yet have been, as it were, forced on by mere
Nature to follow every man his Art, without any instructions, but what Nature
of its own accord has taught them to acquire; and yet notwithstanding have
grown famous in their Professions unto admiration. Now where men have so much
grace or ingenuity, as to back their good fortune with industry, it comes to
pass, that they acquire good Arts, grow truly famous and deserve to be so
esteemed.

Of Sorcerers, and Diabolical Artists, and the abuse and disgrace happening unto
Astrology by means of such.
that these ignorant Artists, tickled with the applause of their good Fortune,
and bewitched with the love of gain, which they have felt so lightly coming in;
and thereupon spurred on with a vehement desire to keep up both their fame and
profit; but withal being loath to take pains to study for it, after they have
been at first flattered with Fortunes favors, courting them at so easy a
rate; and now at last feeling that good luck begins to fail, they strike in
with the Devil, a Master easy to be found, and so graft upon the Stock of
Natures Blessing an off-set of Satan's Endowment, for the supply of their
failing good fortune, and the support of their ambitious and covetous desires.
And thus many an ignorant and harmless skill, buoyed up merely by luck at
first, turns in time into flat Sorcery. And not only these ignorant Fellows,
but too many of the more learned sort also, being naturally evil natured
people, and complying with their bad humors, do make them worse by evil
habits, and growing ever worse and worse, without the happy turn of Repentance,
and having no knowledge of God, do become in time an easy prey unto the Devils
bait; and what with the itch of desire to know more, and to do more, than
Nature and Industry can well afford to teach them, and what with the desire of
vainglory and covetousness being drawn in, these also turn Sorcerers. Yea, and
not only evil-natur'd men, but also persons as well qualified as nature can
make them, for want of good education, fall into bad manners, and so corrupting
Nature, become as bad as the worst. And not only so, but some also never so
well educated, by reason of ill company, forfeit all the hopes that Goodness
had seemed to found in them; and these also in time turn Sorcerers too, many of
them: and this they may do too too aptly, whether ever they study any thing of
Astrology yea or not. But true it is, that too many Astrologers, using their
skiil more profanely than religiously, and finding that their Rules of Natural
Art cannot tell them all things they would know, or so easily and so quickly as
they would know them, despising therefore these lawful and most excellent
Studies, they fall into the study and practice of Geomancy, Sorcery, and plain
Witchcraft. The Devil, though he be a most damnable Apostate, yet is an Angel,
and as such, has skill in all natural causes, and the reason of future
contingencies* beyond the most Learned of mortal men that ever wrote, except
such who wrote and spoke by Divine Inspiration. Now if any man will so far fall
from God, as to be confederate with this Apostate, or any of his Infernal Imps,
there is no doubt but he may save the labor of a world of study which it costs
other men, and he shall have his Astrology at second hand by a kind of
Diabolical Inspiration, and that more readily and more punctually to the
purpose, than they who by great labor and pains come more honestly by it: But
then loses he his Soul by the bargain, and woe be to him that gets by such kind
of intelligence and correspondence. Of Gypsies and common Witches, and the
great wrong Astrology abides by means of their lying Arts and Diabolical
practices.


common Gypsies, who as they counterfeit the feature of natural Egyptians, by a
mere artificial swarth wherewith they besmear their English faces; so abuse
they the World with a dissembled skill of discerning secret and future things;
whereas they know nothing at all but what they have by mere Diabolical and
Juggling tricks: for either they are infernally inspired, or else they are mere
Cheaters. As for matter of real skill, seldom is it that any of them have any
at all, neither have they any of them any reason or ground for what they say,
besides a mere kind of chance: But their Confederate the Devil has a real and a
great skill, 1 King. 22.21, 22, 23.
and has withal a secret way whereby invisibly and undiscerned he suggests
words into his Prophets lips. Acts 2.4.
For as the Holy Ghost miraculously inspired the Apostles, so as to make them
speak all Languages, so the Devil also has his way, after a sort, insensibly to
communicate thoughts into peoples heads, and words into their mouths. Much
difference there is without in the degrees and latitude of this power; for the
Devil is under a restraint, and cannot execute his natural power, but where and
when as God allows him permission; and when he has permission, 1 King. 22.21,
22, etc.
at utmost his power is no more comparable to that of the Holy Ghost, Exodus
7.11, 12 chap 8.18, 19 Rev. 12.7, 8, 9.
than is a Molehill to an high Mountain; yet is it incomparably beyond the
power of mortal men, by nature at least. Now this power of his is ordinarily
able to go no farther, Ephesians. 2.2. Joh. 8.44. Matthew. 16.22, 23.
than to be able to suggest evil motions into men's minds; and thus did he by
Peter, when he made use of his conceit, with attempt to affright Christ out of
the enterprise of his Passion; and this he did by such a secret insinuation,
and so neatly acted, that Peter little dreamed that the Devil had put it into
his head, until Christ flatly and plainly told him that it was so. This liberty
of suggestion has the Devil ordinarily against all the best men that be, Matthew.
16.23. 2 Cor. 17.7.
as he had against Peter and Paul. But as men neglect their devotions to God,
and restrain their prayers, and reading good Books, and good Meditations, their
minds by degrees grow estranged from God, 1 Cor. 7.5. Ephesians. 4.17, 18
and evil thoughts by degrees growing worse and worse, possess their minds in
the room thereof, until in the end Gods Spirit (which never fails to use all
possible endeavors to reclaim men from vice unto godly virtues, so long as
remains any hopes of them) withdraws from them, and leaving them to themselves,
their hearts harden immediately, and a seared Conscience possesses them; and
then together therewith Satan usually enters, as he entered into Judas; Joh.
13.27.
and from that day forward keeps he the chief rule over the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.
and works them as he finds them fittest for his purpose; of some he makes
absolute Sots, as it were mere brute beasts; others he devours with abundance
of Whoredoms; others he stupifies so much with worldly cares, as they become as
it were their own, or the Devils Asses; others he intangles with spiritual
pride in Hipocrisies and Heresies, until they are made, as it were, stark mad
in Opinions: And a peculiar sort of people only they are, who fitted by a kind
of Geniture that inclines to that purpose, he draws into pact with him to
become Witches, or, as it were, Devils incarnate; and this he effects by
incroaching upon them nearer and nearer, as the holy Ghost withdraws, and
insinuating himself, closes with their capicities, and becomes familiar by
degrees, communicating unto them of his secrets insensibly, by inclining their
fancies with his Diabolical powers, so as to make them quick and apt of
apprehension. And all this he does insensibly, without any the least making of
himself known unto them, who he is that they are beholding to for these powers
that come so readily upon them, as if they were merely natural; insomuch that
the Devil becomes a man's ready Servant, and does for him very much, as if he
had earned his Soul to be his, before that man once knows for certain that ever
he had to do with him: And thus goes he on incroaching more and more, until the
Soul being puffed up with such an excess of vainglory, or filled with such
vehemence of lust, or entangled with such a knot of worldly-mindedness, as it
is past danger of retreat; and then Satan appears in his own shapes, by
apparent Vision, or Audible Voice, and familiarly and openly converseth with
his new Prophets, and enters with them into an absolute compact, that he will
be theirs, and they shall be his; Matthew. 4.9.
even as he would have tempted Jesus Christ to fall down and worship him.

Of the several kinds of Witches, and first of the malicious Witch. Job 5.2.
Of this sort of Diabolically inspired people are several kinds. 1. There is
the malicious Witch, whose damnable spleen and envy tormenting himself with
such a vehement desire of doing mischief, as he can enjoy no health in his
bones; and he not endued with a stock of Grace any way sufficient to quench
this fire, the Devil knowing his ayld, proffereth his service in this exigent,
and the man finding his pain of malice without grace intolerable, easily
consents, and sells his Soul to the Devil to gain his will against his
enemies. Now in this case over a wicked man, such as a Thief, or Murderer, or
Adulterer, or any man that lies under any open sin, and dwells in it, the
Devil seems ordinarily to have power over them according to these vehement
desires of his Clients, and also over every man that dreadeth his power, and
also over every one, of whose goods or things he can any ways gain into
possession. And to this purpose it seems, as if the Devil has prevailed to
afflict men's goods, whether living or dead, with diverse plagues, as the death
or lameness of Cattle, and the spoiling of provisions of meat or drink by
strange kind of wild annoyances; and also to touch the bodies of Men and Women,
or their Children, by sickness, and lameness, and strange kind of fits, and
sometimes by death. But the Devil has not always this power over wicked men,
and sometimes by Gods permission he gains to afflict the most righteous of
men, as he did Job, Job 1.2.
either in their Bodies, Children, or Goods. Now to withstand these things is
there no way better, than by strong prayer and crying unto God, and by a bold
and confident opposition of the acts of the Devils, and his Witchcrafts. It is
observed, that the Devil has very rarely any power to hurt that Man or Woman,
who fears him not: And although it be dangerous meddling with Geomantick tricks
to drive away the Devil, which is as much as to say, to drive out Satan by
Satan; or by scratching the Witch, or by burning the Thatch of her house, or
any such like things, which are absolutely doing of evil and unlawful things,
that good may come of it, or giving our Souls to the Devil to be rid of the
Devil: Yet in lawful things, to violate the Devils act in the name of God, as
to burn a bewitched Beast with an hot iron in the very act of its bewitched
fits, or to thrust an hot iron into a vessel of bewitched Liquor, or any such
like thing; as it is written, Resist the Devil, James 4.7.
and he will flee from thee; as there is no ground nor reason why it should be
unlawful so to do, so it has been approved a good assistant remedy, under our
prayers to God, to expel Witchcraft. Now when the Devil cannot compass the
desire of his Clients, so as to harm the envied person, yet feeds he them with
promises, that it shall be done; and thus keeps he them in vain expectations,
until he puts a period to them.

Of the poor and needy Witch.
so are there very many poor and needy men and women in the World, who being as
wicked as they are wanting, and neither knowing how to supply their wants, nor
having any stock of patience to endure them, as such who have neither courage
to rob, nor industry to work, are therefore so greatly tormented with this
pinching need, as makes the Devils service in this kind greatly acceptable for
their supply. And though the Devil be a means somewhat to please them in this
case, by administering some certain ease, by prompting them to several cheats
and robberies, which seem to run away successfully for a time, yet are these
people generally always poor, and so they live and die.

Of the Learned Witches, and these either Covetous or Merry Witches.
A third sort are the learned Witches, who being afflicted with a vehement
desire to know strange things, and that without the knowledge of God, in time
do meet and comply with the insinuations of Satan, which seem to flatter them
with enjoyment of their desires. And these enjoyments seeming so very
delectable to their minds, draw them in by degree to enter into a perfect pact
with the Devil. And these are usually either covetous or merry wanton Witches.
Covetous Witches, who make use of all their skill merely for sordid gain. The
merry Witches are commonly called White Witches, who usually drive a trade of
unbewitching, whom the malicious or covetous have harmed. And this plausible
sort of white Witches, while they pretend to do nothing but good, do the
greatest hurt. For while people think, or seem at least, to think no harm, here
are they drawn in to make use of the Devil to drive away the Devil, and the
good they seem to receive by these men, never does them good; for whether they
be stolen goods brought again by this means, they shall not doubt being
recovered, or the person recovering, shall be one way or other afflicted as
much as that comes to, or whether it be some sickness or sore amended, be sure
it shall break out again ere long, either in the same or some other place. It
is very strange, which is credibly reported, how these White Witches do
oftentimes force the Thief to bring back the stolen goods, and to cast them down
where they had them; but goods so returned upon such a score, certainly shall
never profit them, who procured their return after this manner; for it is most
certain, that this can be done no other way but by the Devil, or by a cheat;
and if credible persons may be believed, such things have been acted, past all
color of cheats. But, will some say, seeing the Devil is for certain the
greatest Liar in nature, how can he tell these men truth? or if he tell them
never so true, how can they believe so great a Liar? In answer to this we must
note, that the Devil does sometimes tell true, because he cannot do otherwise;
as when he was forced to confess, Luke 4.41.
that Christ was the Son of God; and sometimes he tells true for his own
advantage, in order that men may be drawn to believe his lies with the greater
affection and zeal: Thus does he tell true unto his Clients, to oblige them to
be so much the firmer his; and in order, that in the end he may swallow them up
in his delusions. But whether he tell true or false, they who are his, are so
bewitched by him, as to believe it to be true, whether it be right, or never so
much wrong.

Of juggling Prognosticators, and their abominable cheats.
great enemies to Astrology are a company of juggling Prognosticators, who would
make the world believe as if they were errand Sorcerers by their practices,
pretend to Astrology by Profession, but indeed are neither the one nor the
other, but mere Cheaters, who do not so much prophecy what shall befall, as
cheat and juggle, to bring about seemingly what they prophecy; and to this
purpose, maintaining a knavish confederacy with the principal Pick-pockets
whereabout^ they dwell, by compliance with the Thief, help men to their goods,
as if by Beelzeb^^ they cast out Devils; or else by subtle examination, and
extortion of confession from the Quaerents, having outwitted their Clients,
they seem to tell strange things, which they know all and merely by hearsay.

Of the true Questionary Astrology, and how God is willing to have our
questions answered.
Now all these several sorts of people being secluded our company, either as an
Astrologers, or else as private enemies, who by adulterous sophistications go
about to force this noble and famous Science, as a mere stale to their wicked
and diabolical lusts. Yet is there for certain such a thing as Questionary
Astrology, as a lawful, true, and commendable Science, with great profit and
delight to be practiced by sober, wise, and religious men. He who made the
Heavens, and placed the Stars therein for Signs and Seasons, Genesis 1.14. Deuteronomy.
4.19. Psalm. 139.9.
has no envy that any man should read what he has printed purposely to be
understood. No surely, The Lord will do nothing (as it is written) but he
reveals the secrets thereof unto his servants the Prophets. Amos 3.7.
1 Samuel 23.10, 11.
When David was in Keilah, and news was bruted that Saul was coming thither
after him to besiege him there, he could not certainly tell whether it were so
or no, but was inquisitive to know the truth of it; and when he desired it, God
was willing to let him know. And is not the Almighty as gracious still as ever
he was? or was he willing to have questions answered in those days, and can he
be unwilling now adays? Certainly it cannot be. We have not the Ephod indeed,
by which to make enquiry; but God had always more ways than one to teach his
Senators wisdom, and so he has still.

Samuel's days, it seems, How it was a custom in the the time of Samuel to ask
and resolve Horary Questions. 1 Samuel 9.9.
it was a common custom to go the Seers, to enquire for lost goods, what was
become of them, and to make enquiry of many such like questions. Now after what
manner these questions were rsolved, although the Scripture does not expressly
say, yet it gives us to understand, 1. They were not altogether, nor usually
answered by the Ephod, for that was only in custody of the High Priest, and
these Questions were resolved by the Seers, or Wisemen. 2. They were not
ordinarily shown by Revelation, or Dream, or Vision, for these were only in
use in extraordinary cases; but these were mere ordinary Questions. 3. They
were resolved, neither by Ephod, nor by Prophecy, but by some industrious Art,
which came of study and pains-taking; for neither the informations by the
Ephod, or by Revelation, or by any kind of Extraordinary and Divine Prophecy,
was ever known to be mercenary: For as it was Christ's command to his Disciples,
Matthew. 10.8.
saying, Freely ye have received, therefore freely give; so it was the practice
of all extraordinary Prophets in old time. 2 King. 5.15, 16.
Elisha would take no money, no, though he had wrought a wonderful cure upon a
great rich man, because what he did was not by Art, but by Miracle. But here in
these customary cases, it seems these Seers were wont to take money for the
Questions they resolved; for when it was proposed by Saul's Servant, to go to
enquire of the Man of God for the Asses, and that according as it was an usual
custom in those days; it was answered by Saul, saying, But what have we to give
him? 1 Samuel 9.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
we have no bread left, we have no sufficient present. And the servant replied,
I have a fourth part of a shekel of silver, I Will give him that. And then Saul
answered him, Well said, let us go then. Now it is plain, that it was a custom
to go to the Seer for things that were lost, and that Saul and his Servant knew
this custom; and that was a part of this custom to reward the Seers with some
present for his answer to the questions: For though like enough it is, that
Samuel took nothing in this case of Saul or his Servant for resolving them
about the Asses; yet however it is plain, that the Seers did usually take
money, or else what needed Saul's answer; What shall we give him? for had he not
known what the custom was, how came it to pass that both he and the Servant
thought of it to go to the Seer at all? and if it was the custom to take money
in such a case, then came not the Seers by their skill by any kind of
Revelation, but by Study and Art, which deserved as well as required such a
Gratuity. And now if there was such a Study in the case, what could it be but
by some natural means? and if by natural means, what natural means could they
be, but by skill in those means by which it pleases God to sway the World, as
by the Ordinances of the Sun, Genesis 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Jer. 31.35, 36. Jos.
Ant. lib. 1. cap. 8. Acts 7.22.
Moon, and Stars? In these was Abraham the Patriarch well read, and of him
learned the Egyptians and Chaldeans, who practiced much of this very Art; from
the Egyptians Moses learned the same Art; and from Moses these Seers got it,
and Samuel the Prophet also amongst the rest.

And finally how it follows, how those Questions were resolved by skill in the
Stars and Heavens, and no other ways.
How can the Stars sway our thoughts? And say I, How can the Moon sway and
order the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, as it is apparent she does, who knows
how? for though we read of many conceits in the case, yet how easy is it to
confute all those conceits as fond things, over it is for us to say or show how
it is in certain truth. There is undoubtedly a general Vegetive Soul in the
World, every where maintained and enlivened by the holy Ghost. And this
carrying between the Moon and the Sea, those great Waters, like an invisible
Line with an huge Scoop at the end thereof, draws them after her as she goes
her circuit, though no man sees how. And thus in all Sympathies, this Vegetive
Soul invisibly carries virtue from the Heavens between thing and thing, every
where working those secret effects, which we mortals cannot but admire. And
thus in our present case, who knows what this Soul cannot do between the Stars
and our thoughts, working such Sympathies, as a Question serious cannot start
it self but in some such Notch of time, while the Stars and Heavens are acting
upon that very Subject in hand. And hence the Birth of the Question, like the
Nativity of a Child, carries the story of the whole matter in hand in its
forehead. And hence follows that skill of Natural Prophecy, by virtue of the
Starry Aspects, which as they are situate at the precise notch of time of the
Question demanded, are able to demonstrate the various success that each
accident of Affair can claim unto it self. And if so, what hinders, but that He
who has wisdom, and can do it, may read those Answers, which in Letters of
Gold, Almighty God has written in the Heavens, to every Question its proper
Answer? And this as well out of the Stars of Heaven, as once it was done by
Abiather the Priest, out of the Stars of the Ephod.

The Conclusion.
I am not so confident, as I said before, of this Questionary way, as of that
by fixed humane Nativities. But I am very confident, that the Omniscient
Creator is not at all wanting, for any possible care in his contrivance of the
work of Nature, or for the tender of any possible means that may be had for the
supply of all wants: And if it be necessary for man's good to know the time and
the judgment, at all such times as he has occasion to use either, Eccles. 8.12,
etc. 5.6.
as Solomon says it is, and that the wise man shall know it; then it cannot be,
but that God has afforded means without a miracle to come by this knowledge;
and this means, probability says, is by the Stars of Heaven, answering our
Horary Questions; and experience continually affirms day by day, that it is so.
And yet do I not think so neither as some have written, as if my Glove hidden
up and down here and there in mere sport and wantonness, should be so watched
and attended by the Heavenly Bodies, and those Bodies by such servile Angels,
as must needs tell me at every time where this piece of Leather is dropped: No,
Gods works are serious, and his Eagles never were created to catch Flies. For
although the Heavenly contrivance may aptly respond our serious concerns; so as
when David desired to know if he should go up into any of the Cities of Judah,
2 Samuel 2.1.
and which of them? Yet that they should as aptly comply with our mere
frolicks, I hold it ridiculous to imagine. No doubt, but the Heavens are able
to show us infinitely more Learning, than we mortals in this state of
corruption can ever attain to understand. It Is a great bounty of God Almighty
that we know so much as we do, and therefore let wise men glorify the Maker of
all things, for all we attain to understand, and far be it from us to belie, or
any ways to abuse Gods gracious Works. It is sufficiently plain, that an
Astrology there is in the Heavens, and as plain by this time, that Man (in this
state of corruption) may attain to understand it. But as for perfection we
pretend not to it. And so pass I on to my Third Proposition.

The Third Proposition. That this Astrological Understanding may be lawfully
and fairly compassed by Natural Means, without any the least of Diabolical
helps.
The Introduction.
I shall first show its Pedigree and Rise, and thence its Essence, and the true
natural meaning thereof.

Astrology is the most excellent part of that noble Science which is called
Physiology, Of Natural Philosophy, and the meaning and order thereof.
or Natural Philosophy.

Physiology is a Science of Natural Bodies.

The Body Natural may be conceived either generally,, as it is but one great
Body; or else specially, as it may be divided into two, or subdivided into many
thousand several Bodies.

The general Body of Nature is called the World, or the whole World, which, as
it is generally considered, makes all of it but One entire Body.

This general Body admits of many special Divisions and Subdivisions. And
first, it parts into two Branches, making one Body Natural, called
Celestial, and another called Terrestrial. And hence arise two Sciences, the
one of which may fitly be called Oranology, or Astrology, and the other Geology.

Of Geology, or Natural Philosophy Terrestrial, and the meaning thereof.
Geology is a Science that treats of the Natural Body, called the Earth, and
speaks either generally of the whole Earth, or specially of the parts, or some
particular part thereof. This Science of Geology is either merely Speculative,
or else for practice also.

Odder thereof.
Speculative Geology consists in the mere knowledge of the Earth, in whole,
or in part, and of the Principles and Affections thereof; and to this purpose
it treats either of the common being of any earthly thing, merely as it is a
Being, abstract from all manner of Matter, both intelligible and sensible; and
as it acts thus, it is called Metaphysical, or Supernatural Philosophy.

Or else it discourses of a movable Being in its Matter, and that as it is
perfectly material; and this is Natural Philosophy, properly so called.

or else, 3ly. it handles things conversant in matters intelligible, but not
sensible, as they are the Abstracts of Matter; and this is called Mathematical,
or Abstract Philosophy. Of this sort of Science the subject is Quantity, and
this is either Continued or Discreet. If of Continued Quantity the Science
treats, then it is called Geometry, or its subordinate Perspective. But be
the Quantity Discreet the Science treats of, then is it called Arithmetic,
or its subordinate Music.

Natural Philosophy properly so called, treats of Terrestrial Bodies, either
Simple or Mixed. The Simple Bodies are the four Elements, called Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water, which among them do so fill all places of the Earth, from the
utmost and inferior Bodies of the Heavenly matter, unto the inmost center of
the Earth, so as there remains no such thing as Vacuity any where under the
cope of Heaven.

Mixed Bodies are compounded of the four Elements, and are either Animate or
inanimate Bodies. Animate Bodies are either Vegetive, Sensitive, or Rational.

Now while the Learned Artist studies the Earthly Body Natural, the Sciences of
Geography, History, and Chronology do naturally flow from that Study. The first
of these describes the situation of the Earth; the second declares the story
of all that was ever seen or done in it; and the third tells how much time
has passed from the Creation unto every time present. Subordinate to these are
Topography, and particular Stories of Places, and Chronologies of particular
Periods.

Practical Geology, or Natural Philosophy, consists in such a practice, as
makes use of Speculation for the profit of Mankind, so as to leave a track or
fruit of its operation remaining, after the act is past and gone. And this is a
sort of Study that is called Art rather than Science.

The Subject of this Art is either Man himself, or something else. If Man
himself be the subject to be practiced upon, then is the business either to
teach him Manners, and this is called Ethical Philosophy; or else to teach him
the Art of Reasoning, and this is called Logical Philosophy; or else to teach
him the Art of Speaking, and this is called Grammatical, or Rhetorical
Philosophy. If something else be the Subject, then either it is the Earth, or
the Fruits of the Earth. If the Earth, then is the business to dress and till
it, and this kind of doing is called the Art of Agriculture. If the Fruits of
the Earth, then the business is to prepare them so, that they may become fit
for Health, or Wealth, or Food, or Cloth, or a thousand things as Mankind has
need of. If for Health, then this doing is called the Art of Medicine; if for
Cloth or Food, etc. then it is called the Art of Clothing, Drapery, Cookery,
or by as many names as Man has uses to employ the Fruits of the Earth about.

Of Oronology, or Astrology, or Natural Philosophy Celestial, and the meaning
and order thereof.
Now after the manner of the Terrestrial World, so is the Celestial. Astrology,
or rather Oranology, is a Science that treats of the Natural Body called the
Heaven, and speaks either generally of the whole Heaven, or specially of some
particular part thereof.

This Astrology, or Vranology, as it is a part of Physiology, so has it the
same Principles, whether Internal, as Matter and Form; or External, as the
Causes Efficient and Final, Principles of their own nature; and Chance and
Fortune, Principles by accident.

It has also the same Affections, Internal, a Motion and Rest, Finity and
Infinity; and External, as Place and Time.

Vranology is either merely Speculative, or also Practical.

Speculative Vranology consists in the mere knowledge of the Heavens, either
in whole or in part, and of the Principles and Affections thereof; and to this
purpose it treats of these things either Metaphysically, or Mathematically,
or merely Naturally.

Mathematically, it treats of Astronomy, or Vranometry, which is a Science
that treats of the Magnitude, or Measure, or Number of the Heavens, or of the
Stars of Heaven.

Naturally, it treats of the Heavenly Bodies, and their Nature, Motion,
Aspects, and Operations. And hence follows the Science of Astrology, or
Vranology, whose business it is to study and declare these things, and the
reasons thereof.

Practical Astrology, or Natural Philosophy, is That Art, whereby a man does so
employ his skill in the Nature of the Heavenly Bodies, as to make a lasting
profit and advantage of it, to the use of himself, or of Mankind in general.
Hence follows Judiciary Astrology, which is an Art, that by certain known and
long experienced Rules, discerns future Contingencies, how and when they are to
come to pass, by the situation of the Heavens, and the Stars therein, and by
their Motions and Aspects, compared with the knowledge of their Nature and
Operations. So as in the main, Astrology is nothing else but a Bundle of
Aphorisms or Experiments, which the wisdom of all Ages has gathered up
together, concerning the Nature and Acting of the Heavens, and has
communicated and published for the common good of Mankind. Some of these were
brought to light by Shepherds, others by Husbandmen and Seamen, and some by
Scholars, and all communicated together.

Physicians do theirs concerning Medicine from the fruits of the Earth; their
way is to gather Herbs, and taste them how they are hot or cold in the First,
Second, or Third Degree; and to try them, what their effects are, in Potion or
Plaster; and hence learn they to understand what each Herb or Flower, Metal
or Mineral, is able to bring forth. And after this manner, by virtue of a
muititude of Experiments, and a constant observation from time to time, and at
all times, have they invented and brought up the famous Art of Physic and
Chyrurgery. After this very same manner has the Astrologer gained all his whole
skill of the Heavens: Taste them indeed he cannot, but he has his Eye, and his
Ear, and his sense of Feeling, and his reason of Apprehension, and judgment to
observe the effects of the Heavens, and their influences upon Man and Beast,
and upon the whole Earth; and hence he is able to argue from the Effect to the
Cause, what the Nature is of Heaven in general and in particular, and of many
of the Stars what they are able to produce. And after this manner, by virtue of
a multitune of Experiments, and a constant observation from time to time, and
at all times, have Learned Men invented and brought to light this famous Art of
Vranology, commonly called Judiciary Astrology; and there is no more of
Diabolical Art in this, than there is in the study and practice of Physic and
Chyrurgery, there being not a tittle in this, but what is learned after the
same manner as are they, all being the progeny of Experience and Observation;
Of the Subject of Uranology, the Heavenly Body Natural, and its confiderations.
and be there any difference, this is the eldest Sister, and the most ingenious
Art of them all.

subject of Vranology, and that as well of the Speculative as of the Practical
part of that Science, is the Body Natural of Heaven.

Heaven is a Body Natural, most simple, solid, spherical, clear, and moving
constantly in a Circle, and this by virtue of an innate power always within it
self. And thus far all the Learned Philosophers generally do assent and agree.

This Heaven waxes old as does a garment, as witnesses the holy Writ:
Moreover the Effects do show as much, the stature of Man in every Age
decreasing, and the fruitlesness of the Earth in general continually
increasing, as if the Heavens above failed to supply Natures offspring below,
with their wonted stock of virtue.

The matter of this Heaven is not the same with that of the four Elements, or
either of them, either simple or mixed, but either is of a purer and more
excellent mold than any of them, or else is a most pure quintessential matter,
composed beyond all that Art or Earthly Nature was ever possibly able to
contrive.

This Body Natural of Heaven is to be considered either in its own proper
matter, or in respect of the Codies therein moving.

Heaven in its own proper matter is to be considered in its Quantity, Quality,
or Action. The Quantity of Heaven consists in Number and Measure.

Quantity of Number seems to divide the great Body of Heaven into several and
different Orbs. Some are of opinion, Of the Number of the Heavenly Orbs.
that there are ten or eleven of these distinct Orbs of the Heavens; that is,
ten of them besides the Emperial Heaven, whose immensity no mortal man is able
to comprehend, Others suppose there are but eight of these Orbs, that is, seven
Orbs of the seven Planets, besides that one of the fixed Stars, all of them
containing every one his inferior Orb within his own Circle, wrapping one
about another, like the several Coats of an Onyon, and the Sun or the Earth,
enclosed in the Center of all like the Ball in the midst of the Onion, of
which, some say one, and some say the other, to be the innermost, but Astrology
makes little matter which; and so whether there be eight or ten of the Heavenly
Orbs, or more or fewer, Astrology makes but little of concern; or whether there
be but one general Orb, wherein the Planets and fixed Stars do ride in their
several Circuits, loose from the Heavenly Body, as Birds flying in the Air, or
as Fishes swimming in the Sea, Astrology does not undertake to decide:

But howsoever, or which way soever we do account either the Sun or Earth to be
the Center of the World, or the Orbs to be more or fewer, or to be fixed to the
Planets and Stars, or loose from them both; as we cannot say certainly how they
are, seeing they are so much above our reach of reason and comprehension, so we
need not greatly care or concern our selves, saving for recreation in our mere
Speculations. Yet sure it is, by perfect Demonstration, That from the Center of
the World unto the utmost limits of the Starry Heaven, there is a vast and
immense Body of Heaven, consisting of that most simple, solid, spherical and
clear matter, so as if it were most excellent refined Crystal we are able to go
through all; all which St. Paul seems to account but one Body of Heaven, the
Air between that and us making the Psalm. 8 8. Dan. 7.2, 13.
first Heaven, and that vast Body a Genesis 1 17.
second, beyond which that holy Man being wrapped up, was in the Emperial Heaven
above all, where he saw and heard things unspeakable in the 2 Cor. 12.2 Matthew
6.9. chap. 24.36.
third Heaven.

Measure cuts out this whole Body of Heaven into several spaces of Height,
Depth, and Width. Of the measure and space of the Heavens, as they are commonly
divided.


These spaces of Measure are chiefly bounded by the Equinoctial Line, and the
two Polar Points.

The Equinoctial Line is a great Circle, which we imagine to compass the whole
World of Heaven and Earth in that space [extending from the Orb of the Moon
unto the Emperial Heaven) where the Days and Nights are of equal length all the
whole year about.

The Polar Points are those two Points in the immense Ball of the World which
are equidistant from the Equinoctial Line; the one in the utmost Northern, and
the other in the utmost Southern point.

Now this Equinoctial Line is conceived to be precisely 360 Degrees in its
whole circuit, or divided into so many equal parts of space; and every one of
those Degrees is divided into the space of 60 Minutes, or 60 several parts of a
Degree; and every Minute into as many Seconds.

And as the Equinoctial is, so is the Meridian conceived to be the space of 360
Degrees. This is another great Circle, extending from the one Polar Point unto
the other, and twice cutting the Equinoctial Line, compasses the whole World
from North to South, as the Equinoctial does from East to West, and so
returns unto the same Point where it first began. But whereas the Equinoctial
Line is a certain space immutable, the Meridian Line is not so, but is
immutable, and circleth the World in any or all Degrees of the Equator, even as
we please to conceive or imagine.

The 360 Degrees of the Equinoctial Line are called the Longitude of the World,
because they are in order as the Sun and all the Stars do move along in their
Circuits round abount the spacious Heavens in their several Orbs. But the 360
Degrees of the Meridian are called the Latitude of the World, because they mete
out that distance, wherein the Sun and all the Stars, in a due and certain
breadth one from another, do move in their Circuits from East to West.

The Sun in his Circuit keeps not the Equinoctial Line, but declineth one
part of the year unto the Northwards, and another part of the year unto the
Southwards: And all the other Planets observing the same order, (excepting that
whereas the Sun keeps to a constant and level track, these vary sometimes
more and sometimes less distant from the Equinoctial Line, than is this track
of the Suns.) Hence occasioneth another great Circle to be imagined in the
Heavens, called the Zodiac: This Zodiac being also 360 Degrees in the whole
Circuit, is conceived to be about 16 Degrees in breadth; for that the Planets
having sometimes (some of them at least) 8 Degrees and odd Minutes in North
Latitude from the Suns course, and sometimes as much in South-Latitude; this
Zodiac, which is, as it were, the high road-way of the Planets in their
Perigrination about the World, is esteemed to be of so much breadth, as the
Planets any of them do swerve in their Latitude to the North or South: And the
Suns pathway in the midst thereof is called the Ecliptic Line.

This Zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts, called the Twelve Signs; and
these beginning where the Sun enters the Equinoctial to the Northwards, the
first Sign is called Aries, and the rest in order are called Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and
Pisces. These Signs are divided all of them into 30 equal parts, called
Degrees; and these Degrees are all of them subdivided into 60 equal parts,
called Minutes, and they again are subdivided every one of them into 60
Seconds, and they again into Thirds.

Now when the Sun enters into the Sign called Cancer, then is he in his
greatest North Declination, and at that time is distant from the Equinoctial
Line 23 Degrees to the North; whence occasioneth the Circle called the Tropic
of Cancer, the Center of which being the North Pole, it compasses so much of
the Call of the round World, as falls under 23 Degrees and above an half from
the Equator to the Northwards. And where the Sun enters the Sign called
Capricornus, he is under his greatest South Declination, and thence occasioneth
another Circle to be imagined, called the Tropic of Capricorn, as many Degrees
distant from the Equator to the South. Forty five Degrees distant from each
Tropical Circle are two Circles more, usually imagined, called the Artick and
Antartick Circles, which being but little above 20 Degrees distant from each
Pole, do also compass some little portion of the skirt of the world. And
inferior to these are other Circles, called Parallels, which running from East
to West, so divide the Heavens into several spaces between the greater Circles.

Speculative Astrology, commonly called Astronomy: but by these imaginary
spaces, and the motion of the Sun and Moon through them, to know (as by certain
standing rules) when it will be Summer and Winter, and when it will be Spring
and Fall, is that which we call Judiciary Astrology,

Of ibi Quality of the Heavenly Matter.
A second thing to be considered, is the Quality of the Heavens. The Quality of
the Heavenly Matter is either such as is palpable and apparent, or else such as
is secret, and not easily perceptible.

The apparent quality of the Heavenly matter is, that it is pure, clear,
resplendent, round, simple, and solid, and always in motion, and and that of
its own innate power and property.

Sect. 10 But besides these, there are certain secret and imperceptible
Qualities of this Heavenly matter; and these, because they are secret, cannot
so easily be demonstrated that they are indeed such Qualities of the Heavens,
except only by the experience of such ingenious persons, Matthew. 16.2, 3.
who have curiously searched into these several tracts of Nature. Who is able
to demonstrate that a red evening is naturally productive to a fair morning? or
that a red morning is so apt to bring forth the quite conthahy? unless you will
believe an ingenious Observator, who can tell you, that he has always found it
fo, only barring some few rules of exception? and so, fain would I know how a
man would prove, that two Plants growing close together on the same Bank, the
one of them is wholesome meat, and the other is rank poison? A man will answer
perhaps, I have tasted the one and the other, and I find it so upon my tongue;
and reasonable men will believe such an answer from an ingenious man, skilled
in the nature of Herbs, without any further demonstration of any thing, by the
looks or shapes of the leaves, roots or flowers of either Plant. And if so, why
will you not as aptly believe an ingenious Man, skilled in the Herbs of Heaven,
that will tell you by the like experience of observation, that the one of these
Plants is an Herb of Saturn, a malevolent Planet, by whom it is influenced with
its poisonous faculty; and the other is an Herb of Jupiter, a benevolent
Planet, by whom it is influenced with its nourishing faculty, insomuch as
though these Plants are both nourished by the same cold earth and warm Sun, yet
are their operations nursed out of two quite different breasts. But you will
say perhaps, that this is an abstruse observation, and therefore not so apt to
be believed, as that which is made by a plain taste. And say I again, some men
that are naturally born to it (as it were) are as apt at these obstruse
observations, as other men are to relish bread and meat. And if any man has
not so much reason as to be bound to credit all their observations and
experiments, yet me thinks such should be obliged, in civility at least, to
suspend harsh censures, and not to say as some use to do, as if all things they
cannot presently apprehend a reason for, were therefore merely Diabolical. But
to return to our business.

secret qualities of the Heavenly matter, Of the true and proper Qualities of
the several spaces of the Heavenly matter.
are either such as are the true and proper qualities of the several parts and
spaces of the Heavens, or such as are so by accident.

Now to be able to say what is the proper quality of the Heavenly matter, we
must first measure out the Heavens into several spaces of place. For as it is
upon Earth, all ground will not bring forth the same fruit; so is it in Heaven,
all places in Heaven do not work the same effects. Upon the Earth, a man in his
journey rides one ten miles more or less upon the sands, and by and by he
traceth over as many miles more upon the clays, and after that another parcel
upon the gravel: So seems it unto us by the best of observation, as if it were
in the Heavens; for begin we at that point where the Zodiac cutteth the Equator
to the Northwards, and there we meet just entering the Sign Aries, Of the
Quality of the Twelve Signs.
and holding on from thence forwards for the space of 30 Degrees; This,
observation says, is a Sign hot and dry, like an high gravelly or sandy ground;
and when this Sign ascends at a Birth, or if the Sun or Moon be in it, it
usually contributes unto the Native a dry Body, See Doct. of Not. sib. 1. chap.
10, sect. 1.
lean and spare, strong and big bones and limbs, piercing eyes, with black
eyebrows, a swarthy complexion, and sandy. colored or red hair, and inclines
him to be choleric, brutish, violent, and intemperate; that is, this Sign does
naturally effect these things. But if the Planets Jupiter or Venus be in the
Ascendant, or in this Sign, it alters the case for the better, both for quality
and complexion of the Native; but if Saturn or Mars be there, then it alters
for the worse. For as the ground will some of it bear Wheat, and other some
Rye, and yet by adding compass to it, or by ordering it accordingly, the nature
of the mold is many times made to bring forth fruit contrary to its nature.
Even so it is when the Planets or their Aspects fall strongly into a Sign, they
quite change the nature of it many times. But if none of these be, then the
Sign Aries pursues its own nature unavoidably. After this follows the Sign
Taurus for another 30 Degrees, and this, much diverse from the preceding Sign,
is of Nature cold and dry, as if out of an hot sandy soil a man were of a
sudden to enter into a cold clayie Country. This Sign Ascending, or upon the
Suns or Moons place, usually renders up a person with a broad brow, See Doct.
of Not. chap. 10. Sect. 2.
thick lips, and curled hair of a dark color, and of qualities somewhat
brutish, slow, melancholy, and yet a little furious. Next follows the Sign
Gemini, of nature hot and moist, like a fat and rich soil, and gives a Native
tall, Ibid. Sect. 3.
with much duskish colored hair, of a sanguine complexion, and of a good wit,
and of qualities huhumane and aerie, and not without ambition. After Gemini
succeeds Cancer; Ibid. Sect. 4.
at the entrance of which, the Zodiac being in its utmost Northern point,
begins to bend again toward the Equinoctial Line. This Sign is of nature cold
and moist, like a moorish and watery Land, and brings forth a Native fair and
pale, with dark brown hair, and a fat body, and of qualities phlegmatic and
heavy, and inclined to drinking. Then follows the Sign Leo, hot and dry, Ibid.
Sect. 5.
like Aries, and gives a Native with a big head, and a high sanguine ruddy
complexion, with great eyes and flaxen hair. Ibid. Sect. 6.
Virgo is like Taurus, cold and dry, and makes the Native of a mean stature,
and small voice, black hair, and a good wit. Ibid. Sect. 7.
Libra venters with the Line to the Southwards, and is like Gemini, hot and
moist, and renders a Native tall and slender, fair and beautiful, with flaxen
hair, and inclined to luxury. Ibid. Sect. 8.
Scorpio is of nature with Cancer, cold and moist, and brings forth usually a
corpulent person, swarthy, with black hair; of a subtle wit, if not a
dissembler. Sagittarius is hot and dry again, Ibid. Sect. 9.
and gives a strong body and tall, of a Sunburned, ruddy, and well proportioned
face. In the entering of Capricorn, Ibid. Sect. 10.
the Zodiac being in the utmost Southern point, begins to bend again to the
Line, this is a Sign cold and dry, and makes a little person lean and slender,
of black hair, and a sharp chin, Ibid. Soct. 11:
and a long neck. Aquarius is hot and moist, and renders a Native pretty tall
and long-visag'd, Ibid. Sect. 12.
sanguine and ruddy, but brown, with black hair. Lastly, Pisces is a cold and
moist Sign, and gives a short fleshy man, pale and sickly, but of a neat,
jetting, humane, apt to be conceited of himself. These Signs also have their
peculiar operations in Generation of Man and Beast; as to the Sex, some of them
promise a Male-issue, and others a Female, that is, at the Conception, or in
case of an Horary Question. And though we cannot g^^ble Nature so far, as to
open the utmost reason of these operations, yet methinks sober men should rest
satisfied with the relation of the experience of our constant observations; and
the rather, for that the Husbandman treating of his Land, how the one is st^ff
ground, and the other is light, and how this ground will bring forth one sort
of fruit, and that another, he can render no more reason for th^^ than we can
for this; but, says he, we find it so by experience, and so do we.

Of the Degrees of every Sign, and how these have peculiar qualities.
But again, these twelve Signs, we are to subdivide every one of them into 30
Degrees apiece. And it is further observed, that though the Signs have their
general qualities, yet these degrees under them do claim certain peculiar
privileges, as it were by way of exception unto the general quality of the
Sign. For as in Land, of what measure soever, there are peculiar veins of earth
of different nature from the general soil of the Country; also there are some
places in some sort of Land, that have pits and holes in them, Doct. of Not.
chap. 4.
and others that abound with banks and hills, and others again which
abundantly bring forth briars and thorns, so is it in the Heavens after the
same manner: As for example, In the Sign Aries, the Degrees 8, 20, and 29 are
of nature light, as working a fair and clear skin; but the Degrees of 3 and 16
are dark, as operating a dark and swarthy countenance. The Degrees 24 and 30
are called void, as if working some deficiencies upon the brain. The Degrees 6,
11, 16, 23, and 29. are called pitied, which render a man as if he were always
in a pit or snare, not knowing which way to turn him. And the Degree 19 is
always observed to be a Degree increasing fortune.

Again, the first 8 Degrees are Masculine, the 9 is Femine, from thence unto
the 85 are all Masculine, and thence again unto 22 are Feminine, and thence
unto 30 are Mascultne. In the Sign Taurus, the Degrees 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, are
called Azimene, or deficient Degrees, and bespeak a man some ways lame or
crooked, or deformed in his neck. In Aries are none of these, but in Cancer are
many of them, and so in other Signs. This Taurus also has Degrees Light, Void,
Pitied, Masculine, and Feminine, as has Aries, and so has the other Signs
more or less. But the Sign Cancer has a Degree called smoaky, the nature of
which is to work a swarth upon the complexion, and this is the 20 Degree. The
20 of Leo is also, and in the other Signs are more such, although Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Libra, and Pisces have none of them. Now these things are
nothing but mere observations found out by diligent taking notice of Signs and
Degrees as they Ascend, or as they are tranfited by the Sun or Moon; and it is
an experiment very obvious, and apt to be proved.

Of the Qualities of the Heavenly Matter by accident.
Such are the essential Qualities of the Heavenly Matter. Now there are also
besides these certain Qualities, wherewith they are endowed accidentally; and
these are either by means of the situation of the Heavens, or else by reason of
something which has affected this Heavenly matter with other qualities, which
it has an aptitude to entertain. And 1. as for the situation Heavens, we know,
that they are always in motion, either ascending or descending. And as it does
appear by very good experiments, according to these situations, the Heavens do
produce very various qualities. This motion of Heaven is ordinarily divided
into twelve equal parts or proportions, called the Twelve Houses of Heaven; and
as it further appears by experience, these Houses are the great Wheel of
Nature, whereon do depend the various fortunes contingent to all sublunary
matters and things. These twelve Houses are either Angular, Succedent, or
Cadent. The Angular Houses are four, called the Ascendent, Mid-heaven, the
Seventh House, and the bottom of Heaven. The Ascendent is that part of Heaven
which is always rising up level with our Horison, the very point ascending is
the Cusp or principal Seat of this House, Of the twelve Houses of Heaven, and
their qualities by accident. And first, of the Ascendent and its qualities.
and extends about some 5 Degrees above the Earth, and 25 immediately
succeeding, ready to ascend. But if Signs of long Ascension do ascend, half 5
Degrees above the Earth, are all that this House can claim, and some 13 below
are its utmost share. And yet if Signs of short Ascensions do Ascend, it may
well be afforded twice 5 degrees above ground, and 50 below. The quality of
whatsoever part of Heaven that takes up the Degrees of this House, is to carry
along with it the health and life of every Native and thing, that is conceived
or brought forth within its jurisdiction. And hence has this point of Heaven a
faculty of attracting or receiving the virtues of the Heavenly matter that is
accidentally transiting that part of Heaven at Birth, and also of the Planets
and fixed Stars in their Transits, and of all the rays of the Planets in their
Aspects into this part of Heaven, in order to the forming of the shape,
stature, temperature of the body, quality of the mind, and of all accidents and
contingencies which shall befall the Natives body, or health, or life, unto his
dying day. Such a sympathy it seems there is between this part of the heavenly
frame, and of every act and thing that is hatched, and receives life under it.
For as the seed in the ground, after it has first put forth root, buds forth
and appears above-ground; so the Heavens, after they have framed the Embryon,
and the Temperament thereof, under the Earth, give it life and being of its
own, putting forth level with them as they just ascend. For we do not suppose
as if the temperature and qualities of the Native were framed wholly at the
exact time of Birth, although the situation of Heaven at that time never fails
exactly to describe them. No, these temperatures and qualities are formed in
the womb, from the Conception, but yet the Birth describes them, because that
Birth cannot fall at any moment af time, but even with that part of the
Heavenly matter ascending, which is interressed in those temperatures and
qualities. And now therefore look what the nature of this ascending point of
Heaven, qualified with Planets and Stars, and their Aspects, such a person
qualified and endowed shall the Native prove; and of these qualities and
temperatures, and of the whole health and life of the Native, does this point
ascending take the whole charge.

Of the Fifth and Eleventh Houses, and their qualities.
Now the Attendants and Vpholders of Life are two: 1. Children or Offspring
attends to hold up the continuance of it in this World: And 2. Religion and
Learning do come in to uphold it unto eternity in another World. These two
therefore in an harmonious Trine (as if making up that threefold cord; of which
Solomon has said, it can never be broken) do wait upon the ascending point of
Heaven, the one in a succedent House, called the fifth House of Heaven; and the
other in a Cadent House, called the ninth House of Heaven. And to this purpose,
Doct. of Not. chap. 6. sect. 5.
look what is the state of this fifth House at a man's birth, such shall be the
state of that man's offspring; and the Heavenly matter, Planets, Stars, and
Aspects then there, shall apparently show the Conditions, Doct. of Not. chap. 6
sect. 9.
Qualities, and Fortunes of the Natives whole offspring, what, and how they
shall prove. So also look what is the state of the eleventh House in a
Nativity, such shall the Native prove for matter of Religion and Science; and
the Heavenly matter, Planets, Stars, and Aspects therein shall show what and
how the man shall prove, whether for wise or foolish, devout or Schismatical,
and what Studies and Arts he shall be inclined to follow. These are the Matter
for Grace to work upon; but as for Grace it self, Nature has no power over
that, Grace must Rule Nature, but Nature cannot sway Grace.

Angular point of Heaven is called Mid-heaven, Of Mid-heaven; and its qualities.
and is always that point of the Heavens which culminates, or is the very top
of the whole Heavenly frame. And what ever part of Heaven happens to be here
culminating at the Birth of any Person or Thing, that takes charge of, and
carries along with it ever after the Preferment, Honor, Profession, Mastery,
and Authority of the Native: And as are the Planets, Stars, Aspects, and
Heavenly Matter placed and situate in this point, or in the Degrees thereto
pertaining, so shall the Native prove in his lifetime for all matter of
Dignity and Advance in this World, whether for more or less, fortunate or
unfortunate, favored or disgraced.

Attendents upon, Of the Second and Sixth Houses, and their qualities.
and Upholders of a man's Honor and Dignity, are Wealth and Servants. The first
of these does wait upon Mid-heaven in a succedent House, called the Second
House of Heaven, and the other in a Cadent H^use, called the Sixth House of
Heaven; and these two are situate both in an harmonious Trine to the Angular
point of Mid-heaven it self. And now look what the Planets, Stars, Aspects, and
Heavenly Matter are in either of these Houses, such shall the Natives Fortune
prove for matter of Wealth and Servants, whereof the first for Wealth, and the
second for Servants.

Seventh House, Of the Seventh House, and the Eleventh and Third, and their
qualities*
and is always that point of Heaven, and the Degrees appendant, which is
descending or setting out of our Horizon, and is diametrically opposite to the
Ascendant. Now as the rising Heaven is the Conduit of life, so is this setting
Heaven (level with the Ascendent) of all affairs level with life, such as are
Marriage, and all manner of dealings in the World, and the Natives Sweetheart,
Wife, and all persons he has to deal with, whether Friends, Strangers, or
Enemies, and those either honest men or thieves. And the Planets, Stars,
Aspects, and Heavenly matter in this point at a Nativity, do apparently show
how a man shall be had for matter of Wives more or fewer, any or none, good or
bad; and for matter of dealing, how fortunate or unfortunate he is like to
prove; and for matter of Thieves and Enemies how he shall be troubled with them
more or less, or whether he shall overcome them, or they him. Necessary
Upholders of Marriage, and Defenders against Thieves and Enemies, are Friends,
Kindred, and Neighbors. And these in their Trine to the Seventh House are
brought forth, the first out of the Eleventh House of Heaven, a Succedent House
and the other out of the Third House of Heaven, a Cadent House. This Eleventh
House, and the Planets, Stars, Aspects, and Heavenly Matter therein, do show
the state of a man's Friends and Hopes in this life. And the Third House
describes how happy or unhappy a man shall prove in his Brothers, Sisters,
Cousins, and Neighbors.

Of the Seventh House, with the Twelfth and Eighth, and their qualities.
The last Angle of Heaven is the Fourth House, called the Bottom of Heaven, and
is always that point of Heaven which seems to hang at the very bottom of the
round Ball of the Celestial World, and is Diametrically opposite to Mid-heaven.
And as that shows what a man shall rise to in this World, so this declares
what, and when shall be his fall, end, or death. This House has signification
therefore of the end of every matter, and amongst other ends, of the Grave,
which is the end of all men living. And the Planets, Stars, Aspects, and
Heavenly Matter in this House do show, what kind of end every Native is like to
find, whether honorable or dishonorable, and the like. Retainers to this
House are Tribulation and Death; the one signified by the Eighth House, a
Succedent House of Heaven, and the other by the Twelfth House, a Cadent House.
And the Planets, Stars, Aspects, and Heavenly Matter in these Houses do show
how men shall be had for matter of tribulation and afflictions out of the
Twelfth House, and for matter of Death out of the Eighth House.

Ascendant signifies the Native coming into the World; and the Fourth House at
the same time signifies the Parents of the Native going out; For one generation
goes off, and another always comes in, Eccles. 1.4.
according to the course of Nature. Of these Parents, the Father is more
especially signified by the Fourth House; and then secondarily, but not so
forcibly, the Mother of the Native is signified by the Tenth House, and the
Grandfather by the Seventh, and Uncles and Aunts by the Fathers side by the
Sixth, and Uncles and Aunts by the Mothers side by the Twelfth. Hence also
comes it to pass, that by the Fourth House are signified Houses and Lands, and
all manner of Patrimony left by the Fathers; and by the Eighth House are
signified Goods left by Will of the Dead. Also the Second and Sixth Houses in
half Trine, the House of the Grave, and in opposition to the Eighth and
Twelfth, have a secondary signification of Sickness and Death. So the Eleventh
and Third in half Trine to the Ascendent, have secondary signification of
Children and Sciences.

Of the Accidental Qualities of Heaven, as they happen by reason of something
which has affected them.
Thus far of the Accidental Qualities of the Heavenly Matter, as they happen by
means of the situation of the Heavens. Now come we to the Qualities of the
Heavens, as they happen by reason of something that has affected the Heavenly
Matter, with such new Qualities, as it has an aptitude to entertain. These
things thus affecting, are either the Moon, or some other of the seven Planets.

Of the Qualities of Heaven by the Moon in her Nodes affected.
And first and principally, the Moon has a main stroke in this work. It is
observed, that the moon circleth the Earth once in every 28 days space; but in
this perambulation, she does not at all keep to the Suns path in the Ecliptic
Line, nor does she always hold her self on the same hand of that Line, but once
in every fourteen days space she crosses that Line, and so moves sometime on
the North, and other whiles on the South side thereof. And now is it farther
observed, that that peculiar place of Heaven when the Moon cuteth this Line, is
very much affected with this her motion. The Moon is the great Lady of Life and
Growth, and whed she cutteth this Line therefore to the Northwards, (which is
to come nearer into this Northern World) then leaves she behind her an
extraordinary measure of fruitfulness upon that point of Heaven, so that (like
unto rich Compost, which whether it be laid upon Grass or Corn, makes it
exceedingly to grow the better, so) it wonderfully fructifies with its
influence all things whatsoever happening within the line of its jurisdiction.
This point is usually called the Dragons Head, or the Moons North Node, and is
ordinarily found marked thus, [] which as it ascends, it strengthens Life with
a strong and lively constitution; if in Mid-heaven, it promises great Honor,
if in the Eleventh, as much Wealth. If the Planets Jupiter or Venus happen to
be in this point, it makes them much the stronger in their good nature to do
the more good; but if the Planets Saturn or Mars be in this point, it makes
them also the stronger to do mischief, so that like ill weeds in good ground
they thrive exceedingly, over-topping the good seed. But now when the Moon
cutteth the Line to go from us to the Southwards, then leaves she that point
of Heaven where this intersection was made, as barren to all intents and
purposes as the other was fruitful. Hence this Point ascending blemishes Life,
and leaves a stain upon it, empaireth Honor in Mid-heaven, and wastes Riches
when it happens in the Eleventh: It weakens as well the good natures of Jupiter
and Venus, as the ill natures of Saturn and Mars. But now beyond the
Equinoctial our experience is silent, yet suppose we, that the Dragons Tail is
the fruitful point, and the Head the barren point, for that the Moon going off
from us, is coming on with them.

Of the point called the Part of Fortune, and its meaning and qualities.
there is another point called the Part of Fortune. This is the distance of the
Moons place from the Suns, added to the Ascendent; and the nature of it is, (as
wise men have diligently observed) that if this point be situate amongst
fortunate Stars, or in a fortunate place of Heaven, then promises it success
in Health, or Wealth, or Honor, or Offspring, according as it is seated in
the First or Eleventh, or First, or Fifth, or what other House: but if it be
not so fortunately placed, it threatens the contrary. And the reason of this
seems to be, for that the Sun, Moon, and this Ascendent, being the prime
conduits through which runs this stream of Life. and all manner of Fortune good
or bad, this seat of the part of Fortune is the harmony of all three
concentring. And thus much may serve as to these accidentally affected
Qualities in general.

Of the Qualities of the Heavens by the other Planets in their Transits
affected.
Now besides these, are certain Qualities accidentally affected, which concern
only particular persons or times. Thus the places of Saturn, or Mars, or the
Tail of the Moons Node in the Vernal Figure, are unfortunate to all intents or
purposes for that year. And the same in any of the Quarter Figures, is
something of the same nature for that Quarter. The places also of Jupiter and
Venus, in a Vernal or Quarter Figure, are as fortunate, as the other
unfortunate for the same times. The places of an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon,
and of Comets, are also fortunate or unfortunate, as occasion may serve, or as
persons may be concerned in them. The place of Saturn or Mars in a man's native
Scheme, proves always unfortunate to that man all days of his life; and the
place of either of the same in a revolutional Scheme is as bad for that year.
But the place of Jupiter or Venus in a Native, or revolutional Scheme, is
always as fortunate, either for a man's lifetime, or for the year, as it is
concerned, as the other was unfortunate. Also the places of the Twelfth House,
or Eighth, or Sixth, as they were in the Natives Scheme, have always bad
significations to that man whenever they come up upon any concerns. And the
places of the Tenth House, of the Eleventh of the Ascendant, and the Second
House to many purposes, do ordinarily proclaim as much good to a man, as they
come up into concern.

Qualities of the Heavens. Now their Actions are nothing else, Of the Actions
and Passions of the Heavens*
but that thing whereby these Qualities are put into practice. And to this
purpose it appears, that innumerable are the Actions of Heaven, beyond all that
we are able to imagine. Judge. 5.20.
When Barak and Deborah were victorious against King Jabin and Sisera his
Chieftain, the Stars of Heaven were at that Battle, and fought in their courses
against Sisera. And thus do they in every Battle that is fought, taking one
side or the other. These have the management of every Ship that goes to Sea,
and of every Crop that grows on the ground, and of every Man that is born of a
Woman, and of every Beast that goes on all four, and every Bird that flies in
the air, and indeed of all the great matters of the sublunary World. But yet
these Heavens are also subject to Passions; and then were they, Josh. 10.13. 2
King. ^0.11.
when by a kind of violence the Sun and Moon, and all the Host of Heaven, were
made to stay their course, and at another time when they were made retreat.
Also thus were they, when the power of their natural influence was
overpowered, as it was at such time as the Waters of the Red Sea could neither
ebb nor flow, Exodus 14.21, 22. D^n. 3.
nor run their course; and when the Fire could neither scorch nor burn, as in
the case of the Three Children. And thus it is so often as a wise man masters
the Heavens by the help of Grace, or by virtue of acquired moral habits; by
either of which, men are able to force the Heavenly influences, as if a man
should force a River to ascend the Stream, as by Art and Strength may be done.

Of Astrology properly so called, or the Celestial Body Natural, as it is
considered in respect of the Bodies moving in the Heavenly World.
Having now done with Vranology, or the Science of the Body Natural of Heaven,
as it is to be considered in its own proper matter, next come I to Astrology,
properly so called, which is the Body Natural of Heaven, as it is to be
considered in respect of the Bodies moving in Heaven, which are Stars. And
these are either fixed or movable Stars, called the Planets, which are in
number seven; but the fixed Stars are innumerable.

A Star by Aristotle is defined to be a thicker and more compact part of Heaven
than the mere matter of Heaven, round, and capable of giving light.

Of the fixed Stars, and their Nature, Number, and Qualities.
It Is the general opinion, that the fixed Stars are fastened in the Eighth Orb
of Heaven, and do move only as their Orb moves: but Reason has not
absolutely determined this point, so as to leave no doubt in the case
remaining. For though they make all of them an equal motion among themselves,
yet stir they all together, all of them almost one minutes space in a years
time. But whether this motion be together with their Orb, or loose from it, is
a disputable question; but yet which way soever, Astrology makes no matter.

These are observed to differ from the Planets by their twinkling or sparkling.
And hence our modern Philosophers are of opinion, many of them, as if there
were an innate light in these fixed Stars, even as it is in the Sun. But
Astrology cares not for that neither.

These Stars are either numbered and known, or innumerable and unknown.

The known fixed Stars are usually counted 1022, and are observed to be of six
different Magnitudes, and of 48 several Configurations.

Of the first Magnitude are ordinarily computed 15 Stars, of the second 45, of
the third are 205, of the fourth are numbered 477, of the fifth are 217, and of
the sixth but 49.

These Configurations are either within the Zodiac, or on the North or South
side thereof. Within the Zodiac are those twelve, from whom the twelve Signs
have their denominations, and are called Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. On the
North-side the Zodiac are 21 Constellations, which are called Vrsa major, Vrsa
minor, Draco, Cepheus, Boots, Corona, Engonasis, Lira, Avis, Cassiopeia,
Perseus, Heniochus, Opheucus, Serpens, Sagitta, Aquila, Delphinus, Equisectio,
Pegasus, Andromeda, and Triangulus. The Southern Constellations are 15, and are
called, Cetus, Orion, Eridanus, Lepus, Canis major, Canis minor, Argos, Hydra,
Crater, Corvus, Centaurus, Lupus, Ara, Corona, and Pisces magnus. Besides these
are innumerable other Stars, disposed of in the several parts of Heaven,
generally called Sporades, or Stars without form.

fixed Stars are doubtless all of them of great use in the operations of
Nature, Of the nature and use of the fixed Stars of each Magnitude.
but we mortals have not parts and means sufficient to distinguish them all,
according to their peculiar virtues. The nearer they are situate unto the
Ecliptic Line, and the Zodiac, so much the apter are they to operate in the
common acts of Nature; and so much the easier are they allured into the
opportunities of our acquaintance. Also the bigger these Stars are, the apter
are they to be understood.

Of the first Magnitude we have notable experience of that Star in Leo, called
Cor Leonis, in 25 Degrees of the Sign, to be of the nature of Mars and Jupiter
mixed together, to be a Star greatly contributing to Noble qualities, and Kingly
favors. Famous also is the knowledge of Spica Virginis, a Star of Virgo by
Constellation, but in the Sign Libra. This is a Star of the nature of Venus and
Mars, and gives an amiable complexion, and contributes much to Ecclesiastical
Preferments. After these are very well known the Stars called Aldebaron in
Gemini, and Antares in Sagittary, both Stars of Mars, provoking unto courage,
but withal inclining to cruelty. Of the second Magnitude are the South
Balance, and the Head of Pollux, both Stars of a violent nature. Of the third
Magnitude, the Head of Medusa, or Algol, is famous for its mischievous
inclinations; and so are the two Asses Stars of the fourth Magnitude. Of the
fifth Magnitude are the Pleiades, Stars of great moment, by reason of so many
of them together in a cluster. Stars of the Sixth Magnitude are very small, yet
are these also well known to be exceedingly operative, and that especially when
a company of them are together. As in the Breast of the Crab, called Prasepe,
where several little Stars look like no more but a mere white Cloud, and yet
have we often seen, how this Constellation brings about the breaking of ones
leg, head, or arms with a stone, or some such like.

Of the use of the Fixed Stars in prognostication of the Weather.
These Fixed Stars also do generally show themselves exceeding much in the
change of the Weather, as they happen to rise, culminate, or set with the Sun
or Moon, or any of the Planets. And notwithstanding that the crowd of them
makes somewhat a confused track, so as it is almost impossible to trace every
particular Star by his peculiar operations in this thing, so as to be skilled
in all weathers; yet past all dispute is it, that Ingenuity has gone a great
way to that purpose, and is not without very great perfection of knowledge
therein, and very much acquaintance with the true and perfect nature and
quality of many, if not most of the chief and greatest of those fixed Stars,
both for matter of weather and otherwise: Insomuch as there are among the
company of Astrologers such, who are as able to say when it shall Thunder, or
Rain, or Snow, as to say when it shall be Harvest or Seeds-time.

Sict. 26. Thus much concerning the Fixed Stars. Of the Planets, and what they
are.
Next as to the Planets or Wandering Stars, they are but just seven of them in
the whole number: These are Lights, clear, bright, and shining as the Fixed
Stars; but whether they are of the same matter, or different; and if different,
whether they are of the more noble or inferior temper, is hard to say; we are
not so near them, as to be able to thrust a Spade into their bodies, nor to
handle the substance of their matter, so as to be able to distinguish whether
it be hard or soft, or thick or thin; nor can we come so near as to be able to
discover whether the spots in the Sun or Moon are opake matter, or an empty
body, or what else they are. But as the Learned are not denied to exercise
their Ingenuities in saying what they think, so the indifferent Students cannot
reasonably be bound to believe, what cannot reasonably and sufficiently be
proved. Astrology therefore troubles not those concerns, or either of them. But
as a man smitten upon the breast or back with a stone, or staff, or cushion,
can aptly discern of what strength the hand is which gave the blow, though he
cannot tell what colored doublet he wears, or of what sort of stuff his
wastecoat is made; so are we able, so far as we see the effects, to judge of
these Celestial causes, and farther we concern not our selves.

Of the Nature of the Planets.
These Planets are to be considered either in their Nature, Qualities,
Quantities, or Actions. 1. In their Natures, they are very much different. The
Sun is endued with innate light, but all the rest claim under him. It is
apparent, that the Moon borrows her light, and so it appears that Venus does,
though it be not altogether so apparent; and probably seems it, that Mercury
and the Superiors do the same, though it be not clear^, demonstrable. 2. Some
of them have palpable and sensible Influences, besides their secret operations;
but others have only their secret Powers. Thus the Sun very sensibly operates
in heat and life, and so does the Moon, but not so apparently; but Saturn and
Jupiter and the rest act imperceptibly. 3. Some of them are benevolent in their
secret Influences, and others malevolent, and a third sort act indifferently.
Thus Jupiter and Venus are wholly benevolent, Saturn and Mars are altogether
malevolent, Sol, Luna, and Mercury are indifferent, that is, they are
benevolent when well dignified, or when joined with fortunate Planets, and
malevolent when ill dignified, or joined with evil Planets. As to their
situation and motion it is apparent, that about the Earth the Moon it self
makes a Circle once in every 27 days and odd hours; and about the Sun, Mercury
makes his Circle once in every 88 days; and Venus about Mercury and the Sun
once in every 225 days. But whether the Sun or the Earth be the Center of the
World, and by consequence whether the Earth circleth the Sun, or the Sun the
Earth, is not generally agreed yet amongst Astronomers. The first opinion of
late years has gained the greatest number of learned Votes, and seems to make
the most rational Hypothesis of the Heavens. But choose whether way you please,
Astrology is no way concerned which way the Conquest leads; but whether the Sun
or the Earth be Center of the World, the Planet Mars circleth all, both Sun,
Mercury, and Venus, as well as Luna and the Earth, and this he does once in
almost every two years. The Planet Jupiter circleth Mars, and all the rest; but
in regard of the great compass he fetches in order to perform his circuit, it
is almost eleven years before he can accomplish his rounds. Yet the Planet
Saturn circleth this Jupiter and all the rest; but in regard of a far greater
compass his journey does require, it is almost 30 years ere he can come about.
Hence Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are called the Superior Planets, and Venus,
Mercury, and Luna the Inferior; and again, they the slow Planets, and these
the swift. And yet not but that Saturn may move as nimbly as the Moon, only
because of his vast and spacious circuit he runs, he seems to us at this great
distance from him to be slow, and thence is called, and esteemed as he seems,
rather than indeed he is. Now by means of these Circuits about the Earth,
happen the seeming Retrogradations of the Planets. Mercury at every turn he
gets beyond the Sun from us, in his wheeling about him, seems to return by
retrograde motion until he is quite on this side the Sun; and hence he is said
to be retrograde four times in every year. Venus in her rounds gets beyond the
Sun but once in less than a year, and therefore is no oftener retrograde. Mars
and the Sun, or the Earth, differing not so much in their motion, it is not
above once in almost two years time, that any thing can be made appear between
him and the Earth of any kind of retrogradation. Lastly, the Sun seeming to
circle the Earth once in one year, occasions also as if Saturn and Jupiter were
also retrograde once by the year.

Of the Quality of the Planets.
2. The Qualities of the Planets are to be considered either in their
Conjunctions or Aspects. The Conjunction of a Planet is that, whereby it is
bodily present, and acting upon any Subject or Thing, even as when a Hen
sits hurking over her Eggs or Chickens. These Conjunctions happen, either
when one Planet joyneth with another, or of what time any Planet comes into
any concerned part of Heaven, as into the Degree ascending or culminating, as
it was at the point of any man's Birth, or Marriage, or any other considerable
time. In this case, all the Planets have their secret virtues and power of
operation, even as a Plaster bodily applied to any part of a man's body, has
its power of attraction or corroboration. To this purpose the Sun has his
secret Qualities, and produces effects hot and dry for matter of temper, and
works qualities Heroic, Noble, Magnanimous, and Majestic for matter of
humor: and this does he when he is under ground, and out of sight, as well as
when he is above-ground, and in his full shine and luster. Much of the same
nature is the Planet Mars, hot and dry, and works humors bold, fierce,
violent, and courageous. But yet however these two may seem thus nearly of kin,
there is a vast difference in disposition between them; for the Sun is a great
and true friend of Natures, and therefore however he may be hot and burning by
Nature, yet is he like the fire in the Bush of Moses, which burned and yet
consumed not. But Mars more like the evil one of an envious eye, wherever he
penetrates, performs his operations with a malignant and consuming heat,
which bites like the worm that never dies, and that with a kind of glowing
heat, that scorches though it never flames. He it is who works all manner of
Fevers, and other violent and hot distempers in the vitals and intrals of
living bodies; and all manner of falls, blows, and wounds of the body, that
come by violence, by reason of iron, wood, or stone; and these mischiefs he
pursues with such embittered venom, that occasions the ranckling and festering
of wounds, and that so, as, without a curb to his fury, bebecomes inevitably
fatal; and yet all this while, not the least sensible heat shall be once felt
outwardly. These kind of mischiefs are sometimes also wrought by the Sun; but
then first, it is not naturally so, but by accident, the nature of the Suns
operation being corrupted by the cross Rays of some malignant Planet, or part
of Heaven. And 2. when it is so, there is not that venom in those distempers
occasioned by the body of the Sun as in those of Mars. The great work of Mars
is, to endue a Native with courage and resolution, and to fit for War; but then
withal he naturally breeds quarrels by rash actions, and so cuts out work and
way for War. The Sun endues with more Majesty, and being always near unto
Mercury, contributes much gravity and discretion unto that Majesty.

The Moons operations for matter of temper are cold and moist, and for matter
of humor, fickle, and loving novelties, soft and tender, and yet studious.
Much of the same nature with the Moon is the Planet Venus, only with this
difference, that whereas the Moon is cold and moist, Venus is rather cool and
moist; and whereas the Moon is but indifferently affected to befriend or envy,
Venus is altogether friendly to her utmost power. But in operation of humors,
Venus stirs up exceedingly unto all manner of delights and pleasures, as unto
Music, Play, Merriment, Marriage, and all kind of such like matters. The Moon
being naturally very cold, many times breeds phlegmatic and rheumatick
distempers; but Venus is one of Natures good Nurses, and prevents diseases.

Jupiter and Venus are the great Nurses of Nature, but the Sun and Moon are as
it were the Parents of it, who like Man and Wife, by secret Coitions in their
Conjunction and several Aspects, bring forth the whole life and growth of all
the World, both in Vegetive, Sensitive, and Intellectual creatures. And unto
these the other five Planets, and all the fixed Stars, are but as it were
Assistants, sometimes helping, and other whiles in some sense hindering the
life and growth of Nature. Saturn and Mars also have their good work in the
frame of Nature, according to their task and duties; but yet by means of the
corruptions of Nature, they seem as it were Thieves and Robbers, or like Worms,
which destroy Nature, and therefore seem very hurtful, unless it be by
accident, that they do any whit avail. Now the Moon, notwithstanding her
quickening faculty, yet is so exceeding moist and cold, that many times she too
often kills Natures offspring. But where Nature has any good degree of
strength, she mingles life in such a manner with her coldness, that Natives
grow up by her virtue as cold as it is, as the Wheat and Rye, which live through
Frost and Snow.

The Planets, Saturn and Mercury, are somewhat near of the same nature, both of
them being cold and dry; only here is the difference, Mercury operates cold as
Earth, and Saturn as Ice. Also Mercury is indifferently affected unto Nature,
but Saturn seems an utter enemy. The great power of Mercury is chiefly acted
upon the Brain, which he endoweth with wit, more or less, according to his
strength: and by virtue of his influence upon the Brain and Nerves, he causes
agility of body, and is generally the Patron Star of Philosophers, and all
manner of Learned men, and of Travelers, and all manner of traveling men; and
when he is but poorly dignified, of Thieves and Cheats, and all manner of
abused Wits; and sometimes, in a weak Nativity, his body produces diseases of
the Brain, as madness, lisping, dumbness, and such like; and this especially
when he is Lord of the Eighth or Sixth House. Now Saturn has some influence
upon the Brain too, but then his influences bring forth more of imagination and
policy than real wit, and his action works as slow as Mercury does swift; his
chiefest work is acted upon matter of Husbandry, in matters of which he
exceeds, producing notable Husbandmen, saving that withal he inclines them
to be too covetous; but for matter of Health he is very unfortunate, and
breeds abundance of cold, dull, and slow distempers, that last long where
they happen, and that insomuch that if Saturn be Lord of any ill House, he
rarely fails of killing a Native.

Lastly, the Planet Jupiter is of a nature by himself, singularly good; for
temper he operates hot and moist, and that equally and well-tempered; his great
business is to strengthen health and life; and this, if he be well dignified,
and in conjunction with the Sun or Moon, or in the Ascendent, he performs to
purpose; but withal, he fortunates in all cases, as if he be joined with
Venus, or in the Sixth House, he fortunates in Wiving; if joined with Mars, he
fortunates in War; if joined with Saturn in Husbandry, he makes a man lucky; if
joined with Mercury, he strengthens the Brain and Wit; if joined with Sol, he
makes a most Princely brave person: And lastly, be he alone, and any whit
strong, he works a good digestion, a strong body, a religious and honest
mind, and influenceth men to be Divines* Judges, Lawyers, and such like.

Now according to these Natures of the Planets, such are all men, according as
the Planets have predominancy in them; and such are all manner of Herbs and
Plants that grow in the field: Some are influenced by Saturn, and thence are
cold and dry; others by Jupiter, and thence are hot and moist; one by an order
of Mars draws nothing but poison to its roots; and another by the the sweet
influence of Venus, sucks nothing but the sweet sap of the Earth into all its
Fibers. If Saturn or Mars rise with a Birth, or within the Degree ascending,
it is ten to one but the Child dies that year, unless Jupiter or Venus by their
friendly beams interpose. And to this purpose have we as full a comprobation or
attestation of the truth of what we say, as the Physician has of the nature of
Herbs when he tastes them, whether they be hot or cold, or what they be good
for, either as to cure or kill.

heat, moisture, drought, and coldness, but by curious, secret, and
imperceptible ways; as for instance, A man is strongly smitten on a sudden with
a Feverish distemper, very violent and headstrong, and yet nothing can be
discerned how or which way it comes about; the most Learned of Physicians
cannot, by any depth of natural reason say how it was caused, so as to show,
that do another man the like act, and such another Fever shall in the same
manner betide him also: But then look into the sick man's Nativity, and you have
it presently, be sure you shall have the Body, or some ill aspect of the Planet
Mars, or some violent Star under direction at that very point of time as the
Promittor to the Significator; and where ever you find such a Direction again
in another Nativity under the same qualification, it certainly produces the
same effect. And this we have observed by much experience and observation: And
therefore say we, it was not so much a catching cold, or an infection that gave
such a distemper, but the ill influence of Mars, that unseen or felt gave a
secret blow that touched a man at his very heart blood, and the cold or
infection were but instruments; for another man catches cold, and meets with
infection as much as he, and yet is not once sick. Just after the same rate you
find a person on the sudden, from wise and discreet, becomes Lunatic or stark
mad; and you can give no reason at all of it in Nature, saving that in
Astrology say we, all persons that have the Moon in a Nativity in no aspect of
Mercury, and at the same time afflicted by the Infortunes, one or both of them
shall be sure to become thus, as what time the Moon comes to the ill aspect of
that Infortune. And thus by these, and such like Rules as these, attain we to a
certain stock of skill in Astrology, and what this stock is, be it more or
less; (for we pretend not to any thing of perfection) we learn one from
another, as Boys learn their Grammar-Lessons at School, and that by means of an
honest Tutor, without any thing of an infernal Dictator.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by William Bromwich, at the Three Bibles in
Ludgate Street.
(...) Sive Animadversiones in Malachiae Thurstini, M. D. Diatribam de
Respirationis usu; primario Auctore Georgio Entio, E. A. M. D. and Col. Lon.
Soci. A discourse of the Rise and Power of Parliaments, of Laws, of Courts of
Judicature, of Liberty, of Property, and Religion, of the Interest of England
in reference to France, of Taxes, and of Trade, etc. Vade Mecum, or an Epitome
of Astrology, insisting chiefly upon Questions, Nativities, and Elections, etc.
and is the Sum of all our great Volumes. By John Partridge. Vox Lunaris, or a
Philosophical and Astrological Discourse upon two Moons, etc. with some Remarks
upon the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter for 120 years past. By John
Partridge. Prodromus, being an Astrological Judgment, with Predictions upon the
Oppositions in December, 1679. and the Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars in
August, 1680. with other things, and what may thence probably happen in Europe,
etc. With the Nativity of the Plot, and some Remarks thereon. By John
Partridge. Gerhards Meditations and Prayers, written originally in Latin by
John Gerhard, D. D. and Superintendent of Heldeburg: Translated and Revised by
Ralph Winterton, Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. An Ephemeris of the
Celestial Motions and Aspects, with the Eclipses of the Luminaries for 20
years, by John Gadbury, Student in Physic and Astrology, beginning Anno 1682.
where his part ends; the said first Part beginning at the Year 1672. and ending
at the Year 1682. An Explication of the Catechism of the Church of England.
containing an Explication of the Lords Prayer, etc. By Gabriel Towerson, D. D.
The Poor man's Family Book, in three Books, etc. By Richard Baxter. Clavis
Astrologiae Elimata, or the Key to the whole Art of Astrology new Filed and
Polished, in three Parts. By Henry Coley. The Isle of Man, or the Legal
proceeding in Man-shire against sin. By Richard Bernard. The Godly Man's
Companion, or a Manual of Prayers and Meditations.
(...). OR, The most Sacred and Divine SCIENCE OF ASTROLOGY Vindicated, AGAINST
The Reverend Dr. MORE's Calumnies, IN HIS Explanation of the Grand Mystery of
Godliness.

By J. B. B. D. A Minister of Gods Word.

Mat. 2.1, 2. Behold there came Wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
Where is He that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star in the
East, and are come to Worship him. London, Printed M.DC.LXXX.

TO THE Truly Noble and Universally Learned (My much honored Friend) ELIAS
ASHMOLE, Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
THis Innocent Piece comes humbly creeping under your Wings for shelter, as
once Mordecai unto the most Excellent and Virtuous Queen Esther. The wrath of
proud Haman like a mighty Torrent threatening that Magnanimous Hero, and that
with a Vengeance, not only to swallow the man alone, but to sweep away the
whole Generation of him: But so soon as it was known that the great Kings Wife,
was his Niece, The Cloud it self recoyled, and all its drops gave back. But
what shall I say? As Queen Esther among all her Ladies of Honor, so methinks I
see you sitting in the midst over the Muses! Astronomy, Geometry, Physic,
Arithmetic, Music, Limming, Engraving, yea Husbandry too, and Astrology,
(shall I say in the last place) are all yours. But do you hear the News from
Alma Matre? All Astrology must be banished, and that so, as it shall not so
much as find a room in the imaginations of men! Then what shall become of poor
Mordecai? of me? And of us all Astrologers? And do You, Sir, think to escape,
yea though beyond the great Waters, and that in sweetest of Repose, among your
Celestial Companions? Yea, Sir, I doubt not but you will, and not only so, but
so soon as it shall he known, that so great a Mecaenas as your self, is a
Patriot to the Kin; Haman himself will be ashamed of what he has said. Truly,
Sir, I am sorry to be found in this impress, in such Youthful language in many
places, and the farther I read, so much the more harsh methinks it is. But I
know your Candor; you will consider, I write not of mine own phansy, but by a
Copy; which as I am somewhat concerned to imitate, so the farther I wade after
it, the deeplier I am engaged in it: Insomuch that many times, e're I am aware,
it so falls in, that I follow it beyond my intention. But if I have plucked the
Scarlet a little too much, it grieves me the less, because it was upon a back
of the late Times. This humble pains, Sir, is a Duty I owe, at yours, and all
Astrologers service. I have therefore essayed to pay my Debt I owe unto Your
great Civilities especially. And for the deficiency I humbly beg your Pardon,
Sir, for him who most affectionately is,

SIR, Yours to Command in all Love and Friendship, J. Butler.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
IF perhaps thou have read that great Book written by the Reverend Dr. More,
called [The Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness] I wish thee all
possible joy and happiness of the good fruit and benefit thereof: But withal, I
am to wish thee the most Curious Skill of the industrious Be, which having to
do with Flowers of all sorts, every where she comes, reaps the Honey, and
leaves the Poison behind: And so is it for the Health of thy Soul, and
Preservation of Common Charity, to do by this Work of the Learned Doctor's.
Among the many Sciences, in the study whereof holy Fame does dwell, next unto
Theology, that of Astrology deserves place in one of the highest Forms; as
that, which shows forth the glorious Wisdom of the Creator of all things, in
his Eternal Providence in the Tracts of Nature, as by the Study therein they do
most excellently appear; and by the Experience of the Skill of that Wisdom in
the acts of things past, foresheweth many Excellent Marks and Tokens of things
to come, to the great advantage of all particular persons conversant therein,
and are fit to make a good Use thereof. When David was in Keilah, and heard
that Saul was coming to besiege him in that Town, he was desirous to know the
truth, Whether he was coming, yea, or no? And if yea, then, Whether the men of
Keilah would be true to him, or would betray him? And This, because he had no
means to understand timely enough to stand with his safety by a Messenger, he
enquired by the Priest and the Ephod, [1 Samuel 23.6, 9, 10, 11, 12.] and it was
answered rightly, to his great benefit and safeguard. Now it is somewhat
doubtful, by what means this way of Prophecy by the Ephod was understood, some
guessing one way, and some another: but that which with me seems most
probable, is, That the Ephod being upon the Priests back, he was immediately
inspired from God above, so as to be able to give an Answer to the question
demanded. And my reason for it is, because of Caiphas the High Priest, who
sitting in Council in his Priestly Robes, as the manner was to do, though a bad
man, yet was able to prophesy, what would follow of the Debate they were then
upon, [Joh. 11.49, 50, 51.] And now as it pleased God to help David at his
Need, by a Forewarning of what would follow at that time, so it seems it was
the customary practice of his Mercy and Goodness, at all times to do nothing of
any consequence, without revealing much unto his Prophets aforehand, [ Amos
3.7.] And the same Mercy and Good Will as in those days he had, so has he
still: and though Revelations and Inspirations be not usual now adays, as they
were in old time; yet, what by natural Industry, and diligent Observation,
gained from the Stars and Heavens, or any other lawful ways, can be foreseen
and known; our Maker is so far from envying or being angry at it, that he
really favors and applauds us for our so doing. He who has ears to hear
(says He) let him hear, [Mat. 13.9.] And he who has eyes to see, let him see.
And he who has Understanding, let him count the number of the beast, [Revel.
13.9, 18.] And now that there is such a Natural skill of foreknowledg by the
Stars and Heavens to be gained, the Doctor himself has acknowledged, and so
has our Savior said as much, [ Matthew. 16.2, 3. Luke 12.54, 55, 56.] And we do
not pretend to an absolute and perfect Skill, that we can know every thing, and
that without error. And yet this Unkind Doctor in his great Book of
Explanation, has done us so much injury, as to tell all the World, so far as
his Tale can possibly be heard; That we Astrologers, merely for our pretenses
to this Skill as aforesaid, are a Company of Fools and Knaves, or Witches, and
more, and worse, if worse can be said. Nay he not only reviles us who be alive,
but the dead too. Now good Reader, these following lines, are not only to clear
our selves, that though we do study and use Astrology, and are not ashamed to
be called Astrologers, yet are we not such ill men as he says we are; but
contrarily we desire no longer to live, nor to own this Sacred Science, than we
are able to prove, and show, it to be a Science truly Sacred, and of great Use
unto Mankind in general, or any body that shall make a good Use of it in
particular. I am my self a Divine, and am heartily sorry I am to write against
a Divine. And it has been my great Care (God knows) in all this Answer of
Defense, to give good words, and no ill language. But so it is, that the Doctor
has been so very foul upon us, that in mine own necessary defense, do what I
could* I have hit him now and then, and if it was in the Eyes or in the Mouth,
I am sorry for it, it could not be helped, he is to thank himself for it. The
truth is, (as I am credibly informed, and his Pen shows it) He was a man
stained (when he wrote) with the Schism of the late Times; and it is generally
seen and found, that whether they were Presbyterians or Independents, those men
generally were wont to be very peremptory, Magisterial, and angry in most of
their Writings. But having cleared Astrology, my Self, and my good Brethren
that are Astrologers, I have done, and I hope, when the Doctor shall see his
Errors by what I have done, he will be sorry for the Slanders, and all the
hard words he has given us; and I for my share am heartily apt and ready to
forgive him.

From my Study, 1671. J. B.

Errata.
Page 6. line. 29. for with, read which. pa. 10. l. 26. blot out unto. p. 11.
l. 5. for disturber, r. disturbeth. p. 16. l. 10. for may, r. my. p. 22. l. 7.
for hot, r. not. p. 24. l. 9. for were, r. was. p. 49. l. 13. add is after it.
p. 65. l. 22. for grandom, r. grandame. p. 68. l. 26. for alledg, r. allege. p.
80. l. 16. for fur, r. furze. p. 85. l. 29. for do, r. no. p. 87. l. 2. for
retrogade, r. retrograde. p. 88. l. 2. for that if, r. the. and l. 9. at
talk's, blot out s. p. 94. l. 29. at defends, blot out s. p. 96. l. 4. at
Pleiades, forbear the dash ^n middle. p. 101. l. 24. for Almulen, r. Almuten.

The most Sacred and Divine Science of Astrology vindicated, against the
Reverend Dr. More's Calumnies in his Explanation of the grand Mystery of
Godliness.
The Introduction.
Seldom, I have done with, and that so much the sooner, for that he has done
with this World, by a good exchange of a transitory for an eternal Life. And I
doubt not, but I have so far done him right, by separating a few mistakes from
amidst his so many, and such famous Assertions of Truth, as his Friends and
Kindred will give me thanks rather, for the good offices I have done the Dead,
than be any ways displeased that I have taken notice, That the learned Seldom,
as well as the famous St. Augu^tine, was not without an Error in his Pen.

More had done no worse, by the dumb ashes of the sometimes famous Apollonius,
Cardan, and Vaninus, and others: The living memory of the great learning of
those dead men, (I am sure) ^s but little indebted to the Doctor, for his
uncharitable censures vomited over their graves. ^t calls me to mind the saying
of St. Jude, Jude 9.
How Michael the Archangel, when he disputed with the Devil about the Body of
Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, [The Lord
rebuke thee.] As the old saying is, [Give the Devil his due,] How much more
then, ought men to have their's, and that though Heathens, and more yet, if
Christians, but most of all* Christians of Reverend and sober Lives.

this favor of Astrology, which has wrought them into so much danger of the
Doctor's wrath; and particularly, the Calculation of our Savior's Nativity by
Cardan, which has set him upon Record in the Doctor's books, Dr. More's Explan.
B. 7. Chapter 14.. 8.. 9.
for a man of Levity of mind and vain glory, and by and by, of insufferable
impudence, for so doing; and also the commending of that Calculation by
Vaninus, which has drawn him under the Doctor's Iron Pen also, as a vilainous
Insulter: and whereas it is the su^ of these two Crimes alone, which has
indicted and convicted both of them with the Doctor, for combining together to
blaspheme God, and to man Religion contemptible, and useless to the World, and
condemned their skill Astrological in it^ most harmless use, to be a vain and
accursed An^ And whereas my self missing of the hap to re^^ the mystery of
Godliness according to this Doctor's explanation; and therefore little dreaming
o^ any Blasphemy or Irreligion, or Accursedness in the Art of Astrology; but
rather verily expecting to do God Almighty and his holy Church all possi^^^
right and honor by it; even I my self also without consulting Cardan, have
Calculated a Scheme of our ever blessed Savior's Nativity, and made use of
this very Astrology, against which the Doctor is so bitterly angry, together
with other circumstances, to demonstrate the certain^^ of the Day and Year of
Christ's Birth, which the Doctor says, is so uncertain amongst the most
accurate Chronologers; and e're I was aware, by so doing, I find my self also
dropped within the compass of the Doctor's long lash, and unhappily situate in
company with the Light, Vainglorious, Insufferably Impudent, Vilains,
Insulters, Blasphemers, and Irreligious, Students of the accursed Art. Only I
have this advantage, that I am yet alive, and have my pen in my hand to answer
for my self. Which had Cardan, or Vaninus also been able to perform, certainly
the Doctor had never written of them at this rate as we read him. I have
therefore undertaken the quarrel of Astrology, against the Doctor, in order to
show that it is no such accursed Art, as he would make it; and the vindication
of a Calculation of Christ's Nativity, and particularly of mine own Act in so
doing, to demonstrate that it may be done without any thing of Blasphemy
against God, or any matter of contempt against Religion.

Explanation, etc. And my Christologia was in the Press first; and also I had
written my little Tract of Astrology for satisfaction of the ignorant in the
Art, and an answer to Mr. Seldom by way of Postscript, before this of Dr.
More's came to my hands. Only I had heard of such a Tract, and heard it very
much commended by certain Anti-Astrologists. But these Hearsays
notwithstanding, I felt not my affections steeled with so much vehemence of
passion, as to concern my self, what other men thought, or wrote of this
subject. As for what I studied my self in this Art, I was sufficiently
satisfied in my own mind, as well concerning the lawfulness, as usefulness of
it, neither cared I to read either what Melancthon, or Sir Christopher Heydon,
or any other had written in defense of it, to increase my kindness for it. And
on the other side, as for what others wrote against it, I therefore cared as
little to concern my self. There is no need of it, that all the World should be
Astrologers, no more than there is that all men be Musicians. Suppose a man has
a singular skill in managing the Harp, or Lute, or the Organs; he will not yet
be so mad sure, as to call all men fools, who either cannot tune it like unto
himself, or that care not for learning, or if neither, yet that they come not
to hear, or wonder at his Music. So on the other side, suppose a man, a famous
Scholar, endued with all manner of profound learning; only being of a
melancholy, and reserved humor, he has no fancy to the knack of Music, and
neither does he understand it, or care to learn: Yet what a wretch would he be
esteemed by the generality of mankind, should he therefore write a Treatise
against Music, as a study wholly groundless and frivolous, and therefore a
vain and accursed Art; that draws in men to Blaspheme God, and to make Religion
a mere song, and by degrees useless to the World, (as the Doctor says of
Astrology) and all merely upon this account, because himself does not
understand it, whether it be by Nature, or by Art, or by Witchcraft, or by God,
or by the Devil, o^ which way soever, seeing all ways are alike unto him that
has no understanding therein. Now such is the moroseness of some humors, that
they are easily transported with such kind of passions. And if a man chance to
study Music, that is of this kind of humor, he must certainly fail of his
endeavors, because Nature has not cut him out for melody: But when this comes
to pass, then (have he not the more government of himself) immediately he is
transported with such an Envy against the study of Music, and all Musicians,
that he invents all manner of ways to blast both the Art, and Artists. And
after the same manner are we encountered with many Anti-Astrologists. Now I had
thought, I might have enjoyed a kind of liberty of Conscience to my self, in
this thing at least: That if I find a great benefit to my self, in the study of
the Stars and Heavenly Bodies, without any harm to other men; so long as I
blame none for not studying the same things, why (methinks) should any man envy
me, for that either he cannot, or will not do the same? And hence was it, that I
never read Dr. More's Explanation, etc. Because I thought it meet, that Dr.
More might enjoy his liberty of Conscience also, to leave the study of
Astrology, and to follow whatever else liked him best in turn of it: Neither
did I at all envy him, in that he was as much against Astrology, as my self was
for it.

Christologia in the Press, I was given to understand, how much I was condemned
for Blasphemy, before the words were yet clear out of my mouth: And the
Doctor's Explanation was laid before me, in order to make me know, what a
Chapter I am to run through, unless I do suppress the Press. But well! there
needed not many words to the bargain, I was hardly so long amusing, as Caesar
was at the River Rubicon. I found the Doctor smiling at us Astrologers; and I
was as apt to be merry at the Anti-Astrologer; and having read out his lines,
as many as I found of this subject, I presently resolved to strein courtesy
with my other (though urgent) occasions, to join issue with the Doctor in
exchange of a few arguments, in vindication of Astrology, That it is a Science
more Sacred and Divine, than he esteems it as an Art Accursed, and Vain.

Sect. 6. But be it known unto all the World, that it is more grievous, than
natural to me, to argue upon this subject. For we do not profess Astrology as a
Science in any wise absolutely necessary to Salvation: Neither do I at any time
preach it from the Pulpit. But as Gentlemen do by their Swords, some wear them
by their sides for their reasonable defense, or ornament; and others leave them
off. So say I by Astrology, I know it to be much conducing to a wise man's
common good, and it were well, if all such men would study it more, than it is
done; but as for fools it is like enough they may not be fit for it; let every
man therefore follow his own reason, as for this matter. But here is the
mischief now, Some Clergymen are so humoursom in their Pulpits, that they will
spend an hours time i^ railing against Astrology, when it may be neither
themselves, nor any man in presence, either know's, or care's to know, what
it is. But no wonder, for some there are, who, would people be led by them,
would preach them out of their clothes upon their backs. And if preaching will
not do, they will add scribble to their babble, but they will have their wills. Be it
known therefore, that I had never set pen to paper upon this subject, had it
not been merely for my own necessary defense, and for the necessary defense of
this Science, with next under Theology, I know to be the most useful, divine,
and most sacred and laudable Study, when religiously and wisely practiced, as
either a Clergyman, or Gentleman can busy himself about. And had not this
necessary defense required, I had never fpo^^n of Mr. Seldom, nor should I have
troubled this Reverend Doctor.

Astrology and Astrologers, or it may be these ten years time have strewn so
many gray hairs in his head, since his humors first vented, as have ripened
his judgment, to a more reconcilable opinion of the Starry Influences. Which
if either of the two shall take, then happily may this my pains in peaceable
silence, and shaking hands, be well ended. But otherwise may I justly expect no
better language than Cardan, and Vaninus met with at the Doctor's hands. Only I
would have the Doctor know, that I undertake not this encounter, without a
Patience that shall quench all the utmost brands of his fury, insomuch as can
his Pen sputter out altogether wildfire, yet shall he never hurt me. And as for
his dint of argument, may he manage his weapons so lustily, and so fairly, as
to overcome; I do assure him, I shall esteem it more honor to me, to submit
unto his vassalage, than to brangle out a bad cause, with mere scoffs and
compliments; as it seems to me, as if hitherto the Doctor has done by his own.
And with this humor I give the Onset.

CHAP. I.
Dr. More's strange kind of Railery against Astrologer's and Astrology, soberly
answered, and a little retorted upon himself: And the purity of the
Astrological Science proved out of the scurrility of it is Enemies.

Jews, Acts 28.22.
[We know that every where it is spoken against:] And as it seems by the
Doctor, he would have it so too by Astrology. But hold he a little, 'till we
shall find a guess at the criminousness of the accused, out of the wisdom and
gravity of the Accusers. Is not the Rebuke of the wise, better than the Song of
Fools? Eccles. 7.5.
Yea we know it that open Rebuke (be it reasonable) is better than secret Love.
Prove. 27.5.
So willing therefore are we to heed this Reverend Doctor's Caveats, that may
we happily but miss that wrath that is heavier than Stones and Sand, Verse 3.
gladly should we submit to all his worst of lashes. Only let us have but leave,
so far as to look before we leap, and to taste a little of our gentle
Moderator's Temper and Passions, before we headlong swallow down all his
Corrections and Admonitions. For, were it so, that the Astrologer were
erroneous or wicked, or a fool, or either, or all, as the Doctor would have
him: Yet before he can be reproved, the Reprover himself must be clear, or at
least clearer of the crimes and things reproved of. For see thou a man* wise
in his own conceit only (says Solomon) there is more hope of the Fool, Prove.
26.12.
who is reproved by such an one, Chap. 27.6.
than of the Reprover himself? I must beg the Doctor's pardon therefore, in
that I would not be deluded. Again (says the wise man) Faithful are the Wounds
of a Friend indeed, but the Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful: I would know
therefore of my Reprover, whether it be indeed out of good Will, or merely out
of Anger and Passion, that he goes about to tell me of my wickedness and my
folly, before I heed too much of his pretended Counsil. For Wrath is cruel, and
Anger is outrageous, Verse 4.
and who is able to stand before Envy? And there are it seems of this sort,
Chap. 26.19. Verse 18.
who deceive their Neighbors merely for a sport: Of whom Solomon expresse's
himself, That they are as Madmen who throw about Firebrands, Arrows and Death.
From such kind of Monitors and Friends good Lord deliver us!

Doctor's Person, and am not willing to censure any man, and especially of his
Coat, by mere Hearsay, I am to keep my self only, and altogether unto what I
find upon Record, under his own handwriting. But alas! how contrarily do we
find him! both for temper of words, and strength of argument, so infinitely far
off from wooing or winning any one man from Astrology, or from convincing any
the least Favorite thereof, that, unless it were some such miserably
Pusillanimous, as by a Billingsgate Oyster Wench would be frighted with course
words, into any kind of faith, I should think, not one of all his Readers, but
would be wrought upon by him, no otherwise than as when the wind would persuade
a man out of his Cloak, by mere bluster and storm, he wrestles and strives
against it, to wrap himself the faster into it on all hands.

Paul, that great Father of the Holy Gospel, and that so obligingly coming from
his Pen, as who (one would think) should be able to deny him, saying, Brethren,
if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one,
in the spirit of meekness; considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Gal.
6.1.
The Doctor is one of these, unto whom the Holy Father call's [ Brethren,]
though he might have justly called him Boy in comparison: And he supposes also
the Doctor to be one of those spiritual ones he treats of; (and for my part, I
suppose nothing to the contrary, whatever passions, or ill humors at time of
writing those few Chapters against Astrology, might invade him, so as for the
time only, to seem otherwise:) And as such an one, whereas he might command, he
does as it were beseech him, that if a man be faulty, yet that he would not
presently all to beknave and fool him, or worry him with hard words, but in the
spirit of meekness restore him rather, supposing this the much nearer way to
convert and win the scandalous and erroneous. But behold this meekness of the
Doctor!

Apollonius, Dr. Mores Explan. Chapter 17.. 8. B. 7.
or rather his dust disturber, his passions. He call's him [ an hot Instaurator
of decaying Paganism, a silly affector of Astrological predictions.] Well,
suppose the man a Pagan, yet to what purpose is his dust upbraided with it! De
mortuis it is generally held, that we ought to say, much more to write, nil nisi
bona. But however belly not the dead, give the Devil his due, Apollonius was no
such silly person as the Doctor makes him. The Dr. must not deny, but that for
learning and parts, he was a man admired in his time, much beyond his own
worship: His meekness therefore might have strein'd courtesy at home rather,
and have spared the Pagan that language with more credit to his own Reverence.

Vaninus it seems stings him more sharply: and therefore his dead bones are
lashed with the harder words. Expl. B. 7. Chapter 14.. 3.
[ Such two witty Fools in Philosophy as Pomponatius and Vaninus] says the
Doctor. But what, are all Fools that just jump not with the Doctor's will?
Truly I should not hold him a wise man, who would dare to write that Dr. More
himself is a fool to a Philosopher; and yet I am sure, there are as many
learned men will subscribe, That Vaninus was as able a Philosopher as the
Doctors self, and as little of the Fool in him for that matter. But why a witty
Fool? Does not Wit make wise? And how are Fools known, but by contradictions
and such like discourses? But again, Id.. 4.
[ Never man's pride and conceitedness exceeded the proportion of his wit and
parts so much as his, that is Vaninus's. Romans 2.1.
] Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art who judge,
condemning thy self, for that Thou Judger do the same things. But no wonder,
for be there never so many Beams in a man's own Eye, he cannot see one of them;
Matthew. 7.3.
although a Mote in his Brothers Eye, do seem to him as big as a Beam. Again, [
B. and Chapter Id.. 9. Vilainous and insulting Vaninus] he calls him. Even so cry
the scolds at Billingsgate [ Thou Whore, and thou Drab.] And anon after
[Vaninus and Cardan join in Blaspheming God,] says the Doctor. But put the
case to a Lawyer, whether, had either of these been natives of this Kingdom and
living, they might not have had a good Action of Slander against the Doctor for
this kind of language; and whether any thing that he has alleged against them
do amount to enough to make a good plea of justification in Law? But again once
more for all, [ B. 7. Chapter 17.. 8.] He calls him [ That enormous Boaster, and
self conceited Wit, the profane and giddy headed Vaninus; a transported
applauder and admirer of that wild and vain supposition of Cardan,] and a
little after he cries out [ the Master piece of his impious writings, the Basis
and finishing of all his vilainous distorted Doctrines against the Truth and
Sacredness of Christian Religion:] A main chare! any natural Fool may say as
much; the most brutish Coward that lives, if you give him a box of the ear, can
cry Rogue and Rascal presently. And I pray you, what has the Doctor said more?
Has he named any thing out of Vaninus, that proves either his enormous
Boasting, or any thing of his merely self-conceited Wit, or ought that shows
him to be profane and giddy headed? Does he name any of his writings that must
needs be impious, or any of his Doctrines which are so vilainous, distorted,
and against the Truth and Sacredness of Christian Religion? If he has, let him
say what he has named of this nature, for I find nothing but mere Railing at
the ashes of the Dead. And this is a copy of the Doctor's meekness: And such is
our Monitor, who will abide no more study of Astrology.

Astrology, insomuch that he bears a perfect hatred against all the Professors
thereof, and that with so much bitterness, that he cannot endure, that any one
Son of that art should be religious, or learned, or at least that he should be
esteemed so. For else how happened he to fling so much of his some on Cardan's
Grave? It is well known to all, who know either Learning or Religion, that
Cardan (saving his adherence to the Church of Rome) was a person Learned and
Reverend, beyond exception. And yet upon his back falls the Doctor too, and
that with as fowl a mouth as against any. [ B. 7. Chapter 14.. 4. That odd and
crooked writer Hieronymus Cardanus.] He all to becalls him, and yet gives no
account, why he was, either one or the other, unless it was because he was a
learned Astrologer. A little after he adds, [ Nor could any thing but levity of
mind and vainglory induce Cardan to pretend the calculating our Savior's
Nativity Id.. 8.] and by and by with [ insufferable impudence he taxes him, for
pretending to cast our Savior's Nativity, Id.. 9.] And again he adds, [Cardan
and Vaninus have combined to blaspheme God, and to make Religion contemptible
and useless to the World; Id.. 9.] And again to the same purpose, [ Chap. 17..
8.] he cries out, [ that unparalled presumption and wicked sawciness of the
vainglorious Cardan: Who in a rampant fit of pride, and thirst after
admiration, or out of a malicious design to all true piety, etc.] Levity,
Vainglory, insufferable Impudence, Blaspheming against God, and contempt of
Religion, unparalleld Presumption, wicked Sawciness, rampant Pride and Malice!
What a Bed-rol of Articles are here, and all against the Dead. And yet not one
word of proof of either: Except it be in this only, that he Calculated our
Savior's Nativity. But how or which way any rational and sober man shall
gather any one of those many Articles out of such a Calculation, is still to be
proved? First, He tells the World in what position the Heavens stood at the
time of Christ's birth: If this be the blame, then woe as much be to all
Astronomers who Calculate the Planets places for any time. Secondly, He aver's,
That as the Heavens were then posited, by virtue of his readings, with his own
experience compared, he found; that such and such manners, complexions, and
ordinary accidents were wont to follow, as befell our Savior: And if this be
Culpable, then Woe be to all Physicians, who out of the^ Readings and
Experiments collect Receipts of Medicines from their skill in Herbs. Thirdly, He
asserts, That by virtue of his Astrological Experience in the nature of the
position of the Heavens, compared with the life of our Savior, he found some
confirmation of the Truth of the Time of Christ's Nativity, and that truth of
Christ's time of Birth, was some confirmation of the truth and worth of
Astrology: And if this be Blasphemy, Pride, and Malice, etc. then sure the
Scriptures must needs be as much too, which affirm the time of Christ's Birth,
and declare of the Wisemen how they found him out by their Starry intelligence,
or indeed by their Astrological skill. But besides all this, had Cardan been
indeed guilty of these, or any of these Crimes, methinks the Doctor might have
said, wherein lay that guilt, as what words made up the Blasphemy, and what
words, acts or gestures they were, which demonstrated his Pride and Levity,
Impudence, Irreligion, Sawciness or Presumption, etc. For he who says, and
cannot prove what he says, is a Liar and a Slanderer. And the words of a
Talebearer (faith Solomon) are as wounds which go down into the innermost
parts of the Belly. Prove. 26.22.
But why has the Doctor adventured his credit thus? be it but to be suspected
for a Talebearer? why would he adventure upon the dead thus, with accusations
of crime, and of such heinous crimes, unless his proofs had been more certain
and apparent? For whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
showed before the whole Congregation, (says the Wiseman.) Blasphemy, Chap. 26.
verse 26.
is to speak evil of God or Christ. Now where, or with what words, has Cardan
done thus? I am sure in his Calculation of Christ's Nativity he has performed
it with all possible reverence, and respect to Christ, and to the glory of God;
unless you will have it Blasphemy, in that he has asserted, that Christ was Man
as well as God, and had an humane Body. And if the Doctor beleives so too
himself, why cries he Blasphemy, for alleging, that, That Body was submitted
also to the influence of the Stars, as well as other Bodies. But has not the
Accuser himself blasphemed Christ in his Members rather, by heaping slander and
reproach upon his Ministers! And who is more proud and vainglorious than he who
ungraciously contemns and scorneth his Betters? Who more wickedly saucy, and
most unparalleldly presumptuous, Prove. 26.17.
than he who medleth with the strife, which belongs not unto him? He it is,
who is like one, who takes a Dog by the Ears? Who more insufferably impudent,
than he who casts abroad his reproaches, lies, and slanders, without sense of
shame or sorrow? And who more light in mind, than the giddy-headed liers? And
who more rampantly proud and malicious, than those who envy the ashes of the
dead their due praises? And who is guilty of these things, whether it be the
Doctor, or the Dead, let the Doctor's own Explanation be the Evidence, as has
been before quoted.

Doctor to this in answer? It is in his Epistle to the Reader, Fol. 22.. 25. [
And if in my discovery of the reasonableness of things, a more than ordinary
heat has accompanied that light, and may seem to have armed may style in some
places with overmuch sharpness and vehemence: I would desire so soft and
prudent a Soul, to consider with himself, whether there be not men in the World
as bad as I describe: And whether he ought in charity to conceit, I mean any
other than those; and being such as they are, whether they can deserve less;
and if he be none of them himself, why he should partake of their sins, by
disallowing of their deserved Chastisements and Rebuke.] You must note now,
that the Doctor had written his whole Book, and all the Books and Chapters
thereof, before this Epistle to the Reader: And it seems reading over what he
had written, he was sensible of more than ordinary heat, and overmuch sharpness
and vehemence in his writings. But did he mend them, or having seen them, did
he repent, or was he any thing ashamed of what he had written? No, not in the
least, but rather as one who wipeth her mouth, Prove. 30.20.
and says she has done no hurt, he brags of it, and justifies it, and calls it
[ that light in his discovery of the reasonableness of things.] And can light
be without heat, yea though it be more than ordinary heat? Ah, but there are
false lights in the World! And it is good to look before we like, if the
Doctor's be not of this sort of light! The wisdom, or light of Truth, which is
from above, from Heaven, and holy and heavenly men, James 3.17.
is pure and peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy. There Is no slandering and
lying there, no railing, nor calling all to naught. Why, but what is that light
then which does so? Oh, it is quite otherwise; for says the same Author,
Verse* 13, 14, 15.
if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth (says he:) for such wisdom [or light] descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish: For where envying and strife is,
there is confusion and every evil work. But who shall lay this at the Doctor's
door! Some soft and prudent Soul, as he jearingly speaks of all, whose better
Education cannot aptly comply with his slanderous railings, as if in good
sooth, they were seem^ly prudent, but indeed mere silly Souls; for so the word
(soft) is ordinarily used in this kind of speech. And these soft Souls must
first consider, before they blame his more then ordinary heats, or overmuch
sharpness, [ If there be not men in the world as bad as he describes.] Well, we
have considered; and we find there are such men. But what then? There was a
bloody Cain in the World; and therefore I may rail on innocent Abel for a
Murderer: There was a treacherous Judas in the World; and therefore may I
boldly say, that Christ was a Traitor: There was a proud and saucy Doctor in
Christ's-College in Cambridge; And therefore Cardan was a rampantly proud and
saucy fellow. Such is the Inference of his Answer. Well but we must charitably
conceit him, that whoever he names, yet still he means those really bad men in
the World, and when he talks of proud and saucy Cardan, yet it is the Doctor of
Christ's-College whom he must be in charity conceited to mean, and no other
then he. Which if so, his words could be made out, then say I, he may deserve
no less, and as I would be no such my self, so, loath am I to partake of his
sin, by disallowing of his deserved Chastisement, and Rebuke.

Doctor thus angry at Cardan, at Vaninus, and at Apollonius singly and alone?
what would he be then, should he meet them altogether? It seems they ran in his
mind much, and conceiting as if he saw them so indeed; lo how he kicks, and
flounces, and throws about his Firebrands, Arrows, and Death at them all! Prove.
26.18.
[ B. 7. Chapter 17.. 8. A trim sight (says he) would it be to see these three
busy sticklers against Christianity, like three fine fools so goodly gay in
Astromantick disguizes exposed, to the just scorn and de^ision of the World,
for their so high pretentions against what is so holy and solid^ the Christian
Faith is, and that upon so fond and frivolous grounds as this of Astrology.]
First, He charges them all three, as sticklers again Christianity, and high
pretenders against the Christian Faith. But alas, why will the Doctor expose
his Credit thus to scorn and laughter of all knowing men! For however his
quondam P^pils may be so far deluded as to believe, as if Cardan had been some
Jewish Rabbi, or Ma^meton Mufti, yet all well read men do know that he was a
Christian Philosopher and Physician, and died a Professor of the Christian
Faith, and so did Vaninus too. What a strange humo^ then, is this Doctor
possessed with, who so loudly chants his tales abroad, as if they were quite
contrary? Oh but they were Astrologers, and that makes them tanta-mount as if
they were Enemies to the Faith. But if so, why then was not Melancthon, that
famous Pillar of the reformed Religion, a stickler too against Christianity, as
well as Cardan? For he also was an Astrologer, and wrote in defense of it. But
secondly, see what he calls them [ Three fine Fools so goodly gay.] Now had
they been Fools indeed, surely they had not altogether, been worth the Doctor's
anger. But now it seems by his foam at mouth, the Doctor was pinch't by them,
and that merely by shooting at Rovers (for otherwise had Cardan lived in the
Doctor's days, he would not have deigned to talk to him, but have set his Boys
rather to answer him with school butter, as best becoming his foul mouth.) And
was the Doctor pinch't thus? Why sure then, they were no s^ll Fools who could
make his Reverend Pen to wince thus! But we may put it to the vote, for I am
sure there are but few Fellows with this Christ-College Doctor, either in
Cambridge or Oxford, who will join with him in averment, that either of the
three were Fools. And which if so, then who for certain is the foul mouthed
slanderer, who called them such? But lastly, see the Doctor Charity; nothing
will satisfy his vengeance against these three dead men's Ghosts, but in their
Astromantick disguizes they must be exposed to the scorn and derision of the
World. Is there no remedy but a word and a blow? Acts 25.16.
It was not the manner of the Heathens to deliver a man to condemnation, before
he had liberty to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him.
And the manner of the Gospel is, that when no remedy remains against a grievous
Crime, but Ex^tion of the Criminal, yet are we taught not to ^^^gh, but to weep
rather over the ruins of the most notoriously wicked, Luke 19.41, 42, 43. etc.
as our Savior by the Jews. And yet says the Doctor, a Trim sight to see them
exposed to scorn of the World: Yea though unheard, and uncondemned, only
because the Doctor has a prejudice against them. But alas, the Doctor does but
show his teeth in all this kind of Language, and shows the World, That he is an
angry man. And such an one must needs come upon the Stage to chastise
Astrology! Ah, but says Solomon, Anger rests in the bosom of Fools. Eccles.
7.9.
And said the Heathen man of his Ass, when he had transgressed, [ Now would I
beat thee, were I not angry] And 'twas well remembered, for an angry passionate
and ha^ brained Fellow, is not fit to be trusted to drive the Plow, nor to whip
Dogs. And shall such an one be made a Reverend Monitor, that there be no more
Astrology. No surely, every wise man will rather like the better of it, for
being railed at by passionate angry men.

Astrologers might meekly be entreated by him, at this time at least, and 'till
passions get time enough to gain new breath! But alas, what rest or peace can
we expect, while we have to do with waters, continually troubled! For do we
rage, Prove. 29.9.
or do we laugh, yet no rest comes. Whether Seniors or Juniors, Gentle or
Simple, Christian or Heathen, be we but Astrologers, with this Reverend Doctor,
we are all, and altogether either Knaves or Fools, or both, without so much as
except Melancthon, no nor Abraham, nor Seth, nor Shem, from whom Astrology
derives by no small Authority, and Tradition. To taste therefore of the Doctor's
well wishes to us all Astrologers in general. First, Having seriously
acknowledged certain Astrological acts and effects of the Moon, which he says
are sensible, palpable, and reasonable: He concludes, that we are all [
insufferable Fools, to argue from such effects of the Moon, that the other
Planets also, and fixed Stars have as powerful effects upon us; which yet we can
deprehend by neither Reason nor Experience. Explan. B. 7. Chapter 15.. 3.] But mark
now, to make us such insufferable Fools, First, The Doctor blabs forth a great
untruth: He says we argue from the effects of the Moon, that the other Planets
have effects as powerful upon us, which yet cannot be deprehended neither by
Reason nor Experience. But let him quote his Author, for we deny it. For first,
all Astrologers do hold the Moon to be the nearest to us, and the nimblest
plying about us, above all the other Planets, and therefore to have more
powerful effects upon us, then any one other Planet again. And therefore one
exception be it to our unsufferable Follies, that the Reprover himself was not
quite so much in his Wits, as he made account of. But secondly, that the other
Planets have effects upon us, as well, if not so much as the Moon has, we can
deprehend by manifest experience, and that not without reason too; and if the
Doctor cannot, or will not deprehend it (as Nemo omnibus horis sapit,) yet let
him not abuse them, who do. But yet thirdly, suppose we Astrologers pass for
insufferable Fools, for this kind of argument, yet why should St. Paul be
hook't in too for an insufferable Fool, who uses the very same way of arguing,
as by the Doctor is so sharply reproved. [ But some will say, How are the dead
raised up? 1 Cor. 15.35.
And with what Body do they come?] Thus was ^ objected: unto whom the learned
Apostle answered: [ Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, Verse 36.
is (...) quickened except it die.] See now what the Apostle infers from hence.
Lo how the Wheat and other Grain do yearly die, and yet come up ^ain every
year with new Bodies; and this is ^sible, and palpable, as the Doctor says, and
may be deprehended by experience: But that men who die, shall rise again with
new Bodies, is not (...) be deprehended with like experience: And yet [ Thou
Fool] St. Paul calls him, who cannot, or will not believe the last, as well as
the first. But by the Doctor's way of sentencing St. Paul himself was an
insufferable Fool for to saying. Thus lays this Doctor about him, and so he may
but besmear the Astrologer, he cares not how he daubs the sacred Scripture. But
I must vindicate St. Paul, though perhaps I might have passed it by, had my
self only lain at stake. The truth is, saving the Doctor's great learning and
skill in Philosophy, St. Paul was in the right of it. For although the
Resurrection of Mankind, has not that experience to be brought for it, with us
mankind; as the coming up again of the Wheat and other Grain has* Yet is the
power, and skill, and goodness of God evidenced so much, in that which we see
by experience; that what we have no experience for, we may say also it is
certainly able to produce. And by the same rule, whilst we (...) and feel the
effects of that one Planet which (...) next us; why may we not say what the
effects are of the other six Planets, though they (...) farther distant, and
although we had not felt or tasted of them with the like experiences. For how
is it possible the Doctor should forget, the it is the very business of Logic,
out of known, and most plain, to gather up intelligence of more obscure and
disappearing things. And now ^e there no remedy, but we must needs be Fools,
and that insufferably, yet it seems are we Astrologers, not without company,
and that good company too.

Follies, what is next? [ Intolerable Impudence, Explan. B. 7. Chapter 15.. 7.] But
this is cast at the Invent^ only of Astrology, because (he says) they ha^ as
random attributed such things to the other Planets, as they have only ground
for, if any at all in the Luminaries. It seems then, there is such a thing as
Astrology in the Moon, for so much he granted in the Section before cited: And
something of Astrology he seems in this place to yield to be in the two
Luminaries. Only he charges the Inventors of Astrology with intolerable
Impudence, for attributing that to the one, which they have only ground for in
the other. But judge charitably good Doctor; perhaps it was but a mistake in
these Inventors, and if so, Mistakes are tolerable, do not then call it
intolerable Impudence, which all, yea the wisest of men are sometimes subject
too. Yea the Doctor himself confesses, 'twas done at random, and therefore more
carelessly then Impudently. But whether you will count it carelessly or
ignorantly, or either, or neither, I Would fain know how the Doctor hit upon it, to
find out this intolerable Impudence; because (says he in the same Section)
they might observe some more sensible mutation in the Air and Earth, at the
Sun's entering the Sign, it would be more tolerable to fancy that Sign his
Exaltation. But now to appoint to the other Planets, as the Sign to the Moon,
and to the Planet Saturn is a mere running the wild goose chase, from one
single hint, to matters where is nothing of the like reason or experience. And
so because they had some intimation to make the House of, his heat being then
most sensible, and the House of, because she is then most vertical, They have
without Fear or Wit bestowed Houses two apeice on the rest of the Planets,
though neither reason nor effect answerable. Thus mainly does the Doctor reason
to make out the intolerable Impudence: But all will not answer out the
question, how he came to know it? He cannot conceive any thing of reason or
experience why should be the Sign of the Moon's Exaltation, and of Saturn's,
and thence concludes He, that no body else can. The Doctor has been all day in
deep Study of the Revelation of St. John the Divine, and his head been filled
with abundance of proclamations, he happened upon this knot, how came to be the
Exaltion of; and because he could not untie it quickly, he was angry, and cried
out, That there were no such thing; and when he had once started it, it seems
he was resolved to stand to it. We know the Fowler who is used to the Game, can
catch the Goose with ease; but the Doctor being all to befettered in his Gown,
and tired at other sports, was utterly beaten off, and could no more endure to
hear of the wild goose chase, and thence every knotty Study became a wild goose
chase with him it seems ever after. It was somewhat like the story of a foolish
Country man I have heard of, who having never been above ten Miles from the
place where he first drew breath, imagined, that at a certain Hill so far off,
as he could not discern beyond it, the Sun always arose, and that there was for
certain the end of the World. And whosoever should dare to deny that which he
verily imagined he saw, to be true, He would all to becall them impudent Knaves
and insufferable Fools. I will not say but the Doctor has traveled five times
beyond whatever this Country man has done; but yet let me beg his pardon, if I
am of opinion, that there are some Study's he can no more skill to know, then
could the Countryman where he had never been. And I wish he had but patience to
let them alone, whom Nature has better fitted to those peculiar purposes, and
be contented with so much philosophy alone, as she has set him to task for his
own part; and thus without Fear or Wit (as he says by us,) he shall no more
or'erun the Constable beyond what his readings never lead him to.

Impudent impostors, Explan. B. 7. Chapter 15.. 8.] What (says he) will not these
impudent Impostors dare to intrude upon us, when they will vent such stuff as
is liable to confutation by our Senses? An Impostor is a mere Cheat, a Jugler,
a Conjurer, or one who invents a Religion on mere purpose to deceive, and is
worse then a common Theif, or Murderer, or Adulterer, and deserves to be
hanged, and such as the Doctor calls us, and of the worst sort too, impudent
Impostors. And why so? but because we say the Sun is hot and moist, and is hot
and dry, and is cold and dry! Therefore are we impudent Impostors. But to see
how strangely the Doctor reckons without his Host. First, It is grossly untrue
that he says, for we do not say that is hot and moist: Origanus whom the Doctor
seems to quote here, does not say so: Neither does any Astrologer say so, as
ever I read. And if so, who then is most like an Impostor, the Doctor, or the
Astrologer? Secondly, We do say, that is hot and dry, and parching, and we are
able to make it good. But yet there is no such Creature amongst us as the Doctor
coins, who imagins as if could heat the Mountains, and burn up the Grass, as
does. No, this parching heat of the Planet is not a sensible or palpable heat,
which appears outwardly; but rather is it a secret Influence, which insensibly
works upon the inwards of us Mortals, and such, as by means of its bypath, we
cannot thoroughly track; it brings about violent Fevers, hot and burning dryness
of the Throat, burning fits of the Ague, and all such violently hot Distempers.
The does thus too, but not with excess like, for the gives a more truly radical
and natural heat of himself, but infects with a consuming rather then an
enlivening heat. Now to be hot and dry in this sense, is utterly a different
thing, from that nature of the which is sensibly hot and burning outwardly, and
this either the Doctor did not know, which, if so, where was the insufferable
Fool then? Or if he did, why then did he cry out so loud in the same Section, [
A shameless foolery to pronounce hot and dry,] and a little after [ All this
part of their pretended Science, is but a Rhapsody of Fooleries.] After this
sort I have seen the Country Bumkins, the Gee, Whooo's of the Plow and Cart,
when they had made a puppet of clouts, and placed it in state, how with their
Pikes and Guns they would pursue it, and all the Boys and Girls following after
with a so hey, so hey, whooping and hollowing to see the poor clouts fall down,
slain with Fire and Swords. Thus cries the Doctor, burns hotter then the, (a
puppet of his own feigning) and then shoots he over the clouts, [ a shamless
foolery, a Rhapsody of fooleries] and the Boys his Pupils they must answer to
all, so hey, so hey. And yet the Doctor knows, the Astrologers hold no such
principles, only it his sport to invent such may-games. But if so (as methinks
the great Philosopher should never be so weak as to think otherwise) where lies
the impudent Impostor then, and at whose door rests it?

Astrological Physicians. [These (says he) proclaim themselves either Cheats or
Fools, that would recommend their skill from such vain observations, B. 7. Chapter
15.. 10.] I had thought all this while the Doctor had been a Divine. And if so,
I admire how, writing so many volumes as he has tumbled into the Press, he
came to have skill in Physic. Which if he have not, I wonder as much, why a
man of his Reverence, great readings, and of the sacred Function, Prove. 26.27.
would take a Dog by the Ears. For what skills the Ass at the Harp? But if he
has got also a smatch of Medicine amongst all his Philosophy, as in truth not
altother unlikely; for oftentimes it happens, that while a man offers himself
for all things, he is excellent at nothing. And hence it is like enough the
Doctor happened to be so fumbled about Astrology. But be he never so famous a
Physician (as for my part I know nothing of it) yet why should he envy, if his
inferiors also can do good with him. For it is eminently known, that the
Astrological Physicians are many of them exceeding famous, and as greatly
sought after. And besides Cheats (which may be in all Trades) we know, and are
able to give account of infinite real Cures, which merely by the Canons of
Astrological skill have been performed. Which if so, why then does the Reverend
Doctor thus bespatter men for Cheats, whom whole Countries know to be as True,
as Famous for matter of their Profession? or rather, why does he thus abuse his
own Worship by setting it upon Record for notorious slanders? And why calls he
men Fools, whom as wise men as himself do wonder at for their great skill? Or
why questions he thus his own Wits and Honesty, his Wits, as if he was not able
to discern between skilful men, and Fools; and his Honesty, as if he spoke what
he knew to be utterly false, and scandalous.

Raileries peice-meal: I shall huddle them over therefore in drifts, as one
wearied with the discourse. [ They have without all Reason or Sense bestowed
Houses on the rest of the Planets, B. 7. Chapter 15. 11.] (says he.) Again [ The
Foolery of the Trigons already confuted; in the same Section.] And again in the
same [ The whole Zodiac, where all these Fripperies are lodged, is but
Imaginary.] See how prodigally he counts all the World brutish, senseless,
irrational, vain, Prove. 26.16.
and foolish, in comparison of himself. And yet it appears, he understands very
little of these Houses, Trigons, and Fripperies of the Zodiac, he so heartily
despise's, mock's, and laugh's at. Again, read on how arrogantly it comes from
him, [ That also is notoriously foolish, that and should from their Conjunction
with the have two fortitudes, and from to should have two debilities, B. 7. Chapter
15.. 12.] And again in the same Section, [ It is utterly unreasonable to
conceive, that Sextiles and Trines should be good Aspects, and yet a Quadrature
which is betwixt both, should be stark naught.] And a little after he adds, [
You have seen now, how little worth all the Astrological praedictions are, and
yet out of these huge nothings of their fictitious Art, is the whole Fabric
built.] Thus talks the Doctor all this while of things, the reason and
experience of which it seems he nothing understands. There be, who have
diligently observed the tracks and motions of the Planets and how their virtues
increase, or faill, and what by long experience, the compliance of many solid
heads has found out, is charitably communicated to the World. And whether it
be the Doctor's Envy, or his Ignorance, who knows? But it appears, that what,
Doctors and Divines, as Wise and Reverend as the Doctors own Philosophical
Brain, do aver, they have as sound and assured experience of the Truth of, as
the Doctor can have, of what he tastes and feels in a manner: And yet, as if no
body could taste or feel or try but He; He cries out against all Fripperies,
Fropperies; that they are wild and disproportionable jumps, arbitrarious and
groundless things, which none but sickbrain'd persons can believe, and all in
the same Section. But the more to betray his own ignorance of the things he
treats, see how he adds fictitious stories of his own brain to make out his
matters. For what Astrologer holds or writes (who understands himself,) that
the Aspect is stark naught? but rather that it is very good, and of great use
in many respects, and at worst yet is not above half so bad as the, or the of
the Infortunes. Oh that the Doctor therefore, had it been but for his own
credit sake, had either studied a little more Astrology, or that he had never
read a tittle of it: For then these Misunderstandings, (I will not say
insufferable Follies) rash Censures (I will not say intolerable Impudencies)
Mistakes (I will not say impudent Impostories) and unhappy Untruths (I will not
say Wilful, Knavish, and notorious Lies and Slanders) of the Doctor, might have
well been spared, and happily have salved much of his lost Credit and
Reputation by meddling beyond his reach. But let us go on [ They have feigned
the rest of their houses at random, B. 7. Chapter 15.. 13.] That is, the Doctor
understands not the reason of the Houses, and hence so seems it to him, though
who have read and studied farther, know it to be otherwise. [ This recourse to
their fictitious phancies proves nothing, Id.. 16.] That is in the Doctor's
judgment only; but we have sufficiently proved both his judgment erroneous, and
his own fancy fictitious, and He therefore no competent Judge. Lastly, He
concludes his Chapter with a strange kind of wonder in his own Eyes, at his
close Reasonings, and mighty strength of Argument, as if all the skilful World
were forced to acknowledge, how fundamentally he has confuted the whole Art of
Astrology, and proved all their fine terms of Art to be a Company of mere
sonorous Nothings, and that he has made them fall down with a clatter, like a
pile of dry bones, by the battery he has laid against them: And now would he
sing victory, yea absolute victory, were it not for a blind Fort he spies, to
which the Fugitives (as he counts us all Astrologers) do usually make our
escape, [B. 7. Chapter 15.. 17.] Just thus did Cajus Caesar utterly overthrow the
Seas, when the Tides made way for him and his Host to pick up Cockle-shels, and
he went clear away with them triumphantly into Rome. Thus also have I seen boys
throwing their Caps against the Wind, and when the empty darts were driven back
into their faces, they would shout for victory. And thus Childen use to make
Pigeon Houses with Cards in our Country, and when they have done, blow all
down with a breath, and then laugh they altogether most heartily, to see with
what a clatter like a pile of dry bones they come tumbling all of an heap. Also
such another victory have I heard tell of on Westborne Green. There were a
great flock of Geese feeding, at what time an Horseman riding by, and minding
them not, disturbed the gagling Crew; whereat the whole gang grown wrath, the
old Gander stretching forth his haughty neck, and brandishing his angry beak,
gave notice of his wrath by hissing after the Horses heels: But neither the
Horseman nor his Steed once minding the assailants, as neither feeling force,
nor dreading danger, rode on without stop, or turn, or regard to what was said
or done. Whereupon Sr. Gander seizing an absolute victory over both the Horse
and Rider, returned to his Host, where they all laying heads together with
cackling and gagling in their way, raised such a shout of laughter as any one
that stood by would easily understand, they had overrun the whole World. And
thus the Doctor in his own conceit having hiss't the Fugitives all out of the
Cockpit, I wish him as much joy of his victory, as had this courageous Gander
and his Geese, over the Horse and his Rider.

Astrologers, Fugitives as we are, driven into this blind Fort the Doctor talks
on; but alas for we, this is not so strong neither, as is our Impudence great,
[B. 7. Chapter 17.. 1.] Oh this railing language! shall we never have done with it?
Say we not true, when we predict by Astrology what is like to be. (As none of us
that I know of pretending to infallibility, but may do so many times) then we
are Fools! And again at other times say we never so true, yet will it not
excuse us, but then we are most impudent and rashly presumptuous, [Id.. 3.] And
[ a shameless piece of imposture (he says) it is to impute the truth of
predictions to Art.] But lastly lest all he has brought hitherto of his
railing Language should not amount h^ ^ugh to make us acquit our station, he
(...) concludes that the Devil is in us, affirming [ that vagrant Demons of
the air secretly insinuate themselves into our actions, B. 7. Chapter 17.. 6.] And
to make this good, [ How (says he) shall it appear that Cardan 's and others
Death were not predicted by familiarity of Demons, but by pure principles of
Astrology? Id.] How shall it appear that it was not? very good Logic, but
better Railery. The Doctor it seems has no ground to prove the affirmative,
but by railing Language, and therefore he challenges us to prove the negative.
And lastly he concludes, [ That if any thing have fallen out punctually right
it may as well, nay better be suspected to proceed from the secret
insinuations, or visible converse with the aerie Wanderers, than from the
indication of the Stars, Id.. 7.] It may be suspected. Well now I see we are
beholding to the Doctor, he does not call us down right Conjurers, Sorcerers or
Witches: but it is to be suspected so But I would inquire whether as it lies
thus, it be not the greater slander? For had he said expressly, that we wrought
by the Devil; Then when our selves once cleared, the Doctor had been proved a
Slanderer, and a Liar, utterly disabled to be believed any more. But now lying
couched under a may be, prove we our selves never so clear of that may be, yet
still has he room left him for more and more shifts to abuse us. I deny not,
but that there are such Creatures as Sorcerers, and Witches in the World; but
yet between Astrology and Sorcery, there is as vast and wide a difference, as
can be between Sorcery and natural Philosophy. But this is the usual shift of
Envy and base Ambition, that when a man is overdon in curiosity and neatness of
skill, learning or ac^ they will strait cry out, as the Pharisee^ (...) Christ,
he does it by Baalzebub, Matthew. 10.25.
or by the (...) ^evils. And so the Doctor cry's here. Now by what kind of
language this discourse of the Doctor's yields, I would fain be resolved, if or
no the Doctor have not a prejudice against all Astrologers? Before indeed, one
would have thought his prejudice had gone no farther then Cardan, or Vaninus,
or at farthest unto Apollonius. But now we see it reaches Melancthon as well as
Cardan, and the Protestant, as well as the Popish Astrologer, and indeed all
Astrologers whatsoever. And be it so, that Dr. More has such a bitter prejudice
against all Astrologers quatenus Astrologers. Then whether he write false or
never so true, who shall believe him, or be persuaded by him? Every Councellor
praises his own Council (says Sirach's Son). Ecclus. 37.8, 9, 10, 11.
But there are some (says he) who counsel for themselves, and say, Thy way is
good, and yet stand against thee afterward. Ask no council therefore for
Religion of him who is without Religion, nor of a Woman touching her of whom
she is Jealous, nor of a Coward in matter of War, nor of a Merchant concerning
Exchange, nor of a Buyer for the Sale, nor of as Envious man touching
Thankfulness, nor of the Unmerciful touching Kindness, nor of an idle Servant
touching much Business; nor by consequence of Dr. More touching any part of
Astrology, Hearken not to any of these in any matter of Counsel as is related.
For no credit is due to them, whether they speak right or wrong, no more then
the common lier is to be believed, though he speak the very truth. No therefore
be Astrology what it will, or be it never so bad a thing, yet by his ill
language this Doctor has declared against it such an infinite and innate spite,
that write he never so elegantly against it, yet is his testimony to be
debarred, he may be no witness against it, neither is any thing he says to be
regarded.

Doctor's good language; and that is to show, not what this Astrology in truth
is, nor yet what the Doctor has made it, but might he have his wish, what a
kind of Creature he would fain have it be accounted. And first he begins [ A
rotten Relick of the ancient Pagan superstition, Acts. 7.22. Dan. 1.17, 18, 19,
20.
B. 7. Chapter 14.. 5.] Lo, in sacred times where we find Moses and Daniel famous
Astrologers, amongst the best of Jewish Writers; and in Christian times, have
we Cardan Junctinus, Philip Melancth^n, Pezelius, Morinus and diverse other
famous Christian Astrologers, and yet the Doctor blushes not to call it a
rotten Relick of Pagan Superstition.

Secondly, [ He calls it a thing wholly groundless and frivolous, Id.. 8.] But
he forgets his former Acknowledgments, [ How there was much in the Acts and
Effects of the Moon as Astrologers alledg, Chapter 15.. 3. And what might be
attributed to the Luminaries, Id.. 7.] And what reason there was for to be the
sign of 's exaltation, and for to be his House, and for to be the 's House. Now
the Doctor having granted all this: Why then it appears something there is for
certain in Astrology by the Doctor's own concession, and yet now again all is
groundless and frivolous. Who can believe a man who cannot believe his own
self, or how shall any man write after him, who writes Pro and Con this* But,

Thirdly, He grows more angry, and calls it [ an accursed Art, Id.. 9.] But
then be^e Moses and Daniel, and the three Children, and the famous Melancthon
were all accursed persons for studying of it, at least they were so in the
Doctor's eye, however holy Writ and all good men might say to the contrary.

Fourthly, He says [ It stands upon a fantastic Structure, Chapter 15.. 7.] but
this is a small matter with him, though it be contradictory to his own
concession.

Fifthly, He styles it a [ Rhapsody of foolerier. 8.] But the Doctor's tongue
is grown (...) slander.

Sixthly, He calls it [ a frivolous Art,. 12.] But no matter what he calls it,
since the Do^ himself has so many times been taken (...) fictitious stories.

Seventhly, He finds fault that the manner of it [ is frivolous and ridiculous,
Id.. 16.] But he should have said so before his tongue had lost its credit;
it is too late now. Again he rails at its fantastic Laws, Id.

Eighthly, He comes home to it, and in plain terms call's it [ old Paganism
whose Priests were confederate with the Devil, Chapter 17.. 5.] ^ would fain know
whether the Doctor himself also was not one of those Priests, who held
confederacy with the Devil, when he learned so much Astrology as concerned the
Moon, and the two L^mi^rie^: Or if it was not the Devil who made him to know
came to be the Sign of the Exaltation, and to be his House, and to be the 's
House. And if it were so that the Devil taught himself these Lessons, or so
much of Astrology, and so made him one of the old Pagan Priests himself; yet
let him keep it to himself so far as he knows, and keep his tongue between his
teeth from accusing those, of whom he knows no such matter, unless it be a part
of his Religion, to hold men guilty of every fowlest crime upon every mere
suspicion, or fond opinion.

Lastly, Having after this sort railed himself quite out of breath, finally he
sets it down for granted in all points just as he would have it, That [ The
principles of Astrology are groundless and frivolous, nay contradictious one
with another, and built upon false Hypotheses, and gross Mistakes, and that
there is an Affinity and secret Association of Astrology with Daemonalatry, and
that it is a foolery utterly groundless, and nearly verging to the ^ntient
Pagan Superstition, bringing in Apostasy and Impiety, B. 7. Chapter 17.. 7.] And my
self being at last too, utterly wearied to hear any more of this kind of Stuff,
am so well satisfied in the truth and worth of Astrology, that all what the
Doctor has said against it, has done nothing else but made the more for it. For
as Virtue never shines more bright, then where the Devil oppose's it most. So
all manner of Truth, the more evil men rail against it, the more is it to be
embraced, honored, and admired. And now appeal I to all ingenious Readers,
whether I have not taken up matter enough out of this Treatise of the Doctors,
to persuade, That whether Astrology be good or bad, yet ought all wise men to
suspend their Censures, whatever their inclinations are against it, till a more
sober pen, shall seriously take up the Cudgels against it. Or yet if the Reader
please rather, bar we all the Doctor's railery and ill language, as if he were
the soberest man alive; and now Have at him merely by dint of Argument to
maintain,

That Astrology is a Sacred and a Famous Science, and no such accursed Art or
peiece of old Paganism, as the Doctor impiously goes about to make it.

CHAP. II.
Of the Antiquity, Sanctity, and Glory of the Science of Astrology, and that it
is no such accursed Art, or piece of old Paganism, or matter of Daemonalatry,
as Dr. More very impiously goes about to make it; very demonstrably argued,
cleared, and made evident.

Doctor's Charge against this Heavenly Science find we showing its Teeth first
against its parts severally; and lastly concluding against the whole Body
thereof. That which he urges against the several parts, find we introduced as
it were an Assumption, which makes up his second Proposition, (the first being
understood;) And from whence he concludes, That, which it seems was the Thesis
of his first intentions. And this Thesis (to bring it into as narrow room as
conveniently we can) seems to consist of two heads.

First, That Astrology is a vain Art.

And Secondly, That it is a wicked and diabolical Art, [B. 7. Chapter 17.. 7. of
his Explanation.]

But for more surety, take it in his own Language as follows, [ Now therefore
to conclude, Seeing that the principles of Astrology are so groundless and
frivolous, nay contradictious one with another, and built upon such false
Hypotheses, and gross Mistakes, concerning the nature and System of the World;
seeing it has no due object by reason of the interposing of the free Agency of
both Men and Angels to interrupt perpetually the imagined natural series of
both Causality and Events; seeing there is not sufficient experience to make
good the truth of the Art, they that have practiced therein having not observed
the pretended Laws thereof with due accuracy; and therefore if any thing has
hitherto his true, it must be by Chance, which quite takes away their plea from
Events, so that their Art is utterly to seek, not only for Principles, which I
have demonstrated to be false, but for Experience and Effects, which hitherto
have been none; (and assuredly they make nothing of pronouncing loudly, that
such and such a Configuration will have such an Event, though they never
experienced it at all, or very seldom: As it must needs be in the Conjunction
of and which returns not in 700 years;) seeing also that those Predictions that
are pretended to have befallen right, are so few, that they may be justly
deemed to have fallen right by Chance;] Here now have you the sum of his
Argumentation for the Vanity of Astrology, as that it is [a foolery utterly
groundless.] And from hence goes he on, saying, [ And seeing if any thing has
been foretold very punctually and circumstantially, it may as well, nay better
be supposed to proceed from the secret insinuations or visible converse with
the aerie Wanderers, then from the indication of the Stars; and lastly, seeing
there is that Affinity and secret Association of Astrology with Daemonalatry,
and ancient Pagan Superstition; that person must have a strangely impure, and
effascinable passivity of fancy, that can he bound over to a belief or liking
of a Foolery so utterly groundless, as Astrology is, and so nearly verging to
the brinks of Apostasy and Impiety.] Here Is the sum of his Argumentation for
the Wickedness of Astrology, as that in so nearly verging the brinks of
Apostasy and Impiety. And it is enough, now let us see what Astrology has to say
in answer, and that first to his Vanity, and then to his Impiety.

Vanity or rather [ Foolery] of Astrology, (as the Doctor calls it) He sets a
Puppet upon a Frame with four rotten Legs, which must needs fail it, and in the
mean time standing by to see it fall; he hatche's a loud laughter as if
Astrology were utterly fallen down and broken, and yet no such matter, so much
as toward.

First, He begins, [ Astrology a Foolery, because the Principles of it are
Groundless and Frivolous, nay Contradictions, and built upon false Hypotheses,
etc.] But why so? And first, why so Groundless and Frivolous? It is in this
thing, in which he seems to hint especially at the Influences and Aspects of
five of the Planets, and the Aspects of the whole seven, which things he
alleges are groundless and frivolous Phancy's, and a Rhapsody of Fooleries:
[as B. 7. Chapter 16.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. of his Explan.] In answer to this,
first, take we up the Gentleman's own grant, [. 3. The Moon (he acknowledges)
in the Full, swells many things with moisture, which effect is both sensible
and palpable and also reasonable: First, because of her proximity; Secondly,
because of the reflection of the Sunbeams from her Body, which being but of a
moderate power, melts the Air and Vapors into an insinuating liquidness, but
do not dissipate them, as do his direct beams by Day. And this feat (he doubts
not) but that any other of the Planets would perform, if they were so placed,
that their Discus would seem of equal bigness with the Moon, and she were
removed into their place.] Again he grants, [. 4. That by certain experience we
find, that the flux and reflux of the Sea, depends on the course of the Moon,
so that there can be no deceit in the business.] And again, as to the Loadstone
and Polar Star, he grants in the same Section, [ That there are some sensible
effects from the Heavens certain and constant.] But [ it is not (he says) so
much the influence of the Heavens, as the Magnetism of the Earth, in which this
direction of the Needle toward the North consists. Because three Miles from
Rossebury the Needle amidst a many Sea Rocks, ceases not to turn about for the
space of a whole Mile.] Thus much has fallen from the Doctor's lips without
crushing or pressure. Only as he quotes it from Sir Christopher Heydon. And
because he has so ingeniously set down the Argument of that learned Knight on
behalf of Astrology [Ch. 15.. 1.] I am unwilling to do the Doctor so much
wrong, as together with his concessions, to deny his quotations the liberty to
go along with them, and from the Doctor's own Pen, speak as follows, [ It Is
plain that the Moon has a moist influence, and that at her Full the brains of
Beasts generally, the eyes of Cats, and the meat of Shell-fishes are swelled to
a greater bigness; and that they are lessened in the Change. That the Moon also
guides the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, whose influence is equally seen, when
she is under the Horizon as when above, when near our Nadir, as when near our
Zenith. Whence is it plain (say they) that the Heavenly Bodies have not only an
influence besides light, but more searching and penetrating then light it self,
as being able to make its way through the thickness of the Earth, and to reach
its effects on the farther side thereof: Both which wonders they farther
confirm from the Magnetical Needle that looks toward the Pole Star, though on
the other side of the Tropic of Capricorn, where the North Pole will be hidden
twenty or thirty degrees below the Horizon: Whence is it manifest (say they)
that the influence of the Pole Star pierces through the bowels of the Earth,
and is a notorious Argument of the secret and irresistible virtue of the rest
of the Heavens.] Thus writes the Doctor by way of quotation out of Sir
Christopher Heydon, as who would say, what might be argued on behalf of
Astrology. And the truth is, the Doctor has so ingeniously compiled the
Arguments on Astrologies behalf altogether in one entire Chapter, and set them
out in such neat apparel, and in so good order; (Chapter 15.) that as they stand
holding together so unanimously, and maintaining their cause so cheerfully,
methinks they look so confidently sweetly on the Opposer, as if they were at
strife, whether to woo or daunt the Adversary to their side. But on the other
side the answers to those Arguments, and all that comes in against Astrology,
do come up so disjointed, rough hewn, and so snarlingly one among another, as
if the Doctor had undertaken a notable design, whereby under color of
destroying Astrology, he has set it out so neatly, and upon so firm a Basis,
as never to be overturned; and has purposely shot at it, with the throwing of
his Cap only, as if he never intended otherwise then to be foiled, and that
shamefully, in order to advance Astrology the more, and that he may hereafter
practice it himself with the greater grace and freedom, maugre all exceptions
that can be brought against him. And to this purpose I have the more readily
taken up the Cudgels, in order to comply with such a kind of wish of his.

But however to return unto his Concessions, and they compared with the
Objection on the other side, unto which they refer: First, Does the Moon swell
many things with moisture in her Full? (as is granted,) And does this swelling
with moisture extend unto the Brains of Beasts, and Eyes of Cats, etc. so as to
make them bigger at the Full, and lesser at the Change, (as is proposed in the
Objection, and not denied in the Answer?) Why then it seems the Moon has an
influence, though the other Planets have not, and that by the Doctor's own
Concession? No, but says the Doctor, though such effects do flow from the Moon,
yet is it not by means of any influence of here is, but of the Sun beams,
reflecting from her Body, and thereby melting the Air and other Vapors into an
insinuating liquidness. Well, but which way gets that liquidness into the
Brains or Eyes of living Creatures? Sure our great Philosopher has not so
little reason as to imagine, as if these Brains were water-soak't only, as the
Barley when it is steeped in the water in order to be made Malt! And yet it can
be no otherways. For does he not talk of a liquidness, which from without
insinuate's into those Brains and Eyes? And that collected from an Aerie and
Vapourous matter too? But I wonder how possibly this crafty liquidness got
through the head, the skin and skull, and without once stirring those more
outward parts, with any kind of alteration, wrought only upon the Brain, which
was so close locked up within. For do we not easily observe, that when such a
liquidness invades the kernel of any Fruit, it never touches that inside,
until both husk and shell are either rotted off, or so swelled in substance as
to cleave insunder? But besides, every Novice in Husbandry does know, that this
kind of liquidness, though it can insinuate, yet is it not so quick at it:
There are many Seeds, as Haws, and Holliberies, and others, whose Shells are not
near so thick and hard as are the Skulls of Beasts, and yet is it almost a two
Years time before this liquidness can thoroughly act upon them: And yet shall we
be so thick skinned as to imagine, as if this sluggish Labourer could dig through,
and dive beyond skin and skull in a Nights time, and begone in another! But what
is worst of all* how absurd is it to fancy, as if the flesh of Sensitive
Animals was wrought upon by liquid insinuations, as are the Stems, Roots and
Seeds of Vegetive Plants! For although outward applications may have so much
influence upon the Eye or Brain, so as to pain or ease them by insinuating
Powers, yet that Power which nourishes, and so by consequence makes full Brains
and Eyes, or for want of exercise empties, and makes less Brains, or by any
other way causes the Eye or Brain to thrive or diminish, must necessarily be
maintained from within, from the Stomach and Belly, and not merely from any act
of Sun or Moon from without only. And does the Moon work this swelling of Eyes
and Brains? Why yes, that is granted, and if so, then needs must she do it by
working upon the Stomach and Blood of that Beast or Cat, whose Eyes or Brains
she swells; and if so, how then can it be otherwise, but that she has an
influence, whereby at certain times she affords more virtue to the food, and
blood, by means whereof it feeds more full and thriving at sometimes more then
at other some? For, take a certain quantity of dust, and mingle it with water
and leaven, and all the Art that may be, and sees or bake it, and it thrives
not after all, as to be more or less: But then take a certain quantity of Meal,
and use it after the same manner, and lo it comes forth of the Oven, or the
Pot, almost twice as big as it went in, and this it does by reason of that
virtue which lodges in the Seed whereof it was made. And therefore by the same
rule say we of the swelled Eyes or Brains, that it was not the mere liquidness,
or any kind of hotness which made them so, but a certain virtue secretly
infused into the food, and blood which made them thrive thus; And this is it,
which the Moon has done, (as is confessed.) And therefore follows it
unavoidably, that the Moon not only does such things, but that by a certain
influence she does it, whereby she distills her virtue sometimes more, and
sometimes less.

the flux and reflux of the Sea certainly and without all doubt depend upon the
course of the Moon, (as is granted:) Then there also greatly does appear the
influence of the Moon? But no, says the Doctor, the Moon does it by a rational
ground, [Ch. 16.. 4.] And to prove this rational ground, he quotes Des Chartes,
and from him affirms, That the Ellipsis of the Caelestial matter is streitned
by the Moon's Body, which makes the Ether flow more swift; which is a plain
and Mechanical Solution of the Phenomenon. Thus contrive's the Doctor, as if
the Moon caused this Ebbing and Flowing of the Seas, but not by any attractive
or expulsive Virtue or Influence, but as if the Boys with a great Besome, were
driving the water of the Kennel sometimes this way, and sometimes that, with a
violent drift; or as if some great stone haled up the River and back again,
should cause the rolling of the water to and fro. Now the truth is, such things
may be, here below with us. But to say what is done beyond and above the Air,
how come we I wonder to know that? And yet says the Doctor, this is a plain and
Mechanical Solution. But not so plain by his favor, unless we know better, of
what kind of nature that Caelestial matter is he treats of, or that he could
tell us. For do not we know that the Air is a subtle and a curiously made thin
Body, which aptly and easily with very small or no force upon its next
Neighbor makes way for greatest Bodies to pierce and pass through it; and we
have much of reason to believe, that the Caelestial matter is much more subtle
then that. So as it can make room enough for the passage of the Moon's Body
through and through it to and fro, without any the least disturbance to the Air
or Water. But on the contrary, that there is no such thing in nature, appears
by this, in that whilst the waters are carried hither and thither by the power
of the Moon, the Winds are many times contrarily disposed. For were the Waters
driven by a force of the Moon's Body driveing the Caelestial matter, and that
the Air, and the Air the Waters: Then would the Winds also (which are lighter
then the Waters) be driven also by the same violent Air, even as the Waters
are; but this we see is not so, and therefore neither can be the other. But
this argument rather looks much like that of a blunt Country Gentleman's, who
understanding but little of the System of the World, conceited the Earth to be
fastened unto the North and South Poles by great and massy Cakes of Ice, upon
which not hanging so steady, but that it is tottered to and fro by the motion
of the Moon; which therefore as it reels toward the East, swaggles the whole
water of the Sea, floting the same way; and as it returns back again Westward,
brings all the whole Sea with a swaggle back again to Landwards upon us. Now
the truth is, let them conceit this way and the other what they can; there is
no man can propose any certain Mechanical way, whereby this rare Feat should be
thus wrought. It is therefore enough for our matter at this time, that the
Doctor has granted it to happen certainly by means of the Moon. For hence are
we able to say by authority from our Adversaries, that the Moon (...) the flux
and reflux of the Seas, and till they shall be able to show demonstratively how
it is otherwise, it must go for granted, that she does it by an influence
strange and secret beyond (...) what we are able to conceive. And 'till then,
this Planet the Moon must be allowed to have such a Foolery (as the Doctor
styles it,) which we call her Astrological Influence.

Are there some sensible Effects from the Heavens, which are certain and
constant, (as is granted,) and particularly, his the Polar Star such a sensible
effect upon the Magnetical Needle? Why, then it must necessarily follow, that
the Heavens have their Influences, and particularly, that the Polar Star has
its influences upon the Magnetical Needle, and that searching and penetrating
through the very Body of the Earth, as by common experience may be, and is daily
verified. No, but says the Doctor, it is the Magnetisme of the Earth, and not
of the Polar Star which draws that Needle. And he renders his reason for it.
For some three Miles from Rossebury the Needle will turn round and round for
the space of a whole Mile. Well, it seems then, it is between the Earth and the
Polar Star; one of them, then it seems, must needs have an influence. But
suppose we, it should be the Earth that carries this Magnetisme. Is it the
whole Earth that does so, or some part of it only? If the whole Earth, why then
turns not the Needle South-wards, as well as North-wards? And if it be some
part of the Earth only, where is that part? Or is it amongst those Rocks some
three Miles from Rossebury? But if so, why then beyond that Rossebury and those
three Miles of it, does the Needle turn North-wards, and not rather toward
Rossebury? Is this Magnetisme in the Earth then; why if so, its in no one part
or place of the Earth it seems, but in several; it is about Rossebury, and
beyond Rossebury more North, and who knows where the end of it is there? But be
it so, that it be in the Earth, and yet no man knows where in the Earth, what
ground have we that it is in the Earth? Or are the Doctor's Principles as
groundless and frivolous nay and contradictious as our's of Astrology? It seems
there is a strange sympathy between the nature of the Polar Star and the Magnet
Stone: This Stone, if it be nigh to the Needle, has it seems a palpable power
to attract the Needle toward it self. And this it can do (as some say who have
seen the experiment) though there be the thickness of a Table Board, between
the Stone and the Needle. And in this case, the Magnet leads away the Needle to
the Polar Star. But this is the truth of the case about Rossebury, It seems
there is some Magnet Rocks there abouts, which draw the Needle round as it
comes near to every of them; and being near hand, they draw away the Needle
from the Polar Star. But after a small distance, their virtue fails, and then
the Polar Star draws it again. But to conclude, is this virtue of Magnetisme in
the Earth, or any part of it, as the Doctor says? Why then this power of
attracting the Needle would be but weak, and at a certain distance only; for so
the Magnetic Rocks at or near Rossebury work but within their distance, and
that is but small and very mean. But a Magnetisme there is, which draws as far
as from the North Pole unto beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, and that through
the very Body of the Earth, and that therefore can be no Magnetisme of the
Rocks of Rossebury, no nor were all the Earth from Greenland Northward,
nothing but a Magnetic Rock, yet could it not do such a Feat. And therefore
good Doctor bethink again, such it is, and must be no less then the Polar Star,
and not the Earth which influences the Needle thus: And if so, where is the
Foolery now?

Doctor, That he [ doubts not, but that were the other Planets any of them in
the Moon's place, where their Discus might seem of equal bigness with here is;
and she away from where she is, in their place; they might do the like Feats as
she does.] O excellent Conceits, and from an Enemy as favorable as one would
wish!

For First, That the Moon has a mighty power, or virtue, or influence, or
somewhat, call it what you please, whereby she swells the Eyes and Brains at
her Full,, and carries the Seas up and down, here and there, as it were at
pleasure; is granted.

Secondly, That the other Planets, such as and, have every one of them as much
power, or virtue, or influence, or somewhat, only they want proximity, as to
us, in order to exercise that power upon us, as the Moon does. Now this is as
much full, if not more, then any Astrologer would say himself, saving that
wherein the Doctor is apparently oversighted, mistaken or lost with ignorance,
concerning the power of proximity, and the virtue of a seeming Discus with the
Planets.

For First, For matter of proximity, the Doctor it seems is yet to learn, how
the Heavenly Bodies are neither helped by proximity, nor hindered by longinquity
in the exercise of their powers, or in the pouring down of their Influences. It
seems, either he had forgotten, or did not know, that the farther the Moon is
from the Sun, the greater is the light she receives from him; and the nearer
she is to him, she receives still less and less. And it seems, either it was
out of's head, or he had never heard or understood, That the Magnetical Needle
is as constant to the Polar Star, and as diligently attending it, as well in
the utmost Southern parts of the World, as in the nearest Northern Coasts
almost under it. And again it seems, however it came about, that sure the
Doctor took the Heavens and the Ether in them, to be as it with us here on
Earth, full of Rocks and Mountains, Stone-walls, and Church-steeples, and great
thick Woods, which interpose the power and virtue of the higher Planets from
lightning on us at so great a distance: Or else he mistook the Planets, to be
mere Opake Bodies of yellow or red Clay, dull Souls, like old men, who see not
without their Spectacles. ( Chapter 16.. 8.) For so (says he) were they in the
Moons place they might do much: But what would you have from Dunstable-hills,
be they never so white, and shine the Sun never so bright upon them, yet is it
not possible, they should appear beyond York. And as for the Moon her self, he
takes her to be no more (it seems) but as it were some great House built with
Mud-walls, and great Glass Windows, which carried in the Heavens about the
World, is good for nothing but to conveigh the light of the Sun by reflection
upon the Earth by night, when the Sun is out of sight himself, or the heat of
the Sun by the same reflection through the vapors of the Air to fill us with
moisture. And lastly, as for the Sun it self, which gives the Moon her whole
light, he conceives that too, to have no more then a mere general influence of
heat, and that by this mere beat only, it cherishe's and excite's the seminal
Principles of things into actual perfection, and all no otherwise then the
Egyptians, and Livia's Maids of Honor were wont to do, when they hatched
their Eggs without help of the Hen, (Chapter 16.. 6.) Thus strangely goes the
Doctor on, undervaluing these glorious Bodies through his ignorance, or
forgetfulness, or both, not knowing what he does. For do we but overthrow these
fond conceits of his then all he has said against Astrology, how frivolous and
how foolish a thing it is, falls to the ground, and the Fool immediately flies
in the Doctor's own face. To confute them therefore,

First, Let him but read over again his own Objection, out of Sir Christopher
Heydon (Chapter 15.. 1.) [ They allege (says he) that it is a thing beyond all
belief, that such an innumerable company of Stars, whose light is not
considerable, nor their position so exact for Ornament, should (...) made for
nothing else but to look upon. Therefore say they, there is some other Mystery
in it, and the they are endued with certain hidden influences, and have their
several peculiar virtues, as the Herbs and Flowers of the Field. Again, the
Earth and Water being such simple Bodies as they are, the various productions
in Nature could not be, were it not for that infinite variety of the Celestial
Bodies, the Stars and their several influences upon the Earth* Again, Yearly
experience teaches us, that the approach of the Sun renews the World, and makes
an annual Resurrection of Plants, and Insects, and such living Creatures as are
born of putrefaction, and have no other Father then the fiery bearded Sun. If
then this one Planet does such rare feats, certainly the rest of the Planets
and fixed Stars do not stand for Ciphers, but have their virtues and operations
as well as he, whose virtues and influences say these Stargazers, our Art does
punctually and particularly define.] Thus speaks the Objection in the Doctor's
own Language, and he may remember, it is but very little of it, which he has
labored and shifted to evade, and just nothing of it, which he has answered.

Secondly, The Doctor may understand, that however himself may be to seek, and
has not observed so much; yet are there amongst ( Stargazers as he calls us)
such who have very curiously watched all the 7 Planets, and many of the fixed
Stars; and do find by certain experience, and that without any deceit in the
business, and as sure as he has it, that the Moon leads the flux and reflux of
the Sea, that they all have their proper influences upon us, even as the Moon
upon the Brains of Beasts, etc. But if the Doctor will believe none of us as to
this matter, yet let him go to the Sheep-herds in the Field, and inquire of
them; if a Lamb or a Calf yeaned or calved in the New Moon be not usually
giddy, and do not usually die of such Giddies, unless it be that the Planets or
are situat in some such Aspects at birth, as to prevent those Giddies, or to
preserve life at least when those giddies fall? Or let him ask the good Wives,
or their Midwives, who have had warning of such things, if they have not often
observed how the Planets or either rising or setting at, or very near after the
time of birth, do not certainly kill such Infants as are then born? And if he
cannot find such Wives or Midwives, I Will do him the favor to render him an
account of experiments enough and sufficient evidence of the truth of the same.
Or if none of all these may be believed,

Thirdly, The Doctor may be pleased to study the Holy Writ a little better, and
he will find it recorded there to the same purpose.

First, Does he not find tell there of the Constellation of the Pleiades, and
Orion, how the Almighty challenged Job, Job 38.31.
if he was able to restrain the one, and unbind the other? Now if they had, or
have no influence but their mere light or ornament in the Heavens, what was
that then, which was to be bound or unbound in one or the other? Can thou
restrain Pleiades, says He? It appears therefore, that the Stars called
Pleiades have great influence* either to help or harm or both, as occasion
serves, and this was it of which God asked Job, if he could prevent them in
either? Again, it is said of the Stars, Judge. 5.20.
that in their Courses they fought against Sisera. Now what can be understood
by that fight, but that something they did? And if something, which way was it?
not by Sword or Bullet, nor by mere standing to gaze, or to give light, but by
some secret way they had every one of them, as their Course came up to afflict
the Enemy. But especially of the Sun and Moon it is said, how God set them in
the Firmame^, not only to give light upon the Earth; but also to rule over the
Day and the Night, and he made the Stars also; Genesis 1.17, 18.
but these it seems as subordinate, and ruling under the others. Now this rule,
must needs be more then a bare giving light and heat. For the Moon is but
subordinate her self in both these things unto the Sun: And yet has God given
her Ordinances of her own, and to the Stars Ordinances of their own, Jer. 31.35.
whereby they also rule in the Night. Now to rule, and to give Ordinances to
the Suns of the Day and Night, can be no less then to sway over them in command
and power, so as to help or hinder, and to kill or save, and such like. But
especially is the great influence of the Sun declared in holy Writ, in that our
Savior who is the Life and Salvation of our Souls, is described to the World
under the similitude of the Sun, as he is called the Sun of Righteousness that
should arise with healing in his Wings. Now were it so, that the Sun was not a
Fountain of life and health, as well as of Light, Mal. 4.2.
to what purpose is he called a Sun with health or healing? etc. Again, he is
called the Day Star which shall arise in our hearts. It is not said in our
minds, where- the light seems to reign, but in the heart where hence the life
comes. Intimating that as the Sun gives natural life and health unto the heart,
even so does Christ give Spiritual life unto the Soul. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Whence is it manifest out of Holy Writ, that as our Lord Jesus by his Grace
and holy Spirit does give life unto the Spiritual World; so does the Sun not
only by his heat and life, but also by a vivifying virtue lodging in his
influence, give a natural life unto the Earthly World. Or else in vain was such
a Comparison made between Christ the Heavenly, Revel. 1.16. and 12.1.
and the Sun the natural light. But as for those Eggs the Doctor talks of, with
disparagement of the Sun's influence, which seemed to be hatched with
artificial heat without the Sun's help, it must be remembered, that in all those
Eggs was there a seed of life fore-prepared by the influence of the Sun and
Moon, and other Planets upon the Hens from whose Bodies those Eggs were
gathered, insomuch as nothing was wanting but heat only to perfect the act of
producing the fruit: And yet that heat too, whereby they were produced, was not
merely artificial, because the Sun has an influence upon all heat, (as
opportunity serves) quickening and qualifying it, with a vivifying faculty,
saving that when the excess destroys, and the evil influence of the Planet
interposing debauches it. But what says the Doctor to the Insects, can he
produce such too by artificial heat? Or will he grant that the Sun works by a
quickening* as well as by an heating influence? Which if not, let him say which
way else flows forth that life they have, or else the Principles of Astrology
will be clearly quit of all his groundless and frivolous foolery he charges
upon them, and the charge will henceforwards rest at the Doctor's own door; he
having granted by his own Concessions so much, as with this little help I have
added to them by way of explanation of the Case only, will amount high enough
to prove all those things to be the very Truth, and wisdom of Nature, which he
brands with these opprobious Calumnies of groundless and frivolous Fooleries,
and Rhapsodies of Fooleries, and abundance of such like stuff. But seeing he
has singled out the parts of Astrology, and fallen upon each part in
particular, I think my self therefore concerned as particularly to vindicate
those parts from his foul mouthed Pen.

influence of the Planets. And as a foundation to his work, he proposes to
himself by way of Objection thus, [ Chapter 16.. 1. That the Being of the Stars and
Planets would be useless, were there nothing in the Art of Astrology.] To this
he answers No. For were there no thing in the fixed Stars but light and heat, it
would not follow. And why? Because the wiser and later Philosophers have made
them as so many Suns. As if because they are Suns, it were excuse enough for
them to stand for Ciphers, whereas standing for such, the more rather is to be
expected from them, the Sun being the Prince of all Stars, as the most noble
and well bred beyond them all. But how does he prove them as so many Suns? The
wiser and later Philosophers have made them so. That is, they have conceited
so, and as wise as they are of another opinion. And yet (says the Doctor) this
Hypothesis our Astrologers must confute, before they can make good the force of
their first Argument. The Hypothesis it self is but a mere conceit, without
proof, and yet forsooth we must confute it. Sure the Doctor has forgot since he
was in the Schools what belongs to an Argument. But suppose them so many Suns,
and without all influence but Light and Heat, Whom is it they are made to shine
to, or to make warm? As for us, we feel nothing of their heat, and make ten
times more use of a Candle, then of their light. For whose use then were these
multitude of Suns Created? In answer to this, the Doctor refers us to B. 3. Chapter
1.. 6. of the Expla. where we find naught to the the purpose but a Verse out of
blind Homer.

(...).
Englished thus,

He rose to shine to Gods as well as men.
Well fare old Homer at a dead lift, the blind man has hit the mark by chance.
But ah poor Doctor! what a shift was here, to fly for refuge to a poor blind
Poet, to help him out in a point of Philosophy that Homer himself could never
possibly understand. But it was well applied however; for the Doctor's poetical
Suns, and Homer's poetical Gods, are very well met. Next, as for the Planets,
he answers, that the same Philosophers have suggested, That they may have some
such like use as our Earth has, that is, to be the Mothers of living Creatures;
But what living Creatures? Nay, says the Doctor, they have defined nothing
concerning the natures of them, and 'twas wisely contrived, their Opinion
becoming thereby so much the more harmless and unexceptional, as it is in it
self highly probable: For as much as the Earth, as well as and moves about the
Sun, and is as much a Planet as any of them. As the best Astronomers do not at
all now adays stick to affirm. Which does utterly enerv^ the force of this
first general pretense of the Astrologians.] Now I see the Doctor is in good
earnest, and does really think us Astrologers to be mere Fools, who will aptly
be banged out of our Argument with mere topical Arguments. But who made this
man a Doctor I marvel? It is highly probable (says he,) and that is the utmost
of his Argument, and yet how confidently he concludes, that this first general
pretense is utterly enervated, yea utterly cast down and lost! But what if the
Earth were certainly a Planet? And the Planet,, etc. were all Mothers of living
Creatures, as well as the Earth, what is all this to the purpose? God made the
Stars and Planets for us, and to influence us, and whatever Chimera's may dwell
within them, yet as the Argument says, be there nothing in the Art of
Astrology, notwithstanding shall they be useless to us. Thus see how this
Reverend Doctor proves that there are Castles in the Air, by eating of
Apple-pies, and he who has but a competent patience, let him listen to his
close way of reasoning, or the way of his close reasonings; as the Doctor calls
for them to do, [ Chapter 16.. 17.] But it seems the Doctor was well enough aware
what rotten legs his Argument stood upon. For else why did he make such
provision against its fall? Though there were (says he) certain virtues and
influences in every one of them, yet it does not follow that they are
discovered in their Art.] This is his reserve now, in case his sore place
should hap to be rubbed. But neither will this help him.

For First, It follows, that for certain, then there is a certain Art of
Astrology.

But Secondly, Whether our Art be that true Art, I shall leave, 'till I come to
treat more fully of that subject.

various productions of Nature, how they can be, be it not for that infinite
variety of the Celestial Bodies, the Stars and their several influences upon
the Earth and Water, which are such simple Bodies of themselves.] And he says,
That though there were this variety in them, yet because this variety reaches
every point of the Earth, the product would be the same, unless the particles
of the Earth were diversified by some other Cause. Next, that neither the
variety of influence of the Stars, nor of the Heavens, if they are merely
material, are sufficient causes of productions here below. Again, that the
Celestial matter is every where, and that the Earth swim's in it, as Wood does
in Water, so that we need not have recourse to so remote unknown activitiesr.
And lastly that the general (...) or the spirit of Nature is every where ready
to contrive the matter into such shaps and virtues as its disposition makes
toward. And this is enough and more then enough, to take off the edge of the
Knight's Argument.] Well fare a good forehead however, right or wrong. But be
it so, that the spirit of Nature is every where ready, yet how knows he that
the Celestial matter is also every where? We know that this Earth; whether it
be fixed or moveable, however is wrapped up in the Air, and swadled with Clouds
and various Meteors: And beyond that, how it swims in the Celestial matter,
the Doctor may aptly inquire and suppose; and when he has done all; its but his
opinion. And therefore out of what he does not certainly know he can make no
certain proof. But be this Celestial matter never so much, as himself
conceives, or would have it, yet he must remember that Nature operates not
confusedly, but in a just order and method; and not according to any list or
choice of her own, but as she is ordered by her Maker in a certain Method, and
that not all immediately out of Celestial matter, as the Wood swimming in
Water, nor yet by one sort of Instrument; but as she has a vast Fabric or
Workhouse to work in, and Millions of Tools to work by, and all those have
their several employments, and therefore are not intermixed as the liquid water
mingling all together within it self in one entire Body, but are situat each in
their ranks, and places; so neither the Earth nor the Air about it can be so
situat, as to swim all parts of it at once in the Celestial matter, much less
to apply every part of the Earth to its proper Instrument of Nature so as to be
wrought by it, with an immediate conjunction: But these productions here below
must necessarily be caused by the Activity of remote Instruments and their
Influences; but whether those Influences be material or immaterial, I am not
concerned to prove. Yet whether they are the one or the other, are they certain
causes of productions at as great a distance as the Starry Heavens are from the
Earth; as may be seen in the influence of the Polar Star, which draws the
Magnetical Needles pointing upon it self, from the utmost Southern Coasts. But
what is most to be admired with me is, with what strange confidence or
forgetfulness the Doctor can deny, what he professes elsewhere to be a truth:
It is in his [ Immortality of the Soul, B. 11. Chapter 10.. 6.] Where he
acknowledges, that the Weapon-Salve applied to the knife that made the wound,
does cure the wound it self. Now if Salve, which is a material thing, can
operate thus at a distance from the wound, and that as some say, at a hundred
Miles off, from the weapon whereto it is applied, why shall the Stars be
rendered insufficient to do as much, or more, according to that degree they are
in virtue, beyond all that the Earth is able to produce? But says the Doctor,
this is not by a Mechanical but by a Magical sympathy, in a lawful sense. And
what does the Doctor know, but this of the Stars may be so too? Or rather how
came the Doctor to understand, that this sympathy of the Weapon-Salve is not
Mechanical? Has he an eye so curious, as can watch the Air, and that so as to
be able to say, what strings more subtle, thin and fine then Air it self, do
run along between the knife and the wound, and that so as to carry the sympathy
between the one and the other; and all this so exactly, as to determine when
there is no such matter? I doubt rather the Doctor has some ill position of,
either upon his Ascendent, or the in his Nativity, which inclines him thus
rashly to disgrace his Worship, by so confidently asserting what is, and is
not, before he half understands how it is. Such another piece of Rashness is it
when he asserts the [ variety of Celestial influences reaching every point of
the Earth.] I wonder whether the Doctor had repented yea or not, of that
opinion of his, about the Weapon-salve, before he came to treat of the Stars
and their influence! Or whether he had forgot it! Or whether he well
understands what he writes, when he tumbles it into Print! For let him but
consider, does the influence of that weapon-salve from the weapon it is applied
to, equally reach all wounds between that and the wound it cures; or missing
all others, does it merely touch the wound made by that weapon, whereon it
sticks and works? The Doctor knows, it points merely at that one wound, and be
there ten thousand wounds between, yet it misseth them all. And so may he as
well conceive that the influence of every Star, and of every part of Heaven
does not like water scatter it self into all pores of the Earth as it flies
along, but though one Star may have more then Millions of influences going at
once, yet as the weapon^salve sends it forth each into its proper object: And
all this without diversifying the Earth, or any parts thereof.

Planet Luna, which yet he is unwilling should be called by the name of
Influence, though it do never so much influere, or insinuate as he calls it:
Yet an insufferable folly (he says) it is to argue from such reasonable and
palpable effects of the Moon, that the other Planets also and fixed Stars, have
as powerful effects upon us, which yet we can deprehend by neither reason nor
experience.]

First, The charge [ as powerfully] is false, the Astrologers do not say so, as
I have showed before.

But Secondly, That if the Moon which is one Planet, have such and such
influences, which are so apparent as they cannot be denied, what hinders, but
it may aptly follow that her fellow Planets may have influences too, though
perhaps not altogether so apparently to be discerned. The Planets appear to us,
as so many Creatures all of a kind. And in such a case, whatsoever is the
property of one of them as a Planet, may very safely be applied to the other.
As when I find it is the property of a man to speak, I conclude that very
probably all men may speak. And when I find that a Goose does naturally gaggle,
I am apt to think that all Geese can do so too. So therefore, when I find that
the Sun and Moon have power of casting out their Influences, each of them their
proper Influences, I conclude that their fellow Planets can cast influences
too, though all of them their proper influences. Also we observe the Plants
that have their virtues: And when we have tasted and tried this and that, and
find what they can do, we conclude that the rest have their virtues too as well
as they, though as yet we have not tasted. But says the Doctor there is reason
and experience for the acts of the Moon, and not so for any of the rest. Alas,
the Doctor's reasons are but postulations or suppositions at best. And as much
may be said for the best. But for matter of experience, we who have made the
trial, do find by experience, all that is written of the other Planets and
their proper influences to be true. Only there is the more diligence and
vigilance required in the trial, their tracks being not so palpable, as are
those of some acts of the Sun and Moon. Now the Argument runs only thus, If
certainly this one Planet does such feats, then the rest of the Planets and
fixed Stars do not stand for Ciphers, but have their virtues as well as he. And
this no doubt but any rational man will say is very good reason. But the Doctor
not able to say against it, yet cries out unsufferable folly. And in the next
Section, instead of arguing to the same kind of discourse, all the Argument he
brings, is nothing else but a loading Astrology with Lies and Slanders; As if
without any reason or experience that this is the cause of that, we attribute
one thing for another.] And now what shall we, or need we to answer in this
case, unless it be, that the Doctor may be ashamed to drive such a dirty trade
of Billingsgate Poetry? And again, That because there are some sensible effects
from the Heavens certain and constant, that therefore we imagine what effects we
please to proceed from this or that particular Star, without due experience or
reason for the same. This is another Billingsgate story, and we need answer no
more to it, but that it is a mere invention of the Doctor. For we have
experience both certain and apparent, and are able to show it; as sure as the
Needle is to be seen pointing to the North, saving that the experiments are not
so visible to sense, as they are to reason apparent.

Station and Retrogradation of the Planets a gross mistake. Because (says he)
those Phenomenon are not real but seeming. Which he calls a scurvy slur to
these Astrologers.] Alas good Doctor! To see how, while his Worship is laughing
heartily at our mistakes as he conceits, he never beholds his own ignorance.
It Is well known, that we, (who are as able to calculate an Ephemerides as
himself, and many of us have done it, and given warning of the Planets direct
and Retrogade) do understand the meaning of the Phenomenon past mistake. But
however seeming this Station and Retrogradation is, by experience such is it
found unto us, as if it were really so. And diligent observation is able to
evidence, that during such times the Planets are disabled in their
Communication of influences in all those parts where they seem so. But it seems
the Doctor was so weak, as not knowing so much, to conceit as if we had not
understood the truth of the Phenomenon all this while. And thus has he
beslabbered his own Coat, while he thought to throw his pottage upon ours.

Doctor's foam falls foul upon the fixed Stars, Arcturus, Hyades, and Orion,
but most especially is he provoked by the Dog Star. None of them (says he) are
conceived to have any such effects as are attributed to them, but then when the
Sun is in such places of the Zodiac, as himself without them would bring
forth. But woe be to the Dog. For his wrath (says he) is tamed already, but
how tame will he be when the Anticipation of the AEquinox shall appoint him his
Kennel as low as Capricorn, should the World so long continue? These (says he)
may serve for poetical expressions, Job 38.31.
entitling things circumstantial and concomitant to real causality. Here seems
he to rend the holy Writ, and to give the lie to God himself. Can thou bind
the Pleiades, and unbind Orion? (says the Lord to Job.) But Dr. More controuls
him, intimating as if the Almighty talked like Virgil, poetical stories, when
he cried Candidus auratis aperit cum cornibus, annum Taurus.

Applying that to the Signs, which belonged to the Sun. For God makes the
Pleiades and Orion, as if they were to be bound or unbound, and yet neither of
them has either hands or feet to be bound, or any power of making hot or cold,
or wet, or dry, to be restrained, or made void! Thus talks the Doctor like a
Sluggard, wise in his own conceit, Luke ^2.54, 55, 56.
maugre all the wisdom and experience that ever Mortals tasted. Wise men do
know by the very same kind of experience whereof our Savior said [Tis so] that
the Pleiades rising with the Sun at Spring time, do occasion stormy Tempests*
Wind and Rain, which suiting with the Season, are called their sweet
influences, and are so translated out of the Septuagint: And this it seems was
it, whereof God questioned Job, if he were able so to restrain the influence of
those Stars, And. Argol Astronomic. lib. 2. Chapter 8. out of Ptol. Plin. and
others.
as they should not be able to raise such Tempests? Of the Constellation of
Orion the same wise men also have diligently observed and found out, that when
it is joined with the Planet Saturn, it begets Wind and Rain, which in
Summer time binds the Earth with tough and hard Clods, and in Winter time
with as hard Frosts, whence comes the bonds of which Job was questioned, if he
were able to loosen them? These things went for current Observations in
Plinie's time, and the same were they esteemed in the learned Ptolomie's days.
So also are they found in our own Age, by the famous Mathematician Andrew Argol
of Padua. And to this purpose says the Lord God Almighty, according to the
famous translation of the Septuagint. Against all whom this one Doctor opposes
his single Vote, that it is not so, but that it is the Sun and not the Dog Star
which begets the great heat in July and August; and the Sun, and not the
Pleiades, nor the Hyades, which begets the Storm and Tempest in the Spring; and
the Sun, and not Saturn, nor Orion, which begets the Frost and Snow in the
Winter. Thus madly coins he the single Sun to breath both hot and cold and wet
and dry, as he moves only from place to place. But then when the Doctor does
thus entail the heat and cold to the Place of the Sun; he forgets how that in
Ptolomies time, when Dog Days were long since observed, they happened in May
and June, a whole Month before what they do now. And therefore had the Sultry
Season pertained to the Sun only, after it had heated the Earth, how came it to
pass, that in those olden days it happened so soon ere the Sun came to his full
heat? Or why is it that this Sultry Air goes along with the Dog as he meets
with the Sun, and that varying as the Dog varies, and not fixing to any one
point in the Sun's Circle? but the Doctor is as wise as the Welchman who moved
the Judge to put off his trial upon Life and Death, unto the coming of Christ to
Judgment, with his twelve Apostles, alleging that Her could stay till that
time for sentence. And so her Doctorship can very well be persuaded to defer
the Debate of this Dispute until the Dog comes into, which in all likelihood
will not be till after the day of Judgment. At what time may the Doctor or his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns be alive to see it, reason tells them no
doubt but in that midst of Winter the Dog complying with the Sun will produce a
Sultry Calm, as a Parenthesis between the Snows, and that not as a concomitant
but a real cause thereof.

Doctor it seems takes scorn to be found unread in any kind of skill, and it is
a wonder if first or last he control not the Scullion-Maids in matters of
washing Dishes and scraping Trenchers; for he will find it a far easier matter
there, then in his undertakings here. He takes us Astrologers (it seems) to be
all of us mere Ignoramus's who understand not the reason of our own Science,
and therefore takes he upon him to teach us. The Sign (says he) may tollerably
be phancied to be the Sun 's Exaltation. And he gives us to know a reason for
it, because at his entering there we may observe some more sensible mutation in
the Air and Earth. Again, They had (says he) some intimation to make the House
of, his (...) being then most sensible; and the House of the, because she is
then most vertical. And he farther affirms that for Aspects in all likelihood
the sensible variety of the Phases of the in and gave them first occasion to
take notice of Aspects: And then another thing happening, though independent on
the course of the, namely that every seventh day in an acute Disease is
critical, and where are usually at those returns the greatest alterations and
stirs in the Patient, and the Aspect of the happening about seven days from
her, and about seven days more her, This natural Circuit of Fermentations in
acute Diseases has given occasion to slander the Moon in those cases, and for
her sake to reproach the Aspects of and in all the rest of the Planets.] Now
thanks be to this good Doctor for his kind information of our Mistakes, for
this is more then every body knows, or will do us the kindness to let us know.
But had he digested his intelligence a little better before he brought it, it
might have been much the greater Courtesy. For first there are some who are
not satisfied how became the Sign of s Exaltation, because of the sensible
mutation of the Air and Earth in his entrance there, if that were all, because
there is the like sensible mutation at his entrance into and. And then again,
as for, if that were * House only for his sensible heat there, why the^ was not
the Moon's House, because of her sensible cold there, she being a Planet as
much delighted in coldness, as is in heat? And as for, were that the Moon's
House only, because there she is most vertical. Why then was not ^ s House too,
because he also is most vertical there too, as well as? And if that were all,
how is it that the does not change her Houses, as she has to do with change of
Countries, ^ing that in some places she is vertical in and elsewhere in and;
but had the Doctor a little better perused Ptolomy, or the Arabians, or
Origanus, whom he sometimes quotes, he would have found that is generally
esteemed the 's House as well in those Countries where she is not vertical, as
where she is: And that is the House of as well there, where he has less heat,
as where he has most. And lastly, is for acute Diseases, all men are not apt to
believe the Doctor, that every seventh day they are so critical and stirring:
But rather say they sometimes that Stir and Alteration in the Patient happens
on the third or fourth day, or on the ninth and tenth day, as the Moon happens
to arrive at her or in so many days after the Patient fell amiss. And however
the Doctor happened to be sleepy or heedless when the story was told him; he
might have taken notice how generally the people cry out upon the full and new
Moon, for exasperating acute Diseases, and how many there be who die about
those times. And had he heeded the World of experiments of this kind, he had
not been found so grossly ^ardy in calling the stirs and alterations in the
Patient in dependent on the course of the. And truly seeing the Doctor was so
kind to us, I am sorry he was so vilely slur'd in his intelligence, with so
many and so ugly mistakes. But what (...) the Doctor would have had from hence?

First, That without fear or wit we have bestowed Houses two apeice upon the
rest of the Planets, though neither reason nor effect answerable.

Secondly, That such small hints as these are the solidest foundations of the
Fantastic structure of Astrology.] But how easily are these by-^ows awarded
off.

For First, All the Doctor's reasons for what he alleges, I have showed to
have been started and brought in, without fear or wit, and therefore are no
reasons.

Secondly, Were they never so reasonable, yet is there the very same reason why
should be the one House of, as he himself alleges why should be the House of:
And as much reason why should be the other House of, as he affirms why should
be 's House; For if the hottest Planet may have that House where he is at
hottest, why may not the coldest Planet have that House where he is at coldest!
And if the who is a friend of Nature, may be housed in the most vertical Sign,
why may not, who is the Enemy of Nature, dwell in the most unvertical? And if
so, why then says the Doctor without fear or wit, or without reason or effect
answerable, we have given houses two apeice to the other Planets, whilst we
have the very same reason for one, as himself gives for the other? And why will
the Doctor thus shamelesly slur his own Worship with such unbecomeing stories
to his own Reverence?

Thirdly, Be the Structure of Astrology so fantastic as the Doctor says, why
then does he himself lay the foundation of it? For does not he grant it to be
truth which we alledg of the Houses of and? And if so, then it seems there is
somt^ing in Astrology, though not so much as we pretend to, and this by the
Doctor's own Concession. Why then cries he a fantastic Structure of Astrology?

Lastly, Why does he charge us to have (...) reason nor effect answerable, for
the Houses of the other Planets besides the Sun and Moon? For if the Doctor
knows of none we have, yet had he asked, we could have told him reason enough.
Or he might have understood it out of Sir Christopher Heydon. And I doubt not
but I have showed him in my foregoing Discourse of what Astrology is.

Doctor's flourishes it seems: Now comes this Battery henceforwards, and that
with such a menace of Shatter at us, that woe be to poor Astrology, it shall
not so much as find room in the imaginations of men. [Ch. 16.. 7. ending.] Now
therefore good Readers, prepare to make clean and rid your imaginations, for
lo this Battery is planted.

First, He begins in [ 8.] That they prefer the Planets before the fixed Stars
is without all reason, the Planets being but Heaps of dead matter, much like
that of Earth, and having no light but what they borrow from the Sun. For that
which seems to be the innate light of the Moon, is but the reflection of the Sun
's beams from the Earth. Wherefore their activity and influence may justly seem
less then that of the fixed Stars, which shine with innate and not borrowed
light.] This is the first Battery, have at your imaginations good people
therefore: For be the fixed Stars to be preferred above the Planets, woe be to
us, we are gone. But hark a little, how does he argue! The Planets are Heaps
of dead matter, much like that of Earth, but the fixed Stars are not so. But
how came the Doctor to know thus much I trow! was he ever up so high as the
third or second Heaven to see these things that he is so peremptory at it, that
they are so? Or has he had private conference with St. Paul concerning those
things unspeakeable (as he told us in public) in these Heavens so high? Or if
neither, 2 Cor. 13.3, 4.
did not some wandering Demons of the Air bring him the Intelligence? Which if
perhaps so, yet good people take heed your imaginations be not fooled, for the
Devils are Liars never to be believed. But what seems most likely is, as he
said before, some late Philosophers have said so, [Ch. 16., 1.] And the Doctor
himself cries, it is highly probable, or as much as to say I think so. What tame
imaginations I marvail a^ those which must be cleared of all room for Astrology
with such pitiful Batteries as the Doctor's [ Think so's?] But let me beg the
favor of the Gentlemen before they clear the room to spend an Ha ha ha or two
upon these pretty Batteries, which are like throwing stones at the Wind and
never touch it. But what do we talk for, it may be the Planets are but dead
matter, for some say it is like enough so. Yea, but says another, will the
Doctor himself swear it, for else no body is able to witness it. For in good
earnest, I am willing enough my self to have it so, if it could be proved: And
it may be I think so too, but what the better! Well, go on Doctor.

Secondly, (says he) They have no light but what they borrow from the Sun. But
how prove^ he this? For that which seems to be the in^a^ light of the Moon, is
but the reflection of the Sun 's beams from the Earth.] But before we answer
this, let the Doctor remember [Ch. 16.. 3.] where his own Worship avers, That
it is an insufferable folly to argue from such reasonable and palpable effects
of the Moon that the other Planets also are the same, which yet we can
deprehend by neither reason nor experience.] Here now it is come home to him.
The Moon (says he) has no innate light, but what she borrows, this is
reasonable and palpable, but what reason or experience can deprehend, that and
must therefore have none also? Oh the insufferable folly therefore of the
Doctor's own Worship, and of these great Batteries. Now therefore aware your
imaginations Gentlemen, or he will leave you no room in them for Astrology! For
these are dangerous Arguments.

But Thirdly, The fixed Stars have an innate light. That is, the Doctor thinks
so* For he has no other proof. And therefore their activity and influence is
greater then that of the Planets. The Atheist thinks there is no God; and
therefore for certain there can be no room for any in the imaginations of men.
Some think the Pope is a Fool, and that the Grand-Signior is a Madman; and
therefore for certain they are so. Some think Doctor More to be a mere Whim;
and some think More to be derived from the Greek word (...), and therefore for
certain it is so. But what do we talk, all men's thinks are not to be compared
with the Doctor's? However were it so, that the fixed Stars are to be preferred
for matter of light, or magnitude, above some of the Planets, and that the
Planets were really nothing but dead matter like the Earth, yet as to their
activity and influence upon us, by reason of their moveable faculty, and their
virtue such as it is, more nearly apt to suit with, and to make impression upon
our Bodies which are neither light nor Air, but rather Earth; they are
undoubtedly to be preferred as the greatest Agents at least, if not the noblest
Bodies.

Doctor's Batteries strike thick, and what they cannot do by force, they will
endeavor to compass by multitude of blows. For in the same Section he comes on
again and argues, That for the quality of the Planets, they define the Sun hot
and moist, rather then dry, but hot and dry, parching, etc. And then concludes,
Impudent Impostors! What will they not dare to intrude upon us, when they will
vent such stuff as is liable to confutation by our Senses.] I marry Sir, here is
the main Battery. ^sa. 28.15.
We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves, said
they in Isaiah, so as Hell shall not hurt us, nor the overflowing scourge come
at us. I will not say the Doctor lies, but I am sure it is false that he says,
Astrologers holding no such thing, as that either is hot and moist, or that is
parching dry. Now indeed, will a man's Conscience serve him, or his Genius lead
him to poison his arrows thus, no wonder if he fire out Astrology from forth
the imaginations of men. For by this kind of Battery, may a man coin the
Heavens to be mere Hell, and Hell to be Heaven.

Thirdly, He argues saying, all the Planets are Opake Bodies, and whatever
their color is, are as cold as Earth; for neither yellow nor red clay cast any
more heat then white. Wherefore a shamless foolery to pronounce hot and dry,
and cold and dry. And since, from these they are reputed benign and malignant,
Masculine or Feminine, etc. All this part of their pretended Science is but a
Rhapsody of Fooleries also.] Here Is another Battery now half as good as the
last. I cannot say the Doctor lies indeed, but I am sure he does not know that
he tells true. And some say it is tanta-mount to a lie, when men so confidently
affirm for truth, that which they know not whether it be true or false, yea
though it should happen to be never so true. And yet should it be all as true,
as confidently he avers: Yet what would it boot him! For if be not hot and dry
as is the Sun, or as Fire, neither do we pretend so: Only as Pepper or Salt, he
operates an internal heat. And so an internal cold. Also were all the Planets
mere Opake Bodies, why may they not be Male and Female notwithstanding, as well
as the Male and Female Orchis, or the Male and Female Ash or Holy-trees! And
why not Benign and Malignant, as well as a Cherry is one, and a Crab is the
other, and yet both are Opake Bodies. And yet no Rhapsody of Fooleries in
either. Only the Doctor delights to hear his whole Lecture of ^ailery full out.
And now have I answered to the whole rabble of his Discourse, concerning the
foolery of Astrology as he alleges, because the Principles of it are
groundless and frivolous. I will not say with what a clatter (as he talks) his
Arguments are fallen to dust. No, I leave it to the Reader rather, to take it
as he likes, and let him judge as he please. Only I humbly guess, that hitherto
Astrology is free enough from foil, and that all wise men will say as much.

vanity or foolery of Astrology, is, that it is Contradictions. And this
Contradictiousness he only hints in [Ch. 16.. 9.] Here to that of the Earth's
being so pervious to the influence of the Stars and Planets, He says,

First, That it is a Principle without Proof.

And Secondly, That if he give's it us, we must be fain to vomit it up again,
it being destructive to our whole Art. For if the Rays and Influences of the
Stars and Planets have free passage through the body of the Earth, the whole
Ceremony of erecting a Scheme for such a Longitude and Latitude is medless; nay
as to the Heavens the Fate of all men would be alike. For that hidden Influence
which governs all, would reach to all points, from all parts of Heaven at once.]

As to the First, That it is a Principle without proof, it has been sufficiently
handled in the fourth Section of this Chapter.

In the Second, lies that Contradictiousness he speaks of. As if the Influence
of the Planets could not be able to pierce the Body of the Earth, without
influencing all parts of the Earth ali^^. It is apparent by relation of them
who know it, that the influence of the weapon-salve peirceth through the Air an
hundred Miles and more, and yet neither works upon the Air, nor any kind of
wound in that Air, save only that one* which is related to the knife whereon it
is applied. So the Pole Star though it pierce the body of the Earth, yet
affects nothing but the Magnetical Needles, which seem to be of its near
Relation. So also the Plaster upon a Sore, attracts not the blood, but the
corrupt matter only out of the wound, although it searches equally into the
flesh amongst the sound as well as the rotten flesh. And why may not the
Planets then, although they pierce the whole Earth through and through, yet
single out each one their peculiar Objects, and each influence of every Planet
find out their own proper Relations to work upon, and all this without any the
least contradiction?

a foolery, because built upon a false Hypothesis. Now this false Hypothesis is
that which he treats on in [. 10.] And after a fit of conceited merriment, and
flim flam jests, he goes on laughing and saying to himself, [ The best jest of
all is, that there is no such Zodiac in Heaven, or if you will, no Heaven, for
such a Zodiac as these Artists attribute these Triplicities to. For this
Heaven and this Zodiac we speak of, is an old error of Ptolomie 's and his
followers, who not understanding the true Systeme of the World, and the motion
of the Earth, in which is salved the Anticipation of the AEquinoxes, have
phancied an Heaven above the Coelum Stellatum, and a Zodiac that did not
recede from West to East, as the starry Zodiac does. And this figment which
later Ages have laughed off of the Stage, is the only subject of these ^ned
Trigons and Triplicities, which therefore are justly laughed off of the Stage
with it. Which discovery is a demonstration that the whole Art of Astrology is
built but upon frivolous and mere imaginary Principles, as we shall farther
make manifest.] What a crowd of Forgeries are here met together!

First, There Is no such Zodiac in Heaven, (says he.) This is a very confident
one, all Astronomers agreeing to the contrary, that there is such an one. Now
this Zodiac is a certain imaginary Circle, which cutting the Equator in two
parts, carries some 20 degrees of breadth, and coasting along with certain
fixed Stars called the 12 Constellations of the Zodiac, some ^ degrees and odd
minutes on each side the Ecliptic line, vergeth to the North and South of the
AEquin^^, some 23 degrees and somewhat above an half. And whether you follow the
Systeme of the World Ptolomean, Copernican, Argol. Astron. B. 1. Chapter ^1.
or Tychonick, it still admits of the same description. And yet lo the strange
confidence of the Doctor, as if there were no such thing* He Will say perhaps, It
is but an imaginary Circle, and therefore nothing real. But if so, yet still is
he out, for it is a real space of place in Heaven according to the measure of
the Circle.

Secondly, That this Zodiac we speak of, is an old error of Ptolomie's.] This
is false too.

For First, It was an Opinion many Ages ^lder then Ptolomy.

Secondly, There is no certainty to this day, that it is an error, there being
so many of the learned still (...) ^is way against Copernicus.

Thirdly, Let the Systeme of the World be how 'twill, the Zodiacal Circle is
every way the same, and void of any error. And whether there be an Heaven
above the Starry Heaven, or no such Heaven, the Zodiac still keeps along its
12 Constellations.

Thirdly, That this Figment the later Ages (...) laughed off of the Stage.]
This is false too. For within this few years is come forth a learned Tract of
Doctor Harvey's pleading for the Earth, and not the Sun, to be the World's
Center.

Fourthly, That the Astrological Triplicities and Trigons are laughed off of
the Stage too.] This is true as the other.

Lastly, That this discovery is a demonstration that the whole Art of Astrology
stands but upon frivolous and mere imaginary Principles.] Thus fondly conceits
this ranting Doctor, and yet most of the late Astrologers are inclining to the
Copernican Systeme. I am so my self, and yet find not the least concern in it
to the contrary of the Astrological Principles, nor can any man else, saving
the Doctor's mere Figments, and fond Inventions, as if he knew not else what to
say, and was fain to bring up these stories merely to make up a [ say on.] And
yet with a most abominable begging of the question, he goes on tumbling Heaven
and Earth confusedly together, as if all were truth, that he could invent.

Division of the Signs. Good man he would fain set all to rights, and therefore
great pains he takes to sort them in their true places. The Solstitial Signs he
finds are not safely called moveable, but ought rather to be styled fixed. And
truly I like the man, that when he finds an error, will tell me on it so
freely. But how proves he this? In my apprehension (says he!) Ah peascods on
it, that spoils all! What? One Doctor's Opinion, against the Observation of all
Ages? out upon it for shame! But we will wink at small matters (says he.] Yea
truly, in my apprehension he should have said. For in my apprehension, his
Batteries will down with Astrology at long run, yea, no room for it in man's
imagination. But that of the Trigons is more notorious with him. It makes him
smile again. A good merry Doctor, I like such company truly. He has it out of
Dariot, how the (...) and Ascendent in fiery Signs, comfort the Virtue
Attractive, in Earthy the Retentive, in Aerie the Digestive, and in Watery the
Expulsive.] We said, Dariot was a Physician, and he honestly gives an account
of his experience. But let the Doctor be merry, Ha, Ha, He, what has he against
this? Mum mum for a Plum, not a word of Argument. Only showing his teeth with a
kind of envious grin, Would any man dare to administer Physic then, without
consulting the precepts of Astrology? Why? Dariot hinders not, administer what
every man please, only he advises, that Astrology would be a good help. Then
comes he to Husbandry, and there he flings at Sir Christopher Heydon, That Is a
notorious one, (says he) who tells us how we may set a Plant to shoot deep into
the Earth, or higher into the Air, by setting it at such an Aspect of the Moon.
Namely, if the Moon be in an Earthy Triplicity, the Root will shoot more
downwards, if in an Aerie, more into the Air.] And then he smiles, saying [ a
rare secret!] As if no such matter. But good Doctor speak softly, for should
some experienced man of the Spade, but hear your want of Wit, he would throw
dirt upon your Worships Gown. For thus Dogs bark at the Moon, whilst wise men
give God praise for her. Next it came into his head to talk of the 4 Trigons,
and holding on still in his merry vein he went on laughing, till he fell down
backwards, and hitting his head against the Zodiac, he knew not where he was,
and then began to talk at random. It came (it seems) into his muddy Pate how
all the four Elements flew up into Heaven, and took their places in their
respective Triplicities in the Zodiac with great agility, playing at
leap-frog, and skipping over one another Backs in such sort, that dividing
themselves into three equal parts, every Triental of an Element found it self a
fellow member of a Tri^ Aspect. But the best jest of all was (says he,) etc.
And here falling backwards it was, that he fell into the mad stories of the
Zodiac, as I had them in the last Section. Thus he goes about to batter
Astrology out of the imaginations of men, neither with Sword nor Buckler, nor
dint of Argument, but by mere loud laughter, and thus the Boys use to fright
away the Crows. And thus Cajus Caligula overcame the Cockle-shells, when the
Sea was gone.

Essential Dignities of the Planets. And because this is nothing else but the
increase of a Planets innate virtue, by being in such or such a Sign, and these
being the Signs of the Zodiac* He answers, There is no such Zodiac in Heaven,
neither is it any thing. And therefore is it manifest that the whole Doctrine
of Essential Dignities falls to the ground. But oh the wretched Beggar! If he
do but harbor an imagination in his brain, presently it must be granted that
it cannot be otherwise.

First, As for the Houses of Planets; it seems this learned Philosopher had
been hammering out the reasons of those Houses, and because something came into
his head, which seemed to himself pretty, as to say why should be the House of,
and the House of. The learned man immediately concluded, that there could be no
other reason but what himself had started for either one or the other; and
because himself could find none, that therefore for the Houses of the other
Planets there was none. And thence cries out, how from his small hints and
mistakes of reason, they have without all reason and sense bestowed Houses on
the rest of the Planets, guiding themselves by the conceit of the benignity and
malignity of Aspects. Thus strangely abounds the Doctor in his own sense,
concluding all the utmost of our reasonings not to extend one tittle farther
then just as he imagins. And as if it could not possibly be otherwise, without
any the lest resemblance of an Argument against these Essential Dignities
called the Houses of the Planets beyond his own mere ipse dixit. He concludes
positively that all is without sense and reason. Truly, this is a notable
Battery of the Doctor's, and would be of great force, should it be but planted
against Spiders Webs. The Benignity and Malignity of Aspects, he has noted
already, it having no ground, but the rash joining together of critical days,
with the Aspects of the Moon.] And for this he quotes [. 7. of the same
Chapter:] And this I have answered already too, save only that it is worth
observance how the Doctor measures out the wits and reasonings of all
Astrologers, by his own head-peice, our wits may not jump one hairs breadth
beyond just as it comes into his whimsical brain. Next as for the Dignity of [
Exaltation.] This must be but a small preferment:] And why? But because
Albumanar makes the and which are but imaginary Circles of the Moon 's course
through the Ecliptic, to have their Exaltations too, as well as the Planets.
Here now seems something like an Argument, but then all the strength of it
depends on this, how absurd it is to think that imaginary Circles should have
their Exaltations! But consider,

First, These Circles, which to us are but imaginary, because we cannot fix our
eyes upon the places of them; Yet are in themselves no imaginary, but real
points of the Firmament of Heaven, as the knee is a real part of a man's Body.

Secondly, As the parts of the Earth have their several virtues, as some do
naturally and aptly bring forth Fur, others Broom, and others Fern, so these
parts of the Heavens have also their several operations.

Lastly, As any part of the Earth is made more fruitful by means of compass,
dung or soil applied to the mending thereof; even so this point of the
Ecliptic, where the Moon makes her passage over it, is found extraordinarily
exceeding in operation above the other parts of the Ecliptic: But when this
passage of the Moon happens to fall out in the Sign of and, and especially in
the third degree of either; then appears it, that the in the one, and the in
the other, has more then ordinary operation, which is called their Exaltation:
And the truth of this is evident by the same kind of experience, as is that of
the virtue of the weapon-salve, or as those are of any of the potions or
Medicines commended to us by our Physicians. And now if we have a real
experience of the and, that they have their Exaltations in their operations,
and the Doctor knows nothing to the contrary, but this Ha, ha, he, what then
shall his Battery avail him against the Essential Dignities, either of the
Planets, or the Moon's Nodes, called their Exaltation.

Thirdly, As for the Lords of the Trigons, he calls them the foolery of the
Trigons, and why! Because 'twas pity there were not just Planets, that each
Trigon might have had its two Consuls, and not rule solitary in his watery one.]
This is like a man that would confute the Doctrine of the Antipodes, by crying
[ Pish:] For about so much does this Battery of the Doctor's amount to, and no
more.

Fourthly, As for the (...) Their prerogative (he says) is destroyed by the
first general Argument, because the parts of the Sign are as fictitious as the
whole.] When the Doctor is at a full point, as his Ha hah will extend no
farther, then flies he to the main shift, That there is no Zodiac, or that the
Signs of the Zodiac are all but mere imaginary things.] But whatever they are
imaginary to us, who never ascended up so high as to observe the bound-marks of
the several Signs; yet for certain, there is an Heaven as no man can deny: And
if there be an Heaven, then may this Heaven be divided into parts, and that as
well into twelve equal parts, as well as two, and this all men must confess.
And if so, then every of those twelve parts may be also subdivided into thirty
equal parts, by the same general confession, and every one of those twelve, and
those 30 parts, must be as really the parts of Heaven, as Heaven it self is a
real, and no imaginary Body. And if the whole, and parts be real, then are they
no such fictitious things, as the Doctor's whimsi's do imagine. But it may be
the Doctor spites the Images only of the Signs, as the Ram, and the Lion, and
the rest; perhaps his faith is not so strong as to believe there is any such
thing as a Ram or Lion in Heaven. Neither do the Quakers believe there is any
such day in the Week as Sunday, or Monday. We Will therefore comply with weak
Consciences for this once. Let it be the first day, and second day, instead of
Sunday, and Monday. And let it be the first 30 degrees after the AEquinox, and
then the second 30, etc, and not,, nor the rest, will that please? Or if it may
not be the Constellation of the Ram, or the Bull, let it be a certain number of
Stars in such and such forms imagined in the shape of a Ram, and a Bull. Or it
may be he thinks of the Heavens, as a Shepherd on Grimsbury Green did of the
Sea, who when he heard of a Merchant how he sailed so many Leagues upon the
Waters, and inquiring what those Leagues were, was answered, That they were
imaginary distances in their Sailing, he presently concluded that the Sea was
therefore imaginary, and so was the Ship they sailed in, and finally he would
have concluded the Merchant himself imaginary too, if he had not drew his
Sword, and frighted him into the Faith, that he was really some body. But for
want of such a sensible Argument the Doctor goes madly on in a kind of
Enthusiastic humor, and concludes, That the Heaven is nothing, and the parts
of Heaven are nothing, and therefore the dignity of Carpentum, or the Royal
Seat is a mere nothing, and Al^gen is as little as nothing, and that the Lords
of the Decanats is but a frippery, or a pretty kind of strange I know not what;
for frippery is a pretty word whose meaning every round Cap do^ not understand.
Lastly as for Gaudium, he charges it with two falsities supposed by it.

First, As if there were Houses. And

Secondly, As if Planets were Masculine and Feminine* which supposition's
already confuted.] Now how he has confuted the first is fresh in memory, and
therefore the galled place needs no rubbing. As for the second, with great
pains taking, I have at length found out the place where the confutation was
made, and it appears in [. 8. of this Chapter:] Where he argues thus, All the
Planets are Opake Bodies, and whatever their color is, are as cold as Earth:
And therefore to call them Masculine or Feminine is a Rhapsody of Fooleries.]

First, I deny his Assumption to be satisfactory, let him make that out, how he
came to know the Planets to be all Opake Bodies (no not the Sun excepted.) Next
the consequence is insufferable, that if it were so, yet that they cannot
therefore be Male and Female. Ash Trees are Opake Bodies without dispute, and
yet by all Herbalists are allowed to be Male and Female, the one bearing Seed,
the other none. And yet see how confident the Philosopher is, They are already
confuted! And all the Essential fortitudes of the Planets are nothing else but
the telling out so many Nullities to no purpose.] But for such stories as
these, I have seen many a Boy whipped: They would say all was nothing, when they
had told twenty lies, 'till as many smart jerks upon their bare Buttocks made
them to feel the truth.

Accidental Dignities and Debilities: Where in the first place Cazimi and
Combustion seems to ^^st the weight of his displeasure.

And First, It is unreasonable (he says) that a Planet in Cazimi should gain
five Fortitudes; and that

First, Because and in with, (...) beyond the Sun from us a whole Diameter of
the Sun 's Orbit in distance more then when they are in to him, and and are
farther distant by half of their own.] But behold how improvidently the Doctor
argues, never once remembering and considering the purity of the Celestial
Bodies, or whether he does not yet understand it, how that above or beyond the
there is no more vanity, nor corruption therefore, and therefore no hard Rocks,
nor thick Mountains, nor so much as a cold Cloud, that can be once able to
slacken the Force of their Influences; and therefore the distance of Situation
can no ways impede the force of their operation, as is apparently seen by the,
which never receives more light and force of Solar Virtue, then when she is
farthest from him.

Secondly, He stumbles again, How can their virtue pass the Body of the Sun?]
This is answered as before, the Sun also is a pure and thin Body as the Air,
through which therefore the influences of the superior Planets do aptly pierce
without any obstruction, any more then through the pure matter of Heaven it self.

Thirdly, He inquires yet again, How can the Influence pass against the bearing
of the vortex against the Planet, and against us, and all the attempts of
Influence from the Planet, and not be eluded?] Now talks he like a man utterly
unskilled in the Trade, not knowing it seems, that the Planets in do comply,
and not at all clash Influences.

Fourthly, He would know once more, If Cazimi on this side the Sun be good, why
beyond the Sun it should not be bad?] Because Cazimi works a perfect compliance
betwixt the Sun, and the Planet in Cazimi; be the Planet above the Sun, the
readily receives his beams; and be the Planet on this side, that as readily
receives his beams through its own Body.

But Fifthly, Not yet satisfied, he cries, If and in the Sun be of such moment,
why not the spots in the Sun which are far greater?] This he takes to be a rare
argument, and hugs himself in the conceit, laughing to himself, as if our
ignorance had never thought of that Objection, until of his own starting! But I
rather wonder how so great a Philosopher as the Doctor, should be thus taken
with the wagging of a straw! For does not every Scullion Girl know the
difference between a blemish and a beauty spot, though both at once in the same
face! Or between a mere dead patch, and an operative plaster! Or between an
hole in a Wall, and a man standing against the Wall, although at some distance,
each seems alike of a dark color.

But Sixthly, and chiefly, His wonderment is taken up how Cazimi can have and
deserve five Fortitudes, and Combustion which is but a little distant should be
cumbred with as many debilities! And yet free of Combustion, which is but a
little more remove, should have five Fortitudes again?] Things so arbitrarious
(he says) and groundless as none but sickbrain'd Persons can believe them.] But
alas, I pity the good Doctor, (for what the reason is, I am somewhat to seek, as
not knowing the man, but) he seems himself strangely sick-brain'd, as if at
sometimes of the Moon he were not Capax mentis, for otherwise do doubt but the
man is Scholar enough. For were it not so, he would have bethought himself,
that a Walnut is first bitter on the outside unto 9 degrees of distaste unto the
Palate, and yet dig through that outward rind unto the kernel, and you have as
many degrees of good taste, and lastly, you are no sooner passed the kernel but
you arrive at the 5 degrees of distaste again. Lo how Nature has proposed him
an every days pattern plain and common, of her more curious and secret
Contrives! And yet see how the Doctor falls to wondering and exclaiming at that
which a Boy of five years of age knows to be a plain case! Look but into an
Honeycomb where the pots stand as thick as can be set each by other, and yet
may be seen one fortified with Honey as full and sweet as one would wish, and
the very next debilitated by reason of the stinging Be in it; as venomous as
one would think could be hardly possible for such a little Creature to bring
forth, and yet the very next pot as full of Honey again. Or behold but the
Rosy bush, how it is set with now a sweet Rose, and next an offensive prickle,
and then a Rose again. Why then wonder we, that in the Heaven there should be
the like! But if the Doctor cannot apprehend so much just in his whimsical
Mood, let him take a nap, and by that he wakes again, it will be plain to him.
But again he is cumbred, That also is notoriously foolish, (says he) that and
from their with, unto their, should have two Fortitudes, and yet from to again,
they should have as many debilities. For in a great part of that Semicircle
which carries from to, they are far nearer, and therefore much stronger then in
the beginning of that Semicircle which leads from to.] Here he bewrays more of
his old ignorance, as if the fortitude of the Planets stood merely upon their
nearness in distance, which is no such matter. For it is not in Heaven as on
Earth, nor with the Planets as with Fire, which heats most as we approach
nearest. Next he quarrels at the fortitudes and debilities of Direct,
Stationary and Retrogade, as if grounded on a mistake of the System of the
World, and ignorance of the Earth's annual motition, and from an Idiotick
application of accidents or phrases amongst men, etc. And therefore must
Stationary be two debilities, Retrogade no less then five, but Direct five
Fortitudes, whereas in reason Stationary should seal on the effect of the
Planet more sure. But the truth is, a Planet is neither Stationary nor
Retrogade, but in appearance only, and therefore these debilities are but
imaginary.] We have had even enough of the Doctor's own Ignorance and Idleness
too, concerning this discourse of the mistaking the Systeme of the World, and
truly there is no need of rubbing the sore place over again. As for his
Idiotick Phrases, they are very fit resemblances, but sure the Doctor is not so
simple, as in good earnest to suppose us by any such, led into a mistake as he
alleges, whatever he says. His chief weight of Argument falls heaviest upon
the Stationary debility, as if the delay of the Planet in a place, should seal
the surer effect. Here the Dr. declares himself a Copernican.
But experience and reason joining together, do evidence the contrary, namely
that the Stationary Planet is standed in the influence of his virtues, as well
as of his Body, during that station. And whereas he deny's that the Planet is
ever Stationary or Retrograde, save only in appearance, it is not so. For
although the Planet of it self make no returns, but is always moving directly
on, yet going round his Circle, after he has passed his utmost distance as we
stand, he really returns upon us in his preambulation, and the time between
this going on and return, is unto us a real Station, his motion looking upon us
for some days* altogether from the very same point. But however were the
Retrogradation and Station no more but in a mere appearance, yet does it not
follow but the debilities arising from that appearance shall be real, and not
imaginary. Lastly, against the dignity of Sextiles and Trines he alleges, that
it is utterly unreasonable to conceive, that the and should be good, and yet
that if which is betwixt both, should be stark naught; or at least, if and be
good, it is far more reasonable, that should be better then, as being farther
from, and because the Planets thus Aspected, are in better capacity both of
them, with more direct Rays to strike on the Earth, then if they were in a
Aspect.] After this rate talks the foolish people upon the Bay of Sultania and
other places, upon the Coasts of Africa, who knowing nothing of the value of
Gold, do alledg that Brass is better, and will give more in exchange for it.
Thus Children too, do prefer Counters before the Silver Coin, and Brass beads
before real Pearl. And the Dunghill Cock valued one Barley Corn more worth then
a Jewel. So miserable a thing it is for the greatest Scholars when they fall
into matters they understand not; for their reasons therein being led away by
mere seem so's, their discourse many times savour's much more of the long eared
Creatures, then of themselves. For do but observe him, a cannot be stark naught
because betwixt a and. Neither can a Sr. Reverence stink that lies upon a Bed
of Violets; nor can that Creature be an Ass which stands betwixt two men. But
however the must be better then, because and being good, the is farther from,
which is bad, then the is. After the same rate, the dwelling House being good,
the Jakes must be better then the Garden, because farther from the Dunghill
which is bad. But the Aspect strikes better upon the Earth with direct Rays,
and therefore best.] But the Aspect strikes better, and with more direct Rays,
and therefore by the same rule, should be best of all! I wonder how the Doctor
having so many years made it his business to study Philosophy happened to
stumble these so many times together thus! Certainly this Anti-Astrological
piece was hatched under that great unquietness of some acute Disease he talks
of, or was it rather under some or full Moon? Now the truth is, besides all
this whimsical kind of reasoning, the Doctor is utterly fictitious in his
charge. For the Astrologers do not count the Aspect stark naught. For first,
they hold it better then the, and the Aspects of the Fortunes in some senses
are very good.

twelve Houses: Which he says is arbitrarious. And why so, unless it be in that
the Doctor does not understand the reason of them. Next he charges us, that the
success of our Schemes is not upon Art but Fortuitous, and why? but because it
may be drawn so many ways, and all with the like success.] But why names he not
these many ways? For either these many ways are all the same in effect, and
then the Doctor's Consequence is false. Or else they are not the same in
effect, and then the Doctor's allegation is as utterly untrue as a very lie is.

Thirdly, He alleges that our Configuration of the Houses is but a figment,
because going upon that false Hypothesis of Ptolomy, that the Planets and the
Earth have not the to their Center.] This is also an horrible falsehood. For our
Configuration of the Houses depends no more upon that of Ptolomy, then it does
upon the Hypothesis of Copernicus, but equally serves either way. But hear him
out I pray you, for this is not all (it seems) which he has to say against our
Celestial Tenements. For either the Earth is pervious to all the Rays of the
Planets and Stars, as well beneath as above the Horizon, or only they above the
Horizon shed their virtue on the Child. If the former be true, all Nativities
are alike, if the later, why have they any more then six Houses, and why any at
all under the Horizon? And in good sadness, what is their meaning that their
Horoscope and the 6th. House being Houses of so great concernment, should be
under the Horizon; especially when they are pleased at other times to
pronounce, that a Star or Planet that is vertical is most efficacious.] To this
we answer, The Earth is pervious to all the Rays of the Planets and Stars, as
well beneath as above the Horizon. And yet does it not follow, that all
Nativities are alike. For is it not plain, that all kinds of Plants are
pervious to the virtues and influences of the same Earth? and yet how fat off
are they from being all alike, or from bringing forth their leaves or flowers
alike? Does the Vine bear Roses, or the Rose-Tree Grapes? speak good Doctor,
why do they not so, seeing both are equally pervious to the influences, both of
the same Earth, and the same Sun? Now suppose we, a man who talks thus contrary
to the plain effects of Nature, either he has not well studied and digested
what he delivers upon Record, and then is he one of those whom the World
usually styles temerarious Lack-wits alias Fools; or else he delivers purposely
what he knows to the contrary, and then is one of them whom the World calls
Cheaters and Knaves. Vtrum horum mavis accipe. But why the Horoscope under
ground! being an House of Consequence, seeing a Planet is most efficacious,
when most vertical? How strangely thick-skin'd this Doctor would fain seem unto
the World! Why he may understand that as to matters of honor, a Star is most
efficacious when vertical, but as to matter of Life and Nature, he is most
efficacious as he ascends, because as he says himself, he arises from thence as
if new born into the World.

time of a Nativity. I say (says he) it is a curiosity, nothing to the purpose,
to know the very moment when the Child is born.

First, Because the thin covering of the Womb is penetrated continually by the
power of the Stars, the Child in the Womb is as much exposed to them, as when
new born.] This is utterly unnatural, as much as for a Thistle to bring forth
Violets. For the Planets take their charge every one of them in order. And unto
every new employment they receive a new charge. A Child in the Womb is but an
Appendix to the Mother, and is nourished by the blood which nourishes herself,
as if a part of herself 'til separated from her. At the time of Conception
therefore, the Stars can have no farther charge of their Nursery then while it
is in the Womb fixed unto the Body of the Mother. But so soon as the Child
draws breath of its own, the former employment of the Heavens upon it being
ended, a new begins, and so the employment of the Stars upon the Child begins
immediately, as it draws it is breath.

Secondly, He urge's, How hard and lubricous a matter is it to come to that
exactness, which they pretend to be requisite.

First, Because they must know the exact longitude of the place, (a thing of
extreme uncertainty,) or else the exactness of time does no good.] The exact
Longitude matters us not, therefore that is false. The Latitude does, but that
it is so extreme uncertain as the Doctor alleges is false again. Or if there
were some small uncertainty of exact Minutes, they break no squares as to any
sensible Errors.

Secondly, Because our affectation of the exact time is ridiculous, in regard
the Child is born by degrees.] But the Child does not draw it is breath by
degrees, nor is the Navil-string cut off from the Womb by degrees, and
therefore the objection is ridiculous only. But how shall this moment be known
(says his Worship.) By a Minute Watch? But how if they have none, or be not in
the same room? Then must they believe the Midwife.] Yes, Mr. Doctor they must
so, and a very pleasant story your Worship tells, and it is true. But how many
Nativities have been cast without that? say you. Your Worship may go count
them, say I. And yet will they confidently predict Fates and Destinies, upon a
certain time given them? you say. And it may be so, what is next? Well, I know
where his Shoo pinches; It greives him it seems that we have rules and ways to
find out a time uncertain, as if it were most certain, as it appears really to
be by our rules of Art.

Trutine and Animodar as he exclaimes, (although we know the worth of those
matters, is beyond his reach,) and come we to treat with him of the way of
correcting a Scheme by Accidents only. This (says he) at first sight is
Lubricous, Because for his part he thinks it demonstrable from inward Sense,
Reason and Holy Writ, that there is Free Will in men. Whence it will follow,
Quod multa accidunt hominibus praeter naturam praeterque fatum: and therefore
Diseases, Imprisonments, Disgrace, and Preferment may be brought upon us by the
free Agency of others, or our selves, and that sooner or later, according as
men's Virtues or Vices act. Which takes away all certainty of Computation, by
accidentia Nati.] This may most of it be granted unto the very last Consequence
and Conclusion, that therefore it takes away all certainty, etc. For thus far
agrees our Maxim in Astrology, Sapiens dominabitur Astris. But to comply with
the Doctor's slackness of apprehension in this sort of learning, I Will make it
appear to him by examples of his own challenging.

And First, As for Diseases, and particularly to instance in a Fever, as the
malevolent Aspect of draws on, it corrupts the Food we take, in its turning
into blood, and thence working by this corrupted blood, disturbances follow in
the Heart and Head, and the other parts of the Body, all which, no free Agency
is possibly able to prevent: But now besides this, together with this
corrupting influence the Planet also works a certain promptitude unto excess,
in taking in meats, and that especially in desire after such kind of meats as
naturally heighten and inflame the Distemper. And here is it, that the free
agency of man lies, Sapiens dominabitur etc. A wise man can rule the Stars,
that is, he can deny himself when he feels a promptness to such things as will
certainly harm him, and thus by striving against this part of the Influence he
absteins, and by accustoming himself thereto, begets an habit of abstinence,
and by virtue of that habit he abates much of the Diseases force, whence it
becomes far less then otherwise it would have been, and it comes not until
later, and ends sooner then else it would have done. Whereas contrarily, a Fool
by yiedling to the influence, heightens and hastens the Distemper. But yet
notwithstanding, all the wise man's skill and power of Free Will, the body of
the Disease abides, and cannot be avoided. And here lies the accident, which
maugre the Doctor's envy, finds out the time of Birth aright. And then for
matter of Imprisonment; as the malevolent Aspects of such Planets, which have
power to that effect, draw on, all the man's Words, Gestures and Actions tend
so unluckily as to beget differences with Authority in him, and to subject him
unto the frowns of the same, and with all such an unluckiness encounters the
meeting of all his affairs, that beyond expectation, each step hastens on the
Fate of his restraint. And this although wise men may mitigate, and Fools
exasperate, yet no man can wholly evade. This therefore is another sure accident
which no free Agency is possibly able to undo. Once more, as for matter of
Preferment, As the good Aspects come on, a certain luckiness accompanies each
affair, so as all things, words and acts drive it on. And now suppose we the
man never so debauched with wickedness and folly, however he may disgrace and
somewhat harm his good Fortunes, yet overturn it he cannot, no though himself
will's it, yet comes it upon him as it were with a kind of defiance. A wise man
may add to his preferment, by compliance with his good Stars, and here a free
Agent would interrupt and defeat him by lies or treachery, or assault, or stab,
of any such like: But then his good Stars defends him with such a luck, as
every plot to the contrary is defeated by them. Nay these good Stars will many
times so operate upon the turns and constructions of Affairs, as the thus
rising Subject shall be cleared of all Evil-willers, that can intend him harm
by making them friends. And thus the Subject of preferment has his Free Will,
and all persons he has to do with have theirs, and that without any the lest
interruption, and yet this preferment drives on as it were in despite of all
free Agency. But then in [. 16.] the Doctor has another fling at the manner of
working out the time of Birth from these Accidents, which he exclaims against
as very frivolous. This manner of working (he says) is either by Profection,
Transition, or Direction. Against these he rails,

First, Altogether, calling them mere Phancy's and Figments. And then against
Profection in particular, he falls fowl, saying, Is it any where but in their
own brain? But produces nothing of absurdity against it, and therefore needs no
answer to it.

Secondly, As for Transition, he cries O monstrous at it, that a Planet by
passing the same place in which it self or other Planets were at the Nativity,
should cause some notable change in the party born! As if the Planets walked
the rounds with perfumed Socks, or that they smelt stronger at the Nativity,
then at other times, and that another Planet come into the place thereof,
should exult in the Scent, or the same increase the Smell: Or what is it can
adhere in these points of Heaven, that the Planets were found in, at the
Nativity? Or why is not the whole Tract of the same scent? Or why not expunged
by the passage of other Planets?] I will not say the Doctor talks idely, but I
am sure thus Fools use to argue the Case, that is, when they meet with matters
above their understanding, yet as men wise in their own Conceits, and unwilling
to confess their ignorance, they measure all by what they know, as if the Moon
were nothing but a mere green Cheese, and the Stars as so many Silver spangles,
and the Sun some flaming Pitch-barrel upon an high Beacon. At this rate was a
certain Quaker's answer I have heard tell of, who undertaking to know all
mysteries of Holy Writ, was asked, What were the Pleiades, Arcturus and Orion,
spoken of in Job. Correcting the Proposer of the Question, he answered, They
were not Ple-iades, but Ple-jades, and that he was a certain Heathen
Philosopher, and so were Arcturus, and Orion his fellows. Thus the Doctor
having well red himself in the following hounds, conceits the Sun, Moon and
Stars to be all lovers of the same sport, and may I make bold to guess at his
reasons therefore, as he uses to determine ours, for what we say: It seems, as
if the humor entered his Brain, because he had heard tell of a Celestial
Hare, and of Orion and his Dogs in pursuit of her in the Heavens, and why
should not all Stars love the Doctor's sport, as well as Orion, Sirius, and
Procyon? But how I wonder came the fancy of Socks into the Doctor's head,
methinks considering their business of following the Scent, and that, as is
most usually, through all sorts of ways, he might have allowed them slippers at
lest, if not high Shoos! But this conceit sure was penned as the Doctor was
abroad in some Countrey-ramble, and far from the Schools, where was no
remembrance of Logical Discourses: For otherwise had he had but Smith's Aditus
ad Logicam in his pocket, he would have said with himself, If an Hare, or a
Fox, or a Man with his Shoos on, does leave such a scent in every step he
treads, that a Dog coming after some hours, will discern every place, as the
foot went in the wide Field through Bushes and through Plains, and that so fast
as he can run and yet read it; and all this, although Horses, Hogs, or other
men have crossed the way twenty times over, yet the Dog will distinguish the
track he follows, from them all: How much more then (no doubt) shall the Stars
be able (whose curious operations where e're they go, are infinitely beyond the
dry and empty footsteps of a man's shoo-soal, to leave famous impressions and
remembrances of their track behind them) to make their Transits famous both to
operate and be wrought upon, by the Planets following them, and that so, as
it is not ten nor twenty Courses of any other Stars, shall be able to
obliterate, nor yet the Transits of as many years over their heads. For can the
scent of a man's shoo-soal leave an impression to be taken up some hours after,
why sure then a Star so much exceeds that in virtue, as to be able to carry out
it is impression to as many Months, as the shoo-soal was minutes? Or had not the
Doctor been accommodated with Smith's Logic in his pocket, yet had but his
Philosophical head at that time been on his Shoulders, he would have remembered
his own story of the weapon-salve in his immortality, B. 11. Chapter 10.. 6.
how strangely that salve in its Transit only, over the place of that weapon,
where the Nativity of a wound was made, does cause some notable change upon the
wound that was then born, though at a great distance off. And now if this
weapon-salve without its perfumed Socks, can do thus as the Doctor confesses,
what need he stand wondering thus at the Heavens in their Transits, that they
should to do as much or more? Or did not Madness and Effascination also possess
the Doctor's fancy, in this story of the weapon-salve, as well as out phancy's
in our discourse of the Planetary Transitions? But if none of all this could
do, yet methinks the Doctor might have been so civil as to have considered,
that himself is on Earth, and the Planets are in Heaven on high above him; and
if some learned men, not inferior to himself, have seriously observed and
found out such operations of the Planets in their Transits, and thereupon have
argued the power of the Causes from their Effects, as their Logic teaches them
to do. He might have said to himself, I am not able indeed to set bounds to the
Heavenly powers, as to say, so far they can do and no more; and therefore such
a thing may be for ought I know, as these Gentlemen say, only give me leave to
suspend my belief, till my Observation shall reach it as well as their's. But
the Doctor it seems, (might one have been worthy to have seen him, at the start
of this conceit, how he laugh't in his sleeve, and hugged himself in the
repetition of it) was so proud of his Wit in matter of this perfumed Jest of
the Planetary Socks, that he could no longer hold, but he must cry out, What
will not Madness and Effascination make a man fancy?

Lastly, Against the matter of Direction in a Nativity, he complains that it is
as frivolous as the rest. For in a Direction says he, the good change must
happen, when a Planet, or Cuspe, (...) Aspect comes to the place, where such a
Planet (...) Cuspe were at the Nativity. When the Significator comes to the
place of the Promissor, then defeat does not fail to be done, For the Promissor
is conceived as immovable, and such as stands (...), and expects the arrival
of the Significator: Which is a Demonstration, that this Promissor is either
imaginary space, or nothing: And which of th^^^ two think you, will keep
promise best?] The Doctor it seems had got some smack of Astrology, but either
could not, did not, or would not rightly understand it. For else he might ha^^
found that there is always a certain and (...) space measured out into Degrees
and Minutes between the Significator and his Promissor: A^^ according to this
distance of Situation in spa^^ such is the distance between them in time, for
Operation, and Direction is the rule of Art, where by this time is computed,
and being thus both in space and time a real thing, is neither imaginary, nor
nothing, as the Doctor idly argues. But then he goes on, Also if it be the
Horoscope, or any other House, which is Significator, that is imaginary too, as
I have demonstrated. I wish the Doctor himself be not imaginary; for the one
may be proved, even as well as he has done the other. But hear him out, If it
be a Planet; seeing yet the Planets move not as the Birds in the Air, or Fishes
in the Waters, but is Cork carried down the Stream, it is plain how this Planet
never gets to that part of the Celestial matter, in which the Promissor was at
the Nativity, the Promissor ever sliding away with his own matter in which he
swim's. And therefore if he has left any virtue behind him, it must again be
deposited in an imaginary space; which is an undeniable argument, that the
whole mystery of Direction is imaginary.] What more folly yet! Nay ^hen we
shall never have done. I wonder whether the Doctor knows his own meaning. For
(...) he mean as he seems to do, that the Planet as it might be the Moon, never
gets to that part of the Celestial matter, in which the Promissor was at the
Nativity by Transit, that is false, for she reaches it in a very few days, and
the Sun does as much in a few Weeks or Months. Or does he mean, that the place
of the Planet at the Nativity never reaches up to the place of the Promissor?
that is as idle. For who ever pretended that the Parson's House should ever
overtake the high Constable's? Or does he mean some other unknown mystery which
he learned a fishing, as the Cork swam down the stream! But (...) what it will,
he may keep it to himself, and in the mean time he may understand, that by the
Promissor, is to be understood some Aspect, or Cuspe of House, as suppose the
of, or the Midheaven, which the Planets, (as suppose the or, or, or,) are
distant from, in a certain number of Degrees and Minutes, and therefore the, or
the rest cannot promise unto the native the benefit of such an Aspect, or of
coming to such an House presently, or so much as if they were perfectly in the
very act of that Aspect, but yet in time that benefit will come up unto the
Native, and that as effectually, as if the Aspect had been in present force.
Now therefore the being so many degrees off the Aspect, the meaning of the
coming of the Significator unto the Promissor is not by Body, as it is in a
Transit, but virtually only. As much as to say the virtue of the Significator
being at a distance at the Nativity from the Promissor, will be a certain
number of Years and Days, according to the rules of Art in Direction, e're it
comes to Maturity. And now the time of the motion of this virtue observing a
certain constant method, we have thereby from the accident known a sure rule to
find out the moment and time of Birth.

Doctor's 7th. Book, where we find him in his Triumph after Victory. And truly
it is pity to disturb him with any such matter as a contradiction! For why
should we turn his Mirth into Mourning? I remember a story of the veriest
Coward in a certain Battle, who ran away clear out of the Field a Night and a
Day before any of his fellows, and came home into his City crying Victory,
Victory, whereof followed Bonefires, and ringing of Bells, and all manner of
Jollity, 'til at the 24 hours end, the whole Army came flying home, weeping and
wailing, that all was lost, whence the Scene of the City quite altered, and
turned upside down, the first News-monger was sought for out, and inquired the
reason of so loud a lie, he answered, That it was for the advantage of the City
to be continually accommodated with such lies. For what Mirth and Jollity had
that lie advanced, whereas the truth brought nothing home but Lamentation and
Mourning, of Men, Women, and Children. Such a victory as this now, has the
Doctor gotten, and see he is as proud often, and as merry at it, as if he had all
Towns and Castles yielded up, Oh that they had but patience, to lissen to my
close reasonings, (says he.) And what are these close reasonings think you,
but a great company of mere [ think so's,] and [ I says:] I have fundamentally
confuted the whole Art of Astrology, (says he.) That is, as one confuted
Bellarmine, by saying, [Bellarmine thou li^st.] All their fine Terms (says he)
of Horoscope, Apheta, Anareta, Trigonocrator, Almulen, Alcochoden, and the rest
of their Sonorous Nothings, are fallen down with a clatter, like a pile of dry
bones, by the Battery I have laid against them.] That is, by his aforesaid [
think so's:] and as many, or as many more [lies and falseshoods:] and a company
of [hah hahs:] mixed with now and then a merry Tale, and a pellet of Ignorance
no doubt but he has: Yea, though many of these fine Terms he never so much as
once named, before he cried Victory over them. Yea, and though the main Sconce
of all which, he calls a little blind Fort remain still untouched, unto which
he confesses, the Fugitives have made a kind of whilom escape.

again, with whooping and laughing, and his tongue tired with telling the Tale
of his poetical Conquest, concerning the vanity and foolery of Astrology, and
how he beat it down again and again, with opening his teeth, and geming at it;
he would now come to treat of the wickedness of it, in the 17th. Chapter of the
same 7th. Book.

But First, He comes in with his Introduction. There is, says he, A blind Fort,
which by the Title should be a strong one, they call it Experience, or
Observation of Events, which they boast to be accurately agreeable to their
Observations. But here (says he) their Hold is not so strong as their Impudence.

Because First, There are many ludicrous ways of Divination, which many times
hit right.] Very good, and therefore be their never so many serious ways of
prediction, none shall be believed to be otherwise, but mere chance. As who
would say, 1 Kings 22.
because Zidkijah the Son of Chenaanah was a false Prophet, therefore Michaiah
the Son of Imlah could not be a true one. Or because Saul also was among the
Prophets, therefore Samuel and David were no Prophets. This is his close way of
reasoning. 1 Samuel 19.23, 24.
Good Readers have the patience to listen to his Doctorship!

But Secondly, He adds the story of Neptune's Priest, who would prove the Deity
of his God, by the many Donaries of the Votaries, but was failed for want of a
Catologue of such Votaries as had suffered Shipwreck by him. And so must we,
because of the Catalogue of our false predictions. Of which Cardan complains,
scarce ten in forty true, and Picus professes 19 in 20 he had found false and
that in the weather, where no free Agents intermeddle to interrupt the natural
influences of the Stars.] This Argument is as good as the other. There be many
Physicians miss of their Cure, and therefore there are no true Physicians. Jer.
23.16, 17.
There were more false Prophets in Jeremiah's time, then there were true, if
not twenty for one; and therefore no Prophecy to be believed. He quotes Cardan,
but names not where, inquire if he belie him not. He quotes Picus, but Picus
had no skill in Astrology to make trial, and therefore is not to be trusted,
also he was an Enemy, and therefore not so much to be credited. And as for
Neptune's Priests, they were Heathen Souls; and the Doctor would be loath
himself to be counted a lying Priest, because the Quakers pretending to be
Priests, are found Liars.

Thirdly, In [. 2.] instead of arguing us down, he falls to railing us out of
doors.

And First, He lays to our charge our ingenuity, because in case of Error (we
say) the Error is in the Artist, and not in the Art.] I would fain know what
Art or Science Humane it is, whose Professors are clear of Error. If a Divine
be caught tardy in delivering lies, under pretense of God's Word, is the fault
in Theology, or in the Theologist? We do not deny, but that we Astrologers are
subject to mistakes, as well as other men; we may mistake a figure in a Scheme,
or oversee an Aspect in the same, or in casting up the sum of what we do see, a
man may forget a main part out of the account: And must the Art needs be
traduced for these failures? We know that sometimes God does by wicked
Astrologers, as he has done by wicked Prophets many a time that is, he
confounds them with mistakes, as he did by the Babylonian Astrologers and
Inchanters, though otherwise the persons might have been sufficient Artists.
Isa. 47.12, 13. Jer. 9. 1 Cor. 1.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, say the Prophets and Apostles. But
if men will grow proud of their parts, Prove. 21.30.
there is no Wisdom, nor Council, nor Understanding against the Lord.

Secondly, He abuses us with the slander of crooked and fallacious answers,
like the Loxias of Apollo's Oracle. But this is a mere slander. For what we
pretend to, we are plain in, our Aphorisms and Rules are all public, and our
predictions are mostly positive, saving in case of doubt, when a man's skill is
not able to answer the question, (as who can pretend to know all things) then
are we not ashamed to say it is beyond our reach. But be there any such
fallacious pretenders, it is not Astrology, but their own vanity which makes
them such, we disclaim them.

In [. 3.] he comes up again with the old objection, of man's free Agency, which
needs no more answer. Then he falls to reckoning up the multitudes who perish
by Sword, Shipwreck, or Pestilence, swept away altogether; of whom (he says)
it is a bold surmise to imagine, that all these had their Interfectors answerable
in their Nativities to their Deaths. The Artists themselves (he says) dare not
avouch it, but make their recourse to Eclipses and Blazing Stars, and therefore
their Divinations are true by chance only.] But here he Errs again, the Artists
may and do avouch it, and their recourse to Eclipses is but out of Modesty, and
out of abundance of caution only. In the late great Fire of London it is
apparent by many examples, and by all as can be gathered up, that every man's
loss was predicted in his Nativity. But what should hinder in such general
slaughters, why each man should not have his Interfector in his Nativity,
answerable to his Death, as well as in every person singly! However 'til such a
man can be found, in whose death Astrology miscarry's, the Objection is of no
more force then a mere [think so:] which is as much as just nothing. He reckons
up two disagreeing Twin-brethren born in Scotland undisevered, whereof one died
before the other too.] But what of that? There are some men so froward, that
they are seldom at peace in their own selves, especially at such times as
Distempers are upon them, how much more then may two heads disagree, although
they unite in the same nether parts? And again, are their not many men
afflicted with the dead palsy, in whom one side is dead, while the other is
yet alive, and may it be so in a single man, how much rather then shall it be
in a twin or double man? But unless we had a full account of the exact story,
how can it be expected we should give an exact answer! But it still troubles
him that our predictions are many of them so plainly true, as no more to be
denied. Wherefore in [. 4.] he urges that they are as often false, and
therefore (says he) it is equal to say both happened by chance.] That is, if
our Astrological Canons should prove as often false as true, the Doctor is in
the right on it. But so they do not. For we are able to produce our Rules, and
by our Rules to say this Child shall be certainly fortunate, and that
unfortunate, this Year it shall have a Fever, and that Year it shall be well.
And no longer let our Art be credited, then after this Rule we are able to
predict the very truth; but when an Artist is presented with a mistimed
Nativity, it must be by accident if he predict right, and therefore no wonder
if he prove wrong. Or if he mistake his Rules, Astrology must be pardoned from
that miscarriage. Or if Sorcerers, and if Witches pretend to Astrology, who are
no such matter, their miscarriages concern not our door. Or if ignorant
pretenders, by sometimes hitting, and sometimes missing, slander Astrology, it is
no blame to the Art notwithstanding, it is its wrong rather then disgrace. But
(says he) in Horary Questions, they use Tricks and Juggling to deceive.] And
what then, are these the blame of Astrologers, because there are Cheaters
amongst them? If so, woe be to us Divines too.

Flectere si nequeo Superos Acheranta movebo, as angry Juno in Virgil is
represented so,) comes he upon us with this diabolical Slander, that we are all
either Fools, or Knaves, or errant Sorcerers and Witches. But suppose
Astrologers (says he) free from Cheats and Chance, yet will it not follow that
they are free from consulting of Ghosts and familiar Spirits. No, nor does it
follow that they are guilty of any such thing, nor does the Doctor say we are,
but what we may be. But to hold us no longer in suspense, [. 5.] he goes
farther, For my part I do not doubt but Astrology is a part of the ancient
Paganism, whose Priests were confederate with the Devil, and so Daemonalatry
creeps in upon Astrology. For it is not inconceivable how these invisible
Insidiators may so apply themselves to man's curiosity, that will be tampering
and practicing in this superstition, (that suppose in Horary questions) they
may excite such persons at such a time to make their demands, that according to
the foreknown rule of Astrology the Scheme of Heaven will cipher
circumstantially the Person and his Relation or Condition, and give a true
Solution of the demand, whether about Decumbitures or stolen Goods, etc. and
any such Questions as are in Dariots Introduction. And as for Nativities, and
Predictions of the time of Death and manner of it, as ordinarily happens to
such admirers of the Art, that the same invisible powers put to their helping
hand to bring about the effect. And so those whose deaths are predicted must to
the pot to credit the Art. For it is not unreasonable to think, that by certain
Laws of the great Polity of the invisible World, they gain a right against a
man without explicit Contract, if he be but once so rash as to tamper with the
mysteries of the dark Kingdom, or to practice in them, or any way to make use
of them.] What a strange kind of wickedness is here! We Astrologers are all of
us a Relick of ancient Pagans, confederate with the Devil, and guilty of
Daemonalatry; and of this there is no doubt to be made, that is, the Doctor
dares swear it. For what a man doubts not to be true, he may safely swear. I
know a Clergyman in this County, who in 1659. having been led out with
strength of affection as far as Brussels in Brabant, to see his Majesty in time
of his Exile, who no sooner returned, but being suspected to be guilty of more
Loyalty and good will to his Sovereign, then those Cromwellian times could
possibly brook; he was quickly fetched in before the Committee of
Haberdashers-Hall, and all he had, Body and Goods taken into Hucsters hands; it
was charged against him, that he had been with Charles Stuart (as they then
called his Sacred Majesty) and that he prayed for him publicly in the Pulpit.
To prove these things, Witnesses were produced, who knew nothing of either, no
more then the Grand-Signior or the Crim-Tartar, but however they avouch't it,
and as I remember, swore both Articles to be true. Only the Gentleman had this
privilege left him, to put in Interrogatories of cross examination against
these Witnesses in defense of Body and Soul, in case of an Everlasting
Sequestration. His Questions were, how they knew those things, whether in God's
name or the Devils? If in God's, how they had this knowledge, whether by Vision,
or Dream, or Revelation, or Inspiration, or how else? For of their own knowledge
he was sure those Witnesses could have no means of proof, and thus he went on
with close reasoning (as the Doctor says) 'till in the end the utmost of the
Evidence vanished in a mere [think so] and so came to nothing, and the
Gentleman was quit, notwithstanding the evidence at first was so point blank
against him. The Doctor's allegation now is very near of kin to this Oath of
the Cromwellian Witnesses, for having charged us with Daemonalatry with a no
doubt to the contrary, I pray how does he prove it?

First, It is not inconceivable (says he) that such a thing may be, and then he
concludes it is not unreasonable to think it is so. And finally with this mere
[think] of proof, he determines in [. 6.] I say then these vagrant Demons of
the Air, either secretly insinuate themselves into the actions of Astrologers,
or after more apparently offer themselves to familiarity and converse, for to
grace their profession by oral Revelation of things past, present, or to come,
in such a way as is above Humane power.] And because he would be more sure, and
lest his former [think so] should not take so effectually as it deserves, [ I
demand (says he) how it shall appear that Cardan 's for example and Ascletarion
's deaths, and others more punctually, that I could name, predicted by
themselves or others, were not by this familiarity of Demons, but the pure
Principles of Astrology? And so of whatsoever honor, or other events that have
been found to fall out, just according to Astrological Predictions, I demand
how it can be proved, that Astrology was not here only for a vizard, and that a
Magician or a Wizard was not underneath. By how much more accurate their
predictions are, by so much the more cause of suspicion. You must note now,
that to have familiarity with these Demons, so as to predict, or tell any
thing by virtue of such a familiarity is punishable with Death, both by the Law
of God and Man: And yet in this case of Life and Death, when a man is accused
for a Wizard, and no proof can be brought against him but a mere [think so] and
Judge, and Jury, are all ready to acquit him; yea, but says the Doctor, let him
prove himself, that he is not one, or else let him be trust up. Why good Mr.
Doctor (says the Prisoner at the Bar) if you must needs be answered to such a
demand, that is as unreasonable as it is simple and foolish, know you that it
is proof enough of my innocence, in that all the World can say nothing to the
contrary, or at least it is enough to stop the mouth of any the most slanderous
Gown-man, that ever used his tongue to lying and slander. Suppose now a hagling
Disputant in the Schools, should take upon him to prove that Dr. More is more
Knave then Fool; and when he can make nothing on it, so as to produce any one
act of his Knavery, but to the contrary rather, yet he sticks to his points
still, and answers, let the Doctor prove it that he is not so, if he can. Would
the Doctor take this kindly think you, at the man's hands? But again, suppose
we, the Devils may secretly insinuate themselves into some men's actions, and
afterward offer themselves unto a greater familiarity and converse, and
suppose they might gain a right against a man, without explicit Contract, if he
be but once so rash as to tamper with the mysteries of the dark Kingdom. What Is
all this to the purpose, unless there could be no such things as Conjurers, but
what are first Astrologers? Or suppose we, these Conjurers should pretend (as
Sr. Christopher Heydon observes) to be Astrologers in order to paliate their
diabolical Arts. Is Astrology any whit the worse for being belied on! Our
Savior himself would be a Devil then too, if this might go. But suppose
farther, that some who are Astrologers at first, should afterward step from
Astrology, to become Wizards, or Daemonalators, must all necessarily who are
Astrologers be so therefore? Do we not know, that many Divines do study
unlawful Magic, and Negromancy as much or more then Divinity, must all Divines
be Magicians therefore, and that in an evil sense! We know also, that many
Physicians become Atheists, must all Physicians be so therefore. But it is
worth our Observation very much, how prettily the Doctor lays his Plot
concerning Horary Questions, How the Devil should excite men to make their
demands at such a point of time, as the Heavens should suit with those demands
in all circumstances, according to the known rules of Astrology.] Now although
the Devils may very possibly excite men to make their demands, yet be sure the
Heavens at those times, it is not in the Devils power to frame at all; and yet
these Heavens have perfect Astrological Significations in them according to the
punctual solution of all Circumstances in the demands. So that it shall seem
the Doctor does verily believe there is such a thing as Astrology in the
Heavens: Only he would have no body to deal in the skill of it, but under the
Devil's Patent. But then as for Nativities, the predictions related to them,
must not be effected but by help of the invisible Powers, and men's Deaths must
be effected by the Devil, in order to make good Astrological Predictions. It
seems then with the Doctor, these Devils can kill whom, and when they list, and
that as well Saints as Sinners, and the Anti-Astrologists as well as
Philo-Astrologists. For thus was predicted the death of Picus, as well as
Cardan, and of Gassendus, as well as Ascletarion. And thus was predicted the
death of that quondam Saint of the late times Oliver Cromwell. And thus also
strictly agreed with the predictions of Astrology, the death of the innocent
Prince of Spain, Philip Prosper, as well as the blustering King of Sueden, the
late Charles Gustavus, the three last all performed by that most ingenious
Artist Mr. John Gadbury, at such time, as all of them were at the highest of
their Expectations.

wickedness, as to the vanity and foolery wherewith the Doctor charges
Astrology. I am not concerned here I make account (for that I have done before
elsewhere) to give reasons for each part of the Science, but only to answer
what reasons the Doctor pretends against it. Neither do I think my self bound
to content my Antagonist in all my answers, it is enough that I have paid and
satisfied him off. The Usurer when he had his money and use, all paid him in,
yet was not contented, though fully satisfied, but sued his Bond, after all
this. And truly the Doctor is like enough to do as much by me. For he seems
very hard to be pleased. If our Predictions miscarry, any of them, then he
laughs and cries out, We are Fools. If part does hit, and another part does
miscarry, then are all by chance. But if any fall out punctually as predicted,
then its Daemonalatry, and ancient Heathen Paganism, and the more true we
speak, the worse he likes us, as he says himself. So that right or wrong, be we
well or ill, laugh or cry, he will never be pleased. And win or lose, he is
resolved to publish Victory. What I have said therefore, I humbly commit to
public view, that when the Doctor shall at any time deny that I have made him
a full answer, I may not want for Evidence, that he is paid and satisfied, and
then choose him whether he be contented or no. But I am not utterly out of hope,
that all the Doctor has said or done, was no more but as I said before,
purposely to be baffled, and to make his Pen a Sacrifice for Astrology, in
order to excuse him, when hereafter he shall publicly turn Fortune Tellers.

And so No More, but the Doctor's humble Servant, John Butler.

An humble Consideration by way of Comment upon the pious and learned Discourse
of the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, Joseph late Lord
Bishop of Norwich, concerning Pacts with evil Spirits, and particularly
concerning his judgment of Judiciary Astrology therein also mentioned.
defense of this Sacred and Heavenly Science of Astrology; and now having waded
so far, I would willingly enjoy some fruits of my pains before I make my
return, though it cost me something of a swimming for it. I am sensible, that
say we never so clearly for our selves, yet will there be still Objectors found
to say against us, and endless it is to wipe away all the dirt, which every man
has to throw in our faces. But I am as sensible, that all Objectors are not
equally to be blamed; some are as eminent for Learning, as for Malice and
ill will; and these, however they are not worthy of it for their own, yet must
have an Answer, (be it but to stop their mouths) for those other men's sakes,
who admire their parts more then their worth. Others are as eminent for Piety
as Parts, and yet are our Enemies we do confess; but then withal it is
apparent, by what unhappinesses in the misunderstanding of us, this Enmity has
come about; and these Adversaries therefore do justly deserve, as well as
challenge our answer to all, whatever they have against us. Now to answer all,
of all sorts, of either of these, who have been apt to open their mouths at us,
it is impossible: I shall therefore single out certain of the most eminent of
each kind, and refer the rest to that reasonable satisfaction they may gain out
of what I say to these, well knowing, that reasonable men will with a word be
satisfied; and as for the unreasonable, I know no reason they can deserve. And
first to begin where most of merit claims, I think it my duty to offer an
humble word or two to the Right Reverend Father in God, the most pious and
learned Joseph, late Lord Bishop of Norwich, in answer to Case the 2d. of his
3d. Decad, in his Resolutions and Decisions of diverse practical Cases of
Conscience, which inquires how far a secret Pact with evil Spirits does extend,
and what Actions and Events must be referred thereunto.

Holy Father had also drawn in Astrology amongst those, other secret Pacts with
evil Spirits, which are utterly unlawful: And the truth is, it does appear that
he was somewhat ill opinionating concerning this Science. But yet it is plain
that in the sum of his Resolution he commits the Student to his own care and
wisdom, whether to lay down, or pursue this Science; whence it becomes most
apparent, that this ill opinion of his against us happened by some unhappy
misunderstanding, rather then of any experimental evil he knew by our Studies.
But however with Reverence to this learned and most judicious Father, give me
leave to discuss his whole Resolution of the Case.

It is (says he) a question of exceeding great use, and necessity: for
certainly many thousands of honest and well minded Christians are in this kind
drawn into the snares of Satan, unwarily and unwittingly: Thus far the
Astrologer does heartily agree with his Honor's judgment, and bewails the
misfortune of Astrology, which has not been a little abused by the Devil, as a
Cloak under pretense thereof, to draw such honest and well minded Christians
within the compass of Sorcery and Witchcraft: But withal he hopes that no
rational man will make a blame of its affliction. For should we be so
uncharitable, the Sacred word of God also would be condemned, because many
times it also is by the Devils wiles made use on, and wrested, to draw in well
meaning Christians to become notorious Heretics. But to return to the Case.

For the determining of it, these two grounds must be laid;

First, That there is a double compact with Satan; one direct and open, wherein
Magicians and Witches, upon woeful Conditions, and direful Ceremonies, enter
into a mutual Covenant with evil Spirits: The other, secret, and indirect;
wherein nothing is seen, or heard, or known, to be agreed upon; only by a close
implication, that is suggested and yielded to be done, which is invisibly
seconded by diabolical operation. These two Compacts, or two ways of compacting
with the Devil, the Astrologer does acknowledge, and is well aware of. But
withal he is sufficiently satisfied against all danger of any diabolical
Compact in any of his figure-casting skill.

The second ground is; that whatsoever has not a Cause in Nature, according to
God's ordinary way, must be wrought either by good or evil Spirits: That it
cannot be supposed that good Angels should be at the command of ignorant, or
vicious Persons of either Sex, to concur with them in superstitious Acts, done
by means altogether in themselves ineffectual and unwarrantable: And therefore
that the Devil has an unseen hand in these effects, which he marvailously
brings about, for the winning of Credit with the World, and for the obliging
and engaging of his own Clients. Of this kind there is too lamentably much
variety in common experience: Take an handful if you please, out of a full
Sack, as the Book and the Key, the Sieve and the Sheers, for discovery of the
Thief. The notching of a stick, with the number of the Warts, which we would
have removed. Words and Characters of no signification, or ordinary form, for
the curing of Diseases in Man or Beast, more then too many whereof we find in
Cornelius Agrippa, and Paracelsus. Forms of Words and Figures for the stanching
of blood, and the pulling out of Thorns, for easing pain, for remedying the
biting of a mad Dog. Whistling for a Wind, and many other such like. All this
the Astrologer readily subscribes to, as most eminent truths. And no farther
desires he any dealing either in Calculatory, or Figure-casting Astrology, then
there is a Cause in Nature, according to God's ordinary way, without either
help of Angels or Devils, for what he does. All his whole skill in prediction,
he fathereth upon the Heavens and the Stars and Planets therein: and as the
Physician finds by the Herbs, Roots, and Flowers growing upon the ground, what
virtue and efficacy they have to cure Wounds and Sickness: So the Astrologer
has it from as strong experience of the natural force and virtue of operation
in the Stars of Heaven, concerning all that he says or knows. There is a reason
in Nature for it, that a red Evening brings forth a fair Morrow; and experience
has found it to be so, and that it is so only, and no act of Angel or Devil
which makes it so. And there is not a tittle in Astrology, which we trust to,
but what we have as much, and as true experience in, as in the product of a red
Evening. And as for Charms and Spells, and such like trashy Stories as have no
cause in Nature for their Productions and Event, the Astrologer sides with the
Right Reverend Father, and utterly abhors them.



First, As for the rubbing of Warts with raw flesh, and after burying that
flesh in a Dunghill, in order that the Warts may rot away insensibly, as that
flesh rots. I never tried the experiment, nor do I desire so to do. But yet
were I sure of truth in it, I should be apt to doubt, whether there might not
be as much reason in Nature for it, as for some other as unlucky experiments as
seems this to be.

Secondly, As for the Healings of a Seventh Son, by the laying on of his hands,
it seems to be a great secret. And if it come to pass by Nature only, as no
doubt but it does, where a man or Woman is seized with such a virtue unwitting
to them, without desire or inquiry after any such thing; as I have heard of
several such Sons and Daughters who have naturally been prompted to something
extraordinary, either of ingenuity, or the contrary; I must confess, that be
there any thing of evil in the exercise of such a gift, it is beyond my skill
to apprehend the imposture of it.

As for a Third, It seems much more unsavory, namely that Images Astronomically
framed under certain Constellations, should preserve from several
inconveniences; as under the Sign of the Lion, the figure of a Lion made in
Gold, against Melancholic Fancies, Dropsy, Plague, Fevers, etc. And yet it
seems some learned men there are, who defend this kind of practice. Our pious
Author mentions Cajetan for one. But withal he says, Lessius might well marvel,
why he should defend such a practice; when all the World knows how little
proportion and correspondence there is betwixt those imaginary Signs in Heaven,
and these real Creatures on Earth. Now as for mine own part, I confess that
this is a practice utterly beyond my skill and experience. I have heard
something said in vindication of it, as if the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness,
set up by Moses, had been nothing else but a mere natural experiment to cure
the biting of the fiery Serpents; and as if the Golden Mice, and Emeruds of the
Philistims, had been the like to cure the Pest of their Country, by reason of
such kind of Creatures. But notwithstanding, I am very doubtful that this is
but a Wile Satanical, and far be it from me, to countenance such an unsavory
practice: But yet withal dare I not too peremptorily condemn it, not knowing
what secret actions Nature is able to bring about beyond my utmost guess.

Also Fourthly, As for the anointing of the weapon for the healing of the
wound, though many Miles distant: It is well known, that many very intelligent
men are exceeding confident of the lawfulness of this strange kind of practice,
and so confesses our pious Author, but withal he resolves, that doubtless there
can be nothing of Nature; since in all natural Agencies, there must necessarily
be a Contaction, either real or virtual, here is such an interval, none can be:
Neither can the efficacy be ascribed to the Salve; since some others have
undertaken and done the cure, by a more homely and familiar ointment; Hence our
Author's opinion is, that it is the ill bestowed Faith of the Agent, that draws
on the success from the hand of an invisible Physician. This is another very
doubtful practice, and the sacred Authority of this Holy Father misses little
of giving it an utter foil. I am unconcerned, but not knowing how far a virtual
Contaction may extend, beyond all what I am able to imagine, I dare not condemn
it.

Again Fifthly, As for the remedy of Witcheries by heating of Irons. I must
confess I am not a little inclined to allow of this experiment. The hot Iron
makes impression upon the Devils acts, or at least upon the matter of his
action: And now the Devil being once resisted, who knows what force Nature has
to make him flee? But I am not concerned here neither, any ways to oppose the
Holy Father, his authority against it, being of more force with me, then my
fancy for it.

Judiciary Astrology, as it is commonly practiced, whether for the casting of
Nativities, or prediction of voluntary, or civil Events, or the discovery of
things stolen or lost: The natural Astrology (he says) when it keeps it self
within its due bounds, is lawful and commendable, (although not without much
uncertainty of issue;) But that other Calculatory, or Figure-casting Astrology
is presumtuous and unwarrantable; cried ever down by Concils and Fathers, as
unlawful; as that which lies in the midway betwixt Magic and Imposture, and
partakes not a little of both. Now here lies the main pinch, that so Learned,
so Reverend, so Pious, and so great a Father seems to think so hardly of our
Astrological skill: but it is but a mere seem so, and no really such hard
thought of, as at first sight it may seem to be.

For First, The natural Astrology, when it keeps it self within its due bounds,
he very heartily allows us lawful and commendable. And it is no other Astrology
that we plead for as lawful. For no farther desire we our Arts Justification
then natural causes, and due bounds are sure to justify it.

Calculatory or Figure-casting Astrology, which he cries down as presumtuous
and unwarrantable, it is of two sorts;

First, It is no more then such a Calculation, as represents nothing but a
site of the Heavens, and the Stars and Planets therein, with their Aspects to
each other, and of all of them upon us here below; and this only in order to
observe so much there from them, as constant experience has always verified to
be the natural production of such a Figure. A red Evening was a common presage
in our Savior's time, of a fair Morrow, and this was to be seen without
casting a Figure for it. Now I demand, how came we to know thus much of natural
Astrology, but by constant observation and experience thereof? And what if the
same Observation and Experience should take a little more pains, and by more
curious and strict examination should find out the grounds of this red Evening,
how it hangs lodged in the Aspects of the Stars, and their several occurrences,
one among another, and by virtue of these inquiries, to be able to predict the
red Evening it self, and not only so, but to be able also to say when it shall
be fair, without a red Evening, and not only so, but to go farther still, and
to be able to predict yet more and more productions of Nature? Will any man be
so maliciously mad, as to say the first only shall be lawful, and the rest
sinful and wicked, although all come from the very same Observation as the
first, only as Observation grew old, so it grew wiser, and as it came to man's
estate, attained to understand a great deal more then when it was but in its
Minority and Childhood? For be it so, that by looking into the Heavens, it be
possible for ingenious Observations to learn a little, there can be nothing to
be doubted, but the more and longer Observation, more and more is skill to be
learned. And now all that we pretend to for matter of Astrological practice, it
is no more then after the same nature, as is the Observation of the red
Evening, of which our Savior gives this Sacred Test, that it is a real truth.
And thus far therefore is nothing but natural Astrology, and therefore though
Calculatory and Figure-casting in a certain sense, is lawful and commendable by
the testimony of our learned and pious Author, as well as of our ever blessed
Savior. But then there is another sort of Figuring and Calculation, after the
way of Cornelius Agrippa, which however under a Cloak, and for pretense may be
called, but is no real Astrology, and this no doubt but is, very presumtuous
and unwarrantable, as his Lordship complains. Again also, I deny not but some
there are real Astrologers, who work by true Figures of the Heavens, but then
they mingle with these certain Magical practices, whereby they call the
invisible powers to aid them in the judgment of that Figure. And this being
utterly beyond the bounds of Nature, with our Reverend Author we also do
utterly abhor, as such which was ever cried down by Councils and Fathers as
unlawful.

That which lies in the midway betwixt Magic and Imposture, and partakes not a
little of both. This now is a plain Character what kind of Astrology it is our
Author is displeased at.

For First, As for matter of Magic, it is a practice as much different from
Astrology, as it is from Divinity. Some Astrologers its true indeed, cannot
contain themselves within compass, but must be tampering with black Arts; and
there be Divines too, who do as much. But as Divinity is not in the fault, so
neither is Astrology.

Secondly, As for matter of Imposture, we know it is too true, that too many in
the World who have no skill in Astrology, or at most no more then to draw a
Scheme, and to make a prate of it without so much as any Arithmetical or
Astronomical knowledge, without both which, no man can make a true Astrologer,
but however these pretenders driving a Trade with their familiars, and using
many crafty sleights, can judge of stolen goods, and love-matters, and tell
strange stories, which they have by hearsay, and pretend they have it by the
Stars. But this is nothing to Astrology, no more then it is to Music or
Geometry. But however by means of such Cheats as these, and many diabolical
Tricks fathered upon Astrology, it comes to pass many Reverend and wise men are
hereby drawn into misunderstandings, conceiting this Sacred and Heavenly Art to
be quite otherwise then to what indeed it is. I remember the stories of the
poor Heathens in Peru, who almost induced to Christianity, yet refused to be
Baptized, by means of the vicious lives of the Spaniards, alleging that the
most Blessed Heaven could not be good, where such wicked men pretended to be
translated, and therefore they would rather choose Hell without Baptism, then
go to Heaven in company with so evil Livers. Such was the ill luck of
Christianity at that time. And such truly has been the hard Fate of Astrology
of late years.

natural Astrology, as it is plain he did not, yet may we answer,

First, That there are others of as equal Piety, Learning, and Reverence, who
as much have befreinded it.

And Secondly, It would have been no such great wonder, considering,

First, How much the practice of this Science has been neglected in the late
Christian times. For while we abhorred, and fled from Sorcery and Witchcraft,
and burned all Books tending to that purpose, it came to pass that abundance of
Abhorrency led into a contrary extreme to neglect also such reading as was both
tolerable and commendable.

And then Secondly, While the Learned neglected this study, it came to pass
that none, or few but the vicious taking up the practice, it was seldom used
but with abuse. And thence happened to be the more and the farther hated by the
holy wise and learned. And no doubt but this Holy man our Author, out of his
abhorrency of the vicious practices of some Astrologers of his time, might be
drawn into the greater dislike of what himself had not studied.

For Thirdly, The most Wise, and Learned, and Holy, are not competent Judges of
what themselves also are not read in. And as for this Science of Astrology, I
humbly suppose it no blemish to our Reverend Father, if we humbly suppose he
never read so much of it, as to well understand it: For we do not hold
Astrology absolutely necessary to Salvation, and therefore a wise man is not
bound to study all things, and as so, no more of this then, he would the Art of
Dyalling, or Globe-making, or any such like famous studies: But besides we know
all men's Genius does not naturally incline them to study Astrology, or at least
if they should, yet shall they not be any ways assured to hit of it. And
amongst men of this contrary Genius, no wonder is it, if here and there some
are led away by a natural disaffection to talk against Astrology with somewhat
of the extreme in their Pens and Lips. But we have to do with a more pious
Author, only may he but rightly be understood.

Satan (says he) beguiles the simple upon these two misgrounded Principles.

First, That in all experience they have found such effects following upon the
use and practice of such means; which indeed cannot be denied: Charms and
Spells (says he) commonly are no less unfailing in their working, then the
best natural Remedies, doubtless the Devil is a most skilful Artist, and can do
feats beyond all mortal powers; but God bless us from employing him.

Secondly, That there may be hidden causes in Nature for the producing of such
effects, which they know not; neither can give any reason of their operations;
whereof yet we do commonly make use, without any scruple; and why may not these
be ranged under the same head? Which they have used with no other but good
meaning; without the least intention of reference to any malignant powers. In
answer whereto, I must tell them, that their best plea is ignorance; which may
abate the sin, but not excuse it: But then follows his concession, There are
indeed, deep secrets in Nature, whose bottom we cannot dive into; as those
wonders of the Loadstone; a piece outwardly contemptible, yet of such force as
approaches near to a Miracle: And many other strange Sympathies and Antipathies
in several Creatures; in which rank may be set the bleeding of the Dead, at the
presence of the Murderer: and some acts done for the discovery of Witchcraft
both in this and our neighbor Kingdom; but withal, though there be secrets in
Nature, which we know not how she works; yet we know there are works which are
well known, that she cannot do; how far her power can extend, is not hard to
determine: and those effects which are beyond this, (as in the forementioned
particulars) we know whither to ascribe: Let it be therefore the Care and
Wisdom of Christians, to look upon what grounds they go: Whiles they have God
and Nature for their warrant, they may walk safely; but where these leave them
the way leads down to the Chambers of Death.

Satan is apt enough to beguile the simple and ignorant, both these forenamed
ways. And true it is, that diabolical practices, such as Charms and Spells,
want not for experimental assurance of the truth of their effects, as well as
natural, by reason of the Devils skilful Arts to bring them about. But then
again, whosoever has the true and saving knowledge of God's Word in his head,
and the savor of as true Piety in his heart, can very aptly and easily
distinguish between Natural and Diabolical experiments. And by every of these
we are sure that our Astrological experiments are safe enough from any kind of
Diabolical help.

But as for the Second misbranded Principle, undoubtedly it is a very great
truth, That there are hidden causes in Nature for the producing of such effects
which we know not, nor can give a reason of their operation, which yet we do,
and doubt not but we may lawfully make use of without any the least scruple.
And under this same head, although there, is great reason why all those
charming practicing by the Holy Father reckoned up, shall not be ranged, yet is
there as much reason why our Astrological practices should be so ranged under
this head, and perhaps some few others which I have excepted from the rest. Now
this Holy Father to distinguish himself between an holy care to defend and keep
harmless, and well meaning people from the snares of the Devil, and an heady
and violent envy at any doubtful practices does grant, That there are indeed
deep secrets in Nature, whose bottom we cannot dive into, as those wonders of
the Loadstone for one, whose force approaches near to a Miracle. Now such an
ingenious and serious Monitor we have much more reason to respect, then a rash
Friend. For does not reason teach us, that would we streighten a crooked stick,
it must necessarily be bent somewhat the contrary way? And so to avoid the wiles
of the Devil, we do acknowledge it no fault, if a man rather then fail do a
little enter caution against lawful things. And the truth is, where a man is
not fenced with the more grace, it is good council to him to avoid many studies
in themselves lawful, rather then endanger himself within compass of Diabolical
snares. And I am confident that this is the very utmost that ever this Holy
Father intended against Astrology. For do but observe, how he distinguishes
himself. Though there be such secrets in Nature, which we know not how she
works, yet we know there are works which are well known, that she cannot do.
But this cannot be applied unto our natural Astrology, whose works we have good
assurance of, that they are perfectly natural. How far her power can extend (he
says) is not hard to determine, and those works which are beyond this, we know
whether to ascribe, that is to the Devil, and so say we. But then refers he to
the forementioned particulars, of all which he delivers his holy and cautionary
thoughts to beware, and so say we too. Amongst these indeed is Astrology in the
range; but then first, it is not without a distinction of the lawful and
unlawful Astrology, and some other things, he reckons in the number too, no
doubt, not so much out of certain knowledge of their absolute unwarrantableness,
as out of abundance of caution, which being things of a doubtful warrant, it is
better to beware and abstain, then to venture upon the uncertainty. For so he
concludes, Let it be therefore the care and wisdom of Christians to look upon
what grounds they go: whiles they have God and Nature for their warrant, they
may walk safely. And no longer let me study Astrology, then those go along with
me. For as he concludes, where they leave us, or any one else, the way leads
down to the Chambers of Death. And thus our hearty thanks, and reverent
respects, to this Learned and Holy Father, for his most savory, and necessary
Council. I also conclude, That Astrology being a study exceedingly conversant
in the deep secrets and wonders of Nature, where every action of the Heavens is
equal to the Miracle of Loadstone. So let me study and practice it, as the more
I behold God's wonders in Nature thereby, the more may I glorify my Maker, by
beholding the more of his great Glory in all his wondrous works. And while I
study thus, I find that next under Theology, nothing leads me more near unto
this sight of God, then this Sacred Astrological study of the great works of
Nature.

FINIS.

