Imprimatur,

Geo. Thorp Rev. in C. P. and D. Dom. Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a sacris Domest.

Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.
December. 18. 1678.
CHRISTIAN LIBERTY Asserted in Oposition to the Roman Yoke, Delivered in a
SERMON PREACHED IN His Majesty's Royal Chapel OF WINDSOR.

The 8th. of December. 1678.

By John Butler, D. D. Canon of the said Chapel, And Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

London: Printed by M. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

TO HIS Illustrious HIGHNESS PRINCE RUPERT, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke
of Bavaria and Cumberland, Vice Admiral of all England, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, Constable of His Majesty's Castle and Honor of
Windsor, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. The
Publisher humbly Dedicates the ensuing Discourse.
May it please your Highness,
THat the following Discourse becomes Public, is chiefly owing to the earnest
and often repeated instances of several Persons of Honor and Quality, who have
persuaded themselves and me with them, that it may not be altogether useless in
this dissolute and therefore staggering age.

AND that it humbly approaches your Highness is owing to your Highnesses Love
to our Nation, your unwearied industry for the support of the True Religion
Established by Law amongst us, your known and just indignation against the
Roman yoke, and to the many and signal favors which I most humbly and
gratefully acknowledge to have been conferred upon me by your Highnesses hands
on all offered occasions, since I had first the Honor of depending on your
Highness. By these considerations I think my self obliged as well out of
gratitude as equity to make your Highness this small Present. Which (however
defective in it self) will receive no small advantage by your Highnesses
favorable acceptance. With my hearty and daily prayers for your Highnesses
happiness here and hereafter, I humbly take leave in quality of

Your HIGHNESSES Most obliged most Faithful and most Humble Servant Jo. BUTLER.

A SERMON ON GALAT. v. v. I.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
WE find here the Galatians in danger of dealing by the Holy Apostle and
themselves just as the Israelites would have done by Moses and themselves,
after their deliverance from the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.
Those, because in their journey toward the Land of Promise they met with some
difficulties, would fain have been going back to serve again under their old
tyrannical Oppressors: remembering indeed the Fleshpots, the Leeks, the
Onyons, and the Garlic; but stupidly forgetting their making Brick without
Straw, or being severely chastised if they did not do it, and that their Male
Children had been ordered to be strangled, or otherwise made away so soon as
they were born into the world. And these (I mean the Galatians) harkening to
the sly insinuations of some false Prophets among them (converted Jews, who had
a mind to glory in their Flesh) and weary also of suffering Gal. vi. 13.
persecutions raised against them by means of those of the Circumcision, were
wavering and staggering in their Religion and in great hazard of subjecting
their necks to the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, wholly abrogated by the perfect
active and passive obedience of Christ, contrary to the Doctrine which they had
heard and believed, destructive of that liberty wherewith Christanity had
enfranchiz'd them, and particularly of all hopes of benefit by it in order to
their salvation: for it follows immediately after my Text, Behold I Paul say
unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

AN unhappy parallel this! wherein however the Israelites have this advantage
of them: they were but in via, these in patria; those journeying toward their
promised Land, these put into actual possession of it; having by the preaching
of this blessed Apostle been freed from the slavery of Idol-Worship, having had
Jesus Christ crucified so evidently set forth amongst Gal. iii. 1.
them, as if it had been done even before their very eyes, and having embraced
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without the works of the Law.

IT was high time therefore for their spiritual father to take care of them and
to cry out, Stand fast therefore, etc.

AND I would to God that (as the Galatians imitated the Israelites in their
senseless desire after their former servitude, so) many, very many amongst us
did not write after the Galatians Copy.

BUT now (that I may take up the Lamentation of the Prophet Baruch) Woe is me,
for Isai. xlv. 3.
the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing and I find no
rest.

GOD has long since wonderfully brought us out of the darkness of Superstition
and Idolatry into his mavelous light, set us at liberty one and all, King,
Priest and People from most intolerable as well Temporal as Spiritual bondage
under the Roman Yoke. And now after all we i. e. too many amongst us (some out
of vincible and therefore criminal zeal, some out of worldly interest and some
out of base Cowardice) are ready most ungratefully to be entangled with and
subject our necks to the same insupportable yoke of bondage again. Nay (which
is yet worse) as the Israelites had the better of the Galatians, in that those
were only on their way toward their Promised Land, these in possession of it:
So have the Galatians this advantage of us, that they were yet upon their feet,
they were not yet quite fallen; for otherwise the Apostle would not have bid
them stand, but rise up.

BUT amongst us multitudes are fallen away, being already entangled with this
yoke of bondage; and for others nets and snares are daily and hourly spread
abroad not by Fishers but Hunters of men to entangle them. And all this done to
the dishonor of Almighty God and his true Religion, the scandal and hazard of
the State, the sorrow and anguish of all good men, and the exceeding great
peril, if not utter loss of thousands of Souls.

IS any one therefore fallen? Let him rise up again. Is any man yet standing,
yet so as to stagger and waver in his Religion? Let him take heed lest he fall,
always remembering (with which words the Apostle concludes the foregoing
Chapter, and upon which he grounds the charge in my Text) that we are not
children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

Stand therefore, stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free
and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

IN which words we have

I. A Persuasion or Exhortation, Stand fast. II. A Dissuasion or Dehortation,
Be not entangled.


1. THE one drawn ab utili and jucundo; from the profit and pleasure of thus
standing; it is in liberty: The Galatians were and we are free.

2. THE other ab honesto: They were and so are we bound in honor and honesty to
keep our ground and maintain our station in this liberty for the sake of him
who had and has made both them and us free; and that is Christ himself. Stand
fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.



1. THE former drawn ab incommodo, from the mischief of quitting their station
and being entangled: there was a yoke, a very heavy yoke of bondage in the
case. Be not therefore entangled with the yoke of bondage.

2. THE latter ab absurdo; be not entangled again, q. d. Indeed if you had
never been in bondage before, something might be said for you: your vacillation,
your wavering and staggering would call rather for compassion than indignation.
But for you, you who have been emancipated from the yoke to run your necks
wilfully into it again, is such an egregious piece of folly and madness as
deserves neither pity nor forgiveness.

STAND Fast therefore, etc. and be not entangled, etc.

I. To begin with the first, The Persuasion or Exhortation. Stand fast.

IT was a very ill character that Jacob gave of his eldest son Reuben --
unstable as water. Genesis xlix. 4.
For that element falls under the definition of humidum (according to the old
Philosophy) Quod difficile suis, facile alienis terminis continetur: which is
morally true of an unstable irresolute man, you may empty him from vessel to
vessel; indeed you may do what you will with him. Every wind of doctrine
tosseth him, every tentation ensnares him, every passion overrules him, every
prosperous accident lifts him up, and every ill one throws him down. In a word
(as the Wiseman expresses it) he is like a City Prove. xxv. 28.
broken down and without Walls, easily taken in and brought into bondage. And
all this proceeds from incogitancy. He cannot allow himself time to debate and
consider (hardly to think, much less) to try all things; and therefore it is
utterly impossible he should ever hold fast that which is good. The man lives
by chance and not by choice; is just what every thing without will make him
(neither more nor less) and so becomes an easy prey upon every onset. Now
certainly to be thus is beneath the dignity not only of a Christian, but of a
Man.

FOR Gods sake therefore let us look about us; Stand fast and quit our selves
like men. Let us not be like the Galatians here, of whom the Apostle says, that
they could once run (ye did run well) and that now they were hardly Verse 7.
able to stand: but let us be strong and of a good courage.

THE Merchant before he goes to Sea is intent day and night upon his Adventure,
computes the charge, considers the dangers threatened from piracy or shipwreck;
and yet at last in an uncertain hope of gain goes on at all adventures; nothing
can divert him from his purpose.

THE good Soldier from five pounds to ten pence a day, considers that he must
run through much hardship, and carry his life in his hand; yet in hope of
Victory (which is not always to the strong neither) he resolutely wades through
the one and hazards the other. And why (in the name of God) should not we put
on equal resolutions for our perseverance in and defense of our Religion?
having a sure and certain hope (if we keep our station and continue in well
doing) of the Resurrection to Eternal Life.

To which purpose give me leave seasonably to advise you not to trust too much
to your own strength, but (in the words of our Apostle) to be strong in the
Lord and in the power Ephesians. vi. 10.
of his might; and to beg fervently and incessantly, that he would strengthen
our weak hands, Job iv. 4.
that he would strengthen and confirm our feeble Isai. xxxv. 3.
knees, that so we may be able to withstand in the Ephesians. vi. 13.
evil day and having done all to stand.

IN the mean time taught and commanded by God himself, I am not afraid to say
to them that are of a fearful heart -- Be strong, Isai. xxxv. 4.
fear not; behold your God will come with vengeance, even God with a
recompense, he will come and save you.

AND more than this I think I need not say upon the first general of my Text --
Stand fast.

I shall now descend to the two prevailing arguments with which the Apostle
enforces this persuasion or exhortation.

ab utili and jucundo, from the profit and pleasure of thus standing, it is in
liberty; the Galatians were, and we are free.

BUT it fares now with us as it did then with them. The Jews had a mind by
putting upon them the yoke of Circumcision (which was once a Commandment of
God) to glory in their flesh: and the Church or Court Chap. vi. 13.
of Rome ('it is all one to me which) would by making us receive for Doctrins the
commandments never of God but of men, fain glory in our flesh, but with a
design undoubtedly to use it very coarsly; as I question not in the following
part of my Discourse to make it most evident. Stand fast therefore in the
liberty wherewith we are made free.

LIBERTY and Freedom! Why is it possible that either the Galatians or we, or
indeed any man should come to that pass as to stand in need of persuasions to
preserve that? that, upon which no man could yet ever set any price? Certainly
both they and we must be bewitched first. -- I shall not desire to be excused
either for the harshness or homeliness of the expression: for it was the very
case of the Galatians here, against whom our Apostle exclaims thus. -- O
foolish Galatians, who has Chap. iii. 1.
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth?

THE Truth is, they were bewitched with the fear of eternal Damnation which had
been positively denounced against them by some of the Jews who were Zealous of
the Law, and might possibly Zealously affect them, Chap. iv. 17.
but not well. Of such you read Act. xv. 1. Certain men which came down from
Judaea taught the brethren saying, except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved.

BUT besides this, another charm by which they were bewitched, was their
weariness of past and fear of future persecutions, if they did not comply with
the Jews.

THESE were the Bugbears of the Galatians, and they are ours.

EXCEPT ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, said
some of the Jews to them. And except ye become Roman Catholics (which yet
every youth that has but learnt half his Logic will tell you is nonsense) ye
cannot be saved! No; but, with much more fierceness; you shall be damned, say
the Papists with one mouth to us. -- And I would fain know why so. To obviate
what the Zealous Jews had said to terrify the Galatians, the Apostle asks them
this question -- this only Gal. iii. 2.
would I learn of you: received you the spirit by the works of the Law, or by
the hearing of faith? q. d. did I who am a Jew, when I preached to you the
Gospel of Christ (upon which, the Lord working with me, you received the Holy
Ghost, and saw that Doctrine confirmed by miracles) did I oblige you to any
such custom?

AND This only would I learn of the Papists, did we first receive the Gospel
from them? I know very well that some of them want not confidence to affirm any
thing, but we are better assured that Christianity was planted in this Island
long before any of the Popes agents set their feet here. And when they did
come, what did they do for us, but corrupt our Religion by degrees, and draw us
into their yoke by making us believe, that if we did not keep close communion
with and observe them in all things, we should certainly be damned?

BUT the Galatians were weary of their past and afraid of their future
persecutions, if they did not comply with the Jews.

THE more Fools they.

ARE ye so foolish (says our Apostle) have Chapter iii. 3, 4.
ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain. q. d. Have ye
embraced the Gospel with resolutions to suffer in the profession of it? have ye
done it hitherto, and will ye now by foolishly thinking to avoid persecutions
lose the Crown laid up in store for you on that account?

THE more fools they, and the more cowards we.

WE have suffered in the defense of our Religion, of the cause of God and his
Vicegerents against a schismatical and rebellious generation of men, but yet
such as were set on and managed undoubtedly by our old implacable adversaries
of Rome. How many men of all ranks and degrees with an invincible courage lost
their Estates, their Liberties, their Lives in the quarrel! and are we
faint-hearted now? Have a care. He that seeks thus to save his life is in a
fair way to lose it.

BUT stay, is the Liberty wherewith we are made free worth the contending for,
i. e. so as to oblige us to die (if called to it) rather than yield to the
Roman Yoke?

IS it! I do not in the least doubt it. I am sure the first blessed instruments
of our happy Reformation and their followers thought so: else they would never
have lost their Lives in the cause.

BUT (Good God!) in what an age do we live! when a sort of men among our selves
of loose and corrupt principles have not stuck to affront the memory of those
blessed men and women with the name of Foxian Martyrs! Such fellows will look
to themselves I Will warrant them.

NOW to satisfy you in the point, I will in as few words as I can give you an
account of this liberty wherewith we are made free: and then tell me what you
think on it.

WE have the Oracles of God, those Fountains of living water (which contain all
things necessary for our Salvation) put into our hands 2 Timothy 3. 17.
and read to us, according to the Apostles times in a known tongue. We have the
Word of God purely dispensed by Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth. We have the Sacraments rightly and duly
administered according to our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ his own holy
Institution. And all this (which characterizeth a true Church) in order to our
future happiness. Then, which both tends to that and also to our present
well-being, we are taught to obey our King, and all that are put in authority
under him without resisting; to suffer death rather than lift up a finger
against him: never to expect to see the face of God with comfort unless we be
of a peaceable disposition and live an holy life, so taking the holy Jesus for
our pattern as yet (despairing most justly of all benefit from our own or
others pretended righteousness) to rely upon his most meritorious Death and
Passion for our Salvation. In a word, to honor all men, to love the
Brotherhood, (nay our very enemies) to fear God and honor the King. These for
brevity's sake I offer only as a specimen of that great and glorious liberty
wherewith we are made free. And what think ye now? is not this liberty worth
the contending for? worth every man's contending for? I will not so much as
suspect that any person here thinks otherwise. But if any such there be, I
shall only desire your patience a little while, till I come to paint out to
them the yoke of bondage, which is to be given us in exchange for this liberty;
and then I hope they will be satisfied. In the mean time let us stand fast in
the liberty wherewith we are made free. Stand fast therefore. For Christ his
sake stand fast. Which is the Apostles second argument to enforce his
exhortation -- Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

CHRIST made the Galatians, us and the whole world free by his meritorious
Death and Passion on his part, and by faith and repentance on ours. Christ made
us free, by enjoining us no more than his own perfect law of liberty: leaving
power indeed to the Guides of the Church to take care that all things should be
done with decency and order; but not to alter or diminish, no nor to add a
tittle that was not built upon that foundation. And all the Epistles of the
holy Apostles are but so many Comments upon that Law. As for the straw
therefore and stubble which our adversaries of Rome have built upon this
foundation in order to our making brick for the repair of their tottering Tower
-- away with it.

LET us follow Christ the author and finisher of our faith, and not the
corrupter of it; Christ the Captain of our Salvation, the Shepherd and Bishop
of our Souls, and not his pretended Lieutenant and Vicar who acts both beyond
and contrary to his Commission. Remember I beseech you, your first Vow when you
were baptized into Christ who purchased your liberty by shedding his own most
precious Blood for you; and not into that man or Church who are most
notoriously known ready to take it from you at the expense of your blood, if
they cannot compass it by other means. Remember that at that time you promised
faithfully to be the Soldiers of Christ, and to fight manfully under his
Banner: and do not run from your Colors by ungratefully and cowardly quitting
your Post.

STAND fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

AND now one would think the Apostle had said enough to make his Galatians
stand fast, by urging to them their liberty and the author of it; that there
needed no more to be said in the case; and that therefore, if those would not
prevail upon them, all other arguments would prove insignificant and useless.

NO such matter. He knew very well that if he did not show them as well the
danger and absurdity of quitting their station as the profit and pleasure of
keeping it, they would be wavering still.

Moses who did not think it enough to set life and good before the people,
unless he showed them also death and evil) I shall pursue his method, and
proceed to the second general part of my Text, the Dissuasion or Dehortation,
Be not entangled, Nolite contineri, ne illaqueamini, ne implicemini, ne
retiamini (for so many ways the original word (...) is translated, and the
sense in each rendition is much the same) as though the Apostle should have
said, you are now in a state of liberty and freedom which Christ has
purchased for you; have a care of such nets and snares, such artifices and
cunning devices as are laid and prepared to deprive you of it. Have a care of
their fair pretenses. So our Apostle -- as many as desire to make a fair show
in the flesh, they constrain Chap. vi. verse. 12.
you to be circumcised. Have a care of being entangled by their fawning
concessions and crafty distinctions. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,
says the Apostle. And therefore V. 9. h. c.
as he tells them -- I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he
is a debtor to the whole Verse. 3.
Law: So I testify to all those that are wavering and ready to be entangled by
the arts of those perverters, that they must sooner or later submit themselves
to the whole law of that Church; unless they would be looked upon as half
Papists, who are in the esteem of the ruling part of that Church little better
than Protestants, and shall perhaps fare little better when occasion shall
serve. The plain truth of it is this; and herein lies the cheat.

If any person whom they have a mind to make a Proselyte, boggle at their
Antichristian doctrine and practice of giving the Sacrament under one kind
only; they will tell him very softly that indeed it is true, the Church has
for many weighty reasons altered the primitive Institution; but that yet
however if he cannot with a quiet mind submit to the Canon in that particular,
he shall be dispensed with, and receive it in both, till he be clearly
convinced and fully satisfied. But then it is an hundred to one they impose upon
him by giving him unconsecrated Wine. If he startle and stand amazed (as well
he may) at the horrid and barbarous doctrine of excommunicating and deposing
Emperors, Kings and Princes from their regalities and dignities, not only for
being Heretics themselves, as they please to call them (nay their very being
male morati will do it) but for not extirpating Heretics out of their
dominions with fire and sword, if warned so to do; and thereupon having
absolved their Subjects from their allegiance, of giving their dominions to
others if they cannot persuade any of their own people to dispatch them out of
the way by the knife or poison: If any one (I say) whom they are about to
entangle, start or stare at such horrid and barbarous doctrines, they are
dexterously ready to assure him that there is a very great mistake in this
whole matter. For (alas) these are only the opinions of some few private
Doctors amongst them, and not the doctrine of the Church. No, by no means. God
forbid. Though all this while, as that Church has never yet censured such
positions, so one (not to mention more) of these Councils which they call
general, has in a very Council. Lat. 4.
great measure asserted them; and the Popes, whenever they have had a will and
power enough in their hands, have not been sparing to justify and put them in
execution.

AS for their art of intangling by striking a terror into the minds of their
intended proselytes on the account of persecution, telling them (which is a
common Topic among them) Well, well; we shall be all of one Religion within
these two or three years, or within such or such a time; and such like
threatening expressions: indeed silly women laden with iniquity, and children
void of understanding, if they be entangled herewith, may be pitied; but for
men and women that have been well grounded in the Principles of our Religion to
be caught with such chaff -- it is a crime unpardonable.

TO conclude this part of my discourse upon the Dissuasion or Dehortation. If
you find that they would entangle you by telling you (as they seldom fail to
do) that if you come over to them, undergo their penance (perhaps they will get
some body or other to do it for you) and die in their Communion; whatever your
crimes be, you shall be certainly saved: but that if you live and die, though
never so full of faith and good works, out of their Communion, you stand
Excommunicate, and will be as certainly damned: Fear them not; stand fast and
be not entangled.

WHAT! Enter into Communion with, or fear the excommunication of such as stand
excommunicate themselves! and that by an Apostle too! Let no man startle at
what I say. I Will make my words good. This very Chap. i. 8.
Apostle says expressly, though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel to you than that which we have preached unto you, Anathema sit, let him
be accursed. And for fear such bold Innovators should not take his word for it,
he repeats it Verse 9.
again, as we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other
Gospel to you than that you have received, Anathema sit, let him be accursed.

NOW that they have justly incurred this sentence of excommunication (let them
get it off how they can) will easily appear if we take but a view of the yoke
which upon our being entangled, they have prepared for our necks.

1. AND that is the first argument ab incommodo, which our Apostle urges to
enforce this Dissuasion or Dehortation -- there is a yoke in the case.

BE not therefore entangled with the yoke of bondage.

A yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.

OUR blessed Savior instituted eating and drinking the Symboles of his Body
and Blood apart; the Apostles and the Church after them constantly practiced it
for above a thousand years together: and now we must be sacrilegiously robbed of
it for reasons of their own invention, (for Christ's Vicar must be wiser than
his Master) and because they will please to have it so.

THEY tell us that the Church has an unlimited power to do such things, and to
make such alterations. Believe it that list: I have something else to do.

BUT this is a very small matter with them.

HEAR what Bellarmine says of the unbounded power of the Pope alone in all
cases. If the Pope should so far err as to call vice De Romans Pont. lib. 4. c. 5.
virtue and virtue vice, and command them to be accordingly practiced and
forborne, the Church were bound to submit and conform her self, unless she would
sin against Conscience.

WELL said Cardinal!

THE good man had forgot that God himself had accursed those that call evil
good and good evil. But (to let that pass) how comes so great a man to suppose
what he had taken so great pains to prove impossible, i. e. that his Holiness
can err? and how comes he to pull down what he had before (as much as in him
lay) built up, i. e. the Popes infallibility? For if we be not assured of the
real and unalterable difference betwixt virtue and vice, we have no certainty:
and where there is no certainty, it is impossible there can be any
infallibility. Which doctrine of infallibility (for I must hasten) is the very
beam of the yoke to be laid upon us in lieu of the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free.

WE are by Gods providence yet free from the yoke (we celebrate the Supper of
the Lord with eating and drinking according to his own most holy Institution)
Be not therefore entangled with this yoke of bondage.

part of their yoke the doctrine of Transubstantiation: than which I am sure
Jacob Behmen has not any thing in all his enthusiastic writings more
monstrously mysterious and unintelligible. As if no man could possibly become a
good Christian, unless he threw away his memory and understanding at the same
time.

TRANSUBSTANTIATION! a name and thing so unknown to all antiquity and so
utterly impossible in it self, that I must shake hands with my nature before I
can bring my neck to the yoke.

INDEED if the Assertors of that doctrine can once mould me into such a temper
as that (with the Comoedian) I could run in their hand, and in one and the same
breath affirm with them that a Cloud looks like a Camel, like a Weazel and like
a Whale -- much may be done. Till then they must give me leave (and if they
will not give it me, I shall make bold to take it) to belive my senses both
inward and outward, which I humbly conceive and am verily persuaded God and
Nature did not bestow upon me with a design to deceive and cheat me.

IF they ask (as they usually do) why do we then believe the doctrine of the
Trinity, which on this occasion they will have to be as much against human
reason? I answer by denying what they take for granted, i. e. That the doctrine
of the Trinity and that of Transubstantiation are alike against reason. That I
and two more can be one, or that any created being can be in more than one
place at the same is indeed against reason; because we have distinct beings and
are distinctly circumscribed by our own proper limits and places: but that God
who is infinite in power and fills all places with his unbounded presence, may
be whatever he pleases to reveal and declare himself to be, as touching his
Divine Nature, is (if above, yet) not at all against my reason.

BUT (to end this Paragraph) to what purpose should I be obliged in this matter
to call white black, and black white? Cui bono? Cannot the same God who at the
Preaching of the Gospel of his Son by his Apostles conferred the Holy Ghost on
those that never heard of him before; and cannot that Son of God, who
Instituted Holy Baptism to the mystical washing away of sin, confer Grace and
Spiritual nourishment to my soul upon my humble and grateful commemoration of
his meritorious Death and Passion, in eating and drinking the Consecrated
Elements, without the Priests turning by I know not how many unconceivable
Miracles, not only the Bread and Wine, but even the Bread alone into his real
Body and Blood?

IT cannot be expected that I should, within the time allotted me, say all that
can be said (if I could do it) upon these and the following subjects; and
therefore I refer you for your further satisfaction and confirmation, to the
labors of those many Pious and Learned men of our Church, who have in this and
all other points controverted betwixt us, so baffled our Adversaries of Rome,
that though they will have the last word (there is no help for that) they have
nothing left them which with modesty they can say for themselves. As for us, we
are yet by the Grace of God free from this groundless, useless and senseless
yoke of Transubstantiation: Be not therefore entangled with this yoke of
bondage.

David makes it his peculiar Prerogative, and so does his Son too) to pull down
one and set up another? They tell us a great many fine stories of St. Peter's
Keys, and St. Paul's Sword: but alas! they are but stories, ambitious
imaginations of their own brains. Now before I give mine own opinion in the
case so far as we are concerned, I crave leave to tell you what one of their
late Pamphleteers has affirmed in it, viz. That Oliver Cromwell had as much
right to exclude the Royal Family and set up for himself, as King Henry the
Eighth had to throw off his Obedience to the Pope. Spoken like a good Subject,
and a well read man! Is there no difference between an home-born Prince and a
foreign Usurper? And for Gods sake, what power or profit had ever the Popes of
Rome in this Kingdom, but what was either granted them by the indulgence and
bounty of devout and unwary Princes, or else what they extorted by watching
their opportunities and fishing in troubled waters? the last of which was no
Title at all, and the first being abused was justly forfeited.

THE first considerable footing that his Holiness got here was by Austin the
Monk about the year 600. and then the Foundation was laid in blood, in the
blood of twelve hundred Monks. A truer story I am sure than that of their 11000
Virgin-Martyrs. And, as the Naturalists say, ex quibus componimur, ex iisdem
nutrimur, so I may say of them. If you prove good children, believe as the
Church believes and do what she bids you right or wrong; pay your first fruits,
tenths, Peter Pence and other perquisites which the Apostolic Sea claims (all
which however I think better in the King of England's Exchequer than in the
Roman Aerary) then his Holiness smiles at your easiness, and his word is -- Si
populus vult decipi, decipiatur, etc. but if you do not, look to your selves;
the note is changed into that of Nebuchadnezzar (his Predecessor in old
Babylon) -- If you worship not, you shall be cast into the midst of the burning
fiery furnace. But suppose we should (not grant but) give them what they
contend for, i. e. that they did first Preach the Gospel to our Forefathers in
this Island; what will they get by it? Put the Case I should have the happiness
to convert a rich Jew, or an Indian to the Christian Faith; am I thereby
presently invested with a power over his Estate, Liberty and Life?

A blessed Reformation, this! Christ sent his disciples forth as sheep among
wolves; but the Church or Court of Rome (for I protest I can make no
distinction between them) sends forth her disciples as wolves among sheep, to
kill, to tear and to destroy.

I do not find that Christ's disciples received any Commission to cut the
throats of all such as would not submit to the Gospel: but I am sure that both
they and their followers chose rather to suffer death than to cause any
disturbance in the State, otherwise than by Preaching that Gospel according to
their Commission. Our Savior wrought a Miracle to testify his obedience to
the Civil power: and had not that blessed Son of God himself given his
followers an example by patiently submitting to the Sentence of Death under
unjust Judges, because they were in Authority, we had at this day (for ought I
know) wanted a Savior our selves.

THE Jesuits tell us indeed that the Primitive Church and the First Bishops of
Rome did not execute this power because they were then in Incunabulis, in the
Cradle and under Persecution. But I hope the Son of God did not want that power
-- If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight for me, says
he -- and to Peter himself -- Put up thy sword into his sheath, for cannot I
pray now to my Father and he shall give me more than twelve legions of Angels?
But I forget my self.

unknown tongue;













I will name no more, I am weary on it: they all being the unlawful Engines for
the enlargement of their dominion, and support of their grandeur by filthy
lucre.

THESE and many, very many more make up that yoke which is to be given us in
exchange for that blessed liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and which
by Gods superabundant and no way deserved mercy we yet enjoy.

BE not therefore entangled with this yoke of bondage.

2. ESPECIALLY considering the absurdity of being so entangled; which is the
Apostles second argument to fortify this Dissuasion or Dehortation -- be not
entangled again.

SED quid valet istud Rursus? how comes the Apostle to dissuade the Galatians
from being entangled again with the yoke of bondage, who never had the law of
Moses delivered to them, and so had never before been circumcised? whatever
others answer, I think there will be no great difficulty in the case, if
instead of the yoke you read a yoke, which the original will bear as well as
the other: and then the sense is this -- you have by the preaching of Christ
crucified among you been freed from one yoke, that of Idol-worship; no not run
your necks into another of Circumcision.

BE not entangled again.

BUT then even here again the Galatians have the advantage of us: for they were
submitting their necks to a yoke sometime imposed by God himself as absolutely
necessary; but we by taking on us the Roman Yoke again submit our selves to a
yoke of bondage made up of mere human inventions, contrary to Gods word, and
destructive both of true Religion and civil Societies.

BE not therefore entangled again.

WOULD the Doctors go to School again? a School, where they shall be taught
better manners than to rely only upon the all-sufficient merits of their
Savior: than to be subject to any other power than that of our Lord God the
Pope. And in order thereunto they must learn a new lesson, to live a single
life (whether they can do it honestly or no, it makes no matter) for fear lest
having wives and children they should give the State security of their
obedience to their undoubted and lawful Sovereign: Nay (which is more) to be
the Popes executioners, and whenever heis angry and shall please to put their
native Country under an interdict, to proclaim his Bull for Excommunicating
their Prince and absolving themselves and fellow Subjects from their allegiance
to him, and to surcease all religious Offices in the Church. Would the Doctors
(I say) go to School again?

WOULD a Servant manumitted and having a good stock wherewith to set up for
himself be bound apprentice again? Would a General of an Army turn private
Soldier again?

WOULD a man become a child again?

A Patient lately recovered from an ill habit of body or some desperate
disease, relapse and fall sick again?

WOULD a Prince, who holds his Imperial Crown only from God, lay it down at the
feet of an insolent pretender to a power of kicking it off from his head, and
giving it unto whomsoever he will?

AND if these things be absurd; it must needs be so in us, if we return to the
Roman yoke again.

BE not therefore entangled again.

FOR Gods sake, whatever the genius of the Galatians was, let not us in so
weighty a matter as this verify our own Country-Proverb which says, that an
Englishman never knows when a thing is well.

STAND fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be
not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

I have now finished my meditations upon the Text: in the delivery whereof I
have discharged my bounden duty without any sinister ends; without either hope
of good or fear of evil in this life; but (I confess) not without having an eye
to the recompense of reward in that which is to come.

I hope no man will be displeased with me for what I have said. But if any such
there be, I am not careful to answer them in this matter. I shall only make use
of the Apostles honest Apology -- Am I therefore become your enemy, because I
tell you the truth? Chap. iv. 16.


TO conclude; give me leave once more to pursue the Apostles method, who shuts
up this Epistle with earnest persuasions that his Galatians would trouble him
no more about these Chap. vi. 17.
matters; but forsake the lusts of the flesh and live a virtuous and a pious
life: the only way (if we could at last be persuaded to believe it) to beget
unity among our selves, to avert Gods just and dreadful judgments and to make
him favorable and gracious to our Sion.

I say therefore (in the words of the Prophet Daniel) as well to my self as to
all that hear me Chap. iv. 17.
this day -- Let my Counsel now be acceptable to you; let us break off our sins
by Righteousness and our iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be
a lengthning of our tranquillity.

And to that end

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the Glory of thy Name turn from us all those evils that we most Righteously
have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust
and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness
of living to thy Honor and Glory through our only Mediator and Advocate Jesus
Christ our Lord.

AS many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God; to whom be ascribed and given all Power and Praise now and
evermore.

FINIS.

