TO THE MEMORY OF THE MOST RENOWNED DU-VALL: A Pindarick Ode.

By the Author of Hudibras.

LONDON: Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the
West End. 1671.

Where is to be had, The Memoires of Monsieur Du-Vall; containing the History
of his Life and Death: with his last Speech and Epitaph.

TO THE MEMORY Of the most Renowned DU-VALL: A Pindarick Ode.
I.
IT IS true, to complement the dead,
Is as impertinent and vain
As 'twas of old to call them back again;
Or like the Tartars give them Wives,
With setlement for after-lives.
For all that can be done, or said,
Though e're so noble, great, and good,
By them is neither heard nor understood.
All our fine sleights and tricks of Art,
First to create, and then adore desert;
And those Romances which we frame,
To raise our selves, not them a name;
In vain are stuffed with ranting flatteries,
And such as if they knevv they would despise.
For as those times the golden Age we call,
In which there was no Gold at all:
So we plant glory and renovvn,
Where it was never deserved nor known;
But to worse purpose many times
To flourish over nefarious Crimes;
And cheat the world that never seems to mind
How good or bad men dye, but what they leave behind.
II.
And yet the brave Du-Vall, whose name
Can never be vvorn out by fame,
That lived and died, to leave behind
A great example to mankind;
That fell a public Sacrifice
From ruin to preserve those fevv,
Who though born false, may be made true;
And teach the world to be more just and wise;
Ought not like vulgar ashes rest
Unmention'd in his silent Chest;
Not for his own but public interest.
He like a pious man some years before
The arrival of his fatal hour,
Made every day he had to live,
To his last minute a preparative.
Taught the vvild Arabs on the road
To act in a more gentle mode;
Take prizes more obligingly, than those
Who never had been bred Filous:
And how to hang in a more graceful fashion
Than e're was known before to the dull English Nation.
III.
In France the staple of new Modes
Where Garbs and Meenes are current goods,
That serves the ruder Northern Nations,
With methods of address and treat,
Prescribes new Garnitures and Fashions;
And how to drink, and how to eat,
No out-of-fashion'd Wine or Meat;
To understand Cravats and Plumes,
And the most modish from the old Perfumes;
To know the Age and Pedigrees
Of Points of Flanders, or Venice:
Cast their Nativities, and to a day,
Foretell how long they will hold, and when decay.
TO affect the purest negligences,
In Gestures, Gates, and Meenes,
And speak by Repartee-Rotins,
Out of the most authentic of Romances:
And to demonstrate with substantial reason,
What Ribbands all the year are in or out of season.
IV.
In this great Academy of mankind
He had his Birth and Education,
Where all men are s'ingeniously inclined
They understand by imitation;
Improve untaught before they are aware,
As if they sucked their breeding from the Air.
That naturally does dispense
To all a deep and solid confidence:
A virtue of that precious use,
That he whom bounteous Heaven endues
But with a moderate share of it,
Can want no Worth, Abilities, or Wit.
In all the deep Hermetick Arts,
(For so of late the Learned call
All tricks if strange and mystical)
He had improved his natural parts;
And with his Magic Rod could sound,
Where hidden treasure may be found.
He like a Lord of the Manor seized upon
Whatever happened in his way,
As lavvful Weft and stray:
And after by the custom kept it as his own.
V.
From the first Rudiments he grevv
To noble Feats, and tried his force,
Upon whole Troops of Foot and Horse,
Whom he as bravely did subdue:
Declared all Caravans that go,
Upon the Kings High-vvay the foe:
Made many desperate attaques
Upon itinerant Brigades
Of all Professions, Rancks, and Trades;
On Carriers Loads, and Pedlars Packs:
Made them lay down their Arms and yield;
And to the smallest piece restore
All that by cheating they had gained before;
And after plundered all the baggage of the Field.
In every bold affair of War,
He had the chief command and led them on:
For no man is judged fit to have the care
Of others lives, until h'has made it known,
How much he does despise and scorn his own.
VI.
Whole Provinces 'tvvixt Sun and Sun
Have by his Conquering Svvord been vvon;
And mighty sums of money laid
For ransom upon every man;
And Hostages delivered till 'tvvas paid.
The Excise and Chimney-Publican,
The Jevv-Forestaller and Inhancer,
To him for all their Crimes did answer:
He vanquished the most fierce, and fell
Of all his foes, the Constable;
That often had beat his Quarters up,
And routed him and all his Troop.
He took the dreadful Lawyers Fees,
That in his own allovv'd High-vvay
Does feats of Arms as great as his:
And when the encounter in it vvin the day,
Safe in his Garrison the Court,
Where meaner Criminals are sentenced for it:
To this stern foe he often gave quarter,
But as the Scotch-man did to a Tartar,
That he in time to come
Might in return from him receive his fatal doom.
VII.
He would have starved this mighty Town,
And brought its haughty spirit down;
Have cut it off from all Relief,
And like a wise and valiant Thief,
Made many a fierce assault
Upon all Ammunition Carts;
And those that bring up Cheese and Malt,
Or Bacon from remoter parts:
No Convoy e're so strong with food,
Durst venture on the desperate Road;
He made the undaunted Waggoners obey,
And the fierce Higlers Contribution pay:
The savage Butcher, and stout Drover,
Durst not to him their feeble Troops discover.
And if he had but kept the Field,
In time had made the City yield;
For great Towns (like to Crocadiles) are found
In The belly aptest to receive a vvound.
VIII.
But when the fatal hour arrived,
In which his Stars began to frovvn,
And had in close Cabals contrived
To pull him from his height of glory down;
And he by numerous foes oppressed,
Was in the enchanted Dungeon cast;
Secured with mighty Guards,
Lest he by force or stratagem
Might prove too cunning for their Chains and them,
And break through all their Locks, and Bolts, and Wards;
Had both his legs by Charms committed
To one another charge;
That neither might be set at large,
And all their fury and revenge out-vvitted.
As Jewels of high value are
Kept under lock with greater care,
Then those of meaner rates:
So he was in Stone-walls, and ponderous Chains, and iron Grates,
IX.
Thither came Ladies from all parts,
To offer up close prisoners hearts;
Which he received as tribute due,
And made them yield up love and honor too:
But in ^ore brave Heroic ways
Than e're were practiced yet in Plays;
For those two spightful foes, who never meet
But full of hot contests and piques
About punctilio's and mere tricks;
Did all their quarrels to his doom submit
And far more generous and free,
In contemplation only of him agree,
Both fully satisfied: the one
With those fresh Laurels he had vvon,
And all the brave renowned feats
He had performed in Arms;
The other with his person and his Charms:
For just as Larks are caught in Nets,
By gazing on a piece of glass;
So while the Ladies vievv'd his brighter eyes
And smoother polished face,
Their gentle hearts, alas, were taken by surprise.
X.
Never did bold Knight to relieve
Distressed Dames, such dreadful feats atchieve,
As feeble Damsels for his sake,
Would have been proud to undertake,
And bravely ambitious to redeem
The worlds loss and their own,
Strove who should have the honor to lay down
And change a life with him.
But finding all their hopes in vain,
To move his fixed determined fate
They life it self began to hate;
And all the world besides disdain
Made loud appeals and moans
To less hard-hearted Grates and Stones;
Came svvell'd in sighs and drovvn'd in tears,
To yield themselves his fellovv-sufferers:
And follovv'd him like Prisoners of War
Chained to the lofty Wheels of his Triumphant Carr.
FINIS.

