THE JEWISH SYNAGOGUE OR AN HISTORICAL NARRATION OF THE STATE OF THE JEWS, At
this day dispersed over the face of the whole Earth.

In which their Religion, Education, Manners, Sects, Death and Burial, are
fully delivered, and that out of their own Writers.

Translated out of the Learned BVXTORFIVS, Professor of the Hebrew in Basil,
and diligently compared with the Talmud and other Writers* out of which it had
its Original.

Also furnished with diverse Marginal Notes, very profitable and necessary.

By A: B: Mr. A. of Q. Col in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by T. Roycroft for H. R. and Thomas Young* at the three
Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

blazon and Portait of George I

THE AUTHORS PREFACE To the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHen once we exactly ponder in the Scales of our understanding that thrice
pressing load of Jewish ingratitude, disobedience, and obstinacy, for which
they were daily branded by Moses and the rest of the Prophets with a foul
guilt, to which was annexed a vehement reprehension. When we seriously consider
those horrid threats and execrations wherewith God in his justice would depress
them, unless they framed their lives according to the strict rule of his
Commandments; this ought to be a warning-piece unto us to entertain such
blessings with a more grateful acceptance, and hitherto to bend all our
studies, that by our unthankfulness we should not make our selves unworthy of
them, and so be dis-inherited of such a possession. Moses in this manner
prophecies of the Jews ingratitude, Deuteronomy. 32. 15*)
Jesurun maxed fat, and kicked. ( thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick,
thou art covered with fatness) then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the work of his salvation. This issued from a prophetical spirit,
declaring that as already present, which after the revolution of many a year
was to be fulfilled and accomplished. This ingratitude was in its swaddling
clouts when Joshua led Israel into the land of promise, which is ratified by
the unanimous suffrage of the whole College of Prophets, and almost in the
very same terms by Hosea in chap. 13. Jeremy arraigns them as guilty of the
same crime; the bill of indictment runs thus: Jer. 11. 10.
They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers which refused to
hear mywords, and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel
and the house of Judah have broken the Covenant which I made with their
Fathers. And God himself by the mouth of his Prophet thus proclaims their
obstinacy: Since the day that your Fathers came out of the Land of Egypt unto
this day, Jer. 7. 25. 26.
I have even sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, daily rising up early
and sending them; yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but
heardened their neck, they did worse then their Fathers. The obstinacy of this
People at last grew to so high a pitch, that they stopped their ears at the
admonition of the Prophets, who cried aloud unto them to amend their ways, and
curbed their offenses with tart reprehensions, killing, stoning, rewarding
every one with some bitter death; Nehem. 9. 25. 26.
which act of theirs is faithfully registered by the holy Spirit, Ezra ^: They
took strong Cities and a fat Land, and possessed houses full of all goods,
wels dug, Vineyards and Oliveyards and fruit trees in abundance: so they did
eat and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thygreat
goodness: nevertheless they mere disobedient and rebelled against thee, and
cast thy Law behind their backs, and slew thy Prophets which testified against
them to turn them to thee, and wrought great provocations. And Jeremy also may
be cited for a witness, for his words are these: Wherefore will ye plead with
me* ye all have transgressed against me, says the Lord. In vain have I smitten
your children, Ier. 2* 29 30*
they have received no corrections* your own sword has devoured your Prophets
like a destroying Lion. When the Lord sees this his people thus altogether
incapable of corection, he afflicts them with all the punishments which Moses
by the spirit of God had denounced against them, neither their bodies nor goods
can now escape the lash of his fury; he sends among them the sword, famine and
pestilence, tempests, diseases, imbred dissension, and discord; and to make
their misery complete, casts them out of that Land flowing with milk and honey,
and causes them to trace the captives steps into another which they knew not.
The ten tribes together with their King Hoshea is carried by Salmanasser into
Assyria, 2 Reg. 17.
Kin. and when the two remaining Tribes, Juda and Benjamin, were not hurried to
repentance by the present view of their brethrens afflictions, God sends
Nebuchadnezzer King of Babel against them, who leads them captive into the Land
of Chaldea, makes Jerusalem a desolate heap, and turns their Temple, their
chief beauty into ashes. Nevertheless the space of 70 years fully expired,
these 2 tribes were again brought out of the house of bondage, because it was
the Almighties pleasure to preserve the tribe of Judah even unto that time,
when according to his promise, out of that tribe, and in the promised land the
Messiah should be incarnate. But for all this these 2 tribes did not much
outstrip the other 10 in the practice of holiness; for they always following
their own devices, seriously traced the forbidden bypath of their forfathers,
for which the later Prophets, Haggai, Zachary and Malachi were earnest
declamitants against them: the last of which being a Priest, and proclaiming
them guilty of a wicked life, threatens them with a final rejection.

(...) out in obscurity, that so we might again be cast headlong into that
darkness in which we sat, before it was the Lords pleasure by his mercy to
impart unto us the saving knowledge of his heavenly word.

My second Motive was this, that the hardened in heart, and blindfolded Jews at
last descending into the Chambers of their strict cogitations, might have some
glimpse of the greatness of their infidelity, and so convicted before the face
of the whole world of that more than brutish folly in the expounding of the
holy Scriptures, and of their old wives tales, whereby God for the most part is
blasphemed, and his saving word against all humane reason after an execrable
manner perverted, they might begin to be ashamed, who with such a whorish
forehead, and want of wit did not fear to speak or write in this manner of God
Almighty, and his holy word, and that at length they might think, that they had
stumbled at that stone of stumbling, and rock of offense laid in Sion, and
thereupon that they shall fall prostrate upon the ground, be broken, to Gods
Law ensnared and captivated, and finally that God poured upon them the spirit
of deep sleep, Isa. 29* 10, 11.
and so closed their eyes, that every prophecy and the whole Scripture was to
them as the words of a book that is sealed, and that the wisdom of their wise
men is now altogether perished, and the understanding of their prudent men hid,
as the Prophet Isaiah foretold them. The God of mercies have mercy upon them,
and convert them, and keep us firm and immovable in the knowledge of his
truth, that in it we may hope to gain eternal life, as Christ himself
witnesses to our comfort, when he says, John 17. 3.
This is eternal life, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, To him be ascribed, praise, honor and glory for
evermore, Amen.

MICAH c. 4. v. 1, 2.

IN the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of
the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it.

And many Nations shall come and say, come, and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the Law shall go orth from Sion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Luther upon these words of Micah, has left this consequent paragraph in
memory concerning the Jews. So goes the matter, hereupon arise these mental
divisions, this is that which makes the Jews mad and foolish, that which
forces them to a sense so damnable, that they are compelled without the least
show of honesty, to wrest every parcel of the Scripture, because it
contradicts their will, and they cannot endure that we Gentiles should be equal
copartners with them in Gods favor, and that the Messiah should in a like
measure administer to us and them joy and consolation. Moreover, rather than
they would vouchsafe, that we the offspring of the Gentiles (who are by them
daily contemned, accursed and devoted to the infernal hagges, torn and cut in
pieces by their slanderous backbitings) should participate in the Merits of the
Messiah, and enjoy the title of coheirs and brethren, they had rather ten
Messiahs should suffer the shameful death of the cross, and afflict God
himself (if there were any possibility in nature) the holy Angels and all other
creatures with the stroke of death, nay, they would not be afraid of the fact,
though a thousand hellish torments were to be endured for the effecting of it,
so incomprehensible and austere is the pride mixed with the honorable blood of
these Fathers, and circumcised Saints, who alone would enjoy the promised
Messiah, and be capped for the sole Donns of the world. Chjim.
The Nations or Gentiles ought only to be these accursed vassals, and to give
up their desire, that is their silver and gold unto the Jews, and that they
should be constrained to submit themselves unto them after the manner of beasts
prepared to the slaughter, rather then they will relinquish one whit of this
their assertion, they will not refuse wittingly and willingly to be damned
eternally.

THE ARGUMENT OF EVERY CHAPTER.
CHap. 1. Concerning the Articles of the Jewish Creed, the execution of Gods
commandments, and the causes of their superstition. Chap. 2. Of their Nativity
and Circumcision: of the occasion and manner thereof. Chap. 3. How the Jews
instruct their children in the fear of God. Chap. 4. How they prepare
themselves to morning Prayer. Chap. 5. Of the form of their morning Prayer,
their Fringes and Phylacteries. Chap. 6. In what order they depart the
Synagogue, and their preparation to dinner. Chap. 7. How the Jews behave
themselves in time of eating. Chap. 8. Of the form of evening Prayer, and
manner of going to bed. Chap. 9. Of their hollowing of Mondays and Thursdays.
Chap. 10. Of their preparation to the Sabbath, and how they begin it. Chap. 11.
Of the Celebration of the Sabbath, and how they make an end thereof. Chap. 12.
How the Jews prepare themselves to the celebration of the Passover. Chap. 13.
The manner how the Jews celebrate their Passover. Chap* 14. How they
celebrate the seven dnyes of the Passover, and put a conclusion to the
Festival. Chap. 15. Of the feast of Pentecost. Chap. 16. Of their feast of
Tabernacles. Chap. 17. Of their Feast of the new Moon. Chap. 18. Of the Feast
of the New year: how the Jews prepare themselves to the celebration thereof:
how God at the same time judges the Israelites for their sin and offenses.
Chap. 19. Of the feast of the New Moon. Chap. 20. Of their preparation to the
feast of Reconciliation. Chap. 21. Of the Feast of Reconciliation. Chap. 22. Of
the Feast of joy and gladness, for that they have read over the Law, and the
manner how they distribute their ecclesiastical Offices. Chap. 23. Of their
Feast of Dedication of the Temple. Chap. 24. Of the Feast of Purim. Chap. 25.
Of their Fasting days. Chap. 26. Of their difference of meats, and of the
diverse boiling of them, and of their Kitchen Vessels. Chap. 27. Of the manner
how they kill their beasts, and of the corporation of Butchers, and how they
are licensed. Chap. 28. Of their Marriages, and of the Dowry bill. Chap. 29. Of
the divorce used among the Jews, and the bill of divorce. Chap. 30. How a
Jewish woman divorceth her self from the brother of her deceased Husband Chap.
31. Of the uncleanness of the Jewish women, and the manner of their cleansing,
and of their carriage toward their Husbands in the time of their uncleanness.
Chap, 32. Of the Proverb of the Jews, and their manner of begging, and the form
of their pasport. Chap. 33. Of diverse sorts of diseases incident to the Jews,
as the plague and falling sickness. Chap. 34. How the Jews are wont to inflict
punishment one upon another for their offenses. Chap. 35. Touching the burial
of the Jews, and how they are bewailed and lamented of their living friends
and kinsfolk. Chap. 36. Of their Messiah, which they believe is yet to come:
how manifold* he is, of the miracles which shall foregoe his coming, of the
Feast he shall make to the Jews, of his Marriage, his Reign, the state of the
Jews in the time thereof, of his death, as also how Antichrist shall war
against him.
THE JEWISH SYNAGOGUE.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Articles of the Jewish Creed, their execution of Gods
Commandments, and the cause of their Superstition.
THat which the Lord uttered by the mouth of his Prophet Isa. touching the
hypocrysie, obstinacy, and ignorance of the Jewish Nation, in these words;
Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, Isa, 29. 13, 14.
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me,
and their fear toward me is taught by the Precept of men: Therefore behold I
will proceed to do a mavelous work among this people, even a miraculous work
and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. The very same we may now
clearly perceive to be accomplished in every part and parcel; for in their
self-pleasing worship is nothing but deceit and hypocrisy, and in the whole
College of their most learned Rabbines, The Rabbis were the chief Scholars
and Doctors amongst the Jews. Hence the word Rabbi, Rab, Rabbi, and Rabban
signifies as much as Master. These titles sprung up about the time of, or
presently after Christ's incarnation, for formerly the Prophets were called by
their bare names. Rabbi, and Ribbi are more excellent titles than Rab and
Rabban* the most honored of all, given only to Princes and versed in the law of
Moses: these have for their root the hebrew verb (...) which signifies to
multiply, for so were the Rabbines in the knowledge of the Law: they had
another name, which was Geon (...) which in computation makes 60. because a
Rabbine ought to read the 60 Tracts of the Talmud*
and Scribes, The Scribes were the expounders of the Law, ministers of the
Text, in Hebrew Sopherim (...) from (...) which signifies to number, because
they spent their time in numbering not only the verses, but the words and
letters of each book in the Bible.
thy apprehension can fasten upon nothing else but ignorance and gross
simplicity, especially in the knowledge of God, and in the interpretation of
his Word. In the whole Nation of the Jews, nothing worth thy observation,
except a horrid hardness of heart, and perverseness in their conversation, and
every particular action: nevertheless, they blush not a jot to grace
themselves with the title of Gods chosen people. Such also they are who would
seem to burn with zeal that the Word of God might be purely propagated, because
they believe in God with an accomplished faith, and cleave unto him with a
sincere and righty settled confidence above all the Nations of the earth, as
Paul bears witness, That they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. Hence is it, that the Jews even unto this day firmly contend for
their superstitious Worship, professing themselves to have a well grounded and
assured faith toward God, who created heaven and earth, who is one in essence,
and will not suffer any other gods before him.

The Jews Creed contains in it thirteen Articles, which as they are briefly
delivered in their Tephillos (...) signisies a prayer, derived from (...) in
Hiphil, signifying* to pray humbly with the Confession of our sin and
misery, hence their prayer-books are named Tephillos.
or books of Common Prayer, we have here set down.

1. The Articles of the Jews creed
I believe with a true and perfect faith, that God is the Creator, Governor
and preserver of all Creatures, that he did work all things, works as yet, and
shall work for ever.

2. I believe with a perfect says, that God the Creator is one, and that the
unity which is in him, is such as can be found in no other, who only, was, is,
and shall be our God for everlasting.

3. I believe with a perfect faith, that God the Creator, is incorporeall, not
endowed with any bodily properties: finally, that no corporeal essence can be
compared unto him.

4. I believe with a perfect faith, that God the Creator is the first and the
last, that there was nothing before him, that he shall remain for everlasting.

5. I believe with a perfect faith, that he alone is to be worshipped, and that
Worship is due to none besides him.

6. I believe with a perfect faith, that whatsoever the Prophets have spoke and
taught, is the sincere truth.

7. I believe with a perfect faith, that the Doctrine and Prophecy of Moses is
orthodox, that he was the Father, and chief of the learned, that either were of
the same standing with him, lived before him, or shall be extant in future ages.

8. I believe with a perfect faith, that the whole Law was so delivered by God
himself to Moses, as it is now extant with us.

9. I believe with a perfect faith, that this Law shall never admit of a
change, and that God shall give unto us no other.

10. I believe with a perfect faith, that God knows and understands all the
works and thoughts of men, as it is written by the Prophet: He fashioneth all
the hearts of them, and understands all their works. Psalm. 33. 14.


11. I believe with a perfect faith, that God will reward every man's works that
keeps his Commandments, and on the contrary, will punish all those that have
transgressed his Statutes.

12. I believe with a perfect faith, that the Messiah is yet to come, and that
though he daily defers his coming, nevertheless I will hope for his coming,
every day till he come, waiting for him.

13. I believe with a perfect faith, that there shall be a Resurrection of the
dead; even in that time when it shall seem correspondent to the will of the
Creator, whose name be blessed and celebrated both now and for ever in the
highest strains of humane expression. Amen.

This is Sum of the thirteen Articles of the Jewish Creed, as they are
summarily and briefly comprehended and set down in their Books of Common
Prayer: in which belief the poor and blinded souls of the Jews after a
lamentable manner, with incessant groans, much anxiety, inexpressible doubting,
and outcries, sighing out their last farewell to the beloved prison of their
bodies, are utterly lost and undone. Now that every one may with greater
facility comprehend the very gloss and meaning which the Jews themselves annex
to this their Creed, I have thought it meet to illustrate the Articles thereof
by the lamp of a small Comment. And first of all we are to know, that the faith
of the Jews and Mosaicall Religion (according to their own writings) was built
upon these Articles, as upon the foundation, and first of all delivered to the
public view, and reduced into this order by that Casket of Learning, Rabbi
Mosche Bar Bar Maimon, the son of Maimon, for Bar signifies a son from the
Hebrew verb, (...) barar to make clean, or purge: either that children of all
others are the neatest in body and comeliest, or else that their mind ought to
be purged and elcansed from vices. The name Ben (...) is given in respect of
generation, from hanah (...), to build up, because they build up the house of
their Fathers, but Bar is a name given them in respect of their education, Rab.
David.
Maimon, who in the year of the World, 4964* according to the vulgar account,
now used among the Jews, but in the year of our Redemption, 1104. changed this
life for a better; and that then it was strictly commanded, that from
thenceforth, throughout all succeeding ages, that every Jew, confessing this
faith, should resolve to live and die in the profession of it: Hereupon it came
to pass, that these Articles were graced with large Expositions, and thence a
great Volume was written, out of which the forementioned Articles were more
fully drawn, than formerly set down, and annexed to the end of that Voluminous
Book* Esrim vearba.
Esrim vearba, or the Hebrew Bible, printed at Venice by Daniel Bombergus, by
the study of Foelix Pratensis, in the year of Christ 1517. where they are found
expressed in the same manner, in which they are subsequently delivered.

The first Article is concerning God, who is the Creator of all Creatures,
illah haillos Illah haillos, the cause of causes, a term used by* the Hebrew
Rabbis, and Philosophers, as all the other following, (...) cause from (...)
signifying to cause, or give occasion.
the cause of causes, and entity of entities, that every thing, whether extant
in heaven above, or earth below, was created of, and has its subsistence in
him; that he made every thing according to his absolute will, and that every
thing shall again be reduced into its prime nothing, according to his good will
and pleasure; and although that every thing made by him shall again be
annihilated, yet his essence is immortal, not subject to the least shadow of
change, or diminution, because his essence* Mezius Gemurah Mezius Gemrah,
(...)perfection; (...) Gemurah signifies perfection from (...) Gamar, to finish
or to be defective for the best perfection among mortals has its defect.
is perfect, and of it self subsistent, not needing the prop or help of any
other to sustain it. That the same God, is that everlasting light, strength and
life, that his is the Kingdom, Dominion over all creatures. That he is truly
one, and the most renowned Monarch: This Article is grounded upon those words,
Exodus 20. 2. I am the Lord thy God, etc.

The second Article is concerning the individual unity of the Essence and
Nature of God, to wit, that he is echad umeinchad Echad umeinchad of one
essence, both the words are derived from (...) echad, unus one.
of one Essence, and that there is nothing, either within or without the World,
that can any way enter the lists of a comparison; in respect of this unity and
identity, he is not in the same series or order with any thing universal or
singular, which comprehends more of the same stamp under it; neither is he
Keechad Hammurcabh, Keechad hamurcabh, secundum (...) unum hamurcabh
compositorium for (...) marcebah signisies a composit, or conjunction from
(...) to compose or cojoyn, and (...) a composed thing from the same (...).
any compounded thing, which for this reason admits of a Division into parts:
neither Guph Paschut, (d) a simple body, which is one indeed in number, but may
either be increased or diminished, but he is one in Essence, in every point
absolute and perfect, to which no other Essence can be compared in respect of
its unity. This Article is grounded upon that Text, Hear O Israel, the Lord our
God, is one God. Deuteronomy 6. 4.


The third Article is, that Middas hagguph Meddah hagguph, bodily attributes,
(...) signifies a property or affection from (...) signifying to measure,
because our attributes and affections measure out unto us our bodily
perfections. (...) Guph signifies a body, derived from (...) Guph, to enclose,
for it is the casket of the soul.
bodily properties, or any thing contingent to the body, after such a manner,
that it may afterward be separated, as to walk, stand, speak, be silent, sit,
run, and many other of the same kind cannot be attributed unto God without a
manifest injury: hereupon it coms to pass, that as often as the holy Scripture
does assign corporeal Attributes unto him, that we must conceive it to be
spoken of derech haabharah Al derech haabharah, (...) in an hyperbole, or ad
modum transitionis, for gnal, signifies according, derec signifies, a way from
darac to walk, and aberah, a transition from gnabar to pass over.
with an Hyperbole, and Kischon been haadam Kischon been handam, (...)
according to man's coming, laschan signifies a coming from lashan to speak Been
sons from banah (...) to build up, Adam man, from (...) to he of a red color.
after the manner of men: to no other end, but that the Divine Nature may with
greater facility be comprehended by the finite understanding of men: this
Article is grounded upon the 15. v. of the 41. chap of Deuteronomy. You saw no manner
of similitude on that day that the Lord spoke unto you.

The fourth Article is so plain, that it needs no Commentary; to wit, that God
is Kadmon, the first, and from all Eternity, and that every thing besides is
hurried about with the wheel of time, and had its beginning in time. This
Article is grounded upon that Text, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. whereby God is declared to be
Elohe Kedem, (...) Kadmon, Eternity, from Kadam to prevent and so Kedem Elohe
God from alah, vide poster.
the God of Eternity, as also upon that, Isa. 44. 6. I am the first and the
last, and there is no other God besides me.

The fith Article is, that God, one in Essence, is to be worshipped, that we
ought only to serve him, and highly to extol, praise, and celebrate his
Majesty, that in plain terms we ought not to worship any other God for the same
respect: whether that which is to be worshipped, be an Angel or a Saint, a Star
or any other thing composed of the four Elements, because every of these is
his creature, bounded with certain limits, and therefore finite; and he alone
the only Creator, who as he wants beginning, so he is without end; that all
creatures being subject and obnoxious to necessity are not of their own
disposing, and for this cause to have such a necessary dependence upon God, who
alone is guided by his own good pleasure, that there is no obstacle which can
hinder him from effecting that which his will suggests. Again, that Melitzim,
(...) signifies Mediators and Interpreters, for a Mediator does, as it were
interpret the will of one unto another. The root is (...) Malatz signifying to
sweeten, for a Mediator does sweeten and make us acceptable to him we have
offended.
Intercessours or Mediators betwixt God and man, cannot lawfully be appointed,
which ought to be a Lesson unto us, that Idolatry being far removed from us, we
should tender our service to God alone, to which end the thorah (...) Thorah,
the Law, the word is derived from (...) Jarah, Which signifies to lay a
groundwork, intimating that the Law should be firrmely rooted in the hearts of
men: the Letters of this word thorah make in computation 613. and so many
Precepts the Rabbines veckon in the Law of Moses, whereof the Mandatory are
248. according to the members in a man's body, insinualing that we are bound to
fulfill the law in every member. the prohibitory are 363, according to the
number of days in the year, to note out unto us, that every day there is
something to be avoided, which violates the Law, or thus, the number of the
prohibitory Commandments is equal to that of the veins in man's body, to warn
us, that as there are many veins in every Member, to there are many
affirmative Precepts, which teach us to do well, and that we may better effect,
more negative, whereby we avoid the contrary. The Jews say, the Law was two
fold, (...) the written Law delivered to Moses in Sinai, to two Tables; (...)
Lex oralis, thorah begnal peh, delivered by mouth unto him, out of which the
Pharisees establish their Traditions.
or the Holy Scripture may serve us for an inciting Schoolmaster.

The sixth Article is, that God out of his goodness, and according to his
mere good pleasure has elected some out of the whole race of mankind, whose
mind and understanding he has purified above others, has enriched them with
the Spirit of foretelling things to come, and has so subjugated their
perspicacity, to the will of him their Creator, that they become his oracles,
whereby he shows the way unto silly mortals, in which they ought to walk, if
they intend to obtain the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls.

The seventh Article is, that Moses was the most sublime, and excellent in the
whole Catalogue of the Prophets; that he attained unto so high a degree of
wisdom, humane perfection, honor and dignity, that he was accounted equal
unto the Angels; whereupon the prohecies of this one man did in many respects
exceed the Prophecies of others.

First of all, God spoke unto other Prophets by some Angel, who was a Mediator
between God and them, but with Moses he spoke with his own mout, face to face,
The comparison of Moses with other Prophets.
as one talks with his friend.

Secondly, the other Prophets received their Prophesies, either by dreams in
the night, or by some profound sleep upon the day, wherein all their Members,
yea their whole Bodies were so stupefied, that only their mind and memory did
enjoy their proper operations, but Moses did not receive his Prophecies after
this manner, but as it is written of him.

If there arise a Prophet among you, I will appear unto him in a vision, I will
speak unto him in a dream.

Not so, my servant Moses who is faithful in my whole house, Numb* 12* 6. 7, 8.
I will speak to him mouth to mouth.

From whence it is manifest, that Moses received his Prophecies in the day
time, even as often as he stood before the Cherubim, as it is writtten, Exodus* 25.
22.
I will meet thee, and I will commune with thee from above the Mercy seat, from
between the two Cherubims, which are upon the Ark of the Testimony, of all
things which I will give thee in Commandment unto the children of Isroel.

Thirdly, when the spirit of Prophecy came upon any other of the Prophets
either in dreams, by visions, or the mission of an Angel, they had, as it were,
a certain deprivation of their natural powers and faculties, that being
astonished, a horrible dread came upon them, and they driven into an ecstasy;
as the Holy Spirit witnesses of Daniel the Prophet: Dan. 10. 7, 8, 9.
I Daniel saw alone the Vision: for the men that were with me saw not the
Vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide
themselves. Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great Vision, and there
was left no strength in me, for my comeliness was turned into corruption, and I
retained no strength. Yet I heard the voice of his words: And when I heard the
voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep upon my face, and my face
toward the ground. But Moses suffered no invasion of fear or anxiety when he
received his Prophesies: whereupon the Scripture says, Exodus 33. 10.
that the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend:
even so familiarly, that he was not subject to the least amazement,

Fourthly, Other Prophets could not by any proper faculty prophecy when, and
after what manner they would, but only then, when God did not only command
them, but also endowed them with gifts and ability corres pondent to such a
function, whereupon it often came to pass, that they did beseech God to send
upon them the Spirit of Prophecy, who for a certain season had not spoke in
this Dialect, yea, sometimes did altogether leave off to Prophecy. And for this
cause, according to the practice of Elisha, 2 Kings 2. 15.
they desired to hear the melodious sound of musical Instruments, whereby
their spirits and understandings might be recreated; but Moses could prophecy
at his own pleasure, whenever he was conscious of a convenience. Lev. 16. 2.
whereupon it is written: Stay you here, that I may know what the Lord will
command you: And the Lord spoke with Moses saying, etc. For these reasons was
Moses more worthy then the rest of the Prophets, yea, in that supereminent
manner, that no Prophet was ever compared unto him.

The eighth Article is concerning the Law, Artic. 8.
that it was so delivered to Moses by Gods own mouth, as it is now extant
amongst, them The manner how it was given, whether by writing, or dictated of
God to Moses by word of mouth, it is not needful to inquire. If it proceeded
from the mouth of God, then is it necessary that every parcel thereof should be
truth, and in this respect no difference to be made amongst the particular
clauses of holy Writ; as these: I am the Lord thy God, etc. and Thumia was the
Concubine of Eliphaz, who came of Esau: as also, The Sons of Ham were Cush and
Mizraim, phut and Canaan, and this, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one
God, and others of the same sort, seeing they are all Gods true and holy Word.
After the like manner the Exposition of the divine Law, Mippi haggeburah (...)
e^ ore Dei. (...) Pe signifies a mouth, and Gebarah is one of the Cabalissical
predicaments, and among the Rabbines one of the names of God, from (...) Gabar,
to prevail, or be powerful.
came from Gods own mouth, as also all the things observable in the
celebration of their bulabh Lulabh (...) ramus, spatula, palma, a bough, or
bra^ct, for in the feast of Tabernacles the Jews were to dwell in Booths made of
Myrtle and Palm branches, as it is recorded Nehem. 8. 15.
or feast of Tabernacles, as the blowing of Trumpets, Zizim Zizim (...) their
fringes from (...) Zuz, to move up and down.
Tephillim Tephillim (...) their Phylacteries used in this feast.
, concerning which things notwithstanding there is not one express word found
in the Law of Moses, yet are they kept no otherwise then God has with open
mouth delivered them to Moses, and Moses unto us: and Moses, God himself
bearing him witness, Numb. 12. 7. was faithful in all his house. And they are
his own words, Numb. 16. 28. Hereby you shall know that the Lord has sent me
to do all these Works: for I have not done them of mine own mind.

The ninth Article concerning the change of the Law, that the Law of Moses
shall never be abrogated, or any other succeed in the place thereof, and that
nothing need to be added unto it, or taken away from it; that not one jot or
title shall be annexed, or perish from the holy Scripture, neither that any
Exposition shall make it subject to augmentation or diminution: whereupon it
shall come to pass, that Gods holy Temple, and the City Jerusalem shall again
be re-edified, the sacrifices and Mosaical ceremonies restored, and the Jews
themselves at length to be brought back again into their own Land, that they
may for ever observe and keep the Law of Moses.

The tenth Article needs no other explication then the Scripture comments.

The eleventh Article is concerning the reward due to good and evil works; the
reward of good deeds is the world to come, and life eternal; the punishment of
evil, the souls eternal destruction and damnation: whereupon it is written,
Exodus 32. 32, 33. Yet now, if thou will, for give their sin, and if not, blot
me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou have written. And the Lord said
unto Moses, he who has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.

The twelfth Article is concerning the coming of the Messiah, Artic. 12.
whose coming is to be expected as certain, though he long delay it; yea,
none ought or dare to prescribe unto him certain time, any determinate time for
his advent: neither will they suffer the holy Scriptures to be searched into,
that this sulness of time in which he should come, may be made manifest.
Hereupon their Chachamim. (...) Chachamim, there wisemen, from (...) to be
wise, or understand.
and Rabbis deeply grounded in the Jews Religion, were wont to say, tippach
Tippach, from (...) to breath.
ruchan Ruach (...) Ruach signifies breath, of spirit, wind, etc.
schel mechaschebbe Kitzim. I wish they may breath out their own souls, who go
about to set down the time of his approach. They teach that our trust and
confidence is to be settled on the Messiah, that he is to be loved, praised,
and petitioned that he will come quickly; even as all the Prophets from Moses
to Malachi were wont to do: when on the contrary, whosoever doubts of his
coming, gives the whole Law the lie (yea, but the whole Law does make the
miserable, poor, and blind Jew a Liar, who doubting that he is not come,
believes he shall come, when he is already come) in which a plain and clear
promise concerning this matter is enrolled, especially in parascha Parascha The
Rabbines in their b^okes cite not the places according to the chapters, but
according to sections, for (...) signifies a section, or a distinct part of any
thing from (...) signifying to divide, separate, or distinguish. The two first
words of the Section usually stand for the name thereof there Parascha or
Section is either noted with three great (...) Phe, or with three great (...)
Samech. The letter (...) notes out (...) an open and plain Section. The letter
(...) a closed or Section shut up, not in the resPect Of the things themselves,
but manner of writing. For if the Section begin at the beginning of the line,
it is called an open Section because a greater space is list. A close Section
is when (...) he Section begins in the middle of the line, and the space of
three letters is only vacant. Of this sort there is one which is noted by a
little (...) Sarech, which is the last Section on of the Book of Genesis,
beginning chap. 47. veis. 2^. The reason according to the Rabbines, is because
it is the seal and closre of this boo^, the Law and the Prophets, till the
coming of the Messiah. The whole Law is divided into 54. Sections. Vide
Buxtorf. de Parasch.


The 13. Article is concerning the Resurrection of the dead, Artic 3.
of which there is nothing now to be spoken: whosoever therefore faithfully
believes these 13. Articles, is accounted one of the number of the Israelites,
yea, such an one who is to be loved, whom every one ought to commiserate, and
unto whom he ought to perform, wh^^soever God the Creator has commanded to be
done to a neighbor or brother, out of Sincere love, unfeigned affection, and
brotherly kindness; yea, they esteem him a man of that constitution, that
though he commit all the offenses, which in the world become the fuel to set
a fire the whole course of Nature with burning lusts, and consume it with
inbred malice, and therefore suffer punishment in this World according to the
nature and measure of his sin, yet shall he inherit eternal life, being placed
in the Calendar of the sinners of Israel.

Whosoever destroys the foundation on which these Articles are built, or
commits a trespass against any one of them by his infidelity, they affirm, that
he has neither part nor portion in Israel, that he has denied his God, is to
be abhorred like a swinish Epicure, because he has rooted up that which was
once implanted in him, according to the most exquisite skill of the Artificer;
and therefore he deserves no other then to be rejected, abandoned, and perish
utterly: of such an one speaks the Prophet, Psalm. 139. 21. Do I not hate them,
O Lord, that hate thee? and am I not grieved with those that rise up against
thee?

Thus hitherto I have more at large expounded the genuine sense of the Jewish
Creed out of Rabbi Moses the Son of Maimon, more birefly written and nominated
by the Jewish Synagogue Rambam, Rambam the 4 capital laters of the former name
briefly neting R Moses Bar M^^mon, which kind of (...) the R^^bines were
c^monly grace^ with, (...) begun to (...).
with this intent, that every one might more clearly perceive, and know to what
end this belief of the Jews was directed: whose Articles if any with a more
serious scrutiny into their own writings search and examine, he may with great
facility conclude, that when Rambam had brought these Articles into order, and
with severe threanings of extirpation of the Jewish name, and the loss of
their souls, enjoining every one unto the confession of them, to have had no
other aim^ then the overthrow of Christian Religion among the Jews, intending
to put upon it the badge of falsehood; for making it hateful unto them, he
might for ever terrify them from the embracing of it.

Hence the Articles concerning God the Creator, that he is one alone,
incorporeal and eternal, hitherto muster up their forces, that they condemning
the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, and Christ's person, might make it liable
to contempt: as though that we Christians, by maintaining a Trinity, did also
infer a plurality of Gods, or that Christ should not be God, nor partake in his
Fathers essence, because it was his pleasure to assume our flesh in time, not
from eternity: whereupon when hence it follows that he is no God, it may serve
for a necessary consequence, that he is not to be worshipped, for this is due
to God alone, as the fifth Article affirms: and God is only a Searcher of the
hearts, and so was not Christ, as in the 11. Article. In the same manner the 6,
7, 8, 9. Articles are placed in a diametrical opposition to the Doctrine of
Christ, and the whole Gospel, intimating, that Christ was no true Prophet nor
Teacher sent from Heaven, because his Doctrine was not delivered unto him out
of Gods own mouth, as it was to Moses, and that therefore our Savior spoke
many things against the Law in his sayings to the People, yea, was not afraid
to alter many parcels thereof, which ought to have remained unchangeable.
Furthermore, if it be true, that man for the integrity of his life, and tracing
the way of Gods Commandments, as also for his own good deeds can merit life
eternal; and on the contrary, for his evil works and ungodliness becOms the
Heir of everlasting torments: in what respect, I pray thee, does the passion
and death of Christ any whit avail us? The wheel of time has not travised
many minutes, since a certain Jew did not blush to affirm to my face, that he
needed not any to satisfy for his sin; that it is meet, every Fox should give
his own skin to the Currier to be pulled off, and to suffer his own hairs to be
plucked out at his pleasure. The tenth Article therefore, whereby we profess
Christ to be our Redeemer, is contrary to this assertion. Besides this, Rambam,
and the rest of the Jewish Nation who had any knowledge of letters, in all
their Books and Writings have no other scope, but to make the faith of a
Christian the object of suspicion and contempt. Amongst whom Rabbi Joseph Alba,
a Spaniard, challenges the first place, who writ a little Book in the year of
Christ 1425. entitled Sepher ikkarim, (...) liber fundamenti, contning the
grounds of the Jews Religion. (...) sig^^fies a foundation with the Rabbanes.
It was fi^t prined at Venice, An. D. 1425. and then at Lublin i^ Poland 1567.
in which he stoutly maintains the Jewish Creed for Orthodox, and sends out at
random the fiery darts of a fiery disputation against that of the Christians.
His Arguments are grounded upon the main Principles of the Jewish belief.

First, upon the unity of God Essence, and hence he denies the Trinity, as also
the Godhead of Christ.

Secondly, upon the Law of Moses, which was delivered from heaven unto him by
God himself with his own mouth: whence he rejects the Doctrine of Christ and
the New Testament, consequently intimating, that Christ was a false Prophet,
and not the Messiah: hence the main of the strife and Controversies between us
and the lews, lies in these two points, to wit, that of the Trinity, and this
concerning Christ's person.

Thirdly, he establishes his Positions upon the eternal reward of good works,
and the endless punishment of evil, hence despising the death and passion of
our Savior, which he underwent for the sins of mankind.

Of the same grain is that obscene and abominable Book, entitled Nitzachon
Nitzachon signisies as much as victory from (...) natzach, to overcome, as
though Sipman in this book bad triumphed over the four Evangelists. The cause
of Jewish superstition.
written by Rabbi Sipman, whose lines are such, that without all doubt he
committed this Book to writing in the year of Christ, 1459. as it was delivered
unto him from the Devils own mouth. This piece he composed to falsify the four
Evangelists, out of which Sebastian Munster, my Predecessor and Professor of
the holy tongue in this University, transcribed many parcels and confuted them,
in his Commentary upon Saint Matthews Gospel.

When therefore the hard hearted and hoodwinckt Jews did with might and main
endeavor to deny the faith of Christians and to brand it with falsehood, they
shipwrackt upon the Rocks of Superstition, and that in such a measure, that
they utterly did disanull their faith in God, neither have they any knowledge
to believe aright, although they proudly boast of a firm and perfect faith
toward God the Creator of heaven and earth, who is one in Essence from
Eternity, and without end, yet such a faith can never be g^aced with the Title
of the true belief, when as they know not God, in whom so audaciously they
pretend a confidence, after that manner, as he has manifested himself in his
word. Now the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets declare unto us the same
God, that the New Testament propounds, though more darkly, showing, that there
is a Trinity in uniTy, And an unity in Trinity, to wit, God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, yet the Jews, hot without great scandal, denying this
Attribute to the Creat^ur of heaven and earth, it necessarily follows, that
they place no belief in the true God, but rather by a stupid ignorance of him
and his Essence become the very emblemes of Idolatry.

In that they affirm, that whatsoever Moses, or any other of the Prophets
commit to writing, was altogether orthodox, and that their Text is neither to
be augmented or diminished: that Moses was a great and famous Prophet, is an
established truth, yet we doubt not, but their understanding was subject to a
monstrous depravation in this their assertion.

For first of all, they do not only not believe what is written in Moses and
the Prophets to be true, but also do prefer the Expositions of their wise men
and Rabbines upon the Law, and other parcels of holy Writ, before Moses and the
Prophets; yea, they esteem more of the word of a Rabbine than of Moses:
furthermore, they account the Traditions, Statues and Ordinances, not as
additions to the Law, but for the very Law it self, which Moses received from
the mouth of God, and taught unto others, This is the thorah begnal peh, above
mentioned.
yet did not put it in writing, lest the Gentiles learning it also, might put
it in execution; for without this Declaration, Moses his Law can neither be
understood nor performed, as we shall more at large hereafter manifest.

That they persuade themselves, that the Law was given with this condition,
that nothing of it should at any time be changed, they grossly mistake: the
Ceremonial Law signified Christ to come, which whenby his incarnation he had
fulfilled, shortly after the holy Temple must kiss the ground, and embrace the
dust, the City Jerusalem, and the holy things are utterly destroyed, the Jews
banished their own Land, and dispersed among the Gentiles, that at last they
might understand the time already come, wherein there should be but one
Shepherd, and one Sheepfold, and that seeing the Gentiles were entered into
Communion with them in belief in God the Omnipotent Creator of heaven and
earth, that they were also made partakers of the treasures of the Divine word,
and first delivered to the Jews.

Likewise their error is inexcusable, in making Moses the greatest Prophet,
thence striving to annihilate the worth of our Savior, as one who is not
worthy to loose the latchet of his Shoe, but blasphemously terming him a lying
Doctor. Experience does convince, that in this thing many of the Jews have the
lie cast in their teeth by their own convicting conscience. They believe
aright, that in Moses and other Prophets the Messiah was promised; but herein
their understanding is miserably perverted, that they yielding to credit that
he is come so many years ago, are altogether ignorant for what end and
purpose, and in what degree his ^comming should be beneficial unto them: for
all that they expect is only this, that he, like another Moses and Aaron,
should deliver them from a terrestrial and corporal bondage, and again bring
them into their own land: and to this end only, that they might no longer drink
the Wine of bitterness among the Gentiles, but be fed with milk and honey in
the Land of Canaan. They never dream of a deliverance from the spiritual
captivity of sin, for they persuade themselves, that by penance done in their
own flesh, they can satisfy for their own sin, and by keeping of Gods*
Com^andements, and their own good works, merit eternal life.

In the 11. Article of their Belief, Tract, Saned. cap. 11.
they believe that whosoever does many good works shall obtain a great reward
in the world to come. It is read in their Talmud, All Israel shall have part in
the world to come: as it is written, Isa. 60. 21.
All thy People shall be righteous, they shall receive the earth for an
inheritance for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified: Yet nevertheless they shall not all share a like. He that
has done many good deeds shall have a greater portion. Surely the Papists had
their pu^gatory from hence.
The wicked which never repented them of their sins, shall be tormented in Hell
or purgatory for the space of twelve months, and after that shall have a
portion in life everlasting, but not so excellent as that of the just. They who
utterly deny God, and profane his holy Name (of which number are all those that
turn to Christianity) their foreskin shall grow again, which done, they shall
the second time be circumcised, as though they never had been Jews, and shall
remain in Hell for ever.

The Son superviving his deceased Father is bound for a whole year to say a
little Prayer called kaddisch that is to say, holy.
for by the repetition of this Prayer, he shall deliver his dead Father out of
Purgatory; such an one gives up the Ghost with great joy and encouragement,
knowing that he shall be delivered out of Hell by the Prayers of his Son left
behind him. After the same manner a honest woman may redeem her Husband. But
sometimes it so falls out that the Husband ^and Wife are not equal in
honesty, and therefore it should seem that in the world to come the one should
attain to a greater degree of happiness then the other: here the Lord out of
his mercy gives them both entrance together. Briefly the whole nation of the
Jews shall be partakers of life eternal, and shall all ascend into Heaven; but
one shall be more glorious then another. Even as a King or Duke coming into some
great City, he and all his followers have entertainmet, but in a different
fashion; so shall it be with the Jews in the world to come.

In the Article of the Resurrection of the Dead, they themselves are dead: for
first they say, it shall come to pass that only the Israelites shall be raised
to life, but the Christian, and all other prople shall perpetually sleep in the
dust. Hence Rabbi `Bechai in his Book intitu^ed, Kadhakkemach (...) Cadus
farinae, that is, a barrel of meal, the title taken 1. Kin* 17. 14 a book
containing the common places of Divinity, in folio, Printed at Venice.
says: The Jews have a fourfold honor and privilege above other Nations,
which are these, the Land of Canaan, the Law, the Prophets, and the
resurrection from the dead. All these he repeats and proves in particular, The
Jews Belief concerning the resurrection Isa. 26. 14.
in his^ Exposition of the 18. and 33. chapters of the fi^t Book of Moses. For
the confirmation of the last privilege, he brin'gs amongst other the testimony
of Isay, prophesying of the Christians and other people: They are dead, Ib. v.
19.
they shall not live. They are dead, they shall not rise. And of the
Israelites, Thy dead men shall live, with my dead body they shall arise, awake
and sing, you that dwell in the dust, because your dew is as the dew of herbs,
Tract. Tosch, hallchanah, or of the new year c. 1.
and the Earth shall cast^ out, her dead.

The same Rabbine out of the Talmud delivers thus much, that at the great day
of judgment three kinds of dead men are to arise: the first of the most
righteous Israelites: the second of the most unrighteous and ungodly: the third
of a middle sort, who did as much good as evil. The good shall go into life
everlasting, the wicked into Hell and fire eternal, Da^. (...)
as it is written, Many of them that lie and sleep in the Dust shall arise,
same to everlasting life, some to shame and everlasting contempt, From hence
Says the Rabbine, we may infer, that even the wicked ones in Israel shall be
copartners in the resurrection, yet shall this redound to their disadvantage,
seeing both body and soul shall together in Hell suffer never ceasing torments.

They of the middle sort shall be tortured for theirs ins in purgatory, only
the space of twelve months, which time expired, their bodies shall be consumed,
and a blustering wind shall scatter their ashes under the feet of the just: The
Talmudist proves this out of the 13. Chapter of Zachary, the 8. and 9. verses,
for there is written: It shall come to passethat in all the land, says the
Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off, and die, but the third part shall be
left therein: And I will bring the third part through the fire, and refine
them, as silver is refined, and will try them as gold it tried: and they shall
call upon my Name, and I will hear them. I will say, it is my people, and they
shall say, the Lord is my God. And to the same purpose it is spoken, 1. Sam. 2.
6. The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the grave and
brings up. R. David Kimchi upon the first Psalm, says, that the wicked shall
not rise again, but their souls shall perish together with their bodies in the
day of death: and in the same sense, that a Resurrection only belongs to the
just and godly, in his Commentary upon the 26 chapter of the Prophecy of Esaias.
Rabbi Saadiah upon the former words of the Prophet Daniel says, that the term
( many) designs a certain number, and there fore to be restringed to the godly
in Israel, who alone have a portion in life eternal. Them that do not watch, he
ranks in their number, who have forsaken the Lord, and t^rned Apostates; who
for this very thing must be thrust into the lowest Chambers of the infernal
pit, there for ever to be the Emblems of ignominy. To him assent Rabbi Higgaon,
and Aben Ezra in his Book Perusch, or Exposition upon the forecited place of
Daniel; commenting that as many are to watch, so many shall not watch; the
watch^men shall have life eternal, they that do not watch, never dying
reproach. The sense of the words in my judgment (says Aben Ezra) is this,
that so many upright Jews, that pay their debts to nature in the Land of their
captivity, shall rise again and live when the Messiah, or Deliverer shall come;
for of them speaks the Scriptue: As the days of a Tree, so shall be the days
of my people: that is, Iesa. 65. ^^.
as the Tree of life, as the Chaldee renders it; or as a Tree which indures for
some hundreds of years does not perish, so my people shall remain; for they
who shall have a part in the resurrection at the coming of the Messiah, shall
be so long lived, as the Patriarchs from Adam to Noah. So much Aben Ezra upon
the place. At that time they shall cherish and make themselves merry, feasting
their carcasses with that great fish Leviathan, that huge bird Ziz, and that
monstrous Ox Behemoth, of which more particularly hereafter. After this their
jollity, death the second time arrests them, furnishing them with beds to sleep
in till the last resurrection, when they shall have an entrance into life
eternal, where they shall neither hunger nor thirst, but be ever satiated with
the beatifical vision of Gods glory and brightness.

In the first Book of Moses, the 47. Chap. it is recorded of Jacob, Genesis 47.
29. The cause why Jacob would not be buried in Egypt.
that when the time of his departure out of this Vale of tears approached, he
called his Son Joseph, and entreated him not to bury him in Egypt, but with
his Fathers in the Land of Canaan. Rabbi Solomon Jarchi upon these words says,
that Jacob for three reasons would not be buried in the Land of Egypt. The
first was, because he foresaw by the Spirit of Prophecy, that in time to come
store of lice should molest the Land of Egypt. The second, because the
Israelites, who died without the bounds of Canan, could not rise again without
a great deal of trouble, being to be hurried into the ^and^ of Promise by the
hidden and deep vau^ts of the earth. The third, lest the Egyptians, very prone
unto Idolatry, might make him the Idol which they would adore. For the better
understanding of this, I mean here to insert what ever is written concerning
it, in the book called Tanchum, which is an Exposition of the Law of Moles.
Rabbi Chelbo makes it a main question, why the Patriarchs had so great a desire
to be buried in the Land of Canan: he gives himself a solution, saying, that
they who shall dye in the ^and^ of Promise shall ri^s;e first at the coming of
the Messiah. Rabbi Hananiah confirms it, and says, that whosoever dying is
intombed in a strange Land, shall dye a twofold death, which is manifest out of
the 26. chapter of Jeremy, and the 6. verse, where it is registered: Thou
Pashur, and all thy family shall go into captivity, thou shall go to Babel,
there shall thou dye, and there be buried. Hereupon Rabbi Simeon objects, that,
that granted, it must necessarily follow, that all the Tzaddikim (...)
Tzaddikim. The Jews were dissinguished into three ranks 1. Chasidim, called the
Assidins. 2. The Tzaddikim, just men. 3. The Relchagnim, ungodly mentafter the
captivity the Chasidim began to be distinguished from the Tzaddikim; these gave
themselves to the study of the Scripture, thus to add to the Scripture. these
conformed themselves to the Law, they would be holy above the Law, and were
termed by the name of good men: these of all others had the best repute and
love among the people: hence the Apostle ill^ istrat^th the love of Christ by
alluion to this distinction, Romans 5. 6, 7. Some peradventure would die for one
of the Chasidim, a good man, scarcely any for any of the Tzaddikim, a just man,
for the Reschagnim, or u^godly none would die, yet Christ died for us sinners,
Mr. Goodwin out of David Kinchi, upon Ps. 103. 17. and Pirk aboth cap. 13.
or just men should perish, who were not interred in the Land of Canaan. The
answer is, that God shall make certain caves, and profound vaults in the earth,
by which they shall Be brought into the land of promise; at their ar^^vall
there, God shall breath into them the breath of life, and give them a share in
the Resurrection, as it is written, Ezak 37. 12.
I Will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and
bring you into the Land of Israel, Rabbi Simeon Ben Levi says, that the
Scripture speaks expressly, that God shall restore the Jews to Life, upon the
very instant of their return into their own Land: the place he quoteth, is Isa.
12. v. 5. Thus says the Lord God, he that created the heavens, and stretched
them out, he that spread forth the earth, and that which comes out of it, he
that gives breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk
therein: This is to be understood of them that shall be carried to Sion,
through the caves of the earth: That also which is read in the Chaldee Targum
upon the Canticles ought to be referred to this vo^ntation: the words are
these, Solomon the Prophet says, that when the dead shall arise, the Mount
Olivet shall cleave in the middle, and all the Israelites who formerly departed
this life, shall issue out of it: the just also who died in banishment, prison,
or a strange Land, being conveyed hither by hidden passages in the earth, shall
also apPear. From hence we may easily conclude, how beliooveful the Jews think
it to return into their own Land, and there be buried, and so escape the
turmoyle, and trouble of so long a journey, under so many deep rivers and
rugged mountains; and for this very end, (as I have heard out of the Jews own
mouth) many of their rich ones return into the Land of Canaan at this day.

This is that perfect, firm, and well grounded faith of the Jews, in which they
obstinately persevering make it the rock of their salvation, though with great
anxiety and despair. Here we may see what they give to Moses and the rest of
the Prophets and also what use these miserable men make of the holy Scriptures.

Such as their faith is, such are also their works, which they would seem to
shape according to the strict rule of Gods commandments. There profound
Rabbis persuade this simple people, the Jews, that they of the Circumcision
are Gods own chosen people, who may easily fulfill, not only the moral Law
comprehended in the Decalogue, but the whole Law of Moses. The Jewish division
of Moses his Law.
They divide the Law of Moses into six hundred and thirteen Precepts, and again
subdivide these into commanding and prohibiting Precepts: the former according
to their computation are two hundred to eight, which number is (according to
the Rabbis anatomy) equal to that of the members in man's body: the prohibiting
Precepts are three hundred sixty five, just so many as there are days in the
year, or (as it is registered in a book entitled Brand spiegel, and printed at
Cracovia in the Germane tongue and Hebrew character some fifteen years ago) as
there are vein^ in man's body: hence it shall come to pass, that if a man in
one of his members every day perform one of the Mandatory Precepts, and omit
that which the prohibiting Precept enjoins him to avoid, he shall with great
facility every year, and so to his dying day, fulfill not only the Decalogue,
but the whole Law of Moses: this is that right ordering and keeping of their
Laws; here I may counsel Isaiah to make his complaint: Isa 24. 5.
That the earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have
transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant:
for Saint Stephen should be stoned the second time, if he were now alive, and
should reprove the Jews for this their adulterate worship, saying, You
stiffenecked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you do always resist the
Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye, who have recived the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it, etc.

The Rabbis hold on, and say, that men are only bound to keep those six
hundred and thirteen Precepts, Brand spiegelium, cap. 13. 15.
but the women are freed from the observation of any of the first sort, being
only tied to the observation of them which forbid something to be done. They
say also, that there are some Preceps, which are only to be executed by them
at certain times, when their pleasure is, and also others, to which they are no
way subject, as Circumcision, the office of the Priests and Levites, and such
like. Sometimes they may not observe the Commandments, because of their
husbands to whom they acknowledge themselves to ow dutiful obedience, who have
power over them, and oftentimes call them to the performance of other things
than Gods Law, yet never by compulsion. If any one make a question, to what the
women are more particularly obliged? the answer is, that they are bound to the
performance of sixty four of the prohibiting, and thirty six of the Commanding
precepts.

Thus do the Rabbis appoint their women their Task, which they have not
always leisure to manage, because they are to keep the house, play the Cook,
Laundresse, and Nurse, and are also forced to do what ever. their husbands
enjoin them; yet for all this, the number of the Precepts was not thought
sufficient, for the Rabbines have added seven more, that the sum arises to
six hundred and twenty, according to the number of the Letters in the Keter a
Crown or a King, Cap, from (...) in Pihel to encompasse, because it
encompasseth the head. Jer. 3325.
Hebrew Decalogue, which number the Hebrew word Keter, signifying a Crown,
comprehends, for the three radical Letters, Caph, Thau, and Resch make up the
number, and certainty, if there were any who could fulfill the whole Law of
God, he were worthy to wear the Crown of the whole world, and needful it is,
that the Law should be fulfilled, for otherwise the world cannot subsist, as
their wise men would persuade us out of the words of Jeremy, If my covenant had
not been with day and night, I had not made the earth, for so is this place
perverted after a swinish manner in the forenamed book Brand spigelium. A Jew
is as fit an Interpreter of the Scripture, as a Sow to be an Husbandman, as in
rendering these words, that unless the Law (which they call Berith, (...)
Berith a covenant, from (...) cligere, to choose, because the covenant was made
with Gods elect, or from (...) which is clearnisse, because it clears the
conscience of good men, R. Haradosch affirms the same number to be contained in
the word breath which in the words (...) Jesu Mariae. This among the Kabalists,
is no vulgar number, intimating Jesus the Son of M^ry to be the author of the
Covenant*
that is to say, a covenant) had been given, I had not created the heaven and
the earth, and whatsoever now has any existence, it has it from the
observation of the Divine Law: moreover say they, whosoever keeps all these
Commandments, sets a Crown upon Gods own head, and in lieu thereof, God shall
invest their forefronts with seven Crowns, who do celebrate his Coronation,
and shall make them heirs of the seven bedchamber, which are in the Garden of
Para dise, and he shall defend them from the seven infernal Mansions, and they
shall obtain seven heaven's and so many earths.

Hereupon it is recorded in that Tract of the Talmud, entitled Joma, that it
was the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, that the world was created for the sake of
one just man, for it is written in the first book of Moses, the first chap. v.
31. That God shallman that it was good, and by this good thing is meant that
good and just one, Isa. 3. 10.
as it is written, Praise the just one, because he is good, and it necessarily
follows out of the words of Moses, above mentioned, And God saw, etc. (...) or
one just man, which was Adam, for at that instant there were no more in the
earth, Rabbi Chaia Bar Abha is of the same mind, and Rabbi Jochanan confirms it
out of the 25. verse of the 10. Chapter of Solomon's Proverbs, where it is
written, (...) The righpeous is an everlasting foundation.

Moreover, the wisest of their Doctors write, that every vein in man's body is
the souls pedagogue, to instruct it what to avoid, whereupon it shall be found,
that if any proves disobedient to such an admonition, he shall be branded with
this mark, that he has not one good vein in him, Again, all the members prick
a man forward to the execution of that which is commanded him, and in this
manner the three hundred sixty five prohibitory precepts are observed and
fulfilled. O^^serable Jew! what Surgeon can prick that vein in thee whren
has any good^nesse in it? or extract from thee the smallest dram of blood,
which is not corrupt?

King Solomon in his Proverbs says, Prove. 7. 2.
Keep my Commandments, that thou may live, that is, thy veins and members
shall become thy provocative unto goodness, thou shall live for ever; and
David the King in the 34. Psalm, and the 21. verse, promises, He shall keep
all thy bones, so that not one of them shall be broken, which is, as if had
said, who keeps the commandments of the Lord, his bones shall not be broken.

Thus the poor blind doting Jews are fallen into such a reprobate sense, that
they neither will nor can understand the essence of faith and good works, but
running headlong into their obstinate errors, persist in their folly, so that
the words of Sophonie are now verified: Soph. 3. 4.
Her Prophets are light and treachchrous persons, her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, they have done violence to the Law. Truly any one would think that
they ought to be ashamed of so gross ignorance, by which they dilacerate the
word of God in that manner, as though they had not the least relish or spark of
understanding in them: for in the confirmation and declaration of their faith
settled upon no foundation, in the Exposition of the holy Scripture they seema
as strangers and aliens to the word of God, who had dreamed of it about some
thousand years ago, and now grope after it, as the blind man gropeth the for
wall in darkness.

I will not in this place add one word more concerning the Jewish belief and
superstition, considering that I shall speak more largely of it in the
following Chapters, yea, more then they could wish should be revealed. It is
now seasonable and expedient to speak something of the cause of their blindness
and obstinacy with which they are plagued, especially in the reading of the
Word of God.

It is apparent out the History of the Old Testament, The causes of Jewish
obstinacy.
The Jews always have been so stiff necked, that if once they fixed upon any
opinion, that no force of Argument could enforce them to relinquish it:
whereupon Moses and the rest of the Prophets so often reprehend them, for which
many of them were persecuted and put to death by the obstinate Jews, who for
this very cause are often in the new Testament termed, the Murderers and
Butchers of the men of God. When God had once chosen them for a peculiar
people, made a Covenant with them, and for the confirmation of it, had annexed
unto it the seal of Circumcision as an external sign, had delivered them out of
the hands of their enemies, brought them into a Land surpassing a others, with
great strength and a stretched out arm; and also had given unto them by the
hand of Moses a Law according to whose prescript they ought to frame their
lives, acknowledge God, praise and exalt him they did acknowledge, even then
when the whole World drencht in the Sea of Idolatry was ignorant of the true
God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth; then began they to wax proud, haughty,
and pu^t up, counting the Nations as dung, and with a supercilious sore-front,
boasting themselves to be the h^^ly and elect people of God, the Law of God and
Circumcision being the main pillars of this their ostentation. And seeing they
at that time actually possessed the Land of Promise, offered their Sacrifices,
the sum of their wants must be a glorying in their City, Temple, Sacrifice, and
other kinds of worship, for which if any one dare manage a reproof, objecting
that they are not the children of Abraham, because God shall prosligate and
destroy them, because their hearts and ears are uncircumcised, and God shall
again scatter them among the Gentiles; he shall upon the very instant be
cauterized for a false Prohet, and a Liar, and destinated to the stake for
bearing witness unto the truth. Neither did they here put a period to their
madness; they stand firm in their foolish opinions, embracing the Covenant
according to its outside, the Law according to the letter, the ceremonies,
oblations, and sacrifices in their naked representation, provoking not only the
Prophets, but God himself, never regarding whether or no any true knowledge,
fear, or reverence of his Majesty was implanted in their hearts. For the
attempting of these enormities the Lord conceives heavy displeasure against
Israel, Esa. 1. 4.
terms them a sinful Nation laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
children that are corrupters, which had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the
holy one in Israel, and gone away backward, whose hearts were obstinate, their
neck an iron sinew; Esa. 48. 4.
and their brow brass: Transgressors from their Mothers womb, Ezekiel. 2. 4.
whose birth and nativity is the Land of Canaan, Ezekiel. 16.
their Father an Amorite, and their Mother a Hittite; a people rejected and
accursed, as Moses witnesses. He threatens them to bani^h them out of their
own Land, and to carry them into a Land which neither they nor their Fathers
had known; there also, that they shall taste of his fury, be slaves to their
enemies, and to make their City and Temple, in which they so much rejoiced,
like unto Shiloe, Lastly, speaking to Esaias the Prophet, Esa. 6. 10.
he says: Make the heart of this peole fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyespuch; and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. After the same
manner God denounces against them by Moses, Deur. 28. 15. 28 29.
saying: it shall come to pass, that if thou will not hearken unto the voice
of the lord thy God, to observe to do all his Commandments and his Statutes,
which l command thee this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee and
overtake thee: The Lord shall sinite thee with madness and blindness of heart.
Thou shall grope at noon day, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall
not prosPer in thy ways, thou shall be only oppressed and spoiled evermore,
and none shall save thee

The fundamental then and prime cause of the blindness and obstinacy of the
Jews, The cause of Jewish obtinacy.
is the just judgment of God upon them for their sins, and the punishment due
unto the same, which came upon them, because they heaRkened not unto his voice,
worshipping him with their mouth, and with their lips drawing near unto him,
but in their hearts being far from him, Esaias 29* 18.
their service toward him consisting only in the commandments of of men, as
the Prophet Esaias complains. By which we may perceive, that they soon left off
to trace the way of Gods Commandments, settling themselves upon their own
carnal wisdom, upon the sublime perspicuity of their Doctors, who after Ezra
were called Scribes, as upon a new foundation, accounting Their Expositions,
Ordinances, Laws, and Institutions to be of far more worth, then the Doctrine
of the Prophets: against which the Prophets oftentimes declaimed, but to little
purpose. What these Commandments are, which they esteem more then the word of
God, our Savior Christ teaches us in the new Testament, Mark 7. Mat. 5.
when the Jews reprehend him that his Disciples walked not according to the
tradition of the Elders, which were of washing hands, cups, pots, brazen
vessels and tables, and innumerable fopperies of the same sort, by which they
make the word of God of none effect, but only strive to fulfill the inventions
of their Ancestors.

Now in the last place, seeing these their Traditions which Christ pointed out
unto us, are at this day accurately kept and observed of the Jews, seriously
also described in their Cannon La. and celesiastical and moral constitutions,
part of which I have decreed to lay open in the following discourse; I think it
here convenient to search out the grounds and reasons which might th^n, and at
this day does induce them to prefer the Ordinances of men before Gods
Commondements, casting them headlong into the darkness of Superstitlon, so
blinding their understanding, that they cannot possibly find out the trUe
meaning of the holy Scripture.

We read in the Preface of that learned man Rabbi Mosche Mikkotzi, called
Hakdamah (who writ a Book and Exposition upon three hundred and thirteen of
Gods Commandments, which he entitled, Sepher mitzuos gadol, that is, the
great Book of the Commandments, in the year of Christ 1236. and published it
at Toledo in Spain, where the Jews then had a most flourishing School, the
Students therein being in number twelve thousands, as he witnesses in his
hundred and twelfth Prohibitory precept.) that the written Law which God
delivered unto Moses in Mount Sinai, is obscure and difficult, first, because
it contradicts is self. Secondly, because it is imperfect, and therefore all
things necessary to be known, are not there set down: whereupon it is needful
some certain Exposition should be framed, by whose plu^met every one might dive
into the genuine sense of the written Law, and grou^ d thereon as a firm
foundation.

That the Law of Moses contradicts it self, there are many instances.We read
Exodus 12. 15. For sevean days thou shall eat unleavened bread; but Deuteronomy. 16.
8. Six days thou shall eat unleavened bread: again verse. 9. Seven weeks thou
shall number unto thee, which make only forty nine days: but in the 23. of
Leviticus and the 16. it is read, Unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath
shall you number fifty days. In the 16. of Deuteronomy verse. 2. it is said,
Thou shall sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord, of the Flock and of the Heard;
contrary to this ^xod. 12. 5. Your Lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the
first year, you shall take out from the sheep or from the Goats. Again, Deuteronomy.
15. 19. All the firstling males that come of thy Heard and of thy Flock, thou
shall sanctify unto the Lord thy God; but in the 27. of Leviticus verse. 26.
The firstling of the Beasts, which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall
sanctify it, whether it be Ox or Sheep, it is the Lords. Lastly, Exodus 19. it
is written, The third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the
People upon Mount Sinai: But Exodus 20. 22. it is said, You have seen that I
have talked with you from Heaven. These and such like contradictions are every
where obvious in the Law of Moses, and cannot out of it be reconciled.

In the second place we may with great facility prove the imperfection of this
Law; for who shall teach unto us the Notes of birds and other creatures? who
shall instruct us what fat is permitted unto us, what prohibited? to what
height the Tabernacle is to be reared up, and after what figure to be built?
whether circumcision is barely to be administered, or priah See the Exposition
of this word in the Chapter of circum ision:
some other thing to be added? or how the writing called Mezuzah The Exposition
also of this word shall follow in its due place.
, which is to be fastened to the door posts, and of which mention is made,
Deuteronomy. 6. is to be indicted? as also, whether it should be placed upon the right
hand or the left, upon the top, or Threshould of the Gate? Furthermore, who can
reckon up all the kinds of licensed and prohihited meats? who can show unto us
the difference to be had in boiling milk and flesh? how the dead and Leapers
are to be handled, as also dead Beasts, that we may not be polluted by touching
of them? who can teach us the nature and property of the Masorah Masorah is
that critical doctrine invented of the ancient Hebrews, for the clearing of the
Hebr. text, whereby they summed up the verses, words, and letters in it, to
this end, that every one might learn to read it aright, and it also might for
over be preserved from corruption. Elias Levita Prefat. 3. lib. sui masoreth.
The word is derived from (...) tradere, which is to deliver: so that Masorah
signifies as much as a doctrine delivered by hand or mouth unto another.
Buxtorf Com. Masor. cap. 1.
of Points or Accents, as also of the Letters, of which some are lifted up
above the words, some inverted? who can give us a true exposition of all these
things? It must then irrefragably follow, that a Commentary on the written word
is necessary, out of which we may learn, and be instructed in all these points.
So much the forenamed Rabbine.

This is the very means and plot, whereby the Devil first of all seduced the
Jews to forsake the Word of God, and after his magisteriall manner compelled
them to embrace the Traditions of men, and that with such a tenacious grasp,
that neither Esaias, Christ, nor any other to this very day could by any means
unclasp their arms. Go to then, my prudent and skillful Rabbine, where shall we
find a true Exposition of the written Word? In Weckers Books of Secrets? no
verily: In Reuchlines Caballistical Art? no such matter: or lastly, in
Marcolfus? much less; but read the holy Talmud and there you may find it.

But from whence I pray thee was this Talmud sent unto us, that I should give
so much credit unto it, as to make it the Interpreter and Expounder of Moses
his Law? Thou will answer; that Moses our Master and Prophet brought it
together with the written Word from mount Sinai: for think thou thou doting
Gentile, that when Moses stayed forty days and forty nights upon Mount Sinai, he
was set to keep Geese? Could not God in the space of one hour have given him
the two Tables in which he had written his Law, and so sent him a Packing to
have prevented the Israelites in making of their Golden Calfe? There was some
thing more in the wind; for God brought Moses into his own School, and there
first gave him the written Law, Rabbi Eliezer cap. 40.
then expounded the same unto him, in that time which he spent in the mountain,
expressing to the life the cause, measure, foundation, and meaning of every
Commandment, which Declaration finished, Deuteronomy. 4 14. Rabbi Aben Ezra. R
Solomon Jarchi, R. Bechai and others on this place.
he bids him depart the Mountain, and relate all that he had heard to the
children of Israel, as it is written, At the same time the Lord commanded me,
that I should teach you Statutes and Judgments.

These Statutes and Judgments were that Thorah begnal peh, that Law delivered
by Mouth to Moses, which he taught Joshuah, and Joshuah the seventy two Elders,
and by them was derived to Zachary, and Malachy the last of the Prophets, from
whom that great Council, the Sanhedrim, received it, and from that time forward
it was delivered from one unto another, in the same manner that every one had
learned it from his Grandfather or Grandmother. But how could Moses know, when
either it was day or night? Rabbi Bechai, Exodus 34. makes answer, that upon the
day time Moses received the written Law, upon the night that which was
delivered by mouth unto him; a Doctourlike answer; for if it had been night, he
could not have writ, and because there was never a Chandler in the Mountain
Sinai to furnish him with Candles, he could not have had the use of them, if he
had desired it.

But what should be the cause that this Exposition was only delivered by
mouth* and not in writing? Rabbi Mosche Mikkotzi, makes answer; that God did it
to this end, that the Gentiles should not corrupt this Exposition, as they had
corrupted the written word, therefore in the day of Judgment, when both Jews
and Gentiles shall stand before Gods Tribunal, they shall both bring with
them, and present the written Law, hence calling themselves the Sons of God;
then shall the Lord make a further enquiry, and say; which of you has the
Declaration of the Law given by mouth, in Mount Sinai? which none but the
Israelites shall know of, or can produce.

To the purpose then, when there was no more any vision, and prophecies had
ceased in Israel, God stirred up the wisest among the people, who had been the
Scholars of the Prophets, for this end, that they might institute good
Ordinances among the Israelites, rightly teach and propagate the Law, which
they did, as also their successors to this very day.

These men made it a Statute in Israel, that the name of God, most worthy of
praise, should be blessed every day, at the rising and setting of the Sun.

They ordained also eighteen laudatory petitions, in which every Morning and
Evening we praise God, and beg of him that he would bestow upon us all things
necessary for us, that we might rightly fear him, as grace, wisdom and
understanding, that he would vouchsafe to heal all our infirmities, gather us
together again thus dispersed, to punish the wicked, That is, the Christians.
to break their horn and power in pieces, but to exalt the horns of the godly
and righteous They mean (...) the Jews.
to bu^ld up Jerusalem, and to restore again the Kingdom and house of David.

Moreover, they ordained Grace before and after meat, to welcome the New Moon
with joy and gladness, to pray at the sight of the Rainbow, and noise of
Thunder.

Again, that in every City some certain Schools should be opened, and furnished
with sufficient and able men for Masters and instructors, who might bring up
the children of the Jews (...) the Law of Moses.

That the Law of Moses should be weekly read in these their Schools, lest the
children of Israel should forget it.

That the Israelites should not eat nor drink with any people of the earth,
except the Christians, but to fly their meat, as a dog or a snake, in
imitation of Daniel the Prophet, Dansi 1.8. ^^
of whom it is recorded, that he pur posed in his heart, that he would not
defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat, nor the wine which he drank

Secondly, when the City Jerusalem was taken, the Temple laid wast the Jews
overcome, led captive, and no end of their misery and bondage could be
expected, behold, God was so bountiful to Rabbi Juda Hannafi (who was the very
pattern of humility, piety, and sanctity, that thence he was called Rabbenu
hakkadosch, our great Master) that he found so much grace and favor in the
eyes of Antoninus the Emperor, (whose favorite he was) that by his permission
he called a Council of the most learned of the Jews, out of every quarter of
the Empire, who might consult and find out the means how that their Law might
be kept safe, and not perish utterly, while the misforTune of the Jews might
daily increase, their Learned Doctors be either killed, or sent into exile.
The consultation came to this issue, that a consideration had of the great
calamity the Jews were in, being dispersed over the face of the earth, and
again, seeing it was not unlawful to commend their Kabala (...) Kabalah, from
(...) lo receive the mystical Dvinity of the Jews, a Doctrine delivered by
word of mouth, and so received concerning the hidden mysteries of the Law of
God There are two parts of it, the first (...) speculative: the second (...)
practick, which has also three parts, Gematria, Notarikon, Temurah: Gematria,
is a word corrupted from the Greek (...), so called, because it considers a
word according to the number, which the Letters thereof contain, and is that
part of the Kabala, whereby diverse words containing the same number may one be
explained by another; for example, it is written, Abac. he 3. 2. In anger
remember (...) mercy, (...) in numbers makes 248, so much also, (...) as though
he bad said; in mercy remember Abraham and the Covenant made with him.

Notarikon, a word corrupted from the Latins notatio^, is that part of the
Kabala, which considers the Letters of every significative word, as they note
out others in particular, so the name' (...) Machabeus notes out the following
words, (...) Who is like unto thee among the gods, O Lord, Exodus 15. 11. the
name Adam notes, (...) dust, blo^d, and gall, dust in respect of
corruptibility, blood in respect of his vitality, gall in respect of bis
calamity: or as Saint Cyprian, the name (...) notes out the four parts of the
world, which he was toreplenish, (...) the north, (...) the west, a. (...) the
east, (...) the south.

Temurah, the third part of the Kabala, from (...) mutare to change, when one
or more words by the transposition of the Letters are invertea, and signify
diverse things; for example (...) anahtema, is made by a Metathesis, (...)
misericordia mercy; as also that symbolicall word (...) designing 248. the
number of the members of man's body, intimating unto us, that if the accynsed
repent, mercy follows, if not, the curse enters into all his members, and
destroys the whole man, Reuchlin lib. 3. Cabalae, See Buxcorf. abbrev. p, 56,
57, 58


unto writing, that this same Rabbine should gather together in one book what
ever parcel of this Law delivered by mouth, remained in memory, either before
or after Christ's time.

This book he entitled Mischna, from (...) shanah, which is to repea or
reiterate.
that is a, second Law, in Greek called (...), it contains six Principal
Chapters, which are again subdivided into sixty peculiar Sections or Tracts.
Thus much Rabbi Mikkotzi.

In these Sections are contained in short, injunctions, conclusions, positions,
and aphorisms, the Traditions and Ordinances of their Elders, according to
whose Rule the Jewish Synagogue was then, and now ought to square their lives,
against which, Christ, the Evangelists, and Apostles preached and taught, yea
Isa. also, when he calls their Doctrine the Commandments of men.

This book in the year of Christ 219. being confirmed as absolute and Orthodox,
was received and approved by the whole Synagogue of the Jews, who also enacted,
that the Jews then living, and all their posterity should live according to the
tenor of it, which they do even to this day, as it is clearly manifest by the
Hebrew Chronicle, called Tzemach David. Germen Davidis, the flour and offspring
of David, a chronicle from the beginning of the world, to the year 1592, the
author says it was printed at Prague in 4. 1592. Talmud Hierosolymitanum.


Some few years after arose Rabbi Iochanan, who was Rector of the University of
Jerusalem, for the space of fourscore years, he enlarged the foresaid book, and
called it Talmud Hierosolymitanum, or the Talmud of Jerusalem, which book
seemed so obscure, difficult, and hard to be understood, that few cared for the
reading of it, neither was it in so great esteem as the former, neither is unto
this day, and because this book Mischuaios, was written in a decurtate and
different dialect, Rabbi Ass, Rector of the same University after him, began
to explain it for his School lectures, and every year ran over two Tracts
thereof, in this whole time of his profession, which was threescore years, two
times finishing his exposition. In writing he only finished thirty five
Tracts, as Rambam witnesses in his Preface to the book called Zeraim, he began
to profess in the year of Christ 3670

Next after him, in the year 427. succeeded Maremar in the Rectorship, to whom
Rab. Ass, son to the former, joined himself, they two finished that, which
Rabbi Ass, the father had left imperfect, so that the book Mischuaios, was now
altogether complete; that which was added, they called Gemarah (...) from (...)
discere? to learn* for the pe^fection of any thing is from learning and
knowledge. Talmud Babylonicum.
which signifies a complement, or perfection, which together with Mischuaios,
made up the whole Talmud: these two spent seventy three years in the
consummation of their labors, so that the body of the Talmud, was perfected,
received and acknowledged for authentic in the year of Christ 500. being
called the Babylonian Talmud, which to this day is a rule and square unto the
Jews, both in their Ecclesiastical and civil affairs.

This is that glorious vestment of Jacobs posterity, that precious treasure, of
which they are the keepers, delivered unto them by hear^ say, this is their
genuine Perasch (...) acommentary, from (...) explica^e to expound. Malach, 2 3.
or Exposition (yea rather, as Malachi, (...) dying upon your faces) out of
which the doubtful places above mentioned, may fully be resolved: this is that
Thorah begnal peh, the Law of words of greater esteem with them then that which
was written, seeing this without that can by no means be understood. Now
because the main of their folly is not known to many of the Christian World, I
will here add what I have transcribed out of their own books.

Aben Ezra in his Proem upon the Pentateuch has these words: This is most
infallible sign unto us, that Moses grounded upon the Law delivered only by
word unto him, and expressed in the Talmud, which Talmud is the joy and
consolation of our hearts. There is also no difference betwixt Law and Law,
being both delivered unto us by our Ancestors. And in another place he writes
many things to the same purpose, affirming it to be impossible to come by any
exposition agreeable to the nature and propriety of the Commandments of the
Law, unless we lay for our foundation those things which our Wisemen, and
Rabbines have spoke and written. Hence we may conclude, that the faith of the
Jews is not grounded upon Moses, but upon the Expositions of their own
Doctors, which must interpret the former, as a sure foundation of it: as it is
further confirmed in the Book Ammude Golah, called also Semak or Sepher mitzvos
katon: that is, the little book of the Commandments, page 39.
printed at Cremona in Italy, in the year of Christ 1556. The words are these:
Thou shall not think that the written word is the Groundwork, for much rather
the Law delivered by mouth only, which is the Talmud, is the true foundation.
And according to this Law, God made a Covenant with Israel, as it is written
Exodus 34. 27. and these words are Gods Treasure, for God foresaw that the
Israelites in time to come should be cast out into exile: and because the
people of the Land in which they were strangers would copy out and interpret
their Books, as they did the written Word, God would not have this to fall
under the Pen of the Scribe; and although in process of time it came to pass,
that this was also written, yet the Christians could not comprehend the true
sense thereof, by reason of its difficulty, and because the interpretation
thereof requires an acute and sublime understanding, as it is written: I have
written unto him the great things of my Law, Hos. 8* 12.
but they were accounted as a strange thing: yet if Rabbi Isaac Ben Joseph had
not been hood-winkt in superstition, he might have had the eyes of his
understanding so much illuminated, as to have perceived that place of Hosea to
point at the written word; and that this Law was not, as he complains, vilified
and had in contempt by the Gentiles, but even by the Jews themselves, who had
so debased it, that it seemed unto them as an ucouth and unknown thing: as it
came to pass in the days of Josiah the King, in which the Book of the Law was
for a long time lost, and being found again by Hilkiah the High Priest, was
accounted a rare and strange novelty, 2 Kings 32.
as it is registered in the second Book of Kings.

It must also follow (say they) that the words of Moses above mentioned,
Secundum os horum verborum.
according to the tenor of these words, must, the jews being commentators, be
thus understood, according to the words which were heard and received out of
the mouth of God; and the sense must be, that God made a Covenant with Israel,
not according to the written but unwritten Law: which interpretation we find in
the Talmud, for in the Book Tauchum in the Section Elle Toledos Noach, which
begins at the 9. verse of the 6. Chapter of Genesis, we find it thus written:
Our Wisemen say that God did not write (...) Horum verborum gratia, for these
words, but (...) Secundum os horum verborum, according to these words which
were delivered by mouth only, not in writing have I made a Covenant with
Israel. And such are the words of the Talmud, which is harsh and difficult to
them that would learn it, and therefore likened to darkness, Esaias the ninth and
second where the words are. The people that sat in darkness have seen a great
light: that is, they who are much conversant in the study of the Talmud, see
great light, for God inlightens their eyes to see how to behave themselves, in
respect of things permitted and not permitted, clean and unclean, which are not
expressed to the full in the written Law.

A little after we read, that by reason of this Covenant the World subsists,
because God created the day and night unto this end, that the Israelites might
learn the Law of Tradition, or the Talmud by the benefit of them, and so soon
as they cease to study their Talmud, day and night shall be no more. Hereupon
says Jeremy, If my Covenant be not with day and night, jer. 33. 2^.
and if I have not appointed the Ordinances of Heaven and Earth. And what is
this Covenant? The Talmud says, the Jew; and for this reason Jeremy a little
before says, Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of the day, and
my covenant of the night (that is, when you will no longer learn and observe
the Talmud) then may also my Covenant be broken with David my servant. Hereupon
David says, in the Law of the Lord is his delight; in his Law (that is the
Talmud) will he meditate day and night: Psalm. 1. 2.
Yea, God himself has also made a Covenant with Israel, that this unwritten
Law should never be subject to oblivion, as it is written, I, says tho Lord,
will make with them this Covenant* my Spirit which shall come upon thee, and the
words that I have put into thy mouth, shall never depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy children from this time for ever. Here it is not
written, says the Jew, from thee, but, out of thy mouth, that we might
understand the unwritten Law here to be meant, for the learning of which God
has placed the day and the night, as two common Schools. Hitherto Tanchum.

Moreover, we read in the Sermons of Rabbi Bechai, which book he intitles, 1
King. 17. 14.
Cad hakkemach, a Barrel of Meal, in that the six parts of the Talmud make up
the Law of Tradition, which is the proper foundation of the written Word,
considering that this without that can neither be profitably expounded nor
understood. Hereupon in that Tract of the Talmud called Bava meziah it is read,
that to study and read the Scriptures is profit and no profit, to wit, a small
profit, and not to be regarded. But to learn the Talmud is an exercise worthy
of a Salary, and the workman shall surely receive it: To commit unto memory the
Gemarah, which is the upshot of the Talmud is such a surpassing virtue, that it
admits not of an equal. And this is the cause, that the Jewish Rabbines and
Doctors are better versed in the Talmud then the Bible.

I am now persuaded, that I have given a full demonstration of the ground of
the Jewish faith, that it is not Moses, but the Talmud, that joy of their
hearts, and marrow of their bones; which may put a period to the admiration of
any who wonders at their blindness and superstition, and they have forsaken the
way of divine truth, with a light heeled wantonness, following the footsteps of
their Ancestors in the way of lying.

When therefore the Devil, that Father of lies, for his recreation would play a
game at Tick Tack with the Jews, the Law of Moses being their stake; he by
cogging got the dice of them, and would not give over till he had got the
double point, when he inspired into them this heart pleasing consequence:
Seeing the Talmud is the master point, the true ground, the right line,
according to which the written Word ought to be measured, cut out, squared, and
divided, it must of necessity follow, that the Doctrine of all the Rabbis
should be conformable unto it, and as the Talmud is so true that it cannot be
blemished with the least falsehood, so is every thing that the Rabbines do
either write or teach. Now that this after game or consequence did above all
measure possess the Rabbines (who are such greedy hunters after glory, that
God and all the Prophets shall be tainted with a lie, before they miss this
their prey) is apparent out of their following proud Luciferous speeches.

Rabbi Isaac, Page 23. col 10 Candelabrum Lucis. Ir is a Commentary upon the
Law writ an. Dom. 1470.
who died in Portugal in the year of Christ 1493. in his Book Menoras hammaor
(a) has these words: all that our Rabbines have taught or spoken, either in
their Sermons or in their mystical and allegorical Explications, we believe as
firmly as the Law of Moses. In which if any thing be found smelling of an
hyperbole, or seeming clean contrary to nature, and too high for the sensible
faculty of any mortal, we ought to ascribe it not to their words, but to the
defect of our understanding; and although their strains be high and lofty, and
they seem to present unto our view things incredible, Tract de Sab. c. 2.
yet if we rightly balance them, the truth will cast the Scales. As for
example, we read in the Talmud, that a Rabbine upon a certain time preached
that the days shall come in which a Woman should every day bring forth, Jer.
31. 7.
grounding upon that Text, she conceived and presently brought forth; by
presently, understanding daily, which when some understood not, they flouted
the Rabbine, and exposed him to contempt. The Rabbine perceiving it, answered,
that he spoke not after the vulgar fashion of a natural woman, but of an Hen
that daily laid an Egg: an handsome put off indeed.

In the same place it is written; all their words are the words of the living
God, Ib. col. 2.
neither shall any of them fall in vain unto the earth, whereupon it is our
bounden duty to believe what ever is extant in their name, for it is the truth:
neither let any deride them not in his heart, for so doing he shall not escape
unpunished: let every one then take warning, that he speak not any thing
scandalous either to the person or attempts of these men, but rather to
endeavor to learn so much as he can possible out of their writings. To the
same purpose it is recorded in a book printed in the Germane tongue, and Hebrew
Letter at Cracovia, in Poland, Anno Dom. 1597. called Brand spiegelium, in the
hinder end of the 48. Chapter; that the Jews are bound to say Amen, not only at
the end of their prayers, but to every Sermon and Exposition upon the word of
God, in which lie hidden and profound mysteries shaped to the vulgar
apprehension, that by this they might signify and acknowledge that they
believe whatsoever their Rabbines, or wise men have spoken, as it is written in
the Prophet Isa. Open your selves, O ye gates, for the people comes, who
keeps Justice, that is, a people who saying Amen, believes all things that
the wise men and Rabbines have written, but if any man's understanding be
encompassed with such Egyptian darkness, that he cannot comprehend the aggados
or expositions, yet he ought to believe them; for the words of our Doctors are
not wind, but truth it self. Aggadah is a mystical or hidden speech, by which
hidden matters and things of great moment are signified; the word it self by a
certain Metathesis, is the same with Deagah, which signifies poverty and grief,
because a man macerates and tortures himself after an uncouth manner, before he
can rightly understand the forementioned Aggadah.

Hitherto pertains that which is every where extant in the Talmnd, to wit, that
when two Rabbines are at contention, the one affirming the other denying, none
ought to contradict them, because both their Positious are grounded upon the
Kabala, which Moses brought with him from Mount Sinai, and although the one
could not rightly understandd it, yet it is not to be imputed unto him, for
both of them know the reason why they thus speak, seeing the words of the one
as well as the other, are the words of the living God. It is also a Catholic
rule in the book of the Rabbines: Rather keep in mind the sayings of the
Scribes, than them of the Law of Moses, concluding from hence, that the
writings and instructions of the Rabbines are of greater authority, than Moses
and the Prophets.

Luther in his book, In victoria contra Judaeos.
which he writ upon Shem hamphorasch, Schem Hamphorasch, nomen e^positum, the
expounded name of God, to wit, Jehovah, the proper name of God, taken from his
Essence, derived from (...) hajah, which signifies to be or exist in, no^ing
that God is from everlasting to everlasting. by this name they say, Moses and
Christ did all their miracles. This they hold unlawful to be pronounced,
unless it be upon some great Festivalls, reading for it the name (...) Adanai,
or else repeating it by Periphrasis, or circumlocution which I find two fold,
in Pet. Galatinus in his Book dearcanis Catholicae veritatis, the 11. and 12.c.
The first consists of twelve Letters, (...) which is, the Father, Son and holy
Ghost. the seconnd consists of forty two Letters (...) which is, the Fathe is
God the Son God*. the Holy Ghost is God. yet are they not three Go^^, but one
God. Rabbi B^chai says, this bis Exposition is taken out of the first and
second versis of the first Chapter of Genesis, beginning at the Letter (...)
which is the first Letter of (...) in the first verse, and ending at (...) the
first Letter of (...) in the second.
comments in this manner, concerning the authority and credit given to the
Rabbines and their writings. The Jews say, that they ought to believe that
Rabbines, though they should affirm the left hand to be the right, and the
light hand to be the left, as Purchetus testifies After the same manner three
Jews who kept me company, dealt with me when I urged any thing out of the
Bible, then would they object, that they were bound to believe their Rabbines,
and were not tied to the Scripture, whence I persuade my self, Purchetus said
nothing but truth, seeing mine own experience taught me the same.

Luther was not too blame, being guided by his own experience to believe
Purchetus; to make it more manifest, I will produce their own words.

Raschi, or Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, upon those words, Deuteronomy, 17. and 11 According
to the Sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee, and according to the
Judgments which they shall tell thee, thou shall do, thou shall not decline
from the Sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor nor to the
left, has this gloss, when he says unto thee, of thy right hand, that it is
the left, and of the left hand, that it is the right, thou must believe it as a
truth, how much more, if he say thy right hand is thy right, and thy left hand
thy left?

The like we find in Rabbi Bechai, his Commentary upon the foresaid words, who
brings in Ramban, or R. Mosche Ben Nachman, telling his tale in these terms.
Upon a time there came a certain Gentile unto that mirror of Learning, Don
Shammai, and asked him how many Laws or Commandments have you ^ews among you?
to whom Shammai made answer, our Laws are only two, the one written, the other
delivered by mouth. Then the Gentile replied, I believe as fully as thou do,
that written Law to be true, and whatsoever is contained therein to be nothing
but the truth, but as for thy Law of Tradition, I cannot embrace it, neither
account it for a Law, but go to, make me a Jew, be my Shoolmaster, and teach me
in this Law, which words possessed Schammai with such a fury, that he thrust
him from him and commanded him to depart the place; then the Gentile came to
Hillel the elder, Schammai's copartner in office, (for they two were joint
Rectors, and lived but a small time before Christ's incarnation) whom he
questions in the same manner, entreating him withal, that he would vouchsafe
to make him a Jew, which Hillel did, and instructed him in the Jewish Religion.
The day following, Hillel says unto him, pronounce Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth,
which he did, according as Hillel mouthed them unto him: the day following,
Hillel inverting the Alphabet, says unto him, pronounce Daleth* Gimel, Beth,
Aleph, then the Gentile replied, Rabbi, this is not the Lesson thou taughtst me
yesterday; then answered Hillel, thou do not only reject me thy instructor,
but also fear not to yield no credit unto my words, therefore thou ought
to rest thy self contented in the unwritten word, and to believe all those
things, which are taught therein. Cap. 2.
This Story is registered in the Talmud Tract de Sabbatho.

Hence may we conclude, that every one simply without consideration or
contradiction, should believe not only the Jewish Law of Tradition, but
whatsoever the RabbiNes according to the prescript of the same Law write and
teach, and that whosoever does this, is to be esteemed a Jew indeed, whosoever
is refractory and disobedient, the most grievous torments in hell shall be his
portion, Tract Cittin cap. 5.
concerning which thing we read this Decree and Sentence of the Senate, in the
Tract entitled de libello repudii, or Letter of Divorce, in these words, Mar.
Tract. Erubhin, cap. 2^
says, Whosoever shall deride or contemn what our wismen and Rabbines have
spoken, he shall be punished in hot boiling pitch, and that in hell, as they
blasphemously affirm Christ our Savior and Redeemer to be tormented, because
he walked not according to the traditions, ordinances and Doctrines of their
ancestors, but rejected them as a thing despifed. This punishment is also
registered in another Tract of the Talmud, E^ubh^n c. 2. page 22. Col. 1. page
32.
and more at large expounded in a book called Menneras Hammaor, and expressly
set down in the book Beth Iaacob, but in the Talmud printed at Basile it is
left out, and not without good reason, as also many other blasphemous passages,
written against Christ and Christian Religion.

That Canon of the Rabbis appertains also unto the same thing. Whosoever
transgresses any thing that our Wisemen have spoken, he is liable to death: as
it is written, who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him. Thou must
here understand, Eccl: 10. 8.
thou Christian, that this is as the hedge of Traditions, and Ordinances,
wherewith the Jewish Rabbines have encompassed the Law of God. That we may
avoid the above mentioned punishment, these Doctors give us this admonition: My
Son, remember that a far greater care is to be had of the sayings of the
Scribes, then of the words of the Law it self.

Thus has it pleased me by way of a Preface, and for the better understanding
of the things following, briefly to declare and expound the Atticles of the
Jewish Creed, to show how they fell from the Word of the Lord, became
Apostates, and renegadoes, casting themselves headlong into that labyrinth of
Errors, the Talmud, how they were miserably misled thereby, so that the
Doctrine of Salvation was not at all found among them; but on the contrary,
gross heresy, perversion, falsification of the Word of God, superstition,
outward pride, eye-service, the great disquietness of conscience, and horribie
desperation of heart. I will shut up all with the words of Esaias and Jeremy:
Esaias says, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with
their lips do honor me, Cap. 29. 13, 14
but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me is taught
by the Precepts of men: therefore I will proceed to a mavelous work among
this people, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Cap. 8.5. 6.
Jeremy says, Why is this people of Jerusalem slidden back with a perpetual
backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. I harkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness saying,
what have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the
battle, a How say ye, we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us?
certainly in vain made he it, the pen of Scribes is in vain. The wise men are
ashamed, they are dismayed and taken, lo, they have rejected the Word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

CHAP. II.
Touching the Nativity, Circumcision, and Education of the Jews.
THat brief ingress which I made for a manuduction to the Jewish Religion and
exercise of their Faith, in the former Chapter, wherein I fully manifested the
foundation of their Belief, may serve as a light to direct the judgment and
inform the understanding of any one but the image of stupidity, in an easy
apprehension how strong, goodly and beautiful that edifice can represent it
self, which is to be reared upon such a groundwork; how able to keep footing
against the fury of insulting Tempests, Thunders and Lightnings, and the
Prophecies of them, who were enriched with the true knowledge of God, and
illuminated to conceive aright of his holy Word. My desire is, that none should
be offended with this my Anatomy of the Jewish Doctrine, in that without doubt
it contains many things subject to wonder and derision, and ranked in the
Catalogue of mere fables. My persuasion rather inclines to this mark, that
every one read and ponder the same with fear and trembling, because that this
Doctrine had its original from those people, whom God in former times did
choose unto himself before all the Nations of the Earth, adopted for his own
children, endowed them with the knowledge of himself, and had an especial care
that there never should want a Prophet incessantlyto teach and instruct them:
who after that by their ingratitude they had brought Gods anger and curse upon
them were punished with madness, as Moses foretold, Deuteronomy. 28. and with
blindness, Esaias chap. 42. whose heart was hardened, and whose ears were dull of
hearing: so that hearing they did not hear, and understanding they did not
understand: and therefore changed Gods Judgments into wickedness more then the
nations, as Ezekiel complains, Ezekiel 5. 6.
who nevertheless fear not to say, We are wise, and the Law of the Lord is
with us: and we live according to the strict rule thereof, as they boasted in
the days of Jeremy the Prophet, Jer. 8. 8.
who not withstanding making answer unto them, feared not to affirm, that
whatsoever their Scribes had in their Doctrine imparted unto them, to be no
less then a lie, no more then mere and foolish trifles: How truly was this
objected by the Prophet shall in the ensuing pages more plainly appear.
Certainly their boasting of Moses and the rest of the Prophets is vain and
frivolous; their Doctrine also of their Belife is altogether forged, a manifest
perversion and falsifying of the Word of God by such Expositions, which relish
more harsh then old Wives Tales, and Novelties, which are like roasted flesh
stuffed with the Lard of Ignorance.

That therefore we may orderly consider and make known the Jewish Belief so
firmly grounded, we will begin with the Nativity of a Jew; then we will explain
the manner how he is received into the number and communion of the Jews: Our
next step shall be his Education, and by what hand he is directed even unto the
evening of his days; how at last coming to his long home, he is carried
through the hidden and profound Chambers of the terrestrial Globe into the Land
that flows with Milk and Honey, the Land of promise, and there is royally
feasted, and sits at the Table with his Messiah, at which he is invited to fill
his paunch with the most delicate bits of a roasted Ox exceeding in greatness
the size of nature: fish and foul are but his common fare, and drinking no
other wine then that whose Grape had its growth and perfection in Paradise, and
there finally left by them who were his Harbingers to the grave, shall take his
rest with joy inexpressible.

Nunc lectum admissi risum teneatis amici?
Friendly Readers can now your modesty
Set free your spleen from laughters ecstasy?
When any of the Jewish Women is with child, and the time of their delivery
approaches, then the place appointed for the child^birth is furnished with all
manner of necessaries. Which done, the good man of the house or some (...) and
devout Father, for of such they have great (...) piece of Chalk and makes a
circular line round about the Chamber, writing upon the doors and walls without
and within, and about the bed in Hebrew Letters Adam Adam, the name of the
first man, from (...) rubescere, to wax red, as much as red earth, it signifies
Man in general, in both sexes, being of the same extent with (...) Enosh,
which is derived from (...) anash, to be sick, a name given us in re^spect of
the infirmities to which we are incident: they both differ frem (...) Isch,
which signifies a married man, as also (...) Ischah signifies a woman: these
two words according to the ^^bb^n^s con^tain (...) them the name of God, (...)
Jah, which two letters taken away there remains only (...) esh, which
signifies fire ne^^g unto us, that as ^ong as man and wise live in concord, God
is propitious unto them, but God forsaking them, there remains not^ing but the
fire of conten^ion and a curse. 2. Isch differs from Ischah only by the letter
H^ which is an aspiration, noting that the woman was made of man, and as it
were breathed out of his side.
, Chava Chava, Eve, is derived from (...) Chaiah to live, because she was the
Mother of all living, God himself being the E^ymologist.
, Chuts Lilis, that is to say, Adam, Eve, begonn Lilis, whereby the Jews would
signify this much, that herby they entreat God, that if the woman bring forth
a Son, he would give him a Wife like unto Eve, not Lilis, might be a Helper,
the last being refractory and disobedient. The name Lilis is found in the 34.
Chapter of Esaias, and is by some interpreted, a Scriech-Owl, a night bird,
commonly accounted ominous, by others a Witch that changes the favor of
children in the Cradle: and so the Jews in my judgment understand it of some
diabol call Ghost appearing in the shape of a woman, which was accustomed either
to kill or carry away young Infants after their Circumcision on the eighth day.
This Ghost or Spirit was named Lilis, from Lel, which in the Hebrew tongue
signifies night. Concerning this matter we read a story in a Book called B^n
Sira, not after the Edition of the learned Paulus Fagius, but after the Jews
own impression. The copy that I have Printed at Constantinople is the same with
that which Sebastian Munster makes mention of in the end of his Cosmography,
and out of which he transcribed the Hebrew History of the Kingdom of Prester
John, which is also printed in the end of that Copy, which I bought of a Jew
inhabiting those parts, who had got it out of Munsters Library, for Munster was
professor of the holy tongue in this City of Basile, where also he was buried.
In this Book I say it is recorded, that when God had created Adam alone, and
placed him in Paradise, he said, it was not good for Man to be alone, therefore
out of the Earth he formed a Woman like unto him, and called her Lilis. They
presenly fell at odds, began to brawl and chide; the Woman saying to the Man, I
will not be subject unto thee, and the Man replying, neither will I be a Vassal
to thee, ^ut exercise dominion over thee, for thou ought to obey. She presently
makes answer, we are both equal, thou art not better then I am, nor I better
then thou, we were both fashioned out of the earth; and thus shall they
continue in strife and variance. At last when Lilis perceivs that there is no
hopes of agreement, she pronounces the name Schem hamphorasch (which is the
holy name Jehovah, together with its secret and Cabalisticall interpretation,
against which Luther writ a Book) and instantly upon the pronunciation, flies
into the air; then Adam said unto God, O Lord of the whole world, the woman
which thou gave me is flown away from me. Upon the hearing hereof, God sent
three Angels after the woman, Senoi, Sansengi, and Sanmangeloph, bidding them
tell the woman, that if she would return and be obedient unto her Husband, all
should be well; if not, that every day an hundred of her children should give
up the Ghost. These Angels having received this their commission, presently
were upon the wing, and made after her, and overtook her upon a most
tempestuous place of the Sea, even there where the Egyptians were afterward
drowned, proclaiming unto her the will of the Almighty: she refusing to return,
the Angels threatened to stifle and drown her in the waters, unless she would
obey and go back unto her Husband. Then began Lilis to pray and beseech them
that they would let her pass, because she was created to this end, that she
might torment and put to death little Infants the eight day after their
nativity, if they were males, but upon the 20. if they were females. Which so
soon as the Angels perceived, they attempt to force her to return to her
Husband, which Lilis fearing, swore unto them that whenever she should find
the names or shape of these three Angels, either written or painted upon any
scrowl, parchment, or any such like matter, that then she had no power over
Infants, and that she would not hurt them: furthermore she refused not to
embrace ^he condit on, that every day one hundred of her children should die
the death: and so accordingly it fell out, for upon one day a whole Centenary
of her offspring, or so many young Devils went unto their long home. And this
is the cause that we imprint the names of these Angels upon certain sorowls of
par^hment and use to hang them about the necks of our Infants, that Lilis
beholding that which is written may remember her oath and not hurt them. Thus
much we have transcribed out of Ben Sira.

It may very well go for a truth, that they hang such scrolls about their
childrens necks, seeing they daily perform many a strange cure by the help of
them. In what place soever any woman is brougbt to bed, we may find the
forementioned picture, as also the names of those Angels, who are appointed for
the safeguard of us mortals, written above the door of the same.

But from whence had the learned Rabbines this their pleasant History? this
quaere is answered in the book called Brand spigelium, Genesis 2. 22.
in these words, The rib which the Lord had taken from man, he made it a woman,
that she, as a rib taken from his side, should be liable to his service: hence
the Rabbines comparing them words, God created man in his own image, in the
image of God created he him, Genesis 1. 27.
male and female, with those, It is not good that man should be alone, Genesis 2.
28
I will make him an help meet for himself, make a grand question, what became
of that first woman, who was created at the same time that Adam was: and they
salve it thus, the first woman of all, whose name was Lilis, being too highly
conceited of her own worth, would not be obedient to her husbands command,
because the earth was a common mother to them both; the Lord therefore divorced
her from Adam, and gave unto him another, who was flesh of his flesh and bone
of his bone, who might follow, obey and serve him as a member of his own body.
So from Brand spigelium.

So soon as this Witch or night hagge is by these their exorcismes banished and
expelled the room, and the pangs of child birth begin to sense upon the woman,
and the little infant ready to weep out a salutation to his fellow m^rtalls, it
is first of all provided, that a Christian midwife be not sent for, for this is
most severely pro^ibited in their Law, unless in case of necessity, when the
absence of a Jewish midwife must force a dispensation of the Statute, neither
is this licenced unless the woman to be delivered be guarded about with a
whole Troup of her own nation, for they greatly suspect the Chri^s;tian women,
that they should either neglect their office, or else kill their children while
they are a coming out of the womb. If the birth be fortunat^, so that a man
child be born into the world, then nothing but the mounting echoes of joyful
acclamations are heard in their habitations, the father of the child makes
speed into the Market, there to buy fat Geese, crammed Capons, flesh and fish
of all sorts, not omitting a cup of good liquor against the feast of the
Circumcision, The Circum.
which is to be celebrated the eighth day, accordingly as God By Moses enjoined
them. In the mean time, the ten are called (for They must be neither more nor
fewer) to the Circumcision of the Infant, who ought all to be above the age of
thirteen years, and this number in their own language they term Minian. (a)

The night following the woman's delivery, From (...) Mana, which signifies to
nnmber.
seven of them which were invited, and many times some others also come to
visit the mother of the child, who have a great supper provided for Them, which
ended, they roar and sing all the night over, play at Cards and Dice, and
invent many unheard of fooleries. The men drink themselves blind, thinking by
this means to solace the woman in child bed, and comfort her against that
sorrow and grief, which might possess her at the Circumcision of the infant,
as also lest some misfortune might happen unto her upon that night. This is the
ordinary custom, but on the contrary, many of the learned and godly sort, pour
out servent prayers, perlwade him that is to circumcise the infant to sobricty,
that his hand may be steady, while he is a doing his office. 1. He that
circumc^seth is called in the Hebrew Mohel; (...) a Cu^^er ^from^ (...)
^i^cum^^se.
who ought to be a J^w. 2. A man, not a woman, 3. One well exercised in
cutting, for otherwise the rich men among the Jews will not approve of him,
using this Proverb, He shall not learn to cut another man's beard by shaving
mine. Such an one as is not skillful in the art give money to the poorer sort of
the Jews, that he may try his cunning by practicing two or three times upon
some of his children. A man may easily distinguish the Mohel, or him that
c^rcumciseth from another by his long nails, pointed at the top. The knife
where with they cut off the foreSkin, may be made of any thing which is apt to
cut, as stone, glass or wood, but they commonly use knives made of iron, much
like to Barb^rs Rasours. The rich ennammel their knives with gol^, and be^et
them with Jewels. They are accustomed to wash their children before they
circumcise them, and then to wrap them in their swaddling cl^uts, that they may
be cleanly in the time of Circumcision; for otherwise it is not lawful to say
any prayer for them. Hence if the child in the time of Circumcision, through
the vehemence of grief and tears beray himself, he who circumciseth will not
play the Priest, and pray for him, until he be washed and swadled up in other
linen.

The ordinary time appointed for the Circumcision of the child, is the eight
day following the Nativity, reckoning from the very moment of his Nativity, and
this computation commonly begins at the Sun rising, yet notwithstanding for the
most part they cut away the foreskin while it is yet morning, and while the
child is fasting, because such plenty of blood will not issue from the child
then, as at other times.

Upon the eighth day all things necessary for Circumcision are graced with an
early preparation. First of all two chairs are brought into the room, or one at
least, yet of such a latitude and bigness, that two may with ease sit in it,
which is also adorned with Tapestry, and silken and velvet furniture, and that
according to every persons ability. This is done either in the Synagogue, or
common School, The word Synagogue from the Greek (...), to gather, because the
Jews were there gathered together, to worship God. in Hebrew it was Called Beth
hach reseth, the house of Assembly, the Synagegues were before Christ's time,
Acts 15. 21. their Schools, were different from their Synagogues and accounted
more holy, called Beth hamodrasch, the house of sub^il exposition: men and
women had diverse Synagogues, one separated from the other with wier lattices.
or in some private Conclave; if it be done in the Synagogue, then ought the
Chair to be placed near unto the Ark, anciently styled the Ark of the Covenant,
in which the book of the Law is kept; for such a place is holy in esteem. Then
the Godfather of the child which is to be circumcised, draws near, and seats
himself in the foresaid Chair: the Mohel, or he that is to circumcise the child
being placed near unto him. After them follow other of the Jews, one of which
with a loud voice gives warning that they should with all expedition bring the
things requisite for the Circumcision of the infant: the SuMmons ended. some
certain youths hasten to the place, one of them carrying a great Candlesticks
In which are twelve wax lights burning, to represent the twelve Tribes of
Israel; next in order unto these, come two other boys, carrying two Goblets
full of Claret wine, another brings the knife wherewith the child is to be
circumcised, another one Basin full of sand and a third another filled with the
oil of Ba^some, in which are sleeped some Linen rags, which the Mohel applies
to the sore of the newly circumcised infant. These drawing near the Mohel, cast
themselves into a certain ring or circle, that they may better see and learn
his cunning. These places the youths purchase with money: some others also there
be, that flock thither with odours and sweeet mea^s, made by the Art of the
Apothecary, with strong and delicious wine, Carrawaies, Cinnamon and such like,
that they may comfort and refresh the Father or Godfather, or any other of the
assistants, so be it that any of them should fall into a swound by some
conceived grief for the cutting off the foreskin.

All things thus in a readiness, the Godfather of the child places himself in
one of the forementioned chairs, or if there be but one, in the one part
thereof; opposite to him sits the Mohel, and sings that Song registered in the
second book of Moses, which the Israeli^es sung, when they had passed through
the Red sea, with many more oF The same sort, then the women bring the infant
to the gate, when the whole Congregation rising up, the Godfather goes and
takes the child from them, sitting down with him in his seat again, and saying,
BarUch habba, that is, Blessed is he that comes: this word habha has in it
somewhat Cabalistical, the Letters whereof He, Beth, Aleph, in numeration make
eight, so that the mystery must be this, Blessed is he that comes the eight day
to be cirrcumcised. They have also a certain abbreviation or word, every Letter
of which notes another word, which is this, Hinne ba Eliahu, Behold Elijah
comes, who is called the Angel of the Covenant, which thing the Jews
conceiting are of opinion, that Elias comes with the Child, and seats himself
in the empty Chair, to see whether they rightly observe and keep the covenant
of Circumcision as it is written, The Messenger of the Covenant, whom you seek,
behold he shall come says the Lord of Hosts; forwhen at a certain time the
children of Israel were prohibited to make their sons Jews, or to cu^away the
foresk in of their flesh; then Elijah the Prophet plunged in sorrow, hid
himself in a certain Cave, where he purposed to end his days: Then the Lord
spoke unto him, and said, What do thou here Elijah? who answered, I have
been very zealous for the Lord of Hosts, for the children of Israel have
forsaken thy Covenant, that is, the Covenant of Circumcision: Then God promised
Elijah, that he should always be present from thenceforth at the Circumcision
of every male, that he might know that the children of Israel would no more
forsake the Covenant, but perform it according to every circumstance thereof,
as it is written: The Angel of the Covenant shall come.

So soon as Elias his chair is brought into the room, then are they bound to
say in express terms, This seat is provided for Elias, the Prophet. For if
this be not repeated, he comes not to the circumcision. Peradventure through
age his ears are become dull of hearing, and therefore he that invites him must
stretch his voice to a higher note then ordinary. Moreover, that Elias may
tarry till the circumcision be totally finished they leave the chair in the
same place, for the space of three whole day^s. Upon a time a certain rich Jew
of Reginoburgum or Queenborough, would have a young Infant of his circumcised,
who chose Rabbi Juda Chasidi, which for his truly religious life was called
Rabbi Juda the holy, for a Godfather; who while the child was brought in to be
circumcised, and the whole congregation stood up and cried Baruch habha, held
his peace, and did not rise at all. He being questioned concerning this his
carriage, answered, I perceived that Elias came not, and sat in the seat with
me; from whence I collect, that this child will never make a good man: and
because I see a certain man sitting in the window with a long white beard, go
and ask of him whether the words that I speak be true or not, he will answer
you. Well, when they had thus done, the man replied, Be ause Elias soresaw that
this child would forsake the faith of the Jews and turn Christian, therefore he
would not be present ate the circumcision. And truly so it came to pass, for
the child coming to riper years, was converted to Christianity.

When therefore the Godfather has the child lying in his bosom, then the Mohel
loses his swaddling, takes hold of his yard, laying hands upon the former part
thereof by the foreskin, thrusts down the gland thereof, which done, he rubs
the foreskin, that by mortifying of it the child may be less sensible of the
cutting: then taking the knife prepared for circumcision out of the boys hand
that carried it, he begins to sing with shrill voice, Blessed be thou, O God
our Lord, King of the World, who have sanctified us by thy Commandments, and
given to us the Covenant of circumcision. In the mean time, whiles he is thus a
discanting he cuts away so much of the foreskin that the top of the yard may
be seen bare and naked, which he throws in haste into the Basin filled with
sand, restoring the knife to him from whom he took it, and takes one of the
Cups full of red Wine, out of which he sucks so much as he can hold in his
mouth, which he presently spnes out again upon the Infant to wash away the
blood, and also some in his face, if he perceive him to faint: instantly upon
this he takes the child's yard in his mouth, and sucks as much blood out of it
as he can possible, to the end that it may sooner leave bleeding, which blood
he casts out again, either into one of the bowls of red Wine, or into the basin
of Sand. This he does three times at the least, which the Hebrews call mezizah,
which Moses commanded not, but was instituted by the Rabbines and wise men
among the Jews, as it seemed good unto them.

After that the flux of blood be somewhat appeased, then the Mohel with his
nails, which upon either Thumb are very sharp, tares asunder the mangled skin
of the child's yard, forcing it so far backward, that the head of the yard may
wholly appear, which renting asunder they call priah: by this taring of the
foreskin the poor Infant suffers greater pain and grief than he did by the
former cutting. This done, the Mohel takes the linen rags, which one of the
boys kept steeped in a basin of Oil, applies them to the childs yard, and
binds them about three or four times, then taking the Infant, folds him up in
his swaddling clothes.

The whole being thus finished, the Father of the child says, Blessed be thou,
O God, our Lord, King of the world, who have sanctisied us by thy
Commandments, and have commanded us to fulfill the Covenant made with Abraham
our Father. Then shall the whole Congregation make answer, and say: As happy an
entrance shall this little Infant have into the possession of Moses his Law,
in^o Marriage and the practice of good works, as he has had into the covenant
of Abraham our Father. Then the Mohel shall wash his unclean mouth, and h^s
hands also until they be white and clean; the Godfather of the child rises up
with him, places himself directly opposite to the Mohel, who takes one of the
bowls full of red wine, and says a certain Prayer over it: then he prays also
over the Infant and says: O God which art our God, the God of our Fathers,
strengthen and keep this Infant, to the comfort of his Parents; and make that
his name may be called (for at this instant he names the child calling him
Isaac) Isaac, which was the Son of Abraham: let his Father rejoice because he
came out of his loins: let his Mother rejoice in the fruit of her womb, Prove.
23, 25.
as it is written: Thy father and thy Mother shall be glad, and she that bare
thee shall rejoice: God says also by the mouth of his Prophet, and when I
passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
live; yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. At those words
the Mohel dips his finger into one of the Cups full of Wine, into that, I mean,
into which he had vented the blood which he sucked out of the child's yard, and
annoints the lips of the child three times therewith, hoping that according to
the forementioned saying of the Prophet, his days shall be more then they
should have been otherwise, and that he shall live in the blood of his
circumcision. David also says, Psalm. 105. 5.
Remember the mavelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgment of his mouth. Then he proceeds to pray unto God, that he would defend
them that are present, as being such men who would eftsoons confirm his
covenant by the fulfilling of it. Furthermore, that he would vouchsafe to grant
a long life to the Father and Mother of the child; and also to bestow a
blessing on the Babe. His Orizons ended, he reatcheth the Cup, which he had
formerly sanctified to every one of the young men, and invites them to drink
thereof. To conclude, all they return with the Child, who is now made a Jew,
unto his Fathers house, restoring him into the arms of the Mother. And here is
the upshot of the whole matter.

Some of the learned and religious Jews hearing the Infant cry out, by reason
of the pains suffered by him in the cime of circumcision, comfort themselves
with that sentence which is extant in the second book of Moses: I have also
heard the groaning of the children of Israel, Exodus 6. 5.
whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have remembered my covenant.

When the Mohel makes his last prayer, then he stands near unto the Ark of the
Covenant, together with the Godfather of the child, because that is a holy
place. And thus much the Learned among the Hebrews have collected from the
Hebrew word Milah which signifies circumcision. This word has four letters,
every one of which are the Index of a several word: Mohel Jered liphne
hattibha; that is, he that circumciseth shall seat himself near unto the Ark
of the Covenant: or Maleach Joschebh liphne Haaron; that is, the Angel stands
before the Gate: to wit, Elias the Angel of the Covenant standing before the
Ark, sends up his prayers together with ours into the ears of the Almighty.

Some of the upright Jews take the little Infant, and both before and after his
circumcision lay him upon the bolster or cushion of Elias, that he may touch
him.

That they accomplish the Priah, or denudation of the forepart of the Infants
yard with so sharp nails, they say that they are moved hereunto by that saying
in the Book of Joshua:Take unto thee sharp knives, Josh. 5.
(for so it is to be translated, not, knives of stone) and circumcise the
children of Israel the second time. Upon these words the Wisemen among the
Jews conclude, that those words, the second time, ought to be understood of the
priah, which is not other but a second circumcision. Hence issues a most copious
question, Why they which were born in the Desert were not circumcised for the
space of forty years together? the answer is, that this came not to pass by
reason of the stiff necked malignity, and hard hearted insolence of their
Ancestors, for they were men of circumcised hearts: but because blustering
Boreas had not blown in that Desert, within the compass of forty years, whose
healthful blasts conduce so much to the letting of blood, that any wound, this
not travising the terrestrial Globe, is accounted perilous, Hereupon they have
this medicinal Canon. In a cloudy day, or in that day in which the Eastwind
blows, Circumcision must not be administered, nor any vein opened.

Here it may be objected, Tract. Gittin. cap. 3:
the Northern wind does not always blow, and yet circumcision is daily to be
exercised. This objection is answered in the Talmud, that four winds blow every
day, and that the Northern wind is mixed with every one in particular, and for
the most part obtains the predominance; and for this very reason circumcision
may be daily practiced. That this wind was hushed and still while the Israelites
were in the Desert, the very nature thereof, which is to free the air from
clouds, and to be the author of fair weather, is an invincible Argument, as it
is written; The wind passes and purges it, from the North shall come gold:
that is to say, with whose calm clearness, the purity of the most refined gold
cannot manage a comparison. If then this wind should have blown in the Desert,
it had driven away and dissolved the pillar of fire which always accompanied
the people of Israel, which had been to their great damage. Here it is not
lawful for me to expose to the vulgar eye any more of these their quirks. If
any one be ravished with a desire of a further inquiry, let him read Rabbi
David Kimchi upon the forecited place of Joshuah, and the Talmud in the book
of affinity, Tract. leb. hammos cap. 8
and that Chapter which begins Haarel, where most accurate disputes, exh^usted
out of the very abyss of wisdom, shall present themselves unto his view,
concerning the cause why circumcision was omitted in the Desert.

To proceed* the casting of the foreskin into the sand, signifies that their
seed shall be like the sand upon the sea shore for multitude, as it is written:
Genesis 32. 11.
I will make they Seed like the sand of the Sea: Gen 28. 14
and again, Thy Seed shall be as the dust of the earth. Secondly, Glossa Tamud.
16.
they use this Ceremony in remembrance of Balaam, who when he saw that all the
sand in the Desert was full of the foreskins of the Children of Israel, he
presently cried out, Who can number the dust of Jacob? as if he had said, who
can stand before the holiness and worth of this people, all the males whereof,
not one excepted* being circumcised, bury their foreskins in such a sandy
Sepulcher? with what a forefront shall I curse such an holy N^tion? Thirdly,
it signifies that the Old Serpent which seduced the first Adam in Paradise,
shall be fed with this fore skin; for his bread is the dust of the earth* as it
is written: Genesis 3. R Ab^aha^ in lib. Z^^r h^mor in par ascha kit^zek super 23.
cap. Deat. Isa 6^. 25. Prove. 25. 21.
Thou shall eat the dust of the earth. Now seeing the Serpent is as yet man's
daily enemy, and has an incessant and greedy desire to satiate his gluttonous
paunch with his soul and body: thence it comes to pass, that these Saint-like
Jews feed their enemy, the Serpent, according to Gods comman, dwith the
foresaid fore skin as it is written: If thine enemy hunger, give him meat. This
bit is so hard of digestion, that it so debilitates and weakens the natural
strength of the Serpent, that he cannot again ^educe man, as once he did.

If an Insant be sickly, they do not circumcise him upon the eighth day, but
defer it until the time of his recovery. If any Infant dye before the eighth
day be come, then he is cicumcised in the Churchyard, over his grave, yet so
that no Prayers be said for him. It is circumcised to this end, that God being
entreated would be merciful unto him, and together with others raise him up at
the last day. In some places it is not lawful for any one, the Godfather only
excepted, to sit while the child was a circumcising, because it is written: 2.
Kings 23. 3.
That all the People stood to the Covenant. That for a conclusion of all the
Mo^el is bound to give a blessing upon the Covenant of circumcision, holding
the circumcision knise in his hand, the wise men amongst the Jews demonstrate
from that Scriptnre, Psalm. 149. 6.
Let the praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their
hands: Thus the first Act in the Synagogue is finished; now follows the second,
which is performed after the childs return to his Fathers house.

In the mean time that they are busied in the Synagogue, the Cooks are with
much diligence conversant about their Kitchen affairs; the Table is spread, and
great provision is made, to which (as has been formerly recorded) only ten men
are invited, two of which must be a couple of learned Rabbines, who rabble out
a long Grace, and make a kind of a Sermon, to which the hearers giving but lean
attention, in the mean time carouse whole Gob^ets of wine one to another. It
was my chance once to be invited to one of these their feasts, commonly
celebrated after the administration of the circumcision, at which time one of
the Rabbines took for his Text those words of Soloman, Wisdom is a tree of
life to them that lay hold on it: Concerning his Sermon, I can with out a lie
affirm, that I never heard ^uch a dry and ridiculous piece of stuff in all my
life. That they ought to provide such a sumptuou^ and costly banquet, they
prove out of the Hebrew word Milah, which signifying circumcision, the le^ters
thereof according to the Kabala, note ou^ unto us these four ensuing words,
Mischteh laasch l^col hakkervim, which are by interpretation, Let him provide a
banquet for all them that are invited: hence they conclude the the preparation
of this Feast to be legitimate. That it is to be celebrated the eight day, they
prove with greater subtilty, and art of the history of Abraham and Isaac, (...)
which is registered Genesis 21. 8. in these words; And when the child grew and was
weaned, Abraham made a great feast in that day in which Isaac was weaned. Bejom
higgamiel, eth litzchak. in the day wherein Isaac was weaned.

Upon which words they have this Cabalistical interpretation, Rabbi Bechai,
upon the place.
saying, thou do not rend Higgamel (whose Letters are He, Gimel, Mem, Lamed)
but Bejom hagmal, where He and Gimel note not any word, but are only Letters
of numeration, making eight; the word Mal is rendered in the Teutonick, Er hat
besch nitten, he circumcised, therefore according to the Exposition (rather
indeed the perversion) of the Rabbines, the sense must be this, Abraham made a
great feast upon the eighth day, in which his son Isaac was circumcised, and
the child did grow and was weaned: this custom then, that a good banquet
should be prepared, and the learned Rabbines and other upright men among the
Jews should sit as guests, is very commendable; for David makes mention of it
in his fiftieth Psalm, and fifth verse, saying, Gather my Saints together unto
me, those that have made a Covenant with me, with sacrifice, that is, the
Covenant of Circumcision. Instead of a sacrifice then they make this feast,
seeing they may not sacrifice in the Land of their Captivity, for which they
often breath out the doleful accents of grief and sorrow.

The Mahel, or he that did circumcise the child, is tied to abide some certain
days with the mother thereof, and to take care that the blood do not burst out
the second time: the mother remains in childbed for the space of seven whole
weeks, whether the bring forth a male or a female, her husband throughout all
that time must abstain, and not approach so near as to touch her, but it is a
point of Religion to eat with her, which he also does when she is in her
monthly flowers, of which more hereafter.

After this manner the children of Israel are made Jews by fulfilling the
Covenant of Circumcision. If the woman bringforth a daughter, her nativity is
nothing at all set by, yea so little indeed, that I could not find any thing
concerning this matter recorded in their books, except that which Ferdinandus
Hessus, who a few years ago turned to the Christian faith, in which God long
preserve him, revealed unto me, to wit, that when the new born female babe is
six days old, some certain number of young girls seat themselves round about
the Cradle, in which the infant lies wrapped in fine linen and swaddling
clouts, embroidered with silver, who heave the Infant together with the cradle,
many times aloft into the air, and at length name the child, she that stands
at the head of the Cradle being the Godmother; which things thus finished, they
sit them down with other Damsels to a banquet prepared for them, passing away
the time in eating and drinking, and other merriments.

Although it is commanded in the Law of Moses, Levit. 12.
that if a woman have brought forth a man-child, she should for the first seven
days be accounted polluted and unclean, and after that should keep at home for
thirty three days, which added to the former, make forty or seven weeks, to
fulfill the days of her Purification; and also when she has brought out a
woman-child, then shall she be unclean two weeks, and she shall continue in the
blood of her Purification threescore and six days, yet notwithstanding it is a
custom among the Jews now living, that the woman hides her self for the space
of seven weeks, whether she bring forth a man or woman-child, opposing a
certain Sect which at this day flourishes in Turkey, Poland and Russia: this
Sect is styled by the name of Koraim, they keep the Law according to the
Letter, rejecting the institutions and expositions of the Rabbines, of which we
shall speak more hereafter, and therefore lest the Jews here amongst us, should
be thought to think the same things, they allot only forty days residence at
home for a woman that has brought forth, whether it be male or ^emale.

When the forty days appointed for the Purification are fully gone and past,
How the wom^n w^sh thems^l^es the days of (...) Purifi^^d ^on ended.
then they are compelled to purge and wash themselves with cold water before
that they can sleep with their husbands, or have any communion with them; which
done, they put on white and pure garments, and there associate themselves unto
their husbands: they wash themselves in common water exposed to the public
view of their whole Nation, or if they cannot come by any such, then they wash
themselves in certain cisterns, or wells, which they have in their houses,
Courts, or Orchards, made for the same^purpose; these ough^ to be of such a
depth, that they may take the women descending into them up unto the neck; if
the clay in the bottom offend them, then they put a broad stone under the
soles of their feet, or some such thing, that their feet may stand in clean
water, and that the same water flowing and running betwixt toe and toe may come
unto every part of the same; for if never so little remain untouched by the
water, or that the water cannot come to it, then the whole washing stands in no
stead; for this very cause before they enter the Bath, they dishevel their
hair, lay aside their head bands, chains, and bracelets, and all the ornaments
of the neck, they draw off their rings, pick their teeth, and that with so
great art, that they leave nothing, which may yield the least suspicion of
uncleanness. What more? not an hair breadth of their body but must be
unmasked; sometimes they are compelled to dive so deep, that not so much as one
hair does appear above the water, to this end they stretch out their arms and
fingers. They are also bound to open their eye lids and mouth for some small
space, and so to bend themselves that their paps hanging down in a
perpendicular manner may not touch their body, that by this means the water may
come unto every part, and so enrich the whole body with an exact cleanesse; if
in the mean time she fall into a swound, it is not lawful to touch her with
unwashed hands, for this would make her bathing void, and of no effect.
Furthermore it is required, that some man or women should always be present
while she washes her self, but a woman especially, or a girl which has
outstript the age of twelve years by one day, but if such cannot be at hand,
the Goodman may serve the turn, may see and witness, that she washes her self
according as she ought. It is dangerous in their account to send for a
Christian woman, for in such an one they dare not put confidence.

Though it be winter time, yet ought these washings to be performed in cold
water, yea though it be hard frost, yet if in any place they can claim custom,
it may be lawful for them to intermingle cold water and hot, or if there be
any hot baths (as there is in many Countries) into these the women may lawfully
enter, and wash themselves. Who desires to know any more concerning this
matter, let him peruse a certain little book written in the Germane tongue and
Hebrew Character, called Franwen Buchlein, or the book of women, which because
it contains a brief description of their conditions, his palate may there find
wished content, and a plenary satisfaction.

In the next place we are opportunely invited to look into the manner how the
first born is redeemed out of the hand of the Priest. Of the redemption of the
first born.
That son which the mother in time past brought forth according to Moses Law,
was holy unto the Lord, and ought to be redeemed from the hand of the Priest,
as it is written, Whatsoever opens the Matrix is mine, Exodus 34. 19. 20.
all the first born of thy sons thou shall redeem, and in imitation of their
ancestors, the Jews do redeem their first born, the manner of the redemption
follows. The one and thirtieth day following the Nativity of the child, his
father sends for the Cohen, There were ranks or degrees of Ministers about the
Temple, Priests Levites, Nethinims.The name of Priest in general, is (...)
Cohen, from (...)in pihel to minister in holy things. The succession of
Priests, was contained in Aaron and his posterity, the high Priesthood was tied
to the line of the eldest son, the rest were Priests of the second order, they
and the high Priest differe^, first in their Consecration, the High Priest was
anointed, the other only sprinkled with oil mixed with the blood of the
Sacrifice. 2. In their garments, Exodus 28. 3. In their marriage, the High
Priest might not marry a widow, or a divorced woman, but a virgin, Levit. 21.
the other Priests might. 2. they differed in their office. First, the High
Priest only, and that once a year entered into the Holy of holies, Exodus 16.
Secondly, he might not mourn for his nearest a kin, Levit. 21. the others might.

The Levites office was to pitch, take down, bear up and down the Tabernacle,
and the vessels thereof. The Gershonites charge was to carry the Coverings and
hangings of the Tabernacle. The chief things within the Sanctuary were
committed to the Cohathites, the woodwork and the rest of the instruments to
the Merarites: after the Temple was built, they were divided into singers and
Porters, both into 24. orders, they had their initiation at a month old, Numb.
3. their consecration at 25. years old, Numb 8. 3. Their ministration at 30
years. The Nethinims were hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the House of
God, Gibeonites they were, called Nethinims from Nathan to give, because they
were given to the Service of the Temple, Goodwin.


or Priest, as also many other good friends to accompany him, before whom he
sets the Infant upon a Table, and lays down beside him a certain sum of money,
or so much goods as can equalize it in value, which is the quantity of two
Florens of Gold: then he says unto the Priest, my wife has brought forth her
first begotten son, and the Law requires* that I should present him unto thee:
then the Cohen or Priest answering says, Do thou give this thy son, and
leave him unto me? To whom the Father shall reply, yes: upon this, the Priest
asks his Mother whether she ever had a child before that time, Numb. 18* 16
or if at any time she proved abortive, if the mother say no, then the Priest
questions the Father, which of the two be dearer unto him* his first born, or
his money: then the Father answers, that he esteems his firstborn babe above all
riches in the world; then the Priest taking the money, and laying it upon the
Infants head, says; this is thy first begotten son, whom the Lord would have
redeemed, as it is written, And those that are to be redeemed from a month
old, thou shall redeem according to thy estimation for the money of five
shekels, after the shekel The coins in use among the Jews, were either Silver
coins or gold coins. Their silver coins were these, their first and greatest
was shekel, (...) d^rived from (...) to poi^e or weigh, which was twofold,
Regius Siclus, or the Kings shekel of com^mon use in buying and selling, it
valued of our money, one shilling three pence. 2.

The shekel of the Sanctuary, which doubled the former, and was in value two
Shillings six pence, on the one side of it was stamped the pot of Manna, or
A^rons Censer, as others, with this inscription, (...) the shekel of Israel, on
the other side Aarons Rod hudding, with this inscription, (...) The City
Jerusalem: See A^sted in Praecog. Theol. and Mr. Goodwin, page, 327. Their
second Coin was (...) zuz, the fourth part of a shekel, which was also called
(...) in value seven pence halfpenny, zuz is derivid from (...) zuz to move,
for money is the primum mobile of man's appetite, and (...) Ceseph from Casaph,
to breath, to be intent on any thing. Money is the desire of every one, and as
Hesiod says, (...), the life of mortals. Their third kinds of Coin were
first, (...) gerah, from (...) miscere, to mingle, being the cause of commerce,
(...) Agorah, from Agar to gather together, for the same reason: and lastly,
(...) Kesi^a, which signifies a lamb, a piece of money which had a lamb
stamped on the one side of it, so Genesis 33. 9. Jacob bought a piece of grown for
an hundred lambs, that is, for an hundred pieces of money. These three Coins
are in value of our Coin one^penny half penny, twenty went to a shekel.

Their gold Coins were,

1. (...) zahab, a shekel of gold, in our money fifteen shillings.

2. (...) Ada^kon, also called, (...) in value also fifteen Shillings, this was
Persian Coin.

Their sums hence arising were two.

1. (...) Maneh, (...), a pound of gold, 75 pound of money 7 l. 10 (...).

2. (...) Cicar, a talent, in Gold 4500 pound, in money, 375 pound.


of the Sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs. Then turning himself unto the child,
he says, when thou wast in the womb of thy mother, thou wast then in the power
of thy heavenly Father, and they earthly Parents, but now thou art in my hand
and power who am the Priest, thy father and mother desire to redeem thee,
because thou art the first begotten, and holy unto the Lord, as it is written,
Sanctify unto me all the firstborn among the children of Israel, that first
opens the womb, as well of man as of beast, for it is mine. Now this money
shall serve in thy stead, and be thy redemption, seeing thou art the
firstborn, and this shall be given unto the Priest. If I have redeemed thee as
I ought, then shall thou' be redeemed; if I have failed in the pe^formance of
my office, notwithstanding thou being redeemed according to the Law, and after
the manner of the Jews, shall grow up in the fear of God, to Matrimony and the
practice of good works, Amen. If the father chance to die before the one and
thirtieth day after, the child's Nativity be fully come, then the mother is not
bound to redeem her child, and therefore she puts a scroll or pla^e of gold
about his neck, in which it is written, (...)
This is the firstborn son, but not redeemed, the son himself being bound to
redeem himself out of the hands of the Priest, when he shall come to full age.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I will relate a certain History, which is
recorded in the Gemurah or Talmud, concerning a certain stranger or proselyte,
Pioselyte was he, who forsaking Gen^ilisme, turned to the Jewish Religion,
called by the name of (...) Ge^ a stranger from (...) Gu^ to wander, of these
were two sorts, (...) proselytus foe^eris a proselyte of the Covenant, he was
tied to Circumcision, and the whole Law of Moses, as R. Sal. Deuteronomy. 2. 3. 14.
who names him there a proselyte of Justice, to whose adoption three things were
necessary. 1. Circumcision 2. Purification by water. 3. The blood of the
oblation. The second sort was, (...) proselytus portae, a proselyte of the
gate^, Deuteronomy. 14 21. he was not circumcised, nor tied to the observation of
Moses his Law, but only to keep Noah's seven Commendements, which are these, 1.
Judgments for malefactors 2 Blessing the name of G^d 3. To fly idolatry. 4
Robbery. 5. Bloodshed. 6. Eating any member of a beast taken from it alive. 7.
Not uncover ones nakedness, Shindler in Pent^g lot. 1530.
who by a miraculous kind of Circumcision obtained an inheritance in the other
World, and departed this a good Jew.

A certain King of Rome (as we read in tract. de idolatria, c. 1.) was
sometimes an heavy friend unto the Jews, and desiring utterly to put out their
name from under heaven, and to banish them his Kingdom, he calls his counsel,
and thus bespeaks them: suppose a man, ^aith he, has an old ulcer in his body,
in which the ^lesh does putri^ie, whether will he choose to cut away the rotten
flesh to regain his health, or suffer it to remain there still, to his
perpetual grief and torment? These things spoke the King against the jews, who
had for long time sojou^ned in his Kingdom; and grievously molested his
Subjects.

One of the Council, by name Ketijah, hearing the Kings words, and perceiving
whether they tended, made answer, Adoni, which is to say, my Lord, thou art not
able to destroy or banish the Jews, for of them it is written, Zach. 2. 6.
Ho, ho, come forth, and fly from the Land of the North, says the Lord; for I
have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, says the Lord, that
is, the world may even as possibly subsist, and be without winds, as without
the Jews; wherefore thou can not banish the Jews out of thy Realm, and if
thou could prevail so much, as to bring it to pass, the common voice of the
whole world would proclaim thee being brought to extreme poverty* for a
tyrannical King.

Upon these words, the King answered, thou have said that which is right, and
now seeing it is enacted, that whosoever overcomes the King in his answer,
shall be buried quick in a heap of sand, that there he may be choakeda and
perish; thou who have put me to a non plus (which is a scandal to my person)
and set at naught and vilified my Kingdom, shall taste of the appointed
punishment. When he was carried away to the place of execution, there was a
certain Matron seen in Rome of an excellent portraiture, crying out, Woe unto
that ship which is about to strike sail, the Custom unpayed, by which words
the Matron intimated thus much, that Ketijah, who was ready to suffer death in
the Jews cause, and so consequently to obtain eternal life in another world,
had not as yet paid his toll money, that is, was not made a Jew by
Circumcision. Upon the instant of this vociferation, some say that he snatched
a knife, and cut off his own foreskin; others, that he burning with too ardent
zeal, catched hold of his foreskin, bit it off with his teeth, and then with a
loud voice said, I have now at last paid my Custom: when they would not give
him any respite, but burn him in all haste, he cried the second time, saying,
that he bequeathed all his goods and possessions to that most learned man Rabbi
Akibah, as to his lawful heir, whereupon this voice was heard from heaven,
Ketijah, thou son of Schalom, eternal life is provided for thee. From hence
every one may learn, what a precious thing Circumcision is, and what a good
deed it is for any one to legasie all his goods unto a Jew: truly, there is
nothing lost, where a man for an hundred crowns may gain a thousand.

In the same Chapter of the Talmud, the same men boast how Caesar Antoninus
caused himself to be circumcised, Ab^odach za^ah.
how he departed this life a Jew indeed, and how that happened unto him, which
is here related. Not far from the Emperors Palace dwelt a certain famous and
most expert Rabbine, from whose houses to the Emperors porch came a certain
hidden passage under the earth, by the benefit of which they oftentimes had
private conference. Upon this occasion, a great desire to be instructed in the
Law, and Religion of the ^ews invaded the mind of the Emperor, and for this
cause, every day once he repaired to the Rabbine, and heard the Law at his
mouth, and because he would not go unto the Jew without attendance, yet also
would not in the mean time be disclosed, he always chose two for his
companions, whereof one he stabbed with his dagger at the the entrance into the
Rabbines house, the other he made to drink of the same cup at his return to his
own palace, giving also in charge to the Rabbine, that he should have no man in
his company, when he (the Emperor) came to visit him.

When therefore Caesar on a certain time had found together with the Jew, a
stranger, whose name was Rabbi Chanina Bar Chamma, which Rabbine was an holy
man, and one of their prime ones, he was so enraged, that he burst out into
this interrogation: Did not I say unto thee, look that thou have none in thy
company when I shall come unto thee? To whom the Rabbine replied, My Lord and
Emperor, this is not a man, but a good spirit, if he be a spirit says Caesar,
let him go and signify so much to my servant, who lies and takes his rest
without before the gate (speaking of the servant which he had killed with his
ow^ hands) that he make have to come unto me: when Rabbi Chanina perceived the
Emperors servant to be dead then he began to fear and be afraid, not knowing
how to shape an answer, a^ also thinking it very behovefull, that Caesar should
not be found guilty of the murder; in these melancholy dumps he fell upon his
knees, and with the importunity of prayer, becomes so wearisome unto God, that
the Emperors servant was restored to life, which thing the Emperor having
taken notice of such an excessive admiration at the Religious piety of the
Jewish Nation, p^ssessed his soul that from thenceforth he became a Serving man
at his Pedagogues Table. Yea moreover, when the Rabbine at night would please
to visit his Couch, the Emperor bowing himself at his bed side, became his
Footstool, that his Master the Rabbine might with more facility stretch his
limbs upon his bed of Down, the Rabbine indeed in many kinds, strived to repel
the tendered service, but all in vain, for the Emperor did not only perform
these earth kissing Congees with an humility of mind, floating in the lowest
ebb, but also wished it might be his happiness to be his footstool in another
world. At length the Jews had an ocular demonstration that this Emperor before
he entered the tyring room of the grave, did receive the sign of circumcision,
professed himself a Jew, and died in this profession. Many examples of the
same sort are every where obvious in the writings of the Jews, declaring that
many Christians both of high and low degree turning Apostates to Christianity,
have embraced Judaism, and so have obtained the salvation of their souls, if we
may believe it.

But in the last place, what was the Prophets censure of these circumcised
Saints? and in what esteem had they their persons?

Jerem. All the Gentiles are circumcised, and all the house of Israel
circumcised in heart.

Moses. Deuteronomy. 16.
Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stisf necked.

Jerem. Ier. 6. 10.
To whom shall I speak and give warning that they may hear? behold, their ear
is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken, behold the Word of the Lord is unto
them a reproach, they have no delight in it.

Stephen, Act. 7. 52.
a Christian. Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the holy Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye.

Paul the Apostle. Rom 2. 28, 29
He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that circumoision which is
outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of
men, but of God

How then are all the first born of Christians, yea, all faithsull Christians
redeemed? S. Peter answers, Ye were not redeemed with silver and gold from your
vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
received by tradition from your Fathers, but with the precious bleud of
Christ, as a Lamb without blemish and Without spot.

S. Paul teaches us by whom we have redemption, Col. 1. 14.
Even by hi^ blood, that is, the remission of our sins.

But what does circumcision hurt the Christians? S. Paul answers: If the
uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his his
uncircumcision be accounted for circumcision? and shall not uncircumcision,
which is by nature* if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter and
circumcision art a transgressor of the Law?

CHAP. III.
showing how the Jews instruct their children in the fear of God.
WHen any one of the Jewish women gives suck, then she ought to eat good and
wholesome meats, and such as are easy of digestion, to this end, that the
Infant may find and suck from the teats good milk, by which his heart and
stomach may not be troubled with obstructions, but sustained and nourished,
whereby he may sooner come to maturity, and may more easily obtain virtue,
manners, wisdom and understanding. The Chachamim, (a) which are the most
profound W^^ters among the Jews, Wise men.
have with great diligence reiterated their commands, that the Mother should
have a special care, that the Infants be not at any time destitute of good meat
and drink, thinking (and not without reason) this to be a matter of the
greatest moment, thence foreseeing, that they quickly coming to their growth,
may prove men of courage, and such as are able to do God good service, as it is
written: The Lord shall, establish, thee, an holy People unto himself, Deuteronomy*
28. 9.
as he has sworn unto thee, if thou will keep the Commandments of the Lord
thy God, and walk in his ways. Of what nature are his ways? God with a
plentiful hand gives unto all his creatures their meat in due season.
Therefore the mother no way permitting tha her children should suffer for want
of food, but nourishing them unto fatiety, walks in the ways of the Lord:
whereby it comes to pass tha. she may trace the path leading to life
everlasting. And for this cause God gave unto her, not one, but two paps, that
the sucking child might at all times have milk enough.

The wise Scribes among the Jews in their Gemara, propose this question: why
David the King, Tract. Berach de benedictionibus.
when he praised God, did not forget to make mention of babes and sucklings?
Rabbi Abba says, that these ought also to sing praise, because God has placed
the woman's paps above the heart, that the Infant by sucking, may attain to a
ripe understanding, as it were sucking the milk out of the heart of his Mother,
from which fountain flows the excellency of his intellect. Rabbi ehuda that the
paps of women were placed in that part of the body, that the child might not
see his Mothers privity. Rabbi Mattana affirms them there to be seated, as in a
most pure place: God then having such a tender eye and care over little
Infants, how much more exceeding ought that of the Mother to be in the
nourishing of them? ye, which is more, God many times makes a Metamorphosis in
nature, before that the little ones shall perish for want of food. It is
recorded in the Gemara, that upon a time the Wife of a certain poor man
departed this life, (...) de Sab^^ho.
and left behind her a little sucking Infant; the good man being so poor that
his means would not stretch to the hiring of a Nurse; God so changed his
natural constitution, that his paps became full of milk, whence the Infants
life was preserved, many honest m^^seeing it, an^ bearing witness to the truth
thereof.

We read a story of the same stamp in Medrasch or a certain little book of
Sermons, that when Pharaoh King of Egypt had commanded that all the male
children of Israel should be cast into the River, the Hebrew women ran into the
open fields, and there brought forth their young ones; if they were males, the
earh like an indulgent mother, received them into her bosom; which done, God
created for the use of every one of them two stones, out of the one of which
they might suck milk, out of the other honey: and thus they were preserved
under the earth until they came to ripeness of years, and were grown manlike,
at what time every one returned unto his mother.

In the same place it is read that good Mordecai sucked the teats of Esther,
which was the cause, that she being Queen heaped so many good turns upon him,
that from a poor man he rose to a great Potentate. What Mother then can endure
that her child should be deprived of daily food?

The Moralists wanting of modesty, and every other particular virtue, say, that
the case stands with the good Wife of the house, as it does with a Viceroy set
over some certain Kingdom and Inhabitants thereof. He so proving faithful to
his Soveraigd, and using the Subjects well, makes the Kingdom to grow better,
and the revenues to increase, purchases unto himself a plentiful reward;
that at laft, by the accumulation of honors, he is heaved up to some honorable
title, and is capped for a great Lord. But if the contrary be by him put in
execution, he is not only cashiered of his reward, but the clouds of imperial
discontent cast a horrid lour upon his house, and the Gallow tree must be his
lives last period. So the good wife of the house like a Viceroy, is placed over
her children; if she have an incessant care that they be provided with meat and
drink sufficient, then shall the Infants hearts be enlarged for the
entertainment of a polite behavior, and the practice of good works; she also
shall have a reward both in this life and that which is to come, having a place
allotted her together with the just in that Garden of pleasures, Paradise. But
if she feed her children with gross meats, such as may make a chained
enclosure of their hearts, then God shall cut her off, and cast her headlong
into the infernal pit.

The Mother must not too often bear that part of her breast which is next unto
her heart, lest hereby the milk becoming immoderately cold, should afterward
be the occasion of some maladies to the sucking Infant, and hinder his growth.
Moreover, she must have a special care that she fast not two long in a morning,
but early take some warm broth, which turned into good nourishment, may also
become the child's sustenance; she must not suffer her children to go naked at
any time, not upon the day, lest the Sun, nor upon the night, lest the Moon
should hurt them, Psalm. 121 6.
as it is written: The sun shall not hurt thee by day, nor the Moon by night.
She must not suffer any to carry them to bed naked, or that they themselves
should approach their couch being thus unvailed. Moreover, it is not lawful for
them to rise out of their bed naked, but a most diligent care is had that their
shirts be put on and off at their lying down and rising up, that they may early
be accustomed to a reverent bashfulness in the eyes of the Almighty, and
speedily be rapt into this contemplation, that the whole earth is full of the
Majesty of Gods glory, and that in his sight the darkness is like the light it
self: for the same reason they are always to go with their heads covered,
because the Divine Majesty does always hover over them, their wise men bearing
witness If any chance to go without his honnet, he practices nothing less then
the advancing of his fore front against the Majesty of the Omnipotent; and from
thenceforth becomes impudent, forgetful of God and his Commandments.
Conducible to this purpose we read a story in Gemara: That upon a time the
Elders and Senators of Jerusalem, sitting in the gate, two young youths past by
them, the one with his head covered, the other with his bonnet veiled; which
Rabbi Eliezer observing, said, The boy that goes bare head is a bastard: and
Rabbi Jehosuahes verdict was, he was the son of a polluted woman: Rabbi Akibhah
affirmed both to be true. Hereupon Rabbi Akibhah asked his mother how she came
to have such a son? she answered, when I first entered into the bond of
matrimony with my Husband, I was unclean; and for this cause my husband did
separate himself from me, that according to the Law of Moses he might not keep
company with me all the days of mine uncleanness: in the mean time one of his
companions came in unto me, and got me with child, by the which act of
copulation I had this my Son. Whence it appears to be a sign of an untowardly
disposition in any child to walk bare headed. From the seventh year until the
thirteenth they have a serious and impulsive admonition given time not to go
uncovered, after which time they are commanded to use the gesture.

The children of the Jews from their very infancy, are accustomed to wear a
girdle, and truly their honest Matrons fasten it to the hinder part of their
coats, that by this means they may always be mindful of it; for the girdle
severs their heart from the secret parts, lest the heart in time of prayer
might be hindered in its devotion by beholding the privities.

So soon as this infant Jew has learnned his morning prayers, he intermixeth
this Petition, Blessed be thou O God, who girds Israel with the girdle of
strength, having respect unto the girdle he is girded withal; for if he have
none about him, then is this his prayer of no moment, but in vain, and imputed
to him for a sin.

Moreover, the children are not permitted to go barefoot, for fear of a
multiplicity of dangers, which might happen unto them, and that especially in
the Months of December and January, when the Cats dance their Corantoes; for
at that time they may chance to tread upon venomous stuff cast out by the Cats
in this their wantonness, by which their feet may be annoyed with such a
swelling, that for a long time after they can have no remedy.

When they cannot as yet speak plainly or readily, they are caught to pronounce
some good Sentences out of the Bible: they accustom them also upon the morning
and Evening of Evening of every Sabbath, and great feast decently to salute
their father and mother, and to bid them good morrow, good even, to wish them a
happy Sabbath, etc.

Seven years past, and the children coming to more maturity, they are
commanded, that every morning adjoining the name of God, they should remember
to say, God give yon a good day, (...)
etc. (for so spoke Boaz to his reapers, Hael immachem, the Lord be with you)
and also this Jebarecha hael, God bless you, or as we use to speak, (...)
God thank you. It is not lawful for them to use the name of God, unless it
be in some pure place, concerning which more shall be spoken in another place.

They are also taught all manner of utensils necessary for their life and daily
conversation. They practice Nomenclation, that by this means they may fooner
learn to speak Hebrew, and hence it is, that they intermingle many Hebrew words
with the Germane language, or any other, which they use as their mother tongue.

Moreover, these infants altogether shun the company of Christians, will
neither eat nor drink, nor enter into any other kind of commerce with them,
this being the study of their Parents, to make every action of the Christians
for to seem odious, and such as are abomination to the Jews: hence it comes to
pass, that they indesinently hold on to nourish that hatred which they
conceived against the Christians in their infancy even until the end of their
days.

When the children are seven years old, then by their Parents, command they
learn to read and write. If any one be of so great an estate, that he can
bestow the charges, he keeps a Rabbi or Schoolmaster in his own house to
instruct his children. So soon as any one has made so much progress in this
kind, that he can read, then first of all he is taught to construe the Books of
Moses in that language with which he was brought up. In a certain book called
Schebkile emunah, it is recorded, that when the mother brings her son the first
time unto School to the Rabbine, that she ought to give unto him some delicious
wafers made with Sugar and honey, and to say these words, Even as this wafer is
sweet, so let the Law be sweet unto thy heart, let it be like sugar upon thy
tongue, and honey upon thy lips, see that thou trifle not away thy time at
School with babbling and unprofitable speeches, but learn to speak the words of
the Law alone, let them only proceed out of thy mouth; for hereby it shall
comete pass, that the glory of Gods Majesty shall rest upon thy head, and for
evermore shall there keep his residence; for God loves all those that are
intent unto goodness, and speak of his Word. Hereupon the most learned
Doctors among the Jews, have left it written, that Jerusalem being wasted, and
all the Priests and Levites exiled by the Enemy* God did in such a manner for
sake them, that his Majesty would not vouchsafe to bear them company. The
Sanedrim also, or the chief Consistory among the Jews, being likewise by the
Conquerours overthrown without Jerusalem, had not the Majesty of the most high
gone along with them: yet the children at length being banished out of their
School, the glorious Majesty of God omnipotent was their Companion into the
Land of their captivity, concerning which the Prophet Jer. prophesied in these
words, Lam. 1. 5, 6.
Her children are gone into captivity before the enemy and from the daughter of
Z^on all her beauty is departed, where beauty notes out the presence of Gods
Majesty, in the presence of which the beauty of the City Jerusalem consisted:
therefore when the boys sitting at the feet of the Rabbine learn the words of
the Law, and nothing but the Law issues out of his mouth; then the glorious
Majesty of the Creator dwells in them, and delights himself with the breath
coming out of the mouth of these punies; for a breath of this nature is pure
and holy, considering the child has not as yet committed sin.

In the thirteenth year of his age, his title is Bar Mitzvah, the son of the
Commandments, because he is now tied to keep the Law and will of God, as also
then he begins first of all to fin, if he do not perform the said
Commandments. Rabbi Simeon Bar Nachmam, in the name of Rabbi Jochanan, uttered
these words, That if any one teach his son the word of God, he is worthy to sit
before the Lord in that University which is opened in the heavens, Iet. 15. 1^
as Jeremy says, If thou will return, then will I bring thee again, and thou
shall stand before me, that is to say, if thy son hear the Law, I will make him
fellow of the same College that the Saints and Angels inhabit, and make him
partaker of life eternal; and whosoever is not careful that his son should
learn the Law, and so consequently becomes the occasion of his corrupt
education, it were better for him that he were blind, so that he might not
behold his reproachful acts, Genesis 27. 1.
as it is written of the Pat^iarch Isaac, When Isaac was old, and his eyes were
dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, etc. On these
words, Rabbi Eliezer of the stock of Azariah says, That Isaac his eyes were
therefore dim, that he might not see the immodesty and wantonness of his
unnurtured son Esau, and it is recorded in the book Medrasch, that Abraham for
the very same cause departed this life five years sooner than the course of
nature exacted, that is, lest his eyes should behold his degenerate nephew
Esau, leading his life in a wicked ungodly manner.

Ten years being expired, and the youngling Jew being indifferent well versed
in the Books of Moses, it is necessary he apply himself to the study of the
Talmud, and of duty to cleave unto the text thereof, in which the very
foundation of Jewish Traditions and Ordinances, as also of the Divine and
Humane Law is comprehended.

At thirteen years of age he is called Bar Mizvah, the son of the
Commandments, when he is bound to keep and observe all the Commandments, in
number six hundred and thirteen. containing the sum and argument of the Law of
Moses, and of the whose body of Jewish Superstition. If from that time forward
he sin, and do not execute that is commanded, then is he liable to be punished
both by the Law of God and man. What sin soever he committed before the
thirteenth year of his age, his Father must suffer for it.

Which is the reason, that the child coming to these years, his father calls
ten Jews unto him, and in their presence witnesses, that this his Son is come
to full age, and being instructed in the Commandments, has learned the manner
and custom of the Zizim and Tephillim, (of which more anon) as also the form
of blessing and his daily prayers: for which reason he would be freed from him;
that he might not from henceforth smart for his offenses, he being such an one
who is to become Bar mitzuah, the Son of the Commandments, and ought to suffer
for his sins in his own proper person. This being confirmed by the ten Jews
there present, the Father says a certain short prayer, in which chiefly he
gives God thanks, that he has delivered and unburdened him of the punishment
due unto his son for his sin; further entreating him, that his son by the help
of the Divine grace, may for many days remain safe and without danger, and be
industrious in good works.

In the fifteenth year of their age, all the children of the Jews are forced to
learn the Gemara, which is the perfection of the Talmud, written for the better
comprehending and understanding of the acute and subtle dispute and decisions
about the doubtful things in the text thereof; and in these they spend the
greater part of their life, very seldom or never bestowing one minutes study in
the books of the Prophets, but utterly neglecting them: Whence it comes to
pass, that many Jews there are ready to drop into their graves, who (to my
knowledge) have not read any one of the Prophets from beginning to end. And
this is the cause that they know so little concerning the Messiah, that the
promises concerning him are become not only obscure unto them, but also
altogether unknown.

In the eighteenth year of their age the males enter into the bond of wedlock,
(...) what time (...) Jews marry
according to an ancient Order in the Talmud, which they not seldom
transgressing, oftentimes marry before the time enjoined, to avoid fornication;
the females may marry when they are twelve years and one day old.

In the twentieth year they are licensed to traffic, buy and sell, play the
Chapmen, cozen and circumvent any whom they can possibly; of which the
Christians to their grief have had too much experience, of which in another
place.

Because our young Jew has now taken his degree of Bar mitzuah, or Son of the
Commandments, and is entered into the order of the Jews, our endeavor shall
now be to express the manner how both their young and old men behave themselves
in this order.

CHAP. IV.
How the Jews rising betimes out of their beds, prepare themselves for Morning
Prayer.
IT is writtten in that Tract of the Gemara called Bava basra, that it was the
assertion of Rabbi Eliezar haggadol, that every Jew from the fifteenth of July
until the feast of Penticost, ought to forsake his bed before day, because in
this time the nights are long, but from that time till July he may sleep until
perfect lay, because the nights are very short. And the truth of this position
the wise men and Rabbines endeavor to prove out of many places of the
Lamentations of Jeremy, and out of the History of Ruth, which are so full of
subtilty that they cannot in this place be honored with an explanation. The
good Wife of the house is bound to wake her Husband. and the Parents are
jointly obliged to rouse up their children, when they have once passed the
thirteenth year of their age, and are subject to Jewish Ordinances, as we
have declared in the former chapter. Furthermore, the Chachamim have registered,
that every man is bound in his own proper person to be a Cock unto the
twilight, and not to foster such a delay, that the bright eyed morning may take
advantage to call him ls;luggard, Psalm. 57* 1*
to which King David condiscends when he says, I will awake right early.
Surely this is very necessary, and that for the performance of our morning
Prayers, which are to be poured out at the rising of the Sun, and that without
delay, as David testifies in his Psalms saying, They shall honor thee with the
Sun: as though he had said, so soon as the Sun visits our Horizon, they
shall honor and sing praise unto thee in their early Devotions.

The Cabbalists write, that at the dawning of the day the prayers of every
particular enter into the ears of the Almighty, Lament. 219.
and they have some certain grounds out of holy Writ for this their assertion.
Jeremy in his Lamentations says, Arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning
of the watches: that is, when it begins to dawn: David also in a certain
Psalm: The Lord bath granted me his loving kindness in the day time, Psalm. 42.
9.
and in the night season also did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the
God of my life. The most profound Chachamim say, they who are stout and
industrious advance themselves to well doing, and the observation of Gods
Commandments; wherefore it shall carry the repute of a good work indeed, to
rise before the morning watch: and to conjoyn day and night by a continued
singing of the choicest Psalms and Prayer. Wherefore a Jew should not be slack
in such a performance, but with great alacrity take an early leave of his
lovely couch, breakfasting his soul with this meditation: If any Gentile or
Christian should now come unto me, who is my debtor, or should bring some
gorgeous vestments to pledge out of his Wardrobe, or any other thing, by the
mediation of which I might enrich my self: If I should be now called to some
great Prince or Potentate, from whom I might obtain a gift, cully favor, or
who in his own Person should entreat my service; how readily would my fe^t be
plumed with swistness, and spend their forces not to be conscious of the least
delay: with how much more alacrity ought I to speed from my bed to rest, that I
may tender my service, and do homage to the King of Kings, who has given me
life and nourishment, and does defend me against all mine enemies, of what
quality soever?

Whosoever has in him any relish of godliness, ought every morning to
entertain the pangs of grief and sorrow for the Temple of Jerusalem, praying
that that Temple and City may with speed be re-edified. And who before the Day
star appear, or the clouds of night he dispeld by the Suns approach, ere that
he forsake his pillow shall wash his couch with tears, for the desolations of
the Temple of Jerusalem, and the long captivity, shall gain this much, that God
being merciful unto him, shall not suffer his prayer to be deprived of
audience.

In Maseches Sanedrin the Rabbines upon those words in the Lamentations of
Jeremy, T^act, San. de judicibus c* 11. Lam. 1. 2.
She weeps in the night, without any intermission of weeping, dispute and say,
that if any hear the voice of one weeping upon the night, it is so intermixed
with the Gall of bitternessi, that he must of necessity second the mourner in
his dolesull notes. The very same which happened to Rabbi Gamaliel, who upon
the night time hearing the mournful out cries of a certain woman for the death
of her son, counted his life bitter unto him and bare a part with her, weeping
most bitterly. Rabbi Jochanan says, that when any one does lament upon the
night time, the fixed stars and Planets condole with him. Their Chachamim
Wisemen.
write, that he who weepeth ought to let his tears find a current through the
narrow ^h^ud gates of his eyes, because then God will arise and gather them
into his bottle. And then if there chance to be a promulgation of any decree by
the enemies of Israel, to destroy them, God shall remember these godly men who
shed ^ears in abundance, shall take these bo^tles full of them, pouring them
upon, and blotting out the handwriting that was against them, that no evil may
befall the Jews. Hereupon the Prophet David; Thou tellest my flittings, and
putst my tears into thy bottle, are not these things written in thy book? By
these words David would specify thus much, that God pours out the V^ols of
tears upon the writings, or books put out against the Jews, and so defaceth
them, that they become cance^'d and of no force. To the same purpose he speaks
in another place, Psalm. 56. 9
He that sows in tears shall reap in joy.

The Author of the Book Reschith Chochmah The beginning of wisdom a book writ
by o^e of the Scholars of R. Moses it contains the common places of divinity,
amongst which much Philosophy, morolity, and cabbalistical nici^ies are
intermix^. Ez^k. 9. 4.
in the 111 page says, that he received it by tradition from his Elders, that
it is very sovereign for a man to sprinkle tears upon his brow, and to rub them
in, because there are some sins written in his brow which by this means may be
blotted out, according to the words of the Prophet, saying* Thou shall set the
letter Thau upon the foreheads of the men, etc.

The Cabbalists write, that if any have a desire to list up his prayer unto
that holy and blessed God, that he would vouchsafe to deliver the Jews out of
their long continued bondage, he ought to do it when it begins to dawn, that he
ought to weep heartily, and send forth strong cries, so shall his words enter
into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, and then chiefly because there is nothing
which may disturb him in his prayers, none also found who shall move his tongue
against the children of Israel. J^r. 25. 30.
We find it recorded by Jeremy: The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation. The Lord roars in the morning upon his beauty.
The beauty of the Lord is the Temple of Jerusalem, and that is holy; which as
he has permitted to be destroyed, so is it his pleasure that it shall be built
again; and that he may be warned unto the enterprise, he will be early
entreated. Hence David says, My voice thou shall hear betimes, O Lord, early
in the morning I will direct my prayer unto thee, Psa* (...)
and will look up. In the morning, that is, when it begins to be day, I will go
into thy house: he will not do the same upon the night; because in the
beginning of the night God causes all the Gates of Heaven to be shut up, and
the Angels sit as Porters, and are silent; God sends away the evil spirits into
the world who hurt every one they meet. The middle of the night being past, a
great cry is heard in Heaven, and it is commanded that they should set open the
Gates, the day now approaching, to this end that none might wait too long. This
cry is heard by the household Cocks here upon earth, who clapping their wings
with a shril voice awake us mortals. Then these evil spirits lose all their
power, so that they cannot do any more annoyance: for which cause the Rabbines
have ordained a certain thanksgiving which they whould have repeated in them
morning by them that hear the Cock crow; saying, Blessed be thou, O God, who
art Lord of the whole world, that thou have given understanding to the Cock. To
be brief, whosoever fears the Lord, wheresoever he live, needs not the Cock to
awake him.

He that always in aw the Lord does keep,
Needs not to be awaked of his sleep.
Moreover it is the will of the Chachamim, Orach Chaym number 2.
that non presume to raise himself up in his bed, or sitting up therein to put
on his shirt being naked: but lying still should strive to wind himself into
it with his hands and head, lest the walls and beams of the house might behold
the secret parts of his naked body. Rabbi Jose boasts in Masseches Schabbas,
Thus long have I lived, and yet the beams of the house did never see the hem of
my shirt: thereby signifying that he never invested himself therewith being
naked, but lying hid in his bed. Hereupon it is a position of their grand
Sophies, that none ought to put on his coat being naked; much less is it
permitted that he should walk or stand naked in his bedchamber. Brandspiel. c
16.
For suppose any sudden fire or some great tumult might arise, whose rarity
might so affright him that he should run naked out of his bedchamber, with what
a countenance can such a one show himself? It is not also lawful for any one
being naked to make water by his bed side; for of such men the Prophet Amos
speaks, saying, Amos 6. 4.
They sleep in beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches. The
Hebrew word Seruchim, which signifies to stretch out, the Rabbines translate,
(...)
to be resolved into stinking matter, as they expound the same, Jer. 49. 7.
upon which place R. Jose the son of Chanin^ says, these are they who stand
naked before their beds. No man ought thus to think with himself, It is dark,
I am in my Closet* no eye sees me: I say every one ought with all diligence to
abstain from such cogitations; for Gods holy Majesty is above all, and present
in every place: The whole earth is full of his glory, Isa. 6. 3.
as says the Prophet Esaias.

A singular care is also to be had, that no man put on his shirt, or any other
of his garments out of order: he must put on his right foot shoe first, but in
tying of them begin with the left. But if any man have a pair of shoes which
are destitute of shooeties, then must he first fit the left foot, then the
right: at night the left foot shoe ought first to be put off, as that worthy
man Rabbi Jochanan has taught and commanded.

When any one is altogether ready and invested from top to toe, then must he
leave his bedchamber, his head being bowed toward the ground, and his mind
full of devotion, in remembrance of the Temple of Jerusalem now waste and
desolate, always provided his head be covered, and his feet shod, yea,
the-whole body clothed, seeing the Majesty of the Almighty always hovereth
over his head, and because it is scandalous and an enemy to good manners, to
come naked into the sight of any one.

After this, every one drawing aside unto some secret place, shall endeavor to
purge his belly so far as is needful, and to take all pains possible, that he
may come pure and cleanly to morning prayer, as it is written, Prepare thy self
to meet thy God, Amos 4. 12. Psalm. 103. 1.
O Israel, and David says, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me, praise his holy name, in which place according to the Exposition of the
Rabbines, thus much is intimated, that the very intrails ought to be clean and
empty. It is not lawful to name the holy name of God, unless it be done with
all cleanliness, which is the reason that every one must carefully endeavor
that his garments be not polluted^ in his devotions he ought to be very
bashful and modest, yea though he be alone in some dark and private place, as
it is written, humble thy self, to walk before thy God, Mich. 6. 8.
that is, the Rabbines being Commentators, in a secret place. No man must be
conscious of so small providence, as too long to defer the works of nature, for
it is not a sin only so to do, but also may greatly endanger his belly, and
make it liable to rupture. I do not here mention, that the soul by these means
procures a stinking breath, and other consequent discommodities.

It is written in Parscha Kedoschim, You shall not make your souls abominable,
Levit. 20. 25, 2^.
but ye shall be holy unto me, which the Rabbines interpret of them, who
against nature stop the work of nature, saying, that whosoever makes a delay to
salute the lakes when the excrement is ripe for an egresse, he is unclean and a
transgressour of this Commandment: in cleansing of himself he must use the
left hand, not the right, for with this he judiciously handles the holy
Scripture, with this he writes the holy names of God and Angels. When any one
is in a private place, he must be careful with an exact diligence that the
suffer not the word of God and his Commandments to come into his remembrance,
and much less to account it as a thing dispensed withal, to name any name
expressing a Deity; the reason, according to the wisest of the Rabbinicall
Rabble, Tract. Talmud Tanais dc jejunio.
being this, because God will shorten his days who repeats his name in secret.
The Scholars of Rabbi Sira upon a time demanded of him how it came to pass
that he lived so long? to whom he answered, I had never since I was born, the
least meditation of any thing contained in the Word of God, neither did his
name ever proceed out of my mouth in an impure place.

When any one is to ease himself, he may turn his face either toward the North
or South, but by no means toward the East or West, because a due reverence
ought to be had of, and tendered unto the holy Temple at Jerusalem, to which we
ought always to turn the face, not out back parts. Enough of this. I omitting
also their morals, and such like trash, I will show unto you how the Jews
prepare themselves to morning prayer by the washing of their hands.

The Chachamim, and skillful Rabbines write, Orach. Chaym number. 4. Brand spigel.
c. 10.
that no man ought to touch his own body, until his hand^ be washed, and that
in respect of the great danger that may ensue thereupon, for the hand in the
morning is a thing most impure and venomous, by reason of the unclean and evil
spirits, which rest upon the hands until they be drenched in water. If any one
touch his eyes with such hands, they shall become blind; if his ears, they
shall be stopped with deafness; if his nostrils, they become obnoxious to a
continual distillation; if his mouth, it shall be vexed with stinking; if his
hands, they shall be clothed with scabs. When any one washes himself, he holds
the right hand under the Ure, and pours the water thrice upon it, and after
that the le^t in the like manner; for without this Ceremony it is not allowable
that the one hand should touch the other. No man in washing ought to be sparing
of water; for Rabbi Chasda says, that whosoever uses plenty of water in the
washing of his hands, shall be a man of great riches. They must lift their
hands on high in time of washing, lest the unclean water resulting out of the
Basin should repollute them. In the next place they ought to wash their mouth
and face, because this was created according to Gods own image, as it is
written, God created man in his own likeness, according to the image of God
created he him. The Rabbines illustrate the whole matter by this similitude. An
Artificer one who is Master of his trade, makes some goodly vessel, and
therewith gratifies one of his dearest friends. This his friend knowing of his
approach, and seeing the Crafts man coming to his house, takes the vessel,
scours, and makes it as clean as he can possible, left the workman should be
wroth and angry, that he kept not this his handy work from filth and pollution.
In like manner, any Jew, who every day in the morning frequents the Synagogue
appears in the presence of God his Creator, and is bound to worship and honor
him, ought also accurately to wash his face, lest the chief workman should be
angry to behold his creature disfigured with uncleanness.

In Bereschith Rabba, which is an Exposition upon Genesis, the Rabbines
winnowing that Sentence of Solomon, Prove. 117.
A merciful man does good to his own soul, affirm it also to be behove^ull for
him to keep himself cleanly for the good of his body. How can any call upon God
with his mouth, when as yet it is filled with spittle and other filthy matter?
A Jew being about to wash, must do it over a basin or some other vessel, not
over the earth, which done, it is not lawful for him to pour out his water
where any one treads, yet are there found men who practice the contrary, for
the promotion of their art in poisoning, and skill in Magic. The face being
washed, great curiosity must be used in the drying of it; for he who does not
take care thereof, shall have his face so blossomed with budding Ale pocks, so
imbroidered with wrinkles, that the deformity thereof will become loathsome to
the eye of every beholder: the face must be wip^d with a clean towell, not with
a woollen cloth (which some slothful persons blush not a whit to do) for
according to their Doctors, this destroys the memory and annihilates the
understanding. After washing every one ought to give thanks, saying. Blessed
art thou, O God our God, King of the whole world, who have commanded us to wash
our hands.

In general, they ought continually to wash their hands after these things
following. In the morning so soon as they are up, after their return from the
house of office, after they come out of the Bath, when they pair their nails,
after that they have drawn their shoes from their feet, the hands being
ministers, when any has scratched himself upon his naked skin, when he has
touched a dead Corpse, or gone through the middle of dead folks, when he has
had carnal copulation with his wife, or lastly, after the killing of alouse,
whosoever he be that does any of the aforesaid things, and does not wash his
hands thereupon, if he be a learned man he shall forget his learning, and turn
blockhead, if he be not learned he shall lose the use of every one of his
senses.

Now the Jew is sufficiently cleansed, and mundified for his morning devotions,
if two things were not yet wanting, which make him and his prayers far more
holy, concerning which we will add some few words for the better understanding
of what was formerly delivered.

The Jews have a certain instrument of a foursquare fashion, De arba Cauphos
and zizis. O^ach Chaym. n. 8. Brandspiel. c. 48. Minhagim^ p. 6*
which for the most part they put on together with their other garments at
their uprising, but some when they are about to pray. The parts of this
quadrangular garment are two, being for the most part made of linen, but often
of silk, bound and fastened together in the highest part thereof with two
little bands, yet of a great height, so that they may put their head in
betwixt them, so that the one of these foursquare parts may hang upon the
breast, the other upon the back. The Jews, in respect of the four angles, call
this garment Arba Cauphos: in every one of these four angles hang certain
Ribbands, woven of white woollen threads, coupled by a certain knot, and
hanging toward the ground, which are four, eight, or twelve fingers broad;
these they call Zizim, of which they write wonderful and strange matters,
whereof I will relate a parcel.

They who would be accounted very sincere and holy, are wont daily to put on
this their cloak or garment, wearing in it under their long coat, but after
such a manner, that the ends of the forementioned stringes, or hangbies may be
always in their sight: some wear them upon their breasts; others not at all,
but in time of Prayer. It is hehoofull that the two foresaid parts, together
with their appurtenances should hang toward the ground, both at the fore and
hinder part of their body, that they may always be full of the Commandments of
the Lord. When they put these on, then they say some certain Prayers, giving
thanks unto God that he has commanded them to invest themselves with these
garments. These ought to admonish them always to have before their eyes Gods
Commandments, that hereby being scared from sin, they might be pricked forward
to a due performance of them: as it is written: Speak unto the children of
Israel, Lev. 15: 37*28.
and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments
throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of their
borders a ribband of blew. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that you may
look upon it and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them, and
that you seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which you are
wont to go a whoring, that you may remember and do all my Commandments, and be
holy unto the Lord your God. But out of these words their Wise men conclude,
that the eyes and heart are the mediators for sin.

In the Tract called Masseches Schabbas we read, that Rabh asked Rabbi Joseph,
what was the first thing his Father admonished him of? who answered, the
Commandment given by God concerning the fringes, for upon a time my Father
(says he) going down a pair of stairs, Tract. de Sab. cap. 16.
and by chance treading upon his fringes, and breaking one of the threads or
Ribbands would not move a foot till it was made whole again. In a word, their
great Doctors comparing this commandment with others, prefer it before them
all: and have left in writing, that whosoever diligently observes and keeps it,
keeps and observes the whole Law; which thing they thus make manifest: In every
one of the fringes there are five knots, (...)
representing the five books of Moses, to which if we add 8 Ribbands, a (...)
Floruit.
together with the number contained in the letters of the word tzitzith, which
signifies fringes, and in numeration makes six hundred, there arises the
number of six hundred and thirteen, the direct number of the Commandments,
into which the whole Law is divided, and therefore according to this
Cabbalistically concluding Arithmetic, he that rightly observes and keeps this
Commandment concerning the fringes, perfectly fulfils the whole Law.

In the fore mentioned Tract, we read of a certain man hindered from commiting
sin, and a strange woman converted unto Judaism by this Commandment. Upon a
time a young man among the Jews, very learned and studious, but much given to
Venery* hearing of a famous and beautiful Whore, who living in a neighboring
City, had much trading, and yet sold sin at so dear a rate, that for one single
lascivious abuse of her body, she required no less then four hundred pounds,
sent her the money, appointed the time at which she was to expect his lustful
imbracements. The day come, the young man, according to their Covenant, repaired
unto her house, where he found her in a closet sitting in a chair all
imbroydred with gold, near unto which stood a bed furnished in the most exact
and exquisite fashion that Art could invent, which served as fuel to inflame
his lust, and hastened him to this unlawful act: but behold as he went up into
the bed, his fringes smote him on the face, whereat forthwith astonished, and
put in mind of the Commandment, he fell upon the ground, represt his fleshy
desires, and utterly refusing any more to touch or embrace his formerly admired
Mistress: whereupon she demanding of him what defect he had espied in her, that
he thus refused his purchased pleasure? he replies, that the Lord God commanded
the Jews to do him service, and for a more easy performance of the same, gave
them a sign, which when they beheld* they might remember his Commandments,
which sign put me in remembrance of the same, and deterred me from committing
the offense. Hereupon she asked him his name and whence he was? which when he
had told, she seemed to rest contented, and suffered him to depart: but many
days past not until she sold all that she had, and followed after him unto
his dwelling place, and entering the Synagogue, the place of his study,
inquired of the Master thereof where he was? to whom (demanding her business)
she declared the whole matter; and withal desiring to become a Convert unto
the Jewish Religion, and Wi^e to the aforesaid young Student, saying, I have
here brought with me that bed in which he and I should have, contrary to Gods
Commandments, committed fornication: which now that we may use chastely,
honestly, and piously, is the top of my desires. The Master of the place moved
with her words, acknowledged her for a Proselite and joined her in marriage to
the young man whom she loved, by whom she had many comely children, which in
after times came to be great Doctors and learned Rabbines, she until the moment
of her death continuing constant in the Profession of the Jewish Religion. In
like manner it is recorded, that these Fringes and Ribbands upon the shirts of
their garments, put Boaz in remembrance of his duty, and hindered him from
committing folly with Ruth, when she lay at his feet in the threshing floor; as
also Joseph from harkening unto the bewitching of Potiphars Wife. This story so
famous among the Jews, that even Infants and women, who never read the Talmud,
have it at their fingers ends, I could by no means here omit, being also
recorded in their Germain Minhagim, or Books of Common prayer.

In the Trict of the Talmud, called Masseches bava basra, it is written, that
upon a time Rabbi Jochanan saw a casket full of precious jewels, which one of
his Scholars called Bar Emorai seeking to take away by, stealth a violent
commotion shattered all his members, and a voice was heard saying, Let the
casket alone, thou son of Emorai, for it is not thine, but belongs to the wife
of Rabbi Chanina the son of Dusa, who shall treasure up therein store of blew
wool, of which the just and righteous shall cause to be made for them fringed
garments in the world to come. By the example of this good woman all others may
learn thus much, that in the sedulous imitation of her in this world, they
shall find a large reward in another.

The Women are not tied to put on or wear this cloak or coat of remembrance,
yet if they do, it is no scandal to them; for it is said, that Michall the
daughter of Saul did the like: yet according to Rabbi Jehuda in the book
Siphra, the Doctors and learned crew free women from the performance of this
Commandment about the Fringes, and esteem her for a proud novice and worthy to
be laughed at, who will undertake it, seeing it is proper to men alone. To
conclude all, whosoever shall every day without intermission put on this shirt,
coat or cloak, is sufficiently armed against the Devil and all evil spirits.
Proved.

So much concerning the first thing formerly proposed: now follows the second,
Of their Phyla^teries.
for as the Jews have their fringes for^a sign to put them in remembrance to
do well, Orach Chajim number. 25.
so have they also a knot upon the forehead near unto their nose, to put them
in mind to pray seriously; this knot they weave and knit out of the words of
Moses, saying: And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, Deuteronomy. 6. 6,
7, 8.
and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: and thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes: which binding the Jews at this day perform in this manner.

In the first place they choose out a four square piece of black leather, in
quantity but small, of an Ox or Cows hide, which they fold eight times; so
making four distinct houses, or receptacles, unto which they do put four
distinct pieces of parchment, in which are written the ten Commandments, and
other parcels of Scripture which are thought to be the four Sections of the
Law. The first beginning, Sanctify unto me all the first born, Exodus, 13. 2. to
the end of the 10. verse. The second at the 11. verse, continuing unto the end
of the 16. The third beginning at the 4. verse of the 6. chapter of
Deuteronomy, and ending at the tenth verse. The fourth Deuteronomy. 11. 13. ending at
the 22. verse. Then they take some few hairs pulled out of the tail of an Ox
or Cow, which they wash very clean, and therewithal bind together the
foresaid parchments, yet in such a manner that the ends thereof may appear out
of the skin, to this end, that every man may take notice that they are good and
not sophisticate. The skin into whose folds they put these parchment writings,
they sow together with small strings taken out of the bodies of Oxen or Kine,
or made of Bulls sinnews, which if they cannot have, then instead thereof they
use small thongs cut out of the skin it self. Finally, to the foresaid
foursquare piece of leather, or skin thus folded and sowed, they fasten another
long black thong, which they knot about it: the whole piece thus framed and
fashioned, they call their Tephillin or prayer ornaments, serving to put them
in remembrance of the serious and often execution of such an exercise; these
they bind about their head in that manner, that the great knot, in which are
contained the parcells of holy Writ, may be fastened directly upon the
forehead, between the eyes, over against the brain, that hereby the memory of
Gods Commandments may be therein imprinted, their prayers sanctified, and
lastly the Precept of Moses put in execution, who says, It shall be for a
memorial between thine eyes.

The second sort of Philacteries, which are for the hands are made in this
manner, Phylacteries for the hands*
they take a foursquare piece of leather, and fold it as the former, then they
take a piece of parchment, in which they write some certain Sentences out of
Exodus, putting them into a little hollow skin, having but one receptacle, the
hollownesse thereof being such, that ones finger may go into it, this little
skin they sow unto the foresaid piece of leather so often folded, unto which
they likewise fasten a long thong, and this they call their Tephillin Schel
iadon, their Philacteries for the hands, which they fasten upon the left arm
above the elbow, on the inside, over against the heart, that the heart may
behold them, and hereby become more zealous and ^^^ent in its devotion: the
long thong they l^p about their left arm in that manner, that the end t^^reof
may reach to the palms of the hand, and so the Commandment may be fulfilled,
saying, These words which I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart, and
thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hands.

In the attiring of themselves, they first put on the Phylacteries of the
hands, then those of the head, blessing them, and saying, Praised be thou, O
God, who have sanctified us by thy Commandments, and commanded us to put on
these Phylacteries, in the repetion whereof they cast up their eyes to heaven,
diligently looking upon the great knot on their forehead; before they put them
on, they kiss them, touch their eyes with them, that hereby they may be
defended from the breach of any Commandment, and the Phylacteries themselves
may be so handsomely ordered, that they may escape the flouting censure of any
derisive eye. To be brief, in sowing, folding, knotting, bindding, they use so
great art and industry, that by a singular kind of subtilty, they form the name
Schaddai, Rabbi Alphes tract. de Sab^ c 6. p. 77.
according to the three Letters, Schin, Daleth and Iod, and that so exactly,
that every Letter is placed in the right order, which is accounted as a most
holy thing, producing hidden effects and comprehending mystical significations.

Concerning these Phylacteries, the Rabbines have written diverse and sundry
volumes, great and large, out of which it will not be a miss to recite a few
things: And first, for the writing of them, It is holden behovefull and
necessary, that they be written with ink made of galls, and not with that
pitchy sort which is commonly used of Printers and silk Dyers, or with any
other liquor of a red or any other color. Secondly, every Letter must be
written, one not adhering or cleaving unto another. 3. They must be written
with the right hand, not with the left, nothing must be blotted out or
corrected from the beginning to the end; so often as the Scribe shall write the
name of God, he must not forget to say, and that in express words, that he
writes these Phylacteries for Gods glory; for hereby he shall perform what he
is about with far greater diligence, which is very necessary, seeing that if
any Letter do either superabound or be deficient, the Phylacteries become
unholy and polluted, and whosoever shall use them in time of prayers, prates in
vain, and keeps not the commandment as they ought: the due punishment for
which offense shall only rest upon the head of the Scribe, of whom an
especial care is to be had, that he be a Jew, honest, holy, pious, diligent,
and expert.

Secondly, for the skin and parchment, they ought to be of a heifer, or some
other clean beast, and by Gods Law allowed to be eaten: the beast must be
killed by a Jew, not by a Christian, as also tanned and dressed by a Tanner of
their own Nation; yet if there be no such man to be had, the Jew may take a
Christian Tanner to help him, and it is sufficient that this skin ought to be
the skin of a clean beast, and permitted to be eaten, they prove out of those
words of Moses, That the Law of the Lord may be in thy mouth; for those parcels
of Scripture being written upon the skin, it is all one as if they were written
upon every part of the whole beast, and so in meal-time were received in at the
mouth, which they should not, if they were written upon the skin of the
unclean, and forbidden to be eaten. Much more might be said concerning this
matter, but I surcease.

Thirdly, the sanctity and holiness of these Phylacteries is exceeding great;
for first, the body of him that wears them must be free from all pollution,
both inwardly and outwardly, which seeing it cannot be at all seasons, it is
thought expedient that a man should put them on in time of prayer, because
prayer ought to procceed from a pure and clean heart. Again, whosoever shall
suffer them by negligence to fall upon the ground, makes not only himself
liable to fast for the whole day, but also all those that shall behold them
lying thereupon. It is not lawful to hang them up by their strings against any
wall uncovered, but it is required they be put in bag or sachell: they may not
be left in the chamber where a man and his wife lies together, unless they be
put in a bag three double, and locked up in a chest. It is not permitted for
any man to sleep, especially on set purpose while he has these Phylacteries
about him, yet if sleep chance to creep on him unawares, he becomes not hereby
guilty of any crime; yet if in the time hereof, any uncleanness happen unto
him, he cannot lawfully touch the knot wherein the parcells of Scripture are
written and contained, yet he may unloose the thong, and lay the Phylacteries
aside, until he has purified himself, and washed his hands, and then put them
on again.

Furthermore, it is not lawful for any one to let a escape, or ease himself,
having these Phylacteries about him, if he be necessitated to do either, he
must first lay them aside in a place four else distant from that wherein he
shall ease himself, or put them into a bag, and hide them in his bosom next
unto his heart.

Fourthly, women, servants, and others also not well in body, are not tied to
the wearing of these Phylacteries, either because such persons are not all
times clean, or because they cannot always attend the time of prayer, by
reason of that service which they are enjoined by their Masters and Mistresses;
for according to the Rabbines, the women are only bound to observe these
Commandments which may be performed at certain times, not them whose execution
is daily required* for seeing it is said, Exodus 13. 19. That the Law of the
Lord may be in thy mouth: where the institution of this order is mentioned, it
necessarily follows, that they only are tied to the observation of this
Commandment, whose office it is to have the Law of the Lord in their mouths,
and to teach it to others, which is not required of the female sex, and
consequently they are not liable to the wearing of these Phylacteries,
notwithstanding that of the Doctors, who say, that they were worn by the wife
of Jonas the Prophet; for it is sussicient that they say amen to every
Petition, seeing hereby they confess that they believe and hope for whatsoever
their Husbands shall require at the hands of God in these their prayers. Of
this their saying amen spoke Isa, the Prophet, saying, Open your gates that the
righteous Nation may enter in, Isa. 26. 2.
Schomer emunim, who keeps the truth, which is all one (say they) as if he had
said, Schomer Amenim, who says amen at the end of every Petition, believing
all which is required of God in prayer, and saying Amen. Selah.

Briefly, how the Phylacteries should be written upon the fleshy, not hoary
side of the skin or parchment; how the letter Schin should be wrought upon the
great boss or knot; the letter Daleth with the knot of the long thong for the
Phylacteries for the head; the letter Jod upon the knot of the Phylacteries for
the hands; that the name of God Schaddai might be artificially expressed; How
that four- square piece of leather may be so framed and fashioned, that in
form it shall represent a Bridge, and such like, they affirm to have had the
original and platform from Moses, who learned it upon Mount Sinai, Tract.
Berachos cap. 1. p. 7.
and taught it to the people of Israel after his descent from thence, for so
much is testified by the Talmudist upon those words of Moses, After that I will
remove my hand, and thou shall see my back parts, Exodus 33^ 23
but my face shall not be seen: and Rabbi Chamma the son of Bitzna affirms it
to be the position of Rabbi Chasda, that Moses was taught by God himself how
to make and bind on the Phylacteries.

Lastly, least we should omit the time of their morning Prayer, I will only
relate one story, and that worthy credit out of the Talmud, conducible to the
matter now in hand, and that by reason of a certain miracle, of which kind one
was formerly registered concerning the Fringes.

It is written in Masseches Schabbas that these were the words of Rabbi Janna,
Tract de Sab. cap. 18.
that whosoever had a desire to put on the Phylacteries, ought to have as clean
a body as Elisha Baal Cappajim, or Elisha with wings, had, And why I pray you
is he named Elisha with wings? the answer in the Gemara is shaped according to
this fashion: Upon a certain time the Roman Emperor published a most severe
Edict, that any Jew should not wear any Phylacteries, and that upon pain of
losing his head: now in ancient times the Jews were accustomed to bind their
Phylacterie^ upon their foreheads all the day long. To proceed, this Elisha
being a man of undanted courage and little esteeming the Roman Edict, never
ceased to tie these parchments about his head. But upon a certain time, being
conscious that the Apparitor saw him, he took him to his heels, and without
any delay snatching the Phylacteries from his head, hid them in his hand: The
Apparitor apprehendding him, would needs know what he carried in his hand? He
answered, I carry Doves wings; then said the Apparitor, either let me see them,
or else thou die for it; whereupon Elisha opened his hands, and it was even
so as he had spoken, and from this very action was he called Elisha with the
wings.

But what reason may be pretended that Elisha should say, that he carried Doves
wings, rather then the wings of a Stork or a Crow, or some other bird? The
Gemara gives this answer, saying; that the Israelites are like nnto a Dove, for
as the Dove has all her strength in her wings, with which she does fortify
and defend her self against all other birds, of what kind soever, being not
accustomed to use bill, feet, or any other member in maintenance of the
quarrel: so the Israelites also are wont to do, for their wings are the
Commandments of God, which do manage and support them against all evil, that
there is no possibility of suffering any harm from other Nations.

This Query is also answered in this manner: that as the wings of Doves are more
auxiliatory unto them then those of any other bird nnto it; for the Dove
wearied in flight, resting on the one wing, flies with the other, but other
birds in the same case are forced to light upon some tree, or rock, or upon the
earth; so the Israelites suffering great persecution for some one of the
Commandments, by reason where of they cannot fulfill it, they fulfill the
rest, by the merit where of they have help, and a strong tower of defense
against all their enemies; therefore it shall come to pass, that if any one do
with all diligence observe and keep the Commandments, he shall not come within
the lists of any evil project, but shall in a wonderful manner be delivered
from all his enemies, as this winged and penfeatherd Elisha was delivered from
the Apparitor who threatened him with cruel death, as many of the Rabbines have
avouthed, being certified of the truth thereof by their toothless Grandames and
hereupon have not feared to insert it into the Talmud.

CHAP. V.
Of the form of the Morning Prayer of the Jews, and how they behave themselves
in their School or Synagogue.
IT was formerly declared that the Sunrising was the most fit time for Prayer;
yet lest the exercise hereof should be omitted, Orach Chaijm number. 8, 9.
by the too too earlines of the time appointed, the Rabbines have stretch it
upon the tenter-hooks of a dispensation, even to the the third hour of the day,
which is the ninth with us, if my Arithmetic fail me not. Rutheni are a people
of France dwelling near Xantoigne, and Avergne, but in this place rather a
people of Livonia, from whence the Country is called Russia.
Wheresoever then there are many Jews inhabiting in the same place, as at
Worms, Mentz, Frankeford upon the Moene. Fridberg in Moravia, Bohemia, Poland,
and the territories of the Rutheni, and other places where they have Schools
and Synagogues, for so they call their Temples, they always are accustomed to
meet together for to pray at the ordinary time appointed, and to perform this
holy exercise according to the institution thereof set down in their own books,
which we will show with the greater brevity, seeeing we have been somewhat more
prolix in the former Chapter.

When the Jews are dressed Capa Pee, Orach chajim nu. 46.
and have washed and cleansed themselves within and without, put on their
fringed Garments, and all this betimes in the morning, Brunds. cap 41.
then are they not sluggish and slothful, but without delay depart with great
speed and alaerity, and hasten unto the Synagogue, as though they were about to
enter some Conflict; as the Prophet David has recorded: Psalm. 55. 15.
We will go unto the house of the Lord, as though we were to besiege a City:
for in this manner they interpret the words of the Prophet; that is to say, we
will run into the house of the Lord, as though our enemies were following us in
flight. Tract T^l^ud de benedictionibus.
Rabbi Jona says in Masseches Berachos, that whosoever has a desire to go
into the Synagogue must foot it with expedition: Hereupon the Prophet Hosee
says, We shall know him and hunt after him (for so the Jews render the words
of the Prophet) that we may follow on to know the Lord: that is to say, we
ought to be pressed and ready, as these who follow the chase. When any earthly
King does enjoin his Council and others of his Court, that they should appear
before him very early in some place which it shall please His Majesty to
design for the Conventicle, then he of purpose rising betimes out of his bed,
to see whether his Counselors be diligent and watchful in the performance of
his Command; whomsoever he finds first in the place appointed, he converses
with him in a friendly familiarity, yea, and vouchsafes that he shall from
thenceforth be his Favorite.

God is like to such a King; for his will and pleasure is, that the whole
Congregation of Israel, should timely appear in the Synagogue, and presenting
them selves before his face, should certify him in their prayers of all their
wants and necessities. Now if God, who early vouchsafes his more especial
presence in their Synagogue, find not any man preventing his expectation, then
is he angry with his children, saying, ^sa. 50. 2.
Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called was there none to
answer? Blessed is he who coming early in the morning, entertains discourse
with his God. How greatly will the Lord love that Servant, who imploys all his
care, that by his negligence his Lord should not abide solitary and destitute
of a companion?

In Masseches Berachos, Tract Berachos de benedictionibusp. 6
Rabbi, Abhiu, the son of Rabbi Ada, in the name of Rabbi Isaac, says, that if
he who uses to frequent the Synagogue be but once absent, then God instantly
upon it, proposes the question: Who is among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light,
and trusts upon the name of his God? Esaias 50. 10. The meaning is this, that
whosoever keeps his bed, and comes not into the Synagogue, abides still in
darkness.

In the Porch of their School or Synagogue, they have a certain piece of Iron
fastened into the wall, against which every one is bound to wipe his shoes, if
they be unclean and dirty, Eccl. 4. 17.
and they urge the authority of Solomon for it, saying, Keep thy foot when thou
go into the h^use of God, whosoever uses to wear any pantoffles, he ought
to put them off at the door of the Synagogue, lsst he pollute the same, as it
is written, Loose thy shoes from osf thy foot; Exodus 3. 5.
for the place whereon thon stand is holy ground. They ought to enter into
the Synagogue with great fear and trembling, even as he who is ready to
approach the presence of some great King, is accustomed to unbare his head, and
enter the Palace in a bashful fearfulness, according to that of the Prophet
David, Psalm 29. 2. Yet the o^iginall is (...)
Give the Lord the honor due unto his name, worship the Lord with holy
worship: thou do not read here Behadrath, but Bechardath, say the Rabbines,
that signifying comeliness and ornament, this fear and astonishment.

They being about to enter the Synagogue by the poreh thereof use to repeat
some certain sayings hudled up together out of David's Psalms, the custom in it
self being very good and laudable, if it were seasoned with a judicious
attention, and servent devotion. They may not begin their prayers instantly
upon their entrance into the Synagogue, but for a space ought to suspend the
action in a pious meditation of him with whom they are to converse; as also who
he is that can see the very secrets of their hearts, and hear their prayers;
for by this means they are possessed with the spirit of reverence, and are
pricked forward to a serious observation of what is spoken. It is written in
Masseches Berachos, and that upon the Rabbines record, that Rabbi Eliezer lying
in his bed, his Scholars visited him, desiring him to show them the way to
Eternal Life; he willing to satisfy them in their request, said unto them,
whenever you make your prayers, consider before whom you stand; for by so
doing you shall become heirs of life everlasting. Every one of the Jews is
bound to cas^ ^omething into the treasury, though it be but a mite as it is
written, I will see thy face sin justice, where by Justice is understood Alms
deeds, which bears witness thereunto.

In this the^ fixed devotion of mind they are wont to bow themselves toward the
(...) in which the bo^k of the Law is ke^t saying, Numb. 2^. 5.
How goodly are thy (...), O Jac^b, and thy Tabernacle, O Israel, Psalm. 26. 8.
In the multitude of thy (...) I will enter into thine holy Temple* Lord, (...)
have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells, and many more such like sayings out of the Psalms of David. These
things premised in way of a proeme, at last they begin their devotions
accordingly as they are appointed in their book of Common Prayer, and because
the Petitions are very many, they run them over by a cursory reading of them in
their books, although some be ignorant of Letters, and cannot read at all, yet
it is his duty to be frequent in the Synagogue without any intermission,
diligently attending what is said by others, and saying Amen at the closure of
every prayer.

That we may the better understand what manner of prayers they use, I will
translate some of their prayers out of the Hebrew into Latin, and withal
explain them.

The first prayer they use begins thus, Adon Olam, ascher melech, etc. running
all in rythme, as all others of theirs do, and is sung or read by them in a
bouncing tone; the form of which prayer follows.

O Lord of the world, who had rule and dominion before any thing now created,
was created; who was called a King at the instant of their Creation, according
to his good pleasure, and shall so remain after their return into their prime
nothing, to whom be given all honor and fear. He was from everlasting, and
shall always abide in his glory: he is one alone, and besides him there is no
other, who may be compared or be likened unto him (by this reason they deny the
Deity of the Son, and repute him as a common simple man) He, as he is without
beginning, so he is without end. In his hand is strength and power, he is my
God, my protector, and redeemer (by this saying they deride the belief of us
Christians, who do place our Confidence in a Mediator, who himself was subject
to the stroke of death) He is a stony rock unto me in my necessity, and in the
time of my sorrow; he is my banner and my refuge, he is the portion of mine
inh^ritance, even in that day wberein I implore his aid and assistance, into
his hands I commend my spirit, whether I sleep or wake he is present with me,
so that I need not be afraid of any thing.

This prayer being ended then follow in their order an hundred more, which are
commonly short and pithy, and are therefore twice repeated every day, the
reason whereof shall be given hereafter.

The first blessing prayer, or thanksgiving is about the washing of their
hands, as was formerly declared, and that, because if any forget to say it in
the morning when he is washing his hands, he is enjoined to say it before the
whole Congregation.

In the next place they have a thanksgiving, though shore and succinct, for the
wonderful Creation of man, and especially that God created him full of holes
and pores, one whereof being stopped, sudden death necessarily follows
thereupon.

Then they make their Confession concerning the Resurrection of the dead,
giving thanks for the gracious supply of all their wants, saying, Blessed be
thou O Lord, King of the World, who have given understanding to the Cock, so
that he knows how to distinguish day from night, and night from day, so that he
never fails to rouse up the Jew before day, at what time they ought to leave
their beds and go to prayers.

Blessed ^e God, etc. That he created me an Israelite or a Jew, or as others
render it, that he did not make me one of the Gentiles (By Gentile they
understand Christian, which they esteem as Infidels, Idolaters, and a cursed
Nation) The woman says, blessed be God, etc. that he created me a Jewess.

Blessed be God, etc. that he has not created me a servant; this also thwarts
the profession of Christians, whom they account their vassalls, who shall sow
and plow their ground, and shall do all manner of servile employments for them,
while in the mean time they shall sit behind a hot furnace rosting apples,
tossing up whole bowls of wine. What kind of Captivity is this? They answer, if
any man rest himself in any place, having a huge Bowl of rich wine in his hand,
then he is free from bondage, when on the contrary, the Christians are forced
to labor and till the Earth, in the sweat of their brows and nostrils.

Blessed, etc. That he has not made me a woman: the women instead thereof, say
Blessed, etc. that he has created me according to his own good will and
pleasure. This is done in contempt of the woman's sex, because they are not
comprehended in the Covenant of Circumcision, by which God ^eals unto himself
his own peculiar people; and therefore this Scripture must perforce be hatched
in the woman's brains, that is to say, whether they be in the Catalogue of
Israelites, as their husbands are.

Blessed, etc. who exaltest the humble.

Blessed, etc. who gives sight unto the blind.

This Thanksgiving is usual when they first wake out of their sleep, and
unshut their eyelids.

Blessed, etc. who makes the crooked straight; this they say, when lifting
themselves up in their bed, they go about to attire themselves.

Blessed, etc. who clothes the naked; this they say when they put on their
clothes.

Blessed. etc. who raises them that fall.

Blessed, etc. who brings the prisoners out of Captivity.

These two several Thanksgivings are assigned for this reason, because God in
the time of sleep does in that manner sustain and multiply man's spirits, that
they may again exercise their proper functions, the time of their being asleep
being like unto prisoners in the pit.

Blessed, etc. who stretches out the earth above the waters; this they say,
when rising out of their beds, they begin to tread upon the ground.

Blessed, etc. who directs, prepares and governs the ways of man; this he
says, so soon as he comes out of his bedchamber.

Blessed, etc. who has created all things necessary for this life; this he
utters when he ties his shoes.

Blessed, etc. who girdest Israel with the girdle of strength; this he says,
when he puts on his girdle, which every Jew is bound to do, as has been
formerly declared.

Blessed, etc. who crowns Israel with comeliness; this he says, when he puts
his hat upon his head, for it is an heinous offense to go out of his Chamber
uncovered.

Blessed, etc. who refreshes the weary.

Blessed be thou O God, our Lord, King of the whole world, who removest sleep
from mine eyes, and slumber from mine eyelids.

These prayers ended, being so many in number, they add two more, wherein they
petition God, that he would vouchsafe to keep and defend them against sin,
reprobate angels, and wicked men, and all kind of evil. Then humbling
themselves before God, they confess themselves guilty, and relying only upon
the mercy of God, they comfort themselves again with a certain Prayer,
beginning, Ribbon Col haolamim; and with much boasting and many brags in that
oath which the Lord swear unto Abraham, being about to sacrifice his Son Isaac,
say, yet we are thy people, and the children of thy Covenant: and, O blessed
men that we are! how goodly is our portion? how pleasant our lot? how
beautiful our Inheritance? O blessed men that we are, who every morning
pronounce this sentence, Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one God! Gather us
that trust in thee from the four corners of the earth: by which action all the
Inhabitants of the world shall know that thou art God alone. O our Father which
art in heaven, run after us with thy mercy even for thy names sake, because thy
name is named upon us, and confirm and establish in us that which is written,
Soph. 3. 20.
At that time will I bring you back, at that time will I gather you, and give
you a name and renown amongst all the people of the earth, when I have turned
againyour captivity, says the Lord God. After these be ended, there follow 2
other short Prayers, in which they give thanks for the Law delivered to them
from heaven. From the Law they proceed to their sacrifices, which because they
may not offer in these days, they are banished out of their own Land, and their
Temple is laid desolate, as their Ancestors were accustomed, the sacrifice of
the lip succeeds in the place thereof, and reading only the precepts concerning
sacrifices, as they ought in their appointed times to have been offered. they
solace themselves with that saying of the Prophet, Hos. 14. 3.
though in a sense perverted, We will sacrifice the calves of our lips. After
this they ruminate the historical narration about sacrifices, as also a certain
prayer beginning Rabbi Ismahel concerning the use of the Law, and the manifold
exposition thereof: which being grounded upon the Talmud, is so barbarous and
difficult, that not one Jew amongst an hundred is able to understand it. This
they read in such a manner, as the Vestal Virgins do the Psalter. This done,
they say a Prayer, in which they Petition for the re-edification of Jerusalem,
and the Temple, which they daily, even unto this day expect and hope for; yet
this they say with such a fainting voice that none can hear it. The words are
these: Let it be thy good pleasure before thy face, O Lord and God, the God of
our Fathers, that the holy house, thy Temple may be built again in these our
days, and give unto us a will to abide in thy Law. Hereupon rising up with
great joy and shouting, they chant out another laudatory Prayer or
thanksgiving, hoping that God will shortly begin to lay the foundation of their
new Temple, and bring them back again into their own Land. Then sitting down,
they repeat a long Prayer collected out of the Psalms of David, reading withal
some whole Psalms, and a part of the thirtieth Chapter of the first book of
Chronicles: and lastly, singing the last words of the Prophet Obadiah, which
are these: Saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau,
Obad. 2. 1.
and the Kingdom shall be the Lords. With attent minds and much rejoicing,
their hope is that these Saviors of whom the Prophet makes mention, shall come
quickly, and shall go up to Mount Sion: that is, they shall undertake the
quarrel for the Jews, and help them to judge, deStroy, and utterly to extirpate
from the face of the earth the Mountain of Esau; that is to say, the
Christians, together with their Kingdom: they stiling the Christians Edomites,
and the Roman Monarchy the Kingdom of Edom, and so shall bring them back into
their own Land flowing with milk and honey: what the reason is, that they call
u^ Christians Esauites, or Edomites, I will at large inform the Reader in
another place, I will only insert thus much in this present Chipter, which they
write and teach in their secret and hidden books, which they will not suffer to
come into the hands of Christians; that the soul of Esau passed from his body
into that of Christ's: and that Christ was no less wicked then Esau was; and
that we are no better, whence ever we are not without great cause called
Edomites, who put our trust and confidence in him.

Then they begin to sing, God shall be King over the whole earth. In that day
there shall be one God, and his Name shall be one, as it is written in thy Law
O God, Hear O Israel the Lord our God is one God. This they ^abble out as a
thing clear contrary to our Christian profession, as though we worshipped more
Gods then one, and were wont to give him more names then one, as the nam^ of
Christ.

Next in order follows a short Prayer cal^ed Krias schmah, Orach chajim nu. 58.
(...)
taken out of the fifth Book of Moses* and when they read that verse in the
Hebrew language, Hear O Israol, the Lord our God is one God: and come unto the
last word thereof which is Echad, signifying One, they toss up and down, and
bandied from mouth to mouth, with eyes cast up to Heaven for the space of half
an hour* yea, sometimes for an whole hour together, and coming to the last
letter thereof, which is Daleth, the whole Congregation does bend and turn
their heads successively toward the four corners and winds of the earth,
hereby signifying that God is King in every place, yea, throughout the whole
world: for the letter Daleth, by reason of its place in the Hebrew Alphabet*
stands for the number of four. Furthermore the word Ecthad comprehends in it
two hundred forty five other words, to which they superadding these three, (...)
Hael elohechem Emeth, your God is truth, the number amounts to two hundred
forty eight, the very number of the members in man's body, so that if these
several Prayers be said for every member in particular, then the whole man is
strongly guarded against all manner of evil. Whosoever repeats the foresaid
verse three times, shall be safe from the Devil; for that verse begins with the
Letter Schin, and ends in Daleth in this manner, Schema Israel, Adonai Eloheim,
Adonai Echad, which two letters conjoined make up the word Sched, which
signifies a Devil. They repute also this Prayer as a Prayer of singular worth
and sanctity, by which may be wrought many miracles: whence it comes to pass
that they are extremely superstitious in a repetition of the same every morning
and evening.

It is registered in the Talmud, T^act. de bebenedictionibus cap. 9.
that upon a certain time, when it was commanded by open Proclamation, that the
Jews any where having a Synagogue, should not publicly teach and make
profession of their faith; Rabbi Akibha not regarding the command, ceased not
to read and preach it openly in the Synagogue; upon which he was apprehended,
and for the fact cast into Prison* When the Tormentors were about to bring him
to the stake to be burnt, they first of all curried his corpse with an iron
horsecombe, wounding and tormenting him after a lamentable manner. Yet
notwithstanding Rabbi Akibha remained constant, praying without intermission.
And when the time of the day came wherein he was to say that Prayer, Krias
Schema, he begun it with great boldness. At the last his Scholars bespoke him
and said, Most dearly beloved Master, thou have prayed sufficiently, now yield
thy self and take thy death patiently. To whom he made this answer, I have had
this saying in great esteem all my life long: Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy body: and thus I have understood it, that
though any one should pluck out my heart and rent my body in pieces, yet I
ought ever to determine this with my self, never to cease to love him.
Therefore when God has confirmed this in me, should I cease to worship him,
and to bring this Prayer to an end which is directed unto him? Therefore
holding on in this his prayer, he never left repeating the word Echad, until
his soul forsook his body. Then was there a voice heard in the air saying,
Blessed art thou, O Rabbi Akibhah, because thy soul departed breathing the word
Echad, now shall thou have an entrance into life eternal, and shall come into
that light of the Garden of Paradise. Amen. Selah.

They have also another prayer like unto the former, which they call Schemon
Esre, i. e. eighteen, Orach chajim nu. 113.
because it contains so many particular thanksgivings and prayers of praise
therein. Concerning the sanctity and holiness of this and the former prayer,
the Jews have written many a large Tract, which I leaving to bespeak their own
worth, will neither praise nor any ways disgrace. The last of these every one
repeats twice a day, and he that is their Chaplain or Reader in the Synogogue
does publicly sing it by himself two or three several times. The Jews esteem
highly of it, hoping that hereby they shall obtain remission of all their sins.
When it is their will and pleasure to pour out unto God, they are bound to do
it standing, and with such a posture, that one foot may not insist more upon
the ground then the other, in imitation of the Angels, of whom it is written:
And their feet were straight feet. This is handled more at large in Rabbi
Alphes in his first Chapter, Ezekiel. 1. 7.
and in their Minhagim, and in many other books. When they say those words,
Isa. 6. 3.
holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, the earth is full of his glory, being a
parcel of the Prayer Schemon Esre, by them named Keduscha (a), Orach chajim nu.
125. a Sanctitas.
then they caper three times together, leaping up, as though by this their
gesture they did endeavor to become like unto the Angels, who were the first
Choristers that sung this Song of praise. Others say, that because these words
in the Prophecy of Esaias immediately follow, And the posts of the doors were
shaken at the voice of him that spoke, it is both meet and convenient that a
man should touching move himself in the quavering of such an Angelical Anthem.
The Hebrew Doctors write, that whosoever dare to mutter the least syllable,
while the Prayer Schemon Esre is a saying, shall after his death have coals of
fire given him to eat, as it is written in the fourth verse of the thirtieth
chapte^ of Job The wards are (...) Radix juniperorum eorum panis.
for so Rabbi Solomon expounds the words, Rabbi Tanchum says in the name of
Rabbi Jehoschua, that the Doctors made these eighteen short petitions, having
respect unto so many little bones, which are in the back bone of a man, which
bones they ought to bend while they repeat the prayer, whereupon the Prophet
David says, All my bones shall say, etc.

After these two prayers follows an evil prayer full of accusations against
those Jews, which have turned Christians and received baptism, as also against
all other Christians, and their Magistrates, which I have written out word for
word, as it is set down in ancient Manuscripts, and in them of Polonia, where
they dare imprint what they please, and that with great audacity, all fear of
the Christians set aside, it was thus.

They who are blotted out, that is to say, the Jews (who have embraced
Baptism, and turned Christians) shall never more have any hope left them, and
all the unbelievers, as well as those which have turned Apostates, and fallen
from the Jewish belief, as in general all other people, who adhere not to the
faith of the Jews, shall perish in the twinkling of an eye, and all thine
enemies, O Lord our God, which bear a tyrannous hate against thee, shall be
suddenly coufounded, and the proud and presumptuous Kingdom shall speedily be
rooted out, break it in pieces, that it may become level with the ground, and
at last be utterly destroyed (This particle, whether through fea^^ or the
strict injunction of the Magistracy against whom it was directed, in which it
was styled the Kingdom of pride, or simply Reschak, that is to say, impious,
is omitted in their Common prayer books of the last edition, as also in that
Copy of mine printed at Venice, (...)
in the year 1564) and make them without delay obedient unto us in these our
days, Tract, de benedictione. sect. 9. 4.
Blessed be thou O God, which breakest in pieees, and subduest those that are
rebellious. This particle they entitle a prayer against all heretics, because
in it is contained a curse against heretics, as Rabbi Alphes records.

By these heretics, they first and principally understand the baptized Jews,
for every one that is such, they call Meschumad, (...) One cut off from the
Congregation of the faithful, from the verb (...) extirpatus est, excis^^^
(...).
a reprobate, and in the plural number, Meschumadim are these lost and consumed
persons, who leaving Jewish superstition have given their names unto Christ,
and so the Prayer begins Velam^eschumadim, that is to say, to the lost
condemned apostate Jews, instead of which word they have now inserted
Velamaschinin, (...) A traitor, backbiter, from (...) (...) linguax fui^,
detraxit falsa accusation^.
that is to say, to these traitors, by them also understanding the baptized
Jews, for these they call traitors, because they betray and lay open their
wickedness and treachery to the Christians. In very deed a man may easily
conjecture by the words of Rabbi Bechai, what thing they wish unto the
Christians, who writes in this manner concerning this prayer, This prayer
(says he) was made against the heretics, against that wicked Kingdom, the
Roman Empire, against all Christian Magistrates, that all they might be rooted
out which obtain any rnle and authority over the Jews.

The Kingdom of the Turks they always call the Kingdom of Ismael, because
they draw their original from the loins of Ismael, They call the Roman
Empire, The King dome of Edom; the Kingdom of Rome, the Kingdom of Esau, the
Kingdom of iniquity, the Kingdom of pride, a presumptuous also and
reproachful Kingdom, yea, this is every where imprinted as manifestly in fair
Characters in their books, as the bright lamp of heaven sends out his light
upon the earth, concerning which with Gods help more shall be spoken hereafter,
and to say the very truth, this is the more likely, because that this prayer
was made a long time after Schemane Esre, their prayer containing eighteen
thanksgivings, placed in this order, and foisted into their book of Common
prayer by Rabbi Samuel hakkaton, Rabbi Samuel the little, or S^ort, who died
before the destruction of the second Temple. This was done with a singular
sleight of hand, a little after Christ's time, the impulsive cause being very
base, the Doctrine of Christ and his followers the Christians being more hated
of the Jews, then they in words were ab^e To express; but if I be not
deceived, this diminutive Samuel composed this prayer in the City Jasna against
all the Jews that should cleave unto Christ, and against the Romans, who then
had Dominion over the Jews, some forty years after the destruction of the
second Temple, at that time when the great Court of the Sanhedrim was removed
and banished to Jasna, If any reader be skillful in the holy tongue, let him
read that book called Sepher Juchasin, which is a certain Jewish Chronicle,
page 21. the Talmud printed at Venice in the Tract de benedictionibus, the
fourth chapter, and in the Tract Sanhedrim, the first chapter, where sufficient
is spoken concerning this matter.

After this execratory prayer follows a benediction, and a very se^ious prayer
in the behalf of all godly and honest livers among the people, and all them who
out of other Nations have turned to the Jewish Religion, as also that God would
vouchsafe with all speed to build again the City and Temple in their days, to
make the branch of the root of David to flourish, to exalt his horn, that is,
to send the Messiah without delay, and to restore the Kingdom unto Israel.

In the conclusion of these their morning prayers, they beseech God to keep
them in peace, and when they pronounce these words, He that makes peace in
high places, make also peace among all the people of Israel, Orach. Chajim.
Amen: then they go three steps backward, and if any sitting upon an horse or
an ass be traveling upon the way, it is necessary also that his horse or ass
should likewise go backward so many paces: If it chanee they cannot retire
backward by reason of the thronging mul. titude of people in the place, then
skipping up, they leap three times into the air, bowing themselves, and bending
their heads, now to the right hand, then to the left, signifying thereby, that
they beseech God to give them peace in what place soever they are resident: if
a Christian chance to be in their presence with a Crucifix or any other image
representative of a Deity, then ought not the Jew to bow himself, but to lift
his heart unto the Lord. The three steps which they go backward, are done in
honor to God himself, for when any one departs from some great Potentate, he
commonly for some space goes backward in his congees, blessing his worship,
honors him by kissing his hand, and the complementall bowing of his whole
body: after the same manner, when the Jews depart the presence of the Almighty,
they go backward and salute him face to face, lest he should say, My people who
have made long prayers unto me, are so wearied with the practice, that they
show me their back parts. The learned Rabbines say, that this retrogradation or
going back is used in remembrance of a certain miracle which happened in Mount
Sinai at that time when God gave them the Law; Tract. Tal. de benedict. c. 1.
Exodus 20. 18.
for the Rabbines in their Masseches Berachos upon those words: When all the
people saw the thunders and the lightnings, and the sound of the trumpet, and
the mountain burning, the people saw and were afraid, and stood afar off;
dispute and say, that the people through great fear and amazement, was in a
moment of time, three miles backward from the mountain Sinai The chief
Glosse-monger Rabbi Solomon Jarchi writes in his gloss upon this Text, that
the people kept back twelve miLes, of which David spoke saying. Psalm. 68. 13.
The Kings of the Armies did fly, and she^ that tarried at home divided the
spoil, and then came the good Angels and ministering Spirits, and brought the
people back unto the Mountain.

When they are about to depart the Temple or Synagogue, then they speaking
within themselves, quietly and without the least noise, they say a certain
Prayer beginning Alenulesh abeach: It is meet that we should praise the Lord,
who is above all, and in an excellent degree to celebrate him, because he has
created all things, and not made us like unto the rest of the Nations; likewise
that he has not made us as other generations of the World, and has not
appointed us an inheritance like unto theirs, neither is our lot as their lot,
neither as the lot of their whole multititude. Here are some words omitted in
their Books of Common Prayer, and that by the Commandment of the Magistrates
of Italy, where their Books are wont to be, and for the most part are at this
day imprinted. The things omitted were some blasphemous sayings against our
Savior, which are found expressed in the ancient copies, of which I have one
which was imprinted at Augusta by a Jewish Printer called Chajim, in the year
of Christ 1534. In other copies, instead of the words omitted, there is left an
empty space about the length of one line, to this end, that the children of the
Jews, and others who are ignorant, may be warned to enquire, what saying it is
that is there omitted, which when they do, some relate the words unto them, or
otherwise write them in the margent of the Book, as I have observed them to
have practiced in many of their Prayer books; the words left out are these: Who
bend their knee and crouch to that which is vanity and foolishness, and adore
another God who cannot help: (these words they utter against Christ, wherefore
they spit upon the earth in the mouthing of them) But we bend and bow our
knees, yea, our whole man to that King, who is King of Kings, to God holy and
blessed for ever, who stretches out the heavens, establishes the earth, whose
glory and chair of estate is in heaven and the seat of whose power is in the
highest heavens: he only is our God, and there is no other besides him, These
things thus finished, the Jew, now going out Of the Synagogue, says, O Lord
God, lead me by thy justice, by reason of those that lay wait for me in secret,
make plain thy way before my face. Preserve me in my going out and my coming
in, from this time forth for evermore.

They must go out of the Synagogue in the posture of a Crab sish, creeping
backward through the Gate thereof, and that their back part should not be
toward the holy Ark, in which the book of the Law is laid up, to which they
ought to exhibit a certain kind of reverence by turning their face thereunto.
The Rabbines upon those words of the Prophet Ezekiel, Who have turned their
back unto the Temple of the Lord, Ezekiel 8.14.
have delivered thus much in the Talmud, that a grievous and heavy punishment
was inflcted upon the Priests, because in going out of the Temple of the Lord,
In Tract. Joma
they turned their back parts toward the ark of the Covenant, wherefore the
case standing thus, we ought to depart out of the Temple with all fear and
reverence, even as a servant being about to take his leave of his Master, does
it with a retrograde crowching submission, and submiss lowliness. They must not
run out of the Synagogue, lest some might think him that runs to be weary
with praying, and to rejoice that it is now lawful for him to depart. They
must go out with decurtate steps; for if any one does this, God numbreth his
steps, and gives him a great reward, Job. 14. 16.
as it is written: Thou have numbered my steps etc.

If any in his going forth chance to meet a woman, or a damsel, whether she be
one of the Jews or Christians, he ought to shut his eye^, and turn away his
face from beholding her, he must not afford her the common courtesy of a
Complement, lest thereby taking occasion of longer discourse, he should be woed
to the entertainment of lustful notions and evil cogitations.

Concerning the serious manner of praying, they write, Orach chajim nu. 91. and
seq
that whosoever will pray attentively ought to have his head and heart covered,
and to incompass his body with a girdle in the middle, lest his heart by the
sight of the secret part should be inveigled with wicked thoughts. He must turn
his face toward Canaan and the City Jerusalem, his feet equally placed upon
the Earth, as abovesaid. He ought to put his hand upon his heart in that
manner, that his right hand may rest upon his left, withal bowing his head
with great humility: as it is written, Let us lift up our hearts with our hands
unto the Lord in the heavens* and again, Sam. 3. 41.
My life is always in my hand, yet do I not forget thy Law. Psalm. 119. 109.
In time of prayer none must yawn, belch, or spit; yet if he must spit on
necessity, then ought he privately to receive it in his Handkerchiff, and
modestly to cast it behind him, or upon his left hand, but not before him, or
upon his right, for there stand the Angels invisible, whom if any should beray
with this excrement, he should be guilty of an heinous offense. It is not
lawful for any to let a escape in time of Prayer, if he do it against his will,
then ought he to suspend the act of praying, until the ill savor thereof be
gone. If the wind urge him so much and so vehemently that he must of necessity
let fly, then shall he go some four paces aside, set a packing, and instantly
thereupon saying, O Lord of all the earth, thou have created me full of holes,
Which I cannot shut up, all our modesty is open, and known unto thee: our life
is full of shame, we are nothing but worms and Maggots.

Sneesing in time of Prayer, if it come from the parts below, is an ill sign,
if from above, a good one. He that begins once to pray, must not break off
in the middle of his Prayer, yea although the King of Israel should come and
salute him, yet he may not answer him; though a Serpent took him by the heel
and bit him, yet ought he to continue in his devotions; yet there is a certain
dispensation which licenseth a man to give way unto a churlish Ox, and for
fear of him to cease praying til he be gone and past. It is not lawful for him
that prays to touch his naked body with his hands, yet may be touch his hands
and neck: If in this time he be so necessitated as to scratch his body, he must
do it upon the garments. He that prays must move his whole body hither and
thither, as it is written: All my bones shall say, O Lord, Psalm. 35. 10.
who is like unto thee? The Chanter also of the Synagogue in the time of divine
Service ought to pray, standing in some hollow, low, deep place, and to read
the Prayer distinctly, and with as loud a voice as he can possible: I have seen
with mine eyes the Reader fall down upon his knees before the Pulpit, because in
that place the earth was level, and not one place lower then another, and to
have said Prayers with as shill a voice as he could have done from an higher
seat. These Prayers they pour out of a collected narrow heart, chiefly to this
end, that they may obtain the remission of their sins, and that according to
the example of David, saying: Out of the depth have I called unto thee, Psalm.
130.
O Lord; and finally, which is the perfection of all, every one ought to labor
with all his strength to answer Amen, at the end of every prayer. Hence it is
written in the Book Tanchuma, that it was the saying of Rabbi Jehuda, Brunds.
cap 41.
that whosoever says Amen in this world, shall be accounted worthy to say
Amen in the world to come: hence is that of King David: Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, Alas poor Jew, thou have never uttered one Amen attentively for the
space of 1631 years.
Amen, Amen: By which double Amen, he notes unto us, that one Amen is to be
said in this world, another in that which is to come, The wisest among the Jews
say, that whosoever shall say Amen with great attention, shall bring to pass
that thereby their redemption shall appoach with all speed, and suddenly be
accomplished. How I pray you? when Amen is pronounced after the manner that it
ought to be, then God shakes his head and says, Woe unto those children, who
are banised from their Fathers Table. And how much comfort is it to a Father
thus to be praised of his children? thereupon God begins to think of the
deliverance of his people out of their captivity and that he ought not to do
otherwise; for though he has put and exiled them out of his sight for their
sins, yet he suffers with them, and the grief of his children, vexes him at
the heart: Upon which Rabbi Juda has this simily. Even as a Mother having a
Daughter who is immodest and disobedient, who also has been got with child by
some or other, casts her out of her doors for her unchaste life, and uses much
unmerciful carriage toward her; yet in the hour of childbirth she suffers and
laments with her after a wonderful manner: even so God has sent us into
banishment for our sins, yet having compassion he will redeem us when we
seriously pray unto him.

It was formerly noted, that they ought every day to run over a whole century
of prayers and thanksgivings, and this they very magisterially demonstrate, and
that with great subtilty, and after the Cabalistical manner: and first of all
out of those words of Moses: Now therefore, O Israel, hear what the Lord God
requires of thee. Here the Rabbines read not the words according to the
original, Man schoel, which is, what the Lord requires; but, Meah schoel, that
is to say, The Lord requires an hundred: so that Moses intent in this place was
no other then if he had said, The words in the original are (...) quid
requirit? the Rabbis read (...) centum requirit, so perverting the text.
God every day requires of thee an hundred Prayers. But out of what puddle did
these skillful Fishers, the Cabalists, angle out this exposition? the answer
is: First, Moses insinuated so much unto us by putting an hundred letters in
this very verse. Secondly, it is demonstrate by a secret of the Kabala, by
which is made a certain transposition of the Letters, to wit, when the first
letter of the Alphabet is put in the place of the last, and that which is
immediately before the last is put in the place of the second, which kind of
change the Cabalists call Athbasch, that is, when Thau, Aleph, Beth and Schin
are mutually changed one for another. So by the benefit of this secret there
come^ two letters in the place of Mem and He, which make the word Mah above
mentioned, which are Tzad^ and Jod, which in computation make an hundred.
Thirdly, it is read in the Talmud, that David appointed these hundred prayers
at that time, when there daily died in Israel an hundred men, for which cause
these hundred petitions are daily to be repeated.

This is also evidently proved out of those words, which we find thus written
in the second Book of Samuel. David the son of Ishai says, 2 Samuel 25. 1.
even the man who was s^t up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and
the sweet singer of Israel; The man Hukam al der hocherhoben is it, for so the
Vulgar German ^enders it; for Hukam properly signifies one that is exalted, Al
hight, according then to the Cabalistical mysterious Art, the letters of the
word Al being Lamed and Ajin make in number an hundred, and the meaning must be
this; the man says, by whom these hundred laudatory Petitions were erected and
instituted. This Interpretation was taken out of the artificial archives of the
Jewish Theology, into which no Christian may enter. Many more such shall
hereafter be produced, which is the reason that I will trouble the Reader with
no more in this place, but proceed to declare the carriage of the Jews at home
after their return from the Synagogue. I will conclude all with the saying of
the Prophet Esaias: When you shall stretch out your hands, Esaias 1. 15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many Prayers I will not
hear, for your hands are full of blood. Again in another place: Your iniquities
have separated betwixt you and your God, Cap. 59. 2punc; 3.
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear, for your hands
are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your li^^ have spoken
lies, and your tongue has murmured iniquity.

CHAP. VI.
How the Jews after morning prayer behave themselves, and prepare themselves
to dinner.
BEfore the men return home from the Synagogue, Oruch. chay^ number. 55.
their wives have swept and made the house very neat and cleanly, lest their
husbands eyes should fasten upon any object which might molest and disturb
them in their pious meditations; because these are as yet erected to God, who
keeps his residence in the highest Heavens. Now if every man returning to his
own house, finds every thing in a decent order, then his understanding remains
pure, and his mind untroubled; but if he find the contrary, his understanding
becomes muddy and perplexed. A wife that is honest indeed, lays her husband a
book upon the table, which is either the Pentate^ch, or some reprehensory
book, directing aright our life and conversation, to the end, that thence he
may learn the fear of God, and civility of behavior; and therefore he reads
in the same an hour at least, before he goes out of doors to perform any
other business. This the Cachamim and wise men among the Jews, conclude from
the words of Solomon in his Proverbs; saying, The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. Hence teaching us, that in all our actions we undertake,
we ought to fear God and learn his word. Deuteronomy 7. 1^. (...) (...)
After the same manner might the Rabbines have expounded those words, Vehaiah
Gnekebh Tismegnun, That the Jews being interpreters, they must be rendered
thus, There shall be a heal or foot, you shall bear it; and that which
follows is this: Before you set your heel or foot out of doors, you shall
learn the law by reading something therein, and hearing what God wills and
commands to be done. It is a good work indeed to learn the law, and on the
contrary, a great sin for any to be negligent in the reading of the same. In
the time of the first. Temple, the peopl of Jerusalem committed many heinous
offenses; as, Incest and Idolatry, yet the Lord did only in a manner know these
and took notice of them, until they despised the law, and would take no more
pains to learn it. Then the Lord banished them out of his sight, destroyed a
great number of them, and utterly laid waste their holy Temple. Hereupon the
Lord cried out by Jeremie the Prophet, Icr. 9. 12, 13.
Who is wise to understand this? and to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken
he shall declare it. Why does the Land perish, and is burnt up like a
wilderness, and none passes through? And the Lord says, because they have for
saken the law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my word, neither
walked there after. Again, Deu. 29. 24, 25
it is written in the first book of Moses, Then shall all nations say,
wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? how fierce is his great
wrath? And they shall answer, because they have for saken the Covenant of the
Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of
the land of Egypt. Wherefore a religious Jew must not presently after his
coming from morning prayer, fall to his daily labor and servile emploiments,
but either retire himself to his own house, or in Beth Hammedrasch, or the
School dedicated to study, and there to read and learn somewhat out of the
Law, which may press him forward to the fear of God, and an honest life, and
godly conversation with men; that by this means that may come to pass which
the Prophet David makes mention of, Psalm. 84. 7.
saying, They will go from strength to strength, and unto the God of Gods
appears every one of them in Sion. Which is also very well expounded
according to the sagacity of the Jews, in a little book written concerning the
fear of God, in these words: They did go from one study to another, that they
might by learning understand the Law.

When they are returned unto their own house, then laying aside their
phylacteries and precatory fardles, they put them into a chest. First,
unloosing them of the head, then those of the hand, to the end they may at any
time first take and bind on these of the hand. Some also are accustomed to put
off their garment of remembrance, or their fringed Coat, to which the Ribbands
are annexed; yet in my judgment it were more fitting they should wear it
continually, that they might not forget the commandments of the Lord, but
always fulfill his Law. They who are godly carry it all the day long under a
corselet or cloak, but so that the ribbonds may be seen of them, that they may
be terrified from committing sin. I once saw a crabbed Rabbine of a waiward
holiness, who was Master of the Synagogue, whose ribbands hanging at his
fringes, hung so low down, that they did even touch his feet: For as some
desiring not to be forgetful of any thing committed to his memory, knits a
knot in his girdle, to the end that he looking thereupon, may call to his
remembrance what he ought to put in execution. So these five knotted fringes in
use with the Jews, are as so many memorandums to warn them to avoid the
bypath of sin and iniquity. And hence it comes to pass, that all the Jews
are of such a sanctified conversation, that they fulfill, keep and observe
every one of Gods commandments.

They also accounted it very good for the wholesome to eat something before a
man in the morning undertake any business: For there are sixty three diseases
of the Gall, which may all be cured by the eating of crust, and a mornings
draught of the blood of the grape. Who wants wine, he may drink Ale, or a cup
of cold water, as Raschi is of an opinion, and so shall he be fitted to undergo
any labor.

They which are honest wives indeed, will in the mean time make ready for
dinner some boiled meat, Brand spiegel, cap. 43.
that their husbands bellies at their return home finding such cleanly
provision, may not by a long tarrying be occasioned to a thought that their
throats are cut. In that tract of the Talmud about the Sabbath, it is ordained
that the Jews should go to dinner some five hours after daybreak, which is
about eleven a clock; if any over-stay any longer, he may fall into some
disease, by the vehemence where of he may be brought upon his knees; for at
that time the body expects and requires its natural nourishment, which if it
have not, then it seeds upon its own members: As a Bore in the time of winter
is wont to do; for then if it be not possible for him to come by any
sustenance, he by sucking his own feet relieves himself.

The wives also must have an especial care that they serve in the meat thus
cleanly dressed in a cleanly manner; as it is written, You shall not make your
souls abominable with any creeping thing that creeps, neither shall you make
your selves unclean with them that you should be defiled thereby; for I am the
Lord your God, Lev. 1. 43, 44.
you shall therefore sanctify your selves; and you shall be holy, for I am
holy; neither shall you defile your selves with any manner of creeping thing
that creeps upon the earth. This place the profound Rabbines construe in this
manner unto us: That they being commanded by God, ought to eat meats
artificially cooked, as men, not beasts are accustomed to do; and that if any
one do not eat such viandes, he polluting himself, without fall, becomes
unsanctified in the eyes of the Lord. The table is to be spread with clean
linen, bread in whole loaves pure well baked and not burned, is to be set
thereupon; then Grate must be said, and ^a blessing conserred upon the meat to
be received. If the good wives of the house have any pullen, or other cattle
which are to be fed and nourished, they ought first to serve them, before they
presume to sit down to table, In tract. Gitti^ S. 3. and 5. Deuteronomy. 11. 15.
as Rabbi Juda in the Talmud has taught and commanded, grounding upon those
words: I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou may eat
and be full. For there the Law in the first place making mention of Cattle,
gives us to understand, that a man ought first to show mercy and care for the
soul of his beast, then to refresh himself that in so doing, his meat may be
wholesome unto him, and he by feeding thereupon may be full. In the book called
Sepher Mitznos Naschim, or the book of women's conditions, it is registered to
be the duty of women, presently after the ending of morning prayer, to fodder
their Cattle yea before they take their children out of bed and put on their
clothes; Pro. 12. 10.
because it is written, A righteous man regards the life of his beast; but
the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Therefore if the good wife of the
house do early feed her flock, she gains from thence a name graced with the
addition of just and honest. It is read in the same place, that it is good and
praiseworthy, to breed up young Cattle in the house, because the stars and
celestial planets do often prognosticate by their aspects, some misfortune
about to happen unto the Master or Mistrisse of the family. Now if in the mean
time the husband or wife have been pious in the distribution of alms, and done
many good works of the same nature, then the Lord chief Chancel our (some
Angel is hereby understood) who is overseer of the good deeds of men here on
earth, presently enroles them in his table book, by which means they come unto
the fight of the Almighty, unto whom the foresaid public notary delivers this
petition, O Lord of the whole universe, avert the unfortunate influence of the
stars from this man and his fimily, for they have done these and these good
works. Then the misfortune seiseth upon some wicked person or other (for the
heaven being a natural agent, does of necessity keep his course) as it is
written, Pro; 11. 28.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead. If there be no ungodly sinner in the house, then the influentiall
mi^chiefe lights upon the head of some of his Cattle. This matter is too
prolixe, and cannot be comprehended by the shallow capacity of many women.

It is necessary that before any presume to set down to dinner, he should go
and unload his belly in some secret place, that he fall to his victuals with an
empty stomach and purified body; for if he come to the table with a full
stomach, he shall depart from it with a body stuffed with diseases. This the
Jewish Doctors gather out of that verse, Lev. 26. 10.
bring forth the old because of the new: Hence concluding, that a man ought
first to empty his stomach of the meat formerly received, before he take in
any more.

It is also necessary, that a man should wash his hands before he go to dinner;
Oruch, thaym. number. 1571.
to this end he ought to have fresh and clean water, not that which is any way
troubled; and that is accounted for clean water, which has not formerly been
transferred to any other use; that is accounted unclean, in which any kind of
wine has been cooled in the former time, in which cups or drinking glasses
have been washed, or out of which hens or dogs have drunk: Ordinarily the
household servants wash first, then the Mistrisse, and last of all the Master of
the family. that he being clean every whit, may instantly beflow a blessing
upon the creatures provided for their daily food and nourishment, the form of
which I will here after delineate. Furthermore it is a position of the
Rabbines, that any Master of a family being exquisite in the performance of
this ceremony, Tract S^tah, cap 1.
which is as an usheting prologue to the filling of his paunch cannot come
within the reach of any evil.

The hands being washed, are to be cleanly wiped: Hence it is recorded in the
Talmud, that Rabbi Ahbahu was wont to affirm, that whosoever eats his bread
with wet and undried hands, his fact is no less heinous, then if he had eaten
that bread, which by the law was accounted unclean unto the Israelites; Ezekiel:
4. 13.
as it is written, So shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread
among the Gentiles, (...)
whither I will cast them. In the Original, the words signifying defiled
bread, are lachmam Tame, which comprehend according to the Hebrew
Cabbalisticall computation, 168. Which number the letters of these three words,
Belo, Niggubh, Jadaiim, do likewise specify; which do signify being
construed, without the washing of the hands. So then the Cabbalisticall meaning
must be this; The Israelites shall eat their bread with unwashen hands; that
is, they shall eat it defiled. Rabbi Jose says, that whosoever eats bread
with unwashen hands, Tract. Sotah. cap. 1. Prove. 26.
commits as grievous a sin as if he had laien with a whore. And this he sifts
out of those words of Solomon, For a whorish woman, a man shall be brought to a
morsel of bread. This then is so slrictly observed of the Jews both before and
after meat, that you shall not sind one amongst a million, that is forgetful or
negligent in the performance thereof; yea, so curious are they therein, that
when they wash, they will not suffer a ring to stay on their finger, left some
filth might be sheltered under the same; and the observation of drawing off the
ring is so accurate, that he who in time of washing does not draw it off, is
accounted as unclean, as if he had not washed at all. It is written in the
Talmud, that Rabbi Akibha was once for a long time imprisoned by the Gentiles
or Christians: To whom Rabbi Jehoshua Garsites brought every day so much water
as might serve for to quench his thirst and wash his hands. At a certain time
the keeper of the prison took the water from him, and poured half thereof
upon the ground; Tract. Egub. hin. cap. 2.
which Rabbi Akibha seeing, and perceiving that there was not water sufficient
said unto Rubbi Jehoshua, reach me the water that I may wash my hands; who
replied, Sir, here is not enough for you to drink. Rabbi Akibha answers,
whosoever eats meat with unwashen hands, is guilty of death; It is better
therefore that I should dye by thirst, then that I should despise, and set
nothing by the traditions of my Ancestors.

There is also another story in the Talmud to this purpose. Rabbi Meir, Rabbi
Josa, Tract. Iom* de festis. cap. 8
Rabbi Juda, upon a certain time were traveling together, and coming to a
certain Inn, where mine Osle was a Jew, they required lodging, for the
Sabbath drew on, when it is not lawful for the Jews to travel. Rabbi Meir
asked the In-keeper what his name was, who answered and said, his name was
Kiddori. Whereupon Rabbi Meir began to think with himself, that his Oste must
needs be a wicked man who had such an ill name, (...) Deuteronomy. 32. 20*
grounding his thoughts upon those words, ki dor tahphuroth Hemmah, They are a
perverse generation. Which although the event proved to be true, yet Rabbi
Jose, and Rabbi Juda so lightly regarded the nomenclation, that they gave him
their cloak-bags to lay up until the Sabbath was past. Rabbi Meir would not
do the same, but went and hid his in the Sepulcher of the man's father that
kept the Inn. The dead time of the night being come, the Oste was warned in a
dream to go and dig in his fathers grave, where he should find a bag full of
money. When he was up in the morning he told the dream to Rabbi Meir; who said
unto him, that those dreams which were dreamed on the night going before the
Sabbath, were nothing to be esteemed: And then departing with great heed and
care, watched the Sepulcher all the Sabbath day, lest the dreamer should come
and take away his money; which the Sabbath once ended he took out of the earth
again. Upon the first day of the week the other two did also require mine Oste
to deliver their cloak-bags, who constantly affirmed that he had them not, and
sloutly denied that they left any with him. They invite him to the wine Tavern,
hoping that by his friendly usage to regaine their goods. While they were a
drinking, they espy some pease and lentiles sticking in his beard; from whence
they collected, that without all doubt he had eaten such kind of pulse that
morning to breakfast, Whereupon they returning to his wife, required their
cloakebags of her, telling her that her husband commanded them to be restored,
by the same token he had eaten lentiles in the morning. The woman knowing it
even to be as they had spoken, presently made delivery, and they held on their
journey. The good man returning to his house, hearing how matters were carried,
beat his wife so cruelly, that she shortly after departed this life. This
story yields us an evident demonstration, that every one ought to wash after
meare; for if the O^te had washed his hands and wiped his mouth and beard,
these travelers had not spied the sign in his beard, by occasion whereof they
recovered their goods; without which they had not had their cloak-bags
restored, and their Oastesse had not come to this untimely death.

There is another story in the Talmud concerning a Jew, who eat swines flesh
because he did not wash his hands before he sat down to table: It runs thus.
There was a certain Jewish In-keeper, who received into his house, as well
Christians as Jews: Whenever any Jews did turn aside to lodge with him, he
knew them by the washing of their hands before meals; and therefore he always
set the flesh of clean and choice fatlings before them, even such as in the Law
was commanded and appointed to be eaten. But whenever any Christians came, he
set swines flesh before them. It fortuned that upon a time a certain Jew
having more stomach then devotion, came unto his house, who setting down at the
table forgot to wash his hands; whence the Oaste drawing a profitable argument
that he was a Gentile, set swines flesh before him: The Jews stomach being to
far removed from his brain, as to enter into consideration of what he eat,
carried headlong with a hunger starved appetite, lustily invaded with teeth and
knife, what was set before him, never questioning what he crammed his guts
withal. Well, dinner being ended, and the reckoning arising to a round sum,
the guest questions his Host how Beef came to be at so high a rate: To whom
he answered, my friend, you have hitherto fed upon swines flesh, and have
eaten not a little, which now is very dear. The poor Jew hearing this became
very sore afraid for the commission of so heinous an offense, and was forced
over and above, to pay an heavy mulct, and undergo much hard penance for this
his delinquency. All this happened unto him for the neglect of washing his
hands; which may serve as a sufficient warning to every one to have an
especial care to wash before they sit down to meat. This outward curiosity
is reprehended by Is^^ah the Prophet; Their feet run unto evil, and are s^^ft
to shed innocent blood: destruction and unhappiness are in their ways, and
the way of peace they have not known; neither is there any judgments in their
ways: ^hey have perverted their own paths; whosoever goes through them,
knows not peace. This is that which St* Matthew brands them with, Mat. 15. 1,
2, 3.
saying, Then come to Jesus the Scribes and Pharisees which were of Jerus^lem,
saying, why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? for they
wash not their hands when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them,
why do you also transgress the commandment of God by your traditions? Mark 1.
2, 3, 4.
St Mark, also says, Then gathered together unto him the Pharisees and
Pharisaeus ^ Pharisee from (...) parasch expandere, for enlarging and laying
open their Phylacteries, or from parasch exponere, explanare, because they were
expounders of the Iaw, or from the same verb in Pihel, signifying to separate,
either that they separated themselves to the study of the law, or from commerce
with other people in habit and manner. What their opinions were, the New
Testament declares to the full. There were ^even sorts of them, as the Talmud
witnesses, Tract* Sota. cap. 3.

1. Pharisaeus Sichemita, who turned Pharisee for gain, as the Si^hemites
embraced circumcision.

2. Truncatus, so called, because he walked as though he wanted feet, to cause
the greater opinion of his meditation.

3. ^mp^^gens, who winked when he went abroad, to avoid the temptation of
beauty, which often made his wit jump with a post.

4. Pharisaeus quid debeo facere and faciam illud? the questionary, such was
he, Luke 18.

5. Morturius, because he wore a hat in form of a deep mortar.

6. Pharisaeus ex amore, who obeyed God out of mere love.

7. Pharisaeus ex timore, who obeyed the Law only for fear of punishment. See
Pirke Aboth, Rabbi Moses, Gerundensis, Mr Godwin.


certain of the Scribes which came from Jerusalem. And when they s^w some of
his disciples eat with common hands (that is to say, unwashen) they complained.
For the Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat
not, holding the tradition of the Elders. And when they come from the market,
except they wash, they eat not: And many other things there be, which they
have taken upon them to observe; as the washing of cups and pots, of brazen
vessels, and of beds.

CHAP. VII.
How the Jews behave themselves in time of eating.
IN the former Chapter it is recorded, that the Master of the family uses
commonly to wash the last of all; and that for this reason, that he presently
may sit down at the table and say grace, in so doing, neither speaking word,
nor doing any other action between the washing of his hands and blessing of his
meat. This they practice, not only that no evil may befall them in time of
their repast, but also because their Doctors prove it out of those words of
David; Lift up your hands unto the Sanctuary, Psalm. 134. 2.
and praise the Lord. For from hence these profound Artists have learned two
things, the first whereof is this: That the hands in time of washing, are to be
lifted up on high, lest the water which is first poured upon, then and thence
becoming unclean, sliding downward should pollute the fingers: The second is,
that so soon as the hands are washed and sanctified, grace ought presently to
be said, and thanks to be given.

When they are once seated at the table, Orach. chajim. number. 167. 82. 201.
it is required that some fine bread in whole loaves, and salt also be set
thereupon: Then the Master of the family takes a loaf in his hand and cuts it
not in the middle, but in some other part in which it is purest and best baked;
then instantly setting it aside, lays both his hands upon it, and blesses it
in manner and form following. Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the whole
world, who brings bread out of the earth. Then he breaks a bit of it, and
putting it into the salt, or into some sort of sauce, if there be any upon the
table, presently eats it, speaking not a word, for if he do, he is bound to
say grace the second time. The piece which he breaks off is of a good quantity,
lest he should be accounted for a miserable niggard, who desires to be sparing,
where spending is ranked in the place of a good work and laudable. It is also
required, that two or three should sit together at the same table, for
otherwise every one must say grace for himself. This finished, he takes the
bread into his hands the second time, and cuts every one there present a shive
of the same, laying it on their trencher, that every one may feed thereupon.

In the same manner also he blesses the wine, especially in those regions
where they commonly use to drink it; and were not only the whole number of
ten`, but three or four are in company. It is performed in this manner: A cup
brim full of wine being presented, he takes it first into both his hands, then
holds it in the right hand alone; yet if it be big and weighty, he may also
employ his left, so that he place it below the right; This done he lists it up
above the table a hands breadth, and fastening his eyes upon it, raising
himself a little in way of honor, says, Blessed be thou O Lordour God, King
of the world, who have created the fruit of the vine. Here it is also provided,
that when many sit not at the same table, every one in particular ought to
bless his own cup; where Ale or water and honey mixed together, are wont to
be drunk, they use the same kind of grace. The richest sort of the Jews
drinks up the sanctified cup of wine, though they carouse their cups of Ale
after it. They use not at any time to give ablessing being about to drink
water.

Grace being ended, the Master of the family uses to repeat the twenty third
Psalm; after which they fall to lustily, and feed deliciously, if they have
wherewithal.

He that gives not thanks himself, must say Amen to him that supplies the
place. Hereupon it is read in the Talmud, that whosoever says Amen with an
attentive and zealous mind, he is far more worthy, and of greater esteem,
then he that says grace before or after meat. The Rabbines illustrate this by
a simile taken from one that writes a letter in another man's name: For as the
letter is then confirmed and ratified when it is sealed and signed by the hand
of another; so they make good and establish the blessing given upon the meat,
who say Amen at the ending thereof.

Salt is set upon the table in remembrance of their sacrifices which were wont
to be offered in the days of old; for the table represents the Altar, and the
meat thereon is compared to the sacrifice; yea, it is also written, And every
oblation of thy meate-offering, Lev. 2. 13.
shall thou season with salt, neither shall thou suffer the salt of the
Covenant of thy GOD to be lacking from thy meate-offering; with all thine
offerings thoushalt offer salt; and therefore it is lawful to want salt at the
table.

The reason why they do not cut and divide their bread into parcels before
they bless it, is, because it is the position of their Doctors, that hereby
they should offend God; Psalm. 10. 3. (...)
seeing it is written, Ubozeah berech nietz adonai; which the Jews very
handsomely translate, whosoever cuts, and gives a blessing offends the Lord.
The Hebrew word Bozeah, never signifying to cut, neither admits it of any such
signification in this place, neither is it so translated in the Germane
Psalter; but only is so rendered at the pleasure of the Rabbines, as we may
read in Orach chajim, a little book translated into the Germane tongue, for
the use of women and children; in which is briefly set down the plat-forme,
after which their life ought to be framed until the end of their days. They
lay both their hands upon the bread their fingers being stretched out in
remembrance of the ten commandments, which God gave concerning the grain,
whereof the bread is made. These commandments cannot be conveniently inserted
into this place, being set down in a place a little before cited.

Secondly, they do it, moved thereunto by some sayings of holy writ; one
whereof is this: Psalm. 104.14.
He brings forth grass for the cattle, and green herbs for the service of
men, that he may bring bread out of the earth; Another is this: Psalm. 145.15.
The eyes of all wait upon the Lord, and thou gave them their meat in due
season; the third: Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8.
The Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of brooks and waters,
of fount aines, and deeps that spring out of the valleys and hills. A land of
wheat and harly, of vines and fig trees, and pomegranates, a land of oil olive
and honey. And many other sayings of the same sort, which in the original
consist only of ten words, and so the usuallgrace also consists of ten words
only.

In blessing the wine four things are especially to be taken notice of, (...)
and had respect unto, all which are briefly comprehended in the word
Chamischah, which is as a note of remembrance for the more easy retaining of
them. The first of the word is Cheth, which notes unto us Chai, signifying new;
intimating that the wine ought both to be new, and also to be poured out into
the bowl from a full tankard. The second letter, Mem, signifies Male, which is
as much as full; for the cup ought to be full of wine; as it is written, O
Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord, Deuteronomy.
33. 23.
possess thou the west and the south. Hence concluding, that their cup which
they bless in this manner, ought to be full of wine.

If any drink out of the foresaid cup before grace be said, it is to be filled
again out of a fresh and full tankard; if there remain no wine at all in the
tankard, then must that which is in the cup be poured out into a clean
tankard, and from thence into the cup again, and so it passes for current.
The third letter, Schin, notes the word Schetiphah, which is ablution,
intimating that the outside of the cup ought to be washed with cold water.
The last letter, He, notes out the word Haddacha, which signifies a washing,
intimating that the inside of the cup ought also to be washed with cold water.
That they ought to lift up the cup with both hands from the table, they prove
from the words of David, Psalm: 134. 2.
Lift up your hands unto the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord, a very doctorlike
proof indeed.

While they are at their repast, every one using a modest carriage, must think
with himself, that he is in the presence of the Lord. As it is said con^erning
the tithes of the field, Deuteronomy. 14. 23. Ezekiel. 41. 22.
that thou shall eat before the Lord thy God. Again, This is the table that is
before the Lord.

The Master of the family must sit a long time at the table, Tract. Berachos de
benedict.
expecting the approach of some poor person, to whose necessity he may
communicate some of his broken meat. This is a good work, and to be had in
honor; for he that feeds the poor shall prolong his own days, as we may read
in the Talmud. Of this the Prophet spoke, saying, Is not this the fast that I
have chosen, that thou deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that
are cast out, to thine house? No man ought to eat more then will suffice
nature, as the Rabbines write in the Talmud, saying, The poor are always to
be in thine house. Which they construe in this sense; that no man ought to eat
unto satiety at any time, even as poor folks are wont to do, who have not
wherewithal to content their crying appetites. Tract. Berachos de ben.
Bread is not to be handled but in a pure and holy manner; for according to
the Talmudist, a threefold honor must be given unto it. First, no vessel
ought to be set upon it. Secondly, no p^atter may be underpropped with it.
Thirdly, it is not lawful to throw it after any thing. Hence whosoever
contemnes and despises bread, shall fall into extreme poverty; Job 15. 23.
Tract. Cholin. cap. 8.
as it is written, He shall wander abroad for bread. The Talmudists record that
there is a certain Angel set a purpose to observe and take notice of them,
who by their negligence and incogitancy, suffer the bread ordained for their
nourishment, to fall upon the ground, and to be trodden under foot, whom for
their offense he brings to poverty. This Angels name is called Nabel, who upon
a time watching a man very narrowly, it was his whole desire to make him fall
into want and misery; for the accomplishment of which his end, he hoped that
some time he would leave his bread lying upon the earth, that so it might be
trod upon. It came to pass on a certain day, that the man sitting in the
field, did eat bread upon the green grass; which the Angel seeing,
confabulates with himself: Now at length I shall have my wish; for it is
impossible for him to gather up his crumbs which have fallen among the grass,
but he must of necessity leave them to be trodden under foot. The man when he
had done eating, takes a spade, cut away the grass together with the crumbs,
and casts them both into the sea; whence it came to pass that the fishes came
and eat them up, making a meal of them. Thus were the hopes of the Angel made
frustrate, and his voice was heard in the air, saying, woe unto me, fool that
I was, that this man has drawn me from my habitation all in vain, for I can
find no occasion to punish him.

In the mean time while any man is eating and chewing his meat in his mouth,
Tract. Taanis de jejunio.
he ought not to speak, according to the Talmud, lest the meat should chance
to slide some other way then into his throat, and be choked by the means
thereof: Although one sneese at the table, Orach. chajim number. 170.
yet he that eats ought not to say God bless you.

These wise and holy Rabbines write, that Elias the Prophet is always present
at the table, and that every man has one peculiar Angel waiting over him, who
being a daily attendant at the table, notes with what devotion he gives
thanks, how his words fall from him, and according to what square he frames
his behavior. If they who are set down to meat, commune of the things
contained in the Law of God, then the Angel does not depart from them, and
their meat becomes wholesome unto them; but if they spend the time in foolish
tales, or scurrilous relations, then he leaves the room, and an evil spirit
and unfortunate supplies his place; who, dinner and supper being ended, stirs
up strifes, brawls, blows and diseases; such men also are not satisfied though
they eat abundance; as it is written, The righteous eats to the satisfying
of his soul, Prove. 13. 25.
but the belly of the wicked shall want. And because such ministering spirits,
whether good or bad, are always present at the table, thence it comes to
pass, that no Jews will presume to cast the bones and finnes of fishes upon
one hand or other, or behind his back, lest he might touch and offend these
invisible creatures. They do it also to this end, that the dogs under the
table snatching at the bone, should catch them by the shinne. In the same kind
they never suffer that any knife should lie upon the back with the edge upward,
lest those angelical and spiritual creatures should be hurt thereby. Marrow
bones are not to be knocked upon a trencher, for hereby the evil and unclean
Spirits being roused up, think that the men are gone by the ears together,
and so coming into the room, annoy those they find present: Some smailpiece
of bread is therefore to be fitted for the receipt of the marrow, which is
quietly to be picked out of the bone.

In ancient times they were wont to wash between the eatings of flesh and fish;
which at this day they seldom practice, only a respect is to be had in the
opinion of the holy ones, that flesh and fish be not eaten together, but in a
due method one after the other; always provided he pick his teeth, eat a
piece of bread, take a draught of wine; hereby making a difference between the
flesh of fowls and fishes.

The knife which they use to cut flesh withal they account it as an heinous
offense to cut butter or cheese, or any thing made with milk, therewith. Milk
and flesh may not be set upon the Table at the same time neither is it
permitted, that the one should touch the other, con^erning which they have many
statutes and Ordinances; of which in another place.

Every religious man sitting at the table ought to meditate with himself, how
vain and tran^tory a thing man is; and how great a vanity meat and drink is;
Tract. de benedict. c. 1. p. 18
the least part of which remaining in the man, the greatest port on thereof is
cast out into the draught; as Martzutra di^putes upon those words of the
Prophet David, Psalm. 32. 6.
For this shall every one that is merciful, (...)
pray unto thee in a time when thou may be heard. The Jew rendering those
words, leg^^th metzo, In that time when the guts are in emptying. For it is the
Rabbines position, that he is an honest man, who when he eats and drinks,
thinks withal, that he must be forced to evacuate his belly of what it has
received, nature that cleanly huswife willing the same; and yet those two words
whereon they ground this their assertion, signify, in the time when he may be
found, that is, in a fitting time, and the fittest time to find the Lord, i^,
when trouble and necessity molest the just. But to return to the matter in
hand: The Jew entertaining and feeding upon the foresaid meditations, must
remember, that it is altogether requisite for him to lead a temperate life,
and mus^ take an especial care lest out of a luxurious prodigal humor, he
mispend his estate in sumptuous banquets, seeing a laudable frugality makes
many rich.

If in the time of eating, a cup of wine or beer be presented to any which is
better then ordinary, he that first drinks thereof, ought to say this prayer:
Blessed be thou O Lord our God, Lord of the whole world, who art merciful and
good unto me^.

Likewise for me^te^ which are not for the palate of every rusticke, nor for
every days service: Blessed art thou O Lord our God, who have created
diversity of meats. If there be any fruit upon the table which grows on a
tree; as grapes, figs, golden apples, olives, chestnuts, common apples, pears,
almonds, acrons, berries, or such like; then he says, Blessed art thou, O God,
who have created the fruit of the tree; but if only those which sprung out of
the earth, then he says, Blessed art thou O God, who have created the fruits
of the earth.

Over other dishes, that neither grow immediately out of the earth, nor yet
upon any tree, as cheese, butter, fish, flesh, milk and honey, he says,
Blessed be God by whose word was created whatsoever was created. If any take
an apple, or such like thing into his hand and bless it, yet before he eat
it, if it chance to fall unto the ground, then he says, Blessed be thou O
Name of the majesty of his Kingdom, from hence fo^th for evermore. And this he
does, because he had formerly prayed in vain, and that prayer did nothing
avail, having named the name of God to no purpose, which is an offense very
heinous. If the apple fall out of his hand before he have given thanks at all,
then he says, O Lord teach me thy statutes. If any have put any meat into
his mouth forgetting to give thanks, he must keep it in the side thereof,
until he have conferred a blessing thereupon; then let it descend into the
kitchen of his stomach. Berachos. c. 7. p. 50.
In the like manner if he have drunk wine or beer, he must redeem his
forgetfulness with an accelerated consecrating thanksgiving. If the meat in
this case be unchewed, he must take it out of his mouth again, and say a
prayer over it. Now, it is not lawful for any one, either to eat or drink,
without prayer and giving of thanks; so neither is it permitted that any enjoy
a sweet smell or ^avour, Orach. chajim number. 116.
without the exhibition of the due symptoms of a grateful mind to God the
Creator. If the smell in a sense-pleasing exhalation be evaporated from some
savoury wood at the no^e, frankincense, cynnamon, or such like; this pious
ejaculation must proceed out of the mouth, Blessed be thou O God, which have
infused a sweet savor into trees, bringing forth ^lowers. If the odours
proceed from fruits, as apples and musk nuts; then they ought of say, Blessed
be thou O God, who have given such a sweet savor to apples. Over balseme, or
sweet smelling oiles, and nose-alluring waters, they say, Blessed be thou, O
God, who createst sweet and well-smelling oils. Over herbs, Blessed be thou,
O God, who have created herbs, sending forth odours, like unto those of
spices. If any Jew go into an Apothecaries shop, or any other closet, where an
army of odours make a forcible entrance in at the two lea^ed door of his nose,
he presently disgorgeth this thanksgiving; Blessed be thou, O God, who have
created sweet smelling odours of all sorts; what more shall we say? This their
opinion they defend tooth and nail, and this they write: That nothing
whatsoever, wheresoever proffered unto us, can be lawfully enjoyed of us,
unless we first pour out a thanksgiving to God the Creator of it. Hence it
comes to pass, that an ungrateful man is called a robber, because he fears
not to spoil God of his goods and gifts, and that with great injustice. This
custom of theirs, truly is very laudable and no way to be discommended, so it
were used without superstition, and a mind intent upon their Maker: But they
alas, in this, as in all other their actions, have more respect to the outward
Ceremony, then the inward work, placing all the power and virtue in the bare
words, by the repetition of which, they think themselves well apayed.

They leave a piece of bread upon the table, Tract. Sanhedrin* c. 11.
which they account so religious a work, that he who neglects the performance
thereof, shall not inherit the smallest blessing; which the Talmudist proves
out of those words: lob 20. 21.
There shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man look for his
goods. Which is also commanded in the second of Chronicles; where it is
recorded. Since the people began to bring the offerings into the the house of
the Lord, we had enough to eat, and have left plenty, for the Lord has
blessed his people, and that which is left, is this great store. Rabbi Eliezer
says, that a whole loaf must not be left upon the table, lest the action
should seem to have some savor of Idolatry, as in ancient times, wherein as
the Prophet Isaiah says, Isaiah 65. 11.
that they forsook the Lord, forgot his holy mountain, prepared a table for
the troop of heaven, and furnished the drink offering unto that number. Now
the table on which this crust of bread is usually left, at this day is not
prepared for the same end and purpose, that it was in Esaies days; for they
when they had eaten and were full, then instead of giving of thanks, they
spread a table for the hoaste of heaven. But now adays this little piece of
bread is lest upon the table, that there may be always something thereupon,
which may be the subject of blessing; for otherwise the bread being all
devoured, no benediction keeps any further residence upon the table.

Before they say grace after meat, Minhagin p. 6.
every one takes his knife and puts it into his sheath. The impulsive cause, is
that which is read in the Gemarah, that when upon a certain time, some had
left their knives upon the table, he who was to say grace, when he came to
those words, Build again thy holy City Jerusalem, and that quickly in th^se
our days; Blessed be thou, O God, who do build again thy City Jerusalem;
and hereupon recalling into his remembrance the desolations of the City and
Temple, he became so sorrowful and melancholy, that he presently snatched one
of the knives, stabbing himself to the heart, made a way for the departure of
his soul.

It was a custom in the days of old, that before giving of thanks aftermeat,
the crumbs of bread should be swept from under the table with a besome, as also
to wash their hands and mouth at the table over a basin, not over the the top
or cover of a furnace, for this was ominous, and that for this reason: That
their thanksgiving and the name of God therein contained, might be pronounced
out of a pure and sanctified mouth; but in these our days (the occasion being
their sloth and idleness) they use not to practice the foresaid things, before
they arise from the table.

When the Jews have eaten their fills, Grace after meat.
then the good man of the house, some one of the Rabbines, or some guest or
stranger, if any such be present, says grace after meat. Their thanksgiving
is very prolixe and tedious; in which praising God, they thank him that he
gives meat and drink to them and all other his creatures, that he sustaines
them through his goodness, that he brought their fathers out of the land of of
Egypt, and gave them the land of Canaan for and inheritan^e, made a covenant
with them, and in giving them the law made a promise unto them, that he would
for ever keep and defend them. They pray and beseech him that he would have
mercy upon Sion, build again their holy Temple, and restore the Kingdom of
David in these their days; send them the Messiah and Eliah the Prophet to
deliver them out of the house of bondage; to preserve them against poverty,
that they may not be forced to beg or borrow of the Christians, who in their
repute are men merely flesh and blood, poor miserable mortals and
cast-awaies; who entertain no commerce with their Maker; who are subject to
the curse, and utterly rejected, who shall dye and perish like unto beasts;
when on the contrary, they are a holy nation, the ^lock and inheritance of God
himself. They further pray that God would vouchsafe to fill their hands with
all good things, and no^ suffer them to be ashamed, but to break the yoke of
the Christians from off their necks, and to bring them back into their own
land; to bestow a blessing upon the house where in they have feasted, and to
enrich the master and mistrisse thereof, with their children, and all their
posterity, etc. To which things, every one saying, Amen, with attentive minds
repeating the words of David, Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
O fear the Lord all ye his saints, for they that fear him lack nothing.
The lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that secke the Lord, shall want
no manner of thing that is good. This they say with their mouths so empty of
meat, that not one crum of bread or piece of flesh, sticks between their
teeth, and those words bind them thereunto: Let my mouth be filled with thy
praise and glory all the day long. Psalm. 71. 7. Orach. chajim. number. 184.
Prayers are always to be said in that place where dinner or supper is eaten.
Hence the Cabbalists write, that whosoever prays not in that place where any
banquet is celebrated, shall never come unto the grave, because they shall dye
such a death, which is never accompanied with any burial; as, hanging,
drowning, or such like. There was once a time when a certain godly and
religious Jew being in the field, refreshed and filled with wholesome meats,
forgot to give thanks. When he had been long absent from the foresaid place,
and at length remembering he had offended in not saying grace; having another in
his company, he said unto him, that he must of necessity return to that place
where he had formerly taken meat, because he had left a precious tool
there. Which when he had done, and prayed, and given thanks, God showed this
miracle.

He created a golden dove which the Jew had bestowed on him, as a reward of his
honesty and piety, in observing the precepts of the Talmud with so great
diligence. This was a miracle indeed in that place, but it had been none at all
in Paphlagonia, although the dove being thoroughly roasted, had s^own into his
mouth. Without all doubt this miracle was done near unto the Indian mines: For
who will be so stupid, as not to believe that this dove flying from thence, and
being wearied in slight, alighted here to rest her self.

The Chachamim and Doctors command, that a man should not make many banquets in
one week, lest he should so carry himself that every day thereof might be
accounted for an holy day; as some do, who mutually inviting one another, say,
to day you shall feast with me, so will I to morrow with you, etc. for the
whole week. Of such men the Cabbalists writing, say, that at such banquets, an
evil spirit called Sama^l, feasts himself, lib. ^eschis chochma c. 5. p. 6^.
together with others of his society, inciting the guests to many grand
offenses. Rabbi Levi in the behalf of Rabbi Abhen, in the name of Rabbi
Joshua, says, that the bellies of all those that keep such revellings, eating
and drinking, sporting and feasting every week, do burst asunder the third
after they are dead and laid in their graves, and the dung of their intrals is
poured upon their faces; as it is written, I will sprinkle the dung of your
feasts upon your faces. Which once come to pass, the Devils come and jeare
them, saying; now devour that which even now thou gormandisedst. And here I
will leave them, and proceed to a further declaration of their carriage, after
they rise from the table.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their evening prayer, and their manner of going to bed.
IN great Cities where the Jews have Schools or Synagogues, Minhag. p. 6.
Orach. chajim. number. 232.
the beater of the School so called, because by knocking at their doors, he
warns them to come to prayers.
who is the same with a Sexton in other places, going about unto their houses
about five a clock in the afternoon, knocks at their doors with an hammer,
thereby giving them notice that they ought to make have to evening prayer.

So soon as they come into the Synagogue, they set them down, and huddle up a
certain prayer, by reason of the first word therein, called Aschre (...) from
(...) rectum esse, for only the righteous man is blessed. Psalm. 145. 15. 1* 45.
1.
which in English signifies Blessedness, which is taken out of the eighty
fourth Psalm, and the first verse, which begins with this forementioned word;
The prayer runs thus. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, for they will
always be praising thee, Selah. Selah. This word according to Schendler, has
neither any regular form of a Noun, nor signification, but only serves for
music and melody, and as an enc^^uicke, makes up the harmony. A word without
sense; but the root of it, according to Rabbi David, is (...) which signifies
to exalt or elevate; so that Selah must be as much as a note of elevation and
listing up of the voice in such or such a place. Of this opinion is Mercerus;
and therefore it is not found in any place but in the Psalms, and Song of
Habbakkuk. Kimchi says, it lifts us to a consideration of things written.
In these words boasting of their diligence in frequenting the house of the
Lord) Happy are the people that be in such a case; yea blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God. I will magnify thee, O Lord my King; I will
praise thy name for ever and ever, etc. unto the end of the Psalm. This prayer
is in so great esteem among them, that they write, that whosoever says it
three times a day, shall have his portion in eternal life.

Then the Chanter rising up, sings half of that holy prayer, which they call
Kaddisch; after that the whole Synagogue joines in the repetition of the
eighteen laudatory petitions, of which we made mention in their morning prayer.
Which done and finished, the Chanter coming for his chair or pulpit, so
called by the Christians, falls down upon his knees before the Arc, and leanes
his head upon his left hand, which all the people do likewise, and bowing
their head toward the left side, and covering theirface, with their whole
heart (for the heart lies upon the left side, and so the head and heart are
joined in such a position) they in a most devout manner pronounce the words
following: O merciful and gracious GOD, Psalm. 6.
I have sinned in thy sight, but thou art full of mercy. Have mercy therefore
upon me, and receive my prayer, which proceeds out of unfeigned lips. Rebuke
me not O Lord, in thy fury, neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure. They
moreover repeat the sixth Psalm from the beginning to the end, with their
heads covered and bended toward the earth.

The Chanter falls down upon his knees before the Arc, Ios. 7. 6.
in imitation of Joshua; of whom it is written, That he rent his clothes, and
fell to the earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord, until the
eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

The reason why they cover their faces, is this: In ancient times when they had
a large and spacious Temple, they came thither to confess their sins, every
one stood from another by the space of four else, lest his neighbor should
hear his confession. In these days therefore they cover their faces for the
same end and purpose.

They lean their head upon their left hand, moved hereunto by that which is
written: His left hand is under my head, Can^. 2. 6.
and his right hand does embrace me. And moreover, because Isaac being about to
be sacrificed, lay upon his left side. But to return to the point in hand.
They suddenly rise up again, and their Chanter says, We are ignorant, O
Lord, what other thing to put in practice, but only to lift up our eyes unto
thee; as though they would say, We have worshipped thee O God, sitting and
standing being humble and lifted up, kneeling, and with anerected posture; not
knowing what more is re^^i^ed of us; yet we will once again lift up our eyes
unto thee.

Hitherto they only have sung their prayer called Kaddisch, which finished,
their evening prayer is ended.

Now indeed it were very laudable, if after this evening sacrifice of prayer
and thanksgiving, returning to their own houses, they did immediately fall to
supper; and that ended, again to assemble themselves into the Synagogue, for
the performance of their nocturnall devotions. But this practice is disapproved
by the Rabbines, as a thing very inconvenient, seeing many may be drunk, and
so forget their duty of prayer; therefore they have decreed, that presently
after the evening prayer be ended, that accustomed, to be said in the beginning
of the night, should also be finished. Yet not withstanding, they make some
small stay between Minhah and Ma^rib, that is to say, between their evening and
nightly prayers, to the end the one may be differenced from the other.

They have one quaint custom concerning the reconcilement of them that are at
strife one with another, and that in time of prayers. For if two be at ods, and
the one cannot bring the other with him into the Synagogue: That a reconcilemet
may be made, he steps* unto the book, out of which the Chanter sings or says
their common prayers, shuts it, and giving it a clap with his hand, says, I
conclude and put a period to this exercise; which is all one as if he should
say, I lock and seal up this order of praying, interdicting the same, until
an agreement be made between me and mine adversary. And from that time forward,
until his desire be accomplished, it is not lawful for them to say any more
prayers in the Synagogue. Thence it often falls out, that they retune home
without any praying; yet if the one party be wayward and refractory, there
happens many times a surcease and intermission of this duty of prayer, for some
whole days together.

Among many others, they have a prayer, that God would vouchsafe to deliver
them from the Christians* and bring them back again to their own land: This
prayer begins, Baruch Jehovah, O blessed God our Lord, help us, gather together
and deliver us from the Gentiles, that we professing thy holy Name, may make
our boast of thy praise. All the people which thou have created shall come and
worship thee, fall down before thee, and sing praises unto thy name. Our eyes
shall see it, our heart shall rejoice, our soul shall be joyful in thy
strength, when it shall be said in Sion* The Lord does reign, God is King, he
does rule, and shall bear rule for evermore; for thine is thy Kingdom, etc.

But alas poor silly Jew, in vain thou gapest after (with a greedy
expectation) this thy rejoicing, seeing he is come some sixteen hundred years
ago, whom thou as yet waits for, and expects to bring thee joy and
consolation.

Furthermore, they say one petition more, formerly mentioned in their morning
prayer; in which, they entreat God to revenge their cause against all the
Christians in general; but in a more especial manner, against their
Magistrates. If any lost a father in that year, he is tied all the year long
to say that prayer, called Kaddisch the less, by the mediation of which, his
father shall be delivered out of purgatory; of which (God willing) more
hereafter.

When they go out of the Synagogue, then must they repeat those sentences
formerly mentioned in the fifth Chapter. Tal. and R. Alphes. Tract Berachos. c.
1.
And in this place again they exercise many prolix disputes about that prayer,
beginning, Schema Israel, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God,
questioning the manner how, the time when, the place where this prayer should
be said and repeated. All which to avoid prolixity, I willingly omit.

At dinner and supper their carriage is the same. Orach. chajim number. 235.
When they go to bed, they must first draw off the left foot shoe, then the
right. They put off their shirts lying in bed, and covered with clothes, lest
the beams and walls of the house, should behold their unseemly nakedness. And
this is the cause that they never use to empty their bladder in their
bedchamber, their clothes being off, the very act becoming a shameful
disgrace unto them, and the consequent of such impudence, being a fearfullapse
into an extreme poverty; a consideration also had, that it is one of those
things God hates. Whosoever says that prayer, Schema Israel, Hear O Israel
etc. must endeavor instantly upon the finishing of the same, to fall asleep,
and take an especial care, that he speak nothing after it; as it is written,
Psalm. 4. 4.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still, Selah. If sleep will
not presently attempt to close up his eyes he must not cease to repeat the
said prayer until the approach thereof tongue-tye his devotions; for in^o
doing, his rest shall be sweet and delightful unto his wearied body, his
sleep comfortable and restorative.

The bed wherein the man and wife are to make their repose, is to be furnished
with clean sheets without spot or blemish; for it may come to pass, that the
man may meditate upon some thing which he has learned, and also committed to
memory by reading the Scriptures whilst it was yet day; yea both man and woman
may join in prayer to the Almighty, that they may beget children which will
be obedient to their command; and a heinous offense it is, to foster such
meditations, to pour out such prayers upon a defiled couch.

It is written in the Talmud, Tract Taa^is de jejunio.
that the Schoolars of Rabbi Sira, upon a time demanding the reason why he
lived so long, his answer was, that he never learned, named; nay, which is
more, did not at any time think of the Name of God, in an unclean place.
Their bed is commonly so situated, that their head lies toward the South,
their feet toward the north. The reason is, by this means it comes to pass,
they beget many male children, Tract. Berachos. c. 1.
as it is proved out of the Talmud, Rabbi Alphes, and the Psalms of David. The
North, as also the Northern wind, is called in the Hebrew Tzaphon (...) Tzaphon
from (...) abscondere to hide, because the northern pole is his hid from them
that dwell in Judea.
and it is written in the 17 Psalm, ^zphoneca temalle bitnam (...) which our
English renders, thou fillest their bellies with thy hid treasure: Yet however
the word primarily signifies the north wind number. ^40. (...). cap. 38.
which the Rabbines render, The North wind shall fill their bellies, and they
shall have children at their desire. The interpretation indeed is agreeable to
the words of the Text: And though the Rabbines know, that the sense or gloss
which they put upon them, is not proper and correspondent; yet it is
doctor-like in their esteem, to put such subtle interpretations upon the
several parcels of holy writ. And now because this demonstration was
deprehended to be of small force; therefore a philosophical Rabbine, or a
Rabbinicall Philosopher, call him what you please, in his book entitled
Reschis chochma^, The beginning of wisdom, has otherwise expounded it; which
exposition it is not needful here to enroll.

Moreover, the Jews have bedchamber Ethics; The first and chie^e point
handled therein, is, how the man ought to behave himself toward his wife when
they are in bed together, which is there most subtly disputed and handled, as
they are persuaded. Which for the reverence I bear to a chaste and circumcised
ear, I will neither say it is laudable, nor shall my pen expose it to the
offense of chaste, or the temptation of loose livers. If any lustful monkey
have some itching desire to read such baudy morals, let him peruse the book
called Orach Chajim. As for me, my modesty shall bridle it, and leaving the Jew
in the bed with his wife, suffering him to take his rest, we will proceed to a
further narration of their sanctity and holiness.

CHAP. IX.
How the Jews do cease from their labors every Monday and Thursday.
IT is registered in the Talmud, Tract. Rabhae Kama. cap. 7.
as also in the writings of Rabbi Alphes, that Ezra the Prophet did command the
Jews in that time when they were in captivity at Babylon, to observe these ten
things.

First, that upon the Sabbath day;

Secondly, that upon every Monday and Thursday in every week they should
repair to the Synagogue, and read some certain Chapters or Sections out of
the book of the law, and that publicly, some peculiar Ceremonies, and a more
then vulgar holiness being conjoined with the practice of the same.

Thirdly, that upon every Monday and Tuesday they should sit in judgment,
deciding the causes betwixt man and man, that according to the rule of justice,
every one may have his own.

Fourthly, that upon Thursday they should wash all unclean clothes and
vessels, sweep the house, and make every corner thereof very handsome, in
honor of the holy Sabbath.

Fifthly, that every Thursday the men should eat leekes.

Sixthly that the women rising early in the morning, should bake their bread,
to the end that they may have in readiness a morsel to relieve the poor when
he comes to their door.

Seventhly, that the women should wear a veil or mask for modesties sake.

Eighthly, that the women entering into the bath, ought to comb their hair in
an accurate manner, even so that one hair may be parted from another.

Ninthly, that it shall be lawful for all Chapmen and Merchants traveling
from Fair to Fair to sell their wares; that by this means the women may
furnish themselves with all things of fragrant smell, and gay attire, both for
the better celebration of the Sabbath, and for the pleasing of their husbands.

Lastly, that those who were troubled in the night time with the efflux of seed
out of their genitals, and so became unclean, should purge themselves by
washing.

Hence it appears, that although the Prophets who were before Ezra's time, did
institute and ordain, that the people should every Sabbath day, be taught out
of the Law of Moses; yet was it meet that Ezra (to in^ite and prick Israel
forwards to a higher degree of godliness) should enact it for a perpetual
decree, that three days, in any week, should not pass but in one of them
some thing should be rehearsed out of the Law of Moses, by which the people
being auditors, might receive instruction. This Edict of Ezra, his learned
successors did teach and expound, and also ratify and confirm out of those
words in Exodus, Exodus 15. 22.
They went out into the wilderness of Sur, and they went three days and found
no water. By water in this place, understanding the Law, because it is called
by the name of water by the Prophet, Isaiah 55. 1.
Hoe every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price; that is to say, Come ye unto the Law and word of God. Without
which when they had walked three days in the desert, they divided the week in
such a manner, that once in three days they ought always to hear and learn
somewhat out of the law. This custom is also practiced upon Mundayes and
Thursdayes in remembrance of Moses, who upon Thursdaies went up into Mount
Sinai, brought from thence the two Tables of the Law made of Cedar; entreated a
pardon for the sin of the Jews in making the golden calfe; and upon Monday
came down from the Mount again. Hereupon also those which are most
puritanically straight-laced among the Jews at this day use to fast upon
Mundayes and Fridayes; as that Pharisee did in the time of our Savior,
boasting thereof in this supercilious manner, I give thee thanks O God, that I
am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor as this
Publican; I fast twice a week, and pay tithes of all that I have.

Thirdly, it is necessary that upon these days a singular care be had of
hearing and meditating the word of God, in respect that they are days
appointed for judicature. Hence also it is, that the half of them to this very
day are festival among the Jews: For in the mornings of them, they repair
very timely unto the Synagogue, where besides their ordinary prayers, they sing
or say many other which are extant in their Minhagin, and their manuals of
prayer. Moreover, they are wont to boast in a very swaggering style of their
taking out and putting in the book of the Law into the Arc; of which more
anon.

Concerning their usual prayers upon these days, they add one more then
ordinary to those in the morning, beginning, Vehu racham, to which they
attribute great virtue and strange operations; hidden ones surely, for they
have not made their appearance for one thousand six hundred and odd years.
This they use to say standing, and that with great devotion. There is a
certain story very pat to this purpose. When the Jews were banished out of
Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian the Roman Emperor: The Emperor commanded that
three ships filled with Jews, should be set to float upon the sea, having
neither mast nor sails. This his command being put in execution* the ships
being tossed with a most violent tempest, were parted asunder, and cast upon the
shore of three diverse countries; the names whereof, were Lovanda, Arlado, and
Burdeli, which are now worn out of remembrance. All the Jews in one of those
ships, were very courteously entertained by the Lord of that country in which
they landed, who in a most bountiful manner gave them land to till, and
Vineyards. After his death, there arose another King, who handled and vexed the
Jews most inhumanely, even as Pharaoh did their Ancestors, saying unto them,
that he would try whether they were true Jews or not after the same manner
that Nebuchadnezzar tried Hananias, Misael, and Azarias, and if you can walk
without hurt in the middle of the fiery furnace, as they did, then will I
confess that you are true Jews indeed. To whom the Jews made answer,
entreating him that he would do unto them, as Nebuchadnezzar did to the three
former; which was, to grant them three days respite, that they might pray unto
God to deliver them. Which when he had granted, two brothers called Joseph and
Benjamin, and their Cousen Samuel, came together to consult what was best to be
done, who determined neither to eat or drink for three days together. Which
while they put in practice, every one having a several prayer, which they
joined in one, and repeated it without intermission night and day, until their
allotted time was ended. In the morning of the third day, one of them said he
had dreamed that he heard one read a verse out of the Bible, in which Knight was
twice, and Lo three times reiterated; but what it meant, or where it was, he
was altogether ignorant. Then answered one of the other two, and said, this
verse will be a help and comfort unto thee; for hereby is signified, that God
will send thee help from heaven; and it is written in the forty third chapter
of Isaiah, and the second verse, the words whereof are these; K^, when thou
passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they
shall Lo, not overflow thee. Ki, when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
Lo, not be burnt, Lo neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Upon the third
day a huge fire was provided early in the morning, an immense number of people
flocking to the execution, who were very desirous to be present at the burning.
The congregation being complete, these three men did commend their bodies to
the mercy of the fire singing and praying until all the wood being consumed,
they came out of the fire without the least touch thereof.

This miracle the foresaid men divulged in what place soever they came;
whereupon it was ordained and commanded that this prayer should be said every
Monday and Thursday morning in every Synagogue, and place of public prayer;
which the Jews observe and keep unto this very day, hoping, that by the power
of this prayer, they shall be delivered from their long continued captivity,
and tedious exile. But alas, their hopes will be frustrate, so long as they
despise and set at naught the Savior of their souls. Christ Jesus, and
persevere in their horrible superstition. This Fable is here related more at
large, then it is by Antonius Margarita out of the book Colbo.

The prayer beginning Vehu racham, so much esteemed of them, is written in the
form following, He is merciful, forgiving iniquity, and not destroying the
sinner. He oftentimes turns his anger from us, and suffers not his fury to
arise. O God I beseech thee take not thy mercy from me, let thy meekness and
truth always preserve me. Help us O God, our God, and gather us from among the
Gentiles, etc. In brief, the sum of this prayer is this: They beg of God that
he would vouchsafe to pardon their sins, take pity upon the desolations of
their City and Temple, to gather them from the four corners of the earth, and
never suffer his inheritance to be ashamed. In this prayer they are also
mindful of us Christians, against whom they thus petition, O God, how long
shall thy strength remain in captivity; and thy beauty in thy enemies hand? O
Lord God, stir up thy strength, and revenge us upon all our enemies, so shall
their might be turned into weakness, and they shall be ashamed and perish.
These last words are in many Copies left out, by reason of an injunction laid
upon the Printers by the Christian Magistrate, an empty space being left, that
they may either write them, or e^se inquire what is wanting. These things thus
finished, they fall the second time upon their faces, and saying many other
prayers (as was declared in the former Chapter;) they beseech God that he
would remove his anger far from them, and not deliver them into the hands of
their enemies, but being mindful of the Covenant that he made with their
fathers, would make their seed like unto the stars of Heaven for multitude.

After that they have for such a space, either kneeling or standing poured out
their souls in prayer unto God; then follows the narration of that pomp and
state which they exhibit to the book of the Law; they read weekly Lectures
out of it, according as they were enjoined by Ezra the scribe: The manner
follows. In every Synagogue they have the book of the Law, to wit, the
Pentateuch, written in long schroles of parchment sewed together; at the ends
thereof are fastened certain pieces of wood, for the safer keeping, and more
easy carriage of the book of the Law.

This book is kept in a certain Arc or Chest, standing continually against
some wall of the Synagogue. Before the Ark is a little door, and before it a
hanging made by the Art of the embroiderer. This is of diverse sorts, and the
more solemnn the festival is, the richer are the hangings: Those are had in
greatest esteem with them, whose outside is adorned and wrought with the
shapes of diverse birds; for such were always an ornament upon the old Arc of
the Covenant.

The book is always wrapped up in a linen cloth; in which are characterised
some Hebrew words, and diverse names. That which is the most outward of all, is
oftentimes a linen cloth much like unto a little coat or cloak made of silk,
but sometimes of puregold, upon which they hang some silver plates fastened to a
golden chain, in which is written* Kether thorah, that is to say, the crown
of the Law; or Kodesch adonai, holiness to the Lord. Then the sexton goes
about and cries, who will buy Gelilah etz chajim? which is a certain kind of
office, which any supplying, is licenced to toss over the book of the Law by
a serious revisall: Which office is granted unto him who will give the most
money for it, which is put into the poor man's box, and chested up for their
relief.

Those pieces of wood, by the help whereof the book of the Law is carried up
and down, are called by them etz chaijm the wood of life; Pro. 3. 18.
to which that sentence of Solomon was Godfather; Wisdom is the tree of life
to them that lay hold on it. Gelilah signifies a folding, intimating what
things may be observed in the folding and unfolding of the book. Orach. chajim
number 135.


When the Chanter takes this holy book out of the Arc, then he goes into the
pulpit, where he reads out of the same, these words following. Number. 10. ^5:
It came to pass, when the A^ke was set forth, that Moses said, Rise up, O
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee
before thee. Again, Many people shall go and say, Isaiah 2. 3.
come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths, for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. The Chanter when he begins to sing, laying the book upon his arm,
Psalm. 34. 3.
says, O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together, To
which the whole congregation makes this answer; Psalm. 99. 5,9.
O magnify the Lord our God, and fall down before his foot stool, for he is
holy. O magnify the Lord our God, and worship him upon his holy hill; for the
Lord our God is holy. Directly above that four square structure, is placed a
certain table covered with a silken Carpet, upon which the Chasan or Chanter
lays down the book of the Law: Then comes he who is to purchase the Office of
Gelilah with his money, taking away and devesting the book, of its formerly in
wrapping garments; which finished, the Chasan, and the other who was to buy his
place, calling one out of the whole congregation, and commanding his personal
appearance in his fathers name, and his own; he approaching the presence, seats
himself in the middle, kisses the book, not upon the bare leaves of the same,
for this were an heinous offense, but through the swaddling cloutes thereof; and
grasping the cover thereof, says with a loud voice; praise the Lord etc.
Blessed be thou O God, who have chosen us unto thy self before all other
nations of the earth, and have given us thy Law. Blessed be thou O God the Law
giver. Now the Jew persuades himself that his lot is fallen unto him in a fair
ground, seeing he has seen and handled the tree of life, and therefore becomes
blessed above all other people.

In the next place the minister reads a chapter or section out of the Bible
which ended, he who was formerly summoned to appear, takes the book the second
time and kisseth it, saying, Blessed be thou O God who have given us the very
law, and implanted unto us eternal life. Blessed be thou the Lawgiver. After
this, two more are successively called, whose behavior is squared according to
the platform of the formers carriage. He that came first in, goes out by
another door then that which afforded him entrance. After these another is
cited, who ought to have a well brawned arm; for he must lift up the book at
arms end, and turning round, must expose it to the view of every spectator,
the whole congregation in the mean season, bellowing ou^, This is the law which
Moses gave to the Israelites. This Office is named Hagbahah, and is sold to him
for money, who bids most. While the match is in making, those brawling scolds,
the women, press into the Synagogue with a great deal of quarrelling and much
opposition, every one striving to gain a place in some window or other, where
they may be blessed with the sight of such an holy book, thinking to reap
some pleasure by the sole beholding of it, seeing their lips cannot be allowed
to second their husbands in billing of it.

The women have a peculiar Synagogue of their own, differenced from that of
their husbands, with latticed and cross-barred windows: Concerning which, much
is spoken in the Talmud, Tract. Sucha. de Sab. constru. cap. ult. Zach. 12. 12,
13
and an evident demonstration there of is given by the Prophet Zachary, in
these words; The land shall mourn, every family apart, the family of the house
of David apart, and their wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart,
and their wives apart: The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives
apart: The family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart: All the families that
remain, every family apart, and their wives apart. Whence they conclude, that
the men and women are not to come into the same Sinagogue in the time of divine
service; and that for modesty and honesties sake, seeing not only women, but
men likewise, are apt and inclineable to fall into diverse lustful cogitations,
when they are in the same place together. If the Jew who reads the Law, chance
to stumble and let the book fall out of his hand, he is bound to fast, and all
the rest also for a long time together, seeing this accident presageth some
great calamity to come upon them.

At length come they who have purchased the Gelilah, and etz chajim, the one of
them touching the wooden cover of the book, folding it up, (great experience
is required in this case) the other administers the linen clothes, in which it
ought to be inwrapped, and its silver-twisted coat involving all the rest.

Then comes every one in the Synagogue, both young and old, and kisses the
book, touching it only with two fingers, with which they afterward handle
their face; which action relishing of a supreme sanctity, is held for a
sovereign medicine against blindness, and all diseases incident to the eye.

While the book is carried to the Arc, the Chanter sings, praise the name of
the Lord; for the name of this our God, is of great power and strength. The
congregation answers and says; His praise is above heaven and earth; he has
exalted the horn of his peculiar people, to the praise of all his saints: Yea,
the Israelites being a folk most near unto him, praise ye the Lord. When the
book is laid in the Arc, the people say or sing those words of Moses, used by
him when the Arc rested. Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel.
Then they conclude all, saying (as was formerly noted) at their going out of
the Synagogue, O Lord, lead me in thy justice, because of mine enemies, make my
way plain before thy face. The Lord shall keep my going out, and coming in,
from this time forth for evermore. These words they repeat also when they go
out of doors, either to take a journey, or to do any other business.

CHAP. X.
The preparation of the Jews to the Sabbath, and how they begin the same.
IT is written in the second book of Moses, Exodus 16. 22.
That upon the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread; Verse 23.
and a little after, this is that which the Lord has said, To morrow is the
rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, bake that which you will bake to day,
and sees that ye will sees, and that which remains over, lay up for you to
be kept until the morning. These words force the Jews to this conclusion,
that it is their duty, and Gods command too, that they should provide all
things necessary, pertaining to the honorable celebration of the Sabbath;
especially dainty and delicate meats, which they ought to boil or bake
betimes upon the Friday morning, whereon they may feed upon the Sabbath, and
with more facility, rest from their labors. The women are in a more particular
manner enjoined to prepare great store of palate pleasing wafers; who while
they are kneading and making ready the dough, they are very ceremonial
therein, leaving the lump whole. If the bignesel cause a necessity of division,
which is often seen in great families, then the one part thereof is covered
with a cloth, that it may not be ashamed, and put an open scandal by the other
part, in that it is provided in the last place, for the Sabbaths repast.

They honor the Sabbath with three banquets, all served in much pomp. The
first whereof they celebrate upon Friday at night, when the Sabbath begins. The
second upon the day it selse about twelve of the clock. The third and last upon
the evening of the same. These to be the due times, they prove out of those
words of Moses, Exodus 16. 26.
Eat that to day, for to day it is a Sabbath unto the Lord; to day ye shall
not find it in the field. From the word to day, thrice repeated, the Rabbines
conclude, that Moses in this place does signif^e, that manna ought to be eaten
at three several times upon the Sabbath, orderly succeeding one another. This
institution according to the same Doctors, in their Dutch Minhagin, is
profitable in another respect: That is, if only one banquet should be provided,
every one would with such gredinesse feed thereupon, that his guts should be
sufficiently stuffed for the rest of the ensuing time, even until the end of the
Sabbath. But now, seeing that every man knows that one banquet being ended,
two more are to succeed, his stomach has no such edge to the first, as
otherwise it had, but living in a very temperate manner he eats his meat with
pleasure, conscious of a second and third return to the table. What other
Rites they practice shall hereafter be manifested.

In the time of preparation, no man must think it a thing unseemly, or
derogating from his birth or riches, to work with his own hands, that the
preparation to the Sabbath, may be complete. And although some one man there
were, who had an hundred thousand men and maids, yet ought not to be a mere
overseer of their labors, but a partaker, and that in honor of the Sabbath.
According to that which is recorded in the Talmud, that the good and honest man
Rabbe Chasda, would fall a chopping pot-herbes: Those learned men, Rabba, and
Rabbi Joseph, would cleave wood: Rabbi Ezra, would make the fire; Rabbi Nachman
would sweep the house, and would moreover provide all manner of instruments
necessary for the table. Meats either boiled or roasted are kept hot in an
oven, because they are better hot then cold. The tablestands covered all the
day and night long, which has a mystical signification; as hereafter shall
be declared.

Furthermore, they wash their heads, and use the help of a barber if need
require. The women ought to attire their heads, and plate their hair, to go
into some hot bath, or else to wash their hands in hot water. Upon every Friday
they pare their nails, and in a very superstitious fashion, beginning at the
fourth finger of the left hand, and so holding on to the second, then to the
fifth, then to the third, and last of all to the thumb; whence it comes to
pass, that they cut not their nails in order, but still over-skip some finger
or other. In cutting those of the right hand, they begin with the second
finger, and so hold on to the fourth. He that throws his nails, being cut
off, upon the ground, that they may be trodden under foot of men, is a wicked
man, and a great sinner. For Satan has power over the nails, and wizards by
the help of them, exercise their enchantments; and if any chance to tread upon
them, some great danger or other hangs over his head. On the contrary,
whosoever digs and buries them in the earth, he is accounted for an honest
righteous man. If he cast them into the fire, then is he a holy and honorable
man in esteem. And the truth of every particular, they evidently demonstrate
in their own opinion, out of the words formerly alleged; the sum of which
were, that upon the sixth day, they should prepare themselves. Moreover, it is
necessarily required, that every one should sharp his knife, use the whetstone,
and edge him acutely, Job 5 24, 25.
which they prove by those words; Thou shall know that thy tabernacle shall be
in peace, thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin. Thou shall know
also that thy seed shall be great, and thy offspring as the grass of the
earth. Out of which saying the Jewish Doctors have drawn this conclusion; that
wheresoever is a blunt knife, and nothing cunning in cutting there is no peace
at the table, and the whole house is out of square.

In the next place they put on their holiday clothes, Orach. chajim number. 262.
every one dressing himself in the most minicall fashion, his plodding
curiosity can invent. They of the richer sort, have garments only appropriated
to the day, not kissing their corpse upon any other, and their reason for the
same is very plausible; for the Rabbines call the Sabbath a Queen: Now if any
being to make his appearance before this Queen, should not put on some
princely garments, such as in other place; they use to wear in the presence of
a King, then this Queen should be much scandalized thereby.

They cover the table with fine and clean linen, not neglecting the provision
of napkins, trenchers, cups, cushions, stools, and other appurtenances, that
all things may be in a readiness to entertain this renowned Queen, the
Sabbath, in a fit and decent manner.

In the days of old, Orach. chajim. number. 256.
warning to a due preparation was wont to be given by the sound of an horn or
trumpet. But at this day the Sexton or keeper of the Synagogue, goes about to
every house, making proclamation that every man should cease from labor, and
prepare himself to a comely and honorable welcomming of the holy Sabbath,
which comes to his house much like to some beautiful spouse. Therefore
eventide once come, they rest from all domestique employments, and early give
the Sabbath a laudable beginning, adding nothing of the week thereunto; but
going into the Synagogue, are conversant in prayer, in the singing of psalms
and hymns and spiritual songs, according to their wonted manner.

While the day takes it leave with a ruddy countenance, blushing that the night
should displace it, and the splendent rays of the Sun only gild the tops of
trees and mountains, the women light their sabbaticall tapers.

The lamps they use, are made of Copper, and they hang them up in the dining
room, whose matches* so soon as they begin to burn, the mistrisse of the house
stretching out her hands, toward the lights, says, Blessed be thou, O God,
our God King of the world, who have sanctified us by thy commandments, and
commanded us to light the lamps appointed for the celebration of the Sabbath.
When the season is cloudy, the hens supply the place of a clock unto the woman.
For they flying up to take their lodging, are a certain sign, that the time
wherein the Sabbath ought to begin, draws near. If there be no hens in the
Town, then the Crow and Nightingale taking betimes their place of rest give
her notice of the approach. Women are enjoined the performance of this office,
rather then men; for two reasons which are urged by the Rabbines. The first is,
because so soon as our old Grandam Eve had perceived that she by eating of the
forbidden fruit was liable to dye the death, she also desired that good Adam
should taste of the same; saying, if I must dye, indeed it is fit and
convenient that thou should dye with me. Hereupon being very importunate with
him to eat, which he refusing, she breaks a club from off the tree, never
ceasing therewith, to bang his hide, until she forced him whether he would or
not, to take the apple and eat it, Genesis 3. 12.
as the Text says, She gave me of the tree, and I did eat, that is to say,
she gave me many sound blows with her bastinado which she broke from the
tree, and so caused me to eat. This gloss is in Orach chajim, and the second
Chapter.

Thus the mad fool Adam suffered his wife to wear the breeches to beat and
seduce him, and by this means transgressing the Lords commandment, brought
death upon him, and all his posterity.

Moreover, the Sun shall shine in the same degree of a glorious luster to the
immortal eyes of the just, in the world to come, that shined unto Eve before
she had sinned; for so soon as she had committed sin, the Sun changed his
primitive light, clouding it in obscurity, so that Eves black offense became a
veil unto that glorious light of the whole universe.

A second reason for which the women are to light lamps in their houses, is,
because they are always resident at home; but their husbands are often abroad,
in^umbred with diverse affairs. Furthermore it is written, Exodus 27. 20.
Thou shall command the children of Israel, that they bring the pure o^le olive
beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always. The trifling
Rabbines here make a question, Brand ^spieg. cap. 37.
why Moses writ the Hebrew word, Tetzaveh, signifying, thou shall command with
the letter Thau, (...)
when Tzade would have been sufficient? The answer is, that Moses would hereby
show it to be the duty of the women to light the lamps; (...)
for the word, Naschim, signifying women, in number makes four hundred and so
many the letter Thau. Of this word more hereafter
(truly an excellent proof) Therefore seeing the women put out the light of
life which was in the world, in recompense thereof, she is bound in the
evening of every Sabbath and Festival, to light the lamps, and that in sign
of her repentance, as willing to revive and re-enlighten the soul of man,
which compared to the lamp by the wisest of men, when he says, Prove. 20. 27.
The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of
the belly.

The Jewish Doctors have likewise written, that if any woman light those lamps
with a devout mind, attending well what she is about, her work is as worthy
to be had in honor, as if she had lighted that golden lamp which was once in
the holy Temple at Jerusalem.

It is also recorded in the Talmud, that the women dye in childbed for a
threefold sin and offense. First, for their forgetfulness to take the lump
This lump in old time, was made with oil; concerning which you may read, Exodus
29. 23. (...)
of leaven out of the tub, which was provided for the making of bread against
the Sabbath. Secondly, for not lighting the lamps upon the Sabbath. Lastly,
for having no care of their monthly flowers.

These three things are proved after a Cabbalisticall manner, to produce such
an effect, by considering the word Chavah. The first letter Cheth signifies
Challah, which being interpreted, is as much as sickness. The second letter
Vau notes Veseth, a word only in use among the Rabbines, signifying the
menstruous flux of women's flowers. The third letter, H^, notes Hadalkah, (...)
which signifies a burning or inflammation. All which those women that perform,
and diligently put in execution, the foresaid commandments do easily escape.

The lamps ought to be two in number, or more, according to the quality and
condition of the house, wherein they are lighted. These represent all the
members of man's body, as well of the male as female. For the man has two
hundred forty eight, but the woman two hundred fifty two, according to the
Jewish anatomy. These two numbers being conjoined, make up five hundred, and so
many contains the Hebrew word, Ner, which signifies a lamp, being twice
written, once for the man, and once for the woman. The words, Ner, Ner,
signify lamps, not Narra, fools, and the reason is, because the lamp of
life shall once more be kindled both in man and woman.

When the lamps begin to burn, she stretches forth both her hands toward
them, to this end, that her action may be as an ingenious confession, that she
is obnoxious to a crime, in that she should have prayed before the lighting of
the lamps* but because she could not do it unless she would have spent her
breath to no purpose, therefore she spreads forth her hands before the lamps,
hindering their lighting to glent in her eyes, lest also the lamps giving but
as yet a glimmering splendour, should seem not much superior to them, which
send out none at all: So much for the lamps. Of what matter their matches are
made, and with what oil they are to be fed, here to declare would be a task
too tedious. He that desires to know, let him read that tract in the Talmud,
concerning the Sabbath, where these two things are sufficiently handled: We
proceed.

That they begin the Sabbath betimes, the reason is, the pity and commiseration
they have toward the souls which are tormented either in hell or purgatory,
but have always a release in the time of the Sabbath for the celebration
thereof. For so soon as they are entered the Synagogue, and sung that prayer,
beginning, Berachu, in a soul ravishing delightful, and harmonicall note,
then hell breaks loose, and the gates of purgatory fly open, the souls in
both leap out into the earth, and run into every river, fountain, or any
other water they can come by, desiring for a time to cool their scorched
substance; and this is the cause why the Rabbines most severely commanded, that
none should dare to draw any well dry upon the Sabbath day, lest these poor
and miserable souls should be utterly destitute of such a refreshing; as we
may read in their Minhagin. Page 14.


In the mean time that they are a praying in the Synagogue, there come two
Angels, the one good, the other evil, who standing before the door of the
Synagogue, and hearing any pray diligently, Genesis 2.
and also read attentively that Scripture, Thus were the heavens and earth
finished and all the host of them; and what follows concerning the
sanctifying of the Sabbath: They bring him to his own home, and putting their
hands upon his head, Isaiah 6. 7.
say, Lo, this coal has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away,
and thy sin purged.

Rabbi Jose says in the name of Rabbi Juda, that these two Angels bring every
man to his home when he returns from the Synagogue. And if these Angels
entering the house of any Jew, find the Sabbath lamps burn clear, the table
covered and furnished with all necessaries, the bed neatly made; then says the
good Angel, It is the pleasure of God Almighty, that these things should be in
the same state, the next Sabbath day, that I have now found them in; To which
the evil Angel is forced to say, Amen. But if they find all things out of
order then the evil Angel says, these things shall be in the same manner,
the next Sabbath, to which the good Angel sore against his will, must say Amen
likewise.

When they are departed the Synagogue, and every man returned to his own
house, Exodus 20. 8. Minhag. p. 9.
then one saying unto another, God send you an happy Sabbath, they instantly
fall aboard; for it is written, Orach. chajim. number. 269.
Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it; which last word is in the Hebrew,
lekadescho; by reason of which they give this gloss upon the Text. So soon as
the Sabbath is begun, remember that thou also have thy Kaddasch in readiness;
that is to say, remember solemnly to imitate the same with a cupfull of wine.
Hence it comes to pass, that in many Synagogues, presently after the ending of
evening prayer, a bowl of wine is ready prepared, because some strangers or
poor people which have no wine at home, may be there present. This being
consecrated, is reached forth unto them unto the end, that may celebrate the
beginning of the Sabbath in that very place. Whosoever he be in the Synagogue
that blesses the wine, he tastes it not, but gives it to some young boy to
drink thereof; for he is not accustomed to drink of the same, unless it be
at home at his own table, where also he usually consecrates the same. ^rach.
chajim number. 273.


Instantly then upon their return, they sit down to table, upon which ought
to be salt, a bowl of wine, and two loaves, covered with a diapernapkin. Then
the master of the family takes a bowl full of wine, and beginning the Sabbath
with blessing it, says, I am Haschischi, vaie cu^^a haschamaijm. The four
first letters of these words, (...)
note unto us that ever blessed name of God, JeHoVaH, the name expressing his
eternal essence. And by reason of this mystery, the Rabbines have added the
two former words, being the last of the first Chapter of Genesis, unto the two
latter, being the first of the second, and by reason hereof, they rise up at
the repetition of them, giving a due reverence to the name of God. The words
interpreted, run thus: Genesis 2. 1. 2, 3.
The sixth day the heaven and earth were finished, and all the host of them.
And on the seventh day, God ended his work which he had made. And he rested on
the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the
seventh day and sanctified it; because in it he had rested from all his work
which he had made. Here in the mean time he inserts an admonition, saying, O my
Lords you Rabbines, have regard unto the prayer that every one in particular
may in the same manner be excused thereby, as if he had said it himself, and
so he holds on to pray and say, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the
world, who have created the fruit of the vine. Blessed be thou O Lord our God,
King of the world, who have sactified us by thy commandments, and given us
thine holy Sabbath, and out of thy love and good will toward us, have left it
as hereditary unto us, in memory of thy works in the creation. For it is the
beginning of the gathering together of thy Saints, and the memorial of our
departure out of Egypt. Thou have chosen and sanctified us out of all other
people, and have left us the Sabbath of thy holiness, as a legacy of thy love
and good will toward us. Blessled be thou O God, who sanctifyest the Sabbath.
In the next place he drinks some of the wine, and reaches it to the the rest,
that they may do as he has done. Then he takes the napkin from over the
bread, and taking the two loaves unto him, cuts them not before he has said
grace, contrary to that which he does upon the days of the week, but
presently says. By your leave my Masters and Rabbines; blessing the bread in
this form: Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the world, which brings
bread out of the earth. After this he breaks a piece of bread and eats,
imparting also to every one at the table a morsel, which is of greater size
then ordinary, in honor of the Sabbath, upon it is not lawful for any to be
niggardly, then they eat whatsoever God has sent.

While that the cup is in blessing, every one casts a delightful eye upon the
Sabbath-lamps, Orach. chajim. number. 274. Tract de Sab. c. 15. p 113.
because that the Rabbines write, that when any one travels upon the days of
the week, the five hundred part of his sight departs from him; for the
regaining of which, the beholding of these lamps, in that time while the wine
is consecrated, is a sovereign medicine. For the Hebrew word Ner, signifying a
light, being doubled, make in number fifty.

They cover the bread, that it may not behold its own shame; the wine being
present, which is in the first place sanctified for the use of the Sabbath;
notwithstanding that the Scripture gives the bread the place, Deuteronomy. 8. 8.
when it says, I will bring thee into a land of wheat and barley, of vines
and figge-trees. For here wheat is first named, which is the material of
bread; yet nevertheless it is the last of all to be consecrated for the use of
the Sabbath, which would be a great shame unto it if it should stand bare.
Others affirm the bread to be covered in remembrance of the Manna: For first of
all a certain dew fell in the desert, after that, the Manna, and then another
dew, between which two it lay hid as between two napkins: And so the bread upon
the Jews table lies between two linen clothes. Hence it is that the women
make minced pies, or boil some other thing like unto it, which they eat
instead of Manna; for their minced pie has a certain lump for its bottom,
and in the middle it is stuffed with flesh, above also it has a certain cover
made like unto Manna. The reason why they take two loaves, is in remembrance of
the Manna, whereof they gathered in times past, two measures full upon every
Friday, according to that which is written: And it came to pass that on the
sixth day, Exodus 16. 22.
they gathered twice as much bread.

Briefly, Min. page. 11.
of all things to be done by us in this world, an especial care is to be had
of our bodies upon the Sabbath day: which thing the holy Scripture so often
commands us, saying, Thou shall call the Sabbath, Isaiah 59. 13.
Oneg, a delight, because we ought to restrhaine our selves from no sort of
pleasure upon the Sabbath day. In the same manner speaks the holy Scrpture
concerning festivals: Thou shall rejoice in thy feasts, Deuteronomy. 16. 14.
thou and thy son, etc. that all our actions may tend to Gods glory. Eat and
drink therefore, and be good unto thy self, and remember to do it in honor
to the Sabbath: Yet not thinking that he may eat many delicates upon the
Friday, for the filling of his paunch, especially if he be poor and cannot away
with the cost; for this should rather have a place in the Catalogue of sins,
then good works; seeing he should also think upon the Sabbath day, that he
should have no such cheer upon Sunday, and so become sorrowful at that time,
when he ought the most of all to be merry.

All this also is summarily comprehended in a little book called Sepher hajirah,
teaching us how a Jew ought to lead his life in the fear of the Lord; and is
delivered by the Jews themselves in the following verses.

Against the Sabbath, ready thou shall be
To leave all work that does belong to thee.
Thy self for Sabbath do prepare; its gain,
Though many maids and servants thou maintain.
The Sabbath equally in all precepts avails;
Be of good cheer, think as thee naught aileth.
Use neat apparel, costly raiments wear,
For Sabbath of a bride the name does bear.
Buy that is daintiest against the Sabbath's day:
Strictly observe its precepts every way.
Keep in good appetite the stomach thine,
Feed upon fish and flesh, and healthy wine.
Dress up thy bed in handsome fashion good;
Order thy table well, set on thy food.
Bath, wash and cleanse thy head, trim up thy hair,
About thee never any thing do bear.
Sharpen thy knife, fall stoutly to thy meat;
Cut off thy nails, fling them in fiery heat.
Speak blessing to thy wine, cleanse hand and foot;
By this precept thou shall do good I wot.
Be of good mood, of comfortable ease,
Refrain not from, thy self wherein can please.
Merry, and withal joyful shall thou be,
As if thy works all finished were by thee.
Remove thee fro all dumpes and pensiveness,
Table and stools have in a readiness.
Lay on clean table cloth and napkins, as it is fit,
Hasten away your rost-meat from the spit:
Swill handsomely your cups and drinking glasses,
Put out of mind your once endured losses,
Buy the best bit thou find'st upon the Mart,
With wife and children make a merry heart.
One table once thus dressed, gives thee three meals,
Talk nothing but of merry making tales, etc.
There is also extant a certain book of theirs, wherein are contained many
graces, used by them before and after meat; as also upon the chief festivals
throughout the whole year, written in Hebrew and Teutonicke verse. Amongst
others, there is one prayer which begins, How lovely is thy rest O Lord, etc.
Where it follows.

In gallant suit thyselfe array,
Bless candle light, so 'twill in burning mend,
From all manner of working fly away,
On Friday all thy works bring to an end.
Eat savoury f^shes, goodly capons, quails,
Live delicately, see that nothing fails.
Then against Even thy self thus recreate.
All manner of good things for thee provide,
Well-fatted beeves, and such as likes thy pate,
From a good cup of spice'd wine, do not slide, etc.
Item.
In all meekness thou shall walk,
For of that the Law does talk,
With meekness all thy lifetime shall be led.
When Sun does rise, at leisure keep thy bed, etc.
Item.
Linen and silken raiment much is made of,
Honored they be that do make their clothes thereof.
An holy day the Sabbath is,
Happy, that keeps it not amiss.
Bring not your hearts to heavy mournful courses,
Although much leanness lodge within your purses.
Cheerful you ought to be, and without sorrow,
Although elsewhere your money you do borrow.
Furnish your selves with wine, with flesh and fishes,
Upon your table set three sorts of dishes.
A good reward for thee will then be hasting
Here, and in time to come, for everlasting, etc
Item.
Women, your candles remember for to light,
With careful heed observe this time aright.
Here of great profit you will make full quickly,
When great with child you shall come to be fickly.
If then fine cakes to bake you shall be skillful,
At child birth you may play and laugh your wil-full.
And now lest any should account of these as poetical figments and fables, I
will relate some pleasant histories out of the Talmud whereby you may have a
plain evident, yea, even miraculous demonstration, that the pleasure and
jocund life upon the Sabbath day, is the chiefest honor.

In that tract of the Talmud entitled, de Sabbatho: Cap. 16. p. 119.
These;e words are registered as they came from the mouth of Rabbi Chaia. The
rich Butcher.
I (says he) was upon a time in Cyprus (others say in Ladkia) where I lodged
with a certain Katzubh, or Butcher. At the time of supper a table all of gold
was brought in, which sixteen men were scarce able to carry, all the furniture
and other necessaries upon the table, were of gold the platters, candlestickes,
salts, cups, and trenchers, all of gold, with a snmptuous variety of delicates,
an most excellent apples.

When the table was set before him, he beginning to praise God, said, The earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. When the table was removed, he again
singing praises unto God, said, The heaven is the Lords, and the earth has he
given unto the children of men. Then I spoke unto him, and said, Good Sir, how
came you to be so rich? and what good thing have you done in all your life? The
Master, of the household, the Butcher I mean, replied, I have been a Butcher
all my life long, and whenever it was my chance to happen upon some choice
fatling, I always reserved it for the celebration of the Sabbath. From thence
came this my Mammon and great riches, which God vouchsafed unto me, as a reward
for my diligent observance of Sabbaths. Then said I, Blessed be God who has
given thee this abundance, and has made thee worthy to bea possessour of so
great wealth. This befell the Butcher.

In the same page it is registered, that there was sometimes one Joseph,
surnamed Mokir Schabbas, that is to say, an honourer of the Sabbath. This man
of all those victuals that the Shambles could afford, thought nothing too dear
for the celebration of the Sabbath; yea he would spare neither cost nor charges
in the procurement of the most rare fishes the waters could furnish him
withal. This Joseph had a certain neighbor who was very rich: By him he was
continually flouted, with a go to, what does it profit thee that thou
celebratest the Sabbath in such a religious manner? Certainly thou art never
the richer then if thou studied the contrary. I do not reverence the Sabbath in
that degree that thou do, and yet I am richer then thou art. Good Joseph
little regarding his mocks, put his trust in God, hoping that he would give
him a large harvest of rewards for these his weekly expenses. At that time
there were certain Astrologers in that City, who said unto the rich man,
Friend; what avails it thee to be so rich, when thy heart will not suffer
thee to buy one good fish with all thy bags? We by the observation of the
stars, have gathered thus much* that thy goods and riches which are so
infinite, shall all come iuto the hands of Joseph Mokir Scabbas, that reverent
observer of the Sabbath, who upon the Sabbath day is wont to have some morsel
for his money. The rich man hearing the words of these star-gazers, and
meditating upon them, went and sold all that he had, and with the money
purchased many Margarites, and other precious stones, all which he pursed up in
a girdle of hair, and presently takes shipping for another country, that the
good man Joseph might not inherit his goods. When he was about the middle of
the Sea, behold a great tempest arose, and did ^o split the ship, that it was
beyond expectation, if he did not take up his lodging in the chambers of the
deep. The wind blowing most vehemently snatched his hat from off his head,
tossing it into a remote place of this vast Ocean, where a fish at that time
there swimming, swallowed up the hat together with the girdle, wherein were the
Margarites and other precious stones. A little after this, this huge fish was
taken and carried to the City upon Friday to be sold in the Market. Every
Caterer prized the fish; but for a great price set upon it, none could buy it;
at last comes Joseph Mokir Schabbas, who was always accustomed to buy great
fishes of what price soever, who never s^uck to buy this also for the
celebration of the Sabbath, which he did with a great alacrity of mind, and joy
of heart of no vulgar extent. Which when he had carried home and cut up, he
found in the leaunch thereof, the aforesaid girdle stuffed with precious stones,
which the rich Euclio had lost: And so the prediction of the Astrologers came
to pass. Then became Jos^ph a man of exceeding great wealth, greatly rejoicing
because these jewels were valued to be worth a whole Kingdom. Then came a
certain old man unto Joseph, and said unto him; Whosoever borrows much for
the Sabbath day, the Sabbath will likewise repay him much again; and who
honors it but in part, the Lord will restore it unto him fourfold.

It is also recorded in the Talmud, Tract. Taanis. cap. 30.
in the Tract concerning the fasting of one Rabbi Chonech. He was wont every
Friday, to send his servants into the Market, and cause them to buy up all the
pot-herbes which the Gardiners could not put off their hands, and then
commanded them to throw them into the rivers. The Rabbines in Gemarah, which is
an appendix to the Talmud, ask the question, why he did not rather give their
herbs unto the poor? The answer is, that if he had given them to the poor,
then they would have bought none for the celebration of the Sabbath; and if it
should have come so to pass that the Gardiners should have withdrawn all
their pot herbs, so that the poor people could not have had them, then should
not the Sabbath have been celebrated by them. Again, the Rabbines ask why he
did not give them unto the beasts to eat, which had been far better, then thus
to throw them into the water, where they are utterly void of profit. The answer
is, that he would not have that to be devoured by the irreasonable creature,
which may serve for the proper food of man. And that although he cast them into
the waters, yet men might take them from thence and transfer them to their own
use. But why did he buy up all the pot-herbes? This he did for the
encouragement of the Gardiners, that they might the more willingly, and with a
better accord, bring them into the Market every Friday. For if they could not
have sold this their garbish for one day or two together, then had they stayed
at home ever after, and so the poor people should have wanted food upon the
Sabbath day, and by this means the Sabbath it self should have been
dishonored: And therefore Rabbi Chonech took this course, that the Sabbath
might be honored by voluptous living, and that by the poor man too, though a
green sallet were his chief delicate.

It is written in the tract concerning the Sabbath, Cap. 16. p. 118.
that whosoever upon the Sabbath lifts us his head, that is to say, who
celebrates the Sabbath with joy and rejoicing, God shall give him a large
inheritance, subdue unto him many nations, people infinite and innumerable; as
it is written: Then (that is when thou shall keep the Sabbath with joy and
rejoicing, and call it thy delight) thou shall delight thy self in the Lord,
and I will set thee upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
inheritance of Jacob thy father, of whom it is written; Thou shall spreadforth
east and west, north and south, even into the four corners of the earth. Rabbi
Nachman averres, that whosoever exhibites himself as a pattern of merriment
upon the Sabbath day, shall be free from the bondage of the nations, as it is
written, I will set thee upon the high places of the earth, and thou shall
tread upon the necks of thine enemies Rabbi Juda says, that whosoever keeps
the Sabbath with a joifull heart, God shall give him whatsoever his heart can
wish; as it is written: Delight in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4.
and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

And now seeing the Jews do not as yet tread upon the necks of their enemies,
nor are really possessed of the highest places of the earth, neither have gained
their hearts desire, to wit, that they may be Lords and Masters over the
Christians, that they may enjoy the monarchy of the whole world; for the
performance of which their wish, they pour out their prayers upon every
Sabbath and festival. It is clearly manifest, that they have not as yet
rightly and duly kept and sanctified the seventh day, and have not as yet
delighted themselves therein to the full of a satiety.

When then in the first place they have feasted themselves and filled their
guts with Sabbaticall cheer with great joy and gladness, then they pray as
abovesaid. The table is left covered and spread until the evening of the
Sabbath. The candles also lighted in honor thereof, stand in their lamps
unextinguished. Hence arises a sharp contention among them about the lights,
what is to be done, what to be omitted. It is not lawful to hunt or feek for
flies or lice, by the benefit of their light; or to read or write by them, lest
some in so doing should be moved to snuff the lights, and by this means
profane the Sabbath.

Now seeing they will have the Sabbath to signi^ie delight, Orach chajim number.
280.
therefore their wise Doctors think it good, and as a great honor unto the day,
if any married man, but especially one of the Rabbines, who is learned and well
seen in knowledge, upon the Sabbath day at night, hug and kiss his wife a
little more then ordinary. And this is the cause that they eat store of potato
roots before the Sabbath begin, that they may become more valiant in the act of
carnal copulation. For the same cause marriages are commonly celebrated upon
the Sabbath day, that their first concourse upon that night may be the
morefortunate, and the Sabbath it self more highly dignified. Hereupon the
common opinion is, that the infants begot upon this night, continually be
partakers of eminent fortunes, and all of them at length attain unto the
dignity of wise and holy men, chiefly then, when in the act of generation the
parents minds are full of good and pure cogitations; when they come together
not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, but in honor to the Sabbath.

Lastily, when any Jew is a traveling upon Friday, and is distant from his
Inn, or his own dwelling house at evening more then a Sabbath days journey,
then ought he to stay in that very place, and there to reft himself, and
celebrate the Sabbath whether it be in field, or in the middle of a wood, all
perils of robbers, and want of meat and drink set aside. Concerning this
matter, there is extant a true story; which runs as follows. Upon a certain
time three Jews went a traveling: When it began to be night, and the Sabbath
drew near, then said one to another, what course shall we take? the way is
very dangerous by reason of robbers, wild and evil beasts do also haunt the
woods, better it is that we hold on, and every one become the deliverer of his
own soul, then to keep the Sabbath with peril of losing both soul and body.

The third said, I will not depart hence until the Sabbath be ended, for he
that commanded me to sanctify it is able to preserve me in the middle of this
wood. When his fellows perceived his resolution, they held on their journey,
being Sabbath Breakers. But this third man stayed in the same place, as though
he had been nailed unto the ground, and pitching his tent, spread a linen
cloth upon the earth, for want of a better table, and set bread* thereupon, and
what other provision he had, and so saying his evening prayer, sat him down to
take his first Sabbath meal. In the mean time as he was at his repast, there
came a Bore unto him of such an horrible and ugly shape, as never eye beheld.
This said beast drawing near unto him, signified by certain gestures, that he
was an hungry. The Jew good man in a manner terrified, gives him a crust of
bread. withal feeding himself with this meditation, that God if it pleased
him, could easily preserve him in safety. The Bore never moving eats the bread
which was given him and stays there still. So soon as the Jew had sufficiently
refreshed himself, he said his evening prayer, which ended, he lies down upon
the earth to take his rest and sleep, the Bore lying down besides him. The
morning light unlocking his eyelids, he was exceeding joifull, that the Bore
had not devoured him, praising God and giving him thanks for such a benefit; he
orderly also pours out his morning devotions, then taking his dinner and
supper, and running over all his prayers. When the Sabbath was ended, he making
a separation, divided the Sabbath from the rest of the week (of which more
shall be spoken in the next Chapter) and so went on his journey, the Bore
becoming his individual companion all the night over. Upon the same night his
two companions had fallen into the hands of robbers, who had spoiled them of
all that they had. At last (the Bore accompanying him) he overtooke them, whom
so soon as the beast beheld, he run unto them, and tore them both in pieces.
At the sight whereof, fear begins to benum the spirits of the religious Jew,
and a strong opinion possessed him, that he also was at the last gasp. In the
mean time, they who had robbed his fellows, came unto him, and questioned him
what he was, and from whence he traveled. He made answer, I am a Jew (for
having a sure confiden^e in God, he would not deny himself) and came from the
Kings palace, and am thus far on my journey. They further enquired of him
where he got that Bore? He answered, the King bestowed him on me for a guide.
Then said one of the Robbers* surely that Jew is in great favor with the King,
because his will was, he should have a safe pass age by the conduct of that
Bore. And the other replied, we will give him all the money that we have, and
lead him out of the wood for fear lest he discover us. Which they did, and
accompanied him for a long and tedious space; they also holding on to direct
him in the way that he was to go, and the Bore run back into the wood again.
The case standing thus, it behooves every Jew, committing himself to the
protection of him that dwells in the highest heavens, to remember, keep, and
sanctify the Sabbath day with all diligence.

CHAP. XI.
How the Jews celebrate their Sabbath, and also make an end thereof.
UPon the morning of the Sabbath, Orach. chajim number. 281. nov. addit. number. 28.
they do not so early leave their beds, as at other times, but sleep until
the day be far spent, and this they do more for their own pleasure, then for
any due honor tendered unto the Sabbath; yet the more pleasure they enjoy, the
more devoutly they celebrate the Sabbath in their opinion. Their Rabbines do
most magisterially prove the lawfulness of this custom out of the Law, out of
the twenty eight Chapter of the fourth book of Moses. When Moses, say they,
makes mention in that place of the daily sacrifice, it is written, early in the
morning: But when he speaks of the oblation for the seventh day, it is
written, in the day of the Sabbath: The meaning of which words is this. The
daily sacrifices were wont to be offered early in the morning before it was
light (instead of which they repair at this day early unto their Synagogue to
say their morning prayers) as was formerly declared. But upon the Sabbath a
longer stay was made, and the sacrifice was not wont to be offered before
perfect day. Wherefore the Jews ought to sleep larger upon this day then
another, and to go later to morning prayer then at other times, to recreate
themselves for a longer space upon their couches, for the joy and delight
accrewing by the Sabbaths reproach.

When they are once come into the Synagogue, they pray as at other times, yet
saying and singing more prayers and anthemes then ordinary, in honor of the
Sabbath. Upon this day they do not put on their phylacteries (of which we
spoke in the fourth Chapter) and that because the Sabbath it self is a sign of
the Jewish faith, and that this was given to the Jews only, and commanded by
them to be sanctified, and therefore they have no need of other signs, as the
phylacteries and circumcision, whereby a Jew may be known from other men.

They bring the book of the Law out of the Arc in that pomp, which we
specified in the ninth Chapter. They read out of it seven sections of the Law,
for the performing whereof, seven particular persons are called out. Whosoever
is called, comes up by the door next unto him, and goes down by the other;
because it is recorded of the people of Israel to have done the like. For says
the Scripture, the gate of the inner Temple which looks unto the north, shall
be shut for the space of six days, wherein you may work, but upon the Sabbath
day, and upon the day of the Calends it shall be opened. And the Prince shall
enter by the way of that gate, and shall stand at the posts thereof; and the
Priests shall offer his burnt offering, etc. Hence it appears, that when they
come into the holy Temple upon the Sabbath day, they came in at one door and
went out at another.

They are also accustomed to read some certain sections out of the Prophets;
in which the same subject is handled, that is treated of in the books of
Moses. This custom then had its original, when they were interdicted to read
the books of Moses in their Synagogues. For at that time they began to read in
the pla^e thereof, a Lecture out of the Prophets, which they named Hapharah,
which was as a certain exposition upon the Law of Moses. This custom was in
force in the days of the Apostles; for thus it is recorded. For they that
dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the
voices of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled
them in condemning him. Again, Moses of old time had them that preached him,
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. And although at this day they
are not prohibited to read and teach Moses in their Synagogues; yet they keep
the custom of reading the Prophets; for they cannot be too conversant in well
doing.

They pray also for the souls of them, Minhag. p. 12. Orach chajim. number. 288.
who in their life time did not rightly sanctify the Sabbath. For the Rabbines
persuade themselves, that these are tossed in hell from side to side both after
and before the Sabbath, and therefore they pray for them thereupon.

Their prayers in the Synagogue must not continue any longer then six a clock
in the morning. For it is forbidden either to fast or pray any longer,
according as their Doctors have collected out of that saying, Thou shall call
the Sabbath Oneg. For the word Oneg signifying delight or pleasure, is written
without the letter Vau, which in numeration, makes six. By which the Prophet
would secretly insinuate, that we ought not to fast after the sixth hour, or the
middle of the day; because otherwise it would come to pass, that the Sabbath
should not be a pleasure, but rather a vexation unto us. Therefore morning
prayer being ended, they eat their second Sabbaticall meal, making themselves
merry in honor of the Sabbath.

If any have dreamed some ominous dream; as the book of the Law to be burnt,
the beams of his own house to fall down, his teeth to fall out of his head, or
such like, he must fast until it be late at night, and that not without cause,
seeing such fantastical meteors portend no fair weather. If the jaw bones of
any one in the time of sleep, seem unto him in the time of sleep to fall out of
their place, such a dream is a good dream, because it betokens the teeth of
all his enemies that intended evil against him. If to eat be burdensome unto
any, and to fast a pleasure, he may fast by statute. If any cannot abstain
from tears, he may weep by authority, because such a ones lamentation, is his
own delight, his adversaries recreation, both which are conducible to a
sanctified celebration of the Sabbath. Yetnot withstanding, whosoever fasts
upon the seventh day, he must fast also upon the day following, because he
feared not to substract the pleasure due unto the Sabbath day.

Moreover it seems good unto the wise men among the Jews, that dinner being
ended, that somewhat should be learned by study, and some Chapters read o^t of
the holy Bible. Min. page. 13. Caphtor Uperach p 43.
For upon a certain time, the Sabbath complained unto God, that every thing in
this universe had a like unto it self, of which it was only destitute. Then
God instantly replied, and said, The people of Israel shall from henceforth be
thy mate; for they upon the Sabbath day bend their study to the learning of the
Law, which if they did not, they would at that time be altogether idle. Then
the Law posting unto Gods tribunal, poured out its complaints and said; When
Israel shall return into his own land, and one shall go unto his farm,
another to his vineyard, who shall then learn or study me. God answered, the
Israelites shall do it, who resting upon the Sabbath, shall practice nothing
else. By reason of these complaints, it was concluded and thought meet, that
upon the Sabbath day after dinner, every one should busy himself either in
reading of the word of God, or, in collecting something out of their books of
morality, whereby they might be incited unto the fear of the Lord, and so the
Law and Sabbath might not have any more just occasion of complaint. But alas
how rare readers they are in these good books, experience gives an evident
demonstration for the whole weeks space; time enough a man would think. They
speak not so much of their bargains, usury, buying and selling, as they do
upon the Sabbath day.

At even-tide they return again into the Synagogue, and prayer ended, they
fall to their supper, the third and last meal upon this day, while the day is
not yet gone, nor the Sabbath altogether come to its period. They do not at
this time eat much, because their time is short and because they are bound to
shut up the Sabbath with thanksgivings. Moreover, it often falls out, that when
this meal is provided for them, they are not an hungry, because they filled
their paunhes more largely at dinner, which often holds unto the evening. These
meals or banquets they repute as a thing strictly commanded, and for a work
of singular excellen^ie and goodness, con^erning which they writing very many
things in the Talmud, T^act. de Sab. c. 16 p. 118. ^O ach chajim. number. 291^.
are of opinion, That whosoever celebrates them frequently and diligently, he
shall not taste of hell torments* he shall be defended against that most fe^
refull war of Gog and Magog; he shall be preserved from the trouble and
vexation, which shall be upon the earth about the coming of the Messiah, which
they call, Chebble hammaschi^he.

Between evening and night the use of cle^ne water is prohibited, A dolores
Messiae.
neither is it lawful to drink of the brook, because the souls of the
wicked deceased do as yet bath and cool themselves therein, knowing that they
must presently return into hell.

When the end of the Sabbath approaches, and the third and last repast
finished, many use suddenly with great expedition to match away the table
cloth; dreaming that by so doing, due reverence shall be exhibited unto them.

The night inveloping the earth in darkness, they again assemble themselves
to prayer, sing sweet Sabbaticall hymns, especially that prayer, veharacham,
with a ravishing Nigan, their descant resounding in an amiable melody, much
like the ordinary catter-wauling in the month of March; and in so doing, they
chant their farewell to the holy Sabbath. They continue these their songs
until much of the night be spent, out of pity and compassion toward the
souls of the wicked Jews: And that to this end; that the longer these their
devotions are a finishing, the later their return shall be into the infernal
pit. For as upon Friday at eve there is a loud proclamation made in hell, that
all the wicked should depart the place, and go into the earth to celebrate the
Sabbath, that all Israel may upon this day rest from their labors: So upon
Saturday at night so soon as the Jews have ended their evening prayers, a
second proclamation goes forth to will and command all damned souls to return
into the place of torment. Minhag. p. 3. Orach. chajim number. 295.
In these their benighted chanting orisons, they oftentimes call upon Elias the
Prophet, saying that he is promised unto them, that he will not come, but
either upon the Sabbath, or some great Festival. Therefore the Sabbath now
being past, and he not coming, they entreat him that he will not fail to
come upon the next, and declare the coming of the Messiah. (Perhaps good Elias
is not quick of hearing, that he being for so long a time invited, yea
entreated to come, does not come as yet) The Chachamim and skil^ull Rabbines
also record, that Elias the Prophet standing under the tree of life in
Paradise, registres the merits and good works of the Jews, wherewith they
diligently celebrate the Sabbath. Blessed are they.
Lastly, when they sing the certain song, whose beginning is B^^rechu, Then
the women make speed unto their own wels, to draw water out of them.

It is also written, that the fountain Meribah, of which they drank in the
desert, Number. 20.
flows into the sea of Tyberias, and issuing out of it, intermingles it self
with all other fountains.

Now it comes to pass, Minhag. p. 4. Orach. chajim. number. 299 in fine.
that any of the Jewish women drawing any of the foresaid water in that
instant, may use it as a choice ingredient for some excellent medicine.
Moreover whosoever drinks of a fountain so qualified, shall have present
remedy for any disease, Colbo c. 41.
yea though his whole body be infected with the french pox. Upon a certain time
a woman presently upon the ending of the prayer Barechu, went to draw waterat
that instant the fountain Meribah presented it self unto her; for which
reason she protracting the time of her return homeward, her husband began to
chafe and swell with anger; which the woman taking notice of, through fear
streaming from the fountain of his choler into the channels of her body, made
her let the paile of water to slip out of her hand unto the ground; whereupon
some few cooling drops being by the fall besprinkled upon the diseased body of
her raging husband, were as so many skillful Chirurgions to the place they
only touched. This the good man got for his anger, who if he had drunk up
all the water, perhaps he might have gained a final recovery. Hereupon the
Rabbines say, that an angry man reapes no other profit by his choleric
behavior but his own anger.

In the last place, the Jews make a division and interpose a difference
between the Sabbath, and the week ^ollowing giving God thanks that he has
given them so much grace, as to celebrate the Sabbath in that good manner. This
is done by their Reader in the Synagogue after evening prayer, and this he does
for the poor peoples sake, who cannot by reason of their necessity, do it in
their own houses. Otherwi^e the Master of every private family does it in his
own dwelling, in manner and form following. A great candle is lighted much
like unto a Torch, which they call Ner habdalah, or the candle of division or
destruction. Then they bring in a little box commonly made of silver, full of
the best perfumes. In the next place the Master of the family takes a cup full
of wine (but if there be no wine in that country, then he takes ale or beer
instead thereof) and sings with a loud and shrill voice, The Lord is my
Salvation and my trust, I will not fear, because he is my strength and my
praise God the Lord is my health. He has delivered me out of all my trouble,
and mine eye has seen her desire upon mine enemies. The Lord of hosts is with
us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, Selah. I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord. He has been a light unto the Jews, that
is to say, joy, gladness, and honor.

These words ended, he blesses the cup, and pouring a little of the wine
therein upon the ground, he says, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the
world, who have created the fruit of the vine. This done, taking the cup in his
left hand, and the little box full of perfumes in the right, and saying,
Blessed be thou O God, who do create diverse kinds of perfumes; He puts the
box unto his nose to recreate his smell, and reaches it to every one in the
family for the same end. Then taking the cup again in his right hand, he goes
unto the great candle, using no small delight in an exquisite contemplation of
the nails upon his fingers, so that bending his fingers toward his wrist,
they cast a certain shadow upon the palm; after this he stretches forth his
hand the second time, so that he may know by the candle light, that his nails
are whiter then his fingers, which he perceiving, says, Blessed be thou O God
our God, King of the world, who have created such a resplendent candle. Then he
takes the cup again into his left hand, looking in the like manner upon the
nails thereof. Then by and by he transfers the cup into the right hand, and
says, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the world, who have put a
difference between the holy and unholy, between light and darkness, between
Israel and the Gentiles, between the seventh day, and the other six days of
the week destinated for labor. While he is a repeating this prayer, he
poures a little of the wine out of the cup upon the earth; Then he drinks a
little of it himself, reaching it unto others, that they may sup of the same.

Amongst these nocturnall petitions, there is one which begins, Vaiehi Noam, in
which the letter zaijn is not found, which signifies weapons; whosoever
therefore shall say this prayer with a devo^t mind, he shall be safe and
secure that whole night following, from any kind of weapon, so that he shall
neither be killed, nor have the least scratch given him. In the the like manner
he shall besafe from the devil, when he devoutly faith that prayer, beginning,
Schema Israel, Hear O Israel, etc. For the first verse begins with the letter
Schin, and ends with the letter Daleth, which two joined together, make Scheds,
which word signifies a Devil.

This distinction of the Sabbath they prove from those words, Lev. 10. 10. Genesis
1. 4.
that you may discern between the holy and profane; and those, Godseparated the
light from the darkness. Some take of the consecrated wine, and anoint their
eyes therewithal; others wash their face in it, thinking it a wholesome
medicine against the fluxes of the eye; others bath their arteries therewith,
because it is a means to length (...) their days; others sprinkle it in every
corner of the ho^^ri about the beds, and cradles of infants, dreaming that it
is sovereign against enchantments and witchcraft. The truth is, this wine is of
so high esteem amongst them, as that other also wherewith they initiate the
Sabbath.

They smell the perfumes, lest they should fall into a swoon, while one of
their souls departs out of the body. For upon the Sabbathday they have another
soul besides that which they live by at other times. Concerning this matter,
Antonius Margarita, in his book of the faith of the Jews, writes in this
manner. It is written in the Jewish Talmud (says he) that every man has three
souls, and it is proved out of these following words of the Prophet Isaiah,
Thus says the Lord, who created the heaven, and stretched it out, who made the
earth, and whatsoever grows thereon; who gives life and breath unto the
inhabitants of it. According to the letter of this text, they find two souls
in man, to which if we add the natural soul, there arises three. Whereupon
they also write, that two souls depart out of a man sleeping, the one of which
goes upward unto God, to learn things to come, the other goes downward into
the earth, and running to and fro, contemplates nothing else but injustice,
sin, foolishness or vanity. The third they call Ruach Behemoth, the
irreasonable soul, which being the first of all received by man, is seated
near unto his heart, and sees all things whatsoever the other two souls in
their absence from the body have heard seen or done; and hence proceed and
issue all our dreams, which therefore are not always to be contemned. They
say moreover, that upon the Sabbath a man has another soul besides these,
which enlarges his heart, that he may keep the Sabbath more honorably, and
exhilarate himself in a higher strain of mirth, then it were possible for him
to do, if he were destitute of the same. But the Sabbath once being ended,
this soul departs, and the man becomes weak thereupon, against which his
faintness, he may prosperously use these sweet smelling odours, that the body
may have wherewith to recover its former strength. Hitherto Margarita, but
whence he had these words, I cannot as yet find.

Concerning this superfluous soul (...) remember I have read this in the
Talmud. Tract. Betzah cap. 2. p. 16.
Rabbi Jose said (...) the name of Rabbi Simeon, who was the son of Jochai,
that all the commandments that God gave unto the Israelites, he gave them in
public, except the Sabbath which he gave in private; as it is recorded, The
Sabbath shall be an everlasting sign between me and the children of Israel.
Where the Jews by an everlasting sign, would understand a secret token,
willing that the Sabbath should be hid from all other nations, and only
manifested to the Jews. (Therefore mark diligently, Christian Reader, how the
Hebrew word leolam, (...)
signifying everlasting, any reasonable soul being judge, must according to
the Jewish interpretation, signify hidden and concealed.) Hence the Rabbines
in their Gemarah ask the question, that if the Christians and other people do
not know that we have a Sabbath, how comes it to pass, that they in time to
come shall be punished for the contempt of the Sabbath, and for the not keeping
thereof? They make answer to themselves, saying, they know well enough that we
keep the Sabbath, this is not hidden from their eyes, and therefore they are to
be punished because they will not keep it. But the reward due unto the
observance thereof, is hidden from them, and this they know not; yet if they
would rightlly celebrate the Sabbath, they should also know thereward. But this
is a thing impossible for them to put in execution, seeing they are destitute
of the superfluous soul, because it being given to men* rather upon that day
then others, and that more abundantly does enlarge their hearts, that in the
time of the Sabbath, they may take their rest with ease, eat and drink well
and merrily, and set all care and sorrow a packing from their breasts. Hereupon
Rabbi Simeon the son of Lakis, Tract. Taanis de je junio. cap. 4. p. 7.
Schabbat raiin aphesch.
affirmed, that God gave this soul to man upon the Sabbath about eventide, and
took it from him again at the end of the Sabbath, as it is written, When he
had taken rest ev^n to satiety, the Sab^ath remaining, then was he deprived of
his soul; to wit, the superfluous one. Where again note, how neatly the Jews
interpret the holy Scriptures; for the verb jinn^phsch in that place, is
rendered by the Rabbines, to want or be deprived of a soul, whereas it has a
clean contrary signification; to cherish, recollect, recreate, stir up the
spirits, and most properly to breath; which after the manner of men, we ascribe
unto God, concerning whom it cannot be said nor understood, that he has lost a
soul. In this their blindness, the Jews blush not to place their chief
wisdom and knowledge.

Concerning this superfluous soul, Rabbi Abraham also has a most accurate
dispute in his Madrasch or Exposition upon the Pentateuch, which book is called
Zeror hammor, in English a bundle of Myrrh. Other interpreters in this place,
say, thinking their opinion to be more plausible, that the Jews use to smell
to the perfumes, because the fire of hell, the Sabbath yet lasting does not
stink; but so soon as the Sabbath is ended, and the doors of hell set open,
that the souls of the wicked departed this life, may enter again into the
place of torment, then it begins to send out an ill savor, against which, the
nosing of those odors are a present remedy; as it is recorded in their Germane
Minhagin.

They look upon their nails also, because of their fruitful growth, which
a^though they be always cut upon the Friday, yet notwithstanding, they always
grow again. Others say, that this is done in remembrance of that garment,
which God at the first made for Adam in paradise; for it was of the color of
the nails of a man's hand. Others that all this is done to distinguish the
nails from the flesh; which wonderful consideration had its first original
from Adam; Who, Tract Talm. psachin. c. 4. p. 54.
when he saw the whole world wrapped up in darkness, weeping, said, Woe unto me
for whose sin alone the whole earth is darkened! Then God suggested this into
his mind, that he should take two stones, and strike the one against the
otherpunc; which he doing, the fire sparkled: out, whereat he lighted a candle.
Then Adam marking that he was every whit naked, the utmost parts of his fingers
only excepted, he praised God with a greater admiration, as we may read in the
book called Colb^.

They pour some part of the conse^rated wine upon the ground for lucks sake,
because such an effusion prognosticates that house to become plentifully stored
with all things necessary for the sustenan^e of life; and that in such a
manner, that they shame not to write, that in what house soever this wine is
not poured out as water, there is no blessing at all resident.

Some are of opinion, that this pouring out of the wine, to be done for the
refreshing of Corah and his rebellious companions; for the Jews do foolishly
persuade themselves, that these being swallowed up of the earth, do as yet
remain alive therein, and are comforted by this consecrated wine.

A little before somewhat was delivered concerning the stink of hell fire;
Tract. San^edrin. cap. 7.
for the confirmation of which, we have this story in the Talmud. That wicked
man Turnus Rophus upon a certain time, demanded of Rabbi Akibha, in what
respect the Sabbath did excel other days of the week, that they should
prosecute it with so great honor. The Rabbine replied, why do mortals more
honor thee, then other men of the same mould? because said the King, my liege
will have it so. To whom Rabbi Akibha answered again, The King of Kings, even
our God himself, wills us to give more honor and reverence unto the Sabbath,
then to any day in the week besides. Turnus replies, who can certainly assure
thee, that your Sabbath day is the seventh day, and so the true Sabbath indeed;
perhaps you may celebrate it upon some other. The Rabbine answers, this may be
proved, 1. By a watercourse of the River Sambation, who estreame is so
headstrong for the space of six days, that it roles huge great stones along
with it; by reason whereof, it denies any one passage for the whole week, but
upon the Sabbath day it stands unmovable not running at all, in honor to the
Sabbath. 2. I can draw an evident argument for the demonstration hereof, from
thy fathers Sepulcher: For all the week long, the smoke and stench of hell
fire iss;ues out of it, because for that space he is tormented therein; but
upon the Sabbath day, the Sepulcher sends out no ill savor; the reason is, thy
father at that time is come out of hell, and takes his rest, so that the fire
thereof has no power over him, and for this very cause smoaks not upon that
day. When Turnus heard these words of the Rabbine, he said unto him,
peradventure the time of his adjudgement to hell torments is now expired? The
Rabbine bids him go unto thy fathers tomb, the Sabbath now ended, and see if
it do not smoke as yet. Which Turnus hearing, went and found it to be as the
Rabbine had spoken.

This moved Turnus to a heinous enterprise, for by enchantments, he calls his
father from hell, and thus bespeaks him. How comes it to pass (said he) who
did not sanctify the Sabbath all thy life long, should now being dead,
observe and keep it? How far is the time spent, since thou becamest so godly
a Jew? He answered, My son, whosoever living among you will not keep the
Sabbath willingly in this place after death, must be forced thereunto. The
son replies, how are you occupied I pray you upon the work days? Upon them,
says he, some burns us with fire; but upon the Sabbath day we enjoy our rest:
For upon Friday at evening, a Proclamation goes forth, declaring that the time
of ceslation is now present, and that the wicked should depart to celebrate the
Sabbath; which we hearing, betake our selves to rest, and in resting, sanctify
the Sabbath. Then in the end of the Sabbath, when the Jews have ended all
their prayers, then comes an evil Angel called Dumah, who is our Master, and
commands us to return into hell, because the people of Israel have now put an
end to their Sabbath. Then we recoiling into hell, are scorched by the flames
thereof, until the next Sabbath. These are our infernal employments.

If any have an itching desire to read any more concerning these horrible
trifling fopperies, let him read Rabbi Bechai, in parscha vaiischma Jethro,
that is, in his exposition upon the eighteenth Chapter of Exodus, where he
writes many things about the Sabbath. Now seeing God in the Law of Moses and
the Prophets, oftentimes commanded the Jews, that upon the seventh day they
should do no manner of work, and so abstain from the profanation thereof.
Hence arises a grand controversy among the Rabbines, what may be done, what
left und one thereupon, Concerning which matter there is a large tract in the
Talmud, upon which the chief and most learned Rabbines, have written a
Commentary; so that whosoever could broach the most subtle and acute
meditations, concerning the genuine manner of sanctifying the Sabbath, he was,
or certainly would have been accounted a teacher unto others. I will only
repeat some few things conducible to the matter in hand.

First then, whereas God in his Law commands, that not only man, but also the
beast shall rest upon the Sabbath day; The Rabbines with a curious kind of
augmentation, e^quire how far any beast, as horse, ass, or others of the same
kind, may lawfully go upon the Sabbath day? Whether also any of these
creatures may be allowed to carry any burden thereupon. Tract. de Sab. cap. 5.
p 52.
This question is fully stated, and that doctor-like determined of in the
Talmud.

1. No beast must be suffered to go out of doors upon the Sabbath, Orach.
chajim number. 305.
carrying more upon them, then that wherewith he may be led, curbed, and kept
under. So a horse or an ass going out of his Masters stable, must have nothing
upon him but a bridle or halter.

2. An ape, monkey, beagle, hunting-dog, must not go out of doors without a
collar, to which a leash must be tied, that they may not sly away and escape:
Yet also they use these creatures thus upon other days then the Sabbath.

It is also prohibited to saddle an horse, much more that any man should ride,
or lay any burden upon him, lest he should be over-loaden to his hurt. If any
upon the Sabbath day return home, or go to some Inn upon the back of an
horse or ass, it is lawful for him to loose his saddle, but not to take it
off; but if the horse or ass chance to shake it off, then is the horseman
faultlesse, and to be excused.

If any lead his horse by the bridle, he must have a serious care that he
suffer not the bridle to hang an hands breadth from his off his hand; and thus
he must do, lest some should think that he carries it in that fashion for his
own pleasure. He must furthermore, take heed that the bridle hang not too
loosely betwixt him and the horse, for in so doing, he shall seem not to lead
the horse, but to carry the rainges for the nonce; and it is not lawful to
carry the least thing upon the Sabbath.

It is contrary to their religion, to suffer a hen to have a clout or rag about
her foot or wing, as a mark whereby she may be known of the owner upon the
Sabbath day. Wherefore the clout ought to be taken away upon the Friday, that
she may rest upon the seventh day, without molestation.

If any beast chance to fall into a ditch, and cannot recover it self, then
they give it meat until the Sabbath be fully ended, at what time they draw
it out. If the ditch be full of water, so that the beast cannot conveniently
eat its fodder, then they cast in lopps of straw to underprop it, that it may
not be drowned in the water, if it can by this means escape it. If by its own
help it can lift it self out of the ditch, then the Jew is blameless, and not
guilty of the profanation of the Sabbath.

Note that that seems contrary to this which Christ objected to the Jews for
accusing him for healing upon the Sabbath, saying, who is there amongst you,
Man. 12. 11.
who having a sheep fallen into a pit upon the Sabbath day, will not straight
go and draw him out? As though he had said; If you think it lawful for you
upon the Sabbath day, to draw a beast out of a pit, that the life thereof may
be preserved; how much more is a man to be helped upon that day, who is of
far more worth then a beast? Out of these words I say it seems to follow,
that in Christ's time it was permitted unto the Jews, to draw a beast out of a
pit upon the Sabbath day: Whereas the canon Law of the Jews, which is their
spiritual and Talmudicall Law, is diametrically opposite hereunto. And hen^e
truly it was that that wicked Jew, Rabbi Lipman in his book called The triumph
over the four Evangelists, written in the year of Christ, 1459, accuses our
Savior to have taught falsely, and against their statutes and ordinances, that
the Jews were then w^nt immediately to draw out an ox, or any other beast
fallen into a pit upon the Sabbath day; as Sebasti^n Mu^ster has registered the
indictment in his Commentary upon St Matthews Gospel in Hebrew. To which I
answer, that Christ the truth it self, never could speak any thing but truth,
for there was never any falsehood or guile found in his mouth; yea sooner then
the Jews, together with their father the father of lies the devil, can
evidence the contrary, these superstitious brats shall suffer eternal shame.
It is true indeed, that the law contained at this present in the Talmud, is of
that stamp, that out of it Christ may be proved a liar; as amongst others, an
instance urged by Munster out of a Saxon History, concerning a certain Jew,
who upon the Sabbath day (sir reverence) fell into a Jakes, makes manifest; For
he being left there, was sustained with food, and not presently drawn out. The
Bishop of the place also strictly charging and commanding the Jews, that they
should not draw him out upon the Lords day, holy in the sacred solemnization
thereof to the Christians. Whereupon it came to pass, that for two days
space, he was forced to remain in this, house of office, that he might the
better learn his duty. I confess therefore, that their Talmudicall decrees
which are in force with them at this day, are contrary to Christ's sayings; but
that it was so from the beginning, it is a manifest untruth. For 1. The
traditions and constitutions of the Jews themselves, according to which they
lived in Christ's time, brand it with no less. And again, how came it to
pass, that if Christ had lied or spoken false, the Pharisees did not presently
hit him in the teeth there with? Certainly the Pharisees would have
contradicted the words of our Savior, if he had spoken any thing oppugning
their common traditions and ordinances. Now if any ask how it came to pass,
that this was inserted into the Law, which they at this day embrace. I answer,
that it is a new constitution foisted by the Rabbines and Writers of the
Talmud, into their Gemara, or their Appendix of ancient traditions in hatred to
the New Testament and Christian Religion, some hundred of years after Christ's
nativity, Tract. de Sab. c. 18. p. 128.
as appears most manifestly out of the Talmud. For into this they thrust in
such a tradition, that they might persuade the ignorant, that Christ spoke
false. But to return to the matter in hand.

It is permitted unto a Jew, to speak unto a Christian to milk his cow or
goat, lest the milk through its abundance, straining the beast, should put it
to miserable torture; not that the Jew has any desire to be fed with the
milk, for so it were all one, as if he should have milked her himself. This
being granted, that whatsoever aman does by another, it is all one as if he did
it himself. Whereupon it has seemed good to some of their Doctors, that a Jew
may buy milk for his money of the Christians, that he may lawfully upon the
Sabbath day, feed thereupon; seeing the Christian milkes the cow for his own
gain, and not in any love to the Jew. But seeing these things are to full of
quirkes, and cannot be sufficiently described, we will let them pass, and
descend to others. Something therefore is now to be spoken of the rest and
sanctifying of the Sabbath concerning every one.

In the first place it is prohibited both to men and women, to run upon the
Sabbath day, above two paces of the length of an ell, unless they do it to
fulfill some one of Gods commandments; for if they practice the contrary, then
their sight, as was formerly mentioned, shall be diminished. Yet not
withstanding, it is permitted to young men to recreate themselves in jumping,
running, and dan^ing, always provided they do it in honor to the Sabbath. It
is also lawful to jumpe over a ditch, but not to go into the water, which if
any do they compel him to dry his stockings again.

A man cannot have any license to carry weapons about him, such as are, the
sword, spear, or helmet.

The Tailor ought not to go out of doors in any garment wherein he has stuck
a needle.

A lame man that cannot go without a staff, may lawfully use one, which is
denied to the blind man.

They are not to go upon cru^^hes or stilts, pretending the deepnesse of the
water, or thickness of the clay; for although those stilts do seem to bear
men, yet in very deed they are borne by them.

It is prohibited to carry any thing any whither.

It is a heinous offense to turn whiflers, and wear vizards for the
terrifying of others.

It is lawful for to carry an empla^ter applied for the curing of any wound;
yet if it chance to fall off, it is not permitted to be taken up again, and
laid to the same sore.

It is an offense to bind up a green wound given upon the Sabbath day.

It is a capital piece of business, to carry gold or money, or any other
coin, packed up in a sack or satchell, or sewed in their garments when they
go a pilgrimage.

It is lawful for them to wipe off the clay cleaving to their feet, Orach.
chajim number. 301.
by rubbing them against some wall; but it is not meet to rub it off upon the
earth, lest he that does it should seem to fill up a certain ditch.

Any man may by statute rub off the dirt from his stockings or cloak, so that
it be not already hardened, for then a dust should arise, which some taking
notice of, might think such a man impudent and brazen faced in the performance
of such an action.

If any chance to defile his hands with dust, it is lawful for him to purify
them at a mares tail or cowes tail, or the maine of an horse; Orach. chajim
number. 308. and 312.
but it is prohibited to be done with a towell, or any such pure matter, lest
they should be forced to wash the same upon the Sabbath day.

It is not permitted unto any to carry a ^lap to kill fleas withal or any such
diminutive animals.

If any have such need, that he must of constraint be subject to the
necessitation of nature, it is lawful for him to gather a few stones together
for the performance thereof. If he have at home some place a purpose for the
same business, then is he permitted to gather so many stones as he can carry
in his hands for the more commodious effecting thereof.

It is not lawful to catch a ^lea skipping, either upon the earth, or their
garments. If she chance to bite, then they are permitted to catch her if they
can, not to kill her, but to throw her away alive, and send her a grazing.

It is lawful to kill a louse. Yet Rabbi Eliezer says, that whosoever kills a
louse upon the Sabbath day, his trespass is as heinous as if he had killed a
Camel.

Concerning the two last Canons, and the true meaning of them, there have been
many and hot disputations. Some have concluded, that it is not lawful to kill
any creatures upon the Sabbath day, which do multiply according to the ordinary
course of nature; of which sort are fleas, who by a natural commixture hatch
eggs; and on the contrary, to destroy all those, whose original is from sweet
and corrupt humors; to which kind lice may be referred. Although in this cause
a certain doubt arises, because it is the position of a certain Rabbine,
that an egg is the mother of a louse. Hence a Rabbine; God sitting in heaven,
feeds all his creatures, from the Rhunoceros horn, to the egg of a louse, that
is to say, all living creatures from the greatest to the least. The full state
of this question may be had in the Talmud* and therefore there is no necessity
that it should be here inserted, and that chiefly for this reason, because
every one is not apt to dive into the depth of such subtilties.

It is not permitted to any, to clime a tree upon this day, least some bow
should break.

If any one have hens, or any other creatures in a garden, or other place
exposed to rain, he must have an exact care, that he give them not any more
corn for their sustenance, then they may at once eat up, for otherwise the
relics would sprout out, the rain making passage for it, and the Jew should
be guilty of sowing seed upon the Sabbath, and so become the father of an
heinous offense.

It is not jawfull to play upon any kind of instrument, Orach. chajim, number* 338.
having strings upon it, and yielding any sound at all; neither is it permitted
to sing or dance unto the pipe.

It is forbidden to sing a psalm, or any other song, with the hissing
behavior of the mouth.

It is not permitted to any, sor to hist unto his fellow, to sum on him to
come unto him.

It is not lawful for any one to knock at a door with an hammer, or such kind
of instrument, though not withstanding the singing of any spiritual song or
dance, be not notified thereby; because a man may be thought ^^ther to strike
his key into the door, or else to be a building some other structure: And this
is the cause that the Master of the Synagogue beats their doors with his
hand, at what time they are to accomplish their devotions. Yet the Rabbines
have permitted, that the Jews may entreat a Christian to play on the Sabbath
day upon a lute, or to finger any other instrument in honor of the newly
initiated nuptials of the married couple; never surmising that it is done for
the Jews sake, as also seeing hereby, the vulgar jollity is more profuse upon
that day, for a more exquisite celebration. No Jew at all is permitted to play
upon any instrument by Act of Parliament, because it savours not of godliness,
to play a Curranto upon the table, either to this end, that some may dance, or
to still a pettish child.

None must presume to write with his finger upon a wet table, or in the sand or
dust of the earth; yet they may imprint as many characters in the air, as they
shalthink meet. Moreover, no writing written either upon paper, or sealed with
wax, is to be scratched out.

Briefly, the Jews have thirty nine chief and principal Articles, concerning
works and labors, to which all others may be reduced, which can be possible
conceived. For even as a fountain is parted in its gliding pace into several
streams and rivulets, which always keep some resemblance and analogy with
their head, though oftentimes they lose their natural taste and qualities, by
reason of the places and channels in which they keep their course: Even so out
of those chief Articles concerning the labors of the Jews, many more labors
arise and issue, as the River from the fountain, which labors seem to differ
much from the other, yet they always do correspond in some similitude; for
example. The first and chief Article is, to till, plow, or sow the ground; to
this Article these are reducible; To dig, fill up d^tches, dress the garden
with shovels, transplant herbs, plant vines, inoculate, loppe, to water herbs
and young plants, or cyens; and if there be any other kind of work to be
done, by which any thing may be furthered in his growth. Hereupon the Rabbines
for fe^re of filling up of ditches, have permitted it is lawful to spri^kie a
chamber with water upon the Sabbath day, to avoid the rising of the dust, but
by no means to sweep it with a besome, lest some chinke or other should be
filled thereby. And for the same reason they have interdicted the casting of
nuts little stones, o^ such like, into a ditch, as at a certain mark. It is
also prohibited that any one should walk upon new plowed ^land, lest by hard
treading, he might either make a ditch, or fill one.

The second Article, is concerning the cutting down and reaping of corn. To
which are re^erred the plucking of dates, grapes, olives, olive berries; the
gathering of figs and apples; the taking of honey out of the Be hive, and many
more of the same nature. Hence it is permitted to taste or eat an apple hanging
upon the bough or branch upon the Sabbath day, but by no means to pluck it
off. It is unlawful to go through a field of corn, especially if the weather
be rainy, for the seed may be rooted up by the heel, which is all one as if it
were cut with the sickle. Hence it was* that the Jews reprehended the
Disciples of our Savior, Mar. 13.
for pulling the ears of corn upon the Sabbath.

To the Article of threshing, are referred the peeling, renting, shaking of
hemp or flax; the spinning of wool; the straining of any fruits which are
full of moisture; as olives, orenges, apples, grapes, the wringing of any wet
cloth, and such like. The giving of suck is also to be referred to this
Article, yet the Rabbines do not agree in opinion concerning this matter.
Hereupon it is much questioned, whether a Nurse being bewraied by a child upon
the Sabbath day, may lawfully make her self clean? Many hold that she ought
to wash her hands, by the means whereof, the filth may by little and little
be done away. But Rabbi Jose dislikes the opinion, and prohibits the doing of
it, seeing such a washing cannot go in the number of ordinary ones. Thus I
have shown you three of their Articles, which in the Talmud are called the
fathers of labor, by which you may easily know how to judge of the rest, only
I will add, that the offenses committed against both kinds are accounted
equal. The Articles which arise from the first, are called by the Jews, Tole
does Todeloth (...) Generations. The singular number is not found in all the
Scripture; the word is de^ived from (...) which signifies to proc^eate or
beger. It is only twice found written fully, that i^, with all the letters in
the whole Scripture. (...) In the second Chapter of Genesis, and the fourth
verse, When God had finished the generations of heaven and earth. And in the
last Chapter of the book of Ruth, and the eighteenth verse, where are reckoned
up the (...) of which Christ came, who is the fullness of all things. Rabbi
Isaac gives the reason, why it is d^^ective (...) other places. At the creation
death was not in the world, after the fall, it came and cut short the
generations; but when Phares came, his generation was made complete, because
Christ came of his ^eed.
Generations or offsprings, in the relation to the former appellation of
fathers. He that offends against either, is esteemed to deser^e stoning; but
who out of deliberate malice transgresses the least of them, God will blot his
name out of the book of life. These things are more at large commented upon in
the Talmud, the full description whereof, as it is there set down, many
volumes are not large enough to comprehend.

Now although the Jews in their own foolish con^eits, persuade themselves
that they rightly observe and keep the Sabbath, omitting nothing which
apperta^^es to the honoring and sanctifying thereof; yet experience it self,
to which both their consciences and doctrine give witness, cries out, that
they not at any time kept and sanctified it as they ought. Rabbi Jochanan in
that treatise of the Talmud about the Sabbath, in the sixteenth Chapter and the
hundred and eighteenth page, affirms, That whosoever keeps the Sabbath as he
ought, and as the strict rule there of requires, and abstaines from Idolatry,
shall have remission of all his s^ns; which he proves out of the fifty sixth
Chapter of Isaiah, and the second verse, where it is thus written; Blessed is
the man who does this, and the son of man who lays hold upon it, and who
keeps the Sabbath and pollutes it not, (...) mechallelo, and profanes it not,
for so the word in the original most properly signifies. Yet the skillful
rabbines will not have written Mechallelo but Machollo, which signifies, he
has obtained remission. Rabbi Jehuda says, that if the people of Israel had
sanctified the first Sabbath after the giving of the Law in that manner which
they ought, there had never any strange nation borne rule over them. For as it
is recorded upon the seventh day after the giving of the Law, Exodus 16. 27.
some of the people went out to gather manna, and found it not, for which sin
of theirs, Amal^k came and fought against Israel, Exodus 17. 8.
as it is written in the next Chapter. Rabbi Jochanan in the name of Rabbi
Simeon, who was the son of Jochai, says, that if Israel at this day, could
but rightly keep two Sabbaths, one immediately following the other, they should
be presently delivered out of their bondage; as it is written: Isa. 56 4,7.
Thus says the Lord, they that keep my Sabbaths. etc. Even unto them will I
give within my house and within my walls, a place and a name better then of
sons and daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, which shall not be
cut off: Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in
my house of prayer. Because therefore the Jews are not delivered unto this
day, yea are almost past hopes of a future deliverance, it must necessarily
follow, that as yet they have not sanctified the Sabbath as they ought: Yea,
they themselves confess so much, saying, that they were deficient herein in the
times foregoing the destruction of the second Temple, and that this was the
reason why Jerusalem was laid waste; for thus they hold on in the Talmud. Abhai
says, that Jerusalem was destroyed, by reason her inhabitants profaned the
Sabbath, as it is written; Her Priests have violated my Law, Ezekiel. 22. 26.
and have profaned my holy things: They have put no difference between the holy
and the profane, neither have they showed difference between the clean and the
unclean; they have hidden their eyes from my Sabbaths, Verse 31.
and I am profaned among them. Therefore have I poured out mine indignation
upon them. And even so do the Jews at this day; for they observe and keep the
Sabbath only with a good cup of wine, some dainty dishes of flesh and fish,
and al kind of pleasures to the utmost reach of their ability. They abstain
from all outward works, yea they will not have the least finger in any thing
which may carry any show of labor with it, or which may administer any
occasion, which may become a provocation to some work or other. So often as
they are necessitated, as in the winter time to the making of fires at sundry
times, to the snuffing of candles, putting out of their lamps, laying their
meat to the fire, milking their kine, and such like, they hire some poor
serving man who is a Christian, to do the same. Hence they are wont to glory,
that they are the sole Lords, Masters and Freemen of the Christians vassals
and bondslaves; and they who sitting behind a hot furnace, shall do all their
works for them. It were therefore in my opinion, very meet and convenient that
the Christian Magistrates should interdict all those that are their subjects,
to do any such servile works for the Jews, either upon the Sabbath, or at any
other time.

I should have brought some certain of their prayers, for a conclusion of this
Chapter, in the most of which they re-member to pray against the Christians;
Wherein they beseech God, that he would vouchsafe to give unto the Jews, the
riches of the Gentiles, that he would utterly confound the Ammonites, Moabites,
and Edomites (for by this means they Christen us at this day) that he would
smite all people with great fear and vexation, and stir up great wars and
tumults among the nations, even from the East unto the west. But because I have
decreed to reserve these, and many others for another tract, I here omit them,
and conclude with the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. (...). 13.
Bring no more vain oblations.

CHAP. XII.
How the Jews prepare themselves to celebrate the Passover, and of the
celebration of it.
HOW the Jews carry themselves all the week long, daily practicing the duties
of modesty and godliness, has been hitherto declared. Now it follows that
we should speak some things of those solemnities and rites, wherewith they
are wont to celebrate their Festivals. Their feasts are of two sorts, some
great and famous, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
such as those were which their Ancestors kept, and held once every year,
coming from all quarters, to the celebration of it, even to Jerusalem, Exodus
23. 14.
and their appearing before the Lord: Of this sort was the Feast of the
Passover, (...)
the Feast of weeks or Pentecost, the Feast of Tabernacles; which three were
commonly called Schelasch Regalim, The three times, or three courses.
out of the book of Exodus. Other Feasts they use, which they keep in those
Cities wherein they dwell and inhabit, which they call Jomim to^im, that is to
say, good days. The chief Feast among them of the first sort, is the
Passover, which they call by the name of Pesach Pesach (...) from (...) pasach
trans^t, to go over, or pass over a Feast of the Jews, in remembrance, that
God did pass over the houses of the Israelites, and smote not their first
born, when he smote the Egyptians
and is also the first in order; for from the month in which it is celebrated,
they begin to reckon their annual Festivals, and that according to the
commandment of God in the Law of Moses, saying, This month shall be unto you
the beginning of months; it shall be the first month in the year to you. Lo
the first day of the month Nisan The Hebrews at first, measured their months
by the course of the S^n^e, but after their departure out of Egypt, by the
course of the Moon, they either contained thirty days, and were called menses
pleni, or twenty nine, and were called menses cavi. After the captivity of
Babylon they gave them names. The first they called Nisan, containing part of
April, part of March, it is derived from (...) fugere, because in the
beginning of this month, the Israelites fled out of Egypt. It is also called
Abi^, because all things begin then to flourish; the word signifying a green
care. The second they call Aijar, which signifies beauty, because the trees
then begin to be beautified with buds and blossoms. The third they call Sivan,
from (...) Sevan in the Chalde, signifying dust, because by the heat of the
Sun, much dust first begins to be in this month. The fourth Thamuz, took the
name from the Idol of Tamuz, who was according to Rabbi Moses an Idolatrous
Prophet, and killed by the King. The fifth Ab, from (...) in the Chaldee, to
bring (...) fruit, for in this month the corn begins to ripen. The sixth,
Elul, August, from (...) Chald* explor avi^, because they begin then to hunt
and seek hares and wild beasts. The seventh, (...), September, from (...)
possidere, to possess, because then the harvest is got in, and in the
possession of the owners; or, as Schendler (...) to press out, because in this
month was their vintage, and the wine pressed out of the grapes. This was also
called Ethanim, from (...) Ethan, signifying strong, because in this month all
things come to their ripeness, strength and maturity. The eight, Bull, October,
from (...) to sprout out, because then begins a new spring, and the ^rees bud
and blossom, or from (...) Bull, signifying to fall away, because the leaves
then begin to fall from the trees. It is also called Marches^^^, from (...)
rachasch eructare, ebull^e, because the waters then begin to break out and
increase. The ninth, cis^eu, November, it takes the name from a star so
called, and arising in this month, Schem^ler, or from (...) signifying
inconstant, because the weather begins now to be inconstant; frost* snow, wind,
etc. The tenth Tebeth, December from (...) in the Sy^iack, insame commercium,
because winter begins, and stripping the earth of all her garments, does expose
her to disgrace. The eleventh S^h^beth, lanuary, signifying a rod, a seep^er,
or tribe, but in this place a rod or tree, because in this month, they began to
plant. The ^ast, Adar, February, from Adar to wax strong, because now the earth
begins to recover her former strength, by the S^ns approach.
is wherein the New Moon begins her course, is the beginning of the year,
from which they begin to reckon, and order aright their solemnities. Their
common year takes its beginning from the first of September, by them called
Tisri, in the time of the new moon. Hence we read of a fourfold new year in
the Talmud. The first begins upon the first day of Nisan, or March; it is the
new year, wherein begins the computation of the reigns of their Kings, and
celebration of their Feasts. The second begins upon the first day of the month,
Elul or August, and is called the new year of the bringing up of cattle. The
third takes its beginning from the first day of Schebeth or January, and it is
called the new year for trees.

Rabbi Hillel says, that this year begins on the fifteenth day of the foresaid
month. The last is called the New year of years, to wit of the year of
remission of Jubilee, of the planting of trees and herbs, and it begin upon
the first of Tisri, or September. So much the Talmud: Which is thus to be
understood.

The year of Kings, is that year according to which they reckon the years of
their reign in all Contracts, Indentures, Bills and Bonds, made in the year of
such or such a King; so that though any King do begin his reign a month only,
or a week, Note that their first of March is about the middle of our February.
yea but a day before the first of March, yet is time reckoned unto him for a
whole year, and the first of March next ensuing, they begin to write the
second year of his reign. In the same manner the first day of March is the time
from whence they begin to number their annual Feasts, and holidaies. So the
Feast of the Passover is kept in the first month; the Feast of Tabernacles in
the seventh month, and so forth.

2. The beginning of August, begins the year of the bringing up of their
cattle, from whence they begin to reckon the year and month, in which such
and such a beast was brought forth, so that by this means they more easily pay
tithe unto the Lord.

3. The first day of the new Moon in September, is the beginning of years,
because from this day they have always begun the computation of years from the
Creation of the world, to this present time. The year of rest or remission,
which was the seventh year or Sabbaticall year, when their fields and vines
were suffered to keep holiday, took its beginning from the first day of this
month; as also the year of Jubilee The word Jubilee as Marbachus says, comes
from Iubal, the first inventer of musical instruments. But rather from Iobel,
which signifies a Ram, or Rams horn, because the Priests did in this year,
sound on ram^ horns, or because it was a year of rejoicing.
which was every fiftieth year celebrated, of which you may read in the twenty
fifth Chapter of the third book of Moses. From this also they began to account
the times wherein they planted or grafted trees or herbs. So when any tree was
planted in the month of June, then the first year of its planting ended in
August, and the second began in September, etc. the tree being accounted as
unclean and uncir^um^ised, until three years were past and gone.

Lastly, The first day (or according to Rabbi Hillel) the fifteenth of January
did begin the new year of trees and fruits. for according to the time that the
trees before or after this day, did bring forth their fruits, so were they
permitted, or not permitted, to be eaten; and according to this supputation,
they paid their ti^hes also. The fruits ripening before the beginning of this
month, are dates and orenges, and such like, which were lawful to be eaten
the year not run out. But they which brought forth fruit, which was not come
to its full growth, the year not yet ended, it was not permitted unto any, to
eat thereof, before the fifteenth day of January. They paid tithes in like
manner of the former sort, but not of these. This is at large handled in the
forecited place of the Talmud, Antonius Margarita in his book of the faith of
the Jews, says, that the Jews write, that the trees first become sappy upon
the fifteenth of January, Page 70*
and that the pippins in pears or apples, then do turn themselves therein,
which experience teaches for a truth. In the Germane Minhagin, it is recorded,
that none ought to kill a Goose in January, because there is one fatal hour
in this month, in which if any man chance to kill this kind of creature* he
shall surely dye a sudden death. Yet if any do it out of ignorance, let him
take the liver of the Goose and eat it, and no danger will ensue upon the act
which Rabbi Juda Chasid confirms for a truth. So much by way of digression shall
suffice to be spoken of the years in use among the Jews: We now return to
treat of that which was first proposed. How the Jews prepare themselves to the
celebration of the passover.

They of the ri^her sort among the Jews sitting themselves for the celebration
of this Feast, ^spand number. 429.
by a thirty days preparation, buy wheat to make unleavened bread whereof they
may eat in the time of the Festival. They bestow also somewhat upon the poorer
sort, who cannot buy where withal to make unleavened cakes.

The Sabbath immediately foregoing the Feast of the passover, is among the
Jews an high and great day. In this the Rabbines make an Oration to the
people, in which they give a tedious instruction unto the people, concerning
the paschall lamb, and the use thereof. This Sabbath they call the great
Sabbath, a great miracle, happening upon the same, being godfather thereunto.

It is written in the second book of Moses, the tenth day of this month, Exodus
12 3, 6.
they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their
fathers, a lamb for an house. And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth
day of the same month; and the whole congregation of Israel shall kill it in
the evening. Upon which words the Rabbines write as follows. Our fathers (say
they) taking up their lambs upon the tenth day, bound them in their foulds,
that they might keep them unto the foureteenth. Which the Egyptians seeing,
made enquiry what they meant to do with them; to whom the Israelites answered,
that they would kill them against the Feast of the passover. The Egyptians
perceiving that they were about to slaughter and sacrifice that creature which
they worshipped as a creating god (for the Ram is a sign of the Zodiac) were
greatly perplexed, and began to imagine evil against Israel. Then God wrought
a miracle, smiting the minds of the Egyptians with fear and amazement, yea
with such an agony, that they were not able to wag their tongue against the
children of Israel, nor to afflict them with the smallest annoyance of a
mischief. Hence was (say they) that answer of Moses to Pharaoh, Exodus 8. 26.
It is not meet to do so, for then we should offer unto the Lord our God,
that which is an abomination unto the Egyptians. Lo can we sacrifice the
abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and they not stone us?
Abomination, that is, that Lamb, the killing whereof, will be in the eyes of
the Egyptians, an abominable and heinous offense, seeing they adore him as a
God.

Insomuch also, as it pleased the Lord so to work with the Egyptians, that
they had neither strength nor power to do any harm unto the children of
Israel, and that in such a miraculous manner; therefore they style this
Sabbath, which is the harbinger to the passover, and ushereth in the
celebration by the name of the great Sabbath.

Again it is written, Exodus 13. 7.
Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days, and there shall no leavened
bread be seen with thee, nor yet leaven be seen with thee in all thy quarters.
Out of which words, they gather thus much, that when the time of the Feast
approaches, they ought with all diligence, to seek out all the leavened bread
in their houses, and every parcel of leaven that may be found; to wash with
water all their kneading troughes, and other vessels; and in the second place,
to have in a readiness new dough for to make unleavened bread against the
Passover. Therefore two or three days at least before the Feast, they begin
to brush up and make handsome all their household stuff in that form and
manner, which decency persuades, and necessity requires.

In the first place they take a great Caldron used for the celebration of
Festivals, which they fill full of water, and hanging it over the fire, cause
it to boil. Into this they cast all their wooden and pewter vessels; and
after the scalding water has sufficiently loosed the adherent filth, they take
them out and wash them in cold water, which done, every vessel is held for
pure and undefiled. If any thing or other by reason of the bigness thereof,
cannot be put into the foresaid Caldron, as a chair, stool, table, or such
like, then they take a red hot iron or stone, holding it in a pair of tongs
over the table, pouring water in great abundance thereupon, whereby the table,
chair or stool, may be washed. They make no spare of water, for if any part
of the foresaid things be untouched therewith, they remain undefiled. They
daube with clay the kneading trough, after it be thoroughly washed, and set it
aside in some corner of the house. They fill their great Caldrons being
formerly cleansed, with hot water; which done, they cast three live coals
thereinto so fierce, that they make the water to hiss again, and then wash
them in cold water.

For the more easy cleansing of pewter and leaden vessels, they use two pair
of tongs, with the one putting them into the Caldron, and with the other,
taking them out; to this end; that by this mutual change, the vessels may be
made clean. They cast their vessels of iron; as little pots, dripping pans,
broiling irons, and such like, into the fire, where they let them remain
until they sparkle with heat, and then they are clean in estimation. They fill
their brass and iron mortars with coals, binding a thread about them, which
by the vehemence of the heat being burnt asunder, shows the purification to be
perfect. A mortar of stone ought to be new cut or engraven: Briefly, it is
necessarily required, that all vessels of what sort soever, be in every part so
exactly cleansed and purified, that not the smallest sign or token of that
un^leannesse, signified by the leaven, may be really extant or obvious to the
sense; for whosoever eats meat out of any dish or platter in the time of the
passover, that dish or platter being unclean, he commits as heinous a sin, as
if he had slept with a menstruous woman. Just then was that reprehension given
by our Savior unto the Pharisees, Mar. 7. 8.
Ye lay the commandment of God apart, and observe the traditions of men; as
the washing of pots and of cups, and many other such like things you do. And
he said unto them, well, you reject the commandments of God, that you may
observe your ownae traditions. ^at. 23. 25, 27.
And again, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; for you make
clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter; but within they are full of
bribery and excess. Woe be unto you Scribes, Pharisees and hypocrites; for ye
are like unto whited tombs, which appear beautiful outward, but are within
f^ll of dead men's bones, and all filthiness do ye also; for outward ye
appear righteous unto men, but within you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
So much concerning their cleansing of vessels.

In the next place we must enquire into the manner, Orach. chajim number. 434.
Tract. P^sa^. cap. 1.
how they purge and cleanse the old leavened bread, which they formerly sought
for with so much diligence.

Upon the night before the passover, every one, who is Master of a family,
takes a platter and a wing, and lighting a wax candle before he begins his
search, says, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the whole world, who
have sanctified us by thy commandments, and have commanded us to purge out the
old leaven. Then if his house be large and spacious, containing many rooms and
stories, he calls unto him some boys or others of riper years, to help him for
to search; but no women, because they are idle and talkative, and unfit for
such emploiments; these serve as Clerks to say Amen to the former prayer, and
then become fellow-seekers to find out the leavened bread, every one of these
carrying a wax light in his hand, holding the same to every ^hinke and
mouse-hole, that he may see whether any rat or mouse have left any crumbs of
bread uneaten. He is to lift the light no higher then his arms will stretch;
especially in that place where his own wall joines to the wall of the house of
some Christian, for in such a place he is not permitted to seek at all; for if
the light should chance to shine through the crevises into the Christians
house, he might think the Jew were about to set the same on fire. Wheresoever
the house of one Jew adheres unto another, there the scrutator for rats and
mice, must search in every place, as much as he can possible. They must use no
tallow candles in this their scrutinie, for these will suddenly melt, and it is
to be feared, that the chamber should not become clean, but rather defiled by
the leaven hereof. Sometimes they willingly, and of set purpose, cast osme
crusts of bread upon the pavement, especially upon that which they conceive to
be purified, to the end, that their laborious search and prayer, may not be in
vain. These crusts must be of great antiquity, and of an hoary hardness,
otherwise all the fat is in the fire. The bread which is appointed for them to
eat at supper, they hide before they begin to search, lest they should find
this also, and so be forced to burn it, and by this means it should come to
pass that they might go supperlesse to bed. It is not lawful for any man to
speak a word between the ending of prayer and the finishing of the foresaid
inquisition unless it be necessarily required for the execution of the same,
as, open that chamber door, bring hither that candle that I may see.

So much leaven as they find, they gather together, and lay it aside until
the next day, in some safe place, lest a mouse should carry some parcel there
of into her hole, and they caused to renew their search; and this is the reason
why they always ^up in a corner, taking great care that nothing fall out of
their hands upon the floor, and so the whole house should be repolluted. When
the Master of the family has made an end of searching, then he says, what
leaven soever is in my hand, what is not seen by me, that which I have not
found out, let it all upward and downward, be like unto the dust of the earth.

Upon the morrow of the eve of the passover, they begin to bake their spiced
and unleavened cakes. The meal whereof they are made, ought to be ground at
the mill, at least three days before, that it may be cold enough, to the end,
that the lump may not leaven up. The millstone must be new picked, and new
linen is also to be used, which if it cannot be got, it is necessary the old
be thoroughly shaken; for it is ordinary for them to be moist, by reason whereof
the meal may cleave unto them, which in grinding, may int^rmixe it self with
that which is new and sweet, appointed for the celebration of the Festival.
The chest also wherein this pasehall meal is put, ought also to be lined with
linen, lest some corns of a diverse sort, should be mingled there withal. The
water which they use in kneading their dough, they call Mitzuah, or the water
of the commandment, which they draw out of the wels, pour it into the vessels
of celebration, and carry it home about the setting of the Sun, the stars not
yet appearing. They carry it home covered, for it is not permitted that the
Sun should shine upon this water, for the space of 24 hours together. For as
the Sun sends out its beams upon the earth for the space of twelve hours in
the day, and cannot with his rays pierce into the fountain: So must it be
covered for the twelve hours in the night, by which means the Sun comes not
at it by the space of a whole natural day. The Master of the family is bound
to draw the water out of the well or pit, with his own hands, and never think
himself to worthy to undertake such a business; for it is recorded that in
ancient days, a certain King of Israel upon a certain time, took the first
fruits of the trees, and in his own person carried them upon his shoulders
into the garners.

When they begin to knead the dough, then the Master of the family, says, All
the crumbs that fall from this lump, shall be accursed; signifying by these
words, that whatsoever falling upon the earth, becomes leavened, ought to be
given unto, or left for the mice, as also that he utterly disclaimes all
challenge thereof. They work their dough in a cold place, whither the Sun
has small or no access, which is likewise far distant from the oven, lest
the lump might wax hot, and be in danger to be leavened.

The Mistrisse of the house usually takes a certain portion of the foresaid
lump, which in the Law is called Chall^h challah Some (...) think it to be so
called, from the lightness, as though it were written (...), but without
reason. Others more probably, from the shortness and frugality of it, deriving
it from (...) aegrotare, in^^rmari, but most properly from (...) vulnerare,
because being thrust often through with an iron, it has as it were so many
wounds given it.
and making a cake thereof, says, B^essed be thou O God our God, who have
commanded us to set aside an unleavened cake; as it is written: He took of the
basket of unleavened bread that was before the Lord, one unleavened cake, and a
cake of oiled bread, one wafer, and put them upon the fat, and upon the right
shoulder, Lev. 8. 26. Upon the uttering of these words, she casts the cake
into the fire or furnace, that it may be burnt to ashes, before any of the
other be put into the oven: Which done, she raised the unleavened loaves,
which are to be eaten in the time of the Passover. These are commonly made
round, full of little holes, pierced through with an iron, much like to a
horse-combe, that the air posting along through the portals of the cake, may
preserve it from leavening. They use great have in setting them into the oven,
not suffering them to stand any time in the bake house; which taken out again,
wanting both salt and fatness, and kneaded only with water, have neither
taste nor relish. Hence it comes to pass, that some honest huswifes put eggs
into them, that they may be more grateful to the taste.

It has been related unto me, that some of the richer sort of the Jews, make
these their paschall cakes of almonds, not only in honor of the Feast, but
for the pleasing of the palate.

Before the fifth hour of the day be fully come to pass, Ora^^. chajim number.
471.
which is the eleventh with us, they go unto dinner, eating little, and such
mea^es as are easy of digestion, from that time forward. until the stars
appear in the firmament that they may with a more greedy appetite, eat up at
supper their un^ea^ened cakes. If any one in the time be oppressed with
thirst, he may not drink water, but it is lawful for him to carouse a full
bowl of wine, because it is very good to help the stoma^k. Supper being
ended, they cast all the leavened bread which they found the night before, into
the fire, and burn it. The Master of the household saying these words, Let all
the leaven, and every thing leavened which is under my hand, seen or unseen,
purged or not purged, being utterly dissipated or destroyed, be accounted like
unto the dust of the earth.

The first born in the evening of the passover, are injoined to fast from
morning until night, because God in times past, did preserve the first born of
the children of Israel, and suffered not the destroier to come in unto them.
Pesach. cap. 4.
At midday they cease to labor, yet it is no offense for them in the
afternoon to wash their clothes, to fet^h^home new ones from the Tailor, to put
them on in honor of the feast. I conclude with the words of our Savior, Take
heed of the ^^aven of the Pharisees and Sadduces, that is to say, of their
false doctrine and hypocrisy.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the manner how the Jews celebrate their Feast of the Passover, according
to the Jewish form.
IN the evening of the passover, when it begins to be night, they hasten into
the Synagogue, where partly by praying, partly by singing* they offer up their
evening sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving, according to the form set down
in their books of common prayer. The women at home light two great lamps,
accordingly as they did upon the Sabbath; yet they do not here begin the
Feast, as they did then by the consecration of wine, for there is none whose
estate is at the lowest ebb, but he will have a cup of choice wine to welcome
the feast withal, but only sit in the Synagogue until their return unto
their own houses. In the mean time, their wives at home do very honorably
furnish the table, Orach. chajim number. 472.
placing thereupon, vessels of gold and silver, and other precious thing,
according to the several estate of every one in particular; for at this
season, every man ought to make show of his riches, not in a vain boasting
ostentation, but in honor to the Feast. For the doleful remembrance which
ought continually to be inserted in their minds, concerning the desaoltions of
the Temple of Jerusalem, and also intermixed with all their joy and jollities,
is a sufficient curb for the former. A chair of Estate is provided for the
Master of the family, adorned with silk pillowes or cushions, upon which he
may sit, lean, and rest himself; the walls of his house, and the places about
the table being hung with costly darnicks, or cloth of arras, and that in as
curious a manner as possibly can be invented. In such like chaires they seat
themselves, and lean against the walls thus adorned, like some great Lords or
potentates, who being delivered out of the Egyptian bondage, should no more be
inthralled therewith; for every one of them upon the two first nights of the
Festival, conceits himself to be some great Duke or mighty Prince, one
redeemed from the servility of exile, though in very deed, he be the veriest
tag rag that ever went from door to door; one of the poorer sort, who is
forced to hold his dish under another man's ladle, having not so much as an old
shirt to supply the place of a Carpet or any more costly cushion then a turfe,
will place himself this night in some worm-eaten chair, and counterfeit such
Court-like postures, as though he were some young Baron, who had danced away
the greatest part of his means in learning and practicing the light and nimble
carriage of his body. As for the women, it is not needful for them to lean
themselves against anything.

When it is late at night* they make great speed out of the Synag gue, and
feather their heels with expedition to revisite their own homes, where they
are no sooner entered but they command a certain platter to be set before
them, in which lie three cakes wrapped up in two napkins: The uppermost of
which, represen^s the High Priest, the middle, the tribe of L vi, and the
lowest, the whole congregation of Israel. There is also another platter set
upon the table, in which is the haun^h of a lamb, or of a kid, together with
an egg hard roasted. A dish of postage is the next service, made with apples
pears nuts, figs, almonds, orenges and such like fruits, first boiled in wine,
looking as though they were mixed with bruised bricks. Upon these they straw
many spices, but especially cinnamon scarce beaten at all, so that this kind of
pottage seems to have in them both clay and straw; in remembrance that their
forefathers out of these materials, made bricks in the land of Egypt. Moreover,
they grace the table with a sallet made of herbs, of an eager taste, as,
lettice, ivye, raddish, persley, savory, cresses, and such like. Over against
which, they place another dish full of vinegar, in memory, that their ancestors
eat the paschall lamb with bitter herbs. The table being thus furnished, they
in great have take their place, every one, old and young, yea the very infant
lying as yet in the cradle, has a bowl of wine presented unto him, and then
the Master of the house consecrates the cup, and gives an orderly beginning to
the feast: Grace being said, every one takes up his whole one, resting himself
upon the left arm, and pressing with his elbow his silken pillow, as though
he were some right honorable, and thrice noble Lord and Potentate. Some wash
their hands before the giving of thanks, some after. Concerning which, many
disputes are extant in the Talmud, and for decision of the controversy, many
touch their naked body with their hands, that hereby they may take occasion to
wash them. They use Claret wine for the most part in this Feast, because there
is the greatest plenty of it to be had; if such cannot be had, then they use
some other for the initiation hereof, always provided, it be intermixed with
certain spices.

Immediately after they have washed their throats, they fall sourely upon the
sallets, every one taking a little thereof, and dipping it in vinegar; the
Master of the house also saying, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the
world, who have created the f^uites of the earth. They eat these herbs thus
drencht in vinegar, to make their stomach give a more plausible entertainment
to the succeeding dishes, it being very sovereign for the invitation of an
appetite. To proceed: The Master of the household taking that cake of the three
which lies in the middle out of the platter, breaks it in twain, and putting
the greater part there of under his pillow or napkin (signifying thereby, that
their fathers flying out of Egypt* took their dough before it was leavened,
their kneading troughes being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders)
he puts the other half into its former place, between the two whole cakes,
throwing the lambs leg roasted, and the egg, out of the other platter. Then
every one laying hands on the dish wherein is the half cake, says with a loud
voice, such was the bread of affliction, wherewith our fathers were fed in the
land of Egypt. Every one that is hungry, let him come and eat his fill;
whosoever has need, let him come and eat of the paschall lamb. This year we
are in this place, the next year we shall be in the land of Canaan: This year
we are servants and bondmen, the next year (God saying Amen) we shall be
redeemed, become Lords and Masters. (In this place the half cake is an emblem
of poverty and exile: The reason is, a poor man or a beggar has not a whole
loase in all his house, but only scraps and fragments) This their practice they
ground upon those words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 16. 3.
Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of
affliction. This descant ended, they set the lambs leg, and the roasted egg
upon the table again, and the second time present every person in particular,
with a bowl of wine, and take the platter wherein the cakes are, from the
table, that the children may move a question, according to the custom of
ancient days, which is recorded in these words, It shall come to pass, Exodus
12. 26, 27.
that when your children shall say unto you, what mean you by this service?
That ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lords passover, who passed over
the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and
delivered our houses. So the children of the Jews at this day ought to ask
their fathers why they remove the cakes from the table, before they have tasted
of them, and they are to answer them according to the tenor of these words.
Instantly, upon the solution of the objection, the cakes are the second time
set upon the table, and then the whole company sings a tedious song concerning
their deliverance out of the land of Egypt: When they come to that division,
wherein mention is made of the ten plagues of Egypt, they slack their voice,
and with their fingers cast some drops of wine out of the cup; thereby
intimating that these ten plagues being banished out of their doors, ought to
fall upon their enemies the Christians. The song being ended every one taking
his cup into his hand, and in a high note singing or saying; It is meet and our
bounden duty, that we should confess, praise, glorify, extol, honor and
bless him, who has not done not only for our Ancestors, but for us also all
these signs and wonders, who has vouchsafed to bring us out of darkness into
light, out of bondage into liberty, out of the dungeon of sorrow, into the
fair fields of joy and gladness, and has changed our days of mourning and
lamentation, into holy Festivals, representing a delightful Jubilee, for this
cause will we come before him, and sing many hallelujahs to his holy name;
sitting in his chair like a spanish Don newly transformed by a new fashion, he
carouses the second bowl. Then the Master of the house washing his hands,
takes the uppermost cake out of the dish, and says, Blessed be thou O Lord our
God, King of the world, who bring bread out of the earth; yet not eating
thereof, he takes again the middle cake, and says, Blessed be thou O Lord our
God, King of the world, who have sanctified us by thy commandments, and have
enjoined us to eat unleavened bread. Immediately upon the pronuntiation of
these words, he breaks a morsel of both cakes, and eats it, commanding the
rest to do likewise, who all lean upon their left side. Then they take one
whole cake, together with the half; notwithstanding that upon the Sabbath they
are accustomed only to the use of whole loaves, and the reason, Mark here
that the Jews are beggart by their own confession. who immediattly before.
bo^sted themselves as Lords.
because Moses calls it the bread of poverty or affliction; for a poor man is
Lord of no other, save some basket-pieces. In the next place the Master of the
family takes some of the bitter herbs, and puts them into the foresaid
pottage, saying, Blessed be thou O Lord God, King of the world, who have
commanded us to feed upon bitter herbs; and then he invites every one to eat
thereof. They do not now as formerly lean upon their pillowes, in
remembrance, that their forefathers were as yet servants compelled by Pharaoh,
togather straw, and labor in the brick kilne.

Lastly, he takes the third cake out of the platter, and breaks a piece out of
the same, and falls again to feed upon his bitter sallet, but dips not the
herbs into the pottage; because Rabbi Rabbi Hillel lived and flou^ished about
Christ's time, in the year, 3930. Alsied.
Hillel, who li^ed before the destruction of the second Temple, was accustomed
so to do; and they prove it also out of the words of Moses, who says, you
shall eat unleavened cakes, with bitter herbs shall you eat them; Exodus 12. 8.
so they read it: But the words of Moses are according to the truth of the
original, these which follow, In that night they shall eat the flesh roste
with fir^, and unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs shall they eat it.

So much concerning the prologue or preparatory acts to the Supper of the
Paschall lamb; now begins the supper it self. They eat whatsoever God has
provided, making very merry, quaffing off, and carousing whole bowls of wine,
and beer, until the middle of the night; which approaching, the Masser of the
Feast takes the half cake which he had hid under his pillow, eats a little
thereof, and reaches unto every man present a morsel of the same: which done,
they lean very demurely upon their left sides, wash their hands, take a cup of
wine, and drink it off, which is the third cup by them blessed and
consecrated. At length, thanks being given, the cups are filled the fourth
time, and the good man of the house taking his cup into his hands, says, pour
out thy wrath upon the Gentiles, Psalm. 69. 25.
and upon the Kingdoms that have not known thy name, pour out thine
indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful displeasure take hold on them. In
the mean time, one running to the door, unlocks it, and sets it open, thereby
willing to show their great security. In this saying, they curse all people
which are not of Israel, more especially the Christians, hoping that Elias will
come that very night, and declare unto them the coming of their Savior and
deliverer the Messiah, as they also brag and boast in that prayer, called Azrob
nissim The two first words thereof.
their reason is, because all those famous deliverances so full of wonder which
God wrought for the Patriarchs, Prophets, and people of Israel, happened as upon
this night. They pray therefore that God would come again, and deliver them
out of this their calamity, and punish the Christians in the same manner, that
he did the Egyptians. Hence it comes to p^sse, Orach. chajim number. 48.
that so soon as the gates are opened, and the execeration is pronounced, one
of the household invested with a white linen garment, runs into the nur^ery,
that the infants may think that Elias is come indeed, and is about to take
vengean e on the Christians. For a conclusion of all, the Master of the family
says certain table-prayers at the period of the supper, which he closes up
in this manner: Almighty God build again thy Temple, and that shortly, very
quickly in these our days, very quickly now build again, and that shortly,
thy holy Temple. Omercifull God, O great God, O bountiful God, O thou God that
art highly exalted, O beautiful God, O sweet God, O virtuous God, O God of the
Jews, now build up thy Temple very* quickly and with great expedition in these
our days, very quickly very quickly now build up, now build up, now build up,
now build, now build up thy Temple quickly, O strong and powerful God, living
God, mighty God, O God worthy of all honor, O God of meekness, O eternal
God, a God that art to be feared, O God of comeliness, God of majesty, God of
infinite riches, God of surpassing beauty, O faithful God, now build up thy
Temple shortly, very quickly, very quickly in these our days, shortly, very
quickly, now build up, now build up, now build up, now build up, now build up
thy Temple, speedily. The Orizons ended, they betake themselves, to rest, and
sleep in great security; for they persuade themselves, that this night neither
man nor devil can approach to do them any hurt. This night is called in the
second book of Moses and the 12 Chapter, Lel Schemarim, the night of
observation or preservation. Hereup on their minds being fraughted with such a
conceit, they abandon fear, leave open their gates and doors all the night
over, to give an entrance to Elias the Prophet, who as they assure themselves,
will come and deliver them out of this their misery. Thus the poor blirdfolded
Jews trouble and vex themselves with this their vain pomp, and pompous
vanity, for two nights together, instead of that paschall lamb which they
ought to have eaten, using no other ceremonies, then Moses in the institution
thereof has described. It being the position of their Rabbines that it was not
required at their hands, after the destruction of their City and Temple, to
Kill and eat the paschall lamb, according to the ceremonial prescription of
Meses and that they are not tied to observe these or any others by him
enjoined, unless they were in the promised land of Canaan which land alone is
to be accounted pure and holy, all others defiled and profane. Now from these
premises, every one may infer thus much, that seeing the Jews have not, srom
that time wherein the true paschall lamb Christ Jesus was offered, eaten the
posseover in any place according to the right prescription; and also seeing the
Jews at this day so journing in Jerusalem, and the land of Canaan, do not eat
the paschall lamb in the manner that they ought; neither do they offer any
sacrifice, it must necessarily follow, that there is some other cause, why
their sacrifices are ceased, and all other their Mosaicall Rites and Ceremonies
are abrogated, which certainly they might have found out in the space of 1631
years, had they not been smitten with blindness from above. So that now we
may say with the Prophet David, This their may utters foolishness, Psalm. 49.
13.
yet their posterity delight in their talk. But my people would not hear my
voice, and Israel would have none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, Psalm. 81. 12, 13.
and they have walked in their counsels. The Rabbines establish this their
opinion out of the words following. Thou shall therefore sacrifice the
passover unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 16 2.
of the flock and the herd in the place, which the Lord shall choose to place
his name there. Now, seeing God enjoins them (according to their ordinary
gloss) that they should not celebrate this Feast in any other place, but in
the promised land; they do infer, that now being dispersed among the
Nations, they are not liable to the observation of the same. But the true sense
of the words is this; That when God had put a period to Isreal's captivity, and
brought them into the land of promise, the land of Canaan, and having given
unto them a settled kind of regiment, a City and a Temple in which it pleased
him to place his name, then they should repair to Jerusalem to eat the
pas^hall lamb, for the better preservation of the unity of faith among them,
as to the Metropolis and chief City of Israel. But when the scepter was in a
manner taken from them by reason of in^ess^nt w^^rs and tumults, so that they
could not come unto Jerusalem then did every family kill and eat the passover
in their own gates; as it is recorded in the second book of Kings. And so soon
as they were delivered out of these their troubles, 2 Kin. 23 22.
they celebrated the said Feast again in the place appointed with great
solemnity and rejoicing; as good Josial is recorded to have done in the
sore-cited place. Now that for the space of 1631 years, they could not kill
nor eat the paschall lambe^ right none must seek for another cause, then that
of the departure of the Scepter from Juda, the desolation of Jerusalem, and
their long continued exile. For why did not Jerusalem remain unto this day? why
is not the Temple built again? The sacrifices and ceremonies delivered by
Moses, why are they not re-established? The Jews cannot see the reason hereof,
because Moses his veil is as yet before their eyes.

It was formerly mentioned, that the Jews at the supper of the paschall Lamb,
use to carouse four cups of wine, two before supper, two after, which four
consecrated cups, every one ought to drink off, Rabbi Bechai parascha vaeia
Exodus 6. 6, 7.
in lieu of a thanksgiving (as Rabbi Bechai writes) for the four great
deliverances mentioned by Moses in those words, I will bring you forth from
under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage,
and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgment. And
I will take you to me for a people, and I will be your God, which brings you
out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. I will bring you out from under
the hands of the Egyptians; there is the first. I will redeem you with a
stretched outarme; that's the second. I will take you to me for a people; there is
the third. I will be your God, The first word of the prayer signifying pour out
from (...) effundere.
etc. there is the fourth. In remembrance of which four deliverances, they take
off four whole cups of wine, in the time of the celebration of the passover,
lest they should seem forgetful of Gods benefits. The reason why after these
their cups, they curse the Christians in a prayer called Schepoch, is
(according to Rabbi Bechai in the foresaid place) because God shall pour upon
the enemies of the Jews, the Christians and all others, four cups of his
wrath and vengeance; and make them drink the dregs thereof; as it is written,
Jer. 25. 15.
Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I
send thee to drink it. And again, Babylon has been a golden cup in the
Lords hand that has made all the earth drunken. The nations have drunk of her
wine, therefore the nations are mad. Jer. 51. 7.
Again, He shall rain upon the wicked, Psalm. 75. 9.
snares, fire and brimstone, and vapors of smoke, this shall be their portion
to drink. Again, There is a cup in the hand of the Lord, and the wine thereof
is red as for the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall drink them,
and suck them out. If the Jews could rightly weigh and ponder the scope of
these words and parallel them with other places of holy writ, they might
easily find, that this cup is in the first place filled for them, according to
that which is written by the Prophet, saying, I took the cup at the Lords hand,
and made all the nations to drink, to whom the Lord had sent me: To wit,
Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, and the Kings thereof, to make them a
desolation, and an astonishment, an hissing and a curse as it is this day;
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and his servants, his Princes and his people. When
therefore the Jews have drunk off, and digested this fearful cup, they will
have but a slender stomach to reach it out unto the Christians. From all that
has been said, we may conclude, that the Jews keep not the passover
according to Moses his institution, and Gods command, but according to the
traditions of the Rabbines; which with them are in far greater account, then
the commanements of God, as is apparent in the Talmud: Wherein is extant a huge
tract concerning the celebration of this Feast, upon which the Rabbines have
written whole Books and Commentaries. 1 Cor. 7. 8.
To leave them to their vanities, let it be our consolation, That Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us, and therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of malicio^ snesse, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth, John 1. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20.
saying with John, Behold the lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the
world, and with St Peter, knowing that we were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from our vain conversation, received by tradition
of the fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as a lamb undefiled and
without spot, which was ordained before the foundation of the world, but
declared in the last times for our sakes, let us learn not to be ashamed.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the manner how the Jews celebrate the seven days of the passover, and put
a conclusion to the Festival.
While the Feast of the Passover lasts, Minhag. p. 17. Orach. cha^sm (...)
484, etc.
every morning betimes they repair to the Synagogue, they sing Psalms, as they
are wont to do upon the Sabbath, say many prayers, make sale diversely of the
book of the law; they take two several books of the Law out of the Arc,
calling forth five men to read some sections out of the same. If the passover
fall upon the Sabbath, then they call out seven men. When the Priest blesses
the people, the prayers being ended, then he spreads abroad his hand, because
it is the assertion of their Doctors, that the majesty of the Lord rests upon
them; who hereupon have given a strict inhibition, that none in the mean while
should presume to look upon his own hands, unless he will incur the danger
of blindness.

Prayers being ended, every man returns unto his own house, where he falls to
his dinner with a merry heart: When a special caution is to be had, that he
eat no more then necessity requires, that they may the night following, with
greater alacrity, satiate their stomachs with those three cakes mentioned in
the former Chapter. Great di^putes arise, what labors it is lawful to
undertake, what meats may be boiled and eaten upon this day; for it is not
lawful to boil more then they can eat; yet notwithstanding it is allowed to
set on the great pot, and to fill it with flesh: For by this action no danger
can accrue unto them, though the whole be not that day consumed. Much flesh is
the cause of much good, and the more is put in the pot, it will taste the better
in it self, and make the fatter pottage; yet though this be tolerated, yet it
is not permitted to roste more then they may with ease devour, for one joint
upon the spit is never the better tasted for the neighborhood of his fellow.
And again meat is far more delightsome to the palate, when it is piping
hot, then when it is cold. That which may be boiled upon the eve of the
Sabbath, or any Festival, and not lose its taste before the nextday, they may
then boil it, if not, it is lawful sor them to boil it upon the Sabbath day
or Festival, the great Sabbath only accepted; as also the beating of pepper,
and other spi^es, which once beaten do quickly lose their proper re^ish; yet a
ceremony is to be used, for they must bray with the small end of the pestle, and
also make the mortar to lean more to the one side then the other, that a
certain differe^e may be observed between the labors of the week, and those of
the holy day. It is no offense for the mother to wash her infant with hot water
in the time of this Festival, although a Christian did make it hot. It is not
lawful to take the match out of one lamp, and put it unto her. If any desire,
that a wax light should not be altogether consumed, he may set it in the water,
that when the flame comes to the water, it may be extinguished; for it is a
heinous wickedness to cut off that part of the candle with a knife, which he
would have saved.

A Jew is not permitted to invite any Christian upon any Festival, by reason
he might be necessitated to boil and sees more then ordinary, or to undertake
some other labor, which may dishonor the day, by a profanation. If a
Christian come by chance then it is good manners, and also relisheth of
hospitality for the Jew to invite him.

It is not lawful to fast upon a Feasting day, both to avoid evil dreams, as
also by reason of the command, Thou shall be merry in thy Feasts; Deuteronomy. 16. 14.
and it is very meet it should be so, which cannot be done with an empty
stomach, for music in the guts makes the heart merry; contrariwise, and for
the foresaid reason, a man may fast upon the Sabbath; for the Sabbath is styled
by the name of Oneg, which signifies a delight, and if he fast thereupon, it is
delightful unto him, seeing hereby, he shall not be cumbered with fearful
dreams, but his heart shall overflow with joy and gladness.

It is also lawful to weep upon the Sabbath, even to the satiating of the
appetite, which is prohibited upon any Festival, for then his spleen ought to
overflow with laughter, which will not admit of tears for a joint companion.
If any stuff a hen or capon, and sew up the place with a needle, he may burn
off, but not cut the thread; also provided that he thread the needle the day
before. The platters which are used for breakfast, may not be washed for to
serve at supper, but clean ones are to be taken. It is not permitted to hunt,
hawk, or fish; yea although a Christian have caught them, and offer them in
sale unto a Jew, he may not lawfully eat thereof, so long as the Feast
endures; but as for hens and geese, and others which are fatted at home, they
may lawfully kill and eat them. There is also no small controversy amongst
them, whether a man may eat a new laid egg, as also fruits plucked from the
tree* and herbs rooted out of the earth upon the day of Feast. Furthermore,
concerning the killing of beasts, cleaving of wood, making a fire, tinding of
the same, boiling, baking, mi^king of kine, and such like, of which there is a
peculiar tract extant in the Talmud, called Betza, or a disputation about the
eating of eggs: There are diverse opinions concerning the question. The School
or Sect of Schammai affirms, that it is lawful to eat an egg laid upon the
day of the Festival. Hillell avouch^th the contrary, which has caused many a
jarring dispute among the Rabbines. All which are decided in the book called
Orach chajim. number. 495. usque 530.


At eventide they return into the Synagogue for to pray, which they do with
so great have, as though they were following their enemies in flight; the
reason is because they are to boil their meat after evening prayer, which they
are to eat at supper. The day following they celebrate with the same pomp and
solemnity, that they did the former, because then they are uncertain which is
the first day of the new moon in March, and consequently which is the
fourteenth thereof. The celebration therefore of the Feast of the Passover,
holds for the space of two days together, that they may not commit an error in
the keeping thereof. If any one chance in these two days to find any leaven
in his house, he must cover it with a dish or platter, and the day following to
burn it. If any have ducks, hens geese, or doves about his house, he must cast
the corn wherewith he feeds them in a wet place, for if some should be left,
and it should chance to increase, he is held guilty of sowing grain upon the
Sabbath day.

Next after these in order follow four other days, which are only half holy
days, and are called by the name of common-Festivals, upon which they may do
some works but not all; which is also much disputed, and the question stated
in Orach chajim; as for instance: It is lawful to do those things upon this
day which being undone are subject to perish and also some damage may follow
thereupon; as the milking of kine, and such like, It is permitted to cut the
hair of a young man, which is denied to an old one. He that has but one shirt
may wash it so that he do it in private; and the mother may also wash the
childrens clouts; to smooth their linen and collars; ^o make clean their
shoes; to sharp their knives; to write a letter, so that he write the lines
crooked; and many other works he may lawfully undergo, so that the manner of
doing may be somewhat singular, that a difference may be put between the
labors of the week and the Festival. Amongst other things, many have allowed
the paring of nails as upon these days; but the most religious among them,
seeing it to be a matter of great difficulty, have only permitted women, which
are to purge themselves by washing from their uncleanness, to practice it; for
they are bound upon the day of their purification, to cut the nails of their
hands and feet, lest some impure thing might lurk under them.

The seventh day of the Festival is holy, according to the Law of Moses,
wherein it is written, The first day shall be holy unto you, in it you shall
do no manner of work, except that which every man must eat, that only may
be done of you. Upon this day they repair to the Synagogue, to offer up their
morning and evening sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving: Taking the book of
the Law in a pompous manner, and putting the same into the Arc again,
boasting thereof in a wonderful manner; and because they are uncertain which
is the seventh day, therefore they hallow with an equal celebration, the
seventh and eighth; which time expired, they bring again leavened bread into
their houses, that God may see that they obey his commandments, and stretch
out the Feast no longer then he has enjoned. After this, the men must fast for
three days, two Mundaies, and one Thursday. That if any one have drunk too
much in the time of the Feast, or have any other way profaned it, he may do
penance for the fact. For thirty days after the passover, the Jews carry
foul weather in their face, are very sorrowful, make no marriages, neither
cutting their hair, nor going into any bath: And that for the sake of Akibha,
an excellent and learned Rabbine who had 24 thousand scholars, who all dyed
beeween Easter and Pentecost, because one emulated and envied, despised,
backbited, detracted another, not any way exhibiting those debts of love and
honor, to the payment of which they are liable. All the foresaid persons dyed
in the night time, and were buried by the women; for which cause they cease
from labor at Sun set, and hallow the night following. Upon the thirty third
day after the passover, the Jews have a great solemnity; cut their beards,
bath themselves, feast and make merry, because the days of mourning for
Akibha' s scholars are now ended. So much concerning the Feast of the
passover. I conclude all with the saying of Isaiah, They have not known nor
understood, Isaiah 44. 18.
for he has shut their eles that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they
cannot understand. Therefore with my Savior, I say, Mat. 15. 14.
let them alone: They be blind leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

CHAP. XV.
Of their Pentecost.
THE next Feast of the Jews, which is also one of their chiefest, is that
which Moses calls Chag Schebhnos, the Feast of weeks, because before the
celebration thereof, they are to number seven weeks from the passover, which
contain 49 days, so that they held the Feast of Pentecost always upon the
fiftieth day after the passover, according to the injunction of Moses, saying,
Seven weeks shall thou number unto thee; Deuteronomy. 16. 9, 10, 11.
begin to number the seven weeks, from such time as thou beginnest to put the
sickle to the corn. And thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy
God, with atribute of a free will offering of thy hand, which thou shall give
unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord thy God has blessed thee. And
thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within
thy gates, and the stranger and the fatherless, and the widow that is among
you, in the place which the Lord thy God has chosen, to place his name there.

It is also called the Feast of harvest, Exodus 23. 16. Number. 28. Act. 21. 20. 2.
Cor. 108.
because harvest begins about the time of the celebration hereof; as also the
Feast of the first fruits, because at this Feast, they offered their first
fruits unto the Lord, in sign of thankfulness; as we may read in the fourth
book of Moses. In the New Testament it is called Pentecost, Orach. chajim number.
489.
as in the acts of the Apostles, and other places. Their computation of the
time is very accurate. They begin to reckon from the second night of the Feast
of the Passover, when the stars begin to appear, saying this prayer, Blessed
be thou O Lord our God, King of the world, who have sanctified us by thy
commandments, and have commanded us to count the days between the Passover,
and beginning of harvest, of which this is the first, holding on until they
come to the seventh day, when they say, seven days are gone, which make up a
week, at the end of their prayer, see upon the eighth day, now a week and one
day is past, and so hold on in the same manner, until the thirty nine days be
fully expired; that is to say, until they come to Whitson Eve. While their
account is in making, they must stand according to the injunction of the
Rabbines. The time of the Feast being come, and they not able to observe it,
according to the prescript of the Law, therefore every day they lift up their
hands unto God, that he would vouchsafe to build up Jerusalem, and restore
their Temple, as at the first; promising unto God that upon the grant hereof,
they will duly celebrate this Festival, and all other, using all the
sacrifices and ceremonies required as necessary, and prescribed in the Law of
Moses.

That they should take such an exact account of the number of these days, or
the Feast of seven weeks, or harvest, according as they write, was the command
of God himself, lest his children should forget this Feast, and so neglect the
payment of their first sruits to God at Jerusalem, which might easily come to
pass, seeing while they were yet in their own land, about or in the time of
the celebration of this Festival, every one was busied about his rural
affairs, and compelled to look about his harvest business.

This Feast of weeks, is by them compared to a certain King, who coming into
a City where some Prince or Noble Peer is fettered in the prisonhouse,
entreats the Magistrate for his release, which is granted accordingly, so many
weeks being past and gone. And moreover has this added unto his liberty, that
this time being past, he will also give him his daughter in marriage. Then the
Captain begins to reckon every hour, day and week, which the King has
designed unto him. So God dealt with the Israelites while they were yet in
bondage to the Egyptians; saying unto them, I will bring you out of Egypt with
a stretched out arm, therefore you shall number uunto your selves seven weeks
aster the Feast of the Passover: which time being fully past, I will give you
my holy daughter, the Law, to wife. But from which the Jews have now gone a
whoring, and are become most vile adulterers, as Moses and the rest of the
Prophets complain.

The Jewish women are not bound to this computation, as also they are not to
many other precepts, to which the men are liable. Upon the evening of this
Festival, it is not lawful for any man to use phlebotomy; for they write in
their Minhagin or Talmud, that on the eve of this Feast in time past, there
blowed a certain evil and pestilent wind, which they call Tabhoach, Tract de
Sab. cap. 18.
which signifies a robber or butcher, which had destroyed all the children of
Israel, had they not been willing to have received the Law, which God was about
to deliver unto them the day following. They keep this Feast for two days
together, by reason of the same doubt which was frmerly inserted in their
minds, about the celebration of the Passover. In the celebration hereof, they
use not many ceremonies, because it is not lawful for them to sacrifice. They
take the book of the Law twice our of the Arc, calling out five men, who read
some certain Chapters and Sections of the Law, the contents whereof are
concerning the sacrifices, and other rites, which were in use with their
Ancestors in the time of this Festival. Furthermore, they straw their
pavements and floores of their houses, streets and Synag ogues, with rushes, in
remembrance of the Law, which was given as upon this day: Sticking also every
corner of the house with green houghes, enriching their brows with crowns of
ivy, hereby signifying, that all the places about mount Sinai, were green when
the Law was given. Moreover, they eat many dishes made with milk, as custards,
and fritters, or such like, either baked or fried and that because the Law upon
the day when it was given, was as white, pure and sweet as any milk. Among the
rest, they make one principal wafer or junket, deep and thick, with seven
several partitions, calling it the custard or junket of mount Sinai. This same
is to put them in remembrance of the seventh heaven, into which the Lord
ascended from mount Sinai. Lastly, every one is bound to have his table well
furnished with platters ^raught with delicate bits of meat, and his goblets
overflowing with the choicest wine, because without these there is no pleasure;
and also by reason of the command, which says, Thou shall rejoice before the
Lord thy God, thou and thy son and thy daughter. For a conclusion, lets see
what the Prophets say concerning these Jews, who have taken the Law to wife.
Isa. 24. 5.
The sentence of Isaiah is, The earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof,
because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, and broken the
everlasting Covenant. And the Lord by the mouth of Ez^kiel says, The Priests
have out of malice perverted my law, Acts 7. 51.
and profaned my sanctuary. Stephen cries out against them, Ye stifnecked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, you do always resist the holy ghost; as
your fathers did, so do ye. Who have received the Law by the disposition of
Angels, and have not kept it.

CHAP. XVI.
Of their Feast of Tabernacles.
THE third great Festival of the Jews, which they are to celebrate every
year once, appearing before the Lord in Jerusalem, is the Feast of
Tabernacles, concerning which, as also the two former, it is writ in the fifth
book of Moses; Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Three times a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God, in
the place which he shall choose, in the Feast of unleavened bread, in the Feast
of weeks; and in the Feast of Tabernacles; and they shall not appear before
the Lord empty. The time of the celebration of this Feast, was according to
Gods own commandment to be the fifteenth day of the seventh month, according
to the vulgar account, beginning to reckon from the first day of the new year
of Festivals, of which we have spoken formerly, that it begins in March, and so
consequently infer, that this seventh month must be our September: The
etymology whereof as also the reason why this month in their common annual
account, is called the first, shall hereafter be more at large declared.

The end of their keeping of this Feast, was as a sign or token, whereby the
Israelites might recall to mind, the fatherly providence of Almighty God, by
which he had sustained the children of Israel, after a wonderful manner, for
the space of forty years in the desert, having neither house nor harbor.

The manner of celebration is thus prescribed by Moses; You shall dwell in
boothes seven days, Lev. 23
all that are Israelites born shall dwell in boothes, that your generations may
know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt. These boothes were wont to be made of the
boughs of goodly trees; as, the myrtle, olive, fur, which by reason of their
fatness, would for a long time retain their green attire; branches of palm
trees, boughs of thick trees, willowes of the brook, as it is in the same
place. This they put in practice in the days of Nehemiah, after their return
from Babylon; for it is recorded, that then they published and proclaimed in
all their Cities, Neh. 8. 15, 16.
and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches,
pine branches, myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick
trees to make boothes: And they did so. From that which has been said, we may
gather, 1. That the Jews in ancient times, made Tabercles of these kinds of
boughs, in which they dwelt for the space of eight days. 2. That there were
in use for the fabric, more then four several kinds of boughs or branches;
yea the willowes of the brook are not mentioned in the forecited place of
Nehemiah, which were used for the knitting together of the other branches,
being pliable, and fit for that purpose; Therefore the Jews of these present
times; commit a gross error, that they in a most superstitious manner in the
celebration of this Festival, tie and confine themselves to those four kinds
of branches only mentioned by Moses, and not building them Tabernacles
therewithal, but transferring them to another use, of which more hereafter.

Concerning this Feast, there is extant a large tract in the Talmud, wherein
the genuine observation and celebration thereof is set down; the plat-forme of
the boothes or Tabernacles exquisitely drawn; the use of the four several
sorts of branches described, with much disputation, and great subtilty, as
their manner is, not omitting to handle all the ceremonies belonging there
unto; yet never seeking after the true way and means, whereby they may rightly
lift up their hearts unto the God of their fathers: For though in the time of
this Feast they say many prayers, yet they offer them up unto the Lord, only
upon the censure of their tongue, not upon the altar of their hearts, for in
these they are far from him; an evident demonstration hereof, is the winged
hudling over of these their petitions, using such a precipitancy of speech, as
though they were able to pronounce a thousand words with one breath, and
accounting it a work of art and skill so to do. This Feast endures for the
space of eight days; the two first, and the two last whereof, are to be kept
holy altogether; those which are of the middle rank, only for half the day.
Upon the fourteenth day of the month, about eventide, they meet in the
Synagogue, according to their ecclesiastical Ordinances and institutions, where
they sing and pray until it be night. At which time they return to their
houses, and retire themselves into their Tabernacles, where the Master of the
family says a certain prayer, which serves for the initiation of the Feast,
and consecration of the Tabernacles, giving thanks unto God, that he has
chosen them before all other people, exalted, sanctified, and commanded them to
dwell in Tabernacles. The thanks giving being ended, they fall to supper, where
they are very jocund and merry. In ancient days they were wont also to lodge
in their boothes, which the Jews at this day use not; the coldness,
moistness, and other maladies and encumbrances which might accrue unto them
thereby, being as so many potent arguments to dissuade from this, and to invite
them to their own bed-chambers, which experience has taught them to be the
sweeter resting place. Upon the morrow of the fifteenth day, they return into
the Synagogue singing and praying and honoring the Lord with a little
lip-service, their hearts roving quite another way.

When the Chanter has proceeded so farte in his prayers, that he is come at
last to those words, Give peace in these our da^es O Lord; then every one
taking a little bundle of palm, oli^e, and willow branches in his right hand,
and an orange in his lest, says, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the
world who have sanctified us by thy commandments and commanded us to carry a
bundle of branches: Which while he is in repeating, he shakes the bundle, that
it may make a noise; the words of the Prophet moving him thereunto; who says,
The trees of the wood shall clap their hands. Psalm. 69. 12.
Then he shakes the bundle three times toward the East, three times toward
the West, three times toward the North, three times toward the South, heaving
it also in the last place, over his head, then suffering it to beck unto the
ground: In all these several postures, carrying himself much like unto a
fencer, in the tossing, advancing, and shouldering of his pike. Then they pray
again, and again begin to shake their bundle of boughs, thereby giving to
understand, that they are triumphant conquerours of all sin and inquity,
having a conceit, that by the noise of their branches, they have so lashed,
whipped away, and terrifyed the devil, that he dare never any more presume to
accuse them before God for their sins and offenses.

The next thing they put in practice is concerning the Book of the Law, which
some or other goes and takes out of the Arc and lays it upona Deske; and
instantly thereupon every one in the Synagogue circles about the pew or desk,
with the bundle of branches and orenges in his hand. This they d^efor seven
days together, in remembran^e that the walls of Jericho being by their fathers
comp^ssed about sseven days, fell flat unto the ground, and the men thereof
subdued unto Israel, hoping withal, that the walls of the Roman Empire shall
likewise be demolished, and the Jews become the conquerours, Lords and Masters
of the Christians; C^d h^k^kem^ch. p. 51, 52.
which Rabbi Bechai affirms in express words, saying; This our en^ircling or
compassing used by us at this day upon this Festival, is a certain sign unto
us of the state of the time to come, wherein the wall of Edom, that of the
Roman Monarchy, shall be thrown down, and all the Edomites shall be
destroyed and rooted out; according to that of Daniel, which he delivers
concerning the fourth beast, which shadows out unto us the Roman Monarchy in
these words, Dan. 7. 11.
I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke: I
beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame. In that day shall the mount Sion and Jerusalem rejoice, which
were formerly called Midbar, or a desert, as it is written, Thy holy Cities are
a wilderness, Isaiah* 64. 10.
Sion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. The same Prophet saying also in
another place, That Sion ought to rejoice, and Jerusalem to be glad, and clap
her hands, because the Lord will take vengeance upon Edom, that is, upon the
Roman Empire, as it it written; The desert and wilderness shall rejoice. So
much Rabbi Bechai, out of which we may easily gather, how much good the Jews
wish unto us Christians, in the time of this their Festival. Yet in their
books of Common Prayers it appears, that in former times they have been more
invective against us, then they are at this day; for there they pray, that God
would smite us, after the manner that he smote the first born in the land of
Egypt: And that in a prayer which begins, In machzor, Cracoviae impres^o.
Ana hoschiana, where the express words are, Smite our enemies, as thou
smotest the first born in Egypt, and make them subject unto us, etc. Where by
their enemies they understand us Christians, to whom they are now in bondage.

The first shaking of these Festival branches being ended, they shake them
very often in the process of their prayers taking two books of the Law out of
the Arc, out of which they read certain sections, with a baw^ing ostentation,
but very little attention, and less devotion.

The second day they hallow equally as the first, not that they are enjoined
thereunto by the command and law of God, but by reason they are not assured
what day of September may precisely be accounted for the fifteenth; and hence
it is that they make two holidaies, when one only is required. Every evening
so long as the Feast endures, the Master of the family repeats a certain
prayer, whereby he makes the days of the Feast to be discerned and
differenced, from those which are appointed for labor and travel in our
ordinary vocation, giving thanks unto God, that the Feast has been celebrated
in such a good manner.

The four days following are only esteemed holy in part, but upon these also
they sing and pray very much, shaking their palm branches. If any one of these
four days chance to be the day of the Sabbath, then among other things they
read a certain Chapter out of the Prophecy of Ezekiel, concerning the
dreadful war of Gog and Magog; believing and writing, that Gog shall be slain
in this month, and they delivered out of bondage, Or^h. c^ajim number. 604.
shall be brought back into their own land, there for ever to have a peaceable
habitation.

The seventh day is likewise by them kept holy, whereon they say the prayer
called Hosanna Rabba, Help O Lord our strength; because therein they entreat
the Lord for to help them against all their enemies, and to send them a good
and fruitful year. For the first day of this month, is the first day of the
new year of years, properly so called, according to which they frame the
computation of their years. In the morning of every one of these days, they
early wash themselves in hot or cold water, go into the School or Synagogue,
light many candles, sing and pray ^ervently, and with a great deal of
ostentation, In Poland they take out all, though they be a thousand.
take seven books of the Law out of the Arc, and lay them upon the pew or
deske, which, as was formerly related, they compass about seven times, having
their bundles of palm branches in their hands, which are knit together with
willow: After every several encompassing, putting one of the seven books of
the Law, into the Arc again; Rambam Rakanat and Bechai, with many other of
the Rabbines, Commenting upon the 14 Chapter of the 4 book of Moses, blush not
to affirm, that God upon the seventh day at night, reveals unto them by the
moon, what thing soever shall befall them the year following; and that in
this manner. Upon this night they go out into the fields by moone-shine, some
with their heads uncovered; other having only a linen cloth tied about them,
or a veil upon them, which they suffering to fall upon the earth, stretch out
their arms and hands. If any man's shadow in the moonshine seem to want an
head, it is a certain sign and token, that such a one shall that year either
lose his head, or dye some other death. If any seem to want a singer, it
presages the death of some of his friends, if his right hand, of his son, if
his left, of his daughter. But if no shadow at all appear, then that man shall
undoubtedly dye, and therefore if he have appointed a journey, he should
hereby be warned to let it alone, lest he should not return in safety. This
the Rabbines prove from those words of Moses, Their shadow is departed from
them, Number. 14. 9. The Rabbines interpreting that a shadow, which properly
signifies a defense; Yet they say, that though a man cannot behold his shadow
as upon this night, that for this reason he should not cease to be of the
Jewish religion. Furthermore, they write that God at this time definitely sets
down, how much it shall rain all the year after; and then to decree, whether the
year shall be fruitful or barren, so that a dearth and scarcity of corn, often
ensues thereupon. Upon this night therefore they say many prayers for rain and
a fruitful year. And this is the very cause (say they) why God shows unto
them by moonshine* how many men shall dye that year, and how many shall
supervive, which have need of food and nourishment. If many are to dye, then it
is a sign of dearth, for famine causes death.

The eighth day is by them also kept holy, and that according to the Law, being
by them called Schemini azeres, or the day of retention, because the seven
foregoing Festival days keep the eighth day, and is unwilling to let him
depart. Much like a man who has entertained his dearest friend for a week, at
the end thereof is sorrowful, and loath to lose his company. About mid^day they
fall to dinner in their Tabernacles, yet not saying their ordinary graces
before or after meat, which are used upon other days. Into these their booths
they bring unclean pots and vessels and un^^llow them, that hereby they may
find an occasion to return to their own houses; which thing they do so soon as
the night is come. When they go out of the Tabernacles the most of them are
wont to say, O would to God he would vouchsafe that we might dwell in this
manner in the Tabernacles of the Leviathan in time to come, thereby wishing (as
I conjecture) that they may be admitted to eat of that great fish Leviathan,
in the days of the Messiah.

It is recorded in their Minhagin, that the cause why they are bound for the
space of seven days to dwell in Tabernacles, is to put them in remembrance of
the pillar of the cloud under the shadow whereof they went out of the land of
Egypt; which cloud was like unto a Tabernacle, which received the darts and
arrows, that they should not hurt the Israelites. 2. They say that God would
have them to dwell in Tabernacles, that by their shelter, they may be defended
and shrouded from the vehemence of the Suns heat, and violence of weather.
And although they went out of Egypt the fifteenth day of March, yet God
commanded them to build Tabernacles and booths, and to dwell in them in
September, not in March, otherwise it had not been esteemed for a Festival
ordained by Gods especial command, because in the month of March, they might
build them, only to avoid the heat; but in September no such cause can be
pretended, being a very cold season. Hence we may conclude, that the Jews do
at this time dwell in booths by Gods injunction.

The place where they are to pitch these Tabernacles, it ought to be pleasant,
and fragrant in smell. Whence it comes to pass, that Jews street in
Frankeford upon the Maene, is the pleasantest, comeliest, and neatest in all
the City. Moreover, they are to be built in some open place, not in a cloister
or under some cover. When they sit therein, they must not shut their doors,
though both wind and rain molest them. The materials of their booths are to be
green boughs, not tiles or boards, so closely compacted together, that it is
not possible for them to see the stars through them. They of the richer sort
are wont to spread the floors with coverings of the best, adorning their tops
with diverse fruits, as orenges, apples, and the like; which if they seem to be
too dear they commonly use cucumbers in their place. Maids, women, and
servants, are not tied to remain in the Tabernacles, being not liable to the
observance of any command, which binds a man to a certain place. Frost, rain
or snow, ought not to sorce them out of these mansions; yet if it chance to
rain out of measure, then they depart them with great sorrow and expression of
grief, thinking that God is angry with them, and not willing that they should
at that time observe and put his commandments in execution; much like to some
great Lord or Peer, who bidding his servant fill him a bowl of wine, takes it
from him, and throws it into his fa^e. Now, when it is written Levit. 23. 40.
that the Israelites in the time of this Feast, ought to take pri etz hadar,
fruits of goodly trees as they need, as it is without all doubt, that the word
pri in this place signifies not fruits, but boughs in general, whether they
bear any fruit or not, of which they ought to make their Tabernacles, as will
easily appear, if we compare this place with those fo^ementioned words of
Ezra: But the Jews thinking Moses in this place to put this word for orenges,
which they call Esrogim, in a most superstitious manner, they use only those
four several kinds of fruits mentioned by Moses. Concerning which, they fill
the peoples ears with many frivolous and strange wonders, using them not for
the building, but the ornament of the Tabernacle. The Jews in Germany fetch
their orenges* palm, olive, and myrtle branches out of Spain. And hen^e it
comes to pass, that sixteen men of the Jewish Nation, do every year go
thither, and buy great abundance of them, transporting them into all places
where any of the Jews do so journe making them pay sowrely for them; for I
have seen an orange sold in September for four Florens.

These four several kinds of materials used by them for the fabric of their
Tabernacles, are full of great and hidden mysteries. By the palm branch are
represented the hypocritical and deceitful Jews. For as the palm is a
goodly and comely tree to look upon, and brings forth eye-pleasing fruit yet
such as has no ta^te at all: Even so these hypocrites have the Law of God in
their keeping, yet do not bring forth good works enjoined thereby and have
not in them any relish of godliness. The orange figures out unto us the just
men in Israel: For as it is fair to look upon, and the odor thereof affects
the smell with a ravishing de^ight: So the just are as a sweet savor in the
nostrils of the Lord, who not only possess the Law of God, but bring forth
fruits putting his commands in execution. Thirdly, the myrtles have a pleasant
sme^l yet never be^r any ^ruit: So there are many who have not the Law, yet do
the things of the Law, bring forth fruit, and live according thereunto. Lastly,
the willowes of the brook do signify the wicked and reprobate, who neither
have the law, nor bring forth any good works, aptly resembled to such barren
twigs, which destitute of any fruit, are not pleasing either to taste or smell:
And by these they understand us Christians, whom they account as wicked livers
and aliens from the Law of God, appropriating this only to themselves. And
hence it is that Rabbi Bechai in his book called Cad Hakkemach, Cap lulabh. p.
42.
or a Barrel of Meal; says, that these four things shadow out unto us
four Kingdoms, to wit, That of the Assyrians, that of the Persians, that of
the Grecians, and the now extant Monarchy of the Romans, which last is typified
unto us by the willowes. To put a period to these subti^ties, I will relate a
story out of the Talmud, concerning the adorning of these their Tabernacles,
and it is a certain conference or dialogue which God shall have with all people
at the day of doom. It is found in the Tract entitled Abhodahzarah, or of
Idolatry: In these words. At the last day God shall say, that only the Jews
are just and holy, as they who have fulfilled the Law of God, in every part and
degree; but all other people of the earth are ungodly and unjust, as neither
having the Law, nor doing the works presribed to be done in the same. Then
shall the people of the earth answer and say, O Lord God of the whole world,
give unto us that law, and we will in every point and parcel observe and keep
it. Then God will reply, O foolish Christians, do you not know the old
Proverb, that he who labors upon the eve of the Sabbath, shall have whereon
to feed upon the Sabbath; but he that is idle and sits still shall want. Go
ye therefore, and first of all fulfill that little commandment of mine,
called Sukkah From (...) a sum or brief Rabbine.
concerning the celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles. Then every one of them
shall run in all have, and make unto himself a booth or Tabernacle; some upon
their house tops, as the Jews were wont to do in ancient days in their own
land, where the roof was flat and plain, others in their gardens, and they
shall dwell in them. Then shall God so mightily increase the heat of the Sun at
Midsomer, and so forward, that they shall be scor^hed and burnt, and being not
able to endure the heat, shall trample these their booths under their feet,
and being mightily enflamed with anger, shall cry out, Let us break their bonds
in sunder, Psalm. 2. 3, 4.
and csast away their cords from us. Then God shall flout, jeer and deride
them; as it is written in the same place, He that dwells in heaven shall
laugh them to scorn, the most high shall have them in derision. And hence
Rabbi Isaac affirms, that it is never found, that God is said to laugh but
upon that day only. So far the Talmud.

By which relation we may plainly perceive, how these apish Jews hug and
please themselves in their own folly; and how they would even in a manner force
God to believe, that they only are his chosen and elect people, who keep the
whole law, observing and fulfilling all his commandments; when on the contrary
the Christians and other people are men appointed to destruction and damnation,
reputed as a laughing stock and abomination in the eyes of the Lord. But O
silly Jew, what says Ezekiel of thee and thy observance of the Law, hearken
what the Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet. Ezekiel. 20. 10, 11, 12, 13.
I caused them says he to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them
into the wilderness; and I gave them my statutes, and showed them my
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. Moreover also I gave
them my Sabbaths to be a a sign between me and them, that they might know
that I am the Lord that sanctifies them. But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness; they walked not in my judgments, which if a
man do, he shall even live in them, and my Sabbaths they greatly polluted:
Then I said I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Feast of the New Moon.
HItherto we have treated of the chief Festivals usual^y solemnized by the
Jews at Jerusalem in ancient days; and of the manner of their celebration, by
the Jews of these our times. We come now to speak of those Feasts which their
Ancestors were wont to keep in the Cities and places where they had their
dwelling and settled habitation. We will begin with the Feast of the New Moon,
which they solemnize once every month.

The first day of every New Moon, was in old time accounted holy; because God
commanded, that in the beginning of their months, they should offer unto him a
burnt offering, as we may read in the fourth book of Moses. Numb. 28. 11.
Yet is this day to the Jews now living, only half holiday, so that they may
work or not work at their own pleasure.

It is also recorded, Orach. chaj^m number* 419.
that the command for the celebration of this Feast, is rather given to the
women then men so that they ought upon this day, to abstain from all manner of
labor, because in times past they would not give their golden earrings, and
other ornaments, to the making of the molten calfe; when on the contrary, they
offered them with a willing and ready mind, yea also their rings and bracelets
toward the building of the Temple, whose first stone was laid the first of
March. Upon the e^e of this Festival, all they that are of a pious and honest
carriage among the Jews, fast until e^en-tide praying unto God that he would
vouchsafe to send them a joifull and happy New Moon. The next morning, being
that of the Festival, they go into the Synagogue where they make many
prayers, yea* more then they are wont to do upon other Festivals. At midday
they go to dinner at which they become very jocund, cocking their beavers, and
sitting very long; for which they urge Moses, Number* ^^. 10.
saying; In the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the
beginning of your months ye shall blow with the trumpets over the burnt
offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings, that they may be
to you a memorial before your G O D. And to the end that they may sit the
longer at the Table, they play at Cards almost all the day long, pass away the
time in jesting and merry-making. Beside this kind of divination by the Moon,
there were certain other used by their fathers, and forbidden in holy w^it.

The first was (...) an observer of times, saying, This day is good, that evil,
like to some of our English Astrologers. And he was derived ^ither from (...)
gnayn, an eye, because he did^d I^de the eyes of men, or from (...) gno^ah,
time, or from (...) a cloud p^^ne^^^ins, one that beholding the heavens did
foretell the weather. Or from (...) to afflict, because he afflicted men's
consciences by these his predictions. Aben Ezra, Levit. 19. 26.

The second (...) Menacesh A^gur, a Soothsayer, who out of his own experience
could speak of the state of the time following, Genesis 44. 5. Such an one are
some of our foolish vulgars, who if he see a C^o^ or a Hare cross his way, or
meet a red-headed man in the morning, will not take his journey. From (...)
nichesh anguratus, etc.

The third (...) Mecasheph a Witch, Exodus 7. 11. from (...) cisheph auspiciis
us who by bewitching the senses makes things appear otherwise then they are.

The fourth (...) Chober, one who has made a covenant with the Devil, a
Charmer, who cures diseases by ^pels and sentences repeated out of holy writ,
so called, from (...) to join in fellowship

The fifth Shoel Ob, he that asks counsel at Ob, or of a familiar spirit* such
was the Pythonist, Acts 16. The word signifies a Bottle, because the possessed
herewith, spoke with a hollow voice.

The sixth Jedeoni, so called according to the Rabbines, from a beast called
Jaduah; a bone of which they held in their teeth in time of prophecy.

The seventh Doresh El hammethim; one who asked counsel of the dead, a
Necromancer; such was the witch of Endor.

The eighth, Shoel mak^o, one who took counsel by his staff; what way it fell,
that way he would go, Hos. 4. 12. Or measuring his staff by inches, I will go,
I will not go: did according to the event. The last; Roel Baccober, Ezekiel. 21.
21. A diviner by the intrals of Beasts.


the eclipse of the Moon they hold as a sign very ominous to them that trouble
them Wherefore they commonly fast upon the day of the eclipse, entreating God
to save and defend them from all their enemies, and them that hate them. When
the Moon is three days old or more, they gather themselves together upon the
night into some one of their Gardens, or else into their street where they may
clearly see the Moon, lifting up their eyes to Heaven, the posture of their
body being exactly upright, they bless the Moon, one of their chief Rabbines
repeating a certain prayer, and the rest saying after him as follows. Blessed
be thou, O Lord God, our God, King of the World, who have sanctified us by thy
word, and by the spirit of thy mouth, who have created the heaven and all the
host thereof; given laws thereunto* and prescribed certain seasons, in which
they obey thy commandments, measuring out aright the times and seasons, and
herein with great joy and gladness fulfill the will of thee their God and
Creator, who art the true worker, and whose works are truth. Thou have spoken
to the Moon to renew her self by her often change, which renewing is as a
beautiful Crown, and a great ornament unto the head of every one that is in his
mothers womb, even to all the Israelites (as says the Prophet Esaias) who ought
to renew themselves even as the Moon does: that they may praise and honor
their Creator, for the name of his Kingdom, a name highly to be reverenced.
Blessed be thou O Creator. Blessed be thou O Moon. Blessed be he who made thee.
Blessed be thy Lord, blessed be thy Maker. At these words they leap three times
upwards toward heaven; the higher the Caper is, the better it is in esteem:
Then they go on, saying, Even as we, O God, leaping toward thee cannot come
near unto thee: even so all our enemies bending their forces against us, cannot
approach to hurt us. Here again they make a stay, saying that of Moses three
times; Exodus 15* 16.
Fear and dread shall fall upon them by the greatness of thine arm, they shall
be as still as (...) stone, till thy people pass over, O Lord, till thy people
pass over which thou have purchased; hereby praying against us Christians. For
a conclusion of this prayer, one par says peace be unto you: and the other
answer, Peace be unto you, peace be unto you, and to the Israel of God.

This benediction or blessing they for the most part bestow upon the new Moon,
upon the Sabbath thereof, which Sabbath they sanctify with a due solemnity,
putting on their new apparel in honor to the new Moon, which they bless, and
give it a court-like welcome with great joy and rejoicing. I cannot but here
insert a certain Dialogue set down in the Talmud, Cholm. cap. 3* p. 16.
between God and the Moon, which Rabbi Sim^on, Genesis 12. 6.
the son of Pazzai thus relates. It is written, God made two great lights, the
greater to rule the day, the less to rule the night. Then said the Moon unto
God; O Lord of the whole world, tell me, I pray thee, Can two Kings reign
together, and wear one and the same Crown? To whom God made answer, and said,
Go hence and lessen thy self: She replies; O my Creator, shall I therefore be
lessened, because I have spoken before thee that which is true and right? Then
said God, Go and bear rule and dominion both by day and night. But quoth the
Moon, What great honor shall I reap from hence? or what dignity shall accrue
thereby? A burning Candle at noontide, what does it profit? Then the Lord bids
her be gone, saying, that the people of Israel should number their days,
times, and seasons, according to her course and motion, which she denies as
impossible; for to this end they ought to have an exact knowledge of the two
Tekuphoth or Tropicks, as also of the two Solstices, as it is written, They
shall be for signs, and times, and days, and years. Then God makes her this
answer, Go thy way, for many great and learned men shall take unto them this
thy title, as James the less, Samuel the less, David the less. But all this
cannot appease her: which when he perceived, he said, offer a propitiatory
sacrifice for me, because that I have lessened the Moon. Rab. Bechoci.
And hereupon Rabbi Simeon the son of Sakis says, How much does that Goat
differ from others, which is offered in the time of the new Moon, of which the
Lord said, this shall be a propitiatory sacrifice for me, who have offended in
lessening the Moon. So far the Talmudist. The Rabbines diversely dispute what is
the true sense and meaning hereof. They who are of ancient days are of
opinion, that at the beginning the Sun and Moon were equal in light, which they
prove out of the words of Moses, saying, Genesis 1.
God made two great lights. But so soon as the Moon murmured against God, and
would sit as Queen, and suffer none to share in dominion with her, but be sole
Monarch in the celestial Orbs, God debased her for her pride, takes away her
own light, and ca^sed her to borrow of the Sun: and hence are, say they, those
immediately following words of Moses, The greater light for the government of
the day: and the lesser light for the government of the night: whereas he
formerly made no such difference, but simply ca^ling them two great lights. And
furthermore, that God hearing the Moon complain of this her hard usage and
mis-hap, repented of that he had done, and caused a propitiatory sacrifice to
be offered for this his offense at every new Moon. This opinion the modern
Rabbines reject as a blasphemy against God, considering that he is just and
cannot commit iniquity, neither is any wickedness found with him. Wherefore
they have very much tortured and rackt their inventions to find out the true
sense of these words, Number. 18. 15.
diversely interpreting the word Alai written with Gnayn, as Rabbi Bechai
testifies.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Feast of the new year, how the Jews prepare themselves to the
celebration thereof, and how God at the time of this Celebration judges the
Israelites for their sins and offenses.
IT is written in the tract Medrasch Socher Tobh, Caphtor^ uperach. p. 68.
that at the same time when the Sanhedrin, or that great Council of the Jews is
gathered together, to set down and determine a certain day for the Celebration
of the feast of the new year, which begins the first day of the month Tesri or
September, and has also agreed thereupon, then God calls a Senate of Angels
whom he sends into the earth, to enquire, see and know, whether the time of the
Celebration of this feast be determinately appointed, which they presently put
in execution; and returning unto God, declare unto him the day whereon the
feast will be kept: which when God by their relation understands, he also
decrees to fit in judgment, and to judge the world, upon the very same day, as
it is written, God is gone up with a merry noise, the Lord is gone up with the
sound of a trumpet. Psalm. 46. 3.
Then the two judgment seats are set, the cushions laid, the books opened, and
that great Senate of Angels sits down before him. As it is written, And I
beheld, till the thrones were set up, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose
garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his
throne was like the fiery fl^me, and his wheels as burning fire. Thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousand thousands stood before
him: Dan. 7* 9, 10.
the judgment seat was set and the book opened. In the Talmud we have an
excellent story to this purpose. Rabbi Iochamen says, Tract: Rosch haschanah.
c. 1. p. 16.
that at new-years-tide three books are opened: one for them who are extremely
wicked and ungodly, as Atheists and lnfidels: another for them who are just in
a most perfect manner, the third and last for them who are betwixt both in an
indifferent manner, godly and religious, who have done as much good as evil.
Those who are perfectly just have their names presently registered in the book
of life: but they who are extremely wicked, have their names written in the
book of death. Those of the middle sort are deferred, and put off until the
day of reconciliation, which is the tenth day after the celebration of the
feast of the new year. If they truly and sincerely repent them of their sins in
the mean time, so that their good deeds exceed their bad ones, then it goes
well with them, but if on the contrary their evil deeds be more in number: then
they are presently put in the catalogue of the reprobate and damned. As it is
written, Psalm. 69. 29.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written among
the just. By the blotting out of the book understanding the book of the wicked,
and by the word life or living the book of the just, and by the words Let them
not be written among the just, the book of those who are indifferently honest.
Hence is also that of Ralig;bbi Nalig;chman the son of Isaac upon these words
of Moses, Exodus 32. 32.
Now if thou will palig;rdon their sin thy mercy shall appear: But if thou will
not, blot me out of the book which thou have written. In which words. Blot out,
fingers out the book of the wicked. Out of thy book the book of the just. Which
thou have written, the book of them which are indifferently just and godly. So
far the Talmud. 1. Now that God should at this time sit in judgment rather then
at any other, the reason is grounded upon a certain tradition of the Ancients
that God created the whole world, Adam, and placed him in Paradise* in the
month of September: therefore it was thought very meet and just that God at
the years end should require of man an account of his life, and see how he has
carried himself for the space of the year past, and so reward every one
according to his works. Which he paies unto every one in the year following in
this manner.

Sins are of diverse sorts, some God punishes in this world, some also in the
life to come: so also good works, some whereof are recompensed here, some
hereafter. Now if a man for the most part do nothing else but sin all the year
long, polluting his soul with the horrid filth of wickedness, yet doing some
few good deeds: the sum of all is presented before Gods tribunal upon new years
day. 1. Then God takes the scales and puts his good deeds in one end, and his
bad deeds in another: If it seem good then to the Judge of all men to reward
the foresaid man for the good he has found in him in this present world, it
comes to pass that he is called a just man, and has this happy sentence
pronounced upon him in this vale of misery, that he shall have a name in the
book of life, live for the next year, become rich and shall be advanced to
great honors. 1. In like manner if an honest and just man, who every day makes
a conscience of his ways, and lives according to the law all the year through,
offend and commit some gross enormities, for which God is pleased to punish him
in this world, then God calls him a wicked and unjust liver, and pronounces
sentence against him for evil and not for good, puts his name into the book of
the dead, thereby giving him notice that he shall either die or become poor, or
be troubled with some dangerous disease the year following, and therefore
although a man may enjoy the happiness of Saints in the world to come, yet may
he be called with injustice in this, seeing he is here punished for his
offenses even as the reprobate. And on the contrary, one here accounted just
and holy, may be ordained to damnation, because God gives him the reward of his
works in this present world. And therefore no man ought to wonder or account
it a strange thing that the godly suffer affliction and all manner of distress
in this present life, when on the contrary the wicked lives as he list, gives
rest unto his soul, enjoyes pleasure, and is without the gunshot of sorrow and
vexation: yet at the day of death the case is altered, for he that was here so
gay and gallant, must go into everlasting fire, and the other, so miserable
into enternal bliss. God then paying unto them the due reward of their labors.
And this is the very reason why the Germara affirms, that the three foresaid
books are opened upon new years day. Furthermore it often falls out that one
good work blots out a number of transgressions: and one sin abolisheth many
good works, both which are in the power of God. If the sinner, whose name is
put into the book of death, repent him of his ways from the bottom of his
heart; and continue in this course unto the day of reconciliation, being the
tenth of the new-year, he may happily move God to reverse the sentence
pronounced against him, and to transferr him into the book of life. Even as the
godly in the same space angering his Maker by the commission of some heinous
offense, may move him to blot his name out of the book of life, and to write it
among the dead. Thus the blindfolded Jews write, speak, and are conceited of
the Almighties rule and government, making him a Judge of that stamp and
quality which they desire him to be of; far contrary to the description of the
Prophet David, who in heavy cheer praying unto God for the forgiveness of his
sins, Psalm. 143. 2.
cries out; Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for no man living
shall be justified in thy sight. Psalm. 130. 3.
And again, If thou O Lord mark whalig;t is done amiss, who is able to abide
it? Seeing therefore God sits in judgment upon every new-years-day, and so
severely punishes the transgressors of his commandments: Orach. Chaymna: 581.
the Rabbines have made it an Ordinance and Statute in Israel, that every one
should for a month before repent of his sins and the evil he has committed,
turn from his wicked ways, and begin to lead a new life. This therefore the
Jews put in execution, and upon the first day of Elul or August, they fall to a
serious account, calling all their sins to remembrance, and weighing them
according to every several circumstance, in which they have wickedly
transgressed through the whole circuit of the year. Whosoever then every day
before he eat or drink questions his soul, what it has done? and with a
diligent scrutinie searches every corner of his heart for some formerly
practiced wickedness, grieving very much, and being very heartily sorry for the
same, he shall upon New-years-day, when others are to give an account for their
offenses, receive a plenary absolution. And hence it is that the Jews dwelling
among the Walloones, at this day have a custom to rise every morning of this
month before the sun be up, say their prayers and beg pardon for the sins
which they have committed. The Jews of Germany also use to do the like some
four days at least before the feast of the new-year: moreover, they meet
every morning and evening through the whole month in the Synagogue, sounding a
rams horn, not that they are so commanded by Moses: but yet in remembrance of
him, who when he went the second time into the mount to fetch the tables of the
law, commanded a horn to be blown that the people should take notice hereof
and not transgress and say, Exodus 32. 2.
Arise and make us Gods which may go before us: as for this Moses which
brought us forth out of the land of Egypt we do not know what is become of him.

Secondly, they blow the rams horn, that every one may seriously ponder and
weigh the last judgment, and be terrified with the meditation hereof: that they
may be affrighted and fear, Amos 6.
for shall a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people be not afraid: and
so consequently be hurried along to a bitter condolement, eager contrition,
hearty confession and serious repentance of his sins and offenses; for even as
a King makes some of his servants to blow a trumper, that every watchman may
keep diligent watch, and be ready armed at a moments warning, because the enemy
approaches: So it is needful for the Jews in the month of August, which is as
herald to the new year, to sound the Rams horns for to warn every man to
repent him of his wickedness, that they may more easily resist their enemy, Sin.

Lastly, Rosch; has^cha c. 1. p. 16.
the Talmudists, those subtle pated doctors say, that the reason why they blow
the Rams horns at this season, is for to put Satan to flight, and to put him to
a grievous torture: and to make him forget the day appointed for the
celebration of the New Years feast; lest he should come then and appearing
before Gods tribunal accuse them for their sins and offenses.

Upon the Eve of the New-year they rise sooner from supper then ordinary; for
they have many Prayers to pour out unto God for the remission of their sins.
They usually eat before day, hereby signifying that they are not like the
Christians and other people, who fast upon the E^es of their festivals: yet
howsoever he that fasts offends not. In Germany the Jews always eat something
before morning prayer, always provided that they fill not their bellies too
full, especially when they are to say many prayers, whereupon it comes to pass,
that though they make great haste in the saying of their prayers, yet they
commit no offense therein, because their guts are not crammed and full stuffed,
which would be a great hinderance to the speedy gallop of their tongue in
posting over their petitions. Yet some of the more religious sort who would be
accounted more holy then other do fast, and that in imitation of a King, who
imposes a great tribute upon such or such a City, and coming with a great power
of men commands payment to be made. He being yet ten miles distant from the
City, the chief men and burgesses thereof come and meet him, and say unto him,
O Gracious Sovereign, we are poor and have nothing, and what shall we give unto
thee? And so entreating him in the most humble subjective manner, that the hams
of an Alderman can personate, to remit the tax or tribute: of which the King
remits the third part, being brought down by their earish kissing congees.

When the King is yet five miles from the City, then a troop of Citizens of
another order and mean estate, come to give his Majesty some gaping salutation,
making the same request with that of the former: to whom also he forgives
another thirds. When he comes nearer to the City, then young and old flock about
him and bespeak his Grace in the same language: The king then moved by the
multitude of petitioners forgives the whole sum. In like manner God the King of
all the earth willing to make Israel give an account of their life past, and of
all the sins by them committed, requires, yea, enjoynes every one to give
satisfaction in his own proper person: whereupon the holy men and chiefest in
Israel fast the Eve of this festival, and the Lord to recompense them remits
unto them the third part of their sins and offenses. It is therefore enacted,
that they of the better sort should fast, that they may with the more facility
obtain their petitions, and also some of a lower rank forty days together,
whiah are set aside for the doing of penance. Some one must likewise fast upon
the day of reconciliation (of which day more hereafter) and then God will
forgive unto them all their sins, and grant them a pardon for the same. Morning
prayer being ended, they go out of the Synagogue into the place where they
bury their dead: thereby signifying that unless God will be pleased to pardon
their sins, they are no better then they who are dead and laid in their grave.
The papists had their praying to Saints from hence.
They therefore pray unto God to have mercy on them, and that for the merits of
those just and holy Jews who are interred in that place. Here they distribute
great store of alms that their poor may not want wherewithal to celebrate the
festival.

Midday being past, the men send for the barber, and cause him to use all his
art and skill in the trimming of them: thereby giving others to understand,
that they are not like unto other people, who sorrowing suffer their hairs to
grow and increase. Minhagim.
But our security (say they) banisheth all grief, seeing we are certainly
assured that God the King of the world will have mercy upon us, redeem us from
our transgressions, and graciously absolve us of all our sins; and for this
very reason they enter the bath or wash themselves in some running water, that
the day following they may appear purified and clean before the almighty
tribunal. It is also recorded that certain Angels fly in the air, who being
placed over the world and men, descend into these parts below, where they being
in a manner polluted, must necessarily purge and cleanse themselves in the
siery stream Dinor mentioned by Daniel, Dan. 7. 10. Taame mitznos page 36.
Rescha chochma magnum in Schaar par ^eschubha cap. 3* nu: 163.
before they sing praises unto God. Now if it be necessary that such creatures
as the Angels are, must wash themselves before they may be suffered to praise
the Lord, how much more is it required at the hands of man who is so vile and
loathsome.

While the Jews are a purifying their bodies, and stand even up to the ears in
cold water, then they make confession of their sins in the form commonly used.
This their confession comprehends in it two and twenty words according to the
number of the letters in the Alphabet: at the repetition of every one of which,
the confessor beats his breast, and then hides his body in the water, craving so
much courtesy of his fellow as to bear him witness. Where they are near no
rivers, they dig a well in their cellar or garden, concerning the breadth and
depth whereof, they are diverse in opinion, as also how much water may be
contrived in the same.

At eventide they likewise repair unto the Synagogue, where they continue
praying until it be night, at what time the feast begins; welcoming it with
great joy, and many acclamations. So much for the preparation, now for the
feast it self: but before we give you any taste thereof, hearken what the
Prophet says concerning these men of Juda, Jesa. 59. 2. 4. 5.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you that he will not hear. No man calls for justice: no man
contendeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak vain things: they
conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice eggs, and
weave the spiders web. He that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is
trodden upon breaks out into a Serpent.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Feast of the New-Year.
NEw-years-day according to the Jewish Almanac, falls continually upon the
first day of September, which is the beginning of their civil year, according
to which account they date all their bills, contracts, and bargains.

This computation they ground upon the time of the creation of the world, which
was as, they affirm, upon the first of September. So that they now reckon the
years from the creation to be five thousand three hundred eighty four or
thereabouts. Whence we may see how far they vary in their number from the
Christians, even by the space of two hundred twenty three years.

This first day of September is to be sanctified and kept holy by the Jews,
being a thing commanded by God himself; saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel and say, In the seventh month in the first day of the month, Levit.
23. 24.
shall you have a Sabbath, for the remembrance of blowing the trumpets, an holy
convocation. Ye shall do no servile work therein, but offer sacrifice made by
fire unto the Lord.

Though Moses make no mention of the new-year in these words, yet following an
ancient tradition of their ancestors, they begin their civil year as upon this
day, being the first of September, which is the seventh month accounting from
March, in which begins the new-year of their festivals. The chief reason why it
is called the feast of trumpets, is, because the Priests in old time were wont
as this day to repair to the Temple, and blow upon trumpets, that hereby the
people might be warned, and pricked forward to render thanks unto God with a
cheerful and merry heart, for the blessings and favors plentifully powered upon
them in the year last past: that he has preserved them in safety, and redeemed
their souls from death; and that with fear and trembling, truly repenting them
of their misled life, they may appear before God upon the day of
reconciliation, upon which an atonement is to be made between God and his
people. The Jews at this day instead of a trumpet use a Rams horn, the reason
whereof shall hereafter be related. The manner of the Celebration follows.

After evening prayer, they begin the feast by the consecration of a bowl of
wine, and a certain prayer appointed for the day, they account it as a sign of
good luck if their wine be new and sweet. Every one salutes his fellow with God
send you a good new-year, or pointing to the books of which we made mention in
the former chapter, they say, Thou art registered for one who shall be partaker
of a prosperous year, to whom the other makes answer, and you also: that is as
much as if he had said, The Greator of heaven and earth has ordained thee for
a good new-year. The little children run unto the chief Rabbine, and ask him
blessing, upon whom he lays his hands and prays unto God to send them an
happy year.

From the Synagouge to their own houses, Orach chaijm. number. 583.
where they find the table neatly spread, and sumptuously furnished, and that
with no small deal of provision. They presently fall aboard: the first dish
whereupon they make an assault, is a Platter full of dainty Apples steeped in
Honey, of which every one tasting a bit, says, God send us a merry New-year,
then proceeding with great jollity and mirth to the stuffing of their empty
guts. Amongst other things, the forementioned Rams-horn is laid upon the
table, in remembrance of the Ram which being catched in the thickets, was
sacrificed by Abraham in the place of Isaac. Others write that they lay it upon
the table, to signify, that they shall become the head, and not the tail,
Deuteronomy. 8. 13.
according to that promise of the Lord by Moses; The Lord shall make thee head,
and not the tail, and thou shall be above only, and not beneath. Which promise
is made indeed unto the Jews, but with that condition to keep all his
Commandments to observe and do them. But they understood a mastery and dominion
over the Christians to be the tenor thereof; which that it may come to pass
they daily pray to God above.

They eat fish for the most part of the best sort they can procure upon this
night: to show, that their good works and merits shall multiply and increase
even as the fishes in the sea. Fruits of all kinds are no novelty unto them; as
Almonds, Cucumbers, Grapes, Gourds, Leeks, Lupines, sweet, yet gross pulse,
and such like. The Leeks represent their enemies, because they shall be rooted
out of the earth and perish utterly; for the Leek in the Chaldee tongue is
called Crate, which is derived from a Verb signifying to Cut: and hereupon when
they have eaten their Leeks, they say, Let all our enemies and all them that
hate us be uttterly cut off. When they eat the sweet Pulse, which they call
Silka, they say, Let our enemies perish from among the midst of us. When they
eat the Almonds, which they call Timarim, they say, Let our enemies be consumed
and blotted out. When they eat the Gourds, called Kara, they say, Let every
evil thing which is definitely determined against us, be abolished and come to
nothing, and let our good works and deservings, be read and published before
the God of heaven.

The morning come, they repair to the Synagogue more early then at other times;
singing many Psalms, and saying many Prayers. They take the book of the Law
twice out of the Ark, reading some sections out of it, as in imitation of Ezra,
who did the like, Nehemiah 8. but God knows in a far different manner.

After their Haphtarah, or Lecture out of the Prophets is ended, one goes up
into the Pulpit, and sounding the Rams horns at several times, distinctly
bellows out thereupon thirty words; some with an equal, others with an
interrupted tone. If the trumpet give a shrill and pleasant sound, they take as
a certain sign, that a good and a happy year will then befall them: but if on
the contrary, the sound be dull and hollow, or perhaps none at all, it fills
their hearts with sorrow, being a very probable token of an unfruitful and
dangerous season. When the trumpeter has done his office, Psalm. 89. 16.
the whole Synagogue trumptes out those words of David, Blessed is the people,
O Lord, that can rejoice in thee, they shall walk, in the light of thy
countenance.

Morning prayer ended, they return again to their houses: where they eat and
drink, and sound upon their Rams-horns. For it is a position of the Rabbines,
that at this time every one ought to be merry and jocund, being assured, that
God has been gracious unto him in pardoning his sins and offenses: and not
because he has filled his panch, and liquored his throat, for this would God
rather impute unto them as a sin, then recompense as a good work.

After this their repast, every one, man, woman, and child, hasten to the
water, or to some Bridge, thereupon to make Taschlich, Mich. 7. 19.
that is to say, to cast their sins into the water: and the ground of the
practice is that of the Prophet, He will turn again and have mercy upon us: be
will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.
The Jews thus gathered together upon the Bridge, so soon as they behold the
fishes, accounting the sight as a prosperous sign and token, they caper alost,
and shake their garments over the ^ishes, dreaming, and vainly conceiting, that
by this their foolery, they have shaked off all their sins upon the fishes
backs, which swim away with them, Levit. 16.
even as the Scapegoat which carried away the sins of their ancestors into
the wilderness. Others write, that they do it in remembrance of Abraham; who
traveling to sacrifice his son Isaac upon Mount Meriah, which was upon the
first day of September: Satan met him, and turned himself into a great River,
which at the first took him only to the knees; but by and by it reached his
neck. Abraham perceiving himself to be in such a distress, and that he was in
danger of drowning, cried mightily unto God, who heard his prayer, and turned
the water into dry ground; as it is recorded in the tract Medrasch rotosoha.

Evening being come, they fall again to eat and drink, and make merry as they
were wont; and in this manner they celebrate the feast of the New-year in great
security, with much mirth and jollity for the space of two days together. I
conclude with that of the Prophet, Mich. 2. 11.
If a man walk in the spirit and would lie falsely, saying, I will prophecy
unto thee of wine, and of strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this
people. To which alludes that of Sophonie; Her Prophets are light, Soph. 3. 4.
and wicked persons: her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary: they have
polluted the Law.

CHAP. XX.
How they prepare themselves to the Feast of Reconciliation, and the
celebration thereof.
THe time between New-years-day and the tenth of the same month, Orach chajim
number. 602.
upon which they keep the feast of Reconciliation, is called by Jews, the ten
penitential days: for which space they fast and pray very much, and are
wonderful desirous to become holy and religious; that if God should have
written any of their names in the book of death, and determined to afflict
their souls with an unfortunate year, he might at the contemplation and sight
of their penitent life and practice of good works, repent him of the evil, and
have mercy upon them; transcribing their names in the book of life, and sealing
the judgment.

Every morning so long as these days endure, while it is as yet very early
they confess their sins three several times; do not proceed to the
excommunication of any one, neither do they call any man into judgment, or
force any one to take an Oath.

Upon the ninth day they forsake their beds betimes in the morning, frequent
the Synagogue, sing and pray. So soon as they return home, every male old and
young takes a Cock, and every woman a Hen into their hands: the master of the
family doing likewise, Psalm. 107. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
and saying these words, Foolish men are plagued for their offense: and because
of the^r wickedness. Their soul abhorred all manner of meat, and they were
even at deaths door. So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he
delivered them out of their distress. He sent forth his word and healed them,
and they were saved from their destruction. O that men would therefore praise
the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the
children of men; that they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and tell out his works with gladness. And again, If there be a messenger with
him, or an interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto man his
righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, and will say, Deliver him
that he go not down into the pit: for I have received a reconciliation, that
is, a Cock, which shall be a reconciliation unto me. Jo^ 33. 34, 35
When he has ended this his repetition, he finisheth the reconciliation,
waving the Cock three times about his head, and saying at every time, This Cock
shall serve instead of me, he shall succeed in my stead who deserve death; he
shall be my reconciliation, he shall die for me, but I shall enter into life
and bliss with them that are righteous in Israel. Amen. This he does three
times, as was said before; once for himself, once for his children, and once
for strangers which sojourn with him according to the custom of the high
Priest in ancient days, as it is recorded in the third book of Moses. In the
next place he takes the Cock and kills him, Levit. 16, 17.
and drawing, and gathering the skin together about his neck, first meditates
with himself, that he is worthy to have his own throat cut for his sins and
offenses, and then cutting the Cocks throat, thinks himself worthy to be
punished with the sword: After this he takes the cock, and with all his might
throws him upon the ground, thereby signifying, that he deserves to be stoned
to death for his sins and wickedness: lastly, he puts him upon the spit and
roasts him: thereby giving others to understand, that to be burnt in a fiery
furnace does not equalize his desert. These four kinds of death the poor Cock
undergoes for his Master. The intrals, out of commiseration, they commonly cast
upon the house top, that it may also be partaker of such a sacrifice. Others
say that they do it, because sin is rather an internal then an external thing,
and that it cleaves fast to the bowels of the Cock: some Crows coming by, may
claw them up and flee away with them into the wilderness; even as the
Scapegoat in the Old Testament ran away with the sins of the people into the
Desert.

They take all possible pains and care to procure a white Cock for the
sacrifice. They will by no means admit of a red one; because such an one is
full of sins, seeing sin it self is red also, as it is written: Come now let us
reason together, Isa. 1. 18.
faith the Lord; though your sins were as crimson, yet shall they be as white
as snow: though they were red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. Now if the
Cock be white, he is not polluted with sin, and so is able to bear the sins of
others, which being red he could not possibly do, being stufft with his own
sins already. Antonius Margarita in his book of the faith of the Jews,
registers it as the affirmation of some of the Hebrew Doctors, that an Ape is a
more fitting beast for this days sacrifice then the Cock, because in his face
he more represents a Man. Yet they choose a Cock rather then any other creature,
because a Man in Hebrew is called Gebher: Gehher a man from (...) invaluit, to
prevail, he ha^h this, name from his might and strength.
Now if Gebher offend, Gebber must also in justice suffer for his offense. And
therefore the Jews considering the burden of death too grievous to be born, and
the punishment too heavy, spare themselves and kill the Cock, which the
Babylonian Talmudists call Gebher, to satisfy the judge of all flesh; and by
this shift Gebher offends, and Gebher suffers for it. Blind and beastly Jews
how do they trisle and think to puzzle God in that manner, that he cannot know
a Cock from a Man. Woe, woe unto them for this their horrible blindness above
example, without pattern. Such another exposition relishing of the same pate we
find in the book called Schebet Jehudah; written first in Hebrew, then
translated into the Teutonick tongue by the Jews, and printed at Cracovia in
Poland, some twenty two years ago. It is a certain disputation between a Jew
and a Christian before Alphonsus King of Portugal: wherein, when the Christian
urged diverse places of Scripture proving Christ to be the true Messiah, and
amongst others that of the Psalmist, My God, my God, Psalm. 22. 1.
why have thou forsaken me? The Jew made answer, that it was a certain property
belonging to the holy Scripture to be capable of diverse interpretations,
amongst which that is the best which may be confirmed and declared by other
places of holy writ. But as for the forecited place, there were many other
Scriptures which did evidently prove that it cannot be understood of Christ.
And first of all, says the Jew I will rell thee, what answer a learned Rabbine
did upon a certain time make unto the King of Spain. Yesterday said he unto the
King, I being very wroth with my household Cock, because he had troubled me in
my studies with his crowing music, I smote him with my staff, put him into a
dark room where he ceased his crowing: yet withal this my anger being never a
jot abated, I did beat him till I had rent his skin, and disjoynted his bones,
then I put him into a Pot, and covered it according as I thought meet and
convenient, which served him for a Coffin, for there he died. After his death
there happened out a miracle, for his life returned unto him again, and he
began to sing and crow as at former times: and this is the true meaning and
exposition of these words urged by the Christian out of the 22 Psalm: Which
appears so to be if we parallel the place with that of Jeremiah, in the third
of his Lamentations and the first verse. I am the man that have seen affliction
in the rod of his indignation. He has led me and brought me into darkness,
but not light. Surely he is turned against me, be turns his hand against me
all the day. My flesh and my skin has he caused to wax old, and he has broken
my bones. He bath builded against me, and compassed me with gali and labor. He
has heaged about me that I cannot get out, he bath made my chains heavy. And
when I cry and shout he shuts out my prayers. I am the man Am Gebher, that
is to say, I am the Cock, for the word among the Talmudists ^ignifieth so much.
Who bath see naffliction? In the rod of his indignation. There is the rod with
which the Cock was beaten. He bath led me, there is his flight: into darkness
and not into light, there is the place of obscurity into which he was put. He
turns his hand against me, there is the second beating after that he was put up
in his close prison, or the motion whereby he thought himself to move in the
pot. My flesh and my skin has he caused to wax old, that is to say, he has
torn and rent it. He has broken my bones, or cut me in pieces. He has builded
against me, He has shut me up in the pot. He has set me in dark places, that
is, he has put me in the pot and covered it. And when I cry and shout, which
words signify unto us, that the Cock sung and crowed after he was dead, So
much foppery out of the book called Schebet Jehudah, out of which we may
plainly see after what a ridiculous manner the Jews interpret and make a mock
of the holy Scripture, and prove themselves to be really possessed with that
frenzy, blindness, and hardness of heart, wherewith Moses threatened them. We
may see also with what art these juggling mountebanks, and quacksalvering
impostros, can metamorphose a man into a Cock, and again, turn a Cock into a
man. Truly I am forced to believe, that if the Prophet Esaias had used the word
Gebher in his fifty third chapter, the man that is there made mention of,
should of necessity (the Jews being translators) have been a very Cock. Seeing
the Prophet calls him Isch machobheth a man full of sorrows, despised and not
esteemed. One that has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, even
Christ: who was beaten for our sins, and wounded for our transgressions. The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, by whose stripes we are healed. Yet the
Jews will not acknowledge, receive, and confess, such a man: but choose one whom
they can kill, put upon the broach, roast at the fire, and fill their filthy
paunches withal. But woe and alas they may long look for health from the
wounds of an household Cock. The Greek Calends will first have place in the
annual computation, before they receive from hence any settled peace of
conscience, which evidently appears to be true at the hour of their death:
when destitute of all comfort ready to despair, they c^y out, my death is my
reconciliation, and satisfaction for my sins. A miserable poor and cold comfort
indeed, when not only death temporal but eternal both of soul and body must be
the wages for their sin: This the Jews cannot comprehend, seeing God in his
just judgment has shut their eyes that they cannot see nor understand.
Pitiful and lamentable is their case, in which with an unwilling heart I leave
them, and descend to a further declaration of their preparation to this
festival. After that they have made an atonement for their sins by the
sacrificing of the Cock, they repair to the place where the dead are buried,
where they say many prayers, as they did also at New-years-tide, give alms,
and so much money to the poor as the sacrificed Cock was worth. For in ancient
times they were wont to give the Cocks themselves unto the poor and needy,
which they took in great indignation, and abhorred them as a thing abominable,
and in eating whereof they should swallow down the sins of the rich. Therefore
the rich men redeem it with money, and either rosting or boiling it, and feed
thereupon with great joy and rejoicing.

After dinner they go into some cool well or cistern, and wash themselves as
they also did at new-years-tide. They duck often, and dive to the bottom of
the water, by which actions they think themselves to be clean washed and
purged from their offenses. Some in the mean time provide lights, which they
are to use in the Synagogue the day following. The Jews in Germany prepare a
light for every one in particular, which to be necessary, they prove out of the
Cabala in this manner. The Hebrew word Ner signifying a light or Candle,
contains the number of two hundred and fifty. Now every man has two hundred
forty eight members in his body, to which if we had his spirit and soul, this
number equalizeth the first. And by this reason the word Ner signifying a
light, is to be understood of man man, that is to say, every man ought to have
a several light, lamp, or candle to himself. Now for the women, it is not
necessary that any lights should be provided for them, seeing they have four
members (according to the Jewish anatomy) more then is in man. Yet
notwithstanding the Jews inhabiting other nations, provide lights also for the
women, not of necessity, but for the ornament and grace of their Synagogue.
They who are very religious have commonly two lights provided, one for the
soul, the other for the body. That for the soul being more costly and
precious, which they call by the name of Neschamah. Neschamah amma hereby is
noted only the reasonable soul, according to Aben Ezra, who derives as though
i^ were (...) min ha^shamajim from heaven. I think rather from (...) nashah to
lift up, and Shamajim signifying heavens, because it is, or always ought
thither to be lifted up. It is distinguished from Ruach and Nephesh, the
Synonyma's of it in this manner by Aben Ezra Neschamah est vis sensibilis and
rationalis and habet locum in cerebro.

2. Ruach spiritus habet sedem in cord quod est origo ritus, complectiturque
vim irascibilem.

3. Nephesh est vis concupiscibilis and situm habet in jecore. Orach chajim:
nu. 606.




At eventide again they return into the Synagogue, ofsering up their evening
sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving. One goes and salutes another, if any have
a quarrel, or beat any malice to his fellow, he craves pardon for his fault,
and reconciles himself unto him. If any have received any hurt, he is bound
from his very heart to forgive him that hurt him, for if he forgive another,
God will also forgive him his trespasses. If he will not at the first time of
entreaty forgive him, then he that offended him takes three more unto him, and
craves pardon the second time, yea also the third for his offense. If this will
nothing avail, he calls ten men unto him, and earnestly entreats the party
offended to forgive him. If he grant him a pardon, well, if not, well also,
seeing God is appeased, and this his fact shall never rise up in judgment
against him. This custom of asking forgiveness is very necessary, because God
will not pardon the offenses committed against our brother, upon the day of
reconciliation, unless we make an atonement with him. If it so chance that the
party offended be dead, then he who committed the offense against him, calls
ten men, goes unto his grave and says, I have offended against the God of
Israel and him that lies buried in this place.

Every one makes his confession unto his fellow before supper, lest in supper
time a bone should get into his throat and choke him, and so he should die
without any confession, or acknowledgment of his former sins. They make their
confession in manner following. Two men go into some secret corner of the
Synagogue, the one of them kneels down, turning his face toward the North and
his back toward the South, the other takes a good leathern whip and gives him
thirty nine lashes upon the back. He that receives them and confesses his
faults, smiting his breast at every several stripe: he that plays the beadle
and soundly whips his hide, repeats these words of the Psalmist, He was so
merciful that he forgave their misdeeds and destroyed them not, yea many a time
turned he his wrath away, Psalm. 78. 38.
and would not* suffer his whole displeasure to arise.

This verse in the Original consists only of thirteen words, which he repeats
three times, adding a word for every stripe. Then he that did so lash the other
prostrates himself upon the ground, his fellow doing as much for him: mutually
undergoing this grievous penance for their offenses: Yet notwithstanding these
subtle foxes love their own flesh so well, that they endure but a small deal of
pain by such a favorable whipping. This kind of whipping seems to take its
original from that act of Moses, who enacted, that if so, the wicked be worthy
to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before
his face, according to his trespass unto a certain number. Forty stripes shall
he cause him to have, and not past, lest if he should exceed, and beat him
above that with many stripes, thy brother should appear despised in thy sight.
This kind of punishment was in ancient times political, and was in use also
among the Christians, as it is also at this day, for a malefactor to be beaten
with rods. The Rabbines commenting upon this place affirm, that thirty nine
stripes only, not forty, as the law commands are to be inflicted upon the
person offending. The reason whereof, as one of their Rabbines tendered it unto
me, Deuteronomy.23. 2, 3. This was in use in S. Paul's days, who says that he
received forty stripes save one. 2 Cor. 11. The Jewish reason is to be approved
of.
is that which follows. In old time the whip wherewith the effend^r was
punished, consisted of three cords, two of which were shorter then the other,
the third or mid cord being of such a length, that it might easily eacompass
the whole body, all the three being made of the skin of some young bullock. Now
he that lashed the del^nquent with this threefold cord, gave unto him at one
and the same time three several stripes, accounting one for every cord. So that
in thirteen lashes, he received the full number of thirty nine stripes; to which
if he had added one lash more, Rabbi Bechaim. Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
then had he inflicted two more then Moses required to be given unto him, which
was no way to be allowed of, it was therefore thought good rather to be
defective in punishment, then exceeding to give only thirty nine stripes
instead of forty. The true and genuine exposition of this place, is to be found
in the Talmud, which here I will not insert, to avoid prolixity. This kind of
punishment was inflicted upon the Apostle, as he himself witnesses in his
second Epistle to the Corinthians, and that without doubt in a more smarting
degree then is usual among the Jews at this day.

Prayers being ended, they post home with speed inexpressible. Where they find
the table ready spread, and furnished by their wives in their absence: at which
presently they sit down and lustily feed upon the Cocks and Hens, which in the
morning they offered in sacrifice to God for their sins: for in their Minhagin
they affirm, that it is no less the commandment of God, and a good work to
fill their Panches, and cram their Guts, this night with the Cocks and Capons;
and soundly to liquor their throats, then to fast the day following; Always
provided that supper be ended before sunset, for then the feast of
reconciliation begins, and they are to dress themselves in neat and fine
clothing, upon which they wear a surplice or garment of choice linen coming
down unto their feet, hereby showing unto other, that the next day they shall
be pure and clean from their sins and offenses, and like unto the Angels. These
garments they put on in honor to the festival, the celebration of which,
consists not in eating and drinking, being sottishly ignorant, that the worship
of God is of more worth then either. Hence it is that the Lord complains by the
mouth of his Prophet. Hear O heavens, and harken O earth: for the Lord has
said, I have nourished and brought up children and they have rebelled against
me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel h^th
not known, my people have not understood. Ah, sinful nation, ab people laden
with iniquity: a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: they have forsaken the
Lord: they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger: Psalm, 1. 2, 3, 4.
they are gone backward. What have I to do with the multitude of your
Sacrifices, says the Lord? Hosea also says, O I srael return unto the Lord
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take unto you words and turn
unto the Lord, and say unto him: Take away all our iniquity, and receive us
graciously, and so will we render unto thee the calves of our lips. So much of
the preparation to the feast of reconciliation.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Feast of Reconciliation.
COncerning the institution of this feast, Levit. 23. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
we may find it recorded in the third book of Moses: that the tenth day of the
siventh month shall be a day of reconciliation: it shall be an holy
convocation unto you (speaking to the Israelites) you shall humble your souls
and offer sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord: And ye shall do no work that
same day: for it is a day of Reconciliation, to make an atonement for you
before the Lord your God. For every person that humbles not himself the same
day, shall even be cut off from his people. And every person that shall do any
work that same day, the same person also will I destroy from among his people.
Ye shall do no manner of work: therefore this shall be a law for ever in your
generations, throughout your dwellings. By reason of this injunction and
command the Jews at this day are wont to meet in their Synagogue about sunset
before it be night, carrying with them their wax lights, and placing them in
their Candlesticks, singing and praying with a beastly roaring and bellowing
outcries. The women which stay at home to keep the house. light many candles in
the bed chambers and other places, blessing them, and stretching out both their
hands toward them as they do also upon the sabbath, hereby making a difference
between the festival days, and others appointed for ordinary employments and
manual labors.

If these lights burn clear, they take it as a very good sign of some
consequent hap, believing that their sins are remitted: that they shall see
many happy days, and not come as yet into the prison of the grave. If they
give not a clear light, but that which is only glimmering, dark, and obscure;
if they melt away the tallow or wax, distilling drop by drop, then they begin
to be sorrowful, conjecturing this to be a sign of some evil ready to befall
them.

They spread their floores, pavements, and hearths, with Coverlets in some
places, as in Worms they straw their hearths with rushes only, lest they upon
the day following, by often stooping to the fire to chafe and rub themselves,
might defile and spot their holiday attire: or otherwise lest they should seem
to commit Idolatry, which is altogether unlawful; the reason hereof is that
which is written. You shall not pave your pavement with stone, to bow and
prostrate your selves thereupon.

That it is said in the forecited text of Moses, Orach chajim nu: 612.
that they ought to humble themselves before the Lord, they understand to be
meant of a five-fold kind of pleasure from which they are to abstain.

And first of all from meat and drink, even from sunset to ssnset, from the
beginning to the ending of the solemnity* Boys above twelve, and wenches above
eleven years of age, women also who have been above three days in childbed,
are not exempted from this fast. A sick man may eat lawfully if he desire it:
If not, the Physician thinking it meet and convenient for the regaining of his
health, meat is to be administered unto him.

Secondly, every one is bound to go without shoes barefoot: only it is
permitted unto old decrepit and sickly persons, to whose health the coldness of
the season may bring hurt and damage.

Thirdly, no man ought at this time to anoint himself with oil, or wash his
body with water for pleasures sake.

Fourthly, no man must enter into a bath to wash himself, no he may not be
allowed to dip his finger in the water, much less to wash his hands or face.
Yet if any have occasion to ease himself, after the deed done, he may dip his
fingers into the water, so that he go no farther then the foremost joint. Some
take a wet linen cloth and make clean their hands therewith, yet it is
accounted as a thing very dangerous, and nearly coming within the confines of
an offense: for if the cloth should chance to be so wet, as the drops of water
might be pressed out of it, it were enough to prophan^ the festival.

Fifthly, the men must not come at their wives, no not so much as touch them;
and keep themselves out of their company, as though they were in their monthly
flowers.

Before they begin their solemn prayers, usually made by them after sunset, at
the beginning of this festival, three of the chief Rabbines walking through the
Synagogue, saying with a loud voice, Bischibhah schel mahelah, ubischibhah
schel mattah, etc. the meaning of which* words is, that they give power and
license to the whole congregation, as well to the bad as the good among them,
to pray unto God. To this end also the Chaunter goes unto the Ark, where the
book of the law is kept, opens it and says a long prayer, which begins, Col
nidere Va^ssare uschehue, that is to say, All Vows, Covenants, and Oaths etc.
the first part whereof he repeats three times, every time with a more lofty and
joy resounding voice then other. The sum whereof is, that all the vows, oaths,
promises, covenants, asseverations, and protestations, which any one of the
Jewish nation has not kept the year past to be void, A very papistical
indulgence*
remitted, disanulled, the breach thereof not to be acknowledged for an
offense, to be utterly taken away and pardoned. That by this mean,
Covenant-breakers may as well as the keepers, the bad and the villainous, as
well as the good and just, may sing praise and pray unto God. Whence every
Christian may see how little they esteem of an oath, especially made unto one
of us. Then they hold on to sing and pray until the night be far spent: Some
all the night over, others returning to their houses, betake them to their
rest; other sleep in some corner of the Synagogue or other, or in the Synagogue
of the women, in some place farthest remote from the Arc. They among the Jews
who have an earnest desire truly to repent them of their sins, and to lead a
holy life, stand all the time that the feast endures, singing and praying
without intermission, as I have seen some who have stood immovable in the same
place for twenty seven hours together.

When the morning begins to approach they all repair to the Synagogue before
the dawning of the day, making there their agode until night, boasting very
much of the book of the Law, reading many Sections therein. Falling often to
the earth with their face uncovered, and then chiefly when they make confession
of their sins, smiting their breasts at every word, to show the devout attention
of their minds: and the lifting up of their hearts unto their God and maker.
When it begins again to be night, then the Priest wrapping a great hair-cloth
ahout his neck, and drawing it over his head, so far until it come to the
threshold of his eyes: he blesses the people according to the ordinary form
prescribed by Moses, Numbers the 6. the 24, 25, 26, and 27. verses. When he
pronounces the blessing, he stretches out his hands toward the people: they
covering their faces with their own; for it is lawful for no man to look upon
the hands of the Priests: because the spirit of the Lord rests upon them, while
he blesses the Congregation. As it is written, He stands behind our wall
looking forth at the windows, Cant. 2. 9.
showing himself through the grates, that is to say, God stands at the Priests
back, and looks through the windows and grates, that is to say, through his
hands being being stretched out, and his fingers being spread abroad severed
one from another. Then he si^gs another prayer repeating it seven times,
sometimes with a submisse and low, sometimes with a lo^d voice, and the reason
of this reiteration is, because God at this time departs from them and goes
into heaven, not coming again until the priest be the seventh time in
repeating of this prayer. The seventh time therefore they sing it in a
melodious tune, with a sense bereaving harmony, having very good skill, and
sweet voices, as they can witness who have heard them.

Before they depart the Synagogue, they blow upon the Rams horn before
mentioned, a sound both long and loud, in remembrance of the year of Jubilee,
which in ancient times was wont to begin as upon this day. Others write that
they do it in memory of the seven heavens which the Lord opened when he
descended upon Mount Sinai, and gave the law to the people of Israel, and
declare unto them that in heaven there was no other God besides him.

When they have put an end to this their festival, and a period to these their
trifles, then (as they blush not to affirm) there comes a voice from heaven
saying, go and eat thy bread with joy and gladness of heart, for God accepts
all thy good works at the best. Instantly upon the hearing of the voice, they
return to their own houses, some carrying the relics of their wax lights
along with them, because they commonly use them in making the separation
between the festival and other days of the week. But others on the contrary,
leave them in the Synagogue in the Candlesticks for a year together, lighting
them at some certain times. They who are very holy and religious among them,
have a wax light burning in the Synagogue night and day, never going out
throughought the whole year: this they call Ner Tamid, an everlasting light.
When they are returning home, one says unto another, God the Creator seal unto
a happy year: for the three books of which we formerly made mention, are now
sealed up: and Gods sentence pronounced upon every one is ratified and stands
immutable.

Being come home, they find their guts to make a grievous complaint, and
themselves exceeding hungry, having eaten nothing for twenty eight hours
together: they make haste therefore to satisfy their greedy appetite, and to
replenish their belly with store of victuals.

The next morning after they rise betimes out of their beds, and return to the
Synagogue, lest Satan should take an occasion to complain of them, saying unto
God, yesterday they rose early because it was the day of reconciliation: but
this day their devotion grows cold, loving their pillow better then the
Synagogue. What should I say more, this day they are so holy and religious, so
honest and devout, that even the Devil is forced whether he will or not to
commend their carriage: concerning which we have his following conference in
Pirk Rabbi Eleazar. Upon that day in which God gave the Law to the Children of
Israel: the evil spirit Samael came unto him and said, O Lord of the whole
world, thou have given unto me power and dominion over all the people of the
earth, only the children of Israel excepted. To whom the Lord made answer; On
the day of reconciliation and thence-forward thou shall have power over them,
if thou can find any sin, fault, or offense in them, of which if they be
found in no manner guilty, then shall thou not approach so much as to touch
them. Which when Samael understood, he said unto God, thou have a people upon
earth like unto the Angels in heaven. For as the Angels in heaven standing
immovable, neither eat nor drink, and being free from all sin live in peace
among themselves, even so do thy people Israel upon the day of Reconciliation:
which God hearing out of the mouth of the Devil, Chaptor upherach. p. 71
presently without delay forgives them all their sins, and opens his ear unto
their prayers.

It is read in another place, that they give gifts unto Satan, that they may
blind and shut up his eyes, lest he should see their doings and accuse them
unto the Lord of hosts; as it is written: A gift blinds the eyes of the wise,
Exodus* 23. 8.
and perverteth the words of the righteous.

I conclude with the words of God to Esaias: Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek me
daily, and will know my ways even as a nation that did righteously, and had
not forsaken the statutes of their God; They will ask of me the ordinances of
justice, they will draw near unto God, saying, Wherefore have we fasted and
thou see it not? We have punished our selves and thou regardest it not.
Behold, in the day of your fast you will seek your will and require all your
debts. Behold, you^ fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: ye shall not fast as you do to day, to make your voice to be heard
above. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his soul
for a day, and to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to lie down in sackcloth
and ashes? Zach. 6. 5.
will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord?

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Feast of joy and gladness, for that they have read over the book of
the Law. And of the manner how they distribute their Ecclesiastical Offices.
THere is no mention made of this Feast in holy writ. The Rabbines instituted
it as a day of rejoicing, in that God had given them so much as to spend a
whole year in the reading of his Law and exercise thereof: in that upon this
day they have finished, accomplished, and brought to an end the lecture and
exposition of the of the text thereof in their Church or Synagogue, in that he
has in great clemency granted them power and faculty to perform the same.

They distribute and part the five books of Moses into fifty two Chapters of
Sections, whereof they read one every Sabbath day, so that the last Section is
read upon the first day after the Feast of tabernacles, which commonly falls
upon the twenty third day of September. It is recorded in the Talmud, that the
Priests were wont to skip, caper, and dance, using all kind of musical
instruments upon this day, practicing among the vulgar many incred^ble and
skittish fooleries; which here to set down would be rather a weariness then
either pleasure or profit to the reader. Upon this day they repair to the
Synagogue, and in a solemn procession take all the books of the Law out of the
Ark, reading the first and last Section, leaping about the Ark with the books
in their hands, and when they are weary in great pomp putting them into the Ark
again. So long as the books are out of the Ark, a burning Lamp shines therein,
for the Ark must not at any time be found empty; whereupon it necessarily
follows, that the Lamp supplying the place of the books, avails as much as the
books themselves: for the Law is called a Lamp or light, as it is written: The
Command is a Lantern, Prove. 6. 23.
and instruction a light.

Furthermore, they scatter Apples, Plums, and Pears, among the younger sort,
that they also may take occasion to express the utmost of their mirth and
jollity. Yet it often falls out, that that hereby is occasioned a greater deal
of grief and melancholy in the hearts of these nonaged striplings, in that they
often in scambling for these fruits fall into strife, contention, and brawling,
and at last make trial which among them have the most patient stretching ears.

Now because upon this day the reading of the Law is finished, in a second
place they go about the distribution of Ecclesiastical functions and offices,
and in ^he first place them that belong to the Lecturers of the Law. These
their offices or functions are sold by open sale in their Synagogue; and he
that at the third asking offers the most money for them, has them assured unto
him, and is bound to keep them. And in the first place the Clerk or Sexton of
the Synagogue proclaims the office of them who are to light candles all the
year following: as also that of the Cup-bearers who carry the wine, wherewith
they begin and end their Sabbaths, and other Festivals. For though the Master
of every family be bound to give a beginning to the Sabbath by the consecration
of a cup of wine: yet that this ceremony is also performed in the Synagogue,
and that publicly before the whole Congregation, by reason of the poorer sort,
who for want of means cannot procure wine at home for the initiation of the
Sabbath. And moreover it is not to be neglected, because the Boys and children
that drink thereof, become religious and godly Jews.

Thirdly, the Clerk proclaims that if any man will buy Gelilah, let him come
forth, which is an office of unfolding and folding up again the book of the Law.

Fourthly, it is demanded, if any one will buy Hagbohah; He that has this
office is busied in a speedy lifting up of the book of the Law, carrying it
about the Pew or Desk that any one may read thereupon. It is necessarily
required, that he that carries it be strong and of an able body, that he may
without stumbling carry the book unfolded with stretched out arms, for if he
chance to faulter and slip but with one foot, not bearing it in that manner
which is required, the whole Congregation is enjoined to fast, which is reputed
as a very bad sign of some ensuing misfortune.

Fifthly, it is demanded, who purchase Etz Chajim for money. He that has this
office is allowed to touch the two pieces of wood to which the Law is fastened
by long skins or Parchments, as also to carry and administer the little Bag,
Coat, or Sachel, in which the book of the Law after the ending of the Lecture
is with all speed to be wrapped up. Young men and striplings commonly buy this
office: persuading themselves that by touching those forementioned pieces of
wood, their honesty shall be improved, and their understanding bettered: hoping
that thereby their life shall be prolonged, seeing these pieces of wood are
called Etz Chajim, which by interpretation signifies the trees of life, as it
is written: She is a tree of life (meaning the Law) to them that lay hold on
her, Prove. 3. 18.
and blessed is he that retains her. These are touched and handled when the
book of the Law is wrapped up, where a special heed must be taken, and care
had, that they touch not the Parchments with their naked hands, for this is a
heinous offense.

Sixthly, it is demanded, who will buy Acheron, which is an office that
whosoever in the whole congregation is the last called out upon any Festival,
he must read somewhat out of the book of the Law.

Seventhly, it is demanded, who will buy Shehia. He that has this office is a
kind of overseer, who looks unto the rest that they be not negligent in their
charge and place; and if he find them so, he may put them out, and himself in.

All the money which they get for these places and offices, they bestow in the
reparation of the Synagogue and maintenance of the poor. From this open sale of
Ecclesiastical functions, often proceed as from a Fountain, envies, brawlings,
contentions, and evil surmisings. Yea, God himself is often blasphemed, because
the favor and countenance and respect of persons bears a greater sway in
sharing then Justice: while the rich is preferred before the poor; a stripling
sooner admitted into holy Orders, then one of riper years, an illiterate Ass
sooner then a learned Doctor, and an ill liver commonly before an honest man.
Hence it is that these things considered, such a flood of contention often
arises, that a Christian Magistrate is often sent for to stop and stay it;
forunder the Sun there is not a more testy, envious, jarring, and more
implacable people then the Jews. And this is the fruit which they reap from the
reading of the Law with so great attention as they bring and boast of; and to
say the very truth, no better can be expected, seeing their outside makes a
beautiful and glorious show, but within they are full of malice and hypocrisy.
Now whereas there is no perfect joy where slesh and wine, or, as they say,
Bas^r re i^jin are wanting: therefore they conclude and end this Feast of joy
and rejoicing, with a sumptuous and great Supper.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Feast of Dedication.
THis Feast is wont to be celebrated upon the twenty first day of November,
Orach chajim, uu. 670.
by them called Kisleu: in memory of Judas Hasmonita or Machabaeus, that
excellent warrior, who after the death of his Father Mattathias, overcame and
vanquished the Grecians, who had formerly subdued Jerusalem, profaned the holy
Temple, poured out the oil of the Sanctuary, and done very much evil unto the
Jews: He also won the City, cleansed the Sanctuary upon the twenty first day of
this month, as we may read in the first book of M^chabees, and the fourth
Chapter. Wherefore Judas and his brethren, with the whole Congregation of
Israel, concluded, that the days of dedication of the Altar should be kept in
their season from year to year, by the space of eight days, from the five and
twentieth day of the month Casleu, with mirth and gladness. This Feast the
Jews at this day do also keep and celebrate, but in a far different manner then
those ancient Machabites. For here now is nothing to be seen but feasting and
gormandising, quaffing and drinking, piping and dancing, revelling and roaring,
all to pass away the time; but little or no thanksgiving unto the Lord of
hosts for the victory and conquest over their enemies, as upon this day.

At that time, when Judas had dedicated the Temple, none of the holy oil could
be found: so that the Lamps could not be lighted according to the ordinance of
Moses: Judas therefore made diligent search in the Temple, where he found a
small horn of oil, sealed with the Ring of one of the Priests, which was only
sufficient to feed the Lamps for one nights space, yet preserved in that happy
manner, that it was not polluted by the enemies. Hereupon the heart of Judas
and the whole congregation was filled with sorrow, because they could have no
more oil till these eight days were expired, because the City Tehoa from
whence it was to be fetched was four days journey distant from Jerusalem. In
this their perplexity the favaour and mercy of God appeared to them by this
miracle, for the horn of oil sailed not for eight days together. In the
remembrance of this favor and blessing so miraculously conferred upon them,
the Jews at this day use a great deal of superstitious pomp, in tinding of the
Lamps appointed for the Synagogue in the time of this Feast: They provide a
Candlestick with seven branches capable of seven lights or Lamps, which burn
every night, though not until the morrow, from the beginning of this Feast unto
the end thereof: and wheresoever any of these Lamps are found, whether in their
Houses, Stoves or Bedchambers, there it is not lawful to move the finger to any
kind of work. A Lamp must also be hung as well upon the right side of the gate
of every man's house as of the Synagogue, the distance whereof from the ground
ought to be ten spans, no lower; twenty, but no higher. It is a great question
among them how long these Lamps may burn, and by whom they may be tinded:
whether one may be lighted at another? and such like. Thus are they very
solicitous and careful about these external lights; never considering that
there is nothing but darkness in their own hearts: neither striving that they
may be illuminated, by the light of Gods holy Spirit.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of their Feast of Purim.
THe word Purim is a Persian word, and is rendered by the Hebrews Goral, which
signifies a lot. This Feast therefore took its name from that plot and wicked
device of Haman the Agagite, Esther 3.
who in the month Nisan in the twelfth year of Ahasuerus cast Pur, that is a
lot, whereby all the Jews, both young and old, children and women in all the
Kings Provinces should be destroyed and rooted out in one day, even upon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar or February;
which decree was written in the name of the King, and sealed with his Ring.

The end of this conspiracy fell far contrary to Hamans intent. For Haman was
hanged upon a pair of Gallows fifty foot high, and the King granted the Jews in
what Cities soever they were to gather themselves together, Esther 8.
and to stand for their life, to root out, slay, and destroy, all them that
vexed them. So that strengthened by the Kings Letter Patents, they put their
adversaries to death. In Shushan the Palace they slew five hundred men, and the
ten sons of Haman; and the Jews that were in the Provinces of King Ahasucrus
slew of them that hated them seventy five thousand men, upon the thirteenth day
of the month Adar, and rested upon the fourteenth and fifteenth thereof.
Wherefore it is instituted and ordained, that upon the fourteenth and the
fifteenth day of the said month every year should a Feast be kept by the Jews
in all quarters, in remembrance of this great deliverance throughout their
generations by an ordinance for ever. Wherein they rested from their enemies,
in the month which turned unto them from sorrow to joy, from mourning to a
joyful day: as we may read in the ninth Chapter of the book of Esther.

These two days are celebrated at this day by the Jews imitation of their
ancestors, but in that manner, that they rather deserve the name of the days
of profanation and drunkenness, then of joy and gladness.

Although upon these days working is not prohibited by the text of
Scripture:yet the Jews at this day rest from all manner of labor, Tract.
M^gilah.
writing and affirming in the Talmud, that he will never thrive or prosper that
does any work upon them. For there it is recorded, that upon a certain time
that a man being sowing line-seed upon one of these days, a certain Rabbine
coming by and seeing him, began to reprove and curse him. Whereupon it came to
pass, that the seed never came to growth, nor did ever peep out of the ground.

In the first place therefore the women are enjoined in a more peculiar manner
to sanctify and celebrate this Festival, because this deliverance was wrought
by the hands of Queen Esther. The night being come, they light the Lamps of joy
in the Synagogue, and the Chasan or the Minister expounding the book of Esther,
reads it from end to end: whereat the women and children ought to be present,
and give diligent attention; and they have a custom that the little ones so
often as Haman is named, keep a vile stir and a tumultuous noise in the
terrible and forcible explosion thereof. In former times they were wont to
provide themselves two stones, Orach chajim, nu. 690. Sect. 16.
upon one of which the name of Ham^^ was written. These they did beat one
against the other, until the name was quite demolished and worn out; which when
they perceved, they presently cried aloud, Let his name be blotted out. The
name of the wicked shall rot; Accursed be Haman; Blessed be M ^rdecai; Cursed
be Zeresh the wife of Haman; Blessed be Esther the wife Ah^suerus. Cursed be
all they that worship idols or the host of heaven. Blessed be all the people of
Isnael. When the Lecturer comes to that place where mention is made of the ten
sons of Hamau, he is bound to read it with one breath, for they write, that all
these sons of Haman perished in the twinkling of an eye, and their souls in a
very moment took their farewell of their beloved lodging the body. They
celebrate this Feast in a very voluptuous manner, sousing their guts in wine
and beer, because Esther the Queen found favor and grace in the eyes of King
Abasuerus when he sat at her banquet, and obtained pardon for the Jews, and a
grant that they might stand for their lives. And hence it comes to pass, that
for the space of these two days, they busy themselves with no other things
then eating and drinking, smelling, and bibbing, dancing, and piping, singing,
and roaring, ieasting, and sporting, riming, and scoffing, the women putting on
men's apparel and the men clothing themselves in women's attire, which although
it be expressly forbid in the law of Moses, yet they make there one exception,
Orach: chajim number: 615.
saying, that it is lawful and no offense to practice it upon this day, and
this occasion: seeing it is done by them only for worldly joy and recreation,
Rabbi Isaac ^irna in this Minhagim has left in record to posterity, De rit:
Jud: p. 61.
that it is commanded as a work of great excellency, to make merry as upon
these days, to go a whoring, to drink and be drunk, yea in that measure,
that he cannot make any difference between Mordecai the blessed, and Haman the
accursed. that is to say, until he be so besotted with the ale tappe, that he
cannot for his heart declare how many letters be contained in any of these
words, yea moreover, any one is permitted at this time to pour in strong
drink, until he knows not how many fingers he has on either hand. Which
precept indeed is most diligently observed and kept, according to the very
rigor thereof by the Jews at this day, and that chiefly by the beggarly crew,
to whom the richer sort send gifts and presents in a far greater measure then
they do at other times, to the end that one may not mock another for being
drunk, bein commanded and strictly prohibited to send away their meat and drink
to any other end and purpose. With these Bacchanal rites, drunken fits, and
besotting beastliness, they put an end to their annual feasts. For this of
Purim is the last festival in the year, having no more until the feast of the
passover. If the Prophet Isaiah were alive at this day, or should rise from the
dead, truly and really might he take occasion, and that both forcible and
urgent to cry out, Woe and class unto them that rise up early to follow
drunkenness, and to them that continue until the night, till the wine do
inflame them.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the feasting days in use among the Jews.
HItherto we have treated of feasting, fasting succeeds. In the law of Moses
there is only one fast commanded to be kept by the Jews, which is upon the
tenth of September, upon which the feast of reconciliation is annually kept and
celebrated, as was formerly declared. Besides this, it is registered in ancient
records, that many other fasting days were instituted and ordained by the
ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, according as the time required. And Zachary
the Prophet, who lived after the building of the second Temple, makes mention
of four general fasts in these words. zach. 8. 19.
Thus says the Lord of hosts, the fast of the fourth month, the fast of the
fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall ^e to the
house of Judah joy and gladness.

The fast of the tenth month was usually, The first fast.
and is to this day, kept by the Jews upon the tenth day of the same, to wit,
December: because upon this Ne^uchaddnezar began to besiege Jerusalem with
armies, and to afflict the Jews with great trouble and calamities.

The fast of the fourth month, The second fast.
was and is kept to this day upon the seventeenth day thereof: because upon
this they endured many great afflictions which are not yet disgested. For as
upon this day the tables of the law were broken; the daily sacrifice ceased:
the book of the law was burnt, an Idol the abomination of desolation was set up
in the holy place, the temple of Jerusalem. The city it self besieged the
second time, overthrown and taken. For these causes the Jews in these our days
fast very devoutly, begin seriously and earnestly to repent them of their
former life, if a man may believe the external gesture: from which it is no
doubt but their heart is too too much a roving. The days following this fast,
even unto the ninth day of the next month, are accounted ominous and
unfortunate: upon these no schoolmaster must dare to whip his boys. If any
Jew also have a case to be tried by the law, between him and a Christian, at
this time he seeks all manner of evasion and excuse, that he may not appear
before the Judge until these days be expired, fearing lest his cause should
fail and not prove good, and he be overthrown therein.

The fast of the fifth month, The third fast.
is kept upon the ninth day of July: because upon this very day the temple was
burnt, and turned into ashes: In the time here of they go barefoot: sitting
upon the earth, reading doleful stories, and the lamentations of Jeremy. They
go into the place of burial, where they sob out their doleful accents of grief
and sorrow, amidst the sorrowful consort of departed souls, bewailing the
desolations of their beautiful temple with sighs and groans for a month
together. From the first day until the tenth, they neither eat flesh nor drink
wine, they enter not the bath, wash their face or hands, or suffer any rasor to
come upon their head. They do not make any marriages, appear not in judgment
but sore against their wills: complaining and crying out, that they had never
any good hap or fortune in this month: which they prove out of the Prophet
Hosea, Hos. 5. 7. Jer. 2. 24.
saying, A month shall devour them with their portions.

Upon the eighth day they feed only upon lentiles, in sign of sorrow and
heaviness: but they will neither eat beans nor pease, because they have a
certain black stroke in their upper parts much like unto a mouth: but they eat
lentiles and eggs, also such have no such lin^ upon them, neither any
representation of a mouth, and therefore do best decipher and figure out a man
full of grief and sorrow, who sits still and says nothing, as though he had no
mouth at all. A most Rabbinical allusion. At night they eat but little,
continually sitting upon the ground; if any thing, then it must be an egg
roasted: which they do likewise in sign of sorrow, for as an egg is round, and
in figure circular, so is sorrow also, running after the manner of a round
body, now to this man, now to that* Bedtime being come, they lay themselves to
rest upon a harder couch then at other times. He that formerly used two
pillows, is now content with one. He that formerly used one only, casts it away
and will not admit of any, for soft feather and down-bed they embrace some bone
pinching mattress, and for sheets of the choicest lawne, those which are hurden.

The fourth fast, The fourth fast.
which is the fast of the seventh month, is kept upon the third day of
September: because that good and excellent man Gedaliah, which was by
Nebuchadnezar set over the remnant of the Jews that were left of the captivity
of Babylon, was in a miserable and fraudulent manner slain as upon this day, as
Jeremy the Prophet bears witness. These are the four general feasts usually
kept by the Jews in the days of Zachary, Ier. 40. 41.
and also by the disp^rsed remnant yearly in these our times.

Besides these general fasts, Particular fasts.
they have some more particular, not kept by the whole Congregation of Israel
in general, but by every one apart at certain times, according as they desire
to become holy and religious. Thus some of them fast every monday and thursday
through the year, as that proud Pharisee, whereof our Savior makes mention in
the new Testament, who bragged and boasted that he fasted twice every week.

Secondly, 2.
some use to fast upon the tenth of March, for Miriam the Prophetess who died
upon this day, upon whose departure, the fountains in the wilderness did dry
up, so that the children of Israel wanted water, and sinned in murmuring
against the Lord: yet many of the Rabbines are against this fast, that every
one ought to abstain from fasting in the month of March, because therein God
wrought their deliverance out of Egypt, the remembrance whereof ought to cheer
them up to joy and gladness.

Thirdly, they fast for the most part upon the tenth of April, 3.
because Eli and his sons died upon this day, the Arc of the Covenant was
taken by the hands of the Philistines, and the glory departed from Israel.

Fourthly, 4.
many of them fast upon the twenty eighth day of April, because Samuel died
thereupon. They have also diverse other fasts which they keep, by reason such
wise men and Prophets changed this life for a better, upon those days whereon
they observe and keep them. Some fast also upon every evening of the new moon.
Others so often as they have any fearful and unfortunate dreams. He whose
father is dead, fasts yearly upon the day whereon he departed this life. And
many such like causes there are for which they abstain from meat at several
times.

When they fast, they abstain from all kinds of meat and drink from morning
until the st^s appear; which were a true and laudable fast indeed, if it were
performed with a devout heat and mind, in the fear of God, and refe^red to
that end which the Scripture prescribes. But this kind of fasting no^ of the
Prophets could never by the hammer of persuasion beat into their hearts and
heads.

It is written in Medrasch rabba in the Chapter vezos habbetachah, Reschis
chochma parvum. p. 10.
that ever and anon so soon as Moses saw that God would inflict some punishment
upon him, he appointed himself a fast, making himself a cheese-cake as big as
his own body, put on sackloth, sprinkled ashes on his head, and going into the
foresaid pie or cheese-cake, fasting and praying without intermission, did
determine not to depart thence until God had reversed and made void the
sentence pronounced against him. This fable smells of the Talmud, Tanais p. 23.
in which it is written, that a certain godly and religious Jew called Chon
Hammagal, did fast after the manner of Moses, so often as he desired some great
and weighty matter at the hands of God. When upon a certain time it had not
rained at any time throughout the whole month of February, and rain was
necessary that men might receive the fruits of the earth in due season, the
foresaid Chon, fasted and prayed, shutting himself up in such a pie or cake as
in close prison, and saying, O Lord of the world, thy childrens eyes are all
upon me, knowing that I am as dear unto thee as any son can be to a father: I
swear therefore by thy holy name, that I will not go out hence until thou
have mercy upon thy people. Then the Lord sent a gracious rain upon his
inheritance. Habbacuck the Prophet also practiced the like, Hab. 2. Rabbi
Solomon Jarchi,
and hereupon he says, I will stand upon my watch tower, and set me upon the
tower, and will look and see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer
to him that rebukes me, that is to say, I stand in my pie or chees-cake
expecting until thou make me answer, how it comes to pass that the wicked do
so prolong their life; as Rabbi Kimchi comments upon the place. So miserable
are these poor seduced Jews, in this manner deluded and given over to a
reprobate sense, so that they cannot blush at any thing, neither are sensible
of any gripes of conscience, while they speak so grossly and vainly of God and
his word, interpret the Scripture according to the fancies of their brain, and
their own good pleasure. This superstition and abuse in fasting, had a strong
head even in the days of the Prophets. Whereupon Zachary reproves their false
fast, and prescribes the true, for to the priests and people asking him, Zachi
7.
Shall I weep in the fifth month, and separate my self as I have done these
many years? He answers in Gods name and says, when you fasted and mourned in
the seventh month, and in the fifth, even these seventy years, did ye fast unto
me? and do I approve it? And when you did eat and when you did drink, did you
not eat for your selves and drink for your selves? should ye not hear the words
which the Lord has cried by the ministry of the former Prophets, when
Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about
her, when the south and the plain was inhabited. Thus speaks the Lord of
hosts saying, execute true judgment and show mercy and compassion every man
upon his brother, and oppress not the widow or the fatherless, the stranger nor
the poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart.
But they refused to harken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their
ears that they should not hear; Yea they made their hearts as an adamant stone,
lest they should hear the law and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his
spirit by the ministry of the former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath
from the Lord of hosts. Therefore it came to pass, that as he cried and they
would no hear, so they cried and I would not hear says the Lord of hosts.

So much shall suffice to be spoken concerning the Ceremonies used by the Jews
upon their holidayes and festivals: for hereby may any man easily pereive that
their faith and belief is not grounded upon Moses and the Prophets, but upon
the traditions of tht Scribes and Rabbines, which I have desired to show from
the very beginning of this treatise. It follows that we should now treat of
other matters belonging to their private and domestical life.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of their difference of meats, and the boiling of them: and of their new
kitchen veslels.
THe Jews living in diverse parts of the world at this day observe a main
difference in the boiling and eating of fish, flesh, and milk-meats. Which
practice of theirs they ground upon those words of Moses, Thou shall not boil
a kidd in his mothers milk. Exodus 23. 19.
Hence it is that they have written diverse commentaries and expositions upon
this text, concerning the using of flesh, honey and other viands.

Their kitchen boiling vessels are of two sorts, the one whereof is appointed
for the secthing of flesh, the other for milk. Their milk vessels have three
peculiar marks upon them. if they be of wood, then they give them three several
cuts, whereby they may be distinguished from others: and this they do, because
the forecited verse is found three times in the law of Moses. Hereupon it also
comes to pass, that a Jew continually carries about him two knives, one for
flesh and another for cheese and fish, which have also three several marks or
stamps upon them. If through negligence one vessel should be taken for another,
and the contrary thing boiled therein, then it is not lawful for any Jew to eat
thereof, breaking the vessels, if they be of earth, but washing them with
water, if they be of wood, and that in a most exact manner. If they be of iron,
they cast them into the fire, suffering them there to abide until they be fully
purified.

It is enacted that flesh and milk must not be boiled together at the same
time over the same fire: neither are they to be set on the table one opposite
or over against another, but ought to be separated by something put between
them: and to this end they spread one cloth for the dishes furnished with
flesh, another for those wherein cheese and milk are served in, He that eats
either pottage or flesh, he may not be allowed for a whole hours space, to eat
butter, or cheese, or any milke-meats. Yea moreover, they who would be
accounted precise indeed make six whole hours distances.

It is lawful for any one to eat a hen with almond milk: If any one love milk
so well, that he cannot abstain from it, an especial dispensation is granted
him to taste thereof sooner then ordinary, so that he pick his teeth accurately
and Spaniard like, wash his mouth, and eat a crust of bread to take away the
taste of the flesh. If the fat of any thing fall into any dish of meat boiled in
milk, that meat is prohibited to be eaten. Yet if the meat be sixty times more
in quantity then the fat, then may it lawfully serve for the sufficing of any
man's appetite. An egg must not be boiled in a pan or pot in which flesh is
sod. If they desire to have their eggs poched, they first break them into a
platter, or pour them out of one shell into another, having a diligent care,
and provident espial, that no drop of blood be in them. And this is the reason
why the Jews always open their eggs at the top, because in that place there
is often found a vein of a bloody color.

If in carving up a hen they find any eggs within her, they use them not
until they be mollified in water and salt. It is a heinous offense to set fish
and flesh at the same time upon one table, as also to boil them in the same
pan, much more to eat them together, for the leprosy follows as a reward of
the fact. Therefore they either wash their mouth or hands between the eating of
flesh and fish, or else they eat an apple or piece of bread between the eating
of the one, and handling of the other. Briefly it is accounted as a great point
of wisdom among the Jews, rightly to distinguish the kinds of meat; hence when
some difficulties object themselves unto their view, they go for a solution to
the learned Rabbines. All their kitchen vessels, whether of gold, silver, tin,
or lead, brass, or copper, if they can endure the fire, they are to be purged
by fire, if not, by water, according to the command of Moses, Whatsoever will
abide the fire, you shall make it go through the fire, Number. 31. 23.
and it shall be cleansed: and whatsoever will not pass through the fire, you
shall make it to pass through the water.

The Talmudists upon these words infer, Tract. 1. Elim c. 5. p. 75.
that such vessels ought to be cast into a cesterne or pit where a menstrous
woman has washed her self in the time of her uncleanness, because such women
in the Hebrew tongue are called Niddoth, and the water of separation Me
niddoth. Here the Jews give an evident demonstration that an Ass may be known
by his ears from any other creature, for the forecited words of Moses, make
not mention of vessels in general, but of that particular household stuff which
the children of Israel took in way of prey form their enemies the Midianites;
which at that time were a profane, ungodly and reprobate people. And therefore
when Moses made the people to purge and purify every thing they had taken in
battle, partly by fire, partly by water, according as the condition of the
thing it self would suffer: his desire was to signify unto them, that they
onght by no means to make any use of the Midianites goods, unless they were
first of all cleansed and sanctified. Finally, because at this day the Jews
will not use any vessel belonging to a Christian, unless it be first purged in
the foresaid manner, they hereby clearly show unto the world, the opinion they
have of us, to wit, that in their judgment, we are not a jot more pure or holy,
then those people which the Lord banished the land of Canaan for their sins and
wickedness; in in the ^ost of their writings calling us, impure and pro^ane
Gentiles.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the manner how they kill their Beasts.
MAny among the Jews are forced to learn the Butchers trade, which they call
Scachten. He that learns it is bound Apprentice to some skilful Butcher for
term of years, and those not a few; for there are so many precepts,
constitutions, caveats, axiome^ belonging thereunto, that it is very difficult
for any man in a short time to be cunning and expert therein; he must therefore
bestow great pains and study in seeking the rules appertaning thereunto out of
the books of the Rabbines: that thereby he may gain a perfect and sound
knowledge therein.

There is extant a certain small Pamphlet which is called Schochitos and Bed
kos, the Butchers book, in which are contained the principal Rules and Canons
belonging to this Art; according to the tenor whereof the Jews at this day kill
and slaughter their beasts and other cattle: If they meet with any difficult
place whose true meaning cannot be comprehended by the brains of a Butcher,
they repair to some Rabbine for the exposition thereof. He therefore who has
diligently perused this little book, and has been long time a spectator of
another man's labors in this kind, and can rightly judge of them, is made by
some of the Rabbines Freeman of the Company, who also makes him a testimonial
Letter under hand and seal of his skill and ability. Wherein he certifies that
he is expert and skilful in the Butchers trade; and therefore gives him full
power and license to kill and slay any Ox, Sheep, or such like kind of Beast,
when and wheresoever it pleases him. Not long since it was my chance to see
one of these testimonials, which was writ in manner and form following:

This day being such a day of the month, in such and such a year, I have
examined, and in examining found N. the son of N. to be skilful and expert in
the Butchers trade, and that as well to teach by mouth as to practice with
hand. Which things weighed, and rightly by me considered, I have granted him a
license to kill and slaughter, and being killed and slaughtered to search all
kind of cattle. And furthermore, it shall be lawful for him to eat whatsoever
shall be by him in this case searched and slaughtered. Always provided for a
space of a whole year ensuing the date hereof once a week, the next year every
month once, and after that every quarter of a year for the space of his whole
life, he do diligently peruse all the Rules and Canons belonging to the
Butchers trade.

Witness Rabbi N. Butcher.

A Butcher is called in the Hebrew tongue Schochet, the Butchers trade
Schacten. The searcher, or overseer, who looks whether they be sound or not
Bodek, and the action of searching Badken.

In the exercise of this their trade they use knives of diverse sorts,
proportioning them according to the quantity and bigness of the beast that is
to be slaughtered. Their knives of a greater size have commonly broad and blunt
edges, yet apt enough to cut: if they have any gap in them, if it be never so
little, it is not lawful to use them. The greater sort of beasts being ready to
undergo the knife have their feet tied by the Butcher, in imitation of Abraham,
who bound his son hand and foot when he was about to sacrifice him. Afterward
he cuts the weesil of the beast at one cut.

Then he looks upon his knife, to see whether there be any flaws or gaps
therein, which action of his is very necessary, seeing a gap in the edge of the
knife does in such manner terrify the poor beast, that the blood runs unto the
heart to comfort it, so that the knife cannot make a passage for it, by which
means the beast becomes unfit to be eaten. When he has cut deep enough, he
hangs the beast upon the Cammerel, unbowels it, and making a couple of holes,
one upon the right, another upon the left side of the heart; he, or any other
who is skilful in searching, thrusts his hand through these holes into the body
of the beast, with an intent to know certainly, whether any blood or little
Bladders full of blood clag or cleave unto the heart or liver. Which if he
perceive any other fault, be it never so little; then it is not lawful for any
Jew to eat thereof: as it is written: Ye shall be an holy people unto me, Exodus,
22. 31.
neither shall you eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field: ye shall
cast it to the Dog. And again, Of a beast defiled or rent with beasts, whereby
he may be defiled, ye shall not eat: I am the Lord. Out of these words the lews
draw this conclusion, That it is not lawful to eat the flesh of any beast which
is not without taint, spot, or blemish; when the Text it self speaks not of the
living creature, but of a dead carkase, a beast that has died of it self: or
has been torn in pieces by another.

Birds and all kinds of fowl the Jews do kill and slaughter in the same manner
that they do their beasts: cutting their throats, and letting the blood drop
down into a heap of ashes, covering it therewith: This their practice they
ground upon that action of Rebecca, who when she saw Is^^c, lig^hted down from
the Camel. Upon which words the Rabbines in the Schechitos or Butchers book
have left in writing, that at that time it was with Rebecca after the manner of
women, whose virgin, or menstruous blood the Birds came and covered after that
she had risen from the carth: and therefore they say, that God commanded them
in lieu of this to cover and hide the blood of Birds when they slaughter them.

They cover also the blood of other Beasts with earth; because the earth opened
and swallowed up the blood of righteous Abel, Genesis 24. 64. Abel signifies
vanity, showing the righteousness of man to be nothing else: hence that
excellent Elogie, Adam, Cain, Abel, the earth has possessed vanity. The names
of the three first men making it up.
when Cain slew him. I also, says the Author of the Butchers book have seen it
recorded in the book Chasid^m, that the blood is therefore to be hid in the
earth, lest Satan coming, and finding it uncovered, should accuse us before God
of great injustice; because it would seem a very unjust and cruel act,
miserably to kill and slaughter a poor innocent and unreasonable creature in
such a tyrannical manner, which has committed no sin or offense against us,
and therefore is not liable to punishment. Surely the Jews would make the Devil
a very sottish Fool and shallow brained Ass who cannot know thus much; and
themselves very cunning and crafty in such a circumvention of him.

After that they have killed a great beast, they take all the veins and nerves
out of his body, picking away the fat which cleaves unto them; then putting
them in water to mollify and soften them: after a certain space taking them
out again, and washing them in clear water, so that no drop of blood remain in
them; then they lay them upon a shingle or cloven, that the water may drop from
them; then they put them into a vessel, and salt them; which vessel is full of
holes, to this end, that if any blood remain in them, it being sucked out by
the salt, may distill, and find passage through the holes and crevices. If they
are not desirous to have their meat thoroughly salted, they put it in the pickle
only for an hour, and then boil it. They eat not any thing which has the least
drop of blood in it; for it has been always their use and custom, and is at
this day in a wonderful manner to abstain from it. They likewise do not eat the
hinder parts of any beast unto this day, because the Angel touched the sinew
that shrank in the hollow of Jacobs thigh. Yet the Jews of Italy, Genesis 32.
by the rules of their Anatomy, have found out, and concluded, that if the
veins, sinews, and arteries be artificially taken out, the hinder parts may
also be eaten, without making any scruple for conscience sake. Surely if the
Jews who lived in the time of Moses, had been cunning skilful and expert in
this art, then had he spent his breath in vain, in forbidding them to eat so
many several sorts of Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes. And I am verily persuaded,
that if a Sow should be brought at this day to some of these profound
Anatomists, they by cutting her up, and taking out the veins, nerves, and
sinews, would make her a dainty dish for a Jews dinner.

They sell the hinder parts of the beast to the Christians: yet I would wish
all Christians that do buy any such provision at the hands of a Jew, to
consider and know, that the Jews are wont before they bring them to the
Shambles, to spit upon and defile them, causing their children to piss upon
them: they themselves pronouncing a curse upon them, that the Gentile that
buys them may eat up their silthiness, even death it self. I would not have
the Reader to think this a Fable, for it is confirmed by the joint testimony of
so many Jews as have been converted to the Christian faith. Perhaps the Jews
are not in every place so evil minded, so ungodly, and wicked; yet in general
they bear a tyrannous hate and malice against us Christians.

To conclude: by this their great skill in Anatomy, and cutting up of beasts,
and taking out the nerves and sinews, it comes to pass that they are such
excellent Physicians, judging of man's body by insight into that of the beast,
and of all the diseases incident thereunto: yet many a Christian is forced to
pay for his physic with the loss of his life. Concerning which matter if any
one desire to read more, I refer him to Antonius Margarita in his book of the
falth of the Jews.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of their Marriages.
COncerning these marriages it is to be noted, that at the handfasting or
celebration of the espousals, or immediately upon the finishing thereof; many
lews both young and old are called together into some spacious Arbor, every
one of the younger sort carrying a pot in his hand. Afterward comes one, and
reads openly the Letter or Bill of contract; the Contents whereof are, That N.
the son of N* and N. the daughter of N. have promised to marry and be married
one to another. That the one will give unto the other such and such a dowry.
That the nuptials are to be celebrated upon such and such a day; and that the
party which does not perform every condition and covenant, according to every
part and parcel contained in the Letters of espousal, is bound to pay unto the
other fifty Florens. The Bill being ended, the parties to be married say one
unto the other M^zal ^ob, which is as much as God send you good fortune, which
the young men hearing, throw their earthen pots upon the ground, and break
them, saying, that it is a token of good luck, plenty, and abundance. The
espousals thus ended, every one departs the place, and is presented at the door
with a cup of the sweetest wine, which also has some confection annexed unto
it, For eight days after, neither the The Jews of ancient days had two sorts
of wives; the one called ^ashim' (...): which according to Rabbi Juda which
were married with a Bill of contract or solemn espousals, whose children were
heirs unto their fathers lands (...) goods. The others called Pelagshim,
Co^^^ines, or half-wives, not lawful wives or (...) of the hou^e; neither were
their children heirs unto their fathers goods: derived from (...) Palag, to
divide, and Isha^ a wife, a divided or half wife* The f^^^r sort are derived
either by the figure Ap^^^sis, from (...) Anashim, by taking away the first and
capital letter Aleph, (...) that the Man is the Woman's (...) from (...)
S^duxi^, to seduce, b^^^se she deceived Adam, or from (...) (...) to forget;
either that women (...)memory, or rather, that their fathers house in them is
as it were extinct, and quite forgotten.
Bride nor Bridegroom are seen without doors. Many youngsters and scriplings
repair unto the Bridegroom to keep him company, where they pass away the time
by the invention of many toys and trifles, to recreate him, and make
themselves merry, quaffing and carousing healths to his good fortune. The
lawfulness of the act they prove out of the History of Sam^son, who being
about to be married, had brought unto him thirty companious to be with him.

The dame Bride upon the day before the marriage* must wash her self in cold
water from top to toe, so that her whole body be hid in the water. She is led
to the Bath, and likewise back again, by an attendance of gagling women, making
a certain confused noise as they go and return: to the end that every one may
see and know that she is a Bride.

The Girdle which the Bride sends to the Bridegroom ought to have silver studs:
but that which he sends unto her, ought to have those which are of gold. A Jew
upon a certain time to satisfy me in my request, gave me the reason hereof, to
wit, that the silver represented the seed of the man, which is white: the gold
the seed of the woman, which is red: a frivolous and foolish reason, as the
most of their others are.

Upon the day whereon the Bride is to be led into the Synagogue to receive a
blessing, she puts on her wedding garments, decking, trimming, and dressing her
self in the Jewish fashion, as finely as she can possibly: she being ready
dressed, she is led along by her Maids and Damsels, who sing Marriage Songs,
and Bridal-Ballads, bringing her into a certain chamber or closet, and placing
her in a rich and costly Chair, where they comb her head, truss up her locks,
deck her with Fillets, adorn her with Ribbands, beautify her with Garlands,
put a vail over her face, and that for modesties sake, as Rebeckah did when she
was to meet her husband Isaac.

While the women are combing her head, they express a great deal of mirth and
jollity, skipping, singing, laughing, dancing, and all to keep the spleen of
Dame Bride from overflowing with melancholy, which they are conceited to be a
work most grateful and acceptable in the eyes of the Lord. And that the women
may more easily believe it, the impudent Rabbines in their Talmud do affirm,
that God did the like to Eve, when she was to be given to Adam, plaiting her
hair, dressing her head and locks, and also did sing, foot it, and dance with
her in Paradise: which they strive to prove out of the words of Moses, Gen, 2.
22.
And he brought her unto Adam, as though he had brought her skipping, and
leading the dance, as a Bride is now wont to be brought to her husband,
trimmed, and completely dressed, with her hair tired, and locks trussed up. It
is recorded also in Pirk Eliezer, that God attended upon Adam and Eve like a
Serving-man while the marriage was in finishing, and that he made the Canopie
with his own hands under which they were to receive the blessing: that the
Angels became the Minstrels, playing diverse tunes upon Trumpets, Tract. Medah
c. 5. p. 45. Gen* 2. 22.
Pipes, and other instruments that Adam, Eve, and God himself might dance. In
this balsphemous manner writes he that is the Author of that book called Bricum
Spigelium, printed some few years ago at Cracovia in Poland, the German tongue
and Hebrew letter: which book contains many reprehenso^y and moral precepts,
and is of great esteem among the Jews at this day. I find it registered in the
Talmud, that God only made tresses for Eve, which they prove out of those
words, and God built, which the Rabbines read plaited; and hence the Jews at
this day call the plaits of a woman's hair Binias^, which in English signifies a
building, from the Hebrew word Banah, which signifies to build: which
signification Moses also gives unto it, when he says, The Rib which the Lord
God had taken from man, thereof he built Signifying, that mankind was perfect
when the woman was created, which before was like an unperfect building. Or
rather, because the women build their husbands an house, as Rachel and Leah
built the house of Israel, Ruth the last.
a wom^n and brought her to Adam. Which, the Rabbines being Commentators, must
carry this sense: that God planted Eves hair, and brought her unto Adam,
leaping and dancing as he came along. Surely if there were but the least spark
of true knowledge, they would blush and be ashamed to utter these blasphemous
sayings before the world, but God in his just judgment has smitten them with
blindness, that seeing they will not see, and hearing they will not understand.
We leave them therefore an return to our matter.

The time being come when the blessing due unto the married couple is to be
given unto them, Chuppah a cover, arbor or such like, from the Hebrew root
(...) which signifies to cover or hide.
four boys take the Canopie which is fastened to four posts and wooden
pillars, and carry it into the street or garden where the solemnity is to be
kept: whither the bridegroom comes, being attended with many men following him
at his heels. After him follows the bride and her damsels, with sackbuts,
timbrels, and other musical instruments, seating her self by her spouse under
the Canopie. This Canopie they call by the name of Chuppah which signifies a
cover or shelter. When every man and woman there present have taken their
places, then every one begins to cry out Baruch habba, Blessed is he that
comes. Which said, the Bride being led by others is to compass and circle
about her bridegroom three several times, as a Cock does when he is about to
tread a hen, because it is said, Jer. 31. 22.
A woman shall compass a man. Then the bridegroom takes his bride and leads her
once about the floor in a circle, the people in the mean time casting wheat or
other grain upon the bride and saying, Genesis 1. 28.
increase and multiply: hereby signifying that peace and abundance of riches in
housekeeping shall befall them, Psalm. 147. 14*
according to that of the Psalmist, He makes peace in thy borders, an fills
thee with the flower of wheat. In some places they mingle money among their
wheat, which the poorer sort gather for their own relief. The Bride is to stand
upon the right hand of the Bridegroom, because it is written, Psalm. 45. 10*
Kings daughters were among thy honorable women, at thy right hand did stand
the Bride in a v^sture of gold. She must turn her face toward the South,
because it is a tradition of the Rabbines, that whosoever places his bed in
that manner, that he lying there in his face shall be toward the South, not
toward the North, shall be the father of many children.

The Rabbine who marries and joins them together in the bond of matrimony,
Tallith (...) a cloak or hairy garment Genesis 25. Rabbi Solomon says that it is
a little cloak peculiar to the Jews, which they used in time of prayer from
(...) obtegere to hide or cover. Ruth. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 16. 8.
takes the skirt of the hair-cloth or garment, by them called Tallith (a) which
the Bridegroom wears about his neck, and puts it upon the head of the Bride;
which is occasioned by that saying of Ruth to Boaz, Spread the wing of thy
garment over thy ^andmaid for thou art the kinsman, and that of Ezekiel: I
passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was as the time of love,
and I spread my skirts over thee, and covered thy filthiness: yea I swear unto
thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine.

In the next place he takes a glass of wine, which they call (the bride-boule)
blesses it, giving thanks unto God that the Bride and the Bridegroom by his
instinct, have given their consent to be joined together in the bond of
matrimony, and reaching out the cup unto them, commands them to drink thereof.
If the Bride be a virgin, then the cup must have a narrow mouth, if a widow a
large one, at Worms they use an earthen cup, as also at other places. After
that they have both tasted of the cup, The Rabbine takes the wedding-ring from
the Bridegroom which is made of pure gold, yet having no jewel in it, and
calling some witnesses shows them the ring, and asks whether it be a good
one, and worth the money that was given for it; and then puts it upon the Brides
finger, repeating the letters of contract with a loud voice. Which being ended,
he takes another glass of wine, blessing and praying over it, giving thanks
unto God that the Bride and Bridgroom had mutually accepted one of another.
Then reaching them the Cup and bidding them drink thereof, which when they have
done accordingly, the Bridegroom takes the Cup and throws it against the wall
in remembrance of the ruinated temple of Jerusalem. In some places they are
wont to throw ashes upon the Bridegrooms head for the same end and purpose. And
hence also it comes to pass, that the Bridegroom wears upon his head a hood of
a black color, such an one as mourners use: and the Bride a cloak all rough
and hairy, able to fright a child out of its wits, to show unto us that in
their greatest jollity they ought to afflict and humble themselves for the
des^lations of their City and Temple. Thus they walk in garments which may
shadow out much sadness, but in their hearts they have not sance not feeling
thereof. Proving the necessity of this trifling outside sorrow from the words
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2. 11.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence.

That this their marriage or coupling together is celebrated abroad in open
air without covert, the reason is because they ought to multiply even as the
stars of heaven for multitude. When the marriage is ended they sit down to
dinner, the Bridgroom must say grace, and is bound to sing a long prayer and
thanksgiving: and the sweeter he sings the better he pleases his bride, and
indeed he does it rather out of pride and to please her, then for any glory to
God. While he is singing, others are calling for the hens to be brought and set
upon the table. The Brides mess consists of an henn and egg served in together
in one dish. the Bridegroom carves a little of the hen and gives it to his
bride: which so soon as he has laid upon her trencher, the rest of the guests
behaving themselves more like hungry dogs then men, catching at, and with both
hands pulling in pieces the hens before them, devour them in a moment. He that
can get most being accounted the worthiest man at the table. Every one eats
what he catches without help of either knife or trencher, he that has first
done begins to snatch what he can from his fellow: yea sometimes out of his very
mouth, causing thereby a great deal of foolish stir and much laughter; and all
this they do to make the new-married couple marry and jocund.

The egg which we said is used to be served in together with the hen is
always raw, which they are wont to cast one at another face, not sparing a
stranger of Christian if he be invited and there present. The foresaid egg is
set before the Bride to comfort her, and let her know that she shall bring
forth her children easily, without pain and grief: even as a hen brings forth
an egg, with that ease that she expresses it by her cockling voice of joy and
gladneffe. After these sports and childish fooleries, they fall to feast their
bellies in good earnest. after dinner they dance many Giggs, and Capering
Currantos, an when they are about to depart and to put a period to these
nuptial sports, dance a dance called Mitzuah, The commandment, or marriage
pavin, because it was commanded by God himself.

This they dance in this manner, the chief man at the table takes the
Bridegroom by the hand, he another, and so every one his fellow, even so many
as have any skill in dancing, takes one another by the hand. So likewise the
chief mation and most honorable woman in the company joins hands with the
Bride, and all the rest one with another. Dancing hand in hand and making a
great noise with their feet, and in this manner put an end to their marriage
rites and sports: which commonly endure for the space of eight days together.
If the marriage day chance upon the Sabbath, then their dancing measures are
quite out of measure, thinking that thereby they honor the Sabbath in an
extraordinary kind, because the Sabbath is called a spouse as we formerly
declared. A great care must be had that no uncircumcised Christian be invited
to the marriage, for Solomon says, The heart knows the bitterness of his
soul, and a stranger (that is a Christian) shall not be made partaker of his
joy, thus wresting the Scripture to a sense clean contrary.

Moreover, they write that the Angels seeing the Christians at their marriages
do presently depart, and devils enter the place, doing much damage, in
stirring up strife, brawlings, jarrings, slips and falls, breaking arms and
shins, murder, and what not. Hence we may see how willingly they suffer
Christians to be present at their marriages.

When they pledge a health they say, Lochajim tobhim, God grant it may be for
your health; but if they like not the man who drinks to them, as a Christian,
by the foresaid words they understand an imprecation or curse. Relalah, for
this one word in their Cabbalistical computation comprehends the two former:
willing hereby to show that they wish he may drink his last: many such
machinations and imprecations they plot and power out against the Christians,
of which in another place; I will only here add a Copy of the marriage bill,
or letter of contract, which I find drawn in manner and form following.

Upon the sixth day of the week, The dowry bill.
the fourth of the month Sivan in the year five thousand two hundred fifty and
fourth year of the Creation of the world, according to the computation which we
use here at Massilia, a city which is situate near the sea shore, the
Bridegroom Rabbi Moses the son of Rabbi Jehudah said unto the Bride Clavona,
the daughter of Rabbi david, the son of Rabbi Moses and citizen of Lizbon; Be
unto me a wife according to the law of Moses and Israel; and I according to
the word of God, will worship, honor, maintain, and govern thee according to
the manner of the husbands among the Jews, which do worship, honor, maintain,
and govern their wives faithfully. I also do bestow upon thee the dowry of thy
virginity, two hundred deniers in silver, which belong unto thee by the Law,
and mor^over thy food, thy apparel and sufficient necessaries, as likewise the
knowledge of thee, according to the custom of all the earth.

CHAP. XXIX.
Touching the bill of divorce used among the Jews.
I^ is an established truth, that the Jews had a certain indulgence granted by
Moses for their divorcements; for from the beginning it was not so, neither was
it Gods ordinance; but Moses did it for the hardness of their heart, Matthew. 6.
19.
and to avoid some greater inconvenience: as Christ has clearly showed unto u^
in the new testament. Tract. Gittin.
There is extant in the Talmud a voluminous tract concerning the divorce now in
use among them, upon which many other of the Rabbines have written many subtle
and diverse Commentaries: and in them have laid down many causes for which the
strongest bond of Matrimony may be broke in pieces.

The causes pretended by the Jews at this time, were the same that were urged
when our Savior Christ was here on earth, so that the husband can quickly take
occasion of separation, from his wife, and easily find a staf^e to beat the
dog withal.

The bill of divorce ought to be written in a peculiar form, the lines whereof
must not exceed or be fewer then the number of twelve. This ought also to be
delivered unto the woman in the presence of three faithful witnesses, being
signed and sealed in the presence of them. When the husband gives this letter
unto his wife, he must say in express terms, behold O woman the bill of
divorce, for by this thou being divorced from me, art permitted to marry to any
other man, the form of this bill follows.

Upon such a day of the week, and such and such of the month. The bill of
divorce. In the Latin Copy the bill was imperfect, I have therefore corrected
it according to that in Moses Ko^sinsos f. 133.
N. Such or such a year of the creation of the world, according to the
computation which we use here in this City. N. Situate near the River N. I of
the Country N. the son of Rabbi N. now dwelling in such or such a place, near
such or such a river, have desired of mi^e free will without any coaction, and
have divorced, dismissed, and cast out thee my wife, N. of the Country N. the
daughter of Rabbi N. dwelling in such or such a Country, and dwelling now in
such or such a place, situate near such or such a River, which have been my
wife heretofore, but now I do divorce thee, dismiss thee, and cast thee out,
that thou may be free and have the rule of thy self, to depart and to marry
with any other man whom thou will; and let no man be refused by thee for me,
from this forward for ever. Thus be thou lawful for any man, and this shall be
to thee from me a bill of separation, a bill of divorce, and a letter of
dismission

According to the law of Moses And Israel N. the son of N. witness N. the son
of N. witness N. the son of N. witness.


This kind of divorce is not in every place put in execution, they choose a
place of some fame and note near adjoining some notable River, whither foam of
the chief Rabbines are cited by a writ, if some others be not there resident.
The Jews are very much for this carnal divorce, writing vast volumes in way of
Commentary upon it; but by reason of the hardness of their heart, not once
dreaming of the spiritual, whereby they are severed from the Lord of hosts.
Hence remaining aliens from God, and according to their desert vagabonds over
the face of the whole earth.

CHAP. XXX.
Touching the manner how a Jewish woman divorceth her self from the brother of
her deceased husband.
IT is recorded in the fifth book of Moses, that the husband of a woman dying,
his brother being unmarried shall go in unto her, take her to wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother, that his name be not put out of Israel. And if the
man like not to take his brothers wife, then shall she go up to the gate and
accuse him before the Elders, and lose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in
his face, and answer and say, so shall it be done unto the man that will not
build up his brothers house. But in process of time this custom was disanulled
and it was ordained by the Rabbines that none should take to wife the widow of
his deceased brother, but rather for to free himself from her for his greater
honor, should suffer her to draw ^ff his shoe* which kind of divorce i^
called by the Rabbines C^^litra which is performed in this manner.

The widow calls unto her five witnesses, who must be men of another family,
with whom she being about to appear before the chief Rabbine, summo^s her
husbands brother ^lso to the same place. When they are come, the Rabbine asks
the woman whether three months are gone and p^st since the death of her
husband? Whether her husband dying left behind him a brother unmarried?
Whether he that is there present be the natural brother of her husband, begot
by the same man? Whether they think themselves fit to beget children to raise
up seed, or an heir unto the dead, as also to themselves now superviving? What
age they are of? and lastly he asks the widow whether she be fasting or not?
For if she have formerly taken any meat, she may not lawfully spit in the face
of her husbands brother.

Then he asks the dead man's brother whether the woman there present was wife
unto his deceased brother when he was alive? Whether he will take her to wi^e?
or else be divorced from her by the Chalitza, or drawing the shoe from off the
heel. If he answers that he is not willing to marry her, then a shoe is
brought unto him made after a singular fashion, with latchets and other
necessaries, this he takes, and leaning himself against a^ wall puts it on upon
h^s right foot naked. Then comes the woman unto him and ^aith, this my husbands
brother would not raise up seed unto him, and for this cause from henceforth he
shall not be called my husbands brother. Hereupon, stooping toward the earth,
she unlooseth his shoe with her right hand, and drawing it off his foot spits
in his face; and that with such force, that the five witnesses may see the
spittle: and says, Thus shall it be done unto him that will not build up his
brothers house. Then the witnesses and all the whole company cry Chalutz
hannahal, that is, the shoe is drawn off. Thus are these two separated each
from another, that they may severally attend their own employments.

Here arises a great question among the Rabbines, how a woman, suppose that
she wanted the right hand, could draw off the shoe.

Some of them have permitted that in such a case she may ^se her teeth to the
unloosing of it: Others solve it in another manner. If the brother to the man
deceased will not suffer the ignominy of this discalceation, and the woman be
about to marry unto another, then is he bound to pay a great sum of money unto
her, that he may be freed from her. If her husbands brother dwell in another
City, then is she her self compelled to follow him, and to indent with him
about marriage. Concerning this custom of raising up seed unto the Brother, was
that Question proposed by the Sadduces Matthew. 22. The Sadduces were a certain
Sect among the Jews: they had their name either from Sedek, Justice, because
they justified themselves before God: or from Sadoc, the first Author of the
Heresy, who lived under Antigonus Socheus, who succeeded Simeon the just. They
rejected the Prophe^s and all other books of Scripture, save the five books of
Moses. They rejected traditions: they denied a reward for good works, and
punishment for evil, the resurrection of the body, Angels and Spirits, Fate and
Destiny; ascribing all to man's Free Will; and affirming the soul to be
annihilated after it departs the body. Drusius de trib. Sect. cap. 8. lib. 3.
to our Savior: that seeing seven brethren had one after another married the
same woman, whose wife she should be in the Resurrection? out of which we may
conclude thus much, that it was in use among the Jews even in Christ's time, for
the brother of the man deceased, to go in unto and marry his brothers wife.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the uncleanness of the women, and how they carry themselves in the time
thereof.
IT is not lawful for a woman in the time of her uncleanness to enter into the
Synagogue, to pray, to name the name God, or to handle any holy book, as it is
written, Let her touch no holy thing, nor come into my Sanctuary, until the
days of her purification be finished: yet some of the Rabbines have licensed
it* They of the most holy sort write, that what woman soever being admonished
of these things, abstains from them, shall lengthen her own days. So soon as
she has the least knowledge of her own uncleanness, she separates her self
from her husband for the space of seven days, in which time she dare not touch
him, sit upon one stool with him, eat at the same table, drink out of the same
cup, sit opposite unto him, nor speak unto him face to face. When the one would
give any thing unto the other, they are not wont to do it by throwing, but they
lay it down upon some table or stool, that the one being for a good space
removed, the other may take it up.

When the man lies with his wife in her uncleanness, then the children which
they beget prove Lepers, and they affirm that this is one of the chief reasons
why there are so many Lepers among the Christians, to wit, carnal copulation in
the time of the woman's uncleanness; hence scattering abroad venomous and
bitter words against us in writing among the vulgar, which I will not now
relate.

When any woman of the Jews has reckoned up the seven days of her
uncleanness, she holds on and adds seven days more of her purification unto
them; after which time she finding her self thoroughly purified, she clothes her
self in white robes, takes another woman with her, and goes to wash her self in
cold water, and that so nakedly, that she must not have her smock to cover her.
In the Winter time in some places they are wont to power hot water into the
Cistern in which she bathes her self. But in other places they are wont to wash
themselves in cold water, as well in Winter as in Summer. They are bound to
dive so deep, that not an hair of their head be seen without the water: and in
the mean time it is not permitted that they should altogether close either
their eyes or their mouth, that the water may enter into both. They ought also
to stretch out their fingers, bend their body, that their Paps do not touch it,
to ^ishevel their hair by combing of it, to have no rings upon their fingers,
lest there should be any place in the body which might not be drencht in the
water. Some of them upon the washing day eat not until they have bathed
themselves: others will not eat any flesh, lest any thing should stick within
their teeth, and hinder the water to come in betwixt them. If any of them have
a plaster upon a wound, they ought to remove it; as also to cut their nails.
None must pre^ume to touch the woman while she is in the water, yea, though she
fall into a swoon, un^esse with hands first washed. If after her washing any
thing stick between her teeth, she must into the water again. Many things more
might be spoken concerning this matter, if it were lawful to discover the
secrets of women. The Jews themselves have written a certain little book in the
German tongue, and Hebrew character, touching the manners of women: and they
call it the book of women. He that can get it, let him read it: without all
doubt it may be had among the Jews dwelling at Frankford upon the Maene.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the poverty of the Jews, and their manner of begging.
IT is a common report that the Jews will not suffer that any of their nation
should beg their bread, which experience proclaims fabulous: for the poor are
often times relieved by the rich. Upon the Friday at Eve, as also upon the Eves
of every Festival the poor go unto the houses of the richer sort to beg an
alms, that upon the Sabbath or Festival, which by an especial command they are
duly to sanctify, they may cease from begging. If there be any one among them,
who in particular is vexed with some extreme want; From (...) colligere.
the Rabbines having knowledge of it, grant him a license for begging: In which
they declare his necessity, his honesty, and witness him to be a stout
professor of the Jewish faith, and other such circumstances. This Letter or
testimonial they call Ribbutz, an Epistle or Letter of collection; From (...)
colligere.
and the beggar himself they call Rabzan, which signifies a gatherer. This
Letter being granted and given unto him, he travels through the whole Region,
visiting all the Jews he can light upon, and requesting some gift of them. If
he come into any place where there are many Jews inhabiting: he delivers this
his Petition to the chief Rabbine, or to him who beats the posts of the houses
with an hammer, and warns them to the Synagogue; or to the Senators, or the
chief among them; or to the Ruler of the SynaSynagogue, not unlike a Consul, or
to the overseers of the poor, or to the distributers of alms, or to the
Collectors for the poor man's Box; (such are they who gather money among the
Christians, going hither and thither through the Temple, having a certain bag
with a Cymbal hanging at the end of a staff) he delivering it unto them, he
entreats them that by their leave it may be lawful for him to beg in their
quarters. This being granted, he together with two more stands at the gate of
the Synagogue, and desires that some money may be given him: or otherwise the
forementioned couple take his Letter, and gather for him from house to house,
so much as they can get.

When one of the poorer sort has a daughter mariageable, and cannot give her
any dowry; then the Father thus miserable, wanders up and down with a Letter of
the same sort, until he gather so much as will be the means to bestow her:
otherwise he shall hardly procure her a husband.

When the poor Jews go thus on pilgrimage, and turn aside unto other Jews:
they aae by them for a day or two so freely made welcome, that they pay nothing
for their entertainment. But the second day being past, they begin to be weary
of their presence. Hereupon this sentence is proposed to the public view of
travelers in some place of their house. The first day he is a guest, the
second day a burden, the third day a Fugitive, and stinketh.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the diseases incident to the Jews
MAny are of opinion, that the Jews are more lively then the Christians, and
not obnoxious to so many diseases. But experience speaks the contrary; and
their often funerals, even incident unto them in their younger years, confirms
it for a tale. Yea, every man daily sees how they are liable to the Mezels,
Botches, to the frail disease, Plague, and other Maladies, no less then other
people. The frail disease they name Choli nophel, The Falling Sickness, from
(...) cadere. Hilluc, from (...) to go or walk, because the Plague is a very
walking disease*
which disease, as it is very common among them, so are they wont to wish it to
another, saying, God give thee Choli nophel, or Tippul. They call the Plague
Hilluch, hence in their execrations they say, Corripiat te hilluch, the Plague
take thee.

In the time of any spreading Pestilence, they writing certain unusual
Characters, and wonderful names upon the doors of their Houses, Chambers,
Bed-chambers, Stoves: affirm them to be the names of those holy Angels which
are set over the Pestilence. I have seen written upon their doors Adiridon,
Bediridon, and so forth annexing diridon to every Letter in the Alphabet, which
they think to be a present remedy against the Plague. The Leprosy is not so
frequent among them as among the Christians; both because they are fewer in
number then the Christians, and also because they are more temperate in meats
and drinks, and other kind of things which cause this disease. For in their
meats, as much as in them lies, they endeavor to fulfill the law of Moses. They
are not so obstinately abstinent from any kind of meat as Swines flesh: they
cannot endure to hear of it. Yea, they will rather suffer death then eat it.
Yet some of them have been troubled with this disease, as Antonius Margarita
witnesses, who in his time saw some leprous Jews at Prague. The Old Testament
also has recorded this malady to have been very frequent among them. They call
it Nega; and in their cursings say, I wish Nega may fall upon thee.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of the punishments for offenses among the Jews.
SEeing the Jews have for a long time been without a King and Scepter, and have
lost all power and authority of passing sentence of life and death: they enjoin
at this day a certain kind of penance to him that offends, which he must of
duty undergo and perform. Lib Chasidim number. 167. Reschis Chochma, P* 22.
The adulterer is bound to diverse sorts of penance, according to the nature of
the fact committed. In the Winter time he is compelled to stand for certain
days in the water of some River or running Brook. If there be Ice upon the
water, then they cut and hew out a place for his ingresse with an Hatchet; and
he is forced to stand up to the chin in the water so long as an Egg may be
made hard roasted. In Summer time he is compelled to sit naked in an heap of
Pismires; where, although he be so naked, that he has not the least rag upon
him, yet are his ears and nostrils stopped: his penance ended, he washes
himself with cold water. If the season be neither hot nor cold in which he is
to suffer punishment, then they appoint him a certain time of fasting, for the
space whereof he must not eat, unless it be very late at night: at what time
they give him some small portion of bread and water; and this they practice
until the time come when he may either stand in cold water, or sit amongst an
heap of Pismires. It is written in Medrasch, that the first man Adam stood in
the water up to the nostrils an hundred and thirty years before he begot Seth,
for eating of the forbidden fruit. If the punishment seem to be less then the
offense requires: then they compel him in the Summer time to run through the
middle of a thick swarm of Bees, which may lance and sting his body until the
bulk thereof by reason of the anguish swell again. And so soon as he is cured
of the said malady, he must again run through the foresaid swarm of Bees, and
that more then once, according to his desert. If he have often committed
fornication and adultery, then for many years he must continually suffer the
said punishment. Such a Fast is sometimes enjoined such an offender, that for
the space of three years he must fast night and day, not eating any thing
unless it be at supper, when his daintiest fare must be bread and water: only
this qualification is annexed, that he may choose whether he will perform the
forementioned injunction, or otherwise fast three whole days in every one of
the three years, not tasting the least morsel of bread or drop of water. As
Queen Esther did in her great and extreme necessity, and commanded the Jews to
practice the same.

If any go in unto a woman at unfitting time, he is enjoined to fast forty
days, and every day to have his back twice or thrice soundly lashed with a
lethern whip, and thirty nine stripes to be given him. He must not eat any
flesh or hot meats, drink no wine unless it be upon the Sabbath day. If any
kiss or embrace a woman being in her monthly flowers, he must undergo the same
punishment.

A Robber is adjudged to a three years exile: as also that wandering through
every City where any Jews do sojourn, he should with a loud voice proclaim,
Rotzeach Any From (...) occidere.
, I am a Robber, and expose himself to the lash. He must not eat flesh, nor
drink wine. He must not cut his hair or beard, nor put on any clean line^, or
change of garments. It is not lawful for him to wash his hands: every month
once he is bound to cover his head, and to bind the arm wherewith he acted the
murder thereunto with an Iron Chain, and so to deplore the offense committed,
in the sight of the Jews, Some have this punishment inflicted upon them, that
if they sleep one night, they should watch the next, and so become vagabonds
upon the face of the earth, as Cain was. Others are compelled to wear plaits of
Iron upon their naked skin, Others forced to prostrate themselves before the
door of the Synagogue, that every incommer may tread upon. If any Jew accuse
another, and bring him before a Christian Magistrate, or divulge his
wickedness and evil actions, then is he called a traitor. Others inflict some
grievous punishment upon him, and from thenceforth esteem him as a man of no
account and reckoning.

CHAP. XXXV.
Touching the burial of the Jews, and how they are bewailed and lamented of
their living Friends and Kinsfolks.
WHen any Jew is visited with sickness, then the learned* Rabbines come
diligently to visit and comfort him; which they esteem as a good and precious
work. If any be sick unto death, he sends for his nearest Kinsfolks and other
of the learned crew. If the sick person be rich, then in the first place they
barter with him about his temporal estate: if poor, they spare their labor.
They seriously exhort him to a constant perseverance in their faith. First of
all catechizing him whether he believes the Messiah is yet for to come. He is
also bound to make a confession of his sins upon his deathbed, the form
whereof is this. I confess before thee, my Lord and God, the God of my
fathers, the Lord of all creatures, that health and sickness are in thy hand.
I pray and beseech thee to restore me to my former health, and being mindful of
me to hear my prayer, as thou heardest the prayer of King Hezekiah when he was
sick. But if my appointed time be come, then let this my death be the remission
of all my sins which I have committed, either out of ignorance or wantonness
since the day that I was born. Grant that I may have a part in paradise, and in
that world to come that is reserved for the just Grant that I may know the way
of life everlasting. Satisfy me with the joy of the excelling countenance by
thy right hand for ever more. Blessed be thou O God who hear my prayer.

Their final comfort is, that temporal death a debt to corrupt nature, may be a
reconciliation for all their sins, and that God is bound to remit their sins,
because they undergo this death. Alas who can but perceive what peace such
poor comfort can afford to a laden conscience.

When he is giving up the Ghost, then all the bystanders whether kinsfolk or
strangers rent their garments, yet this they do in the skirts thereof where
the rent being but a hands breadth can do no great hurt: they deplore and
lament the man departed seven days after the example of Joseph who mourned for
his father for the same space, and for the renting of their garments they
produce that Scripture, Genesis 50. 10.
Jacob rent his garmants and put sackcloth upon his loins and lamented his son
many days, Genesis 37. 34.


As soon as he is dead they cast forth all the water in the house into the
streets; cover his face, that from thenceforth none may behold it. Then they
take his thumb and by wresting of it into the palm of his hand, make it to
represent the name Schaddai, which is so great a terror to the devil that he
dare not approach the dead corpse. They bind his thumb with the threads and
stringes of his own coat, which otherwise would not remain crooked. For it is
ordinary for a dead man always to stretch out his hands and fingers, thereby
signifying that he has left the world, and that there is nothing in it which
he can now lay challenge unto: as on the contrary, the little infants at their
birth have their hands shut; thereby intimating that God has given, and as it
were delivered unto them the riches of this carthly Tabernacle. Then is he
washed with hot water, that he may be clean when he shall give an account of
his sins and offenses.

This done, they take an cgge and break it, mixing the intrals of it with wine,
and with a great deal of curiosity, anointing the head of the dead carcass
therewith. They invest him with his white robe, which he was wont to wear upon
the day of reconciliation; and for a conclusion of all commit him to the safe
custody of the Grave.

When he is carried out of the house they hurry a certain shell after him:
thereby signifying that by his exit the harsh tones of a melancholy sadness
ought to be utterly silenced.

So soon as they come to the place of burial, then they say, Blessed be God who
has created, formed, nourished, sustained, and at last brought you (for so
they bespeak the de^as is they were alive) into the dust of the earth again. He
knows your number, and in his good time will restore you unto life. Blessed be
thou O God that take away life and give it again. Then they set the Corpse
down by the grave, and compassing the Sepulcher repeat a long prayer. In this
they praise God that he has pronounced a just sentence upon him, which
sentence they name tzidduck haddin Justitia juditij, a just judgment.
This done, certain of them take up the Corpse, lay it in the grave, casting the
earth upon it. His nearest kinsfolks beginning first. The burial being ended,
they depart home with great lamentation. By the way some one of them stooping
three times backward, pulls the grass from the earth, and with his hands
lifting it up above his head, casts it behind him, hereby signifying that the
dead shall rise again, and once more sprout out of the earth like unto grass;
Esa. 60. 14.
as the Prophet says, You shall see it, and your heart shall rejoice, your
bones shall flourish as the herb. Others say, that by this ceremony man is put
in mind how he is dust and ashes.

When they return into the porch of their Synagogue, they wash their hands,
Isa. 25. 8.
saying, He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away
tears from all faces: and the rehuke of the people shall he take away from off
all the earth; because the Lord God has spoken it. From thence they go into
the Synagogue and sit down: by and by they leap up and down, changing their
place some seven times: saying a prayer for the dead, which they call Kaddisch;
as also some comfortable sentences, Psalm. 90. 17.
as this: The glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us.

They who bewail the dead, are forced to ^it seven days barefoot upon the
ground, in which space they are not permitted either to eat flesh or drink
wine, whether they be the children of the deceased or some of his kinsfolks.
Yet upon the sabbath days and other festivals, a dispensation is granted unto
them in honor of these days, For the space of thirty days together they must
not go into the bath, nor to the barber. They must not anoint themselves with
oil or sweet water, not cut their nails etc. The man who mournes for the dead
must eat his meat with men: the woman with women. They idle become careless of
their worldly affairs, breathing nothing out but the doleful accents of grief
and sorrow. He that mourns eats none of his own bread: his friends who come to
visit him, make him partaker of such victuals as they bring with them. In the
first place they give him a dish of eggs to feed upon, and that for his
comfort; for as eggs are round and circular, so is death also wheeling about
now to one, then to another.

The children bemoan their deceased parents for a whole year together: the
surviving son of the deceased father is tied every day for the space of eleven
months, to say a certain prayer called Kaddisch before mentioned, by the
virtue of which prayer, the Rabbines write and believe that his father shall be
delivered out of purgatory. The wicked remain in purgatory for twelve months,
but they who have led their life in a more godly manner are delivered sooner.
Hereupon it comes to pass, that the children commonly pray for their faters the
space of an eleven years, because there is not any who would have his father
accounted for a reprobate. That the father may be delivered by such a prayer,
they prove out of a certain story, rather an old wives tale recorded in the
book, Brandspicilegium in the tract Calah Rabbi Akibha, upon a certain time
being traveling, he met a man carrying a load of wood, which neither any horse
or ass was able to carry. Rabbi Akibhah inquired of him whether he was a man
or a ghost. He answered, I was once a man, but now being dead I am compelled
every day to carry such a heavy load of wood into purgatory, and to this end
that there I may suffer a miserable scorching for my sins which I committed in
my life time, so that I may more fitly be compared to an ass then a man.
Hereupon the Rabbine further enquired of him, whether he had left a son behind
him? what was his wives name, as also his sons name? In what City they dwelt?
All which when he had declared unto him, the Rabbine instantly going into the
said City, happened to meet with his son; whom he taught the prayer Kaddisch,
commanding him to repeat the same daily for his deceased father, for by this
means it should come to pass that he should be delivered out of purgatory.

The son when he had learned the prayer, and had often repeated it for his
deceased father; the father appeared to the foresaid Rabbine in a vision by
night, and giving him thanks that he had freed him from so great torment, as
being the cause of his delivery out of Purgatory, and confessed that he was now
at length thence delivered, and translated into the garden of Eden, Paradise.
Hereupon the Rabbine made all the Schools of the Jews partakers of this history
by his letters, annexing also this injunction, that every child should say
such a prayer for his deceased father. And hereupon it comes to pass, that the
father of a Jew departs this life with great joy and consolation, knowing that
he has left a son behind him that will pray for him. If one have no child,
the whole Synagogue prays for him upon their Sabbath and festival days. By
these and such like fables, the profound Rabbines instill the Jewish religion
into their yonglings, that by this means they may become pious and learned
Jews; yea, hence they are wont to boast before the nations of their sublime
wisdom and sanctity far exceeding the vulgar holiness.

It is also provided, that a lamp should burn for seven days together, in
honor of the soul of the deceased party: for the soul of any dying man is
wont to return to the place where he gave up the ghost, and dolefully to lament
over his dear consort the body.

So soon as the man is dead they cast all the water in the house out of doors,
that they who pass by, may be warned of the decease of some person there.
Others have recorded that they do this thing in memory of the Prophetess
Miriam, of whom it is written: Number. 20. 1, 2.
All the Congregation of Israel came into the wilderness of Sin, in the first
month, and the people remain^d in Cades: where Miriam died, and was buried
there. And when there was no water for the Congregation, they gathered
themselves together against Moses and Aaron.

The Talmudists say that the occasion hereof is this: Tract Aboda Zara, c. 8.
the Angel of death who has deprived the man of life, washing his knife or
sword in the water poisons it; for they write, that Satan or the messenger of
death standing at the beds-head with a drawn sword in his hand; upon which
sword hang three drops of gall: which as soon as the sick man beholds, being
terrified at the sight, he opens his mouth, whereupon these three drops fall
into it. By reason of the first he gives up the ghost: the second makes him
become yellow and pale: the last causes him to putrify.

So soon as the sick man dies, the Angel runs to the waters, washes his sword
in them: by which means they being infected with poison, are to be powered out.

Again, this is one of the best grounds of the Jewish faith, Antonius Margarita
in his tract of Tabernacles, or Booths, writes, that the Jews in ancient times
were accustomed to pray unto God, that he would not suffer the Angel of death
any longer to appear in such a fearful shape at their bedsheads, and that also
they had their request granted: and that they their ancestors put out his left
eye conjuring and binding him by the holy names of God.

It is also recorded in the Talmud, that great honor ought to be given unto
them who have departed this life, because they in the other world have perfect
knowledge of all occurrences in this.

They write also that the soul does not presently upon the dissolution return
into heaven from whence it came, but that for twelve months space it becomes a
vagabond through the earth, returns into the Sepulcher, suffers many torments
in purgatory: and then twelve months fully expired, it ascends up into heaven
there taking its rest. The question being proposed in the book called Schebhet
Jehudah, in a certain disputation betwixt a Jew and a Christian: How it came to
pass that the dead should know all things that are done here upon earth? It is
answered, that the soul does not gain an entrance into heaven, until the body
that was buried be turned into dust; and therefore it remaining so long a time
upon the earth, may without contradiction know the things which are done here
below. That the soul does not presently go into heaven, is manifest out of
the words of Solomon. The dust shall return unto the earth from whence it was,
and the spirit to God that gave it. Ezekiel. 12. 7.
In this place they say, that by the dust is meant our body, which of
necessity returns unto the earth, out of which it was taken: and by the Spirit
our soul which returns to God that gave it: now then to conclude, the body
must first be made dust and ashes, and then the Spirit shall return unto the
Creator, which if it were otherwise, certainly Solomon had inverted his words,
and propounded them thus; The Spirit shall return unto God that gave it, and
the body to the earth.

Elias the famous Grammarian, in his dictionary called Tisbi, expounding the
word Chabat has left it in record, that it was the opinion of their Rabbines,
that so soon as any of the Jews do take their farewell of this t^r restrial
paradise, and the chamberlain death has furnished him with a lodging in the
lower parts of the earth, that the Angel of death comes and sits upon his
sepulcher; and that at the same time the soul returns into the body,
reanimates and erects it. Whereupon, the Angel takes an iron chain, the one
part of which is hot, the other cold, with which he smites the dead corpse two
times or more. At the first stroke all the members of the body are torn one
from another; At the second all the bones are dispersed abroad, at the third,
flesh and bones, yea, the whole carcass is turned into dust* and ashes; Then
come the good Angels and gather the bones together, honoring them with a
second burial. This punishment the Rabbines call Chibbut hakkeber, which they
do not only write of, but also most absurdly believe, in their common prayer
petitioning that God would preserve them against this punishment, and divert it
from them, as we may see in that petition which they call Benschen, being in
the number of those which they use upon the day of reconciliation.

It is written in the book Chasidim that who is much given to almsdeeds, Number.
(...). 2.
is a lover of reproof and honesty, who entertains strangers willingly and from
his very heart, who prays with an attent mind; although he die without the
land of Canaan, he shall neither taste nor try the violence of the grave, but
shall be certainly preserved against the Chibbut hackkeber. The wounds of the
Sepulcher.


Hence it is most evident, that they who die in the land of Canaan are free
from this torture: but they who die in a strange land are subject thereunto.
Hither it is also to be referred, that they who die in other lands are wont to
wander through secret caves and holes of the earth until they come to the land
of promise, otherwise they are not made partakers of the general resurrection,
which thing we have formerly made mention of in the first Chapter and other
places of this book.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Touching the Jews Messiah who is yet for to come.
THat a Messiah was promised unto the Jews, they all with one mouth
acknowledge; hereupon petitioning in their daily prayers that he would come
quickly; before the houreglass of their life be run out. The only scruple is of
the time when, and the state in which he shall appear.

They generally believe, that this their future Messiah shall be a simple man,
yet nevertheless far exceeding the whole generation of mortals in all kind of
virtues: who shall marry a wife and beget children, to sit upon the throne of
his kingdom after him. The Jews twofold Messiah.
When therefore the Scripture mentions a twofold Messiah, the one plain,
poor, and meek, subject to the stroke of death: the other illustrious,
powerful, highly advanced and exalted: the Jews forge unto themselves two of
the same sort, one which they call by the name of Messiah the son of Joseph
that poor and simple one, yet an experienced and valiant leader for the wars;
Another whom they entitle Messiah the son of David that true Messiah who is to
be king of Israel, and to rule over them in their own land. About whose coming
they are among themselves altogether disagreeing.

Those ancient Jews who lived before Christ's incarnation, did not much miss the
mark, when Elias said that the world should continue six thousand years,
whereof two thousand were to be void and without force, that is, without the
law of God, the other two thousand under the law: and the last under the
Messiah.

Their hope was therefore this, that four thousand years after the worlds
creation fully expired, their Messiah should come in the flesh: in which their
error was small or none at all; for according to the vulgar account of us
Christians, Christ the true Messiah was borne in the 3963. year of the world,
but according to the Jews computation in the year 3761, we and they differing
202 years. And now because Christ came not unto them in great power, a king of
glorious state (such as were David and Solomon) to deliver them from the
tyranny of that usurping Herod, and Roman cruelty, neither with a rod of iron
to break in pieces and destroy their enemies: but only began his kingdom over
them* with the spiritual scepter of his doctrine, even for this very cause they
would not receive him for the true Messiah, though some few did acknowledge and
embrace him, Luke 2. 25.
and at that time the most ancient and approved men amongst them did expect his
coming: thus we find a Simeon waiting for the consolation of Israel, Ib. v. 38.
and Anna that old Prophetess speaking of him to all that hoped for deliverance
in Jerusalem. Romans 11. 5.
The very same that the Apostle Paul witnesses in his Epistle to the Romans,
that though the Jews were most ungrateful, yet is there a remnant of them
according to the election of grace. Yea, when all kingly power, sacerdotal
honor and dignity was taken from them, the city Jerusalem made a ruinous heap,
and their beauty the temple turned into ashes, every one now begins to suspect
the time of the coming of the Messiah to be past. Hence it was that in the 52.
years ufter the destruction of the Temple, a certain proud and haughty Jew
boasting that he was the true Messiah, feared not to affirm himself the same
of whom Balaam prophesied in these words: Number. 2. 4. 17, 18.
I shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall
come a star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and he shall
smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. And Edom
shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies, and
Israel shall do valiantly. Others understood this prophecy of the then newly
begun kingdom of the Christians. But the Jews even at this day determine their
Messiah as yet to come, and to fulfill those things which Balaam foretold,
according to their substance. That the said Jew should proclaim himself the
Messiah, was most grateful unto them: who presently in their own conceits can
nourish hopes, that they should become the conquerours of the Romans, who a
little before had destroyed their City and Temple. This Seducer following the
letter of the prophecy, names himself, Ben Chocab, which is by interpretation,
the son of a Star. His chief follower, who at the very first clave unto him,
was Rabbi Akibha, a man of great learning, who had under his tuition twenty
four thousand Scholars, proclaiming him to be Malka Meschiccha, Christ the
King. By this means much people went after him; insomuch, that he chused unto
himself the City Bittera for the seat of his kingdom. But when that Adrian the
Roman Emperor, had after a siege of three years and an half taken and killed
this their Messiah, and together with this beautiful Star had miserably
slaughtered more then four hundred thousand Jews, Schebet Jehndah, the tribe of
Judah. A historical book of the many afflictions, martyrdoms of the Jews, as
also of their disputes with the Christians in Spain, and Italy. It was printed
at Crncovia in Germany. An. d. 1591.
then the remnant of so great a massacre perceiving themselves led astray by
this their Star, turn Anabaptists, and call him from that day to this
Barcozabh, that is, the son of a lie, a lying and bastardly Messiah. Yet
nevertheless, many since have lived who would be reputed for the Messiah, as
you may read in a book called Schebhet Jehudah *.

The issue of all is this; that the Jews convicted in their own consciences,
will they, nill they, are forced to confess that the time in which the Messiah
was to come, is already past.

When therefore they had despised and rejected Christ the true Messiah, and no
other appeared, they falsified the above mentioned tradition of Elias (which
was that the Messiah should come about the four thousandth year of the world)
by annexing unto it this Comment; that the time was prolonged for their
offenses. But when at length no reason could be pretended of this long delay,
neither could they desine the time of his coming: their only evasion is, to
smite with this curse the head of him that should determine a certain season
for his coming, Sanhedrin c. 11. p. 97.
Tippach ruchan atzman schel mechasschebhe Kitzin *, Which is, Let their soul
and body burst with a sw^lling Rupture, who peremptorily set down the time;
that time (I say) in which the Messiah is expressly for to come. Yet this not at
all pondered, and nothing set by, many of them moved by the prophesies of the
men of God concerning the coming of the Messiah, have in their souls and
consciences confessed, that the time of his coming was already past; and
therefore in their writings they acknowledge that he is born indeed; but for
their sins and impenitent life, not as yet revealed. And at this instant all
the Jews dwelling amongst us are of the same opinion. Hereupon Rabbi Solomon
Jarchi says, that according to their ancestors, the Messiah was born in that
day in which ^erusalem was last of all destroyed, but where he has so long
been hid, to be uncertain. Some of them think that he lies in Paradise, bound
to the woman's hair, grounding upon these words in the Song of Solomon: Thy head
upon thee is like Carmel, Cant. 7.5.
and the hair of thy head like purple, the King is bound in the Galleries. By
King understaning the Messiah, and by Galleries, Paradise. Rabbi Solomon
follows this exposition of these ancient Rabbines. Sanhedrin c. 11. p. 98.
The Talmudists write, that he lies in Rome under a gate among sick folks and
Lepers, persuaded by the words of Esaias, who says, that he is one despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows, Esaias 53. 3.
and acquainted with grief. Others forge other lies and tales.

Well, let all these things fall out according to their own desire; The
miracles before Christ's coming.
yet they still believe he is to come. First then before his coming shall
happen ten notable miracles, by which every one shall be admonished and incited
to an accurate preparation for his coming, and also be warned to conceive that
he shall not come so poor and privately as Christ came. These ten miracles I
mean here to present in the same words that the Rabbines have commended them to
posterity, in a little book called Abkas Rochel.

The first miracle, God shall stir up and produce three kings, Abkas rochel
pulvis aromatarius, the author Rimchar a little book in octavo it has 3 parts,
the first of the miracles, before the coming of the Messiah, two of the soul,
and the state of it after this life. The third of Moses his tradition about
Mount Sinai, man's creation. etc. It was printed at Venice anno Dom. 1597. Hos.
3. 4. Jascibhah. (...) a Synagogue from (...) to sit or rest.
who proving traitors to their own faith, shall also turn Apostates: so living
before men as though they served the true God: yet in very deed practicing
nothing less; seducing silly souls, and after such a manner tormenting their
consciences, that they may abjure God and their own faith, even so that many of
the sinners of Israel shall utterly despair of redemption, being ready to deny
God, and forsake his fear. Concerning these things Isaiah speaks, c. 59. 14,
15. Judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off; for truth
is fllen in the street, and equity cannot enter, yea truth fails. What? All
they why shall love the truth shall flee in troops, and flying hide themselves
in the caves and holes of the earth, and shall be massacred by the great, and
mighty, and tyrannical persecutors. At that time shall be no king in Israel, as
it is written. The children of Israel shall abide many days without a King,
and without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without a Teraphin: There shall not be any more Rosch
Ieschibhah (b) that is head of the Synagogue, no faithful teachers who may feed
the people with the word of God, no merciful and holy, no famous and eminent
persons shall remain. The heaven shall be shut up and food shall fail; these
three kings shall enact laws so many, so burdensome, and so tyrannical,
pronounce such heavy judgments upon men, that but a very few shall be left,
because they had rather die, then living deny their maker. Yet these three
kings by Gods ordinance and disposition shall only reign three months.

In the time of their reign* they shall double the ordinary tribute, so that
who formerly paid only eight pieces, shall then pay eighty, he who formerly
paid ten, shall then be forced to give an hundred. He that has nothing at all
to give, shall be punished with the loss of his head: yea also, the longer they
shall reign, the greater and heavier will the burdens be which they shall
impose upon the children of Israel. There shall also come certain men from the
ends of the earth, so black and abominable, that if any man look upon them he
will die through fear. Every one of them shall have two heads, and eight eyes,
shining like a flame of fire. They shall run as nimbly and swiftly as an heart.
Then shall Israel cry out, woe unto us, woe unto us, the frighted little ones
cry alas alas, dear father what shall we do? then shall the father answer,
the deliverance of Israel is now at hand, The second miracle.
and even at the door.

The second miracle, God shall make the sun to exceed in heat, that many
burning fevers, plagues, and other diseases shall be scattered abroad upon the
earth, by reason of which, a thousand thousand of the Gentiles and people of
the world shall die daily. Hereupon, the Gentiles at length weeping, shall
bitterly cry out, woe and alas whither shall we turn our selves? where shall
we hide us? Thus with expedition they shall go and dig their own graves, wish
for death, and oppressed with thirst and grief, hide themselves in the Caves
and Dens of the Earth. But this great heat shall be as physic and a refreshing
to them that are just and good in Israel, Mal. 4. 2.
as it is written, unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of
the stall; by this sun of righteousness understanding that in the heavens. Number.
24. 23.
Balaam (say they) also prophesied of this; saying, alas who shall live when
the Lord has brought it to pass. The third mirale.


The third miracle, God shall make a dew of blood to fall upon the earth: which
all Christians and people of the earth thinking to be watery and most
delightful, shall take and drink, and drinking die. The Reprobate also in
Israel who despaired of redemption, shall also die by drinking of it, but it
shall not be hurtful to them who are just among the Jews, who in a true faith
firmly cleaving unto God, Dan. 12. 3.
do persevere in the same, as it is written. They that be just shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as
the stars for ever and ever: again, the whole world for three days space shall
be full of blood; Joel 2. 30.
according to that which is written: I will give signs in heaven and in earth,
blood and fire and pillars of smoke. The fourth miracle.


The fourth miracle, God shall send a wholesome dew upon the earth. They shall
drink of this who are indifferent honest* It shall serve as a salve to them who
were made sick by drinking of the former, Hos. 14. 5.
as it is written. I will be as dew to Israel, he shall grow as the lilly, and
cast forth his root as Lebanon.

The fifth miracle. The fifth miracle.
God shall turn the sune into so thick a darkenss, that it shall not shine for
the space of thirty days, as it is written, The sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the
Lord come. At the end of thirty days God shall restore its light: as it is
written, Esa. 24. 22.
They shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and
shall be shut up in prison, and after many days they shall be visited. The
Christians being sore afraid to see these things, they shall be confounded
with shame, and acknowledge that all these things come to pass for Isreal's sake:
yea, many of them shall embrace the Jewish religion: as it is written, Jon. 2.
8.
They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.

The sixth miracle, The sixth mimiracle.
God shall permit the kingdom of Edom (to wit that of the Romans) to bear rule
over the whole world. One of whose Emperors shall reign over the whole earth
nine months, who shall bring many great kingdoms to desolation, whose anger
shall flame toward the people of Israel, exacting a great tribute from them,
and so bringing them into much misery and calamity. Then shall Israel after a
strange manner be brought low and perish, neither shall they have any helper:
of this time Esaias prophesied, Esa. 59. 16.
And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor:
therefore his arm brought salvation unto him. After the expiration of these
nine months, God shall send the Messiah son of Joseph, who shall come of the
stock of Joseph, whose name shall be Nehemiah, the son of Husiel. He shall come
with the stem of Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasses; and with one part of the sons
of Gad. As soon as the Israelites shall hear of it, they shall gather unto him
out of every City and nation, as it is written: Jer. 3. 14.
Turn ye back sliding children says the Lord, for I will reign over you, I
will take you one of a City, and two of a tribe, and bring you to Sion.

Then shall Messiah the son of Joseph, make great war against the king of Edom,
or the Pope of Rome, and being conqueror shall kill a great part of his army,
and also cut the throat of the king of Edom, make desolate the Roman Monarchy,
bring back some of the holy vessels to Jerusalem, which are treasured up in the
house of Aelianus. Moreover the king of Egypt shall enter into league with
Israel, and shall kill all the men inhabiting about Jerusalem, Damascus, and
Ascalon: which thing once noised over the whole earth, a horrid dread and
astonishment shall overwhelm the inhabitants thereof.

The seventh miracle. The Seventh miracle.
They say that at Rome there is a certain piece of marble, in shape resembling
a Virgin, so framed and fashioned, not by man's workmanship, but by the Lords
hand. To this Image shall all the wicked livers in the world gather themselves,
and burning in lust toward it, shall commit incest with it. Hereupon, in the
same marble will the Lord form an Infant, which by a certain rupture shall
issue out of it. This infant shall be called Armillus Harascha, Armillus the
wicked, and shall be the same which the Christians call Antichrist. His length
and breadth shall be tenn^els, the space betwixt his eyes and the palm cross
wise. His hollow eyes red, his hair yellow like gold, the soles of his feet
green; and to make his deformity complete, he shall have two heads. He coming
to the wicked king of Rome, shall affirm himself to be the Messiah and god of
the Romans, to whom they easily give credit: and make him king over them. All
the sons of Esau shall love and stick fast unto him. He shall bring under his
yoke the whole Roman Monarchy, and to all Esaus offspring glorying in the name
of Christian, he shall say, bring me the law which I gave unto you. Which they
shall presently deliver, together with their book of Common Prayer, which he
shall receive as true and legitimate, acknowledging that he gave that law and
book unto them, desiring that they will believe in him.

These things once finished, he shall send his Ambassadors to Jerusalem to
Nehemiah the son of Husiel, and to all the Congregation of Israel; with this
mandate to bring their law unto him: and confess him to be God: At the report
of this, fear and wonder assault their souls: and Nehemias accompanied with
three hundred thousand volunteers of the tube of Ephraim, carrying also the
book of the law with him, shall come unto Armillus, and out of it read him this
sentence, Exodus 20.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods before me. To whom
Armillus making answer, shall deny any such sentence to be extant in their law,
and that therefore they ought to acknowledge him for a God, following the
example of the Christians, and other people of the earth. Then shall Nehemiah
the son of Husiel in that instant command his followers to bind Armillus, and
entering the field with thirty thousand armed Nobles, shall put to the sword
two hundred thousand of his assistants. For this cause Armillus greatly
enraged, shall gather together all his forces in a deep valley to fight against
Israel, and to destroy no small number of Jacobs posterity. There shall Messiah
the son of Joseph breath his last, whom the holy Angels shall take, hide, and
casket up with other Patriarks of the world. The Israelites shall be struck
with such astonishment, their hearts shall fleet like water; but Armillus
himself shall not know of the death of their Messiah, who otherwise would not
leave one of them alive.

Then shall all the Nations of the earth banish the Jews out of their
dominions, no way permitting them any longer to be their coinhabitants.
Moreover, such trouble and distress shall at that time perplex the Jews, as
has not been from the beginning to the world.

Then shall Michael come and fan away the wicked in Israel, The coming of
Michael. Dan. 12. 1.
as it is written; At that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which
stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time. Then the
remnant shall flee into the wilderness, where God shall try and purge them
after the same manner that silver and gold is tried in the Furnace. For the
Lord says, I will purge out from among you the Rebels, Ezekiel. 20. 38. Dan. 12.
10.
and them that transgress against me. And again, Many shall be purified, made
white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked
shall understand: but the wise shall understand. Then shall the whole remainder
of Israel be in the wilderness for forty five days, the chief of their fare
being grass, leaves, and herbs; and that Scripture shall be fulfilled in their
ears, Hos. 2. 14.
I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably
unto her. The truth of this appears out of that of the Prophet, From the time
that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes
desolate, set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
Blessed is he that comes to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty
days. But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shall rest* and stand in
the lot at the end of the days.

Conceive that forty five being added to the precedent number of ninty, the
last number of 1335 days does arise. In that time all the wicked in Israel
shall perish; who are unworthy to be copartners in such a deliverance. Finally,
Armillus invading Egypt with great power shall subdue it, as it is written:
Dan. 11. 42.
The land of Egypt shall not escape. From Egypt he shall muster his forces for
Jerusalem, striving with might and main once more to make it a desolate heap.
Dan. 11. 45.
And he shall plant the tabernacle of his palace, between the Seas, in the
glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

The eighth miracle. The Archangel Michael shall arise, and shall thrice wind
a mighty trumpet, The eighth miracle.
as it is written; It shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpets
shall be blown, and they shall come that were ready to perish in the land of
Assyria, Jsa. 27. 13.
and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy
mount at Jerusalem. Again, The Lord God shall blow the trumpet, Zech. 9. 14.
and shall go with the whirlewinds of the South. At the sound of this trumpet
the true Messiah the son of David, and the Prophet Elias shall appear and
manifest themselves to the devout Israelites inhabiting the wilderness of
Judea. Then shall they receive encouragement, the weary hands shall be lifted
up, and strength shall visit the feeble knees. All the Jews also wheresoever
dispersed over the whole earth shall hear the sound of the trumpet, and at last
confess, that God in mercy has visited his people, and by a plenary
deliverance has been gracious to his inheritance, and all the captives of
Ashur shall be gathered together. But the sound of this trumpet shall blast the
Christians and people of the world with fear and astonishment, casting them
into horrid maladies, Then shall the Jews gird up their loins, and with many a
weary journey seek to revisite their Jerusalem. Messiah also the son of David,
together with his harbinger Elias, and all the faithful his followers in
Israel with great joy shall come into Jerusalem. So soon as this pierces the
ears of wicked Armillus: he will babble out, how long will this abject and base
people thus behave themselves? and shall once more with a great army of
Christians hasten to Jerusalem to give battle to to their newly inaugurated
sovereign. But God shall not permit that the Israelites should fall out of the
fire into the pit, but speaking unto the Messiah shall say unto him, Come thou
and sit at my right hand, and to the children of Israel, sit you still, hold
your peace, and quietly expect that great deliverance which the Lord this day
will impart unto you. Then shall the Lord rain from heaven fire and brimstone,
as it is recorded, Ezech. 38. 22.
I will plead against him with pestilence, and with blood, and I will rain upon
him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an
overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone. Then shall Armillus
with his whole army die, and the Atheistical Edomites (the Christians they
mean) who laid waste the house of our God, and led us captive into a strange
land, shall miserably perish; then shall the Jews be revenged upon them, as it
is written, Obad. 18.
The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the
house of Esau (that is, we Christians, as the Jews interpret, whom they'
Christen Edomites) shall be for stubble. This stubble the Jews shall set in
fire, that nothing may be left to us Edomites which shall not be burnt and
turned into ashes.

The ninth miracle. The ninth miracle.
At the second blast of Michael his trumpet being long and loud, all the graves
in Jerusalem shall open, and the dead arise, Messiah also the son of David
together with Elias the Prophet shall restore to life Messiah that good son of
Joseph reserved under a certain gate.

At the same time shall all the Congregation of Israel send Messiah the son of
David as an Ambassador to the remnant of the Jews superviving the last
slaughter, dispersed here and there among the Christians and other people of
the earth, to summon them to Jerusalem. Then shall the kings of the nations
without delay, carry the Jews inhabiting their quarters, upon their shoulders,
and in Chariots unto Sion. I think this will come to pass much about the Greek
Calends. 1. never. The tenth miracle.


The tenth miracle. At what time the Angel Michael shall blow the trumpet the
third time, then shall God bring them forth who border upon the rivers Gosane
Lachlacke, Chabore, and also inhabited the cities of Juda, and they in number
infinite and immesurable, together with their infants shall enter into Moses
Paradise; the earth before and behind them shall be nothing but a flame of
fire, which shall consume all which is needful for the preservation of life
among the Christians and other people.

When the ten tribes of Israel shall return out of the land of their captivity,
then the pillar of the cloud of the divine glory and majesty shall encompass
them, Micah 2. 13.
as it is written: the breaker up is come before them: they have broken up, and
have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it, and their king shall pass
before them, and the Lord on the head of them. Moreover God shall open unto
them fountains flowing out of the tree of life, wherewith he shall refresh them
in their journey, lest at any time thirst should annoy them. Jsa. 41. 18.
For the Lord says, I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the
midst of the valleys: Jsa. 49. 10.
I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and dry land springs of water.
Again, They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor sun smite
them, for he that has mercy on them, The Jews ten fould comfort against the
foresaid signs
shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. To comfort
them against these ten signs foregoing the coming of the Messiah, the most of
which pretend great calamity and affliction to the Jews, they have a tenfold
consolation. Consol. 1. Zach. 9. 9.
The first is, that the Messiah is certainly yet for to come: according to that
of the Prophet, Behold thy king comes etc.

The second that he shall again gather them together being dispersed over the
face of the whole earth, The 2. Cons.
as it is written: I will bring them from the north country, and gather them
from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the women
with child, and her that travelleth with child together, a great company
shall return thither: From which place we may learn thus much, that if any went
unto his grave blind or lame, the same shall God raise up clothed with the
same imperfections: that one may more easily know another, yet the Lord shall
so perfectly cure the lame, Esa. 35. 6.
that they shall skip like Roes, as the Scripture witnesses, Then shall the
lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing; for in the
wilderness shall the waters break out, and streams in the desert. The third is;
The 3. Cons.
that God shall raise up the dead: as it is written; Many that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall arise: these to life eternal, they to shame and
everlasting contempt.

The fourth is, The 4. Cons.
that God shall build them up a third temple, according to that platform and
fashion which Ezekiel has described cap. 41. ver. 1. 2, 3.

The fifth is, The 5. Cons.
that the people of Israel shall be the sole Monarchs of the whole world, their
dominion stretching from one end of the earth unto the other, according to that
of Esaias 60. 12. The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish:
yea, these nations shall be utterly wasted. Yea, the whole world being turned
unto the Lord shall be subject to his law, Zeph. 3. 9.
as it is recorded, For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that
they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

The sixth is, The 6. Cons.
that God at that time shall defeat and destroy all the enemies of his people
(that is, the Christians) and mightily to revenge himself upon them: as it is
written, I will lay vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, Ezekiel.
25. 14.
and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger.

The seventh is, The 7. Cons.
that God shall take away all diseases and maladies from among the people of
Israel, according to that; The inhabitants shall not say I am sick: Jsa. 33. 24.
the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

The eight is, The 8. Cons.
God shall prolong the days and years of the life of the Israelites. So that
they shall live as long as the oak or other of that kind: Jsa. 65. 22.
for says the lord, as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and my
elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands, and again, there shall be no
more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days:
for the child shall die an hundred years old, bnt the Sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed, See Reschaim in the Talmud c. 6. p. 68.
which is as much as to say, if any die at an hundred years of age, it shall be
said of him, that he died as a little infant, or in his infancy: for at that
time the years of life of the Israelites shall be equal to them of the fathers
from Adam to Noah, as Abenezra comments upon the place.

The ninth is, Ninth Cons.
that God shall so clearly manifest himself to the Israelites, that they shall
see him face to face. As it is recorded: Isa. 40. 5.
The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see together:
because the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Yea, all the Lords people shall
be Prophets, as it is written: It shall come to pass afterward that I will power
out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy:
your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.

The last degree of comfort is, Tenth Cons.
that God shall quite root out of them all imbred lusts, and inclinations unto
evil, as it is written: A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will
I put within you, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. Hitherto we have delivered what we promised out of the book
called Abhkas r^chel, in which though it be summarily set down what the Jews
believe concerning their Messiah, as also the manner how he is to bring them
back to Jerusalem: yet I think not impertinent in this place a little more
largely to declare with what solemnities their Messiah shall give them
intertainement in their own land, and with what happiness and felicity they
shall lead their lives under him.

When then the Messiah has gathered all the Jews together out of all the
nations under heaven and from the four winds of the earth, The feast which the
Messiah shall make unto the Jews at his coming.
and has brought them unto the land of Canaan flowing with milk and honey; then
shall he cause to be prepared a sumptuous and delicate banquet, inviting and
friendly welcoming unto it all the Jews with great pomp and joy inexpressible.

At this banquet shall be dished up and served in, the greatest beasts, fishes
and fouls that ever God created. The worst wine that they shall drink shall be
that whose grape had its growth in paradise, and has been barrel'd up and
reserved in Adams Cellar unto that time.

The first dish in this feast shall be that huge ox described in the book of
Job, The first dish. Behemoth. Job. 4. 10.
to be of such great strength and magnitude, named Behemoth. This the Rabbines
affirm to be the same ox whereof David makes mention in his 50 Psalm and 10
verse. All the beasts of the forest are mine, and the cattle (Behemoth)
feeding on a thousand hills, that is to say, which every day eats up the
grass of a thousand hills. But a man will ask what at length would have become
of this ox, if he had lived so long, seeing he had long since eaten up all his
fodder. The Rabbines Rabbi Sal: Jarchi, and Rabhuenaki.
learnedly answer that this ox is stallfed, and remains always in the same
place, and that whatsoever he eats on the day grows again upon the night in
the same length and form.

The second dish adorning the table shall be that vast whale, The 2. dish.
Leviathan.
Leviathan, (according to the Jewish tone Pronounced Lipiasan) who is also
described in the book of Job, and mentioned in other places of holy writ.

Concerning these two beasts there has bin handsomely compiled this tradition
by the wit and ingenuity of the solid pated Rabbis in their Talmud, Babha
Basra. c. 5. p. 74.
it runs thus, Rabbi Jehudah says that what thing soever God created in the
world he created it male and female and that without all doubt; for he created
the Leviathan. yet least the he and she Leviathan: by engendring should augment
the number, and at length by there monstrous magnitude and multitude destroy
the whole world, God gelded the male, and killed the female, reserving her in
pickle to be meat for them that are just in Judah and feared him, in the days
of the Messiah, Jsa. 27 1.
as it is written: In that day will the lord with a sore and great and strong
sword punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea. In the same manner he
created that great ox called Behemoth feeding on a thousand hills male and
female: yet lest by multiplying they might fill and destroy the earth, he
gelded the male and killed the female, reserving it for the Jews diet in time
to come, as it is written: Lo now his strength is in his loins, Job 40. 16. 19
and his force in the navell of his belly, he that made him can make his sword
to approach unto him.

The third dish in this banquet as Elias Levita in his dictionarie named Tesbi
out of the Rabbis reports, The third dish. Barinchue.
shall be that horrible huge bird called Barinchue which killed and unboweld
shall then be roasted. Concerning this bird it is written in the Talmud she cast
an Egg out of her nest by whose fall three hundred tall Cedars were broken
down. Bechoros c* ult. p. 57.
and the Egg breaking in the full drowned three score villages. By this
relation it is easy to conceive this bird to have been little inferior in
greatness to the forementioned ox and fish; whence we may also collect how
glorious a dish the Messiah is to make of it for his guests, and when there are
many such birds (Guls I think) found in the land of Judah, none ought to think
that which is reported of this to be fabulous. The Crow. Babha basra. c. 5. p.
72.


In the forementioned book of the Talmud, we read of a certain great crow which
was seen of a Rabbine, worthy to be credited. The relation runs thus. Rabbi
barchannah says, At a certain time I saw a frog, which is as great as the
village Akra in Hagronia, well how big was the village? It consisted of no
fewer then threescore houses. Then came a mighty serpent and swallowed up this
frog. Instantly upon this, a great crow flying that way picked up as a small
morsel both the frog and the serpent; and taking him to flight sat upon a Tree,
now think with your selves how great and strong this tree must be. To which
Rabbi papa the son of Samuel making answer, unless I had been in the place, and
with these mine eyes seen the very tree, I would not have believed it. Thus
much the Talmudist. Who dare give the lie to this Rabbine? When that good man
Kimchi commenting on the fifty Psalm, and explaining the word Ziz has there
witnessed that Rabbi Judah the son of Simeon did avouch Ziz to be a bird of
that bigness, The great bird. ziz.
that when he spreads abroad his wings he hides the body of the sun, and wraps
the world in darkness. Furthermore, on a certain time, a certain Rabbine was
upon the sea in a little ship, in the middle of which he saw a bird standing of
such an height, Talmud in the same place.
that water came only to her knees: which the Rabbine observing, bespeaks his
companions that there they might wash themselves seeing the water was not deep.
But a voice from heaven hindered the attempt, saying unto the Rahbine, see that
thou do it not: for now seven whole years are gone and past, since a certain
man let a hatchet fall in this very place, which has been ever since a
falling, and is not as yet come to the bottom. By which a man may easily
gather how long legs this bird had, and how great her body ought to be in
proportion to her feet. Without doubt these birds keep their residence in the
wood Ela, in which, The great Lion Cholin. cap. 3. p. 59.
a Lion is reported to live of such an unheard of portraicture, that only to
relate would strike a man with astonishment. Of this Lion the Talmud thus
fables. When upon on a certain time the Emperor of Rome asked Rabbi Josuah the
son of Hananiah, what the reason was why their God compared himself unto a
Lion; and whether he was of so great strength that he could kill a Lion? the
Rabbine made answer, that God did not compare himself unto an ordinary Lion,
but unto such an one as lived in the wood Fla: to whom the Prince replied, show
me that Lion. Then the Rabbine by prayer obtained of God that the lion should
leave the wood, and come, when hs was yet four hundred miles distant from the
Emperor, he roared so terribly, that all the women with child in Rome became
abortive, and the walls of the City fell flat unto the ground. When he had come
an hundred miles nearer, he the second time roared so fearfully that all the
teeth of the Romans fell out of their heads, and the Emperor falling from his
throne, lay prostrate upon the earth half dead; who with vehement entreaties
begs of the Rabbin to send back the Lion; which was likewise put in execution.
But these fables draw us too far from the smell of that fast which the Messiah
has provided for the Jews in the land of promise.

The flesh of the foresaid Behemoth and Leviathan will not digest well without
a Cup of older wine; therefore the Messiah shall broach that wine and give it
unto his guests, The wine for the feast.
which was made in Paradise, and was kept from the beginning of the world to
that time in Adams Cellar, as it is written: In that day sing you unto her a
vineyard of red wins. Esa. 27. 2. 3.
I the Lord do keep it, I do water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day: again, Psalm. 75. 9.
There is a cup in the hand of the Lord, and the wine thereof is red: it is
full mixed; he shall pour it out, and the dregs thereof all the ungodly of the
earth shall drink and suck them up.

Before the supper be served in, The sports where with the Messiah will delight
the Jews.
the Messiah after the manner of Kings, and Princes, and others celebrating
Festivals and Marriages, shall present the Jews with pleasant sports and plays
to make them merry. He will cause Behemoth and Leviathan to meet in some
spacious place, and there they shall play before the Messiah to pass away the
time, and for his minds refreshing, as it is written: Job 40. 20.
Surely the Mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field
play. And again, There go the ships, Psalm. 104. 26.
there is that Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein. Then the ox
running hither and thither shall bend his horns against the Leviathan; which
will greatly affect the Messiah, Psalm. 69. 32.
according to that, It will be more grateful to the Lord then a bullock that
has borns and hoofs. The Leviathan also shall come to encounter the ox, armed
with his fins as an helmet, not easy to be seen, as it is written: Job 40* 14.
15.
Who can open the doors of his face, his teeth are terrible round about. His
scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal. Here shall be the
summons to the battle, and the first encounter begin most hot and furious, but
to small purpose, for they being of equal strength neither can overcome the
other, but at last wearied out both shall fell upon the ground. Then the
Messiah drawing out his sword shall slay them both, as it is written: Jsa. 27. 1
At that day will the Lord with a sore great and strong sword punish Leviathan.

Now comes the Cooks part, nothing but boiling and roasting: and great
provision for this sumptuous supper, as it is recorded: Esa. 25. 6.
The Lord of hosts shall make unto all people in this mountain a feast of fat
things, of fat things full of marrow. The fish shall be served up in parcels to
the guests, which done, every one shall greatly rejoyee, as it is written:
shall thy companions make a banquet of him? Job 41. 6.
shall they part him among the merchants.

This donative supper being ended, the messiah shall marry a wife: the
scripture being witness: The marriage of the Messiah ps. 45. 10. Schegal (...)
properly signifies the wife of a King (...) from (...) Shagal which is to
exercise the very act of venery*
Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand stood the
Queen in a vesture of gold. So the Jews themselves interpret: and the meaning
is this, as Kimchi professes in his great gloss: Among the honorable women
which the Mossias shall have, shall be the daughters of Kings. For every King
of the earth shall esteem himself highly graced, so that he may give his
daughter in marriage unto the Messiah. But the genuine and rightly so named
wise of the Messiah (properly signified by the word Schegal) shall be one of
the most eminent beauties among the daughters of Israel; she shall sit at his
right hand, without intermission abide in the Kings closet: whereas the other
shall stay in, the supping room, or house of the women: not approaching the
King, unless it be his pleasure to send for them. In this bond of Wedlock the
Messiah shall beget children; after he shall die as other mortals, and his
children shall sit upon his throne after him, as it is written: He shall see
his seed, he shall prolong his days, Isa. 53. 10.
and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hands, that is, as a Rabbine
expounds it, The Messiah shall live to a good old age, and last shall be
brought to his grave with great solemnity: and his son shall reign after him,
and after his death his posterity shall possess his seat.

For the manner of life which the Jews shall have under their Messiah. The
manner of life the Jews shall have under their Messiah.
First of all the remnant of the Christians and other people which fell not by
the hand of the Jews shall make have and build the Jews houses and Cities, not
for hire, but of free accord, till their ground, plant them vineyards, yea,
bestow their very goods upon them; The first benefit.
moreover Kings and Princes shall be their servants whom they have subdued.
They themselves shall be clothed in costly array: all their Priests anointed
shall be holiness to the Lord; as it is written: The sons of strangers shall
build up thy walls, Jsa. 60* 10, 11. 12.
and their Kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in
mercy have I had favor on thee, therefore thy gates shall be open continually,
they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces
of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought, for the nations and
kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea those nations shall be
utterly wasted, Jsa. 61. 5. 6.
and again strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and all the sons of the
alien shall be your plow-men, and your vine-dressers. But you shall be named
the Priests of the Lord, men shall call you the Minister of our God: you shall
eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory stall you boast your selves.
(Oh here with hunger and thirst how are the Jews oppressed? Although some of them
satisfy and appease both, without the sweat of their own brows gaining many a
million: for which many a poor Christian suffers toil and vexation.)

2. They shall have a new and wholesome air, The 2 benefit.
as it is written: Jsa. 65. 17.
Behold I create a new heaven and a new earth, the former shall not be thought
upon, by the benefit of this air they shall enjoy their health and prolong
their life, even as the men before the flood. In their hoary old age their
strength and agility shall not forsake them, but remain in the same temper as
in their youth, Psalm. 92. 14, 15
as it is written, They who are planted in the house of our God, shall flosrish
in the courts of the Lord, they shall bring forth more fruit in their age, they
shall be fat and well liking.

3. The seed once sown shall for ever grow up, The 3 Benefit
increase, and ripen of its own accord: after the manner of Vines which require
but one plantation, as it is written, They shall revive as wheat, flourish like
a vine, Hos. 14. 8.
his smell is like Lebanon.

Whenever any one shall desire rain for the watering of any particular Field,
Garden, or the smallest herb therein, the Lord will pour out upon that place,
and on that only, without delay: for says the Prophet, Ask you rain of the
Lord, and he shall create lightnings, and give you showers of rain. Then shall
they gather their fruits and wine with great quietness and security, and shall
not be molested by any enemy: as it is written, The Lord has sworn by his
right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Isay 62. 8, 9.
I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and the sons of
strangers shall not drink thy wine for the which thou have labored, but they
that have gathered it shall eat it.

4. No war nor rumor of war shall any more be heard in the land: The 4 Benefit
and there shall be a firm and secure peace established, not only between man
and man, but also between man and beast; as it is written, I will make a
covenant for them in that day with the beasts of the field, with the fowls of
heaven, and creeping things of the earth: I will put away the bow and the sword
and war from the earth, and make them to sleep secure. And I will espouse thee
unto me for ever and ever: I will marry thee in justice and judgment, in mercy
and commiseration. Again, The Cow and the Bear shall feed: Esaias 11. 17.
their young ones shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw with
the Ox. The Wolf shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid:
and the Calf and the young Lion and the fa^ling together, and a little child
shall lead them.

5. When any war or discord arises among the Gentiles, The 5 Benefit
then the Messiah shall reconcile them, and renew the league amongst them: so
that there shall be no more mutiny; as it is written, He shall judge among the
nations, and rebuke many people; Isay 2* 4.
he shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, nor learn war any
more. Then shall the Jews live in everlasting joys, make new marriages, sing
praise and glory to God without ceasing: shall be full of the wisdom and
knowledge of the Lord: as it is written, In this place of which you say that it
is forsaken, shall again be heard the voice of joy, the voice of exultation,
the voice of the Bride and the Bridegroom, the voice of them that say, Give
thanks to the Lord of hosts. And again, the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the sea is full of water.

Briefly, the happiness of this holy people shall at that time be so
immeasurable, that neither can the heart of man conceive it, or the tongue
yield the least expression thereof. Which things thus ordered and declared,
leaving the Jews in this their prosperous estate, I will put a period to my
labors, and hide the secret of their faith from the Christians; seeing I have
attempted more then they themselves, if they could have ruled the matter, would
have permitted. What I have done already will not be pleasing unto them, in
which I have exposed to every man's eye the full anatomy of their life and
belief.

The Christian Reader may easily perceive by that which has been said, that
the faith of the Jews and their whole religion, is not grounded upon Moses, but
upon mere lies, false and forged constitutions, fables of the Rabbines, and
inventions of seduced Pharisees. And that therefore it ought no more to issue
out of the mouth of a Christian, that the Jews stand for the Law of Moses,
Jer. 8.
but rather with Jeremy, that they are strong defendants of the false worship
of the true God, not suffering themselves any way to be drawn from it. And with
our Savior to affirm, Matthew. 15. 5.
that they make the Commandments of God of none effect by their traditions; in
vain they worship him, when they teach nothing but the mandates of men:
honoring him with their lips, but in their hearts are far from him. Titus 1.
In their words they profess to know God, but in their works they deny him:
these are the men whom the Lord abhors, who being disobedient unto his word are
unto every good work reprobate, as the Apostle Paul has recorded. By which it
is more manifest then the light of the Sun at noontide, that the punishment is
now fallen heavy upon them wherewith Moses threatened them: that the Lord
should smite them with madness, Deuteronomy. 28.
blindness, and astonishment of heart, that they should grope at noon day as
the blind gropeth in darkness. And this appears most clearly, and is more
then evident from this, that they miserably pervert, and contrary to all reason
with an impudent front invested with a dull ignorance expound and interpret the
word of God.

O merciful God, who have vouchsafed to impart this gracious favor unto us
Christians, that we being warned by such an horrible example of the divine
wrath, should with awe and reverence embrace his holy word, lest the same
things should befall us, and so our Candlestick should be removed for our
ingratitude, God of his mercy grant, that the Sun of his justice may always
shine in our hearts until perfect day, and by the illumination of his good
Spirit conduct us unto all truth. Amen.

The End.
Soli Deo Gloria.

