Mr. BUTLER'S SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc.

On the Feast of St. Michael, 1696.

Houblon Mayor.
Martis 29 Sept. 1696. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii Angliae, etc.
octavo.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Butler to Print his Sermon preached before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City, at the
Parish Church of St. Lawrence Jury, this Day being the Day of Election of the
Lord Mayor of this City for the Year ensuing.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable The Lord Mayor and Aldermen, AND
Citizens of LONDON, AT St. Lawrence Iewry, On the Feast of St. Michael, 1696.

At the Election of the Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing.

By LILLY BUTLER Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury.

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange, 1696.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir John Houblon, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
And the Court of Aldermen.
MY LORD,
I Have obeyed your Order for the printing this Sermon, and the more readily,
because it will be a public Acknowledgment of the Necessity and Usefulness of
Religion, especially in your own Hearts and Lives, to the good and happy State
of the People committed to your Care and Government. A Confession very
seasonable and honorable in such an Age as this, wherein so little Regard is
had to Religion in all our Schemes of Politics. My particular Obligations to
your Lordship do also deserve the most public Acknowledgment.

I endeavored, in this Discourse, to represent and enforce the Magistrate's
Duty with the greatest Plainness and Sincerity, that whilst I was preaching the
Duty of others, I might not be thought to forget my own.

May the God of Heaven, stablish, strengthen, settle you in every good Work, in
a prudent and impartial, a diligent and courageous Execution of those great
Offices he has called you to, to the Glory of God, the Joy of the People, and
your own double Honor both here and hereafter. This is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged and humble Servant, LILLY BUTLER.

Prove. xxix. 2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice.
ONE great design of Solomon, in this Book of Proverbs, is to recommend
Religion, by declaring the excellent fruits, which single persons and public
Societies might reap from the sincere practice of it. He tells us, that length
of days are in Prove. iii. 16, 17.
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor; that her ways are ways
of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; that the Throne is established,
that a Nation and a City are Prove. xvi. 12. Prove. xiv. 34. xi. 11.
exalted by it: That it is the Safety, and Honor, and Happiness of a People:
That it does, in a most eminent manner, conduce to the Public Good, and
deserve a general rejoicing, when it adorneth and influenceth the Lives of
those that are in Authority. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People
rejoice.

This is a Political Aphorism of Solomon, a great and mighty Prince, who,
better than any before or after him, understood all the most advantageous
methods of governing for the public good, having Wisdom and Knowledge given
him by the special favor of God, to judge his People, over whom he had made
him King, 2 Chronicles. 1. 11.

By the Righteous, Solomon does generally mean in this Book of the Proverbs,
those that are so in the most comprehensive sense, Religious and good Men,
those that fear God and keep his Commandments. That these are the Righteous Men
spoken of in the Text does farther appear from the opposition of them to wicked
Men in general. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice: But
when the wicked bears rule, the People mourn.

The People rejoice, i. e. Then they have great and worthy cause of rejoicing;
then their condition will be flourishing and prosperous, and happy. It being
very common, to speak of those things as consequent in effect, which in reason
ought to follow.

Thus then we may express the meaning of the Proposition in the Text. That
Religious Magistrates do contribute very much to the general Happiness of a
People. When those that have a lively and vigorous sense of God upon their
Minds, and a sincere regard to his Divine Will, when Men of Conscience,
Integrity, and Religion, when such Men are in Authority, they do highly promote
the good estate of that Society they govern.

I shall First, endeavor to clear the Truth of this Proposition. And Secondly,
make some seasonable Application of it.

First, I shall endeavor to clear the Truth of this Proposition, as it
respects subordinate Magistrates, the Ministers of Justice for God and the
King, in which sense it is most proper matter for our present Consideration, by
showing these Four things.

First, That Religious Men in Authority, will make Conscience of performing the
proper work of their Office, in the several parts and exercises of it.

Secondly, That the proper work of the Magistrate's Office, in the several
parts and exercises of it, does highly tend to promote the good and happy State
of the People.

Thirdly, That Religious Men in Authority will perform all the proper exercises
of their Office, in the most advantageous manner for the effectual promoting
the public good and benefit of the People.

Fourthly, That great Blessings are derived upon the People, for the sake, and
by the intercession, of Religious Magistrates.

First, I shall show that Religious Men in Authority, will make Conscience of
performing the proper work of their Office, in the several parts and exercises
of it. When a Religious Man, one that truly fears God, comes into any public
Office, he considers it, not only as a Place of Honor or Profit, but also as
a new Scene of Duty, and therefore presently sets himself about the study and
performance of it; for he cannot be willingly ignorant or regardless of any
part of his Duty. He knows that Power and Authority are Talents put into his
Hands by God, who expects to receive his own with Usury. He dares not therefore
hide or bury them, but imployeth and improveth them to those Ends for which he
received them; remembering the account he must give of his Stewardship, and the
fearful doom of the unprofitable Servant. He cannot bear the thoughts of
Perjury, and therefore cannot satisfy himself in neglecting any thing, which
by solemn Oaths he has obliged himself to perform. A Religious Magistrate then
is a Magistrate indeed, he does not only bear the Name but do the Work of his
Office, and that for Conscience sake, from a most strong and lasting Principle.
Such Magistrates then must needs contribute very much to the Happiness of the
People, as will be farther manifest, by showing

Secondly, That the proper work of the Magistrates Office, in the several parts
and exercises of it, does highly tend to promote the good and happy State of
the People. They are Ministers of God to them for good, for their good in all
respects, promoting all their dearest and greatest Interests. There is no sort
of good, but it is the Magistrates business to endeavor to procure; and there
is no part of the Magistrate's business, but what tends to procure some sort
of Good to the People. This will be very evident, if we take a particular view
of the several parts of the Magistrate's Office. As,

First, One part of the Magistrate's Office, is to maintain their Peoples
Property; to secure them as far as they can, in the quiet possession of their
Estates; to take care to prevent and punish Fraud and Theft, and to oblige
those to Restitution who are unjustly possessed of another Man's Goods or
Inheritance; to concern themselves in a regular defense of those Laws by which
the Peoples Property is secured; that every Man may eat the labor of his
hands, and reap the Fruits of his Industry, and enjoy the Inheritance of his
Fathers, and sit securely under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree,
whilst none are suffered to make him afraid. And how manifestly is the Public
Good advanced by the exercise of this part of the Magistrate's Office?

Secondly, Another Part of the Magistrate's Office is to maintain all the legal
Rights and Privileges, Liberties and Immunities, of the whole Body, and of each
Member of the Society; to see that no Man do oppress his Brother, or usurp any
unjust Power or Dominion over him; to see that Servants be faithful and
obedient to their Masters, and that Masters give unto their Servants that which
is just and equal. To suffer no Man to transgress the Bounds of his own proper
Station, to seize upon the Advantages which belong to another's Place and
Calling, to invade the Office, or intrude into the Business of his Neighbor;
to watch and consult, and endeavor, by all lawful Ways, that no Encroachments
be made, by any arbitrary or illegal Proceedings, upon the common Privileges of
those who are committed to their immediate Care and Government. And how
beneficial to the People must the Exercise of this Part also of the
Magistrate's Office be?

Thirdly, Another Part of the Magistrate's Office is to preserve their People
in Peace; to keep them from private Quarrels and public Tumults; to compose
their Differences, to allay their Jealousies, to determine their Controversies,
to restrain and punish the contentious, to discountenance all dividing into
Factions, and breaking into Parties, and to endeavor, as much as in them
lies, that under them all their People may lead quiet and peaceable Lives:
which must be to the great Advantage of the Society.

Fourthly, Another Part of the Magistrate's Office is to take care of their
People's Lives; to defend them against the open Assaults, and the secret
Conspiracies of malicious and cruel Men; to execute all those Laws which are
made for the Security of every Man's Person; that they may serve God, and
follow the Business of their several Callings, without Fear or Danger, and lay
themselves down in Peace and take their rest, and, by the Blessing of God upon
their Endeavors, be made to dwell in Safety, which is a farther Advancement of
the happy State of a People.

Fifthly. Another Part of the Magistrate's Office is to encourage Industry. To
provide Work for those that want it, and cannot otherwise maintain themselves
and their Families; to punish Vagrants and Beggars, and all Managers of such
unlawful Games and Sports, as are wont to draw Men off from the useful
Employment of their Callings, and to lead them into an idle and dissolute Way
of living, whereby they become unprofitable and hurtful Members of a Society.
And a careful Performance of this Part of a Magistrate's Duty will highly
promote the Wealth, and therefore also the Strength and Glory of a People; for
it is the Hand of the diligent that makes even Cities and Kingdoms rich.

Sixthly, It is another Part of the Magistrate's Office to succor and relieve
the poor and needy, the distressed and afflicted Part of the Society. To look
to the faithful Management of public Charities; and to make a legal Provision
for those that cannot otherwise provide for themselves. To be what Job tells us
he was, Eyes to the blind, Feet to the lame, and Fathers to the poor, Job 29.
15, 16. to give seasonable Succor to the indigent and fatherless, and to him
that has no Helper, who are the proper Objects of the Magistrate's Care and
Compassion. This also is an Employment which is very serviceable to the good of
the People.

Seventhly, It is a principal Part of the Magistrate's Office to preserve and
promote true Religion. To restrain Men, by a due Execution of Laws, from
corrupting the Doctrine it teaches, from throwing off the Worship it
prescribes, and transgressing those Rules it obliges them to walk by. To stop
the Mouths of blaspheming Atheists and Infidels; to punish the impious
Prophaners of God's holy Name and Day: To curb the Insolence of Lust and
Intemperance; to make the Sword which God and the King have put into their
Hands a Terror to all such Evildoers, who are the Bane and Plague of a
Society, and pull down the Judgments of God upon it. To give all the
Countenance and Protection they can to Piety and Virtue, and to be a Praise to
them that do well. To bestow their Favor, and Places, and inferior Offices,
not only for the Sake of Money or Party, but chiefly with regard to Piety and
Honesty and Virtue. To do all they can that it may go well with the righteous,
for when it does so Solomon tells us the City rejoices, Prove. 11. 10. These
are some of those Exercises which the Office of a Magistrate oblige him to; and
they do all greatly and manifestly tend to make a People happy. And the
Religious Man, as I have showed, will not, dares not neglect any Part of the
Duty of that Place and Relation he is in. When such therefore are in Authority,
there must needs be great Cause of Rejoicing. For the farther Confirmation of
the Truth of this Proposition, I proceed to show,

Thirdly, That Religious Men in Authority will perform all the proper Exercises
of their Office, in the most advantageous manner, for the effectual promoting
the public Good and Benefit of the People. They will perform them most
prudently, most impartially, most diligently, most courageously, and most
becomingly, and when they are thus performed they can hardly fail of being
successful to the making a People happy.

First, A Religious Man in Authority will perform all the Exercises of his
Office most prudently. The Fear of the Lord, says Solomon, is the Instruction
of Wisdom. It disposes Prove. xv. 33.
a Man to do every thing wisely; it will direct his Thoughts, and steer his
Judgment, and determine his Choice, to the best Methods for the attaining every
good End he is concerned for. The Integrity of the Upright shall guide him, the
Righteousness of the Perfect shall direct his Way, Prove. 11. 3, 5. The
Religious Man has a constant Regard to that public Good his Authority was
given him to advance; and he that keeps his Eye always upon his End, will not
easily miss the readiest Way to it* He has no By-Ends to perplex his
Consultations for the People's Good, or to tempt him to set aside any fit or
proper means to promote it. He has no private Affections or Passions, or
Interests, so prevalent with him as to hinder his seeing what Course is best to
take, or to divert him from the Choice of it. He will be sure never to pursue
his Ends with any unjust or dishonest means, or betray the Folly of provoking
God for the public Good. He is very humble and modest, and therefore will not
lean too much to his own Understanding, but be always ready to hear and take
good Advice. He acknowledges God in all his Ways, as the best Guide and
Counselor, and is continually asking Direction and Wisdom of him who makes
wise the simple, guides the meek in Judgment, and teaches him Psalm. xxv. 9.
ix. 12.
that fears the Lord, in the Way that he shall choose. Religion then, better
than any thing else, will enable a Magistrate to discharge his Office
discreetly and wisely, and therefore most effectually for the Good of the
People.

Secondly, A Religious Man in Authority will perform all the Exercises of his
Office most impartially. He is a Follower of God in all his Ways, and
particularly in the Exercise of that Authority he has committed to him, and
therefore without respect of Persons judges every Man's Work. He is not
biassed by any partial or corrupt Affections, or swayed by any particular
respects. He dares not favor the unrighteous Cause of a Friend, or refuse to
interpose his Authority to relieve an injured Enemy. He does not connive at the
Oppressions of his own Servants or Officers, or justify the wicked for reward.
Gold has no Weight in the Balance of Justice when a religious Man holds it.
He takes no Bribes to blind his Eyes, no Gifts to pervert the Ways of Judgment,
nor regards the rich more than the poor. All other Considerations are
impertinent and insignificant to him, beside the Right and Reason of the Case,
or the real Merits of the Person. He endeavors to make himself a terror to
evildoers, and a praise to them that do well, of what Party or Profession, of
what Quality or Degree soever they are. And Laws are never so likely to
accomplish those good Ends for which they were made, as when they are thus
equally and impartially executed. And from whom can you expect this, but only
from Religious Magistrates, such as Fear God, and Hate Covetousness?

Thirdly, A Religious Man in Authority, will perform all the Exercises of his
Office most diligently. St. Paul particularly requires of him that rules,
that he do it with diligence, Romans xii. 8. And the Religious Magistrate will be
sure not to fail in his Obedience to this Command. That he may be the Minister
of God effectually for the People's good, he will attend continually on this
very thing. He has such a constant awful sense of God upon his Mind, that he
dares not be sloathful in his business, or do the work of the Lord
negligently. He is such a great and hearty Friend to the Public Good, that he
cannot be sluggish or indifferent, or soon weary or faint in the pursuit of it.
He is not softened with Luxury, indisposed by Intemperance, or diverted by the
Service of any sinful Lust, like those great Men, the Prophet Amos mentions,
Amos vi. 6.
who lived at Ease in Zion, who drink Wine in Bowls, who drink and forget the
Law, and are not concerned for the Prove. xxxi. 5.
affliction of Joseph, disposed, or at leisure to Redress the Grievances of the
People. He has too great a regard to the Glory of God, and the Interest of
Piety and Virtue, carelessly or purposely to decline, or heavily or negligently
to perform, those Exercises of his Office, which are so highly serviceable to
the advancing of them. How happy then must that People be, where such Righteous
Men are in Authority, Men that make a Conscience of diligently employing their
Time, and Care, and Study, and Endeavors for the Public Benefit, in
performing all the Exercises of those high and useful Callings they are
advanced to?

Fourthly, The Religious Man in Authority will perform all the exercises of his
Office most Courageously. Religion inspires a Magistrate with undaunted Zeal
and Courage, and actuateth all the Vigours of his Soul in doing his Duty. In
the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, Prove. xiv. 26. Prove. xxviii. 1.
says Solomon, and the Righteous is bold as a Lion, he fears the Face of no
Man, neither the Threats of the Mighty, nor the Censures of the People, whilst
he is acting and laboring for his God. He loves God with all his Heart, and
prefers the Public before any Private Interest, and therefore cannot be
Cold or Cowardly, in serving God or doing Public Good. He is of good Courage,
and behaveth himself Valiantly 1 Chronicles. xix. 13.
for his People, and for the Cities of his God. He dares perform whatever the
Duty of his Place requires of him. This one Consideration, that it is his
Duty, weighs down all the Danger, and Difficulties, and Opposition he is to
Conflict with. He is not abashed with the sense of his own guilt, when he
should punish an evil doer. He has the testimony of a good Conscience, which
is an iron Pillar, a brazen Wall, an invincible Defense, against all the
Mischiefs and Reproaches the faithful discharge of his Office can expose him
to. He has a constant regard to that recompense of the reward, the joy that is
set before him, and this gives him Spirit and Courage to bear up against all
the Batteries of Temptation. He is strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, continually fetching down holy Fire from Heaven, by fervent Prayers and
Supplications, to inflame his Courage, and animate his Resolution in doing all
that is to be done by him. He has a great Assurance of the Divine Protection
and Assistance, and therefore deals Courageously, because 2 Chronicles. xix. 11.
he knows that the Lord will be with the good. How great then must the
Happiness of that People be, where such Righteous Men are in Authority, Men
that will be always endeavoring the advancement of it, with such irresistible
Zeal and Courage?

Fifthly, The Religious Man in Authority will perform all the exercises of his
Office most Becomingly. He is the most fit and proper Person to be so employed.
His own practice does recommend and enforce his Endeavors for suppressing of
Wickedness, and the encouraging of Virtue and Religion.

It looks like Envy, or Jest, or Craft, in a Vicious Man, to attempt the
punishing of that he will not forbear, and the encouraging that he will not
practice himself. And how little good success can be expected from such Men's
exercise of Authority? But when a Religious Man is thus employed, he will be
thought to act from a Principle of Conscience, and an earnest regard to the
People's Good. His own exemplary Virtue will beget a great Veneration and
Affection for his Person, and that will add great Weight and Authority to all
he does. There appears something very kind and obliging in his endeavors, to
propagate that he so much values, and chooses for himself, and to restrain Men
from those Vices he is so zealous to purge out of his own Life. So that if we
consider, in what an advantageous manner the Religious Man does exercise his
Authority for the effectual promoting the Public Good, we cannot but conclude,
that when such Men are in Authority there must needs be very great cause of
rejoicing. This will be yet farther manifest by showing

Fourthly, That great Blessings are derived upon the People, for the sake, and
by the intercession of Religious Magistrates. What Men are so qualified to
stand in the Gap, and to turn away Wrath from the People, as a Religious Moses,
such Righteous Men in Authority? How much will their fervent prayers avail with
God? How prevailing will their interest in their People's Happiness be, for the
procuring Public Blessings upon them? The Jews were generally prosperous or
unhappy, according as their Governors were Righteous or Wicked: They received
great Favors and Deliverances, and suffered great Punishments and Calamities
for their sakes. There is nothing more acceptable to God than the faithful
Execution of the Magistrate's Office, which Religion does effectually oblige
him to. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to God than Sacrifice,
Prove. xxi. 3. The staying of the Plague from Israel is attributed, Number. xxv. 6,
8, 11. Psalm. cvi. 30.
by God himself, to the Zeal of Phinehas in executing Judgment, without any
notice taken of the People's Humiliation, their weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. One Religious Magistrate executing Judgment
might have saved the great City Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1. If ye can find a Man,
says God to them, if there be any that executes Judgment and seeks the
Truth, I will pardon it. If now we lay all these things together, they will
sufficiently clear the Truth of this Proposition, That Religious Magistrates do
contribute very much to the general Happiness of a People. I proceed now

Secondly, To make some seasonable Application of it. From hence we may learn

First, That Religion and Piety are chiefly to be regarded in the Choice of
Magistrates; nothing being more necessary or useful, to make them effectual
Instruments of promoting the Public Good. This was the reason of that Advice
of Jethro to his Son in Law Moses, Exodus xviii. 21. Thou shall provide out of
all the People, able Men, such as fear God and hate Covetousness, and place
such over them, and let them Judge the People at all times. The happy State of
this City then is very much in your own power, because the Choice of your
Magistrates is so, upon which it so very much depends. And if, laying aside all
respect to private Interests or Parties, you would always make this your
principal Aim in bestowing, and Voting into Offices, that Righteous Men might
be in Authority, you would certainly have great reason to rejoice in the happy
Fruits of their Interest with God, and their Labors for the Public Good.

Secondly, We may also learn from what has been said, That we ought to give
great Honor and Respect to Religious Magistrates, who are Ministers of God for
so much good, and Instruments of conveying so great Benefits to us. Tertullus
his Language, when it is directed to a good Magistrate, does but express the
due sense we ought to have of our Obligations to him. Seeing that by thee we
enjoy great Act. xxiv. 2, 3.
quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy
Providence, we accept it always, and in all places with all thankfulness. We
should heartily Pray, especially, for our Righteous Magistrates, cheerfully
render them all their Dues, zealously vindicate them from all unjust Censures
and Reproaches, and confer all we can to their Support, and Ease, and Comfort,
under that load of Care and Toil they sustain for the Public Good.

Thirdly, From hence also we may learn, That a Good Man should not be too
obstinate in refusing the Office of a Magistrate, when by the Providence of
God, by the Favor of the Prince, or by the Election of the People he is called
to it. The consideration of that Public Good he is qualified to promote by it,
should weigh more with him, than the Care or Labor, the Charge or Censures it
may bring upon him.

Fourthly, I shall Apply what has been said in a word of Exhortation to those
that are in Authority; That they would approve themselves Religious and Good
Men, by a due Exercise of the several parts of their Office, by being diligent
and courageous in a prudent and impartial Execution of those Laws; which are
made for the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and the maintenance of true
Religion and Virtue. For by this means it is that the Righteous in Authority do
make their People Happy. And for the enforcing of this Exhortation, I shall lay
before you these following Arguments for your Consideration.

First, Consider the necessity of such a faithful and diligent discharge of
public Offices, in order to your escaping the Wrath to come, even the greater
damnation. Your Talents are larger, and the Improvement of them of higher
consequence to the Honor of God, and to the Good of Mankind than other Men's;
and as this does advance your Obligation to Diligence and Industry, so it will
aggravate the Neglect, inflame the Reckoning, and increase the Damnation of the
slothful and unprofitable Servant. In such cases will be verified that saying
of the Author of the Book of Wisdom, Sap. vi. 5, 6. A sharp Judgment shall be
to them that are in high places; for Mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but
mighty Men shall be mightily tormented. Unto You much is given, and of You much
will be required, in that day when, without respect of Persons, God will judge
every Man according to his Works: when the Small and Great shall stand before
God; when the Magistrate himself must come down to the Bar, and give an account
of his Stewardship to an impartial and inflexible Judge, who will have no
consideration of his former Wealth or Grandeur, of the Titles he bore, or the
Preferments he enjoyed, or the high Places to which he was advanced; but of his
Works, of his faithfulness and diligence in executing the great Trust he
reposed in Him, and performing that public Service he called him to. And then
shall the unprofitable Servant, of what Degree or Quality soever he was, be
cast into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

Secondly, Consider, The great pleasure that will attend the faithful and
industrious discharge of your high and honorable Callings. The testimony of
your Conscience that you have done your Duty, especially in so difficult and
useful a Station, will be a continual Feast, a Pleasure which no sensual
Delights can equal, no Adversity extinguish, no outward Violence, no Changes or
Revolutions can rob you of. What a noble Satisfaction will it be to reflect,
upon all the happy fruits of your Industry, the Glory you have brought to God,
and the Good you have done to Men, how highly instrumental you have been to the
Peace and Safety, the Prosperity and Reformation of that People committed to
your Care and Government? This will give you of the Joy of Angels, those
heavenly Ministers of God for our good; yea of the greatest pleasure of God
himself, who chiefly delights in exercising loving kindness upon Earth, and
doing good to Men. What an assured Hope, what a delightful Prospect will it
give you, of the Glory and Happiness reserved in Heaven for you, What an
unspeakable Comfort and Refreshment will it be in the hour of Death, when you
must part with all your Wealth, be divested of all your Pomp, resign all your
Preferments, and yield up your Bodies to Dust and Worms; then to be able to say
with St. Paul, that you have fought the good fight, and finished your Course,
and faithfully served God and your Generation? With what Confidence then may
you look up to God, with what Peace and Pleasure may you give up your Souls to
him, in hope of Eternal Life which God that cannot Lie has promised to all his
good and faithful Servants? Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for
the End of that Man is Peace, Psalm. xxxvii. 37.

Thirdly, Consider, How much the faithful and zealous discharge of the
Magistrate's Office will advance your Honor and Reputation. It is not Men's
great Offices, but the faithful exercise of them that makes them truly
Honorable. To have great Opportunities and great Obligations to do public
Good, as Men in Authority have, and through sloth or meanness of Spirit,
through Fear or any selfish regards to neglect them, must needs expose them to
the Scorn and Indignation of the People. Every one will grudge to see such a
price in the hand of those that have not a Heart to use it. But those that are
diligent and zealous, in doing all the good Offices their Authority qualifieth
them for, and obliges them to perform; Those Magistrates by whose Care, and
Zeal, and Industry, our Properties and Possessions are secured, our Rights and
Privileges maintained, our Persons defended, our Peace preserved, the Poor
employed or relieved, Religion advanced, and Wickedness suppressed; such Men,
such great, such public Benefactors, will be honored of God and Men; They
will be as Signets on God's Right Hand, and remembered when he makes up his
Jewels; the excellent ones upon Earth, in the sight of God of great price.
Every Man will think them worthy of that Power and Authority, which is so
zealously and effectually employed by them to such beneficial purposes. The Ear
that hears them blesses them, and the Eye that seeeth them bears witness
to them; they are every where Job xxix. 11.
extolled and praised, and secure a great, and good, and lasting Reputation.
Their very Graves will be persumed, their Works will praise them in the Dust,
and the generations to come will call them blessed. Such Righteous Men,
especially Righteous Men in Authority, will be had in everlasting remembrance.

Fourthly, Consider, The glorious reward which God has prepared in the other
World for all such good and faithful Servants. Your Work is great on Earth, and
your Reward will be great in Heaven. The Lord himself has said ye are Gods; He
has given you of his Power and Authority, and set you to Judge for him upon
Earth; and if you act for him faithfully and diligently, with Zeal and Courage,
he will make you partakers of his Nature and Glory, his Joy and Happiness in a
degree far beyond what you can now conceive, and ye shall be like God in Heaven.

The faithful improvement of those more rich, and numerous, and useful Talents
you are entrusted with, will entitle you to a proportionable reward in the
great day of recompense. Your temporal Honors and Preferments cannot follow
you into the other World; but the Service you do to God and his People by
virtue of them will, and obtain for you, from a merciful God, a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. It is to you God has given the ten
Talents, and, if you make a due improvement of them, to you he will pronounce
that blessed Sentence, Well done ye good and faithful Servants, have ye
Authority over ten Cities. He will advance you to the highest rank of Saints in
Light, among the chiefest Favorites of the King of Heaven, where you will sit
upon unmovable Thrones, and shine with the brightest Rays of Divine Glory.

What then remains, but that we all make our earnest Addresses to God, that he
would continually supply this great City with such Righteous and Religious
Magistrates, as may faithfully and diligently employ their Power and Authority,
to the Honor of God, the Interest of Religion and Virtue, and the great and
general good of this famous Corporation, that so all the People may rejoice,
and the worthy Instruments of our Happiness may be loved and honored whilst
they live, and unspeakably happy when they die. Amen.

Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on Several Occasions;
together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added an Alphabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

Six Sermons; viz. Of Stedfastness in Religion. Of Family Religion. Of
Education of Children. Of the Advantages of an Early Piety. By his Grace, John,
late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 12o. price 18 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper;
Also by his Grace, John, late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 12o. Bound 6 d. or
Stitched in 8o. 3 d. or something Cheaper to those that are so Charitable to
give away Numbers.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations and
very exact Parallel Scriptures. To which is Annexed the Harmony of the Gospels;
as also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to our English
Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel Clark, Minister
of the Gospel. Printed in Folio on a very Fair Letter; (...)


