THE ACTS AND MONUMENTS Of our late PARLIAMENT: OR, A Collection of the Acts,
Orders, Votes, and Resolves that has passed in the HOUSE. BY I. Can
Intelligencer General.

LONDON: Printed according to Order, 1659.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
Reader,
THou art desired to take notice of the last order of Parliament in this book
mentioned, whereby I am enjoined upon my Oath to discover only things
tolerable and agreeable to the practice formerly of the long Parliament; now
the Lands be sold, Offices disposed of, and their own turns satisfied, and
they turned out; I shall acquaint you further: for it is a maxim here, that if
I swear to be faithful to another, if that other has the worse of it; I am
not bound by this oath; and this is the opinion of all reformed Divines, and to
my knowledge has been put in practice for these 18 years; so that being now
discharged of that oath, I shall hereafter discharge a good conscience; and set
forth an History of rare things. These are not an Ace to them I have in my
Budget,

Farewell, I. Can:

THE ACTS and MONVMENTS of our late Parliament.
May 9 th. 1659.
THis Day their small Assembly was resolved into a Grand Committee, to debate
what the House should be called in ordinary proceedings.

Lenthall. It shall be called the New-Exchange.


Vane. It shall be called The House of Prayer.


Hasilrig. It shall be called a Jail, for I see Martin and other Gaole-birds
here.


Lowry. It shall be called Naberden.


Skippon. It shall be called A Den of Thieves.


Atkins. It shall be called A House of Office.


Scot. It shall be called The free state Cross.


Saloway. That is a superstitious name. Let it be called The Armies Warehouse.


Martin. Let it be called a Church, for we are all Saints.


St. John. I am of opinion that by the ancient known Laws of England, this is
the legallest Parliament that ever was, and that the Men that met here by
OLIVER'S and RICHARD'S Writs made but illegal Assemblies, therefore let it be
called The Parliament House.


Baron Hill. Baron Nicholes. We are of the same opinion strongly.


Withrington. I shall declare no opinion as to the point, but shall consider
thereof.


Prinne this day got in, and he would have it called Bedlam, for here is
frantic Mr. St. John, Hairbrained Hasilrig, senseless Lowry and Atkins,
possessed Vane, distracted Nichols, and a multitude more of Madmen, besides
fools, therefore he thought it fit that the chains and fetters might be
removed from Newgate hither, to be Keepers of the liberties, thereupon the
House ordered it to be referred to a Committee, and adjorned till the
afternoon, and that Mr. Prinne should come no more there, for he was too wise
and too honest to be in that place.

In the afternoon they met, and upon debate these things were resolved on.

First Resolved, That the Family of the Cromwell's were not born Protector's.

Secondly Resolved, That it is more convenient we should have the Government, we
having already the Crown lands, So they adjorned till the next morning.

May 10 th.
This day it was referred to a Committee to consider of the self denying
Ordinance, and they are to take notice that there are several Kings lands yet
to be sold, therefore they are to report whether it be convenient that that
Ordinance be in force or no.

May 11 th.
This day the Committee, whereof St. John was chairman, reported to the House,
that by Law that Ordinance was of no force, for the intent of the Makers of
Laws must be observed, and it cannot be intended, that the Makers thereof
would so far prejudice their own interests as to have that Ordinance to be in
force when Lands are to be sold, and places to be disposed of.

May 12.
Ordered, that this day usually called Ascension-day, be no more called so, but
henceforth May 7 th. be called by that name, in commemoration of our ascent to
the old shop on that day. And this was the great work of that day.

From May 13th. to May 20th.
The House took into their consideration, the titles of honor and dignity
conferred by Squire OLIVER, and his Son RICHARD, and also other titles to be
given, and thereupon it was enacted as follows.

The Contents of the Act for Names, Titles, and Dignities, etc.
First enacted, That our fellow member Alderman Atkins, be no more called
Alderman Tom. Alderman shitbritch, Sir Tom, Sir Alderman, Tom. Thumb, but in
all ordinary proceedings he be called and styled Tom fool, and in exigents, let
him be named Tom. Turd. Secondly, that Harry Nevill be no more called religious
Harry Nevill, that the people may take notice he is one of the Council of
state. Thirdly, that the eldest Son of OLIVER Protector have the same addition
of title and dignity, that the long Parliament conferred upon the eldest Son of
the late King to all intents and purposes. Fourthly, That all other titles of
honor whatsoever be sequestered, and the profits arising thence to go to the
payment of the late Protectors debts.
Provided that this Act not any thing herein shall not be construed to take
away or null those apt and reasonable titles that are given to the several
Members and Council of State, and recorded in the excellent Book of Englands
Confusion.

From May 20 th. to June 1.
This day the regulation of the Law was taken into consideration: And,

Resolved, That the ablest Lawyers be prohibited to judge or practice, that the
Law may flourish and justice be done.

Ordered, That old Colonel Walton grow young again before three weeks, or the
dissolution of this Parliament, and by that time become as frollick as he was
with the Barbers Wife, that his young Wife may no longer be forced to get a
snap abroad, at the great charge of the Public; And that in the interim he sit
close in the House, and that she has allowed to her an universal tolleration
during that time and no longer.

Yesterday the Colt formerly drowned at Huntington, and taken up at the great
charge and pains of the Mayor and Recorder, was voted a Sturgion, vemine
contradicente, And it was ordered that Sergeant Bernard have the next Sturgion,
to his own use, any grant or prescription to others notwithstanding.

Resolved. That Paules-Steeple is the Cross that stood formerly in Cheap Side,
and therefore to be pulled down forthwith.

Reported from the Committee of safety as follows.
That the best way to settle this Nation in peace is to sell the residue of the
Lands, etc. And dispose of them amongst the Parliament Men that were not
liberally provided for before 1653. Yet we conceive that Sir Arthur Hasilrig
remembered himself pretty well before that time, however if the Parliament
adjudge 30000 lb per annum, not sufficient for him, let him have more.

This Report was taken into consideration accordingly, being of great import.

Thereupon the house resolved into a grand Committee to debate the
proportioning of the said lands to the particular members according to their
wants.

Lenthall. Gentlemen can ye think that I, that I your Speaker, your everlasting
Speaker, who am resolved to live and dye with you at 5 lb per diem, can live to
maintain my self and family at that great rate I now live at, and support the
Grandeur that should attend the Speaker to so noble persons, with 13000 lb per
annum, and not above 80000 lb in personal estate.


Skippon. I have enough of 1000 lb per annum, and desire no more to live as
well as Mr. Speaker.


Hasilrig. You say well, but 100000 lb per annum is better, and upon my credit
I want Dan. Collingwood's estate to make me up ^0000 lb per annum, I pray
consider it.


Scot. Gent. My father in Law Plush-Bacon is dead, and has cheated me of 5000
lb, besides it will take 10000 lb per annum to make me honest.


Martin. If I have not enough to pay my debts in present, and to maintain as
many whores as the E. of Midlesex Lord Munson (my fellow boarder in Southwark)
or the late E. of Warwick, I Will leave the house and go to prison again, what?
do you think I Will help to cheat the people for nothing.


Vane. Come Gent. if you will be a little religious, you may make shift with
15000 lb per annum as I do.


Darly. My eldest Son wishes me hanged that I served so long in this trade, and
am like to leave him no better estate. Pray think on it.


St. John. I have built me a little house lately, and want some ground to lay
to it. If you will grant me a Forest, I Will remove my house thither, for the Law
is as clear as it was in E. of Straffords. That I may remove it by habeas
corpus.


Weavour. Come Gent. you are a little too buisy, take heed the Army prevent not
the design, I am a good willer to the Mathematickes my self, but lets make
them sure, for upon my credit Lambert is no fool, thereupon the house
adjourned till June first.


From June the first to the 4th
This day the house took into consideration that seasonable motion of Mr.
Weavour, and have ordered as follows.

Ordered that the Army officers be fooled out of their old Commissions, by
virtue of which they were our Masters, and that they take new ones from us, by
virtue of which we are their Masters.

Ordered likewise that we juggle with some of the stoutest and sobrest Colonels
in the Army to go snipps with us underhand, that they may curb the rest and
keep them in awe.

Ordered that Hacker and Okey be two of them, and that there be but 2. besides
listed into this confederacy, least it be discovered, or least we give too much
from our selves.

Ordered lastly, that this present Parliament sit till May next, (if Lambert be
not too cunning for them before that time) and that in the interim, Parliament
men be valued at penny a piece, and that the former value of 12 a penny set
upon them in 1653 be made void.

June the 4th.
This day the house took into consideration the business between Harry Nevill
and Stroud Sheriff in Bark-shire, which is referred to a Committee to report,
if it be not all the reason in the world that one of the council of state
should have 1500 lb whether it belongs to him or no, and that Stroud should pay
it, for not returning him to that Parliament, which Nevill has 100 times
sworn to be no Parliament.

Ordered by the house that Mr. St. John be assist^nt to that Committee to
inform how the same stands, and whether magna carta does not warrant that, as
well as the dark Lantern.

Monday June 6th.
This day came an express from Ireland that the noble and valiant deputy; will
ere long learn Fleetwood more wit, and Lambert more honesty, and that he will
turn these juglers out of their Box, as his father did.

Ordered thereupon that he forthwith repair to England, if he be such a fool,
and that we catch him in our Clutches if we can, least he obstruct our
religious designs.

June 7th.
This day the house considered of Mr. Harrington's proposalls concerning a free
State. And thereupon,

Resolved. That he is a fool to buisy his nodle about that which the house never
thinks on, for when they have made all even, they will break up school.

June 8th.
Ordered that Mr. Harrington be forthwith dispatched to Iamaica that famous
Island, and form his Commonwealth there, and that he has all the golden
Mines for his pains.

June 9th.
Resolved. That all Papists and Jesuits be tolerated in England, and that
Anabaptists and Quakers be inserted into the Army, that by that time the
Parliament have gotten into their hands the residue of what is left, the Army
may make mutinies among themselves and discharge us, and set the people against
them, and we go Scot free.

June 10th.
The house this day upon consideration that the high and mighty Prince Vane is
to marry with the illustrious Infant of Wimble^on-house, ordered that Richard
Cromwell depart from thence forthwith, to make way for their Highness, and
that the Banqueting house be prepared with a pair of Bagpipes, and a North
Country jigg to entertain the nobles that shall attend the solemnization of
those Nuptials.

June 11th. to June 18th.
Ordered that Hacker and Okey have a strict eye of Lambert when he goes into
Whitehall, least he steps into the Chair.

The house called Mr. Can in, and ordered him to publish only what was
agreeable to their former proceedings, and if it fell out at any time that they
should do otherwise then the people expect, that he should conceal the same,
whereto Can (their news maker) agreed and was sworn.

FINIS.
Gentlemen,
Although this Remedy differ from the matter, I have before treated off, and
intend to proceed in, until I have made all public: yet at the desire of a
friend, I have brought this to public view; hopeing it will prove as a Pill to
stay your stomachs until the rest follow.

yours J. C.

A cure for the State
AN Excellent Composition of Sir Henry Vane's Affection to the Ministry, of
Sir Arthur Hesilrigg's Honesty, of Henry Martin's Chastity, of the Lord
Fleetwood's Valor, of an High Court of Justice Mercy, of each two Grains. Two
Law-Arguments of Baron Wilde's own making, two Ounces of the Shavings of the
Lord Mayors Beard, one Scruple of Alderman Tichborn's Conscience, seven Drops
of Alderman Atkin's Elixary, one Pound of the CITIES SLAVERY, one Dram of
Kiffen's Divinity, with three full Gallons of Widows and Orphants Tears, boil
all these together the full time of one of Doctor Owens Sermons at the Fast of
the HOUSE, then closs stopped up with the Paste of Scotch Charity, the Speakers
Religion, and Sir Gilbert's Constancy.

Two spoonfulls of this taken every Morning fasting, will preserve you from the
like Apostasy, that the Army and other Saints have of late fallen into, and
make you stick close to the Parliament.

Approved by the College of Physicians. Made public for the good of the
Commonwealth.
By P. C. Doctor of Physic.

