A New way of curing the GOUT.

And observations and Practices relateing to Women in Travel etc



Sold by Moses Pit at ye Angel in St. Paul's Church yard.

TWO TREATISES, The one Medical, Of the Gout, And its Nature more narrowly
searched into than hitherto, together with a new way of discharging the same.

By HERMAN BVSSCHOF Senior, of Vtrecht, residing at Batavia in the East Indies,
in the service of the Dutch East India Company.

The OTHER Partly Chirurgical, partly Medical; Containing Some Observations and
Practices relating both to some extraordinary cases of Women in Travel; and to
some other uncommon cases of Diseases in both Sexes.

By HENRY VAN ROONHVYSE, Physician in Ordinary at Amsterdam.

Englished out of Dutch by a careful hand.

LONDON, Printed by H. C. and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the Angel in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

TO THE READER.
IT IS now about 14 years since I labored under an extraordinary pain in both my
knees and feet, not knowing whither to turn my self for pain, having used in
vain all those means by which I formerly had found some ease. After I had
passed five or six weeks in those excessive pains, which sometimes, in spite
of my teeth, extorted tears from my eyes, and consumed my flesh as well as my
strength, keeping me in a manner always sleepless; I was persuaded to suffer an
Indian Doctress to come to me, which was of Quinam, (whom my Wife commonly
employed for the curing of our slaves, and who also had been very succesful in
recovering my only daughter from a certain difficulty of breathing she had been
troubled with for two years together). This Indian woman being demanded,
whether she knew how to cure that painful disease which I was molested with;
Answered, she did. But to tell you the truth, it was done by a way of Burning:
Which means being by me rejected out of an apprehension I had of (...) pain
that must needs accompany such a remedy; she said, that then she would prepare
something to mitigate the pains I suffered, and bring me such a medicine in the
afternoon; repeating still, that if I would endure the Caustic or Burning
remedy, the pain should ever after stay away: But, for all that, I could not
then resolve upon it.

The woman being gone, upon further consideration, I began to repent that I had
refused the use of her Caustic; and thought with my self, that however this
proposed remedy should operate, I could feel but one pain at a time, either
that of the Gout, or that of the Caustic; longing to see my Doctress again;
who being returned, and asked, whether she had ready her matter for the
Caustic, answered smiling, she had: At the same time drawing it forth out of
her pocket, and desiring me that I would suffer her to try her art and skill
upon me; which having at last agreed unto, she went presently to work; having
demanded a lighted candle, and solicitously searched for that part of the place
affected where the greatest pain was: And thereupon she burned with her Moxa
(of which hereafter) on my feet and knees, (to my best remembrance) about
twenty little Escars, which looked like little gray specks, without raising any
blisters, or causing any after-pain; whereupon also all the pain of the Gout
vanished. All this operation was finished within less than half an hour,
without any bodies hearing me complain of pain. And I herewith declare, that
even whilst the burning lasted, I found my self much inclined to sleep; and
that in such a manner, that after the operation was over, I was so overcome by
sleep, that I slept very quietly near 24 hours together, without ever waking;
whereas before, by reason of the cruel pains. I had not been able to sleep at
all for several days and nights together. Being awakened, I found, it is true,
my feet and knees yet much swelled; but in a few days after I was also freed
from those tumifying humors, by the little openings made by the same Caustic,
so that I was able to return to the work of my vocation; most heartily thanking
God Almighty for his goodness to me, and duly acknowledging the operation of
this Indian woman, admiring withal the powerfulness of this remedy against so
contumacious an evil, as is the Gout. There near passed full 27 months e're I
heard any thing of a Gouty pain, and I began to be full of hope it would for
ever have forgot and quitted me, according to the promise of my Doctress; which
not long after, to my great sorrow, died. True it is, that after the time
named, I had once, or at most twice in one year some grudgings of that disease;
but never any sore fit: Only about four years ago, when I fell into a very hot
Fever of nine days continuance, without hope of life, that Fever changed, and
ended in the Gout; all the pains of which, in a very short time, I freed my
self from, by means of the said Caustic; so that I protest heartily, that
being now in a Fever again, I long as much and more for a fit of the Gout, as I
formerly was wont to dread it; knowing it to be an argument of the strength of
the heart, when a Fever determines in the Gout: Upon which score the famous
Crato, Physician to three Emperors, and the learned Sennertus, were wont to
comfort Gouty men, by telling them that this evil tended to health.

Now, from the day that I was so soon and with so slight pains cured of the
Gout, I have given my thoughts liberty to expatiate upon the nature of the
Gout: And first of all, to call in question, whether Physicians hitherto have
had a right notion, and given a true account of the nature and qualities of
this disease: And after a regorous enquiry into the matter, and upon the
consideration of this sovereign remedy, I concluded, that this disease must
needs have another immediate or proximate cause, seat, etc. than had been
hitherto by any man clearly explained and proved.

Whereupon I thought good to discover to the world my thoughts of this whole
matter, although at first I intended to have kept them only for my best friends
and nearest relations. I think, I have herein detected some things for the
improvement of Physic, and for the relief of those that are subject to this
disease, which else is by most men exclaimed against as incurable; and does so
disfigure many a comely person, that he seems not to be the same he was before.
In the doing whereof, my design is to do good to my fellow creatures, and to
lay out this talent for their ease and comfort; as also to open a way for
intelligent and studious men to search into, and find out the nature not only
of the Gout, but also of diverse other diseases that have any affinity
therewith; such as are Head-pains, Toothache, Pleurisies, Colic, and even the
Falling Sickness it self. As I shall be able, in time, if God vouchsafe me
life, more clearly to make out; especially, if the truth here delivered be
embraced, and this small work encouraged, and the remedy here recommended put
in practice; which I heartily wish may be done according to my prescript,
before it be prejudged, and rejected.

The Table of the First Part, Treating of the Description of the GOVT.
CHap. 1. Of the Gout, and its Nature. Chapter 2. Of the internal swelling of the
Gout, and that for the most part invisible. Chapter 3. Of the next and always
accompanying cause of the Gout. Chapter 4. Of the qualities of the Damps which
cause the Gout. Chapter 5. Of the part affected, and the seat of the Gout-making
matter. Chapter 6. That the Gout is a common disease of the limbs, taking its
denomination from the limb it seizes on; together with the place in which the
peccant matter of the Gout is bred. Chapter 7. How, and by what ways the peccant
matter of the Gout comes to the several limbs. Chapter 8. Of the expelling part.
Chapter 9. Of the marks or signs of the Gout. Chapter 10. Of the symptoms of the Gout.
Chapter 11. Of the external Serous swelling, which often manifests it self in the
Gout. Chapter 12. Of the dislocation caused by the Gout. Chapter 13. Of Schirrus's and
Nodes.
The TABLE of the Second Part, Treating of the Cure of the Gout.
CHap. 1. Of the Cure of the Gout in general. Chapter 2. That the Gout is curable
by burning with Moxa. Chapter 3. How this Remedy is to be used. Chapter 4. What Moxa
is, and where to be had. Chapter 5. More particularly of the manner of the
application of this Remedy. Chapter 6. What is to be done after the burning is
over. Chapter 7. Of the admirable effects of this burning. Chapter 8. That this way of
burning goes beyond all Remedies of Europe, against the Gout. Chapter 9. That this
kind of bruning is very tolerable. Chapter 10. Of the qualifications requisite in
the person that shall perform this operation. Chapter 11. Of the Aromatic sticks
to be used in this operation. Chapter 12. Of the place where this burning is to be
made. Chapter 13. Of the inconveniences and dangers attending a faultive operation.
Chapter 14. Of the Serous swellings of the Gout, and their Cure. Chapter 15. Of the
Nodes and stony Tumors, and their Cure. Chapter 16. Whether there be diverse sorts
of the Gout, and whether there be an essential difference betwixt them. Chapter 17.
Of the means conducive to prevent the Gout. Chapter 18. Of the Gout of the Teeth,
and its Cure.
An Appendix.
Of three very remarkable Cases.
THE GOUT, More narrowly SEARCHED, and FOUND out; Together with The certain CURE
thereof.
CHAP. I.
Of the Gout, and what it is.
Theoph. I Have understood with joy, Theodidactus, that you have a singular
opinion of the Gout, its Cause, Seat, Passages and Ways; as also, that you know
the true and genuine Remedy against this cruel Disease, which is also come to
your door, no less than it had assaulted your Father and Father-in-Law, who
were so grievously tormented therewith, that they became altogether helpless,
and were so spent and consumed thereby, that before they arrived to any
considerable old age, they fell into their graves. Whereas I see you, to
admiration, advanced to so great an age, and in so much vigor, as if you had
never known or had any Podagrical person in your Family, or among your
Relations, or had never been subject your self to that merciless disease. Hence
it is, that I most heartily entreat you, that you would be pleased to explain
this matter to me, according to the good inclinations, which I have always
perceived in you, of doing good to your Neighbor.

Theodid. My dear Theophilus, although in doing this I step somewhat out of my
Vocation; yet Christian charity constrains me to comply with your desires
herein, and 10 to confine this knowledge of mine to my particular Friends and
Relations; on condition only, that at this time you do ask me no more
questions, than what shall be pertinent to make us come to the knowledge of the
Gout and the Remedy thereof.

Theoph. I most kindly thank you for your goodness, and promise you to contain
my self within the bounds prescribed.

Theodid. Very well; be pleased therefore to propose your questions in that
order, and I shall answer you to the best of my knowledge.

Theoph. To recover gouty persons, and to free them from their pains (without
which all the blessings of this life are insignificant,) what is above all
things necessary?

Answ. To have a through knowledge of the Disease and of the true Remedy thereof;
both which are equally necessary, insomuch that the one without the other is
not valuable.

Quest. Why is it, that for accomplishing a happy Cure, there is first of all
required a well-grounded knowledge of the Disease?

An. Because it is impossible to cure a disease according to Art, if the nature
thereof be hid from the Artist: And the want of this is the chief reason, why
the care and pains taken by so many learned Physicians has proved so
ineffectual in the Gout.

Qu. What then are the Requisites to attain to the true knowledge of this
Disease?

An. There is required a solid knowledge of these following particulars:

1. Of the next and ever-concomitant Cause of the Gout.

2. Of the Seat of this Evil.

3. Of the Part affected.

4. Of the Ways and Passages, through which this Evil takes its course.

5. What are the inseparable signs thereof?

6. What Symptoms commonly accompany it?

7. That the Symptoms of this Disease be rightly distinguished.

If you err not in these main points, you are in the right way of arriving to a
happy cure of this Malady.

Qu. Do you understand by the name of Gout, all pain in the Limbs?

An. No; but that pain which in sharpness and fierceness exceeds all other, and
that which I mean to describe.

Qu. To let pass the name of the Gout, pray give me a full and plain
description of the Disease it self?

An. The Gout is a preternatural, inward, deep-lurking, and for the most part
invisible little swelling within in the periostium, that is, the membrane that
enwraps all Bones; caused from a dry and cold ill-natured damp or vapor, which
out of the arteries, by the expelling virtue of the heart, is driven out into
the place that is between the bone and the periostium, for the most part into
such Limbs of the Body as are about the Joints; in which this vapor being and
remaining impacted and enclosed, and distending that most sensible membrane,
produces those violent and intolerable pains, whereby the motion of those Limbs
is encumbered and dispoiled, and many other grievous accidents occasioned.

Qu. Does this description differ much from that which has been hitherto
delivered of this Disease?

An. It does: Whence it is, that I exceedingly apprehend, I shall incur sharp
censures from many.

Qu. But let this pass; let us weigh rather your description in its principal
parts. And, First, I do remember, that you make the Gout to be a preternatural
swelling; whereby you doubtless imply, that the Gout is a Disease wherein
violence is done to nature in some part or other of the Body. But this is a
novelty to me, that you add, viz. that it is an inward deeplurking, and for the
most part invisible little swelling, and that that swelling is caused by a
damp, etc. entreating you, that you would vouchsafe to express this more plain,
and to render reasons thereof. And first, why you call it an internal and
deeplurking tumor?

An. The better to distinguish it from other windy swellings, in respect of its
seat: For, whereas those other lie between the flesh and skin, this lies deep,
underneath the membrane that covers the bone; as hereafter shall be more
largely proved.

Qu. But why do you add, that it is a little and mostly invisible swelling?

An. Because it is so indeed.

Qu. But pray, Sir, take care that you run not against sense, out of a blind
zeal of producing a novelty. For, is not the tumor which manifests it self in
the Gout, big and conspicuous enough?

An. You do not distinguish between the Disease it self and the Symtom, which
is the stumbling stone of many even learned men. And the want of this very
distinction seems to me to have been the main, if not the only obstacle, why
they have not lighted upon the true cause of the Gout, and why they have taken
quid pro quo?

Qu. What then is to be done, not to mistake herein?

An. You must ever make a difference between the swelling, which is caused by
the morbific gouty matter, and that which is consequent to the Gout; and this
is to be laid as a fundamental Truth, never to be removed, viz. That the
humor, which makes the external palpable and visible swelling in the Gout, is
not the Gout or dolorifique matter. Which are not so much my words, as the
words of that famous Physician of Dort, called John Van Beverwyck, delivered by
him in his Book of the Gout, and which he has borrowed out of the description
of that disease, which that learned and experienced Professor of Physic at
Wittenberg, Daniel Sennertus, left behind him. Which also is the reason that I
shall place that aqueous and serous tumor amongst the symptoms of the Gout;
where also it is to be handled, and not here, where we speak of the Disease it
self.

Qu. What, is not the humor, that causes the outward and visible swelling, the
Gout or dolorific matter?

A. No, they differ very much from one another, and may be sufficiently
distinguished by those that will attentively consider.

Qu. Wherein consists this difference?

Ans. In this, that the one is the cause of the Disease, the other a symptom;
which will be made very clear, when we shall come to treat of this symptom. But
in part to satisfy your curiosity, pray mark the ratiocination of the lately
named Beverwyck, saying in the quoted Book: That the humor which makes the
swelling, is not properly the peccant matter, is from hence evident; because
that in the beginning, before the part swells, the greatest pain is felt, and
the same grows less, when the swelling appears. It Is true, that that learned
man adhereth still to the opinion of the saltish Serum, affirming that it is a
serous humor, pervaded by a salin acrimony, that causes the Gout. But herein
he, as well as the great Sennertus, has mistaken. Mean time, it is certain, that
the external tumor is not the morbid matter it self, for the reason given; and,
which is more, some podagrical persons endure great pain, without the
appearance of any visible swelling.

CHAP. II.
Of the inward Tumor of the Gout, and how it is mostly invisible.
Qu. I Shall for the present rest contented with the proof alleged, until we
come to the symptoms: But, when this symptomatical or accidental swelling of
the Gout is present, do you then observe two sorts of swelling in this Disease,
one inward, the other outward?

An. I do so; of which two, the first is that which I say in the description to
be a swelling that is little, and for the most part invisible?

Qu. Why do you say so?

An. Because it is indeed small, and for the most part cannot be seen by the
sharpest eye of the body, though it be seen by the eye of reason. For, although
you outwardly perceive no swelling, you may not thence infer, that there lurks
none within, forasmuch as the contrary is true in these and other swellings.
See the proof hereof in a couple of observations of the skilful Physician and
Chirurgian Hildanus in his second Part, the 37th. and 38th. concerning
dangerous and desperate tumors in the muscles of the stomach, in which nothing
preternatural of swelling, or other disorder could be seen outwardly.

Qu. If this tumor cannot be perceived by the eye, whence do you then know that
there is an inward one?

An. From the violent, pungent, beating, distending, and continual pain, to be
easily perceived by ones finger.

Qu. But, it seems, by what you intimate in the description of the Gout, that
sometimes this tumor may be seen?

An. Yes, it may; for at times it appears plainly enough, though few Artists
take it for a gouty swelling, misled by the external appearance of it, which is
in the form of a small hard pimple on the place of the part affected; of which
you have a manifest proof in Pareus, the French Chirurgian, treating of a
distemper in a young woman at Bourdeaux, that had such a tumor on her thigh;
though Pareus does not record it for such.

Qu. When may this tumor be perceived by the eye?

An. Then chiefly, when the gouty cause attacks the Patient, not about the
joints of the limbs, but in or about the middle of those places, with a boiling
pain, wherein nature labors as much as she can (though she be not strong
enough) to expel the peccant matter. At which time, if you observe it
carefully, some tumor appears, as was said above. This I have found not only in
my self, but very notably in another, that was a young man, employed here in
the Foundery of Batavia, called Martyn Smith of Breslaw, who having the Gout in
his right foot, without a considerable afflux of humors, the evil settled on the
midst of his foot, in the form of a protuberant hard pimple or button: Which I
also, by the help of God, did presently cure, so that he the same hour, without
any pain, went out of the house to his Workhouse, which can be attested by the
Physician Thomas Flory, and the chief Chirurgian Warner Leuretius, as
eyewitnesses, that saw it with great admiration.

CHAP. III
Of the next and always concomitant Cause of the Gout
Qu. A After you have sufficiently made out, that the gouty matter causes a
swelling, for the most part invisible; be pleased to explain to us what is the
next and always accompanying cause of this tumor; which to know, I think to be
of great importance.

An. You judge aright; forasmuch as the Cure has always a respect to the Cause
of the disease; and since it is in vain to hope for a recovery, as long as there
is an error or mistake about the peccant or gouty matter.

Qu. Have Physicians been of one opinion herein?

An. No: For some have assigned the cause to be a slimy and cold humor; some, a
mixture of gall and slime; some, a crude, indigested and impure blood; others,
a serous humidity, mixed with an acrimonious saltness; others, winds, with a
mixture of the four known humors; others, ill-conditioned winds alone.

Qu. Whence, I pray, arises this great diversity of opinions?

An. From thence only, that (as has been already intimated) they have not
distinguished the Gout from its symptoms; which has so abused them with the
notion of the humors, that they have put those out of the list of gouty
persons, who in their Gout perceived no afflux of humors, absolutely requiring
the same in this disease; notwithstanding that such as find no serous swelling
in their gouty distemper, do feel full as much pain as others that are wont to
find that afflux, whose grievous pains also are considerably abated upon the
swelling.

Qu. Which then is, in your judgment, the next and immediate Cause?

An. We have expressed it in our above-recited description of the Gout, to wit,
that it is a Vapor or Damp, dry and cold, and mixed with malignity.

Qu. But many will look upon this as an airy and windy fancy, and no solid
truth.

An. If men shall divest themselves of prejudice, and maturely consider all
what has been said, and is yet to follow; I shall then expect a more
favorable judgment, and an unanimous consent to my doctrine.

Qu. According to your theory, the Gout is to be reckoned among Windy swellings?

An. So it must be, because grounded upon experience, the Mistress of Fools.

Qu. But is not this a quite new opinion; or has there ever been any learned
man that has delivered the same?

An. When I lately enumerated unto you the various opinions concerning the
cause of the Gout, you may remember, that the last of them was that which
places it in mere winds, Now, among those Doctors, Sennertus reckons
Guainerius and Matthaeus de Gradibus, two eminent Physicians; and, as far as I
can find, the Chinese Doctors are all of that mind. Besides, that ancient
Physician, Guido de Culiaca (though in the Gout he follows the Humorists)
relates, that he had read in some prescriptions of health given to the Popes of
Rome, that this disease did arise from winds; and the Royal Chirurgian Pareus,
p. 534. assigns, for the certain cause of the running Gout, a very thin
fuliginous matter, which is nothing else but a subtle smoaky damp, or
spirituous substance.

Qu. But Pareus does not speak so of the other kind of Gout.

Ans. It Is true, that he affirms it of the running Gout; but then I must say,
that that kind does not at all in its essence, or next cause, differ from the
other Gout, but only in some qualities, relating to the thinness and thickness
of damps; those, from whence proceeds the running Gout, thinner and subtler;
and those which cause the other Gout, courser and thicker. And it is notorious,
that almost all intelligent Physicians assign damps for the next cause of
Toothaches, Headaches, Pleurisies (at least bastard Pleurisies), Colicks, and
Epilepsies: Diseases which in name indeed, place, and some symptoms, differ
from the Gout, but not in their true essence; they being so near akin to one
another, that they acknowledge but one and same cause.

Qu. It Is true, that some learned men have affirmed, winds or damps to be the
next cause of the Gout; but others have rejected that opinion, and for their
ground of doing so, I shall produce but one argument for all, which M.
Beverwyck alleges out of Sennertus in his Treatise of the Gout, saying, All
sicknesses which arise from winds, do not last so long as the Gout; and making
use of this reason for his denying the flatus or winds to be the true Cause of
the Gout. And further in his Medicina, p. 62. treating of Tumors in general, he
declares, That the windy swellings do vanish easiest of all. What you can say
to this objection, I long to hear.

Ans. Those great men speak here only in general of windy tumors; and what they
say is only true of such windy swellings as lurk under the skin, or in fleshy
parts; not in those that lie in deep parts, and under firm and thick membranes,
as in the Gout, and other hidden or manifest swellings, raised from latent
winds: See the proof hereof in Hildanus, p. 6. obs. 40. in a Tympanites that
was refractory to all remedies.

Qu. What then is the true cause why the Gout is so long a curing? Is the gouty
cause (the damp) so difficult to be with speed removed and evaporated?

Ans. The gouty damp is easy enough to be evacuated, and it is even forward to
be exhaled; but there is a notable obstacle which hinders the speedy
performance of it. And that is this; The impacted and enclosed damp, which
causes the windy tumor in the Gout, seeks a passage to issue out at, but finds
none; partly because of the grosness of the damp; partly and chiefly by reason
of the close and firm membrane of the bone, under which it lurks; especially
since the place, in which this cold damp lodges, enjoys but little warmth, for
the attenuating of this gross damp, and expelling it through the small pores of
that membrane.

Qu. But, I pray, Sir, let me know what is the chief motive that has induced
you to make Damps the only next cause of the Gout?

Ans. First, This remedy which I here offer, as that which suddenly cures this
disease: For, if it be true, that the Medicine declares the Disease, as
Physicians afirm with their Master Hippocrates; I must then conclude, that no
humors, but only a Spirituous thing, is the cause of this Disease. Secondly,
observing the sudden motion of the gouty matter, sometimes dislodging in a very
short time from one limb to another, from the hand to the foot, from one foot
to the other, etc. flying as 'twere with swift wings from above to beneath, and
back again; I find my self obliged to judge, that these are not Humors, but some
Spirituous matter able to do such things.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Qualities of the damps that cause the Gout.
Qu. OF what quality, I pray, are these gouty Damps?

Ans. The above-recited description says, that they are dry, cold, and
illconditioned.

Qu. Why do you say they are dry?

Ans. The better to distinguish these Damps from windy Humors.

Qu. Why cold? Is there not a hot as well as a cold Gout?

Ans. As there is but one next cause, which for quality is always cold; so is
the distinction of a hot and cold Gout, vain: My opinion agreeing with that of
Fernelius, that all Gout arises from a cold cause.

Qu. But with what reasons can you maintain this opinion?

Ans. Irrefragably by the remedy it self; as also by the pruriency and
shivering which gouty persons, upon the motion of this cold damp, do commonly
feel, especially in those parts through which it takes its course; as also
happens in Epilepsies, Pleurisies, Colic, and the like, that come from cold
damps.

Qu. But soft and fair: Your last proof taken from shivering does not hold, as
Beverwyck objects; for then should the matter of hot Fevers be also cold, which
passing through parts endowed with the sense of feeling, not only cause
shivering, but also clashing of teeth.

Ans. This is not said from wellgrounded knowledge; since it has never yet
(that I know) been satisfactorily proved, that Hot Fevers (as they are called)
must needs procced from an hot cause; and upon a thorough disquisition, it
might perhaps be found, that they have been produced from some cold matter or
other; which I think at least to be half proved, because sometimes an hot Fever
ends in the Gout; as I have found; not to go far, in my self, when I was in the
50 th. year of my age. It sometimes also comes to pass, that the Gout
determines in an hot Fever; as appears from what Beverwyck says in his Book of
the Gout, p. 110. speaking of the ways through which the gouty matter takes its
course. The damp, says he, turns back into the veins, and ascends up again to
the noble part (meaning the heart,) where it raises hot Fevers, Anguish, and
the like evils; or shoots suddenly into some other limb, whereby the pain that
is in the hand, is soon after felt in the foot.

Qu. But is not that notable inflammation, which is often seen and felt in the
Gout, sufficient proof that there is a sort of Gout which comes from heat?

Ans. This is a Symptom or accident in the Gout, which is not caused by the
next and always accompanying cause of it, but by the violent pain; as I shall
more clearly make out, when I come to speak of this Symptom; But it is a
Symptom, (not to pass that by in this place) which has strangely misled those
who have mistaken it for a mark of the Gout, as Sennertus and others do
ackuowledg.

Qu. Is this damp also ill-conditioned and malignant?

Ans. So it is judged by considerable and experienced men, as well as by my
self, and that from the intolerable pain and other accidents. So does that old
Master Guido de Culiaco; and Pareus in his 7th. Book, chapter 2. proves it by two
Examples; and our new Medicine confirms the same. Besides, the foetid damps of
the Gout do plainly speak this malignity, which is perceived both at the time
of the act of burning, and after it; that being such, that sometimes both the
Patient, and the Person that administers the Caustic, and dresses the part,
are ready to fall away. And this is most of all found at the dressing of the
little wounds, when they begin to omit good store of moisture. For as soon as
you shall in a morning open the little Plasters, you will be so struck with a
strange stinking smell, that it will almost cast you into a swound. It Is very
probable, that this stuff is already malign before it be cast out from the
heart into the limbs; yet remaining for a while wedged in the limbs, from the
evaporation obstructed, its malignity is heightened. Hence it is not advisable,
to serve this burning or dressing upon any one that is fasting; but it is best,
that both the Patient and the Agent should first breakfast, and take a cordial.

Qu. But, is it possible for Winds to occasion so much mischief?

Ans. Very possible; and then especially, when they are more peccant by their
quality than quantity: So Hippocrates in his golden Tract of Flatus's does not
without cause judge of winds, that most of all the grievous and dangerous
Diseases owe their original to them.

Qu. But can Winds breed such viclent pain?

Ans. They can; chiefly when the membranes (the main instrument of the sense of
Feeling) are by them attacked and distended.

CHAP. V.
Of the Part affected, and Seat of the Gouty matter.
Qu. WHich then, in this painful Disease, is the part that is attacked and
offended by these Winds?

Ans. Principally, if not only, that sensible membrane called the periostium,
that is, that membrane which immediately covers the bones.

Qu. Do you not think, that the membranous ligaments do also suffer here, or
rather the membranes of the ligaments?

Ans. No; but I agree herein with Galen, that they have no feeling; the which
is also confirmed by the learned Barbette in his Praxis, chap. 5. p. 30.

Qu. What do you understand by the Peri-ostium?

Ans. That single membrane or film, whereby the Author of Nature has outwardly
invested and covered all the bones of our body, and which is a close and firm
substance, extendible, and very sensible.

Qu. Does the gouty matter fall from without upon this sensible periostium,
fretting and biting it by its acrimony?

Ans. Not so; for then it could not cause so intolerable a pain, or the right
Gout.

Qu. Where then are we to look for the true seat of the gouty matter?

Ans. Nowhere else but between the membrane and the bone.

Qu. Wherein then consists the genuine essence of this Disease?

Ans. In the violent distension or stretching of this sensible membrane by the
Winds, whereby this membrane being forced out of its due and natural form and
situation, excites so violent a pain.

Qu. Whence do you infer that the gouty matter lies so deep, and particularly
between the membrane and the bone it self?

Ans. Not only from the distending pain, (which is to me proof sufficient) but
also from the contumaciousness of the Gout, which made Hippocrates say in his
6th. Book, aph. 49. That the Gouty fit does not cease before the fortieth day.
And truly, whereas all other windy tumors, that are not lodged so deep, are in
a short time made to evaporte; this windy swelling of the Gout lying so deep,
and lurking under so firm and close a membrane, (and besides, in a place of
little warmth, and it self coming from a cold cause) cannot be easily brought
to a quick evaporation, but by such a kind of remedy as ours is.

Qu. Have not the old and new Masters mistaken the Part affected, and the true
Seat of the Gout?

Ans. Certainly they have: For, (to speak of the part affected, and the seat
together,) I must first allege the opinion of Galen, (as it is cited by
Beverwyck;) he affirming, that the gouty moisture does flow into the hollow of
the joints, and there forces asunder the bones; whereby the ligaments and
membranes, that fasten them together, are so violently expanded, that they
cause that excessive pain.

Qu. Has this sentiment of the great Galen been generally judged and received
to be conform to truth?

Ans. It has been rejected by many, as by Beverwyck and others; and by others
maintained.

Qu. Where do those that contradict Galen, find the Part affected, and the Seat?

Ans. In the ligaments and membranes that tie the bones together, being
penetrated and ouzed thorough by a sharp humor.

Qu. What has moved those that are of the later opinion, to reject Galen's
Doctrine?

Ans. See and read Beverwyck and others.

Qu. But how does Galen refute their opinion, who say, that the gouty matter
ouzeth thorough the ligaments and membranes?

Ans. Thus, that never a gouty person has been perceived to have convulsions
or drawings of the limbs: Which yet must needs happen, if the warm humor did
pass through the ligaments and membranes.

Qu. But these allege, to strengthen their opinion; First, that the pain, as
soon as the limb is but touched, presently increases. Secondly, the debility
and troublesome motion of the part. Lastly, the laxity of the ligaments, which
being ouzed thorough by the humor, do stretch, and sometimes cause dislocation,
Are not these solid reasons to persuade you and all others that they have hit
right?

Ans. Not at all; for their proof is lame in all its parts. And, not to repeat
the irrefragable proof of Galen against their opinion, the pain does not
increase when the limb is but touched and moved, because, forsooth! the gouty
matter has ouzed through the ligaments and membranes: No; for, not these, but
the periostium is the part affected in this evil, which being by the gouty damp
already distended, is upon the touching, or least motion of the limb, irritated
a new, and so causes new pain. Where I establish this for a certain truth,
that never the gouty matter, but only the accidental affluxed humor ouzeth
through the ligaments, so as to occasion stretching and dislocation: Which we
intend more fully to make out, when we come to speak of this accident of
dislocation.

Qu. But against Galen's proof, the defenders of this opinion allege, that
it is no strange thing, that the acrimonious humor of the Gout ouzing through
the ligaments of the joints, causes no drawing in the limbs, because say they,
the nerves themselves are not offended, but only the membranes and membranous
ligaments, which do not cause the motion; and that therefore, although they are
seized with great pain, they cause no convulsion; just as it is also found in
the Toothache, Pleurisy, and Colic.

Ans. This is an exception that concludes nothing, forasmuch as the Gouty
matter provokes not the organs of Motion, but those of Sense.

CHAP. VI.
That the Gout is a general Disease of the limbs, receiving its denomination
from that limb which it seizes on; together with the place in which the Gouty
matter is bred.
Qu. IS the Gout a general Disease, (as Galen affirms) attacking all the joints
of the limbs of the body?

Ans. It is so general, that not one external part of any limb of the whole
body is by its own nature exempt from it. The reason is, because that all parts
and limbs are wrapped about with this sensible membrane, called Periostium, the
head, neck, jaw-bones, breast, back, and the teeth themselves, forasmuch as they
are enclosed in their groves or pits.

Qu. Does this Disease take different names, according to the limb which it
infests?

Ans. It does so: Hence it is called Podagra, when it falls upon the feet;
Gonagra, when upon the knees; Chiragra, when upon the hands; Ischiatica, when
upon the hips: And so, the Toothache, when upon the teeth; the Pleurisy, when
upon the skin that clothes the ribs, etc. All which I esteem to proceed from
one and the same cause; though many will think this strange.

Qu. What is the antecedent cause of the Gout?

Ans. Whatsoever breeds these damps.

Qu. In what place grows this damp, being the next cause of the Gout?

Ans. The learned do as little agree in this, as they do in the next cause it
self; and Fernelius complains, that no man had thoroughly searched into this
point, and that through the want of the knowledge thereof, the Gout had been
left for incurable.

Qu. Is this peccant matter bred only in the head, excepting the skull, as
Fernelius would have it; or without the brain, as others think; or most of all
in the Viscera, as the stomach, spleen, liver, gall, and the rest?

Ans. I give my voice for those that affirm the last, viz. that these Gouty
damps are mostly generated in the inner parts, yet not excepting the head.

Qu. But can you tell, Sir, in what manner they are there produced?

Ans. Doubtless they are, through want of heat, gathered and laid up in some or
other of the aforementioned parts from corrupted humors, and particularly from
corrupted blood.

CHAP. VII.
How, and through which ways, the Gouty matter comes to the Limbs.
Qu. SInce these morbid damps do cause such grievous pains in the external
limbs, but are bred in the inner parts; by what means and passages do they come
to those limbs?

An. By means of the Circulation of the blood through the manifest ways of
veins and arteries.

Qu. Do not these damps ascend or descend directly into the limbs, without
passing the heart?

An. They must needs first pass into the heart.

Qu. By what ways?

An. Through the veins, which, gathering out of the inner parts the generated
damps, carry them, together with the not yet sufficiently concocted blood, into
the heart.

Qu. But do not these malign damps offend that noble part, seeing they cause
such grievous pains in the limbs?

Ans. Certainly they do; and are the cause of Fevers, beating of the heart, and
other distempers; and frequently cause death, when the heart wants strength and
vigor to expel them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Expelling Part.
Qu. IS the heart then the only strong expelling part, which drives those damps
into the limbs?

An. It is, as is evinced by the strong motion and beating of the arteries in
the Gout; whereby the heart labors to deliver it self from such a pernicious
damp, and to discharge and purify the nourishing blood of the same.

Qu. Through what ways does the heart drive out these damps into the limbs?

An. Through the arteries.

Qu. Whence is it, that the Gout for the most part manifests it self in the
extremities of the limbs of the body, as (for example) in the great Toe of the
left Foot?

An. Because that the heart, undertaking the expulsion, drives this offensive
matter as far as it can.

Qu. May one from the Gout judge of the vigor and debility of the heart?

An. You may probably do so from the suffering part: For, if that be far from
the heart, then the heart is strong; if near it, then it is less vigorous, and
unable to send that noxious matter far away.

Qu. But when the heart through the arteries does expel into the limbs,
together with the nourishing blood, these damps; must those limbs receive them?

An. They must receive them as well as the nutritive blood which accompanies
it; the heart expelling them chiefly by the force of the arteries, not resting
till they be thrust out.

Qu. But why does not the part aggrieved expel those damps, and send them
further away?

An. Sometimes it does so; namely, when the expelling force of such a limb is
strong and vigorous; for then it suffers not this bad guest to harbor there,
but forces it by the veins to retreat back to the heart; whence it not seldom
comes to pass, that by another expulsion from the heart it falls upon a weaker
limb; as we see, that the pain which at first was felt in the hand, soon after
is found in the foot, etc.

Qu. When and how comes it to pass, that the limb is not able to drive or send
away this peccant matter, but is constrained to lodge that unwelcome guest?

An. When the expelling virtue and the natural heat of that limb is defective,
and too weak.

Qu. But, Sir, can you sully make it our, that these malign damps take their
course to the limbs, only through the arteries?

An. I can, my reasons being these: First, I prove it by the beating pain,
which, amongst others, is in the Gout one of the sure marks; for, that beating
pain sufficiently shows, that the Gouty matter comes out of the arteries.
Secondly, it is plain from the swelling, distension, and quick pulsation of the
arteries, as those through which this matter takes its course. Lastly, it is
most evident from that remedy, which has been used by the ancient famous
Physicians, as likewise from our discharging medicine.

Qu. What remedy of the Ancients do you mean?

Ans. That of Arteriotomy, or the opening of Arteries; by means whereof, they
declare to have found incomparable more help and ease for the gouty Patient,
than from the opening of veins; for a proof, that the gouty matter is protruded
from the heart through the arteries.

Qu. But how does it appear from your own Remedy?

An. Forasmuch as the same being applied to the Arteries, (when they by their
strong pulsation give sufficient assurance that the peccant matter is not yet
quite expelled, but in part still harbors there,) fetches out that offensive
stuff, and frees them therefrom; as we shall more plainly show in our manner of
curing the Toothache: where it will manifestly appear, that this Burning of
ours is not only a discharging, but also an excellent exhausting aid, forcing
these damps in the arteries and veins to evaporate.

Qu. Does this painful matter cause no pain as long as it is included within
the coats of the arteries?

An. It causes no pain until it does violence to the periostium, because the
tunicles of the veins and arteries are void of feeling.

Qu. When the Arteries (in those that already feel great pain) do not cease to
beat strongly, what conclude you thence?

An. That the Gouty matter in part still rests in the arteries.

Qu. May this matter be totally expelled out of the arteries?

An. Not only it may; but the heart, as the source of the arteries, never rests
till it has effected it.

Qu. Can this damp of it self, or by too strongly repercutient means, be turned
back again through the arteries to the heart?

An. Some indeed are of opinion that it can; but I say that it is not possible:
Nature, or rather the wise Author of it, having provided certain valves, which
toward the heart are shut, and so hinder the return of blood and vapors
thither through those vessels.

Qu. Through what vessels then returns this damp to the heart, as it often does?

An. Through the veins, the Antagonists (as one calls them) of the Arteries;
for this way is open and unobstructed, all the valves of them toward the heart
being open.

Qu. How comes it to pass that this damp returns to the heart?

An. Either when the expelling virtue, and the natural heat of the part that
receives the damp is great; or when strong repelling means are unwarily
applied; by which latter way the Patient is exceedingly prejudiced, because
thereby the pernicious damp is made to return to the heart, which with so much
labor had discharged it self from it; and there it causes Fevers, Anguish, and
the like distempers, and often Death it self.

CHAP IX.
Of the Diagnosticks, or Signs of the Gout.
Qu. IS it necessary to know the proper Signs of the Gout?

An. Certainly it is; forasmuch as those only are fit to cure the Gout, who
know well the proper Signs thereof.

Qu. Has there been no mistake herein hitherto?

An. There has; for men have made those to be signs of the Gout that are none,
as Inflammation, Heat, Fever, etc.

Qu. Which then, in your opinion, are the proper signs whereby the Gout can be
best distinguished from other distempers?

An. Vitiated motion and Pain: which signs are present from the beginning of
the Gout, and as 'twere born with it, and do grow up with the same to its
height, and abate also and vanish with it.

Qu. Are these the only and always concomitant signs, by which we may know this
inward, and, for the most part, unseen windy tumor?

An. They are so; though swollen veins, and strong beating arteries, may also
be put for signs of the same.

Qu. Those two first, are they Signs only, or also Symptoms?

An. They are sure signs, but they are also symptoms.

Qu. Inflammation, Heat, Fever, outward swelling from afflux of humors, etc.
why may not they be esteemed to be proper signs here?

An. Because they do not immediately follow the Disease, nor any proper effects
of the Gouty matter, nor do they always appear in the Gout; and therefore are
deceitful signs, not to be trusted to, and such as have misled some of the most
sagacious men.

Qu. Are they to be reckoned amongst the Symptoms?

An. Not among the proper symptoms of the Gout, but only such as proceed from
some proper symptom of the same.

Qu. How is that pain conditioned, which you make to be a proper diagnostick or
sign of the Gout, whereby the Gout, or the inward tumor in tho periostium, is
made manifest?

An. It Is a pungent, distending and beating pain, which begins and ends with
the Gout, and grows up, and declines with the same.

Qu. What denotes the pungent pain?

An. That the periostium suffers.

Qu. What the distending pain?

An. That the sensible membrane is raised and stretched by the Gouty matter.

Qu. What the beating pain?

An. That the gouty matter is already impacted and wedged in.

Qu. What signifies the intolerable pain?

An. Both the plenty and malignity of the damps, whereby the sensible
periostium is forcibly severed from the bone, and stands by the force of the
intruded winds bent, like a string upon a bent Bow.

Qu. What does the Pain indicate, which not only pervades all the parts of the
body, upwards and downwards, but also passes to the most extreme part, in such
a degree, that the poor Patient can rest neither day nor night?

An. This plainly and palpably shows (besides what was just now said in the
next foregoing answer,) that the membranes of the parts have a strict
communication with one another, and a mutual sympathy.

Qu. What does the Vitiated motion indicate, which increases and decreases as
the Disease does?

An. Not that the organs of motion are attacked, hurt or tormented, but only
that the periostium is put out of its natural posture; which is manifest from
hence, that as soon as this membrane is restored to its natural state, you
cannot perceive the least defect in those organs.

Qu. Why then does the pain increase, and grow more violent upon touching or
moving the part affected?

An. This comes not to pass because that the organs of motion, or their
membranes do suffer; but because that the membrane being already distended, by
the touch or motion thereof it comes to suffer, and to stretch a new; whereupon
new pain must follow.

CHAP. X.
Of the Symptoms of the Gout.
Qu. FOrasmuch as there are found many and different Symptoms in the Gout, will
it not be proper to make a distinction between them, thereby to come to the
true knowledge of them?

An. You will do very well to distinguish first the Symptoms in general from
the Disease it self; and then to make a distinction between the Symptoms
themselves.

Qu. What distinction is there to be made between the Symptoms of the Gout?

An. This; that the symptoms that arise and vanish with the Disease, are to be
distinguished from those that are bred not from the Gout, but from the symptoms
of the Gout.

Qu. Which are the Symptoms that do immediately accompany the Gout, and are born
and dye with it?

An. Of these there are but two, already spoken of, viz. the Vitiated motion,
and the Violent pain: These come and go away with the Disease, following the
Gout as a shadow does a body.

Qu. Which of these two Symptoms is the chiefest and most grievous?

An. The Pain; which is not the Disease it self, or the cause of the Gout, as
has been already said; nor yet is it a simple Symptom, in regard it is a cause
of other symptoms, especially when it is violent.

Qu. What Symptoms are occasioned, or rather caused thereby?

An. Inflammations, Fevers, Faintings, Sleepiness, Loss of strength, Afflux of
humors.

Qu. Is it certain, that all these six Accidents are caused by the raging Pain
of the Gout?

An. Dr. Paul Barbette reckons them all amongst the effects of the Gouty pain,
when he treats of the Symptoms of Wounds in his Surgery, p. 165. of his
Dutch Edition. Besides that it is manifest, that most of these do then first
appear when the pain grows violent, and disappear with the diminution and
ceasing of the pain.

Qu. Whence comes it, that these Symptoms that are caused by the Gout, not only
in diverse Patients, but also in the same, show themselves at one time more than
another, and differ so much from one another?

An. It comes from the greater or lesser intensness of the efficient cause, the
Pain; which receives its degrees from the quality and quantity of the gouty
matter. For the more malign and abounding the damps are, the more grievous also
are not only the proper Symptoms, but also these Accidents of the Gout.

Qu. Does the raging pain excite in all Gouty persons these Symptoms all
together, and at once?

An. Not so; for in bodies that have but little serosity in the blood, the
first five Symptoms do appear; but not at all, or very seldom, the sixth and
last, which is the afflux of humors: In others, who abound in that serosity,
the afflux of moisture will be perceived first of all, and often without
inflammation. Again, when the gouty matter lurks deep, as in the Sciatica, and
in the Gout of the shoulders, you are not then to reckon upon the change of
color, and the afflux.

Qu. That raging pains do cause inflammations, is easily understood; but how do
they produce Fevers, Faintings, Sleepiness, and loss of strength?

An. The intolerable pain drawing to the heart, causes there a Fever and
Fainting; and passing to the brain, produces there Waking: whence must
necessarily follow Loss of strength.

CHAP. XI.
Of the external Serous Tumor, which often manifests it self in the Gout.
Qu. IS it worth while, to treat somewhat more largely of this Tumor, than of
the other Symptoms caused by the Pain?

An. It Is very necessary, because by this Symptom many Learned men have been so
misled, as to take it for the Gout-breeding matter it self, or at least not to
distinguish it from the Sickness it self: Whence, as from a fruitful soil, have
sprung so many errors about the Gout, and especially about the proxime Cause
thereof. Yea this is the only cause, that so many Physicians and Chirurgians
are so much wedded to the Notion of Humors, that they dare almost take it for
granted, that the Gout cannot be without this Swelling and Afflux of Humors;
insomuch, that if they meet with any Gouty person, in whom they cannot find
this Swelling or change of Color (although they find great pain,) they will
rather discard them out of the number of the Gouty, than acknowledge, that
sometimes there are no humors at all accompanying the Gout.

Qu. But since the Affluxed humor, which breeds the external swelling, is
neither in whole nor in part the Cause of the Gout, what shall we make of that
tumor and its matter?

An. It is a Symptom, which is no inseparable companion of the Gout; yea never
begins, and seldom ends with that disease: Which I think I can so plainly make
out, as that the most ordinary capacity shall understand it to be so.

Qu. Does then this serous Swelling not always accompany the Gout as an
inseparable Symptom?

An. No; for, besides that some Gouty persons seldom or never perceive this
Tumor (caused by affluxed humors,) as I have experienced, and many Writers must
witness; commonly there is no affluxed Humor found in the Sciatica.

Qu. But does this Swelling never begin with the Gout?

An. It Is never perceived in the beginning of the Gout; for, though in many
Patients this Tumor very soon follows upon the Gout; yet, if it be well
observed, it is never of the same age with the Gouty tumor, which in order of
time always precedes it: Yea, if care be had, its birth may sometimes be
altogether prevented, by being timely ready to evaporate this dolorifick damp
by a speedy application of my matchless discharging Remedy; as I have often
experimented on my self, and shall further teach in the second part, treating
of the Cure of the Gout.

Qu. But as this Symptom never begins with the disease, does it neither end
always with it, as other Symptoms do?

An. No: This Symptom alone survives the Gout; yea the cause whence it rises
ends not with it. For, as for the most part it first appears when the sickness
is at its height, and the pain rages; so it is often seen a good while after
the Gouty pain, and then by good means and some patience dispelled.

Qu. It seems then, that the pain, which is the cause of this Symptom, ceasing,
the outward tumor does not vanish at the same time?

An. No; for very often the limbs remain swelled as before, and it requires
some days, and some trouble, before this Swelling can be removed; yea, if you
do not take care, it not only lames the Patient, but also deforms him by Nodes
and Schirres, whereby the Motion of the limbs is for ever destroyed.

Qu. What then is to be done, to judge aright of this Symptom?

An. You must hold it for a certain truth, that the Humors which in the Gout
breed the Swelling, are not the peccant or Gout-breeding matter.

Qu. To make me the better comprehend this, pray give me a clear description of
this Swelling, which has been the occasion of so many Errors, and has
deceived so many Learned men?

An. It is a Preternatural swelling in the Fleshy parts, consisting of a serous
humor pervaded with saltishness, by the sharp pain penetrated into the Limbs,
and it is soft, pale, and cold.

Qu. But how may we best distinguish this Swelling from the Gout?

An. If it be viewed at the time when its Efficient cause is gone; for then it
may be seen in its true essence and qualities, and looks no otherwise than a
Serous humor is wont to do.

Qu. I see, you make two sorts of Swellings in the Gout?

An. I do so; the one is Windy, which is the Gout it self; the other Serous,
which is a Symptom: And they differ exceedingly from one another.

Qu. Wherein consists that difference?

An. Chiefly in these particulars: 1. In respect of the Name, which they
receive from their several Causes; for the Gouty tumor coming from Winds, takes
the name of Windy tumor; the other, coming from a serous humor, is called the
Serous tumor. 2. In respect of the Part or Place affected; for, whereas the
Windy tumor distends the Membranes of the bones, the Serous fill the Carncous
parts, as water a sponge, and render the Flesh very spungy. 3. In regard of the
Signs; for, whereas the Inward swelling excites grievous and intolerable pain,
the Serous none or little. 4. The Internal swelling is a proper disease; the
other is raised by the pain, and is a Symptom bred by Consent of parts.

Qu. But since that the Serous tumor in the Gout is not produced by any
External cause, but by an Internal, what is this Cause?

An. The violent pain, as has been often said, which is here the cause of the
Afflux of humors, it being known by Artists, that Pain draws humors after it;
which therefore is by them assigned to be one of the principal causes of the
Afflux of humors.

Qu. But are these humors, of which this kind of Swelling consists, drawn into
the suffering parts by the Pain alone?

An. Artists are wont to add, that sympathizing Nature, as a kind Mother,
succors the suffering part by sending moisture to it; and accordingly this
Swelling should be generated by Sympathy of Consent of the parts.

Qu. What benefit or ease does the part affected receive from sympathising
nature by her sending those humors thither?

An. That the raging pain is thereby mitigated, and rendered more tolerable.

Qu. In what manner is that done, or how does the conveyed humor assuage the
enraged pain?

An. Though this be difficult to explain; yet I cannot agree to the common
opinion, importing, that the Pain-breeding matter by means of the conveyed
humors is driven outward, and dispersed thorough the neighboring flesh, and so
the suffering member for a great part freed of the pain-causing matter: For,
the conveyed humors can by no means approach or come to the dolorifick matter,
much less fotch it out of its deep seat, and dislodge it, because it is so fast
impacted and included under so firm and close a Bone-membrane.

Qu. What is then, in your opinion, the reason why the sharp pain is often
diminished upon the afflux of moisture, not only in the Gout, but also in the
Toothache? etc.

An. Methinks it is probable, that it is done after this manner: The musculous
fleshy parts being by the conveyed humors rendered softer, plumper, and more
spongious, and consequently gentler, do not, in the first place, press against,
or rather resist so much the sensible and distended periostium, as before, when
the carneous parts had but their own native and proper moisture. Secondly, the
periostium being by the conveyed moisture from without made gentler, may with
less pain be stretched; and it may also come to pass, that by that little
warmth, which this serous matter has in it at first, it being now come near
the periostium does somewhat attenuate the included gross damp, and so the
better dispose it to evaporate.

Qu. But does the affluxed humor occasion no mischief?

An. Very much, and sometimes more than the Gout it self; for without care it
causes Dislocation of the suffering members, and the Nodes.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Dislocation.
Qu. HOw is it possible, that the Gout-breeding matter should cause a
Dislocation?

An. By the plentious stock of humors conveyed and drawn in.

Qu. But how; does this abundant moisture, falling into the cavity of the
joints, forcibly thrust the bones out of their cavity?

An. Not so; but it is done in manner following: Pain and Nature cooperating,
the one by drawing in, the other by conveying, bring such a quantity of humors
to the suffering part (for example, the Hipp,) that thereby, in time, the
strong ligaments, which tie the bones together, are so ouzed through, that being
debilitated they stretch and grow so lax, that the bone falls out of its
cavity, and so causes dislocation: Of which we have many sad Examples.

Qu. Does not this mischief fall often out in other Cases?

An. It may happen in all the members of the body; and then especially, when an
unskilful or imprudent Master by the use of wrong means occasioneth yet a
greater afflux of humors than has been already drawn in by the pain, and
furnished by nature: Of which, Pareus records a memorable Example in the
Dislocation of the knees, caused by a Parisian Master, called Greaulm, fol. 256.

Qu. May this Dislocation be prevented by Art?

An. Very well; as shall be shown in that part of our Book, which is to treat
of the Cure of the Gout, and its Symptoms.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Nodes.
Qu. IS there yet more danger to be apprehended from this Symptom, or its
matter?

An. There is; for if you take not great care, it will change into an incurable
Scirrbus or hard tumor, which in the Gout are called Nodes, according to that
of Ovid;

-- Tollere nodosam nescit medicina pedagram. Qu. When comes this swelling to
change to such an hardness?

An. To borrow the words of Beverovicius; when the thin humor is insensibly
exhaled, and the sediment rests behind, then will that turn into hard knobs,
which bursting of themselves, or being opened, render a chalky or such like
matter, whereby our limbs are not only deprived of motion, but also disposed to
crookedness.

Qu. How many ways are these stony swellings generated?

An. Two; either of themselves, or by the unskilfulness of the pretended Artist.

Qu. When of themselves?

An. The Evaporation of the subtiler or thinner parts of these humors may be
caused by the natural and innate warmth of the suffering part, assisted by the
adjacent parts, as also by the preternatural heat of the inflammation of the
same, without any other external cause: Whereupon the gross, thick, saltish,
and carthy parts, as the sediment and relics remaining in the limb, are
coagulated and concreted.

Qu. I. understand you very well; but, I pray, tell me also, how may this come
to pass by the Unskilfulness of Practitioners?

An. When they apply too strongly repelling, or drying, or too much cooling
remedies, which drive the thinner parts inward, or dispel them, and so harden
and render incurable the thicker stuff; whereas they should use moderately warm
mollifying remedies, thereby to expel and consume the whole matter.

Qu. Do these Nodes, when they are caused without the application of perverse
remedies, grow on leisurely?

An. They do so, when they are bred of themselves: For, the foundation of this
chalky matter being once laid, it is raised and increased more and more upon
every new afflux, and from time to time scaled over, until it comes to that
bigness, that it only hinders the motion of the limb, and renders it crooked,
but can also stay or have room no longer under the skin, but making it first
protuberant, bursts it at length in pieces.

Qu. Surely an ignorant Practitioner can bring this to pass much sooner?

An. So he can, and to such a degree, that the poor Patient in the very first
fit of the Gout is for ever deprived of the motion of the suffering limb; of
which we have in Banda an Example of a Lieutenant of ours, now lying here in
Garrison, called Jan van Haerlem.

Qu. But may not this growing of Tophes or Nodes be prevented and hindered?

An. Very well; as shall be taught in the Cure of the Symptoms of the Gout.

Qu. Will you proceed now to the second principal you intended, viz, the Cure
of the Gout?

An. I will, after you have heard what I had to say of the Nature and Cause of
the Gout, its Seat and Part affected, its Diagnosticks, Symptoms, and the
necessity of distinguishing these latter not only from the disease it self, but
also from one another: All which have made way to judge the better of a fit
Remedy to cure the same; seeing we cannot hope for Cure, before the Malady be
thoroughly understood.

THE SECOND PART: Of the CURE of the GOUT.
CHAP. I.
Treating of the Cure of the Gout, in general.
Qu. HAve there not been at all times men that have pretended to the skill of
Curing the Gout?

Ans. Yes indeed; but Experience has put them to shame: For whereas they have
promised cheap and sure remedies against this painful disease, their promise
has notoriously failed, and their Patients have been at last abandoned
remediless. See hereof, amongst others, Fabritius Hildanus his second Part, p.
174. where he speaks of one, whom he calls a Monster, that highly bragged, he
could conquer that great Enemy of Mankind, the Arthritis or Gout, but was
confuted by very sad Experience.

Qu. Why does he call him a Monster?

Ans. Because of that monstrous and mischievous means by him used, whereby he
killed his Gouty Patients. See in the same Hildanus his second part, p. 87,
that unhappy preparation of Quicksilver for the Gout.

Qu. But have none of the best Physicians of Europe in so many Ages found any
sure Remedy against this Disease?

Ans* None that I know of; they rather call the Gout Ludibrium Medicorum, and
the Disease of Richmen; though it seizes also on the Poor, who, if they could
be helped, would soon lose that name. Hence it is become a Proverbial saying,
viz. that he who undertakes to perform something extraordinary, is like him
that pretends to Cure the Gout: Which pretenders are usually sent to the Courts
of Kings and Princes, to practice their skill on them, who will not sail to
make such men rich, as shall perform such undertakings.

Qu. What Is the matter then, that the true Remedy has not been found hitherto?
is the fault in the Physicians, or in the Gouty Patients?

Ans. In both, but most in the former, as not knowing the true nature of this
Disease, notwithstanding all their Disputes and Discourses about it.

Qu. What do you think of Cardanus his saying in the praise of the Gout, viz.
That whosoever will stop the source of the Gout, stops withal the source of
life: Does not this imply, that the Gout is incurable?

Ans. He will say, that the Root of the Gout cannot be totally pulled out,
though you may strip off the Leaves, that is, remove the outward Accidents
thereof.

CHAP. II.
That the Gout is curable by Burning with Moxa.
Q. BUT pray, let me know your opinion in this matter: Is the Gout an incurable
Evil, and Cardanus his saying true?

A. I or the comfort of all the Gouty, I here openly and joyfully declare, that
it is Curable:

Q. But is not this a presumptuous Arrogance?

A. No; for the good God, in compassion to mankind, has been pleased not only
to bring me to the true knowledge of the nature and condition of this Disease,
but also to direct me to a specific and proper remedy thereof, which removes
this sore Evil, it being now, through the divine goodness, in our power to
quell and tame this Giant, without making our selves guilty of any vanity.

Q. What means is this, I pray?

A. It Is the harmless Burning with Moxa, which being three or four or more
times repeated, according to the condition of the place which the Gout has
seized on, pulls the Enemy out of his fastnesses. Mark it, the raging Gout in
the height of its rage, is first stopped in its carrier, and soon after forced
to pack away.

Q. Is this possible?

A. It is; for I have succesfully experienced it on my self, and many others.

CHAP. III.
How, and for what this Remedy is used.
Q. BUT to speak with order of the Cure of the Gout, what is above all to be
considered in this Disease?

A. The suffering part and laboring nature is to be succored without delay,
and the part affected to be delivered of the enclosed damp; the Cure
principally consisting herein, viz. in giving an outlet to the Gout-breeding
or peccant matter, and even in forcing it to evaporate.

Q. Which then is the remedy, that performs so great an effect? Is it not known
in Europe? Where has it been found out?

A. It Is Moxa, best known amongst those of China and Japan: so celebrated,
valued, and commended there, that no other remedies are to be compared
therewith upon the account of its excellent performances; considering that
there are few pains in the body, for which they do not use it with great
benefit.

CHAP. IV.
What Moxa is, and where to be had.
Q. BUT what is this Moxa?

Ans. It Is a very soft and woolly substance, made by a very skilful preparation
out of a certain dried Herb.

Q. What name has that Herb, out of which this woolly matter is prepared? Is
it not known amongst us?

A. The name is unknown to me; but I am well assured, that it is one of the best
Herbs under the Sun, and may very justly bear the name of Matter Herbarum.

Q. Is there requisite a particular skill to prepare it?

A. Yes verily; and there is none of all the Droguists of Europe that have that
skill.

Q. Is the preparation of it much valued by the Chinese and Japaneses?

A. This Art is by those Nations so highly valued, that they will not for any
money communicate it to other Nations, but do keep it for a great secret.

Q. Do they in China and Japan publicly vend it?

A. They drive a good trade with it, and carry it in whole bales through those
vast Empires for sale.

Q. Which of those Nations has the reputation to prepare it best?

A. The Chinese do herein sar excel the Japoneses; as they also do in
preparing and conserving all other sorts of Medicines.

Q. Is this prepared Herb in great esteem with those people?

A. In so great an one, that they are seldom found to be without it.

Q. For what use do they employ this woolly substance?

A. For an actual Caustic, and an efficacious discharging remedy.

Q. Against what Diseases, and in what places of the Body?

A. Against all indispositions arising from cold Damps and Humors, and in all
places of the Body, none (that I know) but the eyes excepted.

Q. Do they find good from this Caustic.

A. Exceeding great, and that with great safety; by virtue thereof freeing the
Body from all lurking winds and cold humors.

CHAP. V.
Directing how this Remedy is to be used.
Q. IN what manner do they use this matter for a Caustic, and in what quantity?

A. They make between their fingers a little pellet of this woolly substance,
which is scarce of the bigness of a small white pea, at one end somewhat sharp,
and at the other end flat; and this they put with the flat end on the place
where the Burning is to be made, setting fire to the upper sharp end by some
small Aromatic sticks, expressly prepared for it, which yield a very grateful
scent.

Q. Does this woolly matter catch fire quickly?

A. When it is competently dry, it catches fire sooner than any tinder: whence
the Chinese employ it also in their Tinder-boxes.

Q. Does this pellet, when kindled, turn all to ashes?

A. Never wholly, but there always remains a little bottom that is not
incinerated.

Q. What may be the cause that it is not wholly turned to ashes?

A. The moisture which by this burning matter is drawn out of the suffering
place; of which moisture indeed the greatest part flies away in fume, but yet
some of it draws into the burning pellet, and so moistens it that it cannot all
be converted into ashes.

Q. Can the humors under the skin be seen with the naked eye to run toward the
burning pellet?

A. Very well, it being done with more speed than men are wont to run to an
house that is on fire.

Q. Does this Burning raise no blisters in the skin?

A. None at all; it only causes a little gray speck, though the pellet be
diverse times successively kindled upon the same place.

Q. What reason is there for it, that the fire here raises no blisters?

A. None other, but that the pellet burns not quite thorough to the skin.

Q. Does not this Burning cause intolerable pain?

A. The pain is very tolerable, because the matter is woolly and soft, not
close nor thick; and the pellet is small, and burns not unto the very skin.

Q. How long lasts the Burning of one pellet?

A. About the time of telling fifty.

Q. How often is the Burning repeated upon one place?

A. Ordinarily thrice upon weak and tender limbs; but upon other places, if
need be, so often till the pain be removed, although you should (for example in
the Sciatica) on one and the same place kindle 25, yea 50 pellets; of which you
need not fear the least inconvenience, but may expect the better discharge.

Q. But does not this Burning occasion great after-pain?

A. None at all; but as the fire is out, you may handle the place burnt without
causing any pain; and, which is more, you may crush and press it as hard as you
please.

Q. Does this Burning take away the pain that is in the place or part, or only
mitigate it?

A. It does both, to admiration.

CHAP. VI.
What is to be done after the Burning upon the places where it has been made?
Q. SO then, there is nothing to be done after the Burning upon the part burnt
to ease the after-pain?

A. I told you just now, there is no such thing as after pain: But yet you must
not leave weak nature to her self alone, but you ought to aid her, and to use
means to separate the little Escar as soon as is possible.

Q. What is to be done herein?

A. Lay a little beaten Leek upon the said Escar, and over that, one of the
outermost coats of the same Leek, a little moistened in the mouth; the which,
like a plaster, keeps the beaten Leek fast upon the Escar. This being taken
off together, some 24 hours after, more or less, you will see the little Escar
disposed to separation, appearing to have round about it a circle of clear
skin, which sometimes also rises to a wound or blister, which may with scissers
be opened to give it vent.

Q. Is not this little Escar to be treated with incision, and to be taken away
with little pincers or lancets, that so the ill which may lurk there may
evaporate? Or is it better to leave it for nature further to open the Escar,
and to throw it off?

A. Beware to use any severe means (from ill-grounded considerations) or any
force; for great pain may thereby be occasioned: And therefore use only warm
Plantin-leaves to make the Escars fall off, patiently staying till they fall
off by that means, and the part heal up; the which is effected by provident
Nature her self, if it be good for the part affected.

Q. But when the Escar seems to be already loose, and even to hang doubled in
the little wound, is it not then to be taken away?

A. No.

Q. If the Escar is severed, and taken away by Nature her self, and the pus or
matter looks like lard, is not this to be removed one way or another?

A. You are not so much as to touch it, bur leave it to Nature to dispose
thereof,

Q. Must you not do your best with the greatest speed to heal up the burnt
places?

A. No; but rather you are to keep them open as long as you can, yet without
changing them into Issues by putting peace or pellets into them.

Q. How is that to be done?

A. By laying upon them warm Plantin-leaves, with the rough side to the skin. I
say, they must be laid on warm, not cold: And this is to be done not by holding
the leaves in warm water, but by laying them on glowing wood-coals; where they
must lie until you see them begin to fall-in; and then they are to be taken off
and rolled stiff together betwixt the palms of the hands, and then to be
unrolled and displaid again, being yet warm and moist, and so laid on the
Escar: Continuing this until it be time to heal up the wound; when the leaf,
being prepared again after the former manner, is to be laid on with the smooth
side to the skin; by which means it will heal up without leaving a mark upon
the part, and much better than if you had employed the best plasters.

Q. Why must these Leaf-plaisters lie a great while upon the part with the
rough side, and at last only with the smooth side?

A. Because the rough side draws out, and the smooth side heals?

Q. Is there n^thing else to be observed touching these vegetable plasters?

A. They are to be kept from falling off by some* compress of linen rags; and
to be refreshed or renewed twice in 24 hours.

Q. But in case the burnt places could not well endure the use of linen
compress, how then may these Leaf-plaisters be secured from falling off?

A. You may lay over them a Diapalma or Basilicum-plaister, only to keep the
Leaf upon the Escar.

Q. But if Plantin-leaves be not to be had, may not other leaves serve?

A. In that case you may use red Cabbage or Colts-foot-leaves; and, if these
cannot be had, employ the said Diapalma or Basilicum-plaisters: Which may
chiefly stand you in good stead, when you are traveling by water or land.

CHAP. VII.
Of the admirable Effects of this Caustic.
Q. MAY a man rest in this application, and expect the desired cure?

A. You may, by God's blessing; and the Physician may look for honor,
considering that in so doing he cures surely, without inconvenience, and even
with pleasure.

Q. Then, it seems, there is no danger in the right use of this remedy?

A. None at all; yea it is such an one, than which there will hardly be devised
a better, and of which you will really see a wonderful effect for the good of
the Patient.

Q. Will it succor nature with most speed, and free her of the evil that
encumbers and torments her?

A. It will; whereas Hippocrates l. 6. Aph. 49. says, that the Gout requires
40 days to cure it; which Galen seconds, with the adding this condition, viz.
if the Physician understand his work, and the Patient do his part in observing
carefully what is prescribed. But this our Moxa, by means of the Burning
described, draws this Wolf with speed out of his den, and delivers the Patient
instantly from his pains and anguish.

Q. But is this way of curing sure?

A. So sure that it fails not, but is always beneficial; and the success of it
is so manifest, that it cannot be doubted.

Q. But you did add, that it would cure with pleasure; which I understand not,
since you have above acknowledged, that this Burning is not without some pain.

A. I mean thus, that the Cure is pleasant, in regard that upon a little sharp
pain, which lasts but a short time, there follows a great pleasure and joy; the
fruits of this short pain being great and every way delightful, forasmuch as
the poor Patient, discharged from the intolerable pain of the Gout, instead of
his doleful lamentations and outcries has now cause to rejoice, and to break
out into thanks.

Q. But is this all, which the Burning with Moxa produces?

A. No; for the same, being timely used, hinders the afflux of humors, though
not always totally, yet at least in great part.

Q. What benefit arises from thence?

A. Thereby is prevented all the mischief, which otherwise may be occasioned by
the afflux of humors; such as is Dislocation and Nodes: Whereas it is certain,
that those who use this way of Burning duly and maturely, shall never have
cause to complain of those grievous effects.

Q. If all this be true, this remedy may be extrolled to the sky?

A. Not only that; but it enables the Patient to be upon his legs, and to
follow his vocation, if it be not too toilsome; and even to travel without any
considerable trouble: By the same also he is exempt from all other tedious and
costly stuff, salves, ointments, plasters, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Showing, that this Burning with Moxa goes beyond all other Remedies of Europe
hitherto used against the Gout.
Q. BUT when the Physicians of Europe and other parts from hence have better
understood the nature of the Gout, will they not be able to find out a better
Remedy against it?

A. It Is probable, that upon the acquisition of the true knowledge of this
disease, they will not deviate so far as before from the way of curing it, and
that in all probability they will eschew many errors and mistakes; but they
will never find out any better remedy than this Burning with Moxa, it being the
best, because the speediest, cleanliest and safest, yea the most genuine, most
secure, and most accommodate means, that can be excogitated by men.

Q. May not the enclosed wind, which you say causes all the trouble, be drawn
out by Sudorificks, Cupping-glasses, Issues, Leeches, or common Causticks?

A. By Sudorificks possibly there might be effected the greatest ease, but the
evil would not be fully removed, seeing that thereby only the subtilest of the
gourty damps would be exhaled. And for Cupping-glasses, Issues, Leeches, and
Causticks, none of them is able to fetch out this evil from its deep-lurking
hole, which is under the close and firm membrane which invests the bones.

Q. Is it not advisable to employ Anodines?

A. By no means, because the pain is thereby not removed, but only palliated
and dulled; but is afterward raised up into greater rage.

Q. Is not Letting of Blood beneficial, as many would maintain?

A. Letting of blood is better omitted, for these reasons: First, because,
according to the opinion of the best, it is not advisable, when the pain is
raging, to open a vein. Secondly, it is not the Blood that is peccant or faulty,
but the ill-conditioned Damps, which indeed run together with the blood and
spirits in the vessels, but do never so mix with the blood, as to make one
body, but may easily be severed: Whereas it is otherwise with the Blood and
Spirits, they two making up one body; as the heat and water constitute hot
water, or as wine and the spirits thereof make one body of wine. Thirdly, by
Blood-letting the noxious Damps are drawn inwards to the Heart, and there
occasion much mischief, and the benefit you look for from it will not
countervail the harm. Fourthly, the forces of the Patient are thereby
diminished, and Nature is enervated in her conslict with the disease; whereas a
good Artist ought always to befriend Nature by strengthening her against her
enemy; and a wise Physician will not be forward to shed blood, but preserve it
as the treasure of life: And as a Seaman in a tempest will not throw his Bread
over board, but rather such commodities as he can be without; so a good
Physician will keep the blood of his Patient, and drive out ill Damps.

Q. What do you think of salves, oils, or other unctuous medicaments in this
case?

A. They close the pores, and obstruct evaporation.

Q. What opinion have you of hot Pickle, humane Urine, warm Cowdung, etc.

A. They are means which are apt to mitigate, yea sometimes to remove the pain;
but not always, or very slowly, nor radically.

Q. Would not an Hot iron be convenient to make this damp exhale, as was
practiced in the Sciatica upon Jacobus Vincus, Ambassador of the Prince of
Lansbergen; witness Dr. Nicolaus Tulpius, Burgemaster of Amsterdam, in his
Observations, chapter 26. p. 228; by which means that Gentleman was freed from his
trouble?

A. It Is too sierce, and withal too dangerous a remedy; practicable indeed,
(notwithstanding the contrary judgment of Fabrit. Hildanus in his 6th part, p.
501;) but it is better to use our gentle way of Burning, which, by far, causes
no such pain, and is more beneficial without putting nature so hard to it. To
confirm this, I shall now only add, what Herls says in his Examen of
Surgery, p. 364. viz. The burning with a red-hot Iron is too violent a way
for Chirurgions, and too painful for Patients, and can seldom be used without
hurting the flesh and muscles. And doubtless all Physicians and Chirurgions
will be of the same mind, as soon as this way of Burning with Moxa shall come
to their knowledge; my opinion being, that they will never make use more of an
hot Iron but in such cases, wherein the said Burning is not powerful enough,
as, for example, in the Rottenness of bones, and the like.

Q. What think you of Spanish Flies, now of so frequent use; of which Jobus van
Mekeren writes in his Observations, that he has used them with much benefit
against the Gout, following the advice of Dr. Vopisus Fortunatus P. lempius?

A. I esteem, that all intelligent Physicians and Chirurgions will much rather
make use of our Moxa for the good of their Patients, they knowing sufficiently
the venemousness of those Spanish Flies, and how hurtful they are to the
Bladder and other viscera; and having used them long enough of necessity,
because they knew no better means. And it is remarkable what Aquapendente warns
of the qualities of Spanish Flies in his Art of Surgery, chapter 3. p. 246.
concluding with these words, That it is madness to use this deadly remedy.

Q. Is the Burning with Moxa less painful than that with an Iron?

A. Incomparably less; nor is it so Dangerous, according to the golden rule of
Hippocrates, lib. 2. Aph. 12. That to heat much, and suddenly, is dangerous;
but to do it by little and little, and slowly, is without danger. And this is
it, what the expert Physician Guilandin confesses in Prosper Alpinus de Medic.
Aegyptiorum, chapter 12. in that remarkable practice of the Burning in Cairo, and
thereabout: Which Chapter highly deserves to be considered.

Q. But, Sir, do you not apprehend, that the Egyptian manner of Burning will
go beyond that with your Moxa?

A. Not at all, being well assured, that the Egyptians will be very glad to
exchange their Cotton and Stramineous linen with our Moxa, as soon as they
shall know the admirable virtue and effect thereof. Nor is the Burning with
Moxa by far so painful, as all the world will judge, when they shall see and
compare both.

Q. Then, I pray, Sir, be pleased to repeat in short, what remedy it must be,
that shall free a man from this disease?

A. The genuine Cure of this Evil, which attacks suddenly, and will not bear
delay without great injury to the Patient, consists in the removal of the
Cause, and requires a remedy, having these following proprieties. First, it
must powerfully open not only the Pores of the Skin, but those also of the
Membranes of Bones. Secondly, it must attenuate the cold thick damps, and
resist their malignity. Thirdly, it must strengthen the innate heat, and the
expulsive force of the part affected, thereby the better to master and remove
the Evil. Now the Burning with Moxa performs all this: It strongly draws out
from the deep, and resists all malignity; it attenuates the cold and crasse
vapors lurking under the membranes, consuming or extracting them, and so
disburthening nature of her enemy; lastly, it so corroborates the weak
suffering part* that it will not so easily receive and lodge again Damps of
that nature.

CHAP. IX.
Showing, that this Burning is very tolerable.
Qu. BUT do you think, you can easily induce your Patients to undergo this
Burning?

A. Certainly being well instructed they will quickly submit to it; though that
kind of Burning which hitherto has been used in Europe, has made men very
averse from that way.

Q. How may they be best persuaded to it?

A. I would rather have them persuaded by other prudent and understanding
persons, than by the Physician himself. For as to him, it will be more
advisable, he should seem himself cool in this business, and stay to be
entreated.

Q. But in case they will not be induced to it out of that perverse
apprehension, what then?

A. If they be so delicate as not to submit to so slight a pain, they deserve
not to be cured, and so must keep their Disease: But, I presume* it will be
with you as 'twas at first with me, who having from an idle fear refused this
Burning, was afterward constrained by the grievous and raging pain to desire
the use thereof. And since that Gouty persons must day and night combat against
the intolerable pain of the Gout, certainly they will not easily be afraid of
this innocent way of Burning. I have seen weak and timorous women, and young
maids, which made nothing of it, in respect of the pain they had endured in
their teeth and head: Not now to speak of Children, who without much cry and
tears have endured this Burning, to be cured of that kind of Dropsy called the
Tympanites, and of other infirmities, and particularly of Convulsions.

Q. But many Doctors and Chirurgions are like to condemn this remedy as new and
unknown, and so render it suspected among their Patients?

A. The Effect will soon silence you, and convince you of envy and ignorance.

Q. But may not this Disease be cured by gentler remedies?

A. No: You may indeed mitigate the pain by gentler means, but not remove the
cause, nor root the Evil out of the part affected; which may best be done by
this our Burning.

CHAP. X.
Of the Qualification required in the person that is to perform this Burning.
Q. IS every one fit to perform this Burning?

A. No certainly; but it must be one that has a perfect knowledge of what is
requisite to it, both before and after, and that is experienced in it; because
considerable mistakes may be committed therein.

Q. What are the particulars, of which this Artist must be well instructed?

A. First, of the Disease, to the cure of which this Burning is to be used.
Secondly, of the Remedy or Moxa, and its virtue, as also of the Herb, and the
way of preparing it. Thirdly, he must know in what manner this Burning is to be
made, and what is to be done both before, in, and after the same.

Q. What else is required thereto?

A. The Practitioner must be a person of a good sight, not unwieldy of body,
having sleady and dry, no trembling nor sweaty hands; for else he will not be
able to give to the pellets their due form or shape, to put them fast upon the
right place, and to make them catch fire: All which is to be done with a
particular dexterity and expedition, that so the patient may not be held any
time in fear.

Q. Pray, will you teach me, how the good Moxa is to be distinguished from that
which is naught?

A. By your sight, smell, and touch.

Q. How by the sight?

A. That which is good has a fine gray color?

Q. How by the smell?

A. It has a grateful seent?

Q. How by the touch?

A. It must be soft like fine wool; if it be hard or stubborn, it is then unfit
for this Burning. And if it have this last quality relating to the touch,
though the color and scent were somewhat decayed, it would not be unfit for
this purpose.

CHAP. XI.
Of the little Aromatic sticks, and their Use.
Q. BUT where is this Moxa to be had?

A. It must by the Commissioners of the East India Company be sent for out of
China: Which will be very well worth the while, since it will prove a gainful
commodity in Europe, and be no bruthen to ships.

Q. What use is there of those Aromatic sticks you have mentioned?

A. They are necessary to kindle the Moxa with; and these must likewise be had
every year out of China or Japan: They also by their pleasing scent when
kindled, keep the Patient and Bystanders, and the Operator, from the ungrateful
and offensive smell, which the gouty damps emit* when by the burning Moxa they
are forced to evaporate; especially if it be considered, what ill the smell of
such stinking vapors may cause in our Bodies.

Q. Are these sticks prepared by Art?

A. They are so, and that of several sorts of well-scented wood, of which
Santal is the chiefest. And they must be very tenderly handled, being very
sragile.

Q. I or what use do the Chinese and Japoneses employ these sticks?

A. For burning; but most for perfuming before their Idols.

Q. May they be kept good for a long time?

A. For some years, if they be kept shut up in a dry box.

Q. May they not be had at Batavia from China, together with the Moxa?

A. They may; but in case a great quantity were required to serve all Europe,
it must be sent for from China or Japan.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Place where the Burning is to be made.
Q. IN what place is this Burning to be made?

A. In all places where the Gout-breeding matter is seated, and causes great
pain. And here the rule of Hippocrates may be applied: Burn where pain is.
Wherefore the Physician or Chirurgian must needs exactly know the very seat of
the gouty pain, without which the operation is for the most part fruitless. And
if the application be made but an inch wide from the very part that is in pain,
it would not have the desired effect.

Q. Since it is of that importance* to know well the true seat of the pain* how
may it best be found?

A. By the Eye and Touch.

Q. How by the Eye?

A. The Master ought to have Eagles eyes, and then by looking attentively he
will soon spy the place* especially if the pain be very great and violent, and
the gouty limb by the affluxed humor not much swelled: For then the
Inflammation directs manifestly to the very seat of the pain and shows the hole
of this raging wolf. And in this case one may easily see the genuine Gout-or
Wind-tumor by taking notice of a little distension and standing out of the
skin, appearing like a small pustule; on the extant head of which, if the
burning be applied, the Patient will be freed of all pain, so as that the
Bystanders will admire, and all Gainsayers be convinced of the virtue and power
of this remedy.

Q. But in case the Seat of the Gout should not be visible, how is it then to
be found out?

A. Considering that this mostly happens in persons that are the first time
attacked by the Gout, and often also in those that are subject to a great
afflux of humors from the Gout; it will be incumbent on the Master to be very
coutious in finding out the true seat of the pain, that so he may not put the
Patient to unnecessary torment. And therefore he must with his forefinger feel
so long upon or about the place, where the Patient complains of most pain,
until by the Patients greatest sense he do find out the true place; which, to
avoid all mistake, he must touch again and again, and then perform the
operation of Burning accordingly.

Q. Pray, Sir, inform me, Whether the people in China and Japan ar^ subject to
the Gout?

A. This evil raigns as well in those parts of the World, as in Europe, and
even among the Hottentots on the Cape of Good Hope.

Q. Do these Nations cure themselves and others of the Gout, surely and
speedily?

A. No, they do not, except it be casually: which may be wondered at.

Q. What Is the matter, seeing they have possessed this excellent means ^
Burning from immemorial times?

A. It Is not the want of a good remedy, but their stubborness, superstition and
perverse custom, th^^ they do not cure the Gout but by chance or good fortune.
For they have been taught indeed to burn in very many, but yet in certain
determined and prescribed places of the body; not being to be induced to
transgress those prescriptions, though the pain should require it. If then it
chances, that the Gout sits just in the place, where they are accustomed to
burn, it is cured; but if it happen to be seated one inch more or less from the
place prefixed, and call for the operation of Burning, they let the Patient
complain and cry out, and will not succor Nature where she needs it. And this
is the true cause, why they enjoy not that benefit against the Gout by this way
of Burning, as they might do.

Q. Is it then allowed and advisable to burn upon all places where the gouty
pain is seated, though there be Veins, Arteries and Nerves underneath?

A. Yes, without exception; forasmuch as this kind of Burning, being performed
after my prescription, cannot hurt these parts or vessels; yea it is beneficial,
by this burning to discharge the swollen veins and arteries of their damps: And
therefore the prescribed pellets may and must be burnt out just upon them; as
shall be more particularly directed hereafter in the Toothache.

Q. But now, the place being found out, is there nothing that may hinder the
Burning?

A* If there be any hair upon the place affected, that must be shaved off with
a rasor; in regard that the least hair impedes the Burning, because it keeps
the ^ine pellet from perfectly touching the skin.

Q. Is there nothing else in the way?

A. If the place, where the Burning is to be made, be fatty or moist, that
satness and moistness must be taken away, and the place duly cleansed and
dried: That done, put the little pellet upon the right place, and there burn
it, repeating it so often till the gouty pain be gone.

Q. But how may it best be known, what effect this Burning has produced?

A. The Patient will soon find that by the diminution of the pain and of the
inflammation, and the Master, that administers, must, (if the Burning have been
made upon an ordinary place of any tender limb, to three, four or five times
successively,) press with his forefinger hard upon the Escar, to learn whether
the dolorifick gouty matter be wholly drawn out or not, which the Patient is
with freedom to declare, if he means to be fully cured, and not in part: For,
if he deceives the Master, he most deceives and wrongs himself.

Q. If the pain with three pellets be quite removed, as commonly it is, will it
be necessary to trouble him with any more?

A. By no means.

Q. But in case the Patient, contrary to expectation, should out of tenderness
and effeminacy, in the burning of the first pellet, which causes most pain,
cry out and grow impatient, what then?

A. The Master in that case is not to mock or laugh at him, but only show a
cheerful countenance, and entertain the Patient with a discourse of the
excellency of the remedy, of the shortness of the time that the operation will
last, and of the number of persons that have been cured thereby.

Q. But pray tell me, Sir, what is the reason, that this Burning has been so
many years hid from us Europeans, whereas it has been experienced for so vast
a time in those Indian Kingdoms, where it is so common, and is used for the
most part with great benefit?

A. This is to be imputed to the carelessness and conceitedness of the
Europeans, because having so good an opinion of themselves, they are ashamed to
learn any good thing from those Pagans; as if they alone were possessed of all
knowledge, and those Nations had no share at all in it: Without which conceit
and negligence, this excellent remedy might have been long before communicated
to these parts of the World.

CHAP. XIII.
Treating of the mischiefs, inconveniences, and dangers of the Burning misused.
Q. BUT, may any ill be occasioned by this Burning?

A. There may; and even in Japan, China, and other places, considerable
mistakes are committed in the Use of this Burning, whereby some, using it
without fear or wit, do cause not only grievous and fistulous wounds, but also
lameness of limbs.

Q. Pray, explain to us more particularly, how these evils proceed from this
Burning misused?

A. To be short, when, after the manner of some Japoneses, the Burning is made
too much and too deep, without due regard had to the places to which the
Burning is to be applied: Whence it comes to pass, that Nature being unable
without help to cast off the Escar (which is great and thick) the purulent
matter remains within, and eating in from time to time, causes a deep
ulceration downwards.

Q. What danger is there of lameness, in case of imprudent Burning?

A. When he that performs the operation, burns the Nerves and Ligaments too
hard, that may easily occasion convulsions of limbs and lameness: Which evil
yet needs not to be feared (no more than that abovementioned,) if you employ a
good Master, or follow my prescription.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Serous swellings of the Gout, bred by accident, and the Cure of them.
Q. OF what matter do these Swellings consist?

A. Of a Serous matter, pervaded with saltness, mostly caused by accident
through pain; being of little danger, and not troublesome to cure; especially
in or about the Joints of the limbs, in which these aqueous tumors are very
easily bred by pain.

Q. It seems, you make no great matter of the cure of these swellings, which
yet Physicians count very troublesome to cure, knowing that they are not to use
any repercussive means in this case?

A. 'This serous humor cannot be better discharged than by our way of Burning;
and that is so sure and safe, that no body ever needs to apprehend from these
swellings any ill, much less incurable nodes or knots, forasmuch as by our
Burning the humor and other feculent matter evaporates, whereby also the part
affected is strengthened, and preserved from all putridness.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Nodes and Stony Tumors, and their Cure.
Q. WHence arises that Stony or Chalky hard swelling in the external parts?

A. From the faeces or sediment of the serous swelling; as has been taught in
the Symptoms of the Gout.

Q. Is there a difference to be made between these hard Tumors?

A. There is; for there is a great difference between a Schirrus that is
hardened, unmovable and indolent, and such an one as is but coming on, and not
yet hardened.

Q. Are both these kinds curable?

A. The first yields to no remedies; the other is best and soonest cured by our
Burning, whereby it is fully discharged, without any relics remaining behind.

Q. Have you experience hereof.

A. I had a notable one in our chief Surgeon, Francis de Ray, a very skilful
Master, who in his Art had served our East India Company near 30 years. He was
exceedingly tormented by the Gout, and got a Schirrhus upon the forepart on
his right hand, which though it took not quite away the Use of the hand, yet
did very much disable and weaken it by a notable intumescence; which being by
my advice burnt and so opened, was in a little time perfectly cured; the matter
of the Schirrus, thence discharged, white like mixed chalk, which the Patient
himself took up with a Spatula, and having laid it on a paper, showed it me,
being dried; whereupon his hand was so strengthened, that he could use it at
pleasure. In like manner the same person freed himself from such another
imperfect Schirrus, seated upon the great Joint of the great Toe on his left
foot.

Q. When, I pray, is the best time to perform this Burning on the head of the
imperfect Schirrus?

A. Then when the Gout returns again to the schirrous part; which very easily
comes to pass in those that are much subject to the Gout; for, in following
this Prescript, you kill two Birds with one stone, and cure at the same time
the Gout and the Schirrus.

Q. Will not this Burning mollify and cure a perfect Schirrus?

A. I have not tried this hitherto; mean time I trust, there are means to be
found, if not totally, yet in part to remove this evil.

Q. What then think you to be most advisable in this case?

A. To open, (as often is done and must be done) the skin, and to take out the
matter of the Schirrus as far as is possible, and that done, to heal up with my
Coridons or Leaf-plaisters the skin as well as you can.

Q. But then, if this should succeed well, can you preserve the place thus
weakened from a new afflux of humors?

A. I think, I can and that after this manner: If the Schirrus were, for
example, upon the knuckle of the forefinger, I would then duly burn the limb
under it on the hand, and thereby intercept all ill humors, and so keep them
from flowing to the weak part.

Q. But what, if that should fail you, and the Gout surprise the limb with a
new afflux of humors?

A. Then should I resolve to hinder those humors from coagulation and
induration by the advantage of our Bruning remedy; by which means you may at
least take away the disfigurements, which these nodes cause in the limbs, if
you cannot restore the use of the limbs.

Q. It seems, you have some hopes even of the last?

A. I have, because I know, that the nodes do lodge not in the very Joints, but
about them; and being discharged one way or another, it is found that the Joints
are free, provided only that the veins and arteries, yea the nerves too, be not
so obstructed by the bigness, hardness and diuturnity of this stony tumor, that
the pervasion of the Blood and Animal spirits cannot by fit means be restored;
in which case the limb must needs remain stiff.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether there be different sorts of the Gout, and an Essential difference
betwixt them?
Q. ARE not almost all Physicians of opinion, that there are different kinds of
the Gout, essentially dissering from one another; or at least, that there is
the Cold and the Hot Gout?

A. They are; but they mistake, being misled by the external Symptoms: For, all
Gout arises from cold, dry, and malign damps.

Q. But yet the Gout may be distinguished?

A. It may, in diverse respects, and principally, First, in respect of the Limb
it seizes on; whence are the names of Chiragra, Sciatica, Podagra, etc.
Secondly, in respect of the quantity, and quality, grossness or subtilty of the
Gouty matter, more or less malignity; whence proceed the denominations of the
Running and Fixed, Young and Old, Adventitious and Hereditary Gout. Thirdly, in
respect of the greater or less afflux of humors. Fourthly, the Gout is either
with nodes, or without nodes. Fifthly, there is a Gout which is seated in or
about the Joints, and another (though that be rarely perceived) which lodges it
self in the midst of the limbs: And this is to be noted against all those, who
will not acknowledge such a Gout for any Gout; which is a great mistake, and no
longer tolerable, because Experience teaches us otherwise.

CHAP. XVII.
Means useful to prevent the Gout.
Q. WHat general means do you think to be good to prevent the Gout?

A. These following: First, you must beware of windy meat and drink. Secondly,
you must avoid great and violent commotions of the mind, especially the passion
of anger. Thirdly, neither must you put your body into too violent motions and
exercises, nor afflict it with nightwakes. Fourthly, you must take continual
care to keep your body soluble, and to prevent costiveness, nor to remove the
same too suddenly. Fifthly, it is beneficial, to take a gentle Vomitive after
your meal, once a week. Sixthly, as soon as you perceive any signs of a Fever
(the mother of the Gout,) then is it proper to take a sudorifick, by the advice
of some experienced Physician, to open the pores, and to promote evaporation.
Eighthly, since that many of the chief Physicians forbid wine to Gouty persons,
as if it were poison to them; (though Sennertus is not so peremptory therein,
but that he allows even to those that actually are in a gouty fit, a cup of
good and sincere Rhinish wine, especially if the Patient cannot forbear it:) I
see no reason in the World, why these Patients should be so quite debarred this
strengthening and cordial liquor, (wine,) as in and after the fit; especially if
it be a good conditioned wine. And my opinion is, that such a wine is so far
from being noxious, that it is beneficial to them, for many reasons, which Van
Helmont alleges at large in his Book of Fevers; whose judgment I cannot but
subscribe to in this matter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Toothache or the Gout of the Teeth, and the Cure thereof
Q. IS there also a Gout of the teeth; for I have been informed by Dr.
Wilhelmus de Ryne, who lately is arrived here, that there is published a
treatise in Europe, entitled, of the Gout of the Teeth?

A. Thus is very properly expressed that kind of toothache, which has the same
proximate Cause with the Gout, and arises from cold Damps, as the Gout does,
which otherwise, according to the common opinion is bred from Desluxions.

Q. But seriously, do you think, that the Gout and Toothache come from the same
Cause?

A. It Is certain to me (whatever some may alledg to the contrary,) that the
next cause, the part afflected, the seat, the ways, the signs and symptoms are
the same in these distempers, and do agree together.

Q. Is then the Cure of the Toothache to be performed after the same manner as
of the Gout?

A. By no means, the Toothache is to be cured in another place, because that
the place, where the pain has its seat here, is within the mouth and the
teeth, where you cannot come to burn with our Moxa?

Q. Would you then have the Temporal Artery opened with a lancet, (this seeming
to be the way by which the evil damp may be expelled out of the teeth;) as some
has ventured to do, to the great ease of the pain?

A. This means is too dangerous, because it is very subject to occasion an
Aneurisma, and spends too much of the vital spirits.

Q. What do you say then of scarification in the neck or upon the shoulders; or
of purging, or of blood-letting?

A. These and the like remedies seldom give ease.

Q. Would you have then the aching Tooth pulled out?

A. Not at all; that way being a desperate one, and not only accompanied with
great pain and mischief to the poor Patient, but also occasioning many evils,
and even death it self. But take me right, I pray; for I here only speak of
that kind of Toothache, which is above described, not of that which comes from
the Rottenness of teeth.

Q. What then, may we follow Spigelius, whole manual operation Scultetus
mentions in the 18th of his Chirurgical Observations; who with his knife,
heated red-hot, did cut off that little branch of the temporal artery which
runs through the Ear to the teeth; by which means the pain presently vanished
and never returned.

A. It Is true, that Scultetus speaks with great commendation of this device,
calling it a Chirurgical remedy of wonderful virtue; which the Author has
first practiced upon himself, and afterward, in Scultetus his presence, upon
others (always with good success:) And this has been further improved by
others: For whereas Spigelius made use of a red-hot knife, to cut off the said
little branch on the outside of the Ear; others have used a little flat
cauterising Iron, in a silver case, that they might go safely, and not burn
deeper than was fit; and therewith they have burnt off and seared within the
Ear, the same ramification of the Carotid Artery, with the like happy success:
As I my self have experienced 26. or 28. years ago at Arnheim, where Dr. N.
Coets did, by this means, immediately free me from an intolerable toothache. I
have also understood here in India from very credible Persons, that D.
Godefridus Dellius, Minister at Kooten near Wyck of Durstede, has cured many
of that pain by this very means.

Q. Since this is so excellent and effectual a remedy, shall we then stand by
it, or is there something to be said against it?

A. So there is; and to deal plainly with you, it ought to yield to a better
remedy, viz. to our burning with Moxa, the which in the Gout of the Teeth
serves not only for a discharging but also for a revulsive intercepting remedy,
which always produces good (if used according to my prescript) and never the
least evil. For, whereas by the former way, of using the red-hot knife and the
cautery, the body loses one of the necessary and the nobler kind of
blood vessels, to the detriment and spoiling of the teeth; by our way those
vesels are preserved entire and unhurt. It Is true indeed, that the pain of the
teeth by the former art is so removed as that it never returns (in case that
whole branch be burnt off;) but this is also true, that by such a cauterising
operation there is for ever cut off that afflux of the blood and vital spirits,
through this seared artery, to the teeth; whereupon at last must follow an
exiccation and mortification of the teeth.

Q. Since then you prefer your burning with Moxa before all other remedies in
the Toothache also, pray, teach me, where it is to be applied?

A. Just upon the temporal artery, where the same in the Temples, not far from
the Ear, beats strongest in a violent Toothache; which is that place where
Chirurgians are wont to apply their Mastick-plaisters, etc.

Q. But is the burning with Moxa upon the temporal arteries not too dangerous?

A* Not at all, if your work be done carefully; yea it is a means very
beneficial, and has been practiced by the father Physicians, of Hippocrates
himself.

Q. After what manner then is this Burning to be performed; must it be done as
in the case of the Gout?

A. Just so; only you must in this case Kindle lesser pellets, and these to the
number of three upon one place, and no more; though it be not forbidden, at
some little distance from the burned place to perform anew the like burnning;
which may be done not only without fearing the least mischief from it, but also
with an expectation of more ease.

Q. Is this Burning followed by a Mitigation or by a Removal of the pain?

A. It performs both, in an admirable manner, and that instantly, or presently
after, without fail; unless, unknown to the Patient and Operator, the Toothache
should proceed from a hidden rottenness of the Teeth.

Q. But, Sir, how will you make it out, that this is a revulsive and
intercepting remedy, and withal discharging the part affected from the evil
which afflicts it?

A. This is as clear as the Sun at noonday, and that from the effects: For the
Damps, which were already by the expelling power of the Heart driven out into
the place that is between the membrane and the teeth, and there produced so
great pain by the expanding of the sensible membrane, are by this our Burning
drawn back to the place where the Burning is made, and other Damps intercepted
that were on the way, and so the body, according to wish, disburthen'd from
both, and the blood purified.

Q. Mean time the learned Sennertus says, that the true means duly to purge
the blood has not yet been found out: Is that true?

A. It is; for the ways hitherto found out to purify the blood do not deserve
that name. For, the matter being well considered, they do something else than
discharge the blood of its impurities: And I am of opinion, that unto this very
time there has been found out no better means for that purpose than what we
here propose; forasmuch as thereby the Blood is suddenly and most safely purged
of all noxious damps.

Q. What is to be done after the Burning for the Toothache?

A. After this slight Burning there remains only a little gray speck, which
needs not to be looked after, because it dries and heals up of it self, and
serves till then for a vent to the evaporating damps.

AN APPENDIX Concerning Three Remarkable OBSERVATIONS.
OBSERVE. I.
About the Removal of the Falling Sickness by our way of Burning with Moxa.
IAcobus Jonas, about 13 years of age, Son of Jonas Aertz, who was chief
Surgeon in the Hospital of the Noble Company in Batavia, having taken a
fancy (against his Fathers command) to see the sad and dismal agonies of dying
persons in a place where desperate and incurable persons were lodged, did upon
a Sunday morning see one of those give up the ghost in so affrightful a manner
under such terrible convulsions, that being more than usually terrified
therewith, he could not forbear to speak of it at Table with amazement: At
which relation his Father being much troubled, did severely rebuke him for so
dangerous a curiosity, strictly commanding him, never to repair to that place
again, from an apprehension, least one time or other he should rue such a
curiosity. But behold! The boy laying himself down upon a bench after dinner,
to take (as it is common in that place) a nap in the afternoon, there appeared
to him (as he related afterward) in a dream that fearful departure of the
dead, so lively to his fancy, that in a fright he awakened, crying out a loud,
and, seized on with a terrible fit of the Epilepsy. To which distemper he
remained a great while subject, and in such a manner, that upon the least
disturbance he fell into new fits, of which his Father was not able by any of
the means by him employed to free him. This did so grieve the good old man,
that in all likelihood it contributed not a little to his hasty death.

It happened, that upon occasion I visited the widow of this Surgeon, where
seeing this Youth halting, I asked what the cause of it was. He showing me a
swelling above his left knee, accompanied with grievous pains; I was apt to
conclude that it was a Gouty distemper, and resolved, thereupon, with the
consent of the parties concerned, to treat it as such; employing my way of
burning, which I did with three pellets consumed on one place: whereupon all
pain being vanished, the youth instantly walked without any inconvenience. I
put upon it a Coridons plaster, and ordered him to renew it twice in 24 hours.
And since that time he never had any fit of the Falling Sickness; doubtless
because that the venomous Damps, which caused this grievous distemper, had been
evaporated our of the body, or rather had been thence drawn out by the Moxa.
And it is observable, that (according to the relation made me by the Lad's
Mother,) this Damp never caused in him a fit of the Falling Sickness, till it
had first for a while tormented the place abovementioned, no otherwise as if
it had been the Gout. Now, when this peccant matter did ascend from the knee to
the Head (which usually fell out every sixth or eighth day,) it was attended
with a sensible Cold in the passage of this Damp, yet acting so slowly, that
the Youth had time enough to give warning to his Mother of a new sit, that so
she might take the better care of him.

OBSERVE. II.
Concerning the Cure of a Mad Female-Slave, by the Burning with Moxa.
URsula, one of our Female-slaves* being sent out to buy some fish for our
family, and come to the place where the Fishermen use to be with their boats,
and having seen one of them arrived with fish, she stepped over several of those
boats to get into that, where she might buy. Which having done, and stepping
back again over those boats to shore, she was frighted at the sudden and
unexpected sight of a drowned Humane body, she had stepped over, that had been
brought up to be viewed by the appointed Officer. Which fright did so seize
her, that she fell down and quite fainted away. But being somewhat recovered,
she was brought home with the fish in her hand, but out of her wits; which the
same night was followed by such a fit of Madness, that at first we knew not
what to do. But having recollected our selves, we resolved to send for the
Guinam-Doctress, to hear her advice, since she had so succesfully cured me of
the Gout. She came the next morning, and being well informed of the
circumstances of this ease, and demanded whether she knew any remedy for it,
she answered, That she would use her Art, and hoped God would bless her
operation. What does she? She bids the other slaves that were present to hold
this poor she-slave fast, and binds the hair of her head close together, into a
knot; which done, she makes one of the most robust slaves to hold that
hair-knot with his hand, and to turn the Patient's head which way she, (the
Doctress) would have it. Whereupon she began to burn with her Moxa close under
the hair, from the forepart of the head unto the neck* and from the neck again
to the forepart, round about; performing this so artificially and gently, that
hardly any mark could be perceived: Whereupon this poor mad creature, to the
admiration of us all, fell into a sweet sleep, of which she awakened toward
evening in very good health and in her right wits, without ever after relapsing
into that grievous fit of madness again; it being now about Ten years since her
recovery.

OBSERVE. III.
Touching a Strange Catalepsis or Stiffness cured by the Moxa.
ONe of our she-slaves, which my Wife had lent to our chief Surgeon William
Persant (who a little while* before had married one of my daughters,) was about
evening, as she was at work without doors upon the wall, suddenly surprised
with this distemper, so that in a trice she became as stiff as a statue,
without any hearing, seeing, speaking, or moving any limb. The said Surgeon
having tried upon her the utmost of his skill to no purpose, and I being made
acquainted with the condition of this wretched slave, my Wife and Son, upon my
desire, went immediately to her, and according to my direction burned her upon
the Arteries of her temples: Which was no sooner done, but she recovered the
use of her senses and the Motion of all her limbs, and she enjoys to this very
day a good state of health.

I conclude with the advice of the never too much celebrated Nicolaus Tulpius,
in the first Book of his Medical Observations, chap. 8. where he says, You
Chirurgions, take good notice of the wholesome Use of Causticks; it shall turn
to your Credit, and to the Benefit of your Patients.

FINIS.

