The Privilege of our SAINTS In the business of PERJURY. Useful for
GRAND-JURIES.
By the Author of HUDIBRAS.
THat Saints may claim a Dispensation
To Swear and Forswear on occasion,
I doubt not but it will appear
With pregnant light, the point is clear:
Oaths are but words, and words but wind,
Too feeble Implements to bind.
And Saints whom Oaths or Vows oblige,
Know little of their Privilege:
Further, I mean, than carrying on
Some self-advantage of their own:
For if the Devil, to serve his turn,
Can tell Truth, why the Saints should scorn
When it serves theirs, to Swear and Lie,
I think there is little reason why:
Else h'has a greater power than they,
Which 'twere Impiety to say.
We Are not commanded to forbear
Indefinitely, at all to Swear,
But to Swear idly and in vain,
Without Self-interest or Gain.
For breaking of an Oath, and Lying,
Is but a kind of Self-denying;
A Saint-like virtue, and from hence.
Some have broke Oaths by Providence:
Some, to the glory of the Lord
Perjured themselves, and broke their word;
And this the constant rule and practice
Of all our late Apostles Acts is.
Was not the Cause at first begun
With Perjury, and carried on?
Was there an Oath the Godly took,
But in due time and place they broke?
Did not our Worthies of the House,
Before they broke the Peace, break Vows?
For having freed us first from both
The Allegiance and Supremacy Oath,
Did they not next compel the Nation
To take and break the Protestation?
To take the Engagement and disclaim it,
Enforced by those who first did frame it?
Did they not Swear at first to Fight
For the Kings Safety and his Right?
And after marched to find him out,
And charged him home with Horse and Foot;
And yet still had the confidence
To swear it was in his Defense.
Did they not Swear to Live and Die
With Essex, and straight laid him by?
Did they not Swear to maintain Law,
In which that Swearing made a Flaw?
For Protestant Religion Vow,
Which did that vowing disallow?
For Privilege of Parliament,
In which that Swearing made a Rent?
And since, of all the three not one
Was left in being, it is well known.
Did they not Swear in express words,
To prop and back the House of Lords?
And after turned out the whole Houseful,
Of Peers as dangerous and unuseful?
This tells us plainly what they thought,
That Oaths and Swearing go for naught.
And that by them they were only meant
To serve for an expedient.
Oaths were not purposed more than Law,
To keep the Good and Just in awe,
But to confine the bad and sinful,
Like moral Cattle in a Pinfold.
A Saint's of the heavenly Realm a Peer;
And as no Peer is bound to Swear,
But on the Gospel of his Honor,
Of which he may dispose as owner;
It follows though the thing be forgery,
And false, they affirm it is no Perjury,
But a mere ceremony, and a breach
Of nothing, but a form of speech,
And goes for no more when it is took,
Than mere saluting of the Book.
Suppose the Scriptures are of force,
They Are but Commissions of course,
And Saints have freedom to digress,
And vary from 'em as they please,
Or mis-interpret them by private
Instructions to all Aims they drive at;
Then why should we ourselves abridge,
And curtail our own Privilege?
It Is the temptation of the Devil
That makes all humane actons evil:
For Saints may do the same things by
The Spirit in sincerity,
Which other men are tempted to,
And at the Devils instance do;
And yet the action be contrary,
Just as the Saints and Wicked vary.
But as on Land there is no Beast,
But in some Fish at Sea's expressed,
So in the Wicked there is no Vice,
Of which the Saints have not a spice;
And yet that thing that is pious in
The one, in the other is a sin.
Is It not ridiculous and nonsense
A Saint should be a slave to Conscience?
That ought to be above such Fancies
As far, as above Ordinances.
The Rabbis write, when any Jew
Did make to God or Man a Vow,
Which afterward he found untoward,
And stubborn to be kept, or too hard,
Any three other Jews of the Nation
Might free him from the Obligation;
And have not two SS -- power to use
A greater privilege than three Jews?
The Court of Conscience which in man,
Should be supreme and sovereign;
Is It fit should be subordinate
To every petty Court in the State,
And have no power at all, nor shift
To help it self at a dead lift?
Why should not Conscience have Vacation,
As well as other Courts of the Nation?
Have equal power to Adjourn,
Appoint Appearance and Return?
Do not your Juries give their Verdict
As if they felt the Cause not heard it?
And as they please make matter of Fact
Run all on one side as they are packt.
When each man Swears to do his best
To Damn and Perjure all the rest,
And bids the Devil take the hinmost,
Which at this Race is like to win most.
Nature has made man's breast no windores
To publish what he does within doors,
Nor what dark Secrets there inhabit,
Unless his own rash Folly blab it.
If Oaths can do a man no good,
In his own business, why they should
In other matters do him hurt,
I think there is little reason for it:
He that imposes an Oath makes it,
Not he that for convenience takes it:
Then how can any man be said
To break an Oath he never made?
These reasons may perhaps look odly
To the Wicked, though they evince the Godly
For if we should defend the Cause
By the strict Rule of Gospel-Laws,
And only do what they call just,
The Cause would quickly fall to dust.
This we among our selves may speak,
But to the wicked or the weak
We must be cautious to declare
Perfection Truths, such as these are.
London, Printed for Benj. Took, 1681.


