ADVERTISEMENT.
There is (...) Printed a Book Entitled, A Treatise of the Holy Trinunity, in
two Parts: The First asserteth the Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit,
in the Unity of Essence with God the Father. The Second in Defense of the
former, answers the chiefest Objections made against this Doctrine. By I. M.

Chap. I. THe Case is briefly stated.

Chap. II. Shows that there is but one God, the Creator and Former of all
things.

Chap. III. Asserteth a Plurality of Divine Subsistences.

Chap. IV. Of the Father.

Chap. V. Proves the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. By his Names. 2. That
God in the Old Testament in diverse Places is Christ in the New. 3. By seven
particular Texts of Holy Scriptures. 4. That Christ pre-existed his Incarnation
in his Divine Nature, and is no Angel incarnate, but is Coeternal with the
Father. 5. His Deity is proved by his Works. And 6. By Divine Worship given to
him.

Chap. VI. Proves the Deity of the Holy Ghost. 1. That he is a Divine Person.
2. His Deity is asserted from several Texts of Scripture. 3. By his Works. 4.
By Divine Worship given to him.

Chap. VII. Proves the Unity of the Holy Trinity.

Chap. VIII. Contains some Explications of the Holy Trinunity. 1. Of the
Essential Being of God. 2. Of the Divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit. 3. Of the Distinctions of the Divine Nature and the Persons, and
some Shadows by way of Comparison of the incomparable and inconceivable Being
of God, and of the Union of Christ's two Natures.

PART II.
Chap. I. Answers Objections against the Scriptural Proofs of Christ's Deity.

Chap. II. Answers to Objections drawn from several Texts of Scriptures.

Chap. III. Answers to several Arguments against the Deity of Christ.

Chap. IV. Answers to several Objections against the Scriptures, that prove the
Deity of the Holy Ghost.

Chap. V. Answers to some Objections drawn from diverse Scriptures to disprove
the Deity of the Holy Spirit.

Chap. VI. Answers to some Scriptures from whence our Adversaries assert that
the Father only is the true God. With a general Answer and Conclusion. Price
bound one Shilling.

A REPLY TO Doctor Wallis, HIS DISCOURSE Concerning the Christian SABBATH.

By THO. BAMPFIELD.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Fabian, at the Bible in Cheapside, near
Bread-street End, 1693.

A REPLY TO Dr. WALLIS's DISCOURSE, Concerning the Christian Sabbath.
SIR,
A Little after the Printing the Enquiry, Whether the Lord Jesus Christ made
the World, and be Jehovah, and gave the Moral Law? And whether the Fourth
Command be Repealed or Altered? There was Reprinted a Tract of Mr. Chafies, on
the Fourth Command, I think, as Answer to that part of the Enquiry, which
referred to the Fourth Command; and then another by one Mr. G. T. both which I
had no sooner Examined, but another was Published by John Wallis, D. D.

Which Discourse of the Doctor's, as containing the strength of what is said
for the First Day, I hold my self principally concerned to consider.

I find the Doctor p. 1. would not on the account of the Day, whether the
Seventh or the First, give any Disturbance to the Peace or Practice of the
Church where he Lives, so that a Sabbath be duly observed, though perhaps not
upon what Day he should choose.

What Day he would choose, I know not, but hope it would be the Day the Lord
has Chosen and Blessed.

But the Question is not, what Day he would choose to rest upon, but what day
we ought to choose, and I am willing to hope he would choose that Day, which
after the best Judgment I can make upon his Book, I think, is the Seventh Day,
and that he means that Day, by that, otherways Doubtful Expression.

And I think the Word is the Rule of Worship, etc. And not the Practice of the
Church where we live.

Nor know I certainly what Church may be meant, for that he and I live in an
Age, wherein there are variety differing a little from one another, nor am I
willing to disturb the true Peace of the Churches of Christ; but if in any
thing they be defective in their Judgment, or Practice, their Peace lies in
their returning to their Obedience, which is better than Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.
22.

And till the Lord bring that about, I see little likelihood the Sabbath should
be duly observed, or have the full Blessing bestowed on it, which is annexed to
it.

Nor do I think the true Sabbath is so hard to be found as he supposes, to whom
I may say as Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. This
Commandment is not hid from thee, neither is it far off; It Is not beyond the
Seas that we should need to go round the Earth to fetch it, (as the Dr. p. 79.
pleasantly advises) but the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth, and in
thine Heart, that thou may do it.

He says also, p. 1. That he does not know whether Sunday be a first or second,
a third or a seventh Day, in a continual Circulation of Weeks from the
Creation, or from Christ's time; and if so, he is at a great uncertainty, and I
do not wonder if he be yet to choose his Day; which Expressions in his first
Page, may give some Light to state this Question, for if he does not know from
Christ's time, which Day of the Week Sunday, as he calls it, is, I see very
little reason why he should observe it.

He adds, And what it is impossible for him to know, he thinks will be no Cirme
to be ignorant of; and if he do not know what Day of the Week Sunday is, and
much more if it be impossible for him to know it, I see no reason at all why he
should write a Book for the Observation of a Day impossible for him to know.

All the Christian and Hebrew Churches in the World, I think, are agreed, that
Sunday is the first Day of the Week, which Day I presume by the rest of his
Book, the Doctor observes, and if we be right in that (as I think we are) that
Sunday is the first Day, it will be no great Task by telling seven, to resolve
which is the seventh Day.

But notwithstanding the impossibility for him to know what Day of the Week
Sunday is, he is sufficiently satisfied that we ought to keep a Sabbath, and so
am I, and I think we may be sufficiently certain, which is the seventh Day in
the weekly Circulation, and am willing to observe that Blessed and Sanctified
Day and Time, which I think is the Lord's Day, and not changed, and so not hard
to be found.

And I do not think God has left the stress of a Point, whereon his Public
Worship does somewhat depend, upon a thing impossible for us to know; by his
Word and Works, he can make this plain to all.

First, I agree with him, that the place of Worship under the Gospel, p. 2. is
not so material, whether this, or that, John 4. 21, 23. 1 Timothy 2. 8. God is a
Spirit, and his true worshippers did, do, and shall worship him in spirit and
in truth. And I know no color now for the Holiness of Places, for which yet
(as the Dr. p. 3.) some are zealous.

I agree with him that Christmas is of Human Institution, which I think he
admits by the words, so be it, p. 3. which I think does also lay aside all
other Holy Days, which are but of Human Institution; and p. 13. about Christmas
the Doctor says, It is not agreed amongst Chronologies, either what Year, or
what Month, much less what day of that Month our Savior was Born, yet (he
says) we keep December the 25th, in memory of his Birth, as supposing him to
have been then Born: And p. 45. he says, No Man at this Day knows what Day it
was, and p. 13. That we are at so great uncertainty, as we reckon the Year 1692
from his Circumcision to begin the first of January, and the same Year his
Conception not till the 25th of March after; as if his Birth and Circumcision
had been a quarter of a Year before his Conception: And so the Doctor leaves
those days, If I mistake not, utterly uncertain.

In p. 12. he tells us, The Pascal Tables which should direct us what day to
keep Easter on, do put us further out then if we had none at all.

I agree with the Doctor, p. 2, and 3. that our Lord Jesus Christ according to
his Divinity was God, and is so, the true God, the God that made Heaven and
Earth, the God who delivered the Law at Mount Synai, and I think those three,
the father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, are on Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 5.
Jehovah Aelohenu, Jehovah our Mightiest, is Jehovah Aechad, is one Jehovah,
was, is, and will be one Jehovah, (i. e.) the Lord our God, is one Lord, and
Mark 12. 29, 30. The Lord our God, is one Lord, which are the words of Jesus.

And I agree also, that the Blessing and Sanctifying the seventh Day, Genesis 2.
3. was by Jehovah, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, which goes far in
this Question, and I think proves the seventh Day to be the Lord's Day.

And when he has acknowledged the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit to be three,
yet but one God, the Lord Jehovah, etc. he adds, p. 3. But he cannot agree that
Christ, as God, and Man, (in Contradistinction to the Father, and Holy Spirit)
did all those things, for he that is Christ, was not then Man.

Which Words of the Doctor, of what he does agree, and what he cannot agree,
insinuates, as if I had said, that Christ as God-Man did all those things,
which the Doctor cannot agree, whereas he must needs know that is not so, for I
neither say, nor ever thought (till that I read it in Mr. G. T. and the Doctor)
that Christ was Incarnate at the making of the World, or at his giving of the
Law on Sinai; so as the Doctor has not well surmized in this, and any Reader
may see it is not so; for Christ took our Nature on him about 4000 years after
the Creation; and I find not a word of any Contradistinction between the Father
and the Holy Spirit, and the Son in the Enquiry, but the direct contrary, viz.
their oneness with the Son in those Works, which they both cannot but know.

And he adds, p. 3. what he should rather say about our Lord Jesus Christ's
blessing the seventh Day, because he was not then the Lord Christ, (God and
Man) etc. seems to make the Surmize somewhat worse, upon which he says, that I
p. 64. lay great stress) for neither I, nor any other that I know, has said or
thought, that Christ, when he Blessed the seventh Day was then in the Flesh, so
that in this I think the Doctor blamable.

But the Doctor does acknowledge that the Son is Jehovah, (i. e.) that he is
Lord; for which see Enquiry, p. 9. 10. etc. and I think he does believe that
the Son of God is Jesus, that is, the Savior, the only Savior, and that he is
Christ, that is, the anointed for that Glorious Blessed Work of Redemption,
that is, the Messiah, he is called, as I think, often in the Old Testament.

For the Father has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the World, in
him, that is, in the Lord Jesus Christ, and our Lord Jesus Christ, as Christ,
is expressly named, Ephesians. 1. 2, 3, 4.

And in Colos. 1. 16. speaking of Christ, as he by whom all things were
created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth: v. 17. and he is before all
things, he, that is, Christ, is expressly Colos. 1. 2, 3. there named the Lord
Jesus Christ, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who v. 19. created all things; and
Christ is named our Lord Jesus Christ in every Epistle from Romans to the Heb.
(for so far I searched a little) and that frequently, and sometime after also.

Mr. G. T. (whom the Doctor in this Objection seems to follow) writes of this
great Mystery in two or three places under the like and greater mistakes, and
so at present I leave him. But for the Doctor to impose upon his Readers
herein, as he does p. 2, 3. seems blameable.

And why he thus begins in a Case which relates to the Deity of Christ with
such Insinuations, for which he has no color, that I know, from the Enquiry,
wherein Christ's Deity and his being Jehovah is directly affirmed, unless it be
at first to infuse some Prejudice, I am not willing to conjecture.

And as to this, if the Holy Spirit by Paul, names Christ the Lord Jesus
Christ, and our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the Father has chosen his, before
the foundation of the world, by whom all things were created, and who was
before all things. I see no reason why Mr. G. T. and the Doctor should vary
from the Apostles expressions, and diverse other Scriptures. And such Artifices
the Reader may discern afterward.

I agree also with the Doctor, That God who made the world in six days, rested
the seventh day, Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 20. 11. And that he blessed the sabbath
day, and hallowed (or Sanctified) it, Doctor p. 3. and here he does read it,
not a seventh, bue the seventh Day; the same Hebrew word here in Genesis 2. 2, and
3. Hashebigni, which is used in Exodus 20. 10, 11. which some would render there
a seventh; and the Reason and Sense of Genesis 2. 2, and 3. does require, that it
be rendered as the word signifies, the Seventh Day, for no man (that I know)
does imagine that the Lord, Genesis 2. 2, and 3. Blessed and Sanctified any other
Day of the Week for Rest, but that only, on which he Rested, and that was
expressly not a, but the Seventh, and no other day of the Week; and so I think,
for all after Seventh days in the Circulation of after Weeks, and Christ in the
time of his Incarnation kept not a Sabbath, but the Sabbath, and surely he
understood his own Institution, and was not mistaken in the Day.

And the Doctor p. 4. says, The Words he Blessed and Sanctified it, may be a
strong Intimation for Mankind ever after to observe the Seventh day, etc. But
(he says) is not expressly said: And that the Seventh day Blessed and
Sanctified, Genesis 2. 2, and 3. is not only a strong Intimation, as the Doctor,
but does include the Seventh day of every Week afterward in a continual
Succession, or Circulation of Days; and Weeks, I think, is proved by the Words
of Blessing, and Sanctifying, or making Holy the Seventh day (which are
comprehensive Words) and from Exodus 20. 10, 11. as that day of every Week which
Men were and are to remember to keep Holy. And God's Sabbatizing on the Seventh
day, was, as I think, that Man might keep the Sabbath day in the continual
Circulation of Weeks in a Spiritual Rest.

And in this Scripture Genesis 2. 2. we have the Foundation for the Seventh day
Sabbath, where the Words are, And on the seventh day God had ended his work
which he had made, and he rested, or sabbatized on the seventh day, from all
his work which he had made, Heb. 4. 4. Where it is said, he spoke of the
Seventh day in this wise, and God did rest the seventh day from all his works
and Elohim blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he
had rested from all his works which God created and made, Genesis 2. 3. And from
God's Sabbatizing here, it is, That the seventh day is called the sabbath,
Exodus 20. 9. 11. And throughout the Old and New Testament, from the Heb. root
Shabath he kept Sabbath: And the Lords Blessing the Seventh day, Genesis 2. 3.
makes it a day of his distributing the greatest heavenly Blessings upon all
that obey his Voice,

And his Sanctifying the Seventh day, shows it to be Consecrated, and so
separated from all common Works, and earthly Employments, and shows it to be
Dedicated and Sanctified by him, to his Worship, as an Holy day, and as his day
( i. e.) the Lords day to be used in Holy Solemn Exercises of Religion as long
as the World lasts, till Believers come to that Sabbatism in Heaven, which
remains for the People of God, Heb. 4. 4, 8, 9.

And he that doubts the Seventh day, Genesis 2. 2, 3. does not include every
Seventh day in the continual Succession of Weeks, may see by comparing Exodus
20. that this Institution is not mentioned in Exodus 20. as then first given,
but as that which God had Instituted upon his creating the World, and the
keeping the weekly Sabbath, was as absolutely necessary for the Spiritual good
of those Believers, and others who lived in the first Ages of the World after
the Fall (and of Adam and Eve also if they had not fallen) as it is for us at
this day, to Contemplate his infinite Excellencies, and mighty Works.

And p. 3. from Genesis 2. 2, 3. and Exodus 20. 11. he does agree, that God has
appointed (after six days of ordinary Labor) Man should observe a Seventh day
of Holy rest, and this in a continual Succession, which I think goes far to
resolve this question, not a, but the Seventh day only being first instituted,
Genesis 2. and afterward observed as a Sabbath throughout the Scriptures.

And if he agrees (as he does p. 3.) that it was the Seventh day that was
Blessed and Sanctified, Genesis 2. 3. and that this is a clear and ancient
Testimony for the Holiness of time, as he does, then, till another Sanctified
Day of the Week, and another weekly time can be found which is Blessed and
Sanctified by the Lord; we are (for ought I can see) to rest or keep Sabbath
upon the Seventh day, as our Lord did, by whom we have no other weekly Day or
Time Consecrated, or observed as Holy, but only the Seventh day, and the
Doctor's opinion of the Holiness of this time has confirmed, and as I think
established my Thoughts of the Holiness of the Seventh-day Sabbath.

I agree also with him, that the Law of the Sabbath is one of the Ten Commands,
Exodus 20. and am not only willing to think (as the Doctor) but am satisfied it
was a Law before, and that not only because we find it observed Exodus 16.
before the Law given at Sinai, Exodus 20. (in which Exodus 16. 25, 26. the Seventh
day is called a Sabbath to the Lord, ( i. e.) the Lord's day) but especially
(as the Doctor acknowledges) for that Genesis 2. 3. God blessed the seventh day,
and sanctified it, because in it he rested from all his Work, and I do, with
the Doctor, think this a clear Testimony (and as ancient as the Creation) for
the Holiness of Time, ( i. e.) as far as I can possibly discern, for the
Holiness of the weekly Seventh day, for there was no other weekly Day then, or
since made Holy that we can find in the Word, but the Seventh day only) and
this alone will go very far to resolve and settle this question.

I agree also with the Doctor, that the Law of the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments, though then given to Israel, is binding to us also, p. 3. and 4.
And I think we have sufficient Evidence from the Scriptures, that the Sabbath
was observed from the Creation to the Flood, though he thinks in the short
History Moses gives of that time there be no mention made of such Observation
from the Creation to the Flood.

For First, on the Seventh day God ( Heb. Elohim) had ended his Work which he
had made, and he Sabbatized on the Seventh day from all his Work which he had
made, Genesis 2. 2.

The Example of God's keeping the first Seventh-day Sabbath, is one undeniable
Evidence of the Seventh-day Sabbath kept after the Creation. For Genesis 2. 1. The
heavens, and the earth, and all the Hosts of them, were finished before the
seventh day, and so the Seventh day was kept after the Creation, and before the
Flood.

A second Evidence is the same repeated, Genesis 2. 3. And God blessed the seventh
day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his Work
which he had Created and Made.

Which Repetition of God's resting the Seventh day, does strongly inculcate and
enforce our Duty, and certainly prove that God had rested the Seventh day after
the Creation, and before the Flood.

A third Evidence from the Case of Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. 3. And in process of
time Cain brought an offering to the Lord, and v. 4. Abel also brought his
offering.

In Process of Time, Heb. Mikketz Jammin, at the end of Days, or at the cutting
off of Days, Enquiry p. 23.

Which end, or cutting off of days, so far as God has revealed, seems to be
the end of the Days of the Week, when the reckoning of Days was cut off, and
after the Seventh day ended, they were to begin to reckon again, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and 'twas the Seventh day, the last day of the Week which before was
Blessed and Sanctified, when the Creation upon the six days was finished, which
Seventh day was the end of the days of the Week.

So as Cain (as bad as he was) and Abel, who obtained witness that he was
righteous, Heb. 11. 4. both (as I think) kept the Sabbath, Cain outwardly, but
Abel, no doubt, by that witness of his Righteousness, in an Holy, Spiritual,
and Heavenly manner, to whose offering the Lord had respect, Genesis 4. 4. but to
Cain's offering he had not respect: And if the Seventh day then ended the Week,
as it now does, and if none can tell us of any other end of days at that time,
I may thence infer, these offerings were at least very probably, if not
certainly, upon the Seventh-day Sabbath, and are a good Evidence for it.

And the Righteousness ascribed to Abel, Heb. 11. 4. surely does import his
Obedience to all Gods Wills then revealed, whereof the Seventh day was
eminently one, and Abel's sacrificing the Firstlings of his Flock was another,
Genesis 4. 4.

Which Offerings were Types of Christ, and proper for the Sabbath Day, which
Abel offered unto God by Faith, and was a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain's,
by which Abel obtained witness that he was Righteous, God testifying of his
Gifts, and by it, he being dead, and yet speaks, Heb. 11. 4. I think he yet
speaks to us, to be Righteous as he was, and to observe the Seventh day.

And that Abel was a Person obedient unto God in all things; we have the
Testimony of Christ, who calls him Righteous Abel, Matthew. 23. 35.

A fourth Evidence is from Genesis 5. 22. Enoch walked with God three hundred
years. And ver. 24. and Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took
him. Enquiry, p. 23. Which Enoch was a Prophet, and Jude 14. 15. Prophesied the
Lords coming to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that were
ungodly, Greek (...) all Corrupt, or all no Worshippers, thrice mentioned in
the 15 ver.

It Is true, those who do not Worship God, or do not Worship him aright, are
highly blameable; but the true Signification of the Greek word being from Alpha
privative, and (...), to Worship: the word (...) does tell us who they were
whom Enoch reproved, that is, such as did not Worship God at all, or not
according to his appointments, and does imply, that Enoch did Worship God
aright, or else how could Enoch convince others, if himself did not keep the
Blessed and Sanctified Day; and whether the word in Jude 14. and 15. do not
imply also that the rest of the then degenerated Posterity of Adam whom Enoch
reproved, did neglect the Blessed Day, seems as I conceive, very probable.

And these are Evidences for the Seventh-day Sabbath before the Flood.

At present I pass by Genesis 13. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10. Jashebeth, because by the
Points, it may be from the verb Jashab, he dwelt.

Evidences that after the Flood, the Sabbath was kept before the Law at Sinai.

Genesis 26. 2, 4. Enquiry p. 23. 24. the Lord appears to Isaac, and promises,
that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed, ver. 5.
Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my
statutes, and my laws. Blessing the Nations in his Seed, includes a promise of
Christ upon Abraham's Obedience.

How Abraham came to know all the Commandments, Statutes, and Laws, I know not
certainly.

It may be, they being implanted in Adam, who was created in Gods own Image,
Genesis 1. 26, 27. were taught down along from Adam in gracious Families, from
Father to Son, and so to Abraham.

And it may be also by special Revelation, but this is certain, that Abraham
knew these, how else could he keep or obey them; and it is certain he obeyed the
Lords voice, and kept his Commandments, and his Laws, and one eminent Voice and
Law of God was, Genesis 2. 2, 3. and God blessed the seventh day, and Sanctified
it.

And Abraham kept my Commandments, Genesis 26. 5. and in Exodus 16. 27, 28. how
long refuse ye to keep my commandments; the same Hebrew word with that Genesis 26.
5. and the Command which Israel brake, Exodus 16. 27, 28. Was that some of them,
upon the Seventh-day Sabbath went out to gather Manna, which they ought not to
have done; and so the Command which they brake, it seems was one of those which
Abraham kept.

And Genesis 26. 5. Abraham kept my Laws; and in Exodus 16. 4. The Lord to Moses, I
will rain bread from heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a
certain rate every day, that I may prove them whether they will walk in my Law,
or no; and Exodus 16* 27, 28. when some brake the Sabbath, and went out to
gather Manna on the seventh Day, the Lord says to Moses, How long refuse ye to
keep my laws: it is the same Hebrew word with that Genesis 26. 5. where the Lord
says, Abraham kept his Laws; and the Doctor does neither offer nor pretend that
Abraham brake the Sabbath.

Now if the Law broken by the Israelites, Exodus 16. 4, 28. were the
Seventh-day Sabbath, as it certainly was, then it is very likely one of the Laws
of God kept by Abraham, Genesis 26. 5. tho the Sabbath be not particularly there
named, was the Seventh-day Sabbath which the Israelites brake, Exodus 16. for we
have the same Hebrew word for both, so that it does appear by Genesis 26. 5. That
Abraham obeyed the Lords voice, and kept his commandments, and his laws; and I
see no good color to doubt it.

And he that says Abraham kept not the Sabbath, when God says Abraham kept his
Commands and his Laws, may as well deny that Abraham kept any other of the
Commands, or Laws of God; a Sixth is from Exodus 5. 5.

In Exodus 3. 18. the Lord to Moses, Say to the King of Egypt, the Lord God of
the Hebrews has met with us, and now let us go we beseech thee, three days
journey into the Wilderness that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God, (which
they could not freely do in Egypt) Exodus 8. 26.

Now Horeb (as Geographers observe) was, without hindrances, about three days
Journey from Egypt, concerning which Mountain, God foretold Moses, Exodus 3.
12. When thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God
upon this mountain.

Upon which Mountain the Law for the Sabbath was reinforced, Exodus 20. 8.

And in Exodus 4. 21, 23. The Lord to Moses, say unto Pharaoh, thus says the
Lord, Israel is my Son, and I say unto thee, let my Son go that he may serve me.

And Exodus 4. 29, 30, 31. When Aaron had spoken to the Israelites, all the
words which the Lord had spoken to Moses the people believed, and when they
heard that the Lord had visited the Children of Israel, and that he had looked
upon their Affliction, then they bowed their Heads, and worshipped; and it were
not hard to say, it is probable that Aarons preaching to them all the words the
Lord had spoken, and their worshipping was upon the Sabbath day, as will
further appear in Exodus 5. 4, 5, 8, 14, 17, 19.

In Exodus 5. 1. Moses and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel, let my people go that they may hold a feast unto me in the
wilderness; and it is not over hard to imagine what that Feast was, which by
comparing Exodus 14. where the Egyptians were drowned, Exodus 15. 1, 22, 23.
where is Moses's song and the murmuring at Morah, and Exodus 16. 1, 23. its
likely was the Feast of the Sabbath.

Exodus 5. 2. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, to let
Israel go; and ver. 3. Moses and Aaron said, the God of the Hebrews bath met
with us, let us go, we pray thee, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God; and ver.
4. the King said unto them, Wherefore do ye Moses and Aaron let the people (or
make them to cease) from their work, get you to your burdens; and Exodus 5. 5.
Pharaoh said, behold the people of the land now are many, and you make them
rest from their burdens.

You make them rest, Heb. Vehishbattem, which as I take it, is in the
conjugation Hiphil, praeterit tense, second Person, plural number, from the
root Shabath, he kept Sabbath, and signifies, and yemake them to keep sabbath
from their burdens, the very same root in Genesis 2. 2. God sabatized, rested, or
kept Sabbath on the seventh Day from all his Work which he had made, and from
the same root, Genesis 2. 3. and God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it:
because that in it he had rested from all his work, which God created and made.
So as Pharaoh charges Moses and Aaron as making the Israelites to cease from
their Work, and as making of them to keep Sabbath from their Burdens.

And when the Word of God is so plain, and full, and certain, and that by the
Mouth of Pharaoh, an enemy that Moses and Aaron did make the Israelites cease
from their Work, ver. 4. and did make them keep Sabbath, ver. 5. For the Doctor
to say against such a plain Word (beside what was said before of Abel, Abraham,
etc.) as he does p. 7. And I think sometimes afterward to the like effect, that
we have not the least mention of the Sabbath from Genesis 2. 3. 'till after
Isreal's coming out of Egypt, may excuse my so long insisting on these
Scriptures.

So we have here in Exodus 5. 5. express mention of the Israelites ceasing from
their work, and keeping the Sabbath, and the Taskmasters exacting their daily
Tasks every day, Exodus 5. 13, 14. shows this, which are evidences for keeping
the Sabbath before they came out of Egypt, and Exodus 5. 17. Pharaoh upbraids
them as idle, therefore ye say, let us go to do Sacrifice to the Lord.

And the Sacrifices, though they were to be offered every day, yet as a
Feast Day, were offered on the Sabbath. And Exodus 8. 1, 8, 25, 26, 27, 28. and
Exodus 9. 1, 13. and Exodus 10. 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24, 25. are agreeable to
Exodus 3. and 4. and 5. and Exodus 12. 12, 13. After the Plague upon the first
Born, Pharaoh to Moses and Aaron, rise up, get you forth, and go and serve the
Lord, as ye have said, also take your Flocks, and your Herds, as ye have said,
and be gone, and bless me also. And that excellent History does show, how the
Lord delivered his people out of Pharaoh's hand, and all his struggling to
hinder the Service of God, and to debar them of the liberty to offer Spiritual
Sacrifices unto him, did all contribute to make the Deliverance more complete,
from that oppressing Bondage, sedately to serve God, and keep his Sabbaths, as
in Exodus 16. 23. where they had a Feast of Bread from Heaven. ver. 4. and I
think ver. 13. of Quails also, besides their Flocks and Herds, Exodus 12. 12,
13.

Another proof that Moses and Aaron, and the Israelites had the knowledge of
the Seventh-day Sabbath, and did observe it, and that before the Law at Sainai,
is from Exodus 16.

As to the Doctor's Opinion of a new Institution of another Sabbath, Exodus 15.
23, 25. at Marah.

I answer, that upon their murmuring there because the Waters were bitter,
which were there cured by a Tree which the Lord showed Moses, he made a Statute
and an Ordinance, and there he proved them, ver. 25. and 26. said, If thou will
diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and wilt do that which is
right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his
statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee which I have brought upon
the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that heals thee; which seems expressly the
Statute and Ordinances before mentioned, which Statute and Ordinance confirms
the Lords Commandments, and all his Statutes, but alters none of them; so that
the conceit of a new Sabbath day here instituted without any word from God, is
a mere conjecture by learned Mr. Chafie (as afterward) and what that Statute
and Ordinance was, the Doctor says, p. 4. We cannot tell; which I think is
enough to set aside all new Epoch here. And Exodus 15. 27. (from Marah) they
came to Elim, where they encamped by other Waters.

And Exodus 16. 1. They journyed from Elim to the Wilderness of Sin, and there
they murmured again for want of Bread, and Exodus 16. 2, 3. the Lord to Moses, I
will rain bread from heaven for you, and the people shall go out, and gather a
certain rate every day, ver. 4. And the sixth day they shall prepare that which
they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily. ver. 5.

And at even the quails came up, ver. 13.

And every man gathered the Manna every morning, ver. 4. 21. which was every
Day of the Week except the seventh Day, ver. 22.

So the Lord there reckons the days, the sixth Day and the seventh Day after
the same manner as at the first, Genesis 1. and Genesis 2.

And this as it seems was not at Elim nor at Marah (but at another place and
time) viz. in the Wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Synai, Exodus 16.
1. But that the Lord there altered the way of numbering the days, or instituted
a new Sabbath day, no such thing is there that I can find; but reckons the
sixth and seventh days (which supposes the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, to make up the
Week) in the same manner as Genesis 1. and Genesis 2. to which seventh Day (as Exodus
5. 5.) the Israelites in Egypt were no strangers.

And the Sabbath, ver. 23. is here called the Holy Sabbath, that is, the
Sabbath hallowed or sanctified by the Lord, Genesis 2. 3. and the Sabbath is four
times called the seventh Day, from ver. 26. to 30. But not a word of altering
the Seventh-day Sabbath as Mr. Chafie p. 31. nor any new Epoch, as the Doctor
p. 10. And so the seventh Day was not forgotten, but well known to them, and
yet the Doctor p. 10. tells us, That as to the sabbath observed from the
Creation to this first raining of Manna, that there is six to one that it is
not the same, so that was uncertain also.

Nor do I see any reason why a new Epoch from Exodus 16. 23, 30. should be
imagined, unless it be, because it is so plain a proof of the Israelites
observing the Seventh-day Sabbath before the Law at Sinai, in obedience to the
Law, Genesis 2. 23. which answers so much of learned Mr. Chafie's and of the
Doctor's Books.

And if there were no new Epoch in Exodus 16. then it seems agreed that the
seventh Day was never altered till the coming of Christ.

And the fourth Command, Exodus 20. 8, 11. I think puts this out of doubt.

Remember the seventh day to keey it holy, six days shall thou labor, but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God, ver. 9. 10. that is, the
seventh Day is the Lords Day, For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
and rested the seventh day, and blessed the sabbath, and made it holy.

Does any fancy that the Sabbath Day here is meant A Sabbathday? or that the
seventh-day is meant only A seventh-day, and so that another Day of the Week is
intended, and will answer the letter of the fourth Command as well as the
seventh-day? I answer, (beside what is said in the Enquiry) That such meaning
of the fourth Command, I think is no where found in any Book before the time of
Christ, nor during his Life, for such a sense would have gratified the Jews, to
object against Christ, nor is it found whilst any of the Apostles lived, nor I
think in many hundreds of years after all their deaths.

Does any doubt which is the Sabbath Day he is to remember to keep holy?

Does any doubt which is the Sabbath Day which the Lord Blessed?

Or, Does any doubt which is the Day of the Week the Lord made Holy?

The Answer is here express.

The seventh-day is the Sabbath which the Lord blessed and made holy, which we
are to remember to keep holy.

Does any doubt whether the order of the Days of the Week, settled Genesis 1. and
Genesis 2. was altered?

The answer is here plain, For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh day, which does refer to, and (seem to me) directly to
confirm the days, and their names, of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. appointed in Genesis 1.
and Genesis 2. together with the time when they begin and end; and so I think we
are thus far safe, that from Genesis 2. to Exodus 20. there was no new Epoch of
days, nor any manner of uncertainty, which was the seventh-day; there was no
intermission of the days by chance, nor the Day forgotten or neglected, as the
Doctor p. 61. nor as I think any manner of doubt when the days did begin and
end.

This seems to me so plain, as I had said nothing thereof, if I had not found
the Doctor insist much, as if there had passed some alteration of days, and
afterward as if the Days began at Midnight, and as if I had nothing but
Tradition, whereby to guess which is the seventh-day from the Creation, to
Exodus 20. for which we have before so many highly probable, and other certain
Scripture Proofs, and for which the fourth Command alone is proof enough, being
declarative of what was blessed and hallowed before in Genesis 2. and is here in
Exodus 20. explained and confirmed.

The Oracles of God were committed to the Israelites, Romans 3. 2. to them was
committed the keeping the Old Testment, and therein the Moral Law, and therein
the fourth Command, and therein the seventh-day, and the Laws given at Sinai,
are said to be true Laws, and good Commandments (and so they certainly were and
are both true and good) and the Lord made known unto them his holy Sabbaths,
Nehe. 9. 13, 15. and if they were made known to them, then they knew his holy
Sabbaths, and if they knew them, as they did, then his Sabbaths were not
altered.

And whether other Nations did measure their time by Weeks p. 5. See Mr.
Chafie, chap. 13. p. 45. chap. 14. p. 49. I think expressly for it.

And to argue from Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham, with such high Characters as
the Lord gives them in his word, and of Abraham as keeping his Laws and his
Commandments, are as I think strong arguments to prove the matter of fact, and
sufficiently expressed that they kept the Sabbath, which is one of the
Commandments, tho the Doctor p. 7. thinks them weak.

And from their Practice, and the Scriptures before cited, I think we have a
certainty thereof, whereof the Doctor p. 8. says, We have scarce a Conjecture,
which seem hard Words against one, and yet harder against so many Scriptures.

And though I am willing to thank the Doctor for what he would give me to begin
the Week on Monday, p. 9. (that so his Sunday may be the Seventh-day) yet I do
not think any Man's Authority so great as to alter the way of numbering the Days
which God has settled, or to control, or alter the Day God has Blessed, and I
am content with Gods Allowance and Command therein.

What is offered about the Paschal Lamb, and Passover, and Circumcision, p. 11.
being sometimes intermitted, I think does confirm the Seventh-day, and not hurt
it, for that when the Israelites returned to those appointments they kept them
again.

And if it be true (which p. 13. the Doctor thinks without doubt, and certain)
that we do not know which is the Seventhday, in a continual Circulation from
the Creation, then all the Doctors Arguments before and afterward for the
First day, are here as it seems without doubt, and certainly answered by
himself; for if we do not know which is the Seventh day, we cannot know which
is the First day, and so cannot possibly keep a Day which we know not; and
somewhat like this he offers p. 1. Nor do I see how the Doctor or any other
Person can be long held to think as they seem to do.

And p. 1. He thinks it impossible for him to know the First day, and p. 14.
Impossible for any Man to know the Seventh day, which are also directly against
him.

And p. 16. he says, We have no particular Command in another Case, which I
think we have, and not only a practice, most likely to be Gods Will, p. 17. But
that not being now in question, I pass it by.

And as to what he there says for the change of the Seventh to the First day,
that I would think so also if I were not otherwise prepossed with Prejudice,
and with a great fondness to find out somewhat wherewith to find fault.

I Reply, that I doubt we have many great Faults not hard to be found, and I
commend to the Doctor Rev. 3. 17. But I know nothing of Prejudice or Fondness,
corrupt Nature and human Frailties, by Grace disallowed in this, and all Cases
excepted, as he surmises; but whenever I find in the Scriptures any Truth
which would correct my Conversation, and make it agreeable to Gods Will, after
due seach and consideration honestly and conscientiously to comply with it, as
other Christians do or ought; and this question has been considered by me now
near twenty six Years.

And if such Truth, according to the best of that Knowledge God has graciously
given concern others also, then to communicate it, and if it be a Truth, which
can be by me no other way opened to them, then to do it in this sort, as I
weakly can, and I shall be heartily glad the Doctor or any other would do it
much better, as he is very well able.

And if we are not to hide our selves from our Brother's Ox, or his Sheep when
we see them go astray, Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And if we are obliged when others, especially our Brethren, err in Judgment or
Practice to reprove them, How much more are we bound when we see many erring in
a moral Duty, to endeavor to set them right?

And to surmise upon him that he writes those Reflections, and many others, to
prepossess and prejudice Readers I am loath to do.

Nor had I made this Vindication if I had not been compelled by the Doctor's
Charge.

And as to the Israelites keeping the true Seventh-day Sabbath commanded Exodus
20. from thence to the Incarnation of our Lord, I do not remember the Doctor to
deny it; for which I think there is enough said in the Enquiry, p. 26. 27, 28.
and much more might be added if need were; and I am unwilling to write again
the same things, although by repeating the same Objections, and reinforcing the
old with new Words; I am sometime constrained so to do.

And in general I say, that as far as I can judge, there is enough said in the
Enquiry to prove that (not A, but) The Sabbath Instituted Genesis 2. and Repeated
Exodus 20. and observed from thence to Christ's coming, and (with every tittle of
the rest of the Moral Law) confirmed, and made perpetual by Christ in Matthew. 5.
17, 18, 19. and Luke 16. 14, 17. who certainly knew the true Sabbath day, binds
all men, till the Heaven and Earth pass away, which is not yet.

And (not A Seventh day, but) The Seventh day there established, and made
perpetual, was observed by Christ, during his Life, for so was his custom, Luke
4. 16, to 21. Enquiry, p. 38. 39, 41, 42, 43, 45. and was observed by Believers
after his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; so was Paul's custom, Acts 17. 2.
which was never altered by the Word that I know.

Which confirming and making the Law perpetual, and every Jot and Tittle of it
by Christ, who was and is Jehovah, does also fully prove (as I think) that (not
A, but) the Seventh-day Sabbath was neither altered, nor changed, nor
forgotten, nor any way uncertain to Christ's time, neither as to the day, nor as
to the beginning or ending of it, and that the Seventh day is the Lords Day.

This being premised, let us consider what the Doctor further offers for the
First, or against the Seventh day; p. 17. 18. he tells us, That Christ on the
day of his resurrection, did not only appear to the good Women at the
Sepulcher, and declare to them the Resurrection, but also the same day himself
declares it to two of them going to Emmaus, Luke 24. 27, 32. and did expound to
them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself, and did open to them
the the Scriptures, and did (as he takes it) celebrate the Lords Supper,
employed in the words, he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to
them, ver. 30, etc.

It Is true, Christ after the Resurrection, appeared to Mary Magdalen, and to
the other Mary, Matthew. 28. 1. 9.

And the Angel said to them, v. 5. and Mark 16. 5, 6. He is not here but is
risen, go tell his disciplees that he is risen from the dead, which they did,
but the Disciples believed them not.

Now it is certain, as it is agreed, that Christ rose the Third day, which Third
day was the First day of the Week; and that the Angel Matthew. 28. 5. (and two
Angels Luke 24. 4. and John 20. and 12.) said to the Women, that Christ was
risen, and the women told it to the Disciples, yet the Disciples would not
believe them; and we have Christ appearing to two Disciples as they traveled
into the Country, Mark. 16. 12. And they went and told it to the rest of the
Disciples, but they believed not them, Verse the 13.

And Christ's appearing to the Women, was a practical proving of the
Resurrection.

Some think the two Disciples, Mark 16. 12. to be the two Disciples traveling
to Emmaus, Luke 24. 13. which is very likely, and that Peter from Luke 24. 34.
and 1 Cor. 15. 5. was one of them. But it is certain they were two Disciples,
and yet the rest would not believe them, Mark 16. 13.

And their Discourse upon the way as they traveled together, Luke 24. 13. was
such as the Doctor mentions, and Christ there reproved them for not believing
what the Prophets had spoken, v. 25. That Christ ought to suffer, but did not
reprove them that we read, for traveling on that day.

And it is likely the Breaking and Blessing of Bread, ver. 30. might be (for
ought I know) the Sacrament of the Supper, and implied.

But still the Journey from Jerusalem to Emmaus, and back again was a
traveling Journey, being near fifteen Miles, and more then a Sabbath days
Journey, as the Doctor agrees; and I do not see how he can make that Journey
consist with the keeping that First day as a Sabbath, whereof there is there,
or before no Institution, nor any Mention, but rather the direct contrary;
their traveling upon that First day of the Week (without any reproof from
Christ) as upon any other of the Six days, seems directly against the Doctor.

And whether our Lord did then travel without pain (as the Dr.) is not written;
he had then the Wounds in his Body, and at his appearing afterward to the
Disciples, and Thomas, John 20. 25, 27. Luke 24. 29. and yet might be without
pain, for ought I know, but surely the two Disciples traveled as others do.

And although the Disciples were eminently Holy, yet because not written, I do
not know what they were then employed about at Jerusalem, (unless it were
mourning and weeping, Mark 16. 10.) (where they were assembled for fear of the
Jews, John 20. 19.) before or after the report of the Women, whom they did not
credit.

And p. 19. I think the Doctor agrees the meeting of the Disciples there
providential, and not upon a Sabbath account, for 'twas for fear of the Jews.

And Christ's appearing to the Eleven as they sat at Meat, Mark 16. 14. agrees
therewith, it was as they sat at Meat.

And to what he offers p. 19. from Luke 24. 36. and 42. and John 20. 19. our
Lords appearing to the Disciples at Jerusalem, and saying, peace be unto you.
So Mark 16. 14, 15, 16. I answer, this Salutation of Peace be unto you, or such
like, is frequent in the Scriptures, and must be strangely and strongly forced
to speak any thing of instituting the First day.

The Resurrection was and is a great Truth, and necessary to be known and
assured, and yet the Disciples were unbelieving of it, notwithstanding all that
Christ told them before his Death, Mark 9. 31. That he should be delivered into
the hands of Men, and be killed, and after that rise the third day, as Mark 10.
33, 34. Luke 24. 7, etc.

And his Resurrection was proved to them by several Witnesses, Luke 24. 10.
whose words seemed to them as Idle tales, v. 11. and the Lord himself upbraides
them for their hardness of heart, because they believed not them who had seen
him after he was risen, Mark 16. 14. So it became necessary (if I may so say)
for the Lord to give full and undeniable Evidence of the Truth of his
Resurrection, by his Personal appearing to the Eleven upon the very day
thereof, as he did, as they sat at Meat, Mark 16. 14. that there might be no
room left for any doubt of his being actually risen from the Dead. A Truth upon
which the whole Doctrine of the Gospel did, and does eminently depend; and this
I think is a fair account of our Lords appearing to the Disciples at Jerusalem.

But that this did alter the Seventh, or appoint the First day for a Sabbath, I
find not, but seems all dark Conjecture, without any warrant from the
Scriptures.

And yet the Doctor p. 20. says, all which being put together, seems to him
very like the Celebration (if not the Consecration) of a Christian Sabbath, or
day of Holy Rest, and Religious Service.

I fully acknowledge, that all that was spoken by our Lord, as well before as
after his Resurrection, was Spiritual and Heavenly, upon all the Sabbaths he
kept as his Custom was, and at all other times before and after his
Resurrection, but yet, that that which the Doctor allows, as it seems to me, as
providential, and not upon a Sabbatical account should alter the Seventh day,
or institute the First, I see not.

And we do not read the Lord blaming his Disciples for resting upon the Sabbath
day, or for traveling upon the First, but for their not believing his
Resurrection.

So as the Seventh-day Sabbath (by all the Doctor has yet offered) seems not
hurt.

From John 20. 26. After eight days Christ appeared to the Disciples, and
Thomas with them.

Christ had appeared to the Eleven Disciples at Evening upon the day of his
Resurrection, as they sat at Meat, Mark 16. 14. which was the First day of the
Week, John 20. 19. when they were assembled for fear of the Jews, but Thomas
not being there John 20. 24. would not believe, unless he should thrust his
hand into his side, ver. 25.

And after eight days, Christ appeared to the disciples, and Thomas with them,
John 20. 26. and says to Thomas, reach hither thy hand, and thrist it into my
side, and be not faithless, but believing, ver. 27. which was an admirable
Condescension of our Lord to cure his, and all others unbelief.

Those Words after eight Days, the Doctor thinks was that day seven-night, etc.
The Cavil, for so the Doctor calls it, he says, is so weak, that he is sorry to
see it, p. 20. And then takes great pains to prove, That after eight days (as
we commonly speak in English, on that day seven-night) is the next First day
after the Resurrection.

I have perused the Enquiry, p. 50. 51. that after eight days is not that day
seven-night. and I neither discern it to be a Cavil, nor so weak as the Doctor
represents it; but that after eight days may be, as it seems to me, the second
or third day seven-night after the Resurrection.

In Matthew. 26. 2, 6, 14, 16, 17. after two days was the passover, seems to be
meant, after two days exclusively, (i. e.) excluding the day on which that was
said.

Rev. 11. 11. After three days and an half, about the two witnesses, the spirit
of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, is
understood as I think, with Reason, after not two, but three Days, or Years,
and an half expired, God will revive them, and restore them to his Service, and
it is same Greek word for, after, here, as John 20. 26. So after eight days, may
not include the day wherein 'twas spoken, and so may be the second or third day
seven-night after.

And I do not know that ever I heard, much less do we commonly so speak, that
after eight days is that day seven-night after, or that after eight days, does
include the day wherein it is so said for one of the eighth days, and if it did
include it, yet after eighth seems to be the ninth, and that in John 20. 26.
was also spoken in the Evening, ( i. e.) near the end of that day.

As for what the Doctor offers, that after eight days must be that day seven
night, because Christ's rising the third day, is said in Mark 8. 31. to be after
three days.

I say the Crucifixion was upon the sixth day, the Resurrection upon the first
Day of the next Week, which does explain what is meant by after three days,
Mark 8. 31. that is, after part of the Sixth day, the whole seventh Day, and
part of the First day.

Now, when after three days, is so explained in diverse Scriptures to be the
third day, it may not follow, that after eight Days, which is no where that I
know, so explained, must include the Day spoken in, and exclude the day after
the Eighth.

And that the Resurrection was upon the third day, I think there is enough
offered in the Enquiry, see Matthew, 6. 21, and 17. 23, and 20. 19, and 27. 64.
Mark 9. 31. and 10. 34. The words of our Lord, The Son of Man shall rise again
the third day, Luke 9. 22, and 13. 32, and 18. 33, and 24. 7, and 21. 46. 1
Cor. 15. 4. He rose again the third day, so as the Resurrection was on the
third Day, and the words, after three Days, are fully explained to be the third
Day, or in, on, or upon the third Day, and the first of these three Days is
expressly included.

And (...), after, sometimes signifies, in, and Mark 8. 31. rendered in three
Days, answers that Objection, and the Enemies Matthew. 27. 64. desired Pilate
that the Sepulcher might be secured until the third Day, that is, till the
third Day is come, not till after the third Day is past, and so the Enemies
understood the Resurrection would be in or on the third Day, and all Scholars
know that.

Greek Prepositions and Particles, are often variously rendered, as the reason
of the place where they are used does require.

And if this place in Mark 8. 31. be so rendered in three Days, ( i. e.) after
the third Day is come, that agrees with all the above cited Scriptures, for his
rising the third Day, and so Grotius and Beza, and other Annotators on Mark 8.
31.

And there is this difference as before, that after eight days is no where
explained to be the eighth day, including the first of the eight, or excluding
the day after the eighth, nor explained by, in eight days, as after three days,
in Mark 8. 31. is expressly explained by many Scriptures to be the third day,
(and as above in three days ( i. e.) till the third day).

What is offered p. 22. from Luke 1. 59. on the eighth day they came to
Circumcise John, was according to the Institution, Genesis 17. 12. He that is
eight days old shall be circumcised, which Institution does actually include
the day of Birth, for that the day of Birth is one day, and seven days more do
accomplish eight days, Luke 2. 21. but it is no where said of that (that I know)
that 'twas after eight days that they were to be Circumcised.

But if after eight days did include the first of the eight days, and did
exclude the day after the eighth day, yet here is no abrogating the
Seventh-day Sabbath, nor any instituting the first day, not any word to any
such purpose; but this seems an occasion taken by our Lord (after eight days
after his Resurrection) when Thomas was with the rest of the Disciples who was
not present at Christ's first appearing to them, to cure his unbelief, and to
confirm the Faith of the rest of the Disciples, and of all others, in these two
great Doctrines, one of the Deity of Christ, whom Thomas there openly and
expressly owns to be the Lord his God, My Lord, and my God, John 20. 28, 29.

The other of the Resurrection of Christ, which till then Thomas said, he would
not believe, John 20. 24, 25. In which two great Doctrines the rest of the
Disciples were before confirmed, as in the Enquiry.

From p. 23. to p. 28. the Doctor would make the day begin at midnight, and to
end at midnight, according to the Roman account, and that to be the Evening
and the Morning, Genesis 15. and from midnight to midnight to be the day.

And though I am not willing to contend about terms, what is the Natural, and
what the Artificial day, yet I may not admit the Days of the Week to be any
other than what God first fixed in the Scriptures, that is the Evening, and the
Morning. It Is true, the Day as distinguished from the Night begins in the
Morning, and ends in the Evening; and the Night, or Darkness, as distinguished
from Day, begins in the Evening, and ends in the Morning, but the whole day
consisted of Evening and Morning, that is, of Night and Day; and we find Genesis
1. 3. that when Light was Created, Let there be light. Ver. 4. God divided the
light from the darkness. Ver. 5. And God called the light Day, and the darkness
he called Night: and the evening and the morning were the first day: And so the
Light was the Day, and Darkness the Night, as distinguished from one another;
but one Day, or the First Day of the Week, consisted of Evening and Morning,
that is, of Darkness and Light, which was the First day. And so Ver. 8. the
evening and the morning were the second day; and ver. 13. the evening and the
morning were the third Day; and ver. 19. the evening and the morning were the
fourth Day; and ver. 23. the evening and the morning were the fifth Day; and
ver. 31. the evening and the morning were the sixth Day; and the seventh day
God rested, or Sabbatized, Genesis 2. 2, 3. where Seventh day is thrice mentioned,
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, or made it Holy: which
making it Holy, I think, resolves the main Question, which Days of the Week,
consisting of Evening and Morning, that is, of Darkness and Light, and so
beginning in the Evening, and ending the Evening after, is there appointed and
fixed, and material and plain, and may not be altered. And our manner of
reckoning of days here, I think is not in question now between us.

P. 22. He takes notice about what time, Mary Magdalen came to the Sepulcher,
on the day of Christ's Resurrection.

And upon Luke 23. 55, 56. When they beheld the Sepulcher, and how the Body was
laid, the Doctor says, that was on the sixth day at night, (which (night) I
cannot find in the word that it was at Night) and they returned, and prepared
Spices and Ointments, and rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment;
which is true, that they returned, prepared Spices, rested, and kept the
Sabbath, which was not A, but the Seventh-day Sabbath after the Death of
Christ, whilst his Body was in the Grave, and he in Paradise ( i. e.) in
Heaven. But I know no word for that, that Christ was buried in the Night, but
toward the end of the sixth Day, and if it were not at Night, the Doctor ought
not so to write.

And from Luke 24. 1. Matthew. 28. 1. Mark 16. 1. John 20. 1. The Doctor would
observe, p. 23. that the Sabbath according to their Account, did not end till
toward the Morning of the next day, but it being not said in either of those
places or elsewhere, that I find in the word, that the Sabbath did not end till
toward the Morning, but that Christ was risen when the Sabbath was past, Mark
16. 1. Early in the morning of the first day, ver. 2. This proves against him,
as I think, that the Sabbath was ended before, viz. the Evening before.

And yet the Doctor says it is manifest, that at this time, as well the Sabbath
as other days, were by them reckoned not from Evening to Evening, but rather
according to the Roman account, from midnight to midnight.

And to prove it, says, it was sometime after the ninth hour ((i. e.) our three
a Clock in the Afternoon) that Christ gave up the Spirit, Mark 15. 34, 37. and
later, when they brake the Thieves Legs; and later, when Joseph begged his
Body, took it and buried it, by which he would prolong the time to run it up
into the Night, for which Night we find no Word, and for which I see no Reason,
nor know any other to whom his sense of this prolonged time is manifest, the
general sense of Learned Cristians being as I think against him. All those
things being well consistent before the Sabbath drew on, and our Lords giving
up the Spirit, the begging of his Body, taking it and burying it, in a Tomb
prepared, might all be in a very little time, for John 19. 42. The sepulcher
was nigh at hand, which surely was so little time as to be all finished upon
the Sixth day, before the Sabbath drew on, Luke 23. 54, 55, 56. And for the
Women to prepare Spices and Ointments the same Sixth day, and all before the
Sun set.

And this way of the Doctor's reasoning, if it would hold, which I think it
will not, would break in upon the Sabbath, upon which the Women rested
according to the Commandment, Luke 23. 56, etc. and would leave a doubt,
whether the Sixth day were one of the Three days, unless men believe as the
Doctor, that the days begin at midnight; see Mr. Shepherd's Tract on this
Subject.

The general opinion I think is right in this, that the reckoning of days in
the time of the Old Testament was from Evening to Evening, which reckoning I
find not yet altered in the Word; but the Romans, who were then Heathens, did
reckon days from midnight to midnight.

And p. 24. how long the First day lasted is built on a Foundation, as if the
day began at midnight.

And p. 25. he says, We reasonably suppose from Luke 24. 29, 30, 35. that the
two Disciples from Emmaus came pretty late at night to Jerusalem.

Which is but supposed, not in the Word, which Word is the Wisdom of God, and
the highest Reason.

Ver. 29. They said to Christ, abide with us, for it is toward evening, and
the day is far spent, which might, and surely did leave time enough for them to
return to Jerusalem that day, for Luke 24. 33. They rose up the same hour, and
returned to Jerusalem, which intimates their haste in returning to Jerusalem.

And 'twas the same Day of the Resurrection, that is, the First Day of the
Week, at Evening, that our Lord appeared to the Disciples at Jerusalem, John
20. 19. as they sat at Meat, when the Doors were shut where the Disciples were
assembled for fear of the Jews, upon the First day at Evening, and John 19. 40,
41, 42. The Body of Jesus was laid in a Garden, because of the Jews Preparation
day, for the Sepulcher was nigh at hand, and so no need of much time to bury
him, all was easy to be finished before the Sabbath began, to which the Sixth
day was a Preparation day, which proves it to be the day before the Sabbath;
yet the Doctor thinks it was about midnight, and then infers as manifest, that
the Jews and four Evangelists did reckon their days from midnight to
midnight, and there adds, if they did not so reckon, Christ could not be said,
Matthew. 12. 40. to be three Days and three Nights in the heart of the Earth,
which I take it, is not well said, for to make a doubt of the three Days in the
Grave, unless we believe it manifest, that the Jews and four Evangelists did
reckon their days from midnight to midnight, seems very blamable.

The Doctor thinks p. 26. the days in the time of the Old Testament, reckoned
from midnight to midnight; and from Exodus 12. 6, 14, 15, 16. about the
Passover that Evening v. 6. (or as in the Margent, between the two Evenings) is
at midnight, and that as soon as midnight is past, Morning began, and says
the account thereof, is so fair, as we need not scruple to embrace it.

And he thinks from the first born of Egypt being slain at midnight, that, the
midnight began the next day after the Passover, then which he thinks nothing
can be more clear, and p. 28. takes it to be very plain from what he has said,
That at the time of Christ's Death and Resurrection, the days were counted from
midnight to midnight, which matters which he thinks plain, clear, and
manifest, I think are mistaken by him.

What was offered from Genesis 1. 5. the Evening and the Morning were the First
day, the Doctor thinks is easily answered, and renders it as in the Hebrew, and
the Evening was, and the Morning was, one day ( i. e.) says he, there was in
the First day, and so in the rest, Evening and Morning, or Darkness and Light,
which is so far true; and says, Darkness is put first, because (beginning the
Day from midnight) the Dark is before the Light; but if it were so, which I
think is not, then the Darkness would be after the Light, viz. till midnight
after, and would put Night and Day in Confusion.

To which I further say, as he, by day one, or one day, Genesis 1. 5. is there
meant the First day; and so I think in the New Testament, by (...), one day is
generally meant the first day, and the first day is certainly meant, as to the
day of Christ's resurrection.

But that the Evening in Genesis 1. 5. began at midnight, is contrary to the
current of learned men (Doctor p. 26.) and contrary to Mr. Chafie, and contrary
to the Hebrews, who best knew the meaning of the Books of Moses, and I think
contrary to the Scriptures throughout, which begin the Evening when the Sun
does set, Mark 1. 32. whereof more by and by.

And as to the Evenings, Exodus 12. 6. it seems to me, that one, or the First
Evening, was the Evening, which (after the Sun created) began the days ( i. e.)
when the Sun did set, and the other Evening was about the time of the daily and
weekly Sacrifices, which ordinarily, I think, was about their ninth Hour, ( i.
e.) our three a Clock in the Afternoon, which Acts 3. 1. is called the ninth
Hour, the Hour of Prayer, when Peter and John went to the Temple.

So Cornelius in a Vision, saw an Angel about the ninth Hour, Acts 10, 3. And
the ninth Hour, that is, our three a Clock in the Afternoon, was about the Hour
of our Saviors being made a Sacrifice for his People, Matthew. 27. 46. Mark 15.
34.

Or that other Evening might be, 1 Kings 18. 29, 36. when Midday was past.

And (betwixt the two Evenings, Exodus 12. 6.) is understood by many, to be
betwixt the declining of the Sun after Noon, and the setting of the Sun, which
may well be; but the first Evening began at Sun set, and belonged to the Day of
the Week, which Days of the Week consisted of Evening and Morning, as before.

Their Morning-Worship seems to have been about our nine a Clock in the
Morning, which I think was their third Hour, Acts 2. 4, 15. at which Hour the
Holy Spirit was poured out.

But the Evening of the Days of the Week after the Sun created, I think began
at, or about Sun set, and comprehended from Sun setting to Sun rising, and the
Morning, from Sun rising to Sun set, which Evening and Morning made up every
day of the Week then, and ever since as before.

And yet the Doctor p. 25. thinks, that both the Jews and four Evangelists did
reckon their days from midnight to midnight.

And the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. 3, 6. which was to be killed the Fourteenth
day of the first Month, between the two Evenings, Exodus 12. 2, 6. (whether the
Evening wherein they were to kill it began at our three a clock in the
Afternoon, or presently after Noon) gave them time enough to kill it and dress
it, without running up the time to midnight.

It Is true, The Lord smote the first born of Egypt at midnight, ver. 29. and
why it was at midnight I know not, but (if we may so humbly say) it might be (
inter alia) for greater terror to Egypt.

Which midnight there, did not that we find, alter the institution of the
Passover, much less did that smiting the Egyptians alter the Days of the Week;
and so our Lord observed the Passover before his Passion with his Disciples the
Fourteenth Day of the first Month at Even, Matthew. 26. 20. Mark. 14. 17. Luke
22. 7, 14.

And we read, at Even there was upon the Tabernacle, as it were, the appearance
of Fire, until the Morning, and so, it was always, and so the Evening did not
here begin at midnight, but as it began to be dark, Numb. 6. 9, 15, 16, 21.
that is, when the Sun did set.

Which Fire gave Light when it was Dark, that is, from the Evening till the
Morning.

And that the Evening does begin, not at midnight, but at Sun set, we have
many places in the Old and New Testament, Deuteronomy. 23. 11. When the Evening comes
on, is, when the Sun is down; they are the words of Moses, who wrote Genesis
and Deuteronomy.

And Josh. 10. 26, 27. The five Kings were hanged on five trees until the
evening, and at the time of the going down of the sun, they took them down by
Joshua' s command; so as the Evening was the time of the Suns going down in
Moses and Joshua's time.

In Prove. 7. 9. the Evening is called the Twilight, in the Twilight in the
Evening of the Day, and the Twilight begins when the Sun sets.

Jer. 6. 4. The day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched
out; now when the Sun sets the Earth begins to be shadowed, and then the former
day goes away.

Mark 1. 32. And at even when the sun did set, they brought to him all that
were diseased, or the Evening being come when the Sun had set, which makes it
as plain as words can well express it, that the Evening began not at midnight,
but when the Sun did set, and that when Mark wrote his Gospel.

So Mark 13. 35. The Words of Christ, Watch, for ye know not when the master
comes, at even, or at midnight, (or at cockcrowing, or in the morning) so the
Even was one time, and midnight another, so the Evening did not begin at
midnight, and yet the Doctor thinks it manifest, and that we need not scruple
to embrace it, then which he thinks nothing can be more clear, whereas it seems
very plain by the Scriptures, that every day begins in the Evening, that is,
when the Sun sets.

And if it be so as above, then all which the Doctor says for mid-night-day,
and all he builds thereon fails, which may confirm us that the Crucifying of
Christ was on the Sixth day of the Week, about our three a Clock in the
Afternoon, and that the Resurrection was upon the First day of the Week in the
Morning; and yet the Doctor p. 28. thinks it to be very plain, that at the time
of Christ's Death and Resurrection, the Day began at midnight, and did continue
till midnight.

And in p. 28. says, We have now found our Saviors Example as to the two first
Sundays from his Resurrection; if at least their First day of the Week be our
Sunday, for the uncertainty of the days, which is the First, and which is the
Seventh day he still holds, as before, as I think, against himself, for if our
Sunday be not the First day, why does he plead for it?

By which, frequent reserve of the uncertainty which is the First day of the
Week, if the Doctor does mean to rebuild the First day (as the Romanists, and
some few others) upon the authority of the Church, or of the Civil Magistrate,
it seems fair to tell us so, for if it be uncertain what day of the Week the
First day is, I cannot see any Foundation in the Word, or common Reason for
observing an uncertain weekly Day, and if it be uncertain, then it is certainly
gone.

As to our Saviors Example which the Doctor has found, as to one of those two
First Sundays, it is an Example of our Saviors, and two of his Disciples
traveling on Sunday, which Example I may allow him, without any hurt or danger
to the main question.

And his other Example, about, after Eight days, which he has found, has been
answered, as I think before.

And these two Sundays, are all that the Doctor finds as Examples by Christ,
for altering the Sabbath from the Seventh to the First day, of which altering
we find not one word in either.

He says nothing of any Word or Example of Christ before his Death, for such
alteration, for he knows our Saviors manner was to keep the Sabbath during his
Life.

Nor says he, that I remember, any thing of the Thief, his being with Christ in
Paradise the same day of his Crucifixion, Luke 23. 42, 43.

Then p. 29. he says, We have clear Evidence of a like Practice, Acts 20. 7.
And so leaps over all about Paul, and others keeping the Sabbath, that is in
the former Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, which I shall have occasion to
remember him of.

From which Acts 20. 7. he renders dielegeto, holding forth, and this rendering
holding forth, the Doctor does twice, page 29.

In the Enquiry, p. 55* in answer to the Objection from Acts 20. 7. where Paul
Preached to the Disciples, I take notice, that the Greek Word there rendered
Preached, is in Acts 17. 2. rendered Reasoned, where Paul, as his manner was,
Preached to them three Sabbath Days; and so the same Greek word with that in
Acts 20. 7. is rendered Reasoned in Acts 18. 4. where Paul Preached in the
Synagogue every Sabbath, to Jews and Gentiles, this little notice I take of the
same Greek word in these three places of Acts 20. 7. Acts 18. 4* and Acts 17.
2. rendered Preached, Acts 20. 7. but rendered Reasoned, Acts 18. 4. and Acts 17.
2. Though it be the same Greek word which I think of some use to show that Paul
preached Christ every Sabbath, the Doctor seems to take offense at, and gives
leave to render it, Paul did hold forth, and instead of, he continued his
Speech, that he held on his holding forth, till midnight, which Expression of
holding forth has been much abused in this Age by some Men, against eminently
Holy and Learned Non* conforming Ministers, when they have been accused as
Malefactors for Preaching the Gospel, to scorn, reproach, and despise them as
holders forth, etc. And the Expression of Holding forth being taken in an ill
and despightful sense by some, who so use it.

I think the Doctor might have spared to put it upon Paul, who in his Preaching
Christ, was then a Nonconformist Minister, and Preacher.

And it seems, if it were not written incautelously to be highly blamable.

In which Expressions of Holding forth, with others afterward, which refer to
Spiritual Praying and Praising, as this does to Preaching the Gospel. The
Doctor goes in bad company, and I doubt, highly gratifies them, whilst he
writes so agreeably to their Language.

Which words of the Doctor, however written with some seeming softness, are a
very ill Bleat if they were meant, which I hope they were not, as they are*
commonly understood by all good and bad Men that I know.

And in further Reply to the Doctor's from Acts 20. 7. I refer to what is in
the Enquiry, p. 55. 56, 57, 58.

And admitting that (one) there is one day, and that one day the First day of
the Week, and that the Disciples there came to gether to break Bread, and
admitting that breaking of Bread was the Lords Supper, and the Assembly there
to be a Christian Assembly as it was, yet supposing the day as before, does not
begin at midnight, but in the Evening, as I think it certainly does; and
supposing Paul as his manner was Acts 17. 2. (as before) preached on the
Sabbath, every Sabbath, Acts 18. 4. Acts 16. 30. and that to Jews and Gentiles,
Acts 13. 14, 42, etc. which cannot be denied; and supposing that what we have
in the Prophets reproving Israel for profaning, or polluting (as Esai. 56. 2,
4, 6. Esai. 58. 13, etc.) the Sabbath, or any part thereof, to be generally
expressed by their refusing to keep the Sabbath, and supposing what we have in
the New Testament about our Lords custom of keeping the Sabbath to be briefly
expressed, (by his going into the Synagogue on the Sabbath, and as preaching)
does comprehend, and include all the rest that was requisite to the perfect
keeping the Sabbath, as it certainly did, or else we should have read it there
objected against him, which we do not find; and supposing the like of the
Apostles in their measure in the Acts, etc. about their keeping Sabbath, I
think any Man may reasonably suppose, that Paul who kept every Sabbath as
before, had kept the Sabbath, Acts 20. 7. And that when the Seventh day was
over, Paul and the Disciples met that Evening (that is, the Evening of the
First day) being ready to depart on the Morning (which Evening his readiness to
depart on the morrow seems to imply) which the Doctor p. 31. thinks a pleasant
shift, which seems a plain and true Fact, for Paul there continued his Speech
till midnight, ver. 7, 8. And when he had recovered Eutichus, and broken
bread, and eaten, and tarried a long while, till break of day, Paul did depart
accordingly, Acts 20. 7, 11. And I know none has yet imagined that Paul and the
Christians kept two Sabbath days in one Week.

So as supposing the Doctor's mid-night-day mistaken, as I think it is, and
supposing* the First day to begin in the Evening, which I think it did, and
does.

And supposing Paul's manner was to preach every Sabbath in the Synagogue, Acts
13. 14, 42. Acts 16. 30. Acts 18. 4. which he certainly did; and supposing that
Paul*s preaching in the Synagogue did comprehend his conscientious observing
the whole Sabbath day, then instead of a President for the first Day, as the
Doctor would make it, putting all those places in the Acts together, it seems a
President for keeping the Seventhday Sabbath, and the breaking Bread, and
Paul's preaching to the Disciples there that Evening till midnight, to be both
after the Sabbath kept and ended, and his traveling the next Morning, Acts 20.
11. if it were, as it seems, the Morning of the First day after the Sabbath was
over, makes it, that he did not keep the First day, but traveled upon it. So
supposing as before the breaking of Bread, imports the Lords Supper, which the
Disciples came together for, upon the First day of the Week, that might very
well succeed Paul's and their keeping the Sabbath before, upon the Evening of
which First day the Converted might come together to receive the Lords Supper
together, when they were distinguished from the rest of the Assembly (as is
usual in our Assemblys to this day) to whom Paul preached Christ upon the
Sabbath day before, and departed in the Morning, read and judge, and this is
the clear Evidence, which the Doctor says he has from Acts 20. 7.

And the Doctor thinks I am not in earnest, and calls it trifling and shifting,
(which are hard Words) to render (...), one day of the Week, from which I see
no inconvenience when he renders it, (...), one, which signifies one, yet was
the First day, Genesis 1. 5. and when he himself renders (...), one, p. 42 and
when it is agreed, that though (...) properly signifies one, which no Grammarian
can deny, yet that one was the First day, and so by (...), Acts 20. 7. I think
may be meant the First day of the Week, though the Greek (...), one, be rendered
one Scores of times in the New Testament.

I pass by the Doctor's case of a Horse bought for five Pounds, and paid by
five Pounds of Candles, etc. because I have no mind to that way of arguing, by
telling old Tales; p. 32. he goes over again the case of the Passover, the days
of Crucifixion, and Resurrection, and Acts 20. 7. to all which before, and p.
33. the case of Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham, and from thence till Israel's
coming out of Egypt, he says, I bring no other proof for their keeping the
Sabbath, but Exodus 5. 4, 5.

And if he mean that I bring no other Proof, but one Scripture Proof, that
seems somewhat hardly meant.

And he may find in the Enquiry, and here before, other Proofs besides Exodus 5.
4, 5.

But I had thought one plain, full Word of God for Israel's there keeping
Sabbath, or for proving any other Truth, or Matter of Fact, had been enough to
convince the most Learned, who acknowledge the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, which I hope the Doctor does and I do.

What the Doctor would p. 34. teach me, as to better purpose for the
Seventh-day Sabbath, from Pharaoh's seven fat and lean Kine, and the seven days
before Noah's Flood, and Nebuchadnezzar's being seven Years at Grass, and from
the three Intervals of seven days, one about the Rain before the Flood, Genesis 7.
4. and the other two of Noah's staying seven days, and then again seven days
before he sent out the Dove, Genesis 8. 10, 12. which he says is better Argument
then any I bring.

I hope he will not oblige me or any other to believe he so thinks, for if
those his Arguments be better then any I bring, I doubt he would not have writ
this Book at his Age to Answer them.

P. 34, 35. he says, There is nothing of a weekly Sabbath in Job, which if it
were true, needs not, if there be, as there is enough for it elsewhere, in the
Word.

And if you will allow a little Digression, see Job 31. 26, 27, 28. which the
Doctor p. 64. says, may perhaps be Job's disclaimer of Sun-Worship, which is
somewhat toward it.

And see that of Eliphaz, Job 22. 17, 22. Receive I pray thee, the law at his
mouth, that is Gods Mouth, where the word Law, is the same Hebrew Word used
Exodus 16. 28. about the Sabbath, and Job 22. 22. Lay up his words in thine
heart, so as whenever, and wherever Job lived, it is certain, he and his
Friends had some knowledge of the Law, and Words of God, and if of the Law and
Words of God, why not of the Sabbath which is his Word, and a part of his Law:
See also Job 1. 1, 5, 6, 8, 9. Job 2. 1, 3. especially Job 1. 6. and Job 2. 1.
which day, at least some of the Hebrew Rabbis thought to be the Sabbath.

And although the Doctor p. 35. would make all that is offered in the Enquiry,
that the Ascension of Christ might be upon the Sabbath day, Acts 1. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 12. to be a little matter, and yet serving my turn, I refer the
Reader for that to the Enquiry, p. 43. to which I add, I do not yet see, but
that the Ascension day might be upon the Sabbath day, according to Acts 1. 12.
for I do not think those words, that Mount Olivet, (the place of his Ascension)
is from Jerusalem a sabbath-days-journey, Acts 1. 12. which of old was esteemed
about two Miles, are so expressed there by the Holy Spirit, but for some
special respect to the Sabbath day, which words of a Sabbath-days-journey are
no where else so expressed in the Scriptures, that I find, but I take it it is
agreed by Geographers, that Mount Olivet is about two Miles from Jerusalem. In
Exodus 16. 29. The Lord gives you on the sixth day, the bread of two days,
abide every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh
day, that is, that day they were not to go abroad into the Field to gather
Manna, nor to do any other Work, Exodus 20. 10. but they might go to the Holy
Convocation, Lev. 23. 3. And the Cities of the Levites were to reach 2000
Cubits from without the City, East, South, West, North, Numb. 35. 5. and in
Josh. 3. 3, 4. when the Ark was born toward Jordan, the People were to go
after it, yet there was to be a space between them, and it about 2000 Cubits by
measure, and they were not to come nearer to it; what those Cubits in measure
did extend to, the Jews could best tell us, who thought it about two Miles,
which those in the Camp might travel to the Ark, the place of their Public
Worship upon the Sabbath day, Enquiry, p. 43. 44, 45. And it seems to me, that
Acts 1. 12. is so expressed, to show that Christ and his Disciples going from
Jerusalem to Mount Olivet, and the Disciples going from thence back again to
Jerusalem, was no breach of the Sabbath day.

But however this were, I think the main question, which is the true Christian
Sabbath is built and established upon many other direct full Scriptures before
and after cited, which give no color for denying.

What the Doctor offers for the Feast of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1. p. 37. as to the
day when it was, which he thinks was on the First day of the Week, I know no
Word for that, or other Ground but Conjectures, and some uncertain Romish
Traditions, for what day the Fiftieth day was from the true day on which Christ
and his Disciples kept the Passover, Matthew. 26. 17, 18, 19, 20. I do not yet so
certainly know, and the Doctor p. 12. agrees, that our Savior kept his last
Passover on one day, and the Jews on another: But the most probable Judgment I
can make from Mat. 26. 17, 18, 19, 20. from Acts 1. 12. and Acts 13. Acts 16.
Acts 17. Acts 18. 4, etc. is, that it might be on the Sabbath day, and this is
certain, that when the day of Pentecost was fully come, the Holy Spirit was
poured out, Acts 2. 1. 2. But supposing what the Doctor agrees p. 12. that
Christ kept it one day, and the Jews on another, I think I can prove by the
Word, that Pentecost was on the Seventh-day Sabbath, and not upon the first day
of the Week.

But this also about what day it was, not being yet so evident to all, and the
Sabbath being, as I think, clearly proved by other Texts, I pass it by at
present.

I pretermit diverse things to which he recurs, p. 38. and takes up again and
again what he had written to before, and then the Doctor adds,

A like place is that of 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.

Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye upon the first day of the week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gathering when I come.

What likeness there is between those two places I can see very little of, and
that this yields nothing at all for his purpose, any man who will read it twice
may easily discern, yet he thinks it is plain from thence, that the Frst day of
the Week was weekly observed, and was wont to be observed, both by the Church
of Corinth, and by the Churches of Galatia, which he thinks Paul supposes, and
takes for granted, which are all mere Conjectures where I think (...) may well
be rendered one day of the Week, without any offense.

To which place I think there is answer, Enquiry, p. 58. 59. to which I add,

If the Doctor by the Words was weekly observed, and wont to be observed, mean
was weekly, and wont to be observed as a Sabbath, or as a weekly Day of Holy
Rest (without which he says nothing).

I reply, that here is not one word of any Sabbath or Rest weekly, or other
Rest, or of any Worship or Preaching, or any such thing, not one such word,
either at Corinth or Galatia, or taking it for granted, etc. but the quite
contrary, that is, an order that they should every one of them lay by in store
for charitable Uses, which does include the casting up their Accounts, how else
could they know how God had prospered them, which the Doctor p. 39. says
scornfully, is a wise Objection, which seems a true and plain Matter of Fact.

What that order was to the Churches of Galatia, he says, that I cannot tell,
but leaves out my next words, unless it were to remember the Poor; and to what
is in the Enquiry, p. 58. about an yearly Collection, I add, 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2.
where he said Achaia was ready a year ago, and 2 Cor. 8. 10. others were
forward a year ago.

But admitting that (...) here signifies First, here is not one word in this
order to keep Holy the First day, nothing of that day as a Sabbath, nothing of
Praises, breaking Bread, Praying or Preaching, or of any Worship, or Resting
here, but only an order for every one of the Christians there, to lay by him in
store as God had prospered him, which seems also, when they were asunder, and
at home, that there might be no gathering when Paul came; and this I should
think any who read it (without great prejudice) must needs see and know; so
that for the Doctor to say he thinks it plain there, that the First day was
weekly observed, and wont to be observed at Corinth and Galatia, and that Paul
takes it for granted, and supposes it, etc. without any word for it, seems all
from a strong and willing fancy, and very blameable, as highly imposing on the
World.

And in p. 38. and 39. he reassumes what he had written to before, which in me,
without any great cause that I know, he p. 39. calls trifling, and Childs-play,
which shows him to be angry, and p. 41. says, It must be great Ignorance, or
somewhat worse, which sort of Language agrees well enough in this Cause to prop
it up (instead of Word and Argument) with hard Expressions, and if that will
please him I shall easily acknowledge my Ignorance and Weaknesses, which are
many and great: but withal, I think a weak and simple Man who has the word and
command of God on his side, as I think I certainly have in this case, may
contend with the most Learned, for whom otherwise I yield my self much too weak.

Nor do I find in all his Book any reason, much less any reason to believe (as
he p. 42, etc.) that the First day was then generally observed, or wont to be
observed, or at all observed, unless by the Heathens, nor that it was according
to Christ's direction, because we have no word that I know for either, which
word is the highest Reason, and why then does the Doctor top upon others those
Words, According to Christ's Direction.

And a like saying of the Doctor's we have p. 43. by Christ's giving
commandments to the Apostles, about things pertaining to the Kingdom of God,
Acts 1. 2, 3. that we are to presume this in particular, about the observing
the First day of the Week, and yet there confesses what those Commandments
were in particular we cannot tell, so we are to presume what he admits we
cannot tell, which to me is a new Article in Religion made for this purpose.
And upon such Presumptions without one word from Christ that I know, the
Doctor's opinion seems built.

P. 41. He considers Mark 2. 28. The Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath,
and supposes by Son of Man, is there meant Christ, and if he suppose it, why
then does he there controvert it; which Text shows the Sabbath to be the Lords
Day, as ver. 27. The Sabbath was made for man, shows it was made for the good
of Man, for his Spiritual and Eternal good.

And says, I cannot show that ever the Jewish Sabbath is called the Lords day,
although he knows if he have read the Enquiry, p. 64, 65, 66, 67. that I there
quote diverse Scriptures, where the Lords Seventh day is called the Lords Day,
whereof more by and by, upon Rev. 1. 10.

What he says p. 43. that I cannot tell whether of the two (that is the Seventh
or the First day) is the Seventh day of the Week, does again overturn all his
Book, for if it be as he says, uncertain, so as we know not which day is which,
how can any Man observe his day in Faith, and what is not of Faith is Sin, and
what then is become of all his Arguments for an uncertain weekly First day?

But I think we can tell which is the Seventh-day Sabbath, and I say as before,
from Nehe. 9. 13, 14. that the Lord made known to them his Sabbaths, his
Sabbaths, so the Sabbath was the Lords Day, which they knew; and from him and
them we have his Sabbaths. And Romans 3. 2. to the Jews were committed the words
of God, which with the Old Testament, and therein the Ten Commands they still
have; and I think we ought to believe what the Lord Christ accounted and named
to be the Sabbath day, was then, and I think is now his Sabbath Day, that is,
the Lords Day, Mark 2. 28.

P. 44. 45, 46. Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, which he
would have to be on the First day, which I think I have shown by the
Scriptures, Enquiry, from p. 64. to 68. to be the Seventh day, to which I do
not remember he offers any answer (unless some Traditions) to which, to avoid
Tautologies, I refer the Reader, and am of the same opinion as there, and
without Prejudice, which he would often insinuate, I think, the Lords Day, Rev.
1. 10. was not only the name of a day, but the name of the Seventh-day Sabbath,
Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4. Exodus 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Isaiah 58. 13. Matthew. 12. 8. Mark.
2. 28. Luke 6. 5. which Scriptures he that will examine and consider, may
easily see that the Seventh-day Sabbath is the Lords Day, (if the Scriptures be
as they ought to be, the rule of judging in this case) which the Doctor would
fain have to be the First day, and cannot tell us which day of the Week, the
First day is now from Christ's time as before, and does not know it, and thinks
it impossible to know it.

And p. 46. 47. he again admits, That Christ was the God who gave the
Commandments, by which he does admit, that the seventh day there given by
Christ is the Lords day, for Exodus 20. 10. the seventh day is the sabbath of
the Lord thy God, (i. e.) the Seventh day is the Lords day. And so it often
falls out in this debate, that what he and others are constrained to admit in
one point, answers what they would deny in another, as I think this does; for
if the Lord gave the Commandments, as he did, and as the Doctor admits
(together with the Father and Holy Spirit) then he gave the Fourth Command, and
therein the Seventh day, Exodus 20. 10. which Seventh day is there expressly said
to be the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, that is, to be the Lords day, which as I
think by his own admission, tells us, which is the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10.

Of his Traditions, p. 48. 49. (on which the Doctor before) I think there is or
can be no certainty from them.

And their Authority to alter any thing in Doctrinals or Practicals, stated in
the Scriptures is of no force with me, nor with any Protestant that I know, nor
I hope with him, and he may see in the Enquiry diverse Traditions, Histories,
and Records for the Seventh-day Sabbath, which the Doctor answers not, although
I build all upon the Scriptures, and not on Traditions.

I say as before, that Christ's manner was not to keep A, but The Sabbath during
his Life, and the Women, and others kept it, whilst his Body rested in the
Grave, whilst he was in Paradise, that is, in Heaven; not only on what they
called the Sabbath, as the Doctor p. 50. which I think not well surmised by him
(as if they, or rather the Holy Spirit there called a wrong day the Sabbath)
but on what was the Sabbath, and that some of the Disciples traveled upon the
very Resurrection day, and that Paul and other Christians did not only seem to
(which are the Doctor's words, and I think are hard words) but expressly and
actually did observe, not only what they called the Sabbath, but what was the
Sabbath, the true Seventh day-Sabbath (not only) after Christ's Resurrection,
but after his Ascension, and after the Holy Spirit given, and that that was
Paul's manner, and of others every Sabbath day as before, these Repetitions I
am forced to.

Which I think, do prove that Christ and the Apostles did then take not A, but
The Seventh day to be the Christian Sabbath (as it was); or why else does the
Holy Spirit so very often in the four Evangelists, before his Death and
Resurrection, and in the Acts after his Resurrection and Ascension, and after
the pouring out the Holy Spirit, name it not A, but The Sabbath, not only what
they called, but what was the Sabbath.

Yet the Doctor p. 51. thinks Paul's Preaching upon the Sabbath days to be
occasional, by which, if he means as it there seems occasional only, I know no
word he has from God in the Scriptures, for his Sense of occasional, and I
think Paul's constant Practice to Preach upon the Sabbath days, was according
to the Duty of a Minister of Christ, and in Obedience to Christ's express
Command, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. by which Command I think all other his Ministers
are obliged.

And as to the Passover, and all Sacrifices, and other Ceremonials, that they
are abolished by the Death of Christ, I think certain, and to what is said in
the Enquiry, as to that, I add this,

That the Passover, sacrifices are all set aside by that word, Luke 22. 19. and
1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. This do in remembrance of me, and so the Passover,
etc. are laid aside by the Lords Supper, by which Ordinance of the Supper, we
declare that Christ was sacrificed for the Sins of his People, and by this we
declare his Death till he come in Glory, to judge the Quick and Dead; and there
was, or is no further need of Sacrifices, or Types to represent Christ's Death.
And so the Passover, and all other Sacrifices to be at an end, by these words,
This is my body which is given for you, or which is broken for you, this do in
remembrance of me. Which Lords Supper was then instituted, and immediately
succeeded the Passover, which Passover then ceased, Matthew. 26. 17, 20, 26. And
as they were eating, Jesus took bread, etc. Mark 14. 22, etc.

And to what is offered p. 54. from Romans 14 4, 5, 6. He that regards a day,
regards it to the Lord, and he that regards not the day to the Lord, he
does not regard it.

It is not said what was the day there in question, but the Doctor thinks it
most likely to be that of the Jewish Sabbath.

What day this was, is hard for any Man at this distance of time to determine,
and more hard to build any certain Doctrine upon it, as a certain Day, when God
has not that I know, told us in his Word what day it was, but left it wholly
uncertain.

I find nothing in that Epistle about days, till Romans 14. 4, 5, 6. where one
Man esteemed one Day before another, another esteemed every day, he that
regards the day, regards it to the Lord, and he that regards not the day
to the Lord, he does not regard it.

And it is not there said (as the Doctor acknowledges p. 54.) what was the Day
there, nor do I now see how possibly to know what Weekly, or Monthly, or
Yearly, or Feasting, or Fasting, or other day it did refer to, but of the
Sabbath there is no mention, and why is it then most likely to be the Sabbath,
which he confesses is not there said, and whatever day it was, it seems it was
no great matter whether they regarded it or not, ver. 6.

And whatever day that were, it was certainly such a day as Paul would not have
them judge one another for, ver. 4. which makes it likely to me, that it was
not the Sabbath day which Paul so constantly preached Christ upon, and observed
as before, which Sabbath is a part of that Moral Law which Paul was under to
God, but was such a day (whatever day it was) as he thought fit at that time
and place to leave undetermined.

As for Gal. 4. 3, 8, 9, 10.

In Galatia were some Disciples, Acts 18. 1, 4, 23. In which Chapter it is
said, Paul preached at Corinth every sabbath, to Jews and Gentiles.

And Paul, Gal. 1. 2. directs that Epistle to the Churches of Galatia, where
probably were some converted, and many unconverted.

And Gal. 4. 3. Paul says, When we were children, we were in bondage under the
Elements, or under the Rudiments of the world* which seems the Heathen World,
ver. 8. When they knew not God, they did service to them, who they knew by
nature were no Gods, which was the case of the Heathens, for the Israelites did
then, and do still Worship Jehovah, who is God, the true God, and so do
actually Worship Christ the only Messiah, who is Jehovah, as in the Enquiry, p.
9, etc. And the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5.
Enquiry p. 12. But the Israelites don't yet know Christ to be Johovah, their
Messiah, Savior, and Redeemer; which Truth upon their Conversion and
Restoration, remains to be revealed to them.

So as this place seems specially directed to those who had an Heathenish
Education, who before served those who were no Gods, who after they knew God,
Gal. 4. 9. were turning again to the weak and beggarly Rudiments, to their
first Teachings, and Heathenish Instruction, which Paul there blames ver. 10.
you observe days, and months, and times, and years, ver. 11. I am afraid of
you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

What days these were is the Question, the Doctor says it is not here said in
particular, what those days were that are here meant, yet he thinks it is most
likely, and scarce to be doubted, to be meant of the Sabbath.

To which I answer, That I think days there cannot be meant of a weekly Rest,
and if it be, it is directed there not to rest upon Sunday, which was observed
by the Heathens in honor of the Sun, as we may see afterward.

And every Sabbath being observed by Paul, and the Sabbath not being (that I
can find) in question, days there I think cannot refer to the Sabbath.

Which the Doctor thinks most likely to be meant of the Sabbath, though he
acknowledges it is not said; and if it be not so said, how can any man's
Conscience build upon what is not said in the Word, and the Heathens generally
observed Sunday, and their Princes and Magistrates being Heathens, some of
those converted to the Christian Faith, might in some sort decline giving them
offense upon their days, whether Feastivals or Fasting days, but that tho it
might be is conjectural. It Is certain that many do things now which relate to
Worship, in compliance with those under whom they live, and so have done I
doubt in former Ages, and it is certain they observed days, which observation
Paul blamed, and some of those days might also be Jewish days, as Passover, New
Moons, etc. as in the Enquiry, or days* of purim, Hester 9. 26. which the Jews
observe still, as I think, in all Nations where they live.

And it is to me most likely, and scarce to be doubted, that one of those days
blamed by Paul, and the principal one was Sunday, which the Heathens observed,
wherein the converted Heathens were by their Heathen Parents who knew not God,
first instructed before they knew God, Gal. 4. 8. which Paul calls weak, and
beggarly Elements, ver. 9. which words of weak and Beggarly Elements do
certainly not refer to any part of the Moral Law, as afterward.

So that upon the whole of this in Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. it seems more likely,
that Paul blames them for observing the First day, if it were at all then
observed by Christians.

And Gal. 4. 12. which is the next verse, Paul adds, Brethren, I beseech you to
be as I am, who constantly observed the Sabbath day as before.

As to what is objected from Coloss. 2. 16. where Paul says, Let no man judge
you, in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or
of the Sabbaths, Greek, (...), which the Doctor p. 55, 56, 57, 58. understands
of Sabbaths, and so of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and p. 59. does not think it by
the Fourth Command to be so determined to this day, that is, the Seventh day,
as to be unchangeable to after Ages: And when Christ, or his Apostles by
direction from him did put it into a new order; this new order does as well
suit the words of the Fourth Command as that former, all which are postulata,
and I reply, if it be not changed, then the Doctor cannot change it; and if it
be settled in the Word, that the Seventh day is the Sabbath, as I think it is,
then it is unchangeable, and the Doctor cannot suit the Command to his Sense,
and when the Doctor (or any other) produces any such new order from Christ, or
from his Apostles to change the Seventh to the First day, he will say somewhat,
and I hope all Christians will obey it, but I see not yet any such new order
produced.

In the General, I acknowledge this of Coloss. 2. 16. at first seemed the most
colorable Objection that I knew.

Colosse is said to be in Phrygia, and the Inhabitants Heathens, this Epistle
Coloss. 1. 1, 2. Paul directs to the Saints, and faithful Brethren in Christ,
which are at Colosse, which it seems were converted Heathens, and it may be
some persecuted and converted Jews, ver. 9. 10. Paul prays for them, that they
may be fruitful in every good work, of which good work the law of God is a
rule, and ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. Paul tells them, that the son of God the
redeemer created all things, whom ver. 3. he calls the Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom those who were enemies by wicked works (which wicked Works I think were
Works against the Moral Law) were then reconciled to present them, ver. 22.
holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, (free from all
Immoralities) and present them perfect in Christ Jesus, whom as they had
received, so they should walk in him, which good Works Perfection, receiving
Christ, and holy Walking, I think were true Conversion, sincere Repentance,
Faith, Holiness, and new Obedience to the Word of God and Moral Law.

And Coloss. 2. 8. Beware least any man spoil you, through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ.

The Philosophers (who are thought to have been Platonists) would then, as
others now, have brought the Doctrine of Christ, and Laws of his Kingdom, to be
judged by their Reason, who were Heathens, who would have put a cheat upon them
by their Traditions, to withdraw them from Christ's institutions, after the
Rudiments, or first Teachings of the Heathenish World, which were corrupt.

The Heathens had other Objects, (as Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc.) and ways of
Worship, contrary to Christ and his Laws.

Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy
day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbaths (or weeks) Coloss. 2. 16.

Let no man judge or censure you, or impose upon you, that as necessary, which
is not after Christ and his Laws; there were Feastivals among the Jews which
were Typical and Ceremonial, and amongst the Heathens which were Idolatrous.

Against which Rudiments of the World, ver. 8. Paul speaks more from ver. 20.
to 23. to which Paul would have them dead, and not as tho living in the World,
(which was there Heathenish) to be subject to Ordinances after the Commandments
and Doctrines of Men (of Heathenish Men) which things have indeed a show of
Wisdom in Will Worship.

Which second Chapter seems mainly aimed against the Philosophical Heathenish
World, and their Will* Worship, after the Commandments and Doctrines of
Heathenish Men.

Though some Learned Men have also thought, that it refers to the inclinations
of some there to the Ceremonial Laws, abolished by the Death of Christ.

Now that the Greek word (...), Sabbaths, does signify Week, or Weeks, I refer
to the Enquiry, p. 70, 71, 72, 73. John 20. 1, 19. (...), Luke 24. 1. the like
16. 2. (...), Matthew. 28. 1. (...), which in the plural number does signify
Sabbaths, or Weeks, and in the New Testament is used for Week, and for Sabbath,
whether it be put there for Weeks I cannot now examine, nor do I see it
necessary, seeing the plural number does ordinarily signify more then one.

What I offered in the Enquiry, p. 70. that the word Sabbaths in the New
Testament is never applied to the weekly Seventhday-Sabbath, was mistaken by
me, and the word never, should have been left out, or the Expression otherways
cured; and Enquiry p. 136. that God who reserved a Tenth of our Substance,
reserved, But, a Seventh of our Time, But, should have been left out.

Both which, with other Errata's before, I read it in any Printed Book, I gave
particular order to amend, in a Printed Paper of Errata's, and upon a question
which requires such variety, by so old and weak a Man as I am, besides Errors
in Transcribing, and Printing under some Difficulties, it will be strange if
there be not now committed more and greater Errors, which a little Candor and
Temper would easily excuse.

And p. 45. the Doctor takes a third exception, and writes near half a page
upon it, on a similitude I use of Moses, no man knows of his Sepulcher to this
day, that is, no Man ever knew where his Sepulcher was.

And as to the Similitude or Comparison referring to the day of Christ's
Incarnation, the Doctor would rather say, at this day then (as I) to this day,
which great Exception can hardly be excused, for in that similitude I think he
mistakes my words, and meaning also.

At the Incarnation some then knew the day tho no Man At this day knows what
day it was, and the Doctor agrees the day of the Week, or Year, of Christ's
Incarnation is now not known so as this Exception of to, against at, seems very
little at best.

And I think he knows that the Lord buried Moses in a Sepulcher unknown, not
only at that time, but to this day, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.

Now it is true the Greek word Sabbath, in the plural number, in the New
Testament is also applied to the Sabbath, as to the Week, Matthew. 12. 15, 10,
12. (...), and 28. 1. (...), etc.

So that (...), the plural number, (from the Greek word, (...), a Sabbath, in
the singular number) is in the New Testament sometimes understood of the
Sabbath, and sometimes of the Week, and in Matthew. 28. 1. properly meant of both.

And so the question remains, Whether Sabbaths Colossians 2. 16. ought to be
rendered Sabbaths, or Sabbath, or Weeks, and if Sabbaths, Whether the Seventh
day be there meant, or no?

The Doctor thinks Sabbaths here must be meant of the Seventhday-Sabbaths
(which words, must be one very positive, and against the Opinion of many
Learned, as by and by) which he thinks it manifest, p. 56. were there in
dispute, (which dispute I cannot find in that Epistle, nor any where else in
the Word) and why then does the Doctor without the Word think it to be there in
dispute, and manifest? and he thinks it was then at an End, (which End we read
not in the Word) but find it still observed in many Churches of Christ to this
day, Enquiry, p. 106. to 112, 118, 119, 120.) and why then does he think it was
then at an end.

Nor do I find any new order from Christ or his Apostles, as he surmises, p. 59.

And if Sabbaths, Coloss. 2. 16. do mean Weeks, and not the Weekly Sabbath day,
then that Objection of the Doctor falls, and if it mean the First day ( i. e.)
Sunday, which the Heathens observed, then it is against the Doctor so far as
Paul's blaming their judging will go.

And if it mean Weeks, as it seems to me more likely it ought to be here
rendered, or if it means Ceremonial Sabbaths, then so far as this reaches it
refers to the Observation of Weeks, and Ceremonial Sabbaths now abolished.

But both one and other seem to me uncertain now, to build any (must be's) upon.

And Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in respect of a feastival, or of the
new moon, or of the sabbaths. Beside the Seventh-day Sabbath, there were at
least three Feastivals or Sabbaths amongst the Jews.

At the Passover, the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven Days, from which
Passover, Lev. 23. 4, 5. we have the pretense for Easther, now ceased as before.

The Feast of Pentecost, fifty days after the Passover, that is, seven Weeks
after, ver. 15. 16. where we have the pretense for Whitsuntide.

There were also the Sabbaths of Years, every seventh year shall be a sabbath
of rest unto the Land, a sabbath for the Lord, Lev. 25. 4. And after seven
sabbaths of years, ver. 8. they were to sound the trumpet of the Jubilee, ver.
9. and ye shall hallow, or sanctify the fiftieth year, ver. 10. And hence (as
I take it) we have the ground of the Roman Jubilees.

Now it seems to me, that if the word there do mean Sabbaths, that those three
may be blotted out, and taken out of the way, and all Heathenish Feasts,
Feastivals, Weeks, and Sabbaths, as well Sunday as the rest, Coloss. 2. 14.

But that which I think does fairly and fully answer the whole Objection from
Coloss. 2. 16. besides what is hereafter offered by Learned Men, may be, that
this is a caution against judging the Believers at Colosse, in meat, or in
drink, or in respect of the Feastivals, new moons, or sabbaths, and seems to
agree with Romans 14. 4, 5, 6. Who art thou that judge another man's servant,
one man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day, and at
Rome and Colosse, were then cautious against judging the Christians about days.

And we find not in either of those Epistles one word to alter the Seventh day
to the First, or to institute the First, all that would be a forced
interpretation, the Text is against judging of Christians there about days.

And whether it be meant at that time and place, of judging for or against
those Meats and Drinks, or Days or Feasts, or Fasts, or Weeks, or Sabbaths,
whatever they were is not now over easy to be resolved.

It Is likely some converted Teachers, whether Jews or Gentiles, I know not, had
taught what was not right about Days, which Paul here corrects.

And it is certain there are some things in Paul's Epistles hard to be
understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and if they were hard to be understood in Peter's
time, which was Paul's time, for they were Contemporaries, much more hard now
near 1700 Years after; and by whom hard places in Paul's Epistles were then
wrested, we may gather a little light, 2 Pet. 3. 17. (...), such as were not
subject to the Law of God, were the wresters, and this place in Col. 2. 16.
seems strongly wrested beyond the words of it, which are against judging the
Saints at Colosse, in those respects at that time, when the Ministers of the
Gospel had much to do to preach Christ, and by Christ to lay the foundations of
christianity, which foundation in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer and
Creator of all things, Paul soundly laid in this Epistle, Coloss. 2. 3, 14, 16.

Which Caution against judging one another, was, no doubt, at that time and
place necessary, and rightly understood, is still of great use.

And let no man beguile you, or seduce you, Coloss. 2. 17. Wherefore, if ye be
dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, whether Heathenish, or
Jewish, Why are ye subject to Ordinances, ver. 18. which are nothing else, if
not instituted by Christ, or if laid aside by him, but human inventions, ver.
20. according to the commandments and doctrines of men, ver. 22. which are
appointed, not by the Lord, but according to the pleasure of men, as I think
the First day is, whereas the Seventh day is appointed by the Lord, and the
Conscience and whole life of man, ought to be governed by the commandments of
God, without adding or diminishing, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Matthew. 15. 6, 9.

Which commandments of men, have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship,
Coloss. 2. 23. Worship which some men imposed on themselves and others, as if
they could do and teach better and wiser then God had commanded, which it seems
is an old and humane Infirmity.

Mr. Cawdrey, and Mr. Palmer, in their Treatise of the Sabbath, page 50. say,
That the Apostle in Col. 2. 16. speaks of the other Holy days and Sabbaths, and
not of the weekly Sabbath.

Mr. Sheppard in his Doctrine of the Sabbath, page 166. These. 181. speaking of
Gal. 4. 10. Romans 14. 4, 5. Col. 2. 16, etc. says, If we suppose that these
places be meant of the weekly Sabbath, and riggidly urge them, we may quickly
press Blood instead of Milk out of them, and wholly abolish (as Walleus) the
Observation of any Christian Sabbath.

Doctor Owen, in his Treatise of the Sabbath, page 214. speaking of Col. 2. 16,
17. says, It is known, and confessed, that at that time all judaical
Observations of Days, whether Feasts, or Fasts, Weekly, Monthly, or Annual,
were by themselves and all others called their Sabbaths. And that kind of
speech was then in common use is here observed by our Apostles, it must
therefore necessarily be allowed, that there were two sorts of Sabbaths amongst
them, the first and Principal was the Weekly Sabbath, so called from the rest
of God upon the finishing of his Works, and that other day became from their
Analogy, thereto to be called Sabbaths also. But that the difference between
these Sabbaths was great, The one of them was ordained from the foundation of
the world, before the entrance of Sin, and so belonged to all mankind in
general (to all Mankind) the other were appointed in the Wilderness as a part
of the peculiar Church-worship of the Israelites.

That the one was directly commanded in the Decalogue, wherein the Law of our
creation (the Learned Doctor calls it the Law of our Creation) was revived and
expressed, and that the other have their Institution expressly among the residue
of ceremonial temporary Ordinances. See to the like purpose, p. 215, 216, 217.

Mr. Richard Byfield, in his Treatise on the Sabbath, p. 130. on Col. 2. 16.
says, That the Apostle there speaks not of the Fourth Commandment, because
he treats expressly of those Sabbaths which were of the same rank with the New
Moons. And that he speaks as he does to the Galatians, chap. 4. 10. of the
Observation of Days, Months, and Years, which pertained to the Servitude and
Bondage of weak and beggarly Rudiments, as in ver. 9. Now (says he) that any
precept of the Decalogue should be so accounted, and reckoned as a weak and
beggarly Rudiment, was far from the Apostle to think, and is abhorred to
Christian Ears, and Religion. Which I think Answer to the Doctor's Objections
from Col. 2. 16, etc.

Which four Opinons I had from another hand since I came to London, and if I
had the use of my own persecuted Study, and other Books here, 'twere easy I
think, to gather many more.

And upon the whole, I find Col. 2. 16. to be against judging of Christians
then and there, and for ought appears against judging either way, and so this
place, in whatsoever sense we take it, makes only against judging in those
cases.

Page 59. the Doctor takes the Law for the Seventh day Sabbath to be a new Yoke
to the Gentiles, because it was given to the Jews as a Sign, or a distinctive
mark, and for a perpetual Covenant, Exodus 31. 13, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 20. But
this also will be against him, as we shall see by and by.

That it was then new to the Heathens who observed Sunday I agree.

It Is true, it was a sign, but such a sign as all Proselytes did embrace and
obey, till the coming of Christ, and by him is made a perpetual law, Matthew. 5.
18, etc. and so a perpetual sign between him and his people.

And tho Circumcision were a sign, yet that is ceased, as before, and Baptism
instituted.

And the Pascal Lamb, tho it were a distinction between the Israelites, etc.
and the Egyptians, yet being a Type of Christ, was lain aside by him at his
Institution of the Lords Supper, as before by the words, This do in remembrance
of me, Luke 22. 19. and ceased at his Death.

And if it be merely circumstantial, and does not at all influence Religion,
whether in the Temple or other place God be Worshipped, John 4. 21. as the
Doctor, p. 60. and p. 2. Yet God having so directly resolved, that the Seventh
day is the Sabbath, that is not a new Yoke, but an old Institution, for the
good of all Mankind, given at the Creation, and commanded in the Decalogue, and
so given by Christ. And with the rest of the Commandments, Matthew. 5. 18. and
Luke 16. 17. made perpetual by him, and so I think is Christ's Yoke, and an
easy Yoke, (for it is only to take the commanded weekly Seventh instead of the
First day) Matthew. 11. 29, 30. which the Doctor and others should willingly take
upon them.

Page 60. he adds, That the Jewish Sabbath (so he often calls it, and the Word
Jewish runs much in his mind) seems to be, not a continuation of a former
Sabbath, but rather a new Institution (which I cannot find in the Word) as he
says he has showed before, which upon all the search I have made I cannot find
in all his Book; and I am loath to observe what I often read therein, the great
Latitude he takes that way.

The Doctor p. 60. quotes the Enquiry, p. 26. and says, I press and put great
weight upon it, that the Seventh day is a Sign and perpetual Covenant, to
distinguish his People from other, that is, says he, the People of the Jews
from other Nations; which last words, the People of the Jews from other
Nations, are added by the Doctor, whereas my words and meaning was, and is
throughout, that the Sabbath was and is a perpetual Sign and Covenant with all
true Israelites, that is, all true Believers of all Nations, in all Ages, from
the beginning of the World to the end of it, to distinguish such from the
disobedient to Gods Laws.

And such Artifice to add somewhat of his own to turn what is offered into his
own Notion are blameable.

And for the Doctor to say, as he there, That Circumcision, the Passover, and
the Seventh-day Sabbath, were distinctive Marks, and at an end by the Death of
Christ, is not so. It Is true of Circumcision and the Passover that they are at
an end, as before, but not of the Sabbath.

So that a particular unravelling the many Allegations which I think are not
so, would make this Reply too large.

And he there makes the Sabbath abolished.

By which affirmings he may make other Commands abolished, if his Sayings and
Comments may pass for Doctrine, to abolish and overthrow any part of the Law of
God.

And adds there, That it is as merely circumstantial (as the place of Worship
is) whether a Sabbath be kept on this or another day, which is the Doctor's
Opinion, I think directly against Genesis 2. 2, 3. and against the Moral Law,
Exodus 20. 9, 10, 11. Established and made perpetual by Christ, Matthew. 5. 17,
18. Luke 16. 17. besides his indifferency to this or another day.

My taking notice of the Doctor's Allegations about Facts which much concern
this question, may be excused, for that otherways some Readers may take them
for true, and so be misled in their judging this Case, and many I have passed
by, which observing Readers may note.

Page 61. he repeats from Exodus 31. 13. that the Sabbath is a Sign, and yet p.
60. 61. doubts, was either not observed at all, or long before this time had
been forgot.

To which I Reply, if the Sabbath were a Sign, and such a perpetual Sign, to be
kept throughout their Generations, as it was (as the Doctor) and if it were a
perpetual Covenant between the Lord and them, as it was (as the Doctor) and
made known to them as before, then surely they knew what day of the Week it
was, and forgot it not, but observed it as they do, every where where they live
to this day, which the Doctor has no reason that I know to doubt.

And if that were so, that the Sabbath was long before forgot, and if the days
of the Week are all uncertain, and none can tell which was which, Where are we
then, but in utter uncertainties?

And these Objections from the Seventh-day Sabbath being abolished, and a
perpetual Sign (and yet forgot and uncertain) contradict one another.

Page 61. he says, God had a particular respect to their Rest from their
Bondage in Egypt, by the Preface to all the Commands, I the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of Egypt, and by the close of this Command, as repeated
Deuteronomy. 5. 15.

I Reply, be it so, yet that was such a Deliverance, as the Gentiles then had a
share in, and as concerned all the People of God, at that time in the World, to
take special notice of, and such a Deliverance as is celebrated by all the
Christians in the World to this day, and doubtless will be so by all such to
the end of the World, and is celebrated as such I think in the English Common
Prayer Book: See their Catechism.

He there again recurs to Exodus 16. for a new Epoch of days, which is Replied
to before, that I find no such thing there, as a new Epoch.

And page 62. he says, As God by Moses did give a new Epoch or Beginning to a
Circulation of Sabbaths at Marah, so might Christ by himself, or his Apostles,
fix another Epoch from his Resurrection.

I Reply, that neither of these Epocha's being found in the Word, I think the
Doctor blameable for saying God did give a new Epoch by Moses, which we do not
read he did give, and if it be not in the Word, Why does the Doctor affirm,
that God by Moses gave it?

And he says, It is not expressly said that Christ did bid his Apostles to fix
another Epoch from his Resurrection, yet he says he gave them Commandments for
that purpose, Acts 1. 2, 3.

Now for the Greatest Man living to say, Christ gave them Commandments for that
purpose, without a word from Christ for that purpose, seems to me highly
blameable, Every word of God is pure, add thou not unto his words, least he
reprove thee, Prove. 30. 5, 6.

We do suppose with Reason, the Commandments given by Christ to the Apostles
were to preach the Gospel, to disciple all Nations, to baptize in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, and to teach all things he
had commanded them, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. And see Mark 16. 15, 16, 17, 18. Luke
24. 46. to 52, etc.

And we have other Commandments of Christ to some of his Disciples, John 21. 1,
2. where he gave this to Peter (and in Peter I think to all the rest, and to
all succeeding Ministers of Christ) ver. 15. feed my Lambs, ver. 16, 17. feed
my Sheep, ver. 19. follow me, which things did and do pertain to the Kingdom of
God, of which things Acts 1. 3. Christ spoke, but what Commandments in
particular Christ gave to the Apostles for a new Epoch, does not appear that I
know there, or elsewhere in the Word. But when they are produced, I hope his
Ministers and Churches will receive them, and what else the Apostles had by
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, after Christ's Ascension, concerning the
ordering of his Churchse, and rightly constituted Offices, or concerning any
thing else which are recorded in the Scriptures, we readily embrace.

And I may request the Doctor to take heed how he grafts any other Commandments
for any purpose on Christ, but what are written in his Word, and if there be no
such Commandment, from Christ in the Word for that purpose, for his Apostles to
fix another Epoch from his Resurrection; Why does the Doctor affirm it, if his
Cause were good? yet such means to defend it I think cannot be justified, and
such affirmations in Facts material to the main question, I think ought to be
reproved.

As to what is said p. 62. That not one jott or tittle of the law, meaning the
Decalogue, is destroyed (I think he means that in Matthew. 5. 17, 18.) but does
still continue in force, and that we are all under that Law, as to the
substance of the Duty.

I Reply, that he there again acknowledges that we are all under that Law, that
is, under the Ten Commands, and that they still continue in force.

And if so, I would ask the Doctor one Question, who asks me Diverse.

Who can resolve us what is, and what is not Substance in Gods Commands, but
God himself who gave them? he knows what bad work several have made by
endeavoring to mangle them, especially those of the first Table, and indeed
those of both Tables.

For what is said p. 62. that Matthew. 24. 20. Pray that your flight be not in
winter, nor on the sabbath day, which flight was about thirty eight Years after
Christ's Resurrection, that that makes nothing at all to my purpose.

I think a fair answer to that is in the Enquiry, p. 73. 74 to which I add,
that we cannot as well argue from hence, that it were a Sin to Labor in
Winter, as on the Sabbath day, as the Doctor, p. 63. for that the Sabbath and
Winter stand on different Reasons, which are obvious; the Sabbath was
commanded, and the Winter bad to fly in because of the Cold, Wet, etc. and work
was not forbidden in Winter, which was forbidden on the Sabbath, as the Doctor
knows; and so Matthew. 24. 20. feems to the purpose, for the Sabbath was to
continue by that Text, after the Death of Christ.

Page 63. my many other little Excursions, as little to the purpose he will not
name, which is a short way of answering.

But says I take great pleasure to expose the name of Sunday, by which name for
distinction, I sometimes call it, as himself does often, which (if he pleases)
he may henceforth call the First day, its true name, as I often do, and other
snubbing of Sunday (as the Doctor there) I remember none, but he often calls
the Lords Sabbath by a reflecting addition, which I often pass by without
snubbing again.

He says, It Is true, some of the Heathens did Worship the Sun, but that they
did it more on Sunday then on Monday, or Tuesday is more then he knows, or I
can prove.

For, Reply to which see Enquiry, p. 88, 89, 90. And for his, and others
satisfaction herein, I refer them to Mr. Chafies Learned Tract on the Fourth
Command, Reprinted 1692. which Reprinting I think of use, being a Learned and
Moderate Tract, tho I think Mr. Chafie is out in the main Question about the
Seventh day, but helps much to prove the Worshipping the Sun weekly upon
Sundays, and many other Truths.

In which Tract, Mr. Chafie, p. 20. chap. 9. does show, that the Assyrians
(which seems to have been before Moses, and one of the first Heathenish
Dominions) and that all Nations Worshipped the Sun, with which Idolatry, he
says, the Egyptians, and many of the Israelites and generally other Nations
were infected, where p. 23. Mr. Chafie tells us, That those Sun-Worshippers, on
what Days of the Week they gave especial Worship to the Sun or Moon, those Days
were called by the Names of the Day of the Sun, that is Sunday, and the Day of
the Moon, that is Monday.

So as Sunday is a very ancient day of the Week, and by him it appears they did
very anciently divide their time by Weeks; which ancient weekly Sun-Worship, I
think is proved by the Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. See also Ezekiel. 8. 16. 2 Kings
23. 5. Deuteronomy. 17. 3, etc.

In which 9th Chap. of Mr. Chafie's, we have also, how the Heathens always
Worshipped toward the Sun rising, page 26. 27, 28, 29. which Authorities the
Doctor may easily sind.

Mr. Chafie says, not any Nation of Note under Heaven, but adored the Sun as
their God (the Sun was King, and the Moon was Queen, but the Sun was Trump).
The Chaldeans, Persians, Egyptians, Phenecians, Trojans, Grecians, Romans,
Scythians, Aethiopians, Tartars, etc. all Worshipped the Sun.

And p. 71. Mr. Chafie says, That Sunday was so called from our Heathen
Ancestors, who called this day (that is Sunday) so in honor of the Sun, whom
they Worshipped upon Sunday.

And p. 30. Mr. Chafie tells us, That to take off the Israelites from this
Idolatry, the Lord used this means for one, that they should not have the day
of the Sun (that is, Sunday) for the day of his Worship, but the day before,
(that is, the Seventh day) which I think refers to the time of the 16th or 20th
of Exodus, which proves not only the Observation of the Seventh day by the
Israelites, but of Sunday by the Heathens, and that very anciently, and that
continually in the weekly Circulation of Days, to this day, though I think Mr.
Chafie be out about the change of the Seventh day, as before and after.

And Mr. Chafie chap. 15. p. 59. gives the Testimony of diverse Ancient and
Learned Writers, which show that the day of the Sun with the Gentiles was a
Weekday, even the same which Mathematici, the Mathematicians (of old) called
Sunday, which seem sufficient Proofs, that the Sun was Worshipped on Sunday,
and that weekly, and that very anciently.

Which 9th. and 15th. Chapters of Mr. Chafie, I think might give satisfaction,
that all Nations of Note under Heaven Worshipped the Sun, and that very
anciently, as far back at least as the time of Moses, and that upon Sunday, and
that toward Sunrising, that is, toward the East, and that weekly, whilst the
Israelites Worshipped weekly toward the West, upon the Seventh day.

And Mr. Chafie, p. 32. chap. 10. tells us, That the Holy Place, (or Holy of
Holies) in the Temple at Jerusalem was toward the West, and that when
Worshippers Prayed there, and Bowed, their Posteriors were toward the
Sunrising, and their Faces Westward, and that Temple was built by the Lords
special Direction.

Which is one of the means (assigned by Mr. Chafie) God used to take off the
Israelites from Worshipping the Sun, so Sun-Worship was long before that.

Which Tract of Mr. Chafie, I shall a little further consider afterward.

Page 65, 66, 67. the Doctor considers the Names of our Days, Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, which being now the known Names
of the Days, he thinks we need no more scruple the use of these Names, then to
talk of Pope Pious, Clement, etc. Which I think he gives as answer to what is
in the Enquiry, p. 90. against those Names of Days, whose Original the Doctor
agrees to be from Heathenish Idols.

To which I Reply, from one of the Texts quoted in the Enquiry, Exodus 23. 13.
Make no mention of the names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy
mouth, which Learned Mr. Chafie p. 30. l. 25. 26, 27. thinks refers to the Idol
Names of the Days of the Week, which also proves the Antiquity of Sunday, and
the Antiquity of Weeks. And the changing those Names of Days I remember, was
propounded by some of the Reformers, about the beginning of the Reformation in
England: And Pope Sylvester, the first of that Name, hating the Name and Memory
of the Gentile Gods, gave order that the Days should be called by the Name of
feriae, as I remember they are named in the Centuries.

And it seems to me in this, and some other cases, the main Doubt is, Whether
we shall be ruled by the Word or no?

And the Names of our Days of the Week being Idolatrous, as the Doctor agrees;
I did in the Enquiry, p. 90. upon the occasion of Sunday, say a little about
them, upon which the Doctor expatiates, and falls hard upon Scruples.

Now causeless Scruples I yield are a Weakness, but a true Conscientious
Tenderness of Mind, not to offend God in any thing, wherein his Will in his
Word is made known, is as I think, one of the most excellent Frames in Man. And
if the Doctor under his Notion of Scruples, thinks to reflect upon
Conscientious Obedience to the Word, or any part thereof, (which I hope he does
not) he will be much to blame, and God having so expressly forbidden the mention
of the Names of Idols, as these were by which the Days are called Sunsday,
Moonsday, Tuiscosday, Wodensday, Thorsday, Frizasday, Saturnsday.

And having also expressly given us in his Word, the proper true Names of the
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Days, which Seventh day
is called the Sabbath throughout the Scriptures, how ever that may seem to the
Doctor, I make no Scruple to call the Days of the Week by the same Names as the
Lord calls them; and if the Doctor will retain the old Idol Names without
Scruple, notwithstanding his own acknowledgement whence they are, and
notwithstanding the Word against them, I cannot help it, and it seems to me the
most subtle of those, who are so fond of holding fast the Idol Names of Days,
do doubt the consequence of laying them aside, as if it might by degrees
introduce both true Names and Things.

What is said p. 68. 69, 70. (upon the occasion of Scruples) about Spiritual
Worship, and Worshipping in Spirit and in Truth, I think does much concern all
that fear God. But because he does not speak out directly, but only falls upon
Scrupulosities, and Shadows, and Circumstances seemingly, though I think it
pretty plain what he reflects upon, I shall reply but a little to that, and do
refer the Reader to the Enquiry, p. 32. where he may find in few words what I
think from the second Command (besides many other Scriptures) of Forms of
Worship, Graven, Printed, or Written, and not instituted by the Lord, but
invented.

And in Reply to another, I think Luke 11. 2. compared with Matthew. 6. 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. about the Lords Prayer, that the same Cautions of, into thy Closet, shut
thy Door, and in secret, and in secret, etc. Matthew. 6. 6. do refer to, and
explain Luke 11. 2. By which Cautions I think he should be governed, and
Enquiry, p. 32. he may see what I think from Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Col. 3. 16. about
singing; all which, and much more, some may count little things, Scruples, and
causeless Scruples, nice Speculations, and needless Scrupulosities, whereby (as
such may pretend) men are diverted from the Substantials of serious Religion,
and spiritual Worship, which I think are very hard Reflections.

Now I doubt, that not only the Romish World, but some others not of that way,
as far as I can discern, are yet at some distance from their Duty in those
cases, who are held to the Frames wherein they walk by the Authority of Men,
and who for years past, have taken a liberty to comply with the Worship of the
Country where they live, and take all down without chewing, as they find them,
and so I doubt esteem those who differ from them (who upon the most diligent
Search, and long Experiance, Worship God as they think, according to the Word)
as scrupulous, and as standing for little Circumstances and Shadows, and so
Conscientious, Lively, Spiritual Worshipping as but Shadows, and not substance
of Christian Worship, and such Worshippers, as diverters of others from serious
Religion, many of whose Rods do yet bud and blossom, and bring forth Almonds,
which if God so please, I shall be heartily glad to hear of their Rods who
reflect upon them.

Which little Circumstances and Shadows as they are called, do not at all, as
some pretend, influence the substance of spiritual Worship, but are mere
scruples, and minute things; and here it seems we have some thoughts of
spiritual Prayer, etc. as before of Preaching. And thus the very Life and Power
of Christian Worship is, as I think, reflected upon by some who have Frames of
right Worship, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and some of them correct Frames, that is, who have
a way of Worship which has some similitude, or likeness to right Worship) who
change their Glory for that which does not profit, and drink the Waters of
other Rivers instead of Living Fountains, between which several Waters there is
an internal difference, as great and manifest, as there is between good,
wholesome, running and living Springs, and dead Water, which may be some short
and weak Reply to the Reflections before mentioned.

And if it were not to avoid offense, I had written, and might write more on
this subject, which so much concerns all Mankind certainly, to know how to
Worship Jehovah aright, and which for all Mankind, Ministers and others, old
and young, who have the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and common
Sense, and can speak, and are by Grace made willing, is demonstrably as easy
to be put in practice without Crutches, and to be taught even to Children,
without more ado, as for such to be taught, for just Reasons, to speak for any
thing they stand in need of, and would desire another, in whose power it is to
give unto them.

And upon this occasion I had thought on some Lines about Swearing to a Point,
and about abjuring Endeavors, whether lawful, peaceable, and honest Praying
and Preaching Endeavors be excluded, but to avoid offense have crossed them
out.

And to return: Tho it be all one to the Doctor, whether the days be called
Saturday, Sunday, or Alpha, Beta, Gamma, in this we differ a little, he takes
them as it seems, as he finds them in the World, and I take them as I find them
in the Word, and I know no principle amongst men, which does so effectually
answer, and cure all blamable scruples, and unquietnesses of Mind, as a sincere
Obedience to all the Wills of God, which he that will do shall know, John 7.
17. which I doubt taking all as one, finds them, though it may lull in
security, will never perform.

Page 66. He blames the whole of Judicial Astrology, as precarious, and only a
Trick to amuse credulous People, and make a gain of them, which is truly
blameable, yet amongst two sorts of People is now very common.

As to what is said p. 68. about meeting once upon a Sabbath day, besides
Morning and Evening Worship, etc.

I Reply, that I think that most for the real Service of God, and the Good of
his People, which God has directed in his Word, which Rule, unless some
necessity intervene, will be always found free from all Inconveniences; and for
that I refer the Reader to the Enquiry, p. 83. 84. Almost all the Questions in
these Papers depend much upon this, Whether Man shall be allowed to be wiser
then God?

Page 69. Whether to begin the Sabbath at Six or Twelve a Clock at Night? he
thinks a thing not worth contending about.

And if it be so small a thing, not worth contending about, Why does he not
begin it when the Lord began it, that is in the Evening? one would think that
none should differ with the Lord over all for a small thing, and of so little
worth, when he has in his Word plainly told us his Will.

And tho he thinks it not much more, whether on this, or that day, so the
Sabbath be well kept, I do not yet know what he means by well keeping, but the
words, this or that day, seem in him very indifferent to either, and I doubt
will make any Man of that mind very cold in well keeping it.

I think with the Doctor, we are to avoid foolish Questions, and to study
things which make for true Peace, which Gods Word when it is obeyed, does most
certainly do, and the foolish Questions are those which cross his Law and Word,
and are contrary to it, and striving against his Law and Word, is one of the
worst Fruits of the Flesh, which Wars against his Will, and (to use some of his
Words) in whomsoever that Temper is found (I doubt) it is for want of true
Love, and other Fruits of the Holy Spirit.

And when some study to spin out Disputes into so fine a Thread as to make the
day begin and end at one time, which God has so firmly settled to begin and end
at another, Genesis 1. 5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31. and to make the Week days all
uncertain, which is which, etc. is to make that dark and difficult, which the
Scriptures and Works of God have made plain.

I think within, we complain of the Romanists (and I think of others also) and
deservedly, for loading their Worship with Ceremonies, the number of which
(besides that they are mere humane Inventions, and so of no spiritual Use) are
a burden which has broken down many eminently Holy and Learned in this Age, and
which divert the Mind from Spiritual Worship.

And I think it also somewhat of the same Mischief, when Men's Minds are amused
with uncertain dark Speculations, whereby they are endeavored to be turned
away from plain and easy Obedience, and Ground is layen for perpetual Doubts
and Scruples, whilst the Word says one thing, and some of great Learning and
Influence do and teach another.

And as to the Point in question, I may say (as the Doctor p. 70.) I have upon
the whole said, as I weakly can, so much as I think may satisfy others, if
they consider it without Prejudice, a temper which the Holy Spirit can give his
People, and I know when men have long espoused a Notion by which they have a
benefit, which Notion, if they let go, they loose or endanger that benefit.

It is no great wonder if they go on in their old way, till God does awaken
them, but whether they go on with or without Doubts and Scruples, I know not.

Nor do I know any thing can be so plainly said, no, not from direct Word and
Law of God, which by an Ingenious and Learned Man, may not be cavilled at, if
he be so minded, and God will suffer him, and when the Lord has, as it seems to
me, so plainly declared his Will, if some will not submit to it, who else can
help it?

And when I have thus said, I leave the Success to the Lord.

Page 71. he mentions a late Book on this Subject, to which I had drawn such
Answer as I then could, before I saw the Doctor's, but finding, as far as I
remember, nothing therein in this case but what is offered with great Advantage
by the Doctor, or what may be answered by observing Readers. I think to say but
a little more to it.

P. 5. of his Preface, he says, Suppose the Authors (he means the Author of the
Enquiry) Notion be Orthodox, and the contrary (that is, his own) Heterodox, he
gives us the pernicious tendencies thereof.

That is, as I understand him, suppose it to be the mind of Christ, and a Sound
and Orthodox Opinion, that the Seventh day is the true Christian Sabbath (which
is a fair, and I think a true Supposition) yet he is against the Communicating
of it as pernicious (which seems to me somewhat harsh) and suppose his own
Opinion Erroneous and Heterodox; yet he is for it, and would not, as I
understand him, have it contradicted: to which I only Reply, that I doubt the
ancient Prophets, the Apostles, and the Reformers from Rome, etc. were not of
that mind.

In his little Book, he has these and other Reflections on the Author of the
Enquiry, or on that he there offers, or on those who receive it, etc.

As Judaical, fanciful, baffled, absurd, Heterodox, and impious, scrupulous,
superstitious, a Weed, and Thorn, rotten Premises, sandy Foundations, false
Measures, Proofs invalid, which it pitties him to see, uncharitable, rigorous,
deluded Brain of silly Zealots, impertinency, empty, false Premises, silly
Conjectures, against all Reason and common Sense, etc. which seem to me
blameable.

And he hopes p. 56. himself has written by Gods Assistance and Guidance, and
p. 163. by Gods Assistance, and p. 116. by Gods Help. and (he hopes) his
Guidance.

Which Expressions I think may be used sometimes, and in some Cases, but men
should take heed how they use them, as if they were divinely inspired, when
they use them so interwoven.

Page 70. to p. 79. the Doctor sums up what he has offered, with all the
advantages of a Learned Man, (as he sometimes does before) with new words, on
which I might make some Remarks.

In that about the Fifth Command, p. 82. he tells us, His Humane Law, that is
to determine who is to be reputed the Father, and this he applys, first to
natural Parents, which as cases may be put, may fall very heavy upon many
Children, whose Parents were married, but not according to Human Law.

And that General Rule from Humane Law, if I mistake him not, he understands as
determining the Law of God, for he says, p. 81. There be many things which the
Word of God, or the Divine Law does determine in Thesi ( that is in a general
Position) which when (in Hypothesi) they come in practice, will require the
intervention of Prudentials, or Humane Laws, and he there, and p. 82. puts
cases upon the Eighth, Seventh, Sixth, and Fourth Commands.

So his General Rule is applied to Laws in both Tables.

And what he there says as to Natural Parents, the like he says as to other
Superiors, as well as Natural Parents, and those Laws which seem absolute
(says he) have yet their tacit Limitations employed.

To which I Reply.

That I think every Man should beware how he sets up Humane Laws, to determine
against Gods Law in any case, for if Gods Law determine one thing to be a Duty
or a Sin, and Man's Law determine the contrary, we are I think to obey God, Acts
4. 19. whose Laws are Superior to all Humane Laws.

And he that in the Duties required in either Table, does allow the
intervening, or coming in of Prudentials, or Humane Laws to control or to
determine the Word of God, or the Divine Law, under that color, or tacit
Limitations employed, and of room for Prudence to interpose, does, I doubt,
unlord the Word and Law of God, Mark 7. 13. (which unlording the Word, or
making it of no effect, Mark 7. 13. is also spoken by our Lord there, in the
case of the Fifth Command, v. 9. to 13.) and does open a gap to enervate that
Law of God.

So that for any to say, that his Hunane Law that is to determine who is to be
reputed my civil Parent, that is, who is my lawful Prince (whatever the Law of
God determines in that case) under the subtle Words of Room, for Prudence to
interpose, and of tacit Limitations employed, I doubt reserves a liberty
inconsistent with the Word and Law of God, and very hard to be defended.

For with those Limitations, and if Humane Laws shall determine the Divine
Laws; in some Parts of the World bad Men may find Pretenses for the rankest
Atheism, Theism, Arrianism, and Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit,
notwithstanding the First Command, for the foulest Corruptions and Invasions on
Christian instituted Spiritual Worship, notwithstanding the Second, for the
highest Prophanations of the Name of the Divine Majesty, notwithstanding the
Third, as well as for polluting the Sabbath, notwithstanding the Fourth, and
for Rebellion, Murder, Adultery, Stealing, False-witnessing, and Covetting,
notwithstanding the other Six. And so it seems to me, such Limitations, etc.
have need of many Cautions to correct them.

Now before I answer the Doctor's two Expedients, I first Reply to somewhat
more I find in Mr. Chafie's Learned Tract.

Mr. Chafie in p. 2. of his Epistle, says, That Christ the Son of God, has
taken away the Jews Sabbath, and Established another, contrary to what God the
Father instituted, etc.

Now, tho I hope he was a very Good, as well as a Learned Man, yet he seems not
to have then had clear Apprehensions of Christ, as creating the World, and then
resting, nor of Christ, as instituting the Sabbath, Genesis 2. 2, 3. nor of Christ
confirming the Moral Law at Synai, etc. Exodus 20. nor of Christ making it
perpetual, in Matthew. 5. 18. Luke 16. 17.

And in that Tract Mr. Chafie speaks of one Sabbath at the Creation, another in
Exodus 16. and another at the Resurrection of Christ; by which Notion he makes
(to have been) three Sabbaths, from whom I think the Doctor takes up (if I
mistake him not) the like opinion of three Sabbaths, wherein I think they are
both out, as before. And hereafter for Mr. Chafie's Notion of one
Seventh-day Sabbath at the Creation, and another Seventh-day Sabbath in Exodus
16. I doubt would make two Seventh-day-Sabbaths in one Week of seven Days,
which seems to me inconsistent, and would make the First day more uncertain
also, besides the uncertainties of the Doctor.

Mr. Chafie's opinion, p. 19, 20. That God has not bound men to any set time
to begin their Week; and chap. 8. p. 18. he says, The Lawgiver himself has
plainly pointed out unto us in this Law, that is, in the Fourth Command, which
is the Lords Day, or Sabbath of the Lord, and that is the day following the six
days of Labor (with Men) and that in every nation, however they begin their
Week, the Seventhday thereof is the Lords, p. 20. l. 9. p. 44. l. 6, 7. and his
Epistle, p. 7. l. 4. and that the Seventh day is not to be reckoned from the
six days of God's Labor, but from the six days of Labor with Men; and so also
in his Postscript; but does acknowledge chap. 11. p. 35. it has been the
general opinion, not only of the Vulgar, but of the Learned also (which opinion
of the Learned I think is right) that the Seventh day commanded us in this Law,
has Relation only to the six Work-days of the Lord God, and not to the six
Work-days with Men; which opinion of Mr. Chafie's for Man's Day, is, I think,
contrary to Genesis 2. 2. for on the seventh day God ended his work, etc. and
rested the seventh day from all his work* so as it was the six days God wrought,
which were the six Working-days, and the Seventh day God rested, when he ended
his Work, which was and is the Holy and Blessed Sabbath, which first
appointment of the Lord I find no where changed, and so Exodus 20. 9, 10, 11.
Six days shall thou labor, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord, in
it thou shall not do any work, etc. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day,
and made it holy; and so it seems very plain, that the six, Working-days are
those on which the Lord wrought, and the Resting, or Sabbath day, that which
the Lord made Holy, and Blessed, and on which he Rested.

And Mr. Chafie in chap. 12. says, God by his Law tyeth all Nations, that at
what time soever they begin the Week, they work not on the Seventh day, but
sanctify it.

Which would be true if men began the Week as the Lord directed in Genesis 1. but
else by that Rule of Mr. Chafie's, Friday in Turkey (being their weekly
Sabbath) the Christians living in Turkey, are bound by the Fourth Command to
sanctify Friday, ( i. e.) the sixth Day of the Week, as the Lords Sabbath day,
because the Turks there so do.

And by the same Rule, those Christians who live in any Heathen Nation, where
they Worship the Sun, and observe Sunday, there they must keep Sunday, and
Sanctify it, because the Heathens where they live so do.

And those Christians who live in those Christian Provinces, who keep the
Seventh day, must keep the Seventh day as the Lords Day, because others so keep
it, and for that reason. And the like of those who live in any part of the
World amongst the Israelites.

And those Christians who live in those Christian Countries where they keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath, and the First day also, must keep I know not which of them
by Mr. Chafie's Rule. And I take it as agreed, we are not to keep two Days in a
Week, and that there are some such people of these sorts, see Enquiry, p. 119,
etc.

Which Rule of Mr. Chafie's, to resolve which is the Sabbath day commanded by
the Practice of the Country where we live, and that God has not bound men when
to begin their Week, is to set up Man's Day, as it seems to me, against the
Lords Day, and I think the Doctor writes by, for he seems to take it as he
finds it.

Which Rule I doubt will agree neither with the letter or meaning of Genesis 2. 2,
3. or of the Fourth Command.

What Mr. Chafie objects, That by the different Horizons, wherever Paradise
was (which p. 17. he says is unknown) no man can tell in the place where he
lives, when to begin the Day of Gods resting at the Creation.

I Answer, if our Sabbath did begin at the same instant of time that Gods first
Rest did, and Men were obliged to that instant, then that were an hard
objection.

But I know no place in the Word where it is said, that every Sabbath afterward
was to begin the same moment or time that the first Sabbath began in Paradise,
or at Synai, etc. Nor do I remember any thing so offered in any Writer. But
that the Sabbath then did, and that Sabbaths afterward were to begin in the
Evening everywhere, as Time was distributed into Days at the Creation, I think
is before shown, and that every Day of the Week began in the Evening, and
lasted from Evening to Evening, and that the Days began at or about Sunset,
and supposing the Darkness and light were the Evening and Morning of the three
first Days, Genesis 1. 5, 8, 13. sure the Days then did not begin at midnight,
when Darkness began the Day, and Darkness and Light made up the First day, and
so the Second day, and so the Third day, which Word I think may settle that
Point, that the Days did not begin at midnight.

Suppose also the Sun Created, as it was the Fourth day, and went round the
Earth every day after it was created, as it did, and does to this Day. But on
what part of the Fourth day the Sun was created is not certainly revealed that
I know.

The Fowls and the Fishes were created upon the fifth day.

And Adam was created on the Sixth day, and being created in the image of God,
was made capable of knowing and contemplating the Perfections of him that
created him, and of observing, and keeping Holy the Seventh day, which
presently after his Creation was Consecrated, or made Holy, and Blessed, to let
him into that Spiritual and Heavenly Life and Rest, which his State of
Innoceney made easy and pleasant to him.

And in Reply to one of the Doctor's Expedients, we may also suppose the Sun
when set in the Firmament, Genesis 1. 17. traveled Westward round the Earth
daily, as it still does.

Now when the Sun did set the Fourth day, then the Fifth day began at Paradise,
and when the Sun did set there next, the Sixth day began there, and when the
Sun did next set there, the Seventh day began there, and that first Seventh day
was probably as long as the other Days of the Week were, and are.

And as the Posterity of Adam (and so of Noah) traveled East, West, North, or
South, by degrees the Earth was overspread, Genesis 9. 19. and into whatever
Country they came, as the Sun did set, so every Day of the Week began, and so
on to this day.

I Write as plain as I can.

So as the weekly Seventh day did begin as the Sun did set, in every place
round the Earth, from Paradise Westward, till the Sun came about in 24 hours to
Paradise again.

And for an instance, and for certainties sake, I will begin with the Eleventh
of March, the vernal Aequinox, 1692/3 which falls out to be the Seventh day of
the Week.

And the Seventh day at the Creation, did begin as the three First days, and
the other Weekdays did, that is, in the Evening, as Mr. Chafie, and many other
Learned Men do agree, at, or about Sun set, as I think is before shown, and
lasted 24 Hours, from Evening to Evening, according to Genesis 1, and Genesis 2.

And the Sabbath day then was as it still is, proportionably as long as the
other Six Days of the Week allowed for Work, or rather wherein we are commanded
to work, every of which six Days has a Night or Darkness, as well as Day
Light, in which Night or Darkness, if need be, Men may as lawfully work, as in
the Day Light, tho generally the Day is made for Work, and the Night for Rest.

And so the Sabbath day has an Evening, and a Morning, that is, a Night and
Day of Holy Rest, in which Night we may take Rest, as in other Nights.

As for those who begin the Sabbath day in the Morning, they lose the Evening,
that is, the Night of that Day, which being no part of the Sixth day, nor (to
such) any part of the Seventh day, yet 12 Hours of time between the End of the
Sixth, and Morning of their Seventh day, would cease to them to be any part of
the Week, if their Opinion would hold who begin the Sabbath in the Morning,
unless they continue their Sabbath till the next Morning, and so turn God's
first Institution upside down.

Others who begin and end the Sabbath day at midnight, being then generally
asleep at both, when they begin and end it, they cannot tell when they begin or
end it, and so must needs loose those Meditations which are peculiar to the one
and to the other, and how any can begin or end it at mid night I know not.

But supposing as before, the Evening in all Parts of the Earth, begins and
ends the Day, then it is easy for all to know the beginning and ending of it.

And as the Evening and Morning made up every Day of the Week in Paradise, so
Evening and Morning, as Mankind came about the Earth, made up every Day of the
Week everywhere else, and as the Evening of the Seventh day came, so the
Sabbath began, and the Sabbath ended everywhere as the rest of the Days of the
Week ended, that is, the Evening after.

And if this be the true Scheme of Days, then somewhere in the Round of the
Earth, every Inhabitant of it the 11th. of March, 1692/3. may not only keep the
Sabbath, but certainly know when it begins and ends, and will have also their
full six Nights and Days in the Week for their Work and Callings.

And so as Adam or his Posterity, and so as Noah or his Posterity, traveled
into any part of the Earth, East, West, North, or South, where ever they came
after six days of Travel, or other Labor, they might, as the Sun did set, Rest
the Seventh day.

And all the tying up all parts of the Earth to the precise time or moment of
the Lords resting in the Evening of the first Seventh day at the Creation, and
that the Seventh day Sabbath everywhere over the Earth, ever after, must begin
and end the same minute the first Sabbath began and ended, whether it be at
midday, or mid*night, or any other part of Night or Day, seems a mere cramping
of the Question, without any Ground for it that I know from the Word.

Whereas, if the days begin in the Evening, as I think they, do, and if the
Evening and the Morning do constitute and make up a day as they do, then all
the Scruples raised, when every Day of the Week, and in particular, when the
Seventh day-Sabbath, all over the Earth, does begin, and end, are resolved,
that is, in the Evening, and so the two long days in Joshuah's and Ezekiah's
times, make no alteration of Days, as in the Enquiry. And so the Evening and
the Morning make up every Day of the Week to us in England, and to every other
Nation in the Earth, and for any other certain way to resolve when the days do
begin and end, but by Gods first appointment, I know not, for else it would put
the most skilful Mathematicians everywhere to a stand, when to begin and end
the Days, and leave all Computations of Days, and Weeks, and Time in
uncertainties and great disorder.

I take the 11th. of March the vernal Aequinox, because Astronomers agree the
Sun to be then in the Equator, as it is the 11th. of September, at the
Autumnal Aequinox, at which times, the Days and Nights are by them said to be
equal all over the Earth.

And if I had supposed the Sun in his Declination to either of the Topics, the
various Climates, and obliquity of the Horizon, might have occasioned disputes,
which, what I can, I avoid, and therefore take the 11th. of March, 1692/3.

Nor do I enquire the place of Paradise, where it is, about which there are
many disputes, which place Learned Mr. Chafie confesses is not known.

And if we know not where Paradise is, then I cannot begin to give Instances of
the Scheme before from thence, but if it lies East or West from Mount Synai,
that will make some difference of time in the beginning and end of Days at
Synai, and at Paradise, and yet not alter the days of the Week in either, for
that the Seventh day of the Week in Paradise, was, is, and will be in the
weekly Circulation of days, the Seventh day of the Week there.

And the Seventh day in the Week at Synai, though it may differ in degrees of
Longitude from Paradise, yet was, is, and will be in the weekly Circulation of
Days, the Seventh day of the Week at Synai; and so of the rest of the Days
there and in every other place, as in Egypt, Exodus 5. 5. where the Israelites
kept the Sabbath, and Exodus 16. 1, 23, to 30. in the Wilderness of Sin.

And yet notwithstanding that difference in Degrees between Paradise and
Egypt, and the Wilderness, and Synai, that made no difference between them, as
to the beginning or ending of Days.

In Paradise the Seventh day (as the First, Second, and other Weekdays) began
in the Evening, and ended the next Evening, and so the Seventh day in Egypt,
in the Wilderness, and at Synai, began in the Evening, and ended the next
Evening. And at all those places, according to appointment at the making of the
World, Genesis 1. and Genesis 2. notwithstanding the different Degrees or Minutes
there might be of the Sunsetting at Paradise, and at those places.

The Lord who knows all his own Works, the Beginning or Head of whose Word is
Truth, Genesis 1. 1. Psalm. 119. 160. The entrance of whose words will give light,
Psalm. 119. 130. Blessed and made holy the seventh day* Sabbath, Genesis 2. 3. at
Paradise.

And blessed and made holy the seventh day at Synai, Exodus 20. 11, 12. although
it is likely there are some Degrees or Minutes between.

But how ever that be, yet we are pretty certain by the Maps where Synai was,
and is, and where Jerusalem was and is.

And according to the common received Principles of Astronomy, fifteen Degrees
making an Hour, Jerusalem is situate about six Degrees in Longitude, Westward
from Synai, and so the Sun sets at Jerusalem, after his setting at Synai,
twenty four Minutes of an Hour, or thereabout, that is, two fifth parts of an
Hour, Westward from Synai, and yet that difference in the beginning of the
Seventh day at Synai, and of the Seventh day at Jerusalem, made no alteration
of the beginning or ending of the Seventh day-Sabbath at either.

The same Seventh day which was commanded to be remembered to be kept Holy at
Mount Synai, and which was repeated by Moses in Deuteronomy near Jordan, which
place near Jordan may be about twenty two Minutes of Longitude from Synai, was
certainly remembered and kept Holy by the Israelites, at Mount Zion in
Jerusalem, with this difference, that the Seventh day began at Jerusalem,
twenty four Minutes of an Hour after it began at Synai, and some Minutes after
it began near Jordan, which made no alteration of Days at either, but the
Seventh day at Synai began in the Evening, twenty four Minutes of an Hour
before it began at Jerusalem, and at Jerusalem, the Seventh day began twenty
four Minutes of an Hour Westward, after it began at Synai, and yet was the
Seventh day in both, and began in the Evening at both, that is, at or about Sun
set at both, notwithstanding the difference in time of twenty four Minutes,
which may a little direct how to find when the Seventh day does begin, and so
of the rest of the Days every where.

This may be illustrated by further Instances, and for certainties sake, I will
set out, and begin to reckon from Jerusalem, where they observed the true
Seventh day Westward (without setting a Meridian there, although it be Arbitrary,
as the Doctor acknowledges, and may be set where we will) and by degrees bring
the Account round the Earth to Jerusalem again.

From Jerusalem to Colosse, are about seven Degrees, that is, twenty eight
Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Ephesus 9 Degrees, that is, 36 Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Antioch, where Paul and his Company kept the Sabbath, Acts
13. 13, 14, 15, 16, 27, 42. q?.

From Jerusalem to Philippi, now ruined and desolate, which was situated on the
confines of Thrace, are about 14 Degrees, that is, 56 Minutes, where they kept
the Sabbath, Acts 16. 12, 13, 14.

From Jerusalem to Corinth, are about 17 Degrees, that is, 1 Hour and 8
Minutes, yet this difference of time, and so of beginning of the Sabbath, made
no alteration of the Sabbath, where they also kept the Sabbath, Acts 18. 1, 4.

As they did also as Thessalonica, Acts 17. 1, 2. where the Sun sets about 1
Hour and 10 Minutes after it sets at Jerusalem.

And every where as the Sun did set, so the Sabbath day, as every other Day of
the Week did begin and end as before.

From Jerusalem to Warsaw in Poland, are about 22 Degrees, that is, 1 Hour and
28 Minutes difference of Sunsetting.

From Jerusalem Westward to Vienna, are about 29 Degrees, that is, 1 Hour 56
Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Rome, are about 30 Degrees, that is, 2 Hours.

From Jerusalem to Amsterdam, are about 40 Degrees ( i. e.) 2 Hours and 40
Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Paris, are 44 Degrees, that is, 2 Hours 56 Minutes.

From Jerusalem to London, are about 48 Degres, that is, 3 Hours and 12 Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Edinburgh, 49 Degrees, that is, 3 H. 16 Min.

From Jerusalem to Dublin, about 53 Degrees, that is, 3 Hours and 32 Minutes.

From Jerusalem to Lisbon, are about 57 Degrees, that is, 3 Hours and 48
Minutes.

From Jerusalem to New England, are about 120 Degrees. that is, 8 H.

I have passed over the first Meridian (which is Arbitrary as before) and
follow the Sun as it goes round the Globe of the Earth, till it comes about to
Jerusalem again, which as to this way of accounting, I think makes no
alteration.

And all these differences in Hours and Minutes, from the setting of the Sun at
Jerusalem, and the setting of the Sun in all these beforementioned, and all
other places in the Earth, make no alteration of the Days, or of the Sabbath,
all which begin every where, as the Sun sets every where, and when the Sun
every where did set, so the Sabbath day, as every other Day of the Week did
begin and end as before.

I still follow the Sun from Jerusalem to Japan, the Sun may be said to set
seventeen Hours at Japan, after it sets at Jerusalem, and when the Sun sets at
Japan, then the Seventh day begins at Japan* 11 of March, 1694/5.

And from Japan (to pass over the other Meridian and Rest of the Land in Asia)
to Jerusalem again, about seven Hours.

And so from Jerusalem, as the Sun goes round the Earth to Jerusalem again,
are 24 Hours, that is, from the Sunsetting at Jerusalem the 11th of March,
169^/^. to the Sunsetting at Jerusalem the 12th of March, 169^. are 17 Hours
from Jerusalem to Japan, and 7 Hours from Japan to Jerusalem, and 17 and 7 are
24 Hours, the Evening and the Morning which make up the Day.

Which Scheme does, as I weakly can, travel round the World, and if it be right
in the main, may answer some Doubts about the Days in this case. And if I
mistake, I think I do not wilfully mistake, in which account I had no help from
Globes, and so I have no great assurance, but that there may be mistakes, and I
am content to be corrected by the Learned Doctor, who excels in Astronomy, in
Geography, and I think in most other Learning. Or any other Ingenious,
Unprejudiced and Skilful, who may find mistakes in the Degrees of Longitude,
and in the Hours or Minutes, which however I think may not hurt the Opinion
built upon it, that the difference in the time of the Sun setting in any of,
and all those places, and so of all other places in the Earth, the 11 of March,
1692/3. makes no alteration in the beginning or ending of the Sabbath day,
supposing as before, that day (with the rest of the Days of the Week) did begin
at the Creation, and does still begin and end about the time of the Sun*
setting, and suppose also that beginning and ending never altered since the
Creation to this day.

And if this be so, it seems demonstrable, that every Day of the Week began
every where in the Evening; and to the Seventh day also round the World as the
Sun did set.

The Doctor's other expedient, he would have me begin my Week on Monday, and
then Sunday will be the Seventh day, I suppose he means if I can tell seven.
But if the Doctor please to begin the Week as God begins it, Genesis 1. 5. and if
he reckon on v. 8. 13, 19, 23, 31, as God does, he will find Genesis 2. 2, 3. the
Seventh day to be the Sabbath, and as it seems to me, to begin in the Evening.

And in lieu of his two Expedients, I will with his Favor, advise him and
others two things,

1st. Upon the Fourth Command, Exodus 20. 8, 9. To take heed how they assume a
liberty to alter any Command of God, or any jot or tittle thereof, because of
Mat. 5. 18, 19. and Rev. 22. 18, 19, etc.

2dly. Upon the Second Command: Whatever be the manner of Worship in the place
where he or they live, unless they be sure that for Matter and Manner it be
according to Christ's Institutions: That they beware how they take it as they
there find it, which though it may be a probable means of worldly Advantages,
yet I have some doubt, it is no sound Rule to Worship by, because the Lord thy
God is a jealous God, visiting iniquity, etc. and showing mercy to those who
love him, and keep his commandments, Exodus 20. 4, 5, 6. and Deuteronomy. 5. 8, 9, 10,
etc.

And upon the whole, I think not A, but the Seventh-day Sabbath was observed by
the Lord, Genesis 2. 2, 3. and afterward by the Patriarchs, by Moses, and by the
Israelites in Egypt, and in the Wilderness of Sin, where they had Mannah, and
at Mount Synai, and at Mount Zion in Jerusalem and to the end of the Old
Testament, to whom the Lord made known his sabbath, Neh. 9. 13, 14. his
Sabbaths as before, and to whom he gave them as a sign, and as an everlasting
covenant, and that not A, but, The Sabbath was observed perfectly and
constantly by Christ during his life, which I think proves it not forgotten,
nor altered to his time, and that not A, but The Sabbath was observed by his
Disciples, inspired by the Holy Spirit after his Resurrection, and Ascension,
which also proves it not forgotten, nor altered then.

And as their losing the Knowledge, which was the Seventh day, is not in the
Word that I know, so the certain Seventh day, was preserved by all Nations,
Worshipping the Sun on Sunday, Mr. Chafie, p. 20, etc. and all the Israelites
before Christ, and all the Jews since (that we can read or hear of) and some
Christians still keep not A, but The Seventh day, and many Christians keep the
first day, other Christians keep both Seventh and First day, as in the Enquiry;
and the early and long Controversies about what Days to keep the Passover on,
and the Histories, Counsels, Centuries, and our own Records, Ancient and
Modern, as in the Enquiry, seem plainly to prove, that the Seventh day was
never altered, from Christ's time to this day, nor from the Creation to Christ's
time, and that the Seventh day in England is the same Seventh day varying the
Hours and Minutes as before, which was observed by Christ, which was made
perpetual by Christ, which was observed at Mount Zion, which was given at
Synai, and which was blessed and made holy at the Creation, Genesis 2.

And here I might also observe, that the Doctor neither denis nor answers the
Authorities in the Enquiry, for observing the Sabbath, 400 and 700 years, etc.
after Christ, and for the changing the Seventh day to the First day by Rome,
etc. not the clear Evidence for the first bringing in the First day into
Scotland, by a Counsel there above 1200 years after Christ, nor that of the
King and Nobles of England here to like purpose, Enquiry p. 106. to 114, etc.

Nor that how all our Ancient and Modern Records in England to this day, call
the Seventh day of the Week the Sabbath day, Enquiry, p. 117. to which the
Doctor says nothing, nor to that of the many Provinces and one Empire still
observing the Seventh day, Enq. p. 119. 120. And all put together, I think may
sufficiently disprove the uncertainty which is the Seventh day, which the
Doctor so often would leave doubtful against himself, and may prove that our
Seventh day of the Week is the true Seventh day, blessed and made holy at the
creation.

And I insist, that Christ's Command to keep Holy the Seventh day, not being
altered, nor repealed, but with all the rest confirmed, and made perpetual by
him, still binds, as all the rest of the Commands do.

I have passed by diverse Expressions in the Doctor's Book, but have not that I
know declined any thing that required, as I think, further Reply, and what he
objects again, and again I often think it enough to answer to but once. And if
I do not fully repeat his Objections or Words at large, it is to make this
Reply as short as I can, and the Reader may resort to the Book.

And to conclude: Instead of further summing up what I have weakly written here
in Reply to the Learned Doctor and others, as I could, I commend to the Reader
a few Scriptures.

Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4. On the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and
he rested the seventh day from all his work which he had made, and God blessed
the seventh day, and made it holy, because that in it he had rested from all
his work which he had created and made, and so the Sabbath is the day upon
which God rested after his Work, and which he Blessed and made Holy, who is, v.
4. Jehovah Aelohim, the Lord God, so the Seventh day is the Lords day.

Exodus 16. 29. The seventh-day sabbath is said to be as it is, a gift, The Lord
has given you the sabbath, and so we should take it as a Gift from him, as his
Gift, and as the Lords day

Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy, etc. The
seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God, and so the Seventh day is the
Lords day.

Exodus 31. 13. The Lord calls them my sabbaths, verily, my sabbaths ye shall
keep, so the Sabbath is the Lords day, it is a sign between me and you, etc.
that ye may know that I am the Lord that does sanctify you, v. 14. and ye
shall keep the sabbath because it is holiness to you, v. 15. Six days work
shall be done, but the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holiness to the Lord, v.
16. the sabbath, a perpetual covenant, it is holiness to you, v. 14. and holy to
the Lord, v. 15. and v. 16. the sabbath, a perpetual covenant, and v. 17 a sign
for ever. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh
day he rested, and was refreshed, so the Seventh day is the Lords day. And v.
18. The Lord gave to Moses to tables of testimony, written with the finger of
God. And Exodus 32. 15, 16. the tables were the work of God, and the writing the
writing of God, upon which tables of testimony or witness the fourth command
was one.

Exodus 35. 2. Six days shall work be done, and on the seventh day it shall be
to you holiness.

Lev. 23. 3. Six days shall work be done, but the seventh day is the sabbath of
rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein, it is the sabbath of
the Lord, etc. so the Seventh day is the Lords day.

Lev. 23. 32. from even unto even shall ye celebrate your sabbath, which I
think is directing in an Humiliation day, which is there to begin in the
Evening when they were to afflict themselves.

And I think states this part of the Question, when the Days began, that is, in
the Evening, and when they ended, that is, at the next Evening, which the Dr.
p. 27. thinks, began and ended at midnight.

In Numb. 15. 32. we have the case of the Man who gathered sticks not A, but
The Sabbath day, which is a great, certain, undeniable example against the
least profaning of the Sabbath day.

Deuteronomy. 5. 12. Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee, 13. Six days labor, etc. v. 14. But the seventh day is the
sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. so the Seventh day is the Lords day of Rest (
i. e.) the seventh day is the Lords day, Psalm. 119. 1, 6. blessed are those who
walk in his law, and in keeping of his commandments there is great reward,
Psalm. 19. 11.

Esai. 56. 2. Blessed is the man who keeps the sabbath from polluting it, v.
4. 6. from polluting it, Ezekiel. 20. 13, 16, 24 my sabbath they greatly polluted,
if we would be Blessed, keep his Sabbaths, and don't pollute them, which it
seems was Isreal's Sin, of old.

Esai. 58. 13. If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day, and call the sabbath a delight, or delights, the holy
of the Lord (so the Sabbath day is the Lords day) honorable, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words, v. 14. then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, etc. and
is not that a desirable frame?

Ezekiel. 22. 1, 2. The word of the Lord, thou have profaned my sabbath, v. 26.
her Priests have violated my law, etc. and have hid* their eyes from my
sabbaths. So the Sabbath day is the Lords day.

Ezekiel. 44. 4, 5, 15, 24. in the prophecy of the new temple there is a promise,
that the Priests who shall come near unto the Lord to minister unto him, they
shall hallow my sabbaths. So the Sabbath day is the Lords day.

Matthew. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the law, v. 18. For verity I
say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no
wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled, don't think that Christ altered
one tittle of the Law, and so not one jot or tittle is yet passed from the Law.

Matthew. 18. 8. Christ is said to be Lord of the Sabbath day, and if Christ be
Lord of the Sabbath day, then the Sabbath day is the Lords day.

Mat. 24. 20. Pray that your flight be not on the sabbath day, which flight was
about 38 years after Christ's Death, which I think shows it was to continue
after his Death, that is, as I think, as long as the World lasts.

Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. Christ to his Disciples, go teach all nations, teaching
them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, and Christ with
the Father and holy Spirit, one Jehovah, gave the commands as before.

Mark 1. 21. after Christ's Baptism by John, v. 9. Jesus came into Galilee,
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, v. 14. repent ye, and believe the
Gospel, v. 15. then he calls Simon, and Andrew, James and John, and they
followed him, v. 16 to 20. and they went into Capernaum, and straitway, on the
sabbath day, he entered into the Synagogue, and taught, and Mark 2. 27. the
sabbath was made for man, for his good, for his spiritual good.

Mark 16. 1, 2. Jesus came into his own country and his disciples followed him,
and when the sabbath day was come, he began to preach in the synagogue, which
also proves the Sab. made for the spiritual use of man.

Luke 4. 16, to 27. in v. 14. (after his being tempted, v. 13.) Jesus returned
in the power of the spirit, into Galilee, and v. 15. taught in their
Synagogues, and v, 16. he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and
as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up
for to read, and preached the Gospel, v. 17, to 29. and then he came down to
Capernaum, and taught them on the sabbath day, besides diverse other places in
the Evangelists, which do all prove the Sabbath made for the spiritual good of
Man. And so I think we have enough to prove that our Lord Jesus Christ kept the
Sabbath during his life, and that perfectly; for he was a lamb without spot or
blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19, etc. and that the Seventh day Sabbath was made holy for
the spiritual Good of Man.

Luke 16. 17. it is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, then one tittle of the
Law to fail, which one would think are strong words, and of Authority in this
case. And Heaven and Earth are not yet passed, and so not one tittle of the Law
does yet fail; and if this Scripture be true, as it surely is, it mightily
proves the Seventh day to be the Sabbath, Ezod. 20. 10. which Seventh day in
the Fourth Command is more then a tittle.

Luke 23. 54, 55, 56. And when he was Crucified, Dead and Buried, and the
Sabbath drew on, the Women followed after, and beheld the Sepulcher, and how
his Body was laid, and they returned and prepared Spices and Ointments, and
rested, not A, but The Sabbath day, according to the Commandment, that is,
according to the Fourth Commandment, and so the Seventh day was not altered
then, and so kept not A, but the Sabbath day, after Christ's Death and Burial,
as in probability all other Believers then did, for I do not remember to have
read of any that deny it.

John 14 15. If ye love me keep my commandments, Exodus 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 9 John
14. 21. he that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
23. If a man love me he will keep my words.

John 15. 10. If ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love, 14. ye are
my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Are we Friends of Christ, and
would we abide in his Love, then keep his Commands.

Acts 13. 13, 14. Paul and his Company went into the Synagogue at Antioch, on
the Sabbath day, and v. 15. After the reading of the law and the prophets, v.
16. Paul stood up and preached Christ to them, from v. 16. to 41. and, v. 42.
the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next
Sabbath, not the next Morning upon the First day of the Week, but the next
Sabbath, and so after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and after the
Disciples were all filled with the Holy Spirit, Acts 2. 1, 4. It Is certain Paul
kept the Sabbath, and Preached to Jews and Gentiles, not upon the First day of
the Week, but upon the Sabbath day.

And we have the like Acts 13. 44. the next Sabbath day (not the next Morning)
almost the whole City came together to hear the Word of God, and v. 47, 48. as
many of the gentiles as were ordained to eternal life believed: so diverse
Gentiles were here converted unto Christ on the Sabbath day, v. 49. the word of
the Lord was published throughout all the region, and v. 52. the disciples were
filled with joy, and with the holy spirit, and is not this a desirable frame?
and do not all these prove that the Sabbath was made for the spiritual good of
Man?

And Acts 14, 1. In Iconium, Paul and Barnabas went both together into the
Synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke, that a great multitude both of the Jews,
and also of the Greeks believed, a great multitude, and v. 3. The Lord gave
testimony to the word of his grace, by signs and wonders done by them. Acts 16.
1, 3, 12, 13, 14, 15. at Philippi, Paul and Timothy, on the Sabbath day went
out of the City by a Rivers side, where Prayer was wont to be made, and spoke
to the women which resorted thither, where Lydia was converted, whose heart the
Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul, and
was baptized, and her Household; which Scriptures with many others, do show, and
I think prove that the Sabbath was not altered, but did continue after Christ's
Ascension, and was observed.

Acts 17. 1. to 4. at Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews, Paul, as
his manner was (as Christ's manner was Luke 4. 16.) went in unto them, and three
sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures, alleging, that Christ
must needs have suffered, and risen again from the Dead, and that this Jesus
whom he preached unto them is Christ, and some of them believed; and consorted
with Paul and Silas, and of the devout Greeks, that is of the Gentiles, a great
multitude, and of the the chief Women, not a few were converted to Christ upon
the Sabbath day, so the Law for keeping Holy the Sabbath, was not then passed
away.

And Acts 18. 1, 2, 4, 5, 19. at Corinth Paul Reasoned, that is ( Greek)
Preached in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks,
that is, the Jews and Gentiles. And what greater, and stronger, and clearer
Evidence and Proof for the Seventh-day Sabbath can Man desire, then these plain
Scriptures are? and that it was at first Instituted, Blessed, and made Holy,
and throughout the Scriptures of Old and New Testament, used for the conversion
and eternal good of Man.

Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the law through Faith, be it not, yea, we
establish the law. Romans 7. 12. The law is holy, and just, and good. Romans 7. 14.
we know that the Law is Spiritual. Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one that believes. And 1 Cor. 9. 21. Paul was under
the law to Christ, and 1 Cor. 11. 1. he says, be ye followers of me, even as I
also am of Christ, who 1 Cor. 15. 3. dyed for our sins, and 1 John 3. 4. sin is
the transgression of the law, but Gal. 3. 11. no man is justified by the law,
v. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, v. 21. Is the law
against the promises of God, God forbid, or be it not, v. 24. but our
schoolmaster unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith, who Tit. 2. 14.
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all anomy, or contrariety (in
Opinion or Conversation) to the law of God, and Heb. 8. 10. the Lord says, I
will put my laws into their minds, and write them in or upon their hearts,
which surely is greatly desirable, that his Law be written on our Hearts. And
we have the like promise, Heb. 10. 15, 16, 17. says the Lord, I will put my
laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, which Law in Jam.
20. 8. is called a Royal Law, that is, the Kingly, Chief, and universal Law,
under which all other Laws of God are comprehended, which Christ, the Lord and
King over all, has prescribed and commanded, 1 John 1. 10. If we say that we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, 1 John 2. 3. and hereby we know that we
know him, if we keep his commandments, v. 4. he that says I know him, and
keeps not his commandments (is mistaken) v. 6. he that says he abides in
him, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked, and Christ kept the sabbath,
and 1 John 3. 22. whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and 1 John 5. 3. for this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, 2 Ep. of Joh 6. this is love, that we walk after his
commandments, Rev. 12. 17. The Dragon was wroth, and went to make War with
those who kept the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
and Rev. 14. 1^. Here are those who keep the commandments of God, and the faith
of Jesus, and Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they
may have right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the
city.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 28. for Cronologies, read Cronologers, p. 4. l. 5. r. one, p. 5.
l. 15. for v. 19. r. v. 16. p. 5. l. 39. r. but, p. 9. l 27. dele and, p. 10.
l. 15. for Jashebeth, r. Lashebeth, p. 12. l. 15. for Morah, r. Marah, p. 13.
l. 14. dele 22. l. 15. for Exodus 12. 12, 13. r. Exodus 12. 32. p. 15. l. 4. for
23. r. 2, 3. p. 16. l, 28. for 15. r. 14. p. 18. l. 37. dele 14. p. 19. l. 26.
for v. 5. r. v. 6. p. 21. l. 1. dele and 42. p. 23. l. 18. for 6. r. 16. l. 21.
dele and 21. 46. p. 24. l. 23. for one, r. One, p. 29. l. 40. for Number. 6. r.
Number. 9. p. 33. l. 5. for 30. r. 13. l. 35. for 30. r. 13. p. 34. l. 18. dele
it, p. 41. l. 23. for sacrificis, r. and sacrifices, p. 46. l. 6. for (...), r.
(...), l. 7. for (...), r. (...), p. 47. l. 6. for 15. r. 5. and for (...), ^.
(...), l. 8. for (...), r. (...), l. 9. for (...), r. (...), l. 17. for must
be, one, r. must be, are, p. 49. l. 32. dele and, p. 50. l. 6. for Apostles, r.
Apostle, l. 9. for day, r. days, l. 14. for other, r. others, p. 53. l. 11. for
was, r. is, p. 54. l. 34. for? put* p. 58. l. 21. for Anp, r. And, l. 26. dele
as, p. 63. l. 31. for His r. ' It Is, p. 64. l. 17. for or, r. of. l. 23. for
his, r. ' it is, p. 65. l. 20. r. as before and hereafter, p. 72. l. 30. r.
degrees.


