THE FRENCH PERFUMER.

Teaching the several ways of Extracting the Odours of Drugs and Flowers, and
Making all the Compositions of Perfumes for Powder, Wash-balls, Essences, Oils,
Wax, Pomatum, Paste, Queen of Hungary's Rosa Solis, and other Sweet Waters.

The Manner of Preparing Sweet Toilets, Boxes, etc. with the Preparations and
Use of Perfumes of all kinds whatsoever.

ALSO How to Color and Scent Gloves and Fans.

Together with the Secret of Cleansing Tobacco, and Perfuming it for all sorts
of Snuff, Spanish, Roman, etc.

Done into English from the Original Printed at Paris.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Buckley at the Dolphin over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1696.

TO THE READER.
THE Origin of Perfumes is as Ancient as the Creation of the World; when the
whole Earth was a delicious Garden, exhaling the sweetest Smells. Art that
never Injures Nature, but rather improves it, in succeeding Times collected
what that good Mother had scattered in several places to Compound agreeable
Mixtures of Sweets: After innumerable Observations upon repeated Experiments,
this Art is brought under infallible Rules to its utmost Perfection; by help of
such Rules which I had learnt from the best Masters, and made use of a long
time, I have collected the Secrets which I now present to the Public.

This Treatise is not designed to instruct Artists, who have particular Rules
of their own, which (though by different Methods) lead them to the same end,
but compiled for the Public Good, which with me is the best reason for doing
it, and for which therefore I shall not ask their Pardon.

Persons of Quality and Condition will find here in a short View, a Variety of
Sweets for various Uses, if they can afford themselves leisure enough to gather
Flowers at their Country Seats, and make use of them for Perfumes, they may not
only agreeably divert themselves in the Operation, but likewise save the
Expense of buying them at Extravagant Rates in Shops: The Fair Sex especially,
whose natural Graces receive so Charming a Luster from Neatness, will find
enough in this Treatise to gratify their Curiosity.

If any Difficulties arise, they are explained in my Advertisements, I would
not insert them through the body of the Book, because the Reader might more
easily find them there, and not be puzzled in preparing my Receipts.

Those who are read in the Holy Scriptures, will not disapprove of my Design,
if they consider that there was in the Old Testament an Altar whereon they
burnt nothing else but Perfumes; and that it is expressly written in several
places in the Bible, that God delighted in Sweet Smells. Scentings prescribed,
and so exactly observed in the ancient Law, are further Instances of the
Antiquity and use of Perfumes.

Solomon had a great many Women who prepared Perfumes for his own use: The
Queen of Sheba, who came so far to see that Wise King, presented him with
several Perfumes. Some of the Offerings made to our Savior by the Wise Men
were Perfumes; and Mary Magdalene could not express her love better to Jesus
Christ, than in washing his Feet with Sweet Ointment.

But to leave the Holy History, and mention the Esteen they are in our days,
our present King has diverted himself very often in seeing Mr. Martial compose
in his Closet several Sweets which His Majesty was pleased to wear about
himself. The Prince of Conde, whose Memory will be ever precious to France,
pleased himself often in seeing Mr. Charles Scent Snuff, and make other
Perfumes which His Highness made particular use of. The Powder that we call a
la Marechale took its name from my Lady Marechale d' Aumont, who delighted in
preparing it. Whosoever would imitate these great Persons, and pass the time
away in making Perfumes, etc. will find great assistance in this little Book,
and I assure them they will succeed infallibly, provided they follow my
Directions, for there is not one Receipt in it which I have not tried my self
with all the Success imaginable.

THE TABLE.
A List of the Ingredients of Perfumes, and Remarks on them Page 1, etc.
Advertisements concerning the Principal Compositions. 9
Powders.
POwder of Common Roses for Hair 23 Powder of Musked Roses 24 Powder of Orange
flowers ibid. Powder of Jasmin 25 Powder of Jonquils ibid. Powder of Ambret 26
Powder to perfume other Powders ibid. Powder washed with Brandy 27 Powder of
Violets or Iris Powder ibid. Powder of Moss of Oak called Cyprus Powder 28
Powder of Frangipane 29 Another sort of the same 30 Another sort 31 The manner
of perfuming Powder as they do it at Montpellier ibid. Fine Powder a la
Marechale, good to make Pasts for Beads and Medals 32
Wash-balls.
THE manner of cleansing Soap 32 Common Wash*balls 33 Another sort 34 Another
sort 35 Neroly Wash-balls 36 Bolognia Wash-balls 37 Bolognia Balls the best 38
Wash-balls well perfumed 40 Another sort 41 Benjamin-water the best 42 Spunges
prepared for the Face 43
Essences and Oils perfumed with Flowers.
HOW to make Essences of Flowers 44 Essence of Millefleur, or of several sorts
of Flowers 46 Olive Oil perfumed with Flowers 47 Oil of Sweet*Almonds perfumed,
and Paste to wash hands ibid. Essence of Neroly 49 Essence of Bergamot or Cedra
50 Essence of Orange strong ibid. Essence of Citron or Lemmon 51
Of Pomatums.
POmatum perfumed with Flowers 53 Pomatum good to refresh the Complexion, and
take off the redness of the Face 55 Another sort of Pomatum very good for the
Face 56 Another sort very fine for the Face 57 Pomatum for the Lips 58 Receipt
to make a liquid Paste of Almonds to wash hands without Water. 59 Opiate in
Powder to cleanse the Teeth 60 Another sort ibid. Another sort ibid. Receipt to
make liquid Opiat 61
Perfumes good for the Mouth.
ESsence of Amber 62 Essence of Hypocras 63 Cachoo perfumed with Amber very
good for the Mouth 64 Pastils perfumed good to eat 65 Excellent Hypocras
perfumed 66 Rosa Solis, or perfumed Liquor ibid. Another Liquor perfumed 67
Perfumed Sweet Waters.
ANgel-water boiled 68 Another sort 69 Millefleur-water, or of all sorts of
Flowers ibid. Angel-water distilled in Mars balneo 70 Carnation-water 71
Cinnamon*water ibid. Thyme-water ibid. Orange*flower-water distilled in a cold
Still 72 Rose Water 73 Queen of Hungary's water ibid.
Pastils to burn.
ORdinary Pastils 74 Pastils of Roses made into Wax-Candles 75 Spanish Pastils
ibid. Portugal Pastils 76 Receipt to dissolve Gum to make the Paste for Pastils
77 Receipt to make perfumed Paste for Beads and Medals ibid. Another sort 78
Another sort ibid. Another sort ibid. Annother sort 79 Receipt to prepare Gums
for the said Pasts ibid.
Gross Powders a la Marechale, and how to use them.
GRoss Powder a la Marechale 80 Another sort ibid. Another sort 81 Receipt for
Sweet Bags 82 Rose buds 83 Orange-flowers dry ibid. Sweet Bags 84 Another sort
ibid. Sweet Bags to wear about you. 85 Another sort ibid. Another sort 86
Baskets of Ozier Perfumed to keep Ladies Cloths in 87 Pockets Perfumed for
Ladies 88 Periwig Boxes Perfumed ibid. Perfume for the wrong side of Taby 89
Perfumed Boxes to keep Linen in ibid. Perfumed Toilets 90 Sweet Toilets as
they are Perfumed at Montpellier 91 Another sort 92 Perfume to wear about you
93 Another sort ibid. Another sort 94 Another sort 95 Another sort ibid.
Another sort ibid. Perfumes of Smoke ibid. Cotton Perfumed 96 Another sort
ibid. Another sort ibid. To Perfume a Room with Smoke 97 Another way ibid.
Treatise of Perfumed Skins and Gloves.
THE manner of Washing Skins for Fans, and Perfuming them with Flowers. 98 How
to Wash all sorts of Skins and Perfume them. 100 The Manner of Perfuming and
Preparing Gloves 101 Perfumes for Gloves or Skins, before you Perfume them with
Flowers 102 Perfumes made with Musk. 103 Another sort. 104 Perfume of Ambret
ibid. Perfume of Rome. 105 Another sort. 106 Spanish Perfume 107 Perfumed
Gloves or Skins with Amber 108 Preparations to Oil Gloves on the wrong side 109
The Manner of Coloring Skins and Gloves 110
Mixture of Colors.
ISabella lively 111 Isabella Pale ibid. Nut Color ibid. Light Nut Color.
ibid. Brownish Nut Color ibid Amber Color ibid. Gold Color ibid. Flesh
Color. 112 Straw Color ibid. Brown Color ibid. Light Brown ibid. Frangipane
Color ibid. Light Frangipane ibid. Olive Color ibid. Wood Color ibid.
Treatise of Snuff.
THE Manner of Making Snuff. 113 How to Cleanse Snuff. ibid. Another Way 115
How to Color it Yellow and Red ibid. Snuff Perfumed with Flowers 117 Another
Way 118 Buds of Roses, to Perfume Snuff 119 Snuff Perfumed with a great many
sorts of Flowers 119 The Manner of Making Snuff of different sorts of Grains
120 Fine Spanish Snuff 120 How to Perfume Snuff with several Perfumes of
different Smells 121 Snuff Perfumed with Essence of Bergamote ibid. Pongibon
Snuff. 121 Snuff Perfumed with Spanish Perfume 124 Spanish Snuff Perfumed with
Perfume of Rome ibid. Maltha Snuff 125 Amber'd Snuff 126
A LIST of the Ingredients of Perfumes.
AMber-greice. Black Amber. Pure Musk. Musk-bladders. Dutch Civet. English
Civet. Common Benjamin. Fine Benjamin. The cleanest Benjamin. Storax liquid.
Storax dry. Balm of Peru. Calamus. Souchet. Cinnamon. Cloves. Nutmegs. Iris.
Coriander. Labdanum. Makanet. Starch. The Wood of Sendal Citrain. Wood of
Roses. Wood of St. Luce. Spirit of Wine. Essence of Cloves. Essence of Cinnamon
of Havre de grace. Essence of Dutch Cinnamon. Oil of Ben. Oil of Sweet-Almonds.
Olive-Oyl. Gum-Arabick. Gum-Adragant. Cachoo. White-Sugar. White*Wax. Coral.
Syrup of Cherries. Orkanet. Soap of Genoa.
The Flowers are,
Common Roses. Musk Roses. Roses of Province* Hyacinth* Violets. Jonquils.
Daffadils. Orange flowers. Flowers of Jasmin. Tuberoses. Cacies.
Remarks on the Principal Drugs mentioned before, to know whether they be Good
or no.
Of Amber.
AMber being a very dear Drug,*: is necessary for the Buyers to know it well;
which will be very easy if you observe, that when Amber is vented, or has lost
its virtue, it is full of little white holes: You must also take care that it
should have no smell contrary to its nature. To make trial of its goodness,
heat a Needle and prick the Amber with it; if the smoke is sweet, the Amber is
good. The same Rule may be observed for the Black Amber.

Several Authors have written of Amber, I need not be large upon it; it is
commonly conjectured that it is formed at Sea, and is a kind of Froth tossed by
the Waves to the shore, and which after a while is hardened.

Of Musk, and Bladders of Musk.
MUSK is an Animal found in hot Countries, who is hunted till quite weary, and
so is taken alive; being taken they prick him in several parts of his Body with
a sharp Needle poisoned at the point; the Venom of the Needle hinders the Blood
from coming out; on the contrary in every pricked place rises a Bladder of
Blood; and that the Blood should not return into the Body, they split the Belly
of the Beast, and draw the smallest Guts out of it, with which they tie the
Bladders of Blood; afterward they keep them in the Sun till the Blood is
coagulated; then they cut off all the Bladders, which are called Bladders of
Musk; and the true Musk is nothing else but the Blood which is in them, as I
said before. The Bladders are not the Kidneys of the Musk, nor the Kidneys of a
Pole-Cat, as many imagine, but the Bags of Blood made as before. The Kidneys of
Pole-Cats are good for nothing, they have indeed a Smell, but weak and useless:
And as for the Musk, if it be good, it must break easily with your Fingers like
dry Blood, which is not hard however, for when it is too hard and too dry, it
is a certain sign that it is too old, and consequently has lost its Virtue, and
is good for nothing.

To preserve it, you must keep it close in a leaden Box, which Box should be
enclosed in two or three other leaden Boxes to keep it fresh and good.

Of Civet.
THE Civet-Cat is a little bigger than a Pole-Cat, and naturally very
Melancholic: They keep her in an Iron Cage, and those who keep them make them
Sweat, by placing a great many Chafing-dishes full of Fire about their Cages,
they Sweat presently, and as their Sweat thickens, they gather with an Ivory
Knife all the Sweat which is under the Chest, and between the Legs, which Sweat
we call Civet. When it is too old, it looks brown and is not good; it must be
of a yellow golden Color, and of a strong and yet pleasant Smell to be good.
But above all, it must not draw into Threads, for then there is Honey mingled
with it.

To preserve it, put it in a Glass, and the Glass in a leaden Box with Cotton
about it.

Of Benjamin.
THE Common Benjamin is ordinarily very brown, the best is of a Pearl color,
full of white and big Spots, clear shining, the Smell very strong and clean,
much like Lemonds preserved with Honey: They say it comes from Arabia, and grows
in the same Mountain where Frankincense is found. It is hard in a Stone as we
see it. The Ancients call it Myrrh.

Of Storax.
THE Liquid Storax is always good; as for the dry Storax, you must not choose
the dryest, but when you will use it in Powder, else the softer is the better;
for when it is new it breaks like Gingerbread, and then it smells best. It
comes also from Arabia, and is a Gum dropping from a Tree: The Smell is
excellent, especially in Compositions made to burn.

Of Balm of Peru.
THE true Balm of Peru is known by the strength of its Smell; and to be good,
the Smell must be strong and pleasant. You may easily know when it is true, and
not adulterated, by dipping in it a little Straw, and letting it drop in a
Glass of Water; if the drop falls to the bottom, without leaving any thing at
the top, the Balm is excellent.

Of Macanet.
YOU must break the Grains of Macanet, if they look yellow it is a sign that it
is old; for to be good and new, the inside of the Grains must be white, and
then the Smell is much Sweeter.

Of Spirit of Wine.
TO make an Experiment whether the Spirit of Wine be good, pour some in a
Spoon, and mix with it Gunpowder, put Fire to it, and if the Powder take Fire
and burn away the Spirit, it is very good.

You may try it also in pouring some in a Spoon, then Fire it, let it burn in a
close place without Air, and if the Spoon is wet after the burning, it is a
certain sign that the Spirit of Wine is not good.

Of Starch.
THE Starch which we make use of in Sweet-powder for Hair, is not the same
which the Landresses use, there is this difference, that the taste of this is
fat and greasy, and the former is mighty dry; consequently the best Starch is
always the whitest and the driest.

Of Soap of Genoa.
PErfumers must always make use of the best Soap, which is the Soap of Genoa,
it must be hard and dry, for if it is moist, and if you keep it long, it will
waste away, and will never make good Wash-balls.

I Will say no more of the rest of the Drugs mentioned before, every body being
capable to know whether they have their natural Smell.

Advertisements concerning the Principal Compositions.
Of Powders for Hair.
ALL white Powders are made of Starch, and there is no more Preparation for
Powder of a high Price, than for Powder of a low Rate; there is nothing else to
be done, but to beat it and sift it very fine; you must only be very curious
when you Perfume it with Flowers* because the goodness of Sweet-powder depends
on it: But more particularly the Powder of Orange-flowers, and of Common-roses;
for if you are longer in sifting it than I prescribe in its place, the Powder
may be spoiled, nay it will be so hot* that you can hardly endure your hand in
it. The Flower will turn into Dung, and render the Starch damp, and turn into
little lumps, and will smell musty; which may be avoided if you observe the
Rules I give in its proper place. However, if it happen that the Powder should
be spoiled, you must speedily use this Remedy. Sift it, break with your hands
the little lumps, sift presently all the Flowers and add fresh ones; sift them
again every three hours, and your Powder will be good again. There is no danger
in leaving these Flowers, because they will not be hot, but have a care to
leave them no longer than I prescribe in another place. You ought to know, that
all sorts of Flowers are not capable to communicate their Smell to the Powder,
Orange-flowers only; common Roses, Musk Roses, Janquils and Jasmin are of that
nature; other Flowers have a Smell too weak; Tuberose seems to have a strong
Smell, but its quality is not proper, and is useless to Perfume Powder.

Powder of Cyprus is made of the Moss of Oaks, the Powder of Violet of the Root
of the Flower Iris; the Powder of Franchipane is made in mixing Powder of
Cyprus with Starch, both of equal quantity. All these Powders must be made in
the Summer, because the other Seasons being moist, the Powders will participate
of their moisture, you must keep them close in a dry place. Observe, that the
Moss which is made use of in preparing the Powder of Cyprus, is not the same
that grows at the Root of the Oaks, and which is green and like Fringe; but
it is the Moss which grows upon the Boughs of old Oaks, it is white and in
Leaves.

Of Wash-balls.
THE best Wash-balls were made formerly at Bolognia in Italy, for the Bolonais
had found the Secret to prepare and perfume the Soap so well, that no body a
long time attempted to find it out; but they have been of late so negligent,
and we have applied our selves that way with so good Success, that we have
found the way to make them better than they ever did; insomuch that though the
Wash*balls which are commonly sold for Bolognia Balls were never made there,
yet they are at least as good: It Is true we make use of their Soap, but we
perfume it after the manner you will see.

As for the other sorts of Wash-balls, the way to make them consists only in
preparing well the Soap as I prescribe, for the Soap being of it self of an
ugly Smell, you must needs clean it before you perfume it: It Is the best Advice
I can give on that Point.

You need not to clean the Soap for the ordinary Wash-balls, the Essences you
put in will penetrate them thoroughly.

If you desire to mark your Wash-balls with a Seal, they must be rolled first
and stiffened: And if you will gild them, stay till they are dry, then wet a
little the mark of the Wash-ball with Cotton dipped in Sweet-water, lay the
Wash-ball upon the leaf of Gold, and fasten it with a little dry Cotton*

Of Benjamin-water.
A Great many undertake every day to prepare Benjamin-water, and very few
succeed in it; they generally fail in one thing, viz. They put too many Drugs
in it: As for Example, They imagine that without Litharge it will not whiten
the Water, but it is a great Error. Observe exactly what I say in my Receipts,
and you will make it excellently. I only advise you to prepare it in the Summer
where the Sun shines, for if you make it in the Winter it will prove dangerous,
because if the Bottle breaks, as it happens sometimes, the Spirit of Wine takes
fire, and may cause great Damage.

Essences and Oils perfumed with Flowers and natural Essences.
THE Essences of Flowers which we use for Hair are not true Essences, and we
call them Essences, because they are prepared with Oil which takes perfectly
the Odor of Flowers, and only to distinguish them from the common Oil. The
common Oils are the Oil of Sweet Lemons, Olive-oyl perfumed with Flowers, which
we make use of for Perriwigs. But the Oil called Ben, whose figure is
triangular, and whose Kernel renders an Oil so fine, that it has no manner of
Smell; having no Smell at all of it self, it takes the Smell extremely well of
the Flowers you mix with it, even of the most sweet and weak Smell, and so
naturally, that there is no difference between the Smell of the Flower, and
that of the Oil: Provided you prepare it well, you will see in its place how to
Perfume them.

To speak now of the Natural Essences, They are true Essences, because they
come from the Flower or the Fruit they have the name of. Natural Essences are*
The Essence of Neroli, called otherwise the Quintescence of Orange-flowers; the
Essence of Cedra, called Bergamotte; Essence of Citron; Essence of Orange
strong or small: The Essence of Neroli is drawn from the Water of
Orange-flowers, and is made of the Fruit which is in the Flower: The Essence of
Cedra is produced of the drops you squeeze out of the Peels of Citron
Bergamotte: Essence of Citron is drawn from the Lemons distilled, and that of
Orange from Oranges distilled.

You have now the difference between Essences and Oils: The Flowers which we
may use in our Climate to make Essences and Oils for Hair and Perriwigs, are
Jasmin, Orange flowers, Tuberose, Jonquil, Musk-roses, because they are most
common, and have the strongest Smell, the other Flowers have a Smell too weak:
Every body knows the Sun gives the strong Smell to the Flowers, therefore we
cannot make use of all sorts of Flowers as in hot Countries.

Of Pomatums Perfumed with Flowers.
POmatums Perfumed with Flowers are not good for the Face, but only for Hair;
they are not now so much used as they have been formerly, the Oils are more
convenient: I must say however, that if Oils are more convenient for Perriwigs,
Pomatums are more fit to clean Women's Heads, and at the same time to nourish
the Hairs, and so they are always very useful. If you will have your Pomatum,
take the very Smell of the Flowers; it is necessary to clean well with Water
the leaf of the Hogs Fat which it is prepared withal; observe that chiefly.

Of Perfumes for the Mouth.
AMber is extraordinary good for the Stomach, too much Musk is offensive to the
Mouth, so the less you can put in your Compositions it is the better: Remember
to put no Civet, it is very hurtful to the Mouth.

Of Sweet-waters.
ANgel-waters are made after several ways, which come to the same thing, if you
remember all the Drugs which compose them, and know the quantity, as you will
learn by my Receipts, you may make it as good as you please, in using more or
less Drugs. You must only observe, that if you make it in a close Copper*pot,
it will be thick and muddy; but if you distill it in an Alembick it is clear
like Rock-water, though it has the same Smell as the other.

The Queen of Hungary's Water cannot be made here so good as at Montpellier,
because it is made there of Rosemaryflowers, which are there in great Plenty:
However the Water we make with Rosemary-leaves is very good, and has the same
Virtue.

Concerning Waters made of Flowers: There is only Orange flowers and Roses you
can make Water of, all other sorts are adulterated. Several have tried to make
Jasmin-water, but could not succeed; the reason why is easy to be found, A
Flower to make Water of must have a good Body or Substance; else it must be a
Flower of an Aromatical Tree, as Rosemary or Myrrh, whose Leaves you may
distill, because they have a strong Smell.

As for Example, Take Orange flowers or Roses, and rub your Hands with them,
and they will smell stronger than before: But on the contrary, If you do the same
with Jasmin or Tuberose, they will be so far from communicating their Smell,
that they will be reduced into Dung, and will stink. By this you may judge, that
though some pretend to sell Water made out of Carnations, there is no such
thing, because that Flower has not strength enough to produce any; but because
it smells much like Cloves, the Water made out of them, is sold for the Water
of Carnations.

Of Sweet Balls to burn.
TO compose Pastils good for burning, you must not mix any thing with them, but
what is fit to burn and smoke sweetly; therefore if you put in Drugs, they are
as good as lost. As for Example, Put Civet in them, it will rather stink than
smell well; and put a Grain of Civet in the Fire, it will stink, so will the
Musk, but burn Amber, etc. it will Smoke a very fragrant Smell.

Of gross Powders put in little Sweet Bags and Toilets.
OBserve that all these sorts of Preparations, though different, have all
relation one with another, because they are all of a strong Smell; and the best
way to prepare them, is to mix all the Drugs with such Dexterity and Caution,
that one can hardly distinguish which of all the Smells prevail; you will know
how to do it, if you read and follow the Directions I give in my Receipts,
mixing more quantity of sweet and strong Smells with less quantity of weakest
Smells; and if you have failed in your Composition, there is a remedy for it,
in mixing more or less proportionably.

Of Aromatic Herbs.
THE Aromatic Herbs are not very necessary in Perfumes, but because some make
use of them, I have prescribed how to prepare them, though I must confess, all
the Pains you can take will never make them more Pleasant and Sweeter. This
sort of Herbs keeping so well their Smell, that it is almost impossible to
qualify them, we mix them with other Drugs which cannot be altered, or we make
a sort of Preparation you will see in our Receipts.

Of Perfumes that we wear about us.
ALL the Perfumes we wear about us, must be of sweet and pleasant Smell, use no
great quantity of Musk nor Civet, and never without mixing them, for pure Musk
makes ones Head ach, and the Civet alone is not Sweet, you must prepare them by
the mixture of other Smells not so strong; read my Receipts.

Of Preparations to perfume Gloves or Skins.
THESE Preparations being made with the dearest and most precious Drugs, as
Amber, Musk, Civet, Sweet-waters, Sweet Essences, etc. you must be very careful
to mix nothing with them but strong Smells or Essences, for though these
Perfumes are strong enough, it is certain that if they are mixed with other
contrary Perfumes, they are presently spoiled and lose their Virtues: On the
other side, All the Sweet Smells preserve themselves one with another; Perfumes
made of them last for ever, when well prepared and used. To keep them Sweet a
long time, they must be very well dressed and cleansed: It Is the chiefest thing.

Of Tobacco.
ONE of the hardest Receipts in Perfumes, is that of Perfuming Tobacco with
Flowers; for Tobacco having a very strong Smell, must consequently be very well
cleansed, and the strong Smell taken away, to be fit to take another Sweeter.
And it is certain, that if you do not cleanse it extraordinary well, it will
never take well the Smell of Flowers; or if it does, you will be obliged to use
as much more Flowers than it needs, besides the Smell will never last long: All
other Perfumes you put in it, as Amber, Musk, Civet, will signify nothing, if
your Tobacco is not perfectly clean, the Smell will never be pleasant; and the
strong Smell of Tobacco will in a little while alter all other Perfumes. In
short, It can never be good, therefore never be concerned if your Tobacco
wastes in cleansing it, you will not lose much of it if you sift it in a strong
fine Cloth; and you will be sure that the Smell of it, when well perfumed, will
keep a whole year sound and good. The ways how to do it are easy, as you will
see in the Treatise of Tobacco.

The Time to gather Flowers.
WHEN you will use Flowers for Gloves, Essences, Pomatums, Tobacco, or for any
other Preparations, gather them in the Morning after the Sun has shined upon
them one or two hours, and in the Evening two hours before the Sunsetting: Let
the Orange-flowers be flowered and not in Buds; let them be very dry, not wet
in the least, and wrap them in dry Paper, and not in Linen.

The last Advice I give you, is, If you find that the quantity I prescribe in
my Preparations is too great, it is easy to remedy it, in diminishing
proportionably all things, I prescribe them after the same manner I practiced
my self.

I do not speak a word in this Book of Paint, being persuaded that all sorts of
Paints spoil the Face; I give some Rules only how to make Pomatums very
curious, which you may without danger make use of, for they are very good, and
do not Paint at all.

Receipt of Powders for Hair.
PUT a Pound of Rose-leaves to twenty Pounds of Starch-powder in a Box, mix
them all together with your hands very well, and every four hours shake them
well, that the Flowers should not heat; the next day at the same time you put
them in the Box, sift them and put as many Roses again, and so for three times;
all that while you must let the Box be open, from the first time you put the
Flowers in, till you take them out, and your Powder will be made.

Powder of Musked Roses.
MUsked Roses being more scarce than common Roses, you must put the same
quantity of Powder and of Musked Roses, and let them be well mixed, leaving the
Flowers in the said Powder twenty four hours; after what time sift the Flowers,
and put fresh ones, and do so three times; you need not to sift them again, for
they will not heat. Take care your Box be very close.

Powder of Orange-flowers.
MIX a Pound of Orange-flowers with twenty Pounds of Starch-powder, let them be
well mingled, and sift them twice a day at least, or else they will heat; and
in twenty four hours you must sift your Flowers, and put fresh ones in the same
quantity, and so for three times. If the Smell is not strong enough, renew them
again, and your Powder will be good. Keep the Box close while the Flowers are
in, and when there is none left.

Powder of Jasmin.
IN a Box where you have put twenty Pounds of Starch-powder, mix a thousand
Sprigs of Jasmin, lay them even, make a Bed of Powder, and a Bed of Flowers,
and let your Sprigs lie thus twenty four hours without touching them, for they
will not heat; afterward sift your Flowers, put fresh ones in the same
quantity, and continue so for three days, your Powder will be good: If you will
have the Smell a little stronger, add more Flowers to it proportionably.

Powder of Jonquils.
THE Receipt I prescribed for Powder of Musked Roses, will serve for the
Preparation of the Powder of Jonquils. Take the quantity of Powder to the
Proportion of your Flowers, so that your Jonquils be well mixed with your
Powder, but not over much. Having lain 24 hours, sift your Flowers, and put
fresh ones: Do so three days, and your Powder will be good.

Powder of Ambret.
TAKE five Pounds of Jasmin Powder, and the same quantity of Musked Roses
Powder, mix them together, then fill a Sieve of that Powder, pour in the eighth
part of an Ounce or two gros of Essence of Amber, and mix them together; then
sift your Powder, but not the lumps made by the Essence, which you must take
out, and put them in again, and sift them till the whole be dried and run
through: Mix them all together, and your Powder is done.

Though the white Powders are perfumed with Flowers, it is not enough, you must
make another Perfume as hereafter to make them excellent, then nothing will be
wanting.

Perfumes to perfume other Powders.
TAKE twelve Pounds of Ambret Powder, or of another sort if you will, put in a
little Mortar half a gros of Civet of the bigness of a Sugar-plum, and beat
them together: Add to it of that Powder, and pass it through the Sieve; beat
again the Lumps that remain, and pass them with the same Powder; being sifted,
beat a gros of Musk, then mix them well together, and your Powder will be made.

You may mix two Ounces of that Powder with a Pound of Jasmin or Orange-flowers
Powder, it will make a mixture of Smells very pleasant, and help the Flowers to
give a better Smell.

Powder cleansed with Brandy.
POUR a Pint of Brandy in a Box, wherein there is ten Pounds of Starch-powder,
mix them very well, and let them dry; being very dry, beat them, and pass them
very fine through a Sieve.

Powder of Violets, or of Iris.
THERE is nothing else to be done, but to beat the Iris, and pass it through a
Sieve: That Powder is very good for Hair, and smells naturally of Violets;
there is no other of that Smell, because the Violet has not strength enough.

Powder of Moss of Oak, called Powder of Cyprus.
FIRST of all dip the Moss of Oak in a great quantity of Water, during three
days at least; take it after that out of the Water, and squeeze it well; then
wash it again for several times till the Water be clean; then take it out of
the Water, squeeze it well, and dry it in the Sun: You must stir it every two
hours while it dries, that it may not heat, and being very dry follow this
direction. To beat it in Powder, fill your Mortar with the Moss, pour a glass
of Water upon it, and beat it, it will reduce it self in Crumbs, which it could
never do if it had not been so moistened: Being thus prepared, put it again to
dry in the Sun, and being quite dry you will beat it easily in a Mortar, and pass
it through a Sieve very fine: So your Powder will be done.

The last preparing of Powder of Cyprus used by good Perfumers, is to mix once
or twice Flowers of Jasmin and Musked Roses after the same manner as in other
Powders, it will not take for all that the Smell of Flowers as the Starch does,
but make it more susceptible to take other Smells you will give to it.

Powder of Frangipane.
TAKE six Pounds of Orange-flowers Powder, and as many of Moss Powder of Oak,
which you shall mix well together, then heat the bottom of a little Mortar, and
the end of the Pestle pretty hot, that it may melt the Froth; pour in it an
Ounce of Essence of Amber, and at the same time a handful of the said Powder,
which you must mix well with the Pestle, adding to it as much Powder as can
fill the Mortar; then put it all in a Bag, with more of the same Powder over
it, which you must sift in a Box, that it lose not its strength; and you must
put again into the Mortar all the Clods which the Essence has made, beating and
mixing them as before, throwing more Powder: You shall continue so doing till
the whole be wasted, then you must do this.

Put in the Mortar half a gros of Civet, and a bit of Sugar as big as a Walnut,
beat your Civet with the Sugar very small, put to it by degrees some Powder,
stirring it with the Pestle, then turn it in a Sieve, sift it gently, then put
into the Mortar again the lumps made by the Civet, beat them once more,
throwing over some Powder as before, and you must continue to do so till the
whole be very fine, then mix it all together, and your Powder will be excellent.

That Powder is of pleasant Smell, and of Ashes color, very good for all sorts
of Colors of Hair.

Another sort.
MIX Powder of Moss or Cyprus with Starch-Powder in the same quantity, and put
Flowers as you do to Orange and Jasmin-flowers Powder; and when you think fit,
Perfume them with Amber and Civet, as it is said before, and it will be very
good.

Another sort.
HAving observed one of the two last Receipts for the Powder of Frangipane, if
you have a mind to have it Musked, instead of half a gross of Civet, to the
same quantity of Powder put only eighteen Grains, and half a Gros of Musk, beat
it small with a little Sugar, after the same manner you use it with the Civet,
and the Smell will be extraordinary Sweet.

How to perfume the Powder of Cyprus, or Moss of Oak, as they do at Montpellier.
TAKE two Pounds of Powder of Moss of Oak cleansed with Flowers, as it is said
in its place, infuse in it eighteen Grains of Civet with a little Sugar, as I
said before; then put with it half a gros of Musk after the same manner, this
being done, put it in a Box very close, it will be of an extraordinary fine
Smell, a little will serve to Powder the Hair, and give it a sweet Smell.

Fine Powder called a la Marechale, fit and very good to make Paste for the
Beads of Necklaces.
TAKE two Pounds of Moss of Oak, a Pound of Starch-Powder, an Ounce of Cloaves
beaten, an Ounce of Calamus in Powder, two Ounces of Souchet, two Ounces of
rotten Wood, mix the whole well together, and your Powder will be done.

The rotten Wood must be of Oak, because being red, it gives a fine color to
the Powder.

Of Wash-balls.
How to cleanse Soap.
TAKE a Cut of Soap, scrape it well* cut it in thin Slices, and put them in a
great Kettle over the Fire, with four or five Pints of Water; stir it with a
Stick till the Soap be quite melted, pour it afterward in some Vessels, and
let it lie several days till it be hard; then cut it as thin as you can, and
let it dry till it be as hard as Wood; put it after that in some Vessels or
Basins, and pour over it Brandy enough to allay it, you must throw some Salt in
it and turn it, that the whole be well soaked; then let it dry again in the
Air, being very dry, when you have occasion for your Wash-balls, you must
soften as much as you want: You will find a Receipt how to soften it in this
Treatise.

Common Wash-balls.
TAKE five Pounds of Soap, scrape it, put it in a Mortar, and beat it a long
while, then handle and work well your Soap, that you may take out the little
bits that have not been beaten, put your Soap into the Mortar again, mix in it
two Pound of Starch-powder, an Ounce of Essence of Citron or of Orange, and
about half a Pint of Macanet-water prepared, as I Will tell you by and by, stir
the whole gently with the Postle, and beat it long enough to mix it well, and
it is done; you need no more but to role your Paste as you will to make your
Wash-balls: Let them dry if your Paste is too soft, it will harden of it self.

Macanet-water is made thus: Beat four Ounces of Macanet in a Mortar, soak them
in a Pint of Water no longer than from one day to another, strain the Water
through a Linen Cloth, and squeeze the Macanet very well; you must after that
allay with the same Water, two Ounces of Cerus beaten in Powder, add to it a
handful of Salt, and you may use it as I said before.

Another sort.
AFter you have beaten five Pounds of Soap as before, and taken out the Lumps,
you must put your Soap into the Mortar again, and throw into it two Pounds of
Starch-powder, half a Pint of Macanet-water, prepared as I said before, a
Spoonful of Oil of Aspick, half an Ounce of Orange or Citron, two Spoonfuls of
liquid Storax prepared as hereafter, stir it all gently with the Pestle, beat
it very well till the whole be well mixed together, and it is done.

You must prepare the liquid Storax thus: Put an Ounce of Storax in an Earthen
Pan, with half a Glass of Water, stir the Storax with a Spoon while it is
melting, and being melted use it as I said.

Another sort.
MELT five Pounds of Soap, cut it in slices very thin, pour in a Pint of
Citron-water, being well melted, strain it through a Linen Cloth not very
fine, put to it two Pounds of Starch-powder, an Ounce of Essence of Orange or
Citron, two Ounces of Cerus allayed with a Glass of Water, you must work your
Paste well with your Hands till the whole be well mixed, and when your Paste is
very stiff, role your Wash-balls of what bigness you please, and dry them.

To Compose the Citron-water, you must cut in bits half a dozen of Lemons, old
or new it is no matter, let them boil in a Pint of Water half an hour, then
squeeze them through a Linen Cloth, and you may use that Water.

Wash-balls of Neroly.
TAKE eight Pounds of dry Soap, and cleansed as we said before, and put it in a
Basin, pour in it Orange-flowers or Rose Water, as much as will cover the Soap
to allay it well. You must take care to stir twice a day the Soap till it has
soaked the Water and be soft again; keep it so till it is fit to be beaten,
beat it then a long while, and work it well to take out the Clods which are
left: Put your Soap into the Mortar again, put to it a Pound of Labdanum in
Powder very fine, and two Ounces of Neroly, mix and stir them together gently
with the Pestle; then beat the whole a long time to mix it well and it is done.
If your Paste is too hard, pour a little Orange-flower-water, the Paste will be
good, and being made stiff, role your Wash balls and dry them.

Wash-balls of Bolognia.
YOU must take three Bundles of common Wash-balls of Bolognia, beat them in a
Mortar to Crumbs, then put them in a Basin, pour in the Basin Angel-water enough
to cover the Paste, let it soak till it is soft, and that will be in two or
three days, in the mean time stir it and turn it twice a day, and when all the
Water is gone, and the Paste is hard and stiff, beat it a long while, then work
it well to take out the Clods; afterward divide your Paste into two even
Cakes, then do this.

Take half a Pint of Angel-water, and the same quantity of Rose Water, put in
the little Mortar two gross of Musk, with a little of the Angel-water to
dissolve it, beat it, pouring in always of that Water, then strain it through a
Linen Cloth not too fine nor too course; scrape after that with a Spoon the
Musk left in the Linen, and beat it again, pouring a little of the said Water,
and continue so doing till the Musk be infused and melted with Angel and
Rose-waters, wash the Linen with the same Water to cleanse and take away all
the Musk: The whole being well mixed, put all the Water in a Glass*bottle, to
use it as you will see hereafter.

Take one of the said two Cakes of Paste, which you must beat to bits in a
Mortar, throw upon it a good handful of Labdanum-powder very fine, half an
Ounce of Balm of Peru, a few drops of Essence of Neroly, about half a Pint of
the said Water, stir and mix all gently with the Pestle; then beat it all
together a long while to mix well the Paste and it is done. And as you have done
to the first Cake, do the same to the other, and cover them together very
close, that they may have time to take the Scent of the Sweets, then your Paste
being stiff, role it as you please to make your Wash-balls, and dry them.

Bolognia Wash-balls the best.
TAKE three Bundles or little Boxes of Bolognia Wash-balls, beat them, and dip
them in Angel-water enough to cover your Paste, as we said before: Besides
Angel-water, add to it half a Pint of Benjamin-water, beat that Paste and turn
it upside down twice a day, that the whole be well mixed, the Water being gone,
and the Paste stiff, beat it afterward, and work it well to take out the
Clods; and the whole being reduced into a Paste, make two Cakes alike of it,
then do this.

Beat half an Ounce of Musk in a little Mortar, pouring in it Angel-water as
before in the Receipt of other Wash-balls; at last infuse your Musk, beating
and straining it through a Linen Cloth, with half a Pint of Angel and
Rose Water, then use it thus,

Take one of the two Cakes, beat them to bits in the Mortar, and pour over the
Cake two Ounces of Balm of Peru, some drops of Essence of Neroly, a good
handful of composed Powder, viz. a third of fine Powder a la Marechale, a third
of Powder of Campane-root, a third of Labdanum-powder, and half a Pint of the
abovesaid Water prepared with the Musk; mix the whole together very well, beat
it a long while, and your Paste is made, the Smell of it will be very pleasant:
Role your Wash-balls when your Paste is stiff; what you have done to one of the
Cakes, you may do to the other.

Wash-balls well perfumed.
TAKE three Bundles of Bolognia ordinary Wash-balls, beat them in a Mortar,
allay them with Angel and Benjamin-water, as we said before; being beaten again
and made in Paste, divide them in two Cakes alike, and prepare it thus:

Beat very small half a gross of Civet in a little Mortar, with two Ounces of
Balm of Peru, which you must drop in by degrees: Add to it two gross of Essence
of Amber, some Essence of Cloves, and as much of Cinnamon; mingle the whole
very well together, and keep it to use it thus.

Put in the Mortar one of the two Cakes broken in bits, throw over two handfuls
of prepared Powder, viz. a third of Labdanum-powder, a third of fine Powder a
la Marechale, a third of Powder of Campane*root; put also to it half of that
Composition, and half a Pint of Millifleur Water, half an Ounce of Essence of
Neroly; mix the whole well together, and when you have beaten it long enough,
to mingle it all very well, your Paste is made: You may use the same Receipt
for the other Cake left.

Another Receipt to perfume Wash-balls.
TAKE three Bundles of the same Bolognia Wash-balls, beat them in a Mortar, dip
them, and make a Paste as I said before, the Paste being divided into two even
Cakes, break one in bits, put it in a Mortar with a handful of Labdanum-power,
a handful of the dregs of the Angel-water, beaten in Powder, an Ounce of Balm
of Peru, half an Ounce of Essence of Neroly, and half a Pint of Millifleur
Water, mix the whole gently with the Pestle, then after you have beat it a long
while, it is done: You may do the same to the other Cake of Paste. If you cannot
have Bolognia Wash-balls, make use of Soap cleansed, as is prescribed in the
beginning of this Treatise, it is very good for all sorts of Wash-balls. Take
of it three or four Pounds or more instead of every Bundle of Bolognia Balls;
and for want of Powders mentioned before in the Preparation of Wash-balls, you
may make use of the Dregs of Angel-water beaten and sifted very fine through a
Sieve, the Balls will be as good; observe that all the Powders must be very
fine.

Excellent Benjamin-water.
PUT in a thick Glass-bottle a Pint of Spirit of Wine, and a Pint of Brandy,
half a Pound of Benjamin, a quarter of a Pound of Storax* half an Ounce of
Cloves, an Ounce of Cinnamon, and four Nutmegs, all well beaten; being in the
Bottle, stop it well, and let it stand upon Sand in the Sun in the heat of the
Summer for a Month, and it is done: Take it away when it Rains* and let the
Bottle be very large, leaving an empty space of four Inches at least, or else
the Spirit of Wine being hot, will certainly break the Bottle. If you think
your Benjamin-water is not red enough at the time limited, that it should be
enough, beat in a little Mortar some Orkanet of the bigness of a Bean, dissolve
it with some of your Benjamin-water, pour it in the Bottle, and let it stand in
the Sun two or three days, and it is done.

A Receipt to prepare Spunges for the Face.
CHoose the best and finest Spunges, cut what is superfluous about them, then
dip them in Water a little while, wash them after that, and cut them well,
changing Water till the last Water be very clean, then dry them* being dry dip
them in Angel-water, or in Orange-flower-water, pour over them half a Spoonful
of Essence of Amber, your Spunges having lain in Water a whole day, take them
out, do not squeeze them much, and dry them; they are done.

A Treatise of Essences and Oils perfumed with Flowers.
How to make Essences of Flowers.
IT is easy to draw Essences out of all manner of Flowers though they are of
different sorts, for if you can make of one, you may make of all others. Here
is a general Receipt for all the Flowers which have any Smell.

Take a Deal Box of what bigness you please, Tin it within least the Wood
should spoil the Smell of the Flowers, and soak up the Essence which drops in.
Take wooden Frames so made, that they may go in the Box exactly, they must be
two Inches thick, and round about full of Wire Pins.

You must also have as many Cloths as Frames, these Cloths must be a little
bigger than the Frames, that you may fasten them round the Frames and stretch
them; by this Direction it is easy to Proportion the Cloths to the Frames, and
the Frames to the Box.

The Cloths must be of Cotton, and well washed in good Lie, they must be washed
again in fair Water, then be well dried.

Dip your Cloths in Ben Oil, and let them soak up all the Oil they can; squeeze
them a little, then stretch them over your Frames; lay the first Frame in the
bottom of the Box with Jasmin or Orange-flowers, strew them even upon the
Cloth, and lay another Frame over, continue so doing till you have laid in all
your Frames, or till your Box be full; the Frames must be two Fingers thick,
that the Flowers laid between two Frames be not squeezed at all, and by that
means every Cloth will be full of Flowers over and under. Leave your Flowers in
the Frames twelve hours, from Morning till Night, put fresh ones often,
continue so doing for some days, till you think the Smell is strong enough.

Then take your Cloths off your Frames, fold them, role them, and tie them well
with Pack-thread, that they are not loose, and press them in a Press to draw
Oil out of them, and it is the Essence of Flowers.

Observe that the Press must be Tinned over, least the Wood soak the Essence
Put under the Press Vessels very clean to receive the Essence, then fill
Glass-bottle with it.

Observe also that you cannot make it a Box but Essence of one sort of Flower
at a time, for the Smell of one will spoi the other, and the Cloths which
served to draw one Essence, cannot serve for another, except you wash them as
before and dry them.

Essence of Millefleurs.
THAT Essence is prepared with Essence of all sorts of Flowers mixed together*
putting more of those whose Smell is weak, and less of the strongest Smell, and
match them so well, that you can hardly discern which prevails, and it is done.

Olive-Oyl perfumed with Flowers.
TAKE the best and the sweetest Olive-Oyl you can find called Virgin-Oyl,
having no Smell at all, it takes the better the Scent of Flowers. Here is no
other thing to be done to perfume it, but to follow the Directions I give in
the Receipt of Essences.

Oil of Sweet Almonds perfumed, and a Paste to wash Hands.
SCALD as many Sweet-Almonds as you please, peel them, let them drop and dry in
the Air, then beat them and pass them through a Sieve: Lay them in a Box tinned
within or pasted with clean white Paper: Make a Bed of your Almonds beaten in
Powder, and over them lay a Bed of Flowers; continue so doing as long as you
have Almonds and Flowers; let your Flowers lie from Morning till Night, if that
be not enough let them lie twenty four hours, then take them out of the Sieve,
and renew them; continue the same till your Almonds have taken the Smell of the
Flowers. After that take Linen Cloths very strong a quarter of an Ell square,
well washed and dried. Lay your Almonds upon them, and tie them in little Packs
two and two together very close, fold against fold in the Press, and draw the
Oil of them, and it will have the Smell of the Flowers: The very Cakes of
Almonds left will have the same Smell. They are extraordinary good to wash
Hands; beat them only in a Mortar, sift them through a Sieve, and rub your
Hands with them in a Basin of warm Water; you may mix Iris Powder with it if
you will. This Paste we call the Paste of Provence, Jasmin or Orangeflowers
Paste.

Observe that in the Composition of Essences or Oils, the Cloths or Paste must
be in the Press three hours at least to draw the Oil.

Essence of Neroly.
THE Essence of Neroly comes out of the Fruit which is in the Orangeflower: You
can draw but very little of that Essence, a great quantity of Water can make
but an Ounce. The way how to make it up is thus, When the Orangewater is
distilling, let it drop in a Bottle long, narrow-necked, and big-belly'd, when
the Bottle is full of Water, let it stand and stop it; and as the Essence is
lighter, it will certainly swim over the Water, so rising to the Extremity of
the neck of the Bottle, you may easily pour it in another Glass; it is Green at
first, but being kept a while it will turn Red.

As it is impossible to pour that Essence without some Water with it, to
separate them, put the Essence and the Water mixed with it in a Viol, stop the
neck with your Thumb, and turn the Glass downwards; the Essence being light
will come to the top, then take away your Thumb a little to let the Water out
gently, all the Water being out, stop the hole again to keep in the Essence
which remains alone.

Essence of Cedra is a kind of Citron-Tree.
Cedra or Bergamote.
THE Essence of Cedra comes out of a Citron, which grows out of a Bough of a
Citron-Tree grafted on a Bergamot Pear Tree, so the Citron which grows on it,
participates of the two qualities, the Citron and the Pear. To make Essence of
it, you must cut in little bits the Peel of those Citrons, and squeeze them
with your Fingers in a Glass-bottle, where you can hardly put your Hand to
squeeze the Rind, as we do the Rind of Oranges in a Glass of Wine: Thus by the
quantity of it you have Essence.

Essence of strong Orange, or of small Grain.
PUT what quantity you please of small Oranges, not too ripe, in a cold Still
with Water, let it distill in a Glass*bottle long-necked, let it rest a while,
the Essence will swim over, take it out of the Water, and keep it in Viols well
stopped.

You will know in the Treatise of distilling Waters, how to order your Alembick.

Essence of Citron.
MAKE the Essence of Citron after the same manner as the Essence of strong
Orange; cut only the Lemons in two, and lay them in the Alembick with Water,
let them distill as before and take up the Essence. I do not prescribe the
quantity of Citrons nor Oranges, it is easy to know what quantity of Waters is
sufficient to boil them and not burn them, there must be Fruits enough to make
the Essence.

A Receipt to prepare Wax for Wiskers.
MELT together four Ounces of white Wax, two Ounces of Jasmin Pomatum or other
in an earthen Pan upon a Chasing-dish, stir them gently; being melted, pour a
Spoonful of Essence of Citron, or of strong Orange, mix them well, fill your
Moulds, and presently after let them stand in a Vessel full of cold Water,
being cold it is done.

Black Wax.
TO the same Composition as before, mix only some black of Smoke, your Wax will
be black.

Gray Wax perfumed.
MIX to the Preparation of the white Wax two Spoonfuls of fine Marechale
Powder, and the Wax will be gray.

Of another sort.
PUT two Spoonfuls of the Dregs of Angel-water in fine Powder to the
Composition of white Wax, and instead of Essence of strong Orange or Citron,
pour to it half a Spoonful of Essence of Amber or of Neroly, fill your Moulds
and it is done.

A Treatise of Pomatums.
TAKE what quantity you think fit of the Leaf of Hogs-fat, dip it in Water in
bits as it comes from the Hog, change the Water every three hours during four
days, and you must the two last days work it in Water with a Spoon every time
you put new Water to it, then take it out of the Water and drain it well: Melt
it over a soft Fire in a new Earthen Pan, stirring it very gently that it do
not burn: Being melted, pour your Pomatum in a Basin full of Water, stirring
continually the Water and the Pomatum together with the Spatula till it is
quite cold and congealed. Afterward pour out the Water, and continue to beat
and stir your Pomatum, and by degrees the Water will all come out. Let the
Pomatum rest a while, then do as follows.

Prepare two Pewter Dishes of the same bigness, lay your Pomatum two Inches
thick in the Dishes, in one of them strew over the Flowers you design to
perfume your Pomatum withal, all over even, and cover it with the other Dish;
thus the Flowers will not be squeezed, and will give their Smell to both Dishes.

Let the Flowers lie from Morning till Night, if they are scarce with you,
leave them twenty four hours, then take them up with your Pomatum, and stir it
a little, spread it again, and lay fresh and new Flowers as before; continue so
doing some days Morning and Night, till your Pomatum is of a good and strong
Smell, and it is done. Keep it in Glasses.

You cannot make a good Pomatum and keep it well, but of Jasmin and
Orange-flowers, or of Tuberose, other Flowers are too weak to give a Sweet and
lasting Odor.

Pomatum good to Refresh the Complexion, and to take off the Redness and
Pimples of the Face.
TAKE half a Pound of the Leaf of Hogs-fat, dip it in the Water several days,
changing the Water as often as I prescribed in the first Receipt, and your Fat
being very white, put it in a new Earthen Pan, with two Pippins cut in bits
without peeling them, and an Ounce of the four cold Seeds, set the Pot on a
soft Fire, and let your Pomatum be melting a quarter of an hour, then take it
off the Fire, and mix in it an Ounce of Oil of Sweet*Almonds, strain it after
that through a Linen Cloth tied hard, and let it drop in clear Water, stir the
Pomatum and the Water with a wooden Spatula till it is cold and congealed in
the Water, then pour out the Water, and work your Pomatum again to draw out the
rest of the Water, and it is done.

Another sort of Pomatum very good for the Face.
TAKE four Ounces of the Leaf of Hogs-fat, and whiten it in Water as I said
before* then pour out the Water and put aside your Fat.

Melt after that a Penniworth of Virgin-wax, two Penniworth of Sperma Ceti, and
two Ounces of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, in an Earthen Pan on a soft Fire, do not
let them boil, stir them in the mean while to mix them well together; then melt
gently your Hogs-fat prepared, and pour it in the said Composition; stir them
well with the Spatula, then pour the whole in a Basin full of Water; stir again
the Pomatum and the Water with the Spatula till it is congealed, and then you
must pour in it fresh Water, and change it often till your Pomatum is very
white, do not forget to stir it continually with the Spatula, and it is done.

Another sort of Pomatum, very fine for the Face.
TAKE two Ounces of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, half an Ounce of Virgin-Wax four
Pennyworth of Sperma-Ceti; melt the whole together in an Earthen Dish, over a
Chafing Dish full of burning Ashes; stir gently the Wax with a wooden Spatula,
that the whole be well mingled and incorporated: Then take off the Fire your
Composition, and pour to it by degrees some fair Water, beating it in the mean
while with the Spatula. Continue so doing till your dish is full, and your
Pomatum congealed in the Water, for it must swim in the Water: Having so beat
it a long while in the first Water, pour the Water out, and put some fresh,
still working your Pomatum till it is white, then it will swim upon the Water;
take it out with the Spatula, and work it without Water, till it is very white.
All the Water being strained out of your Pomatum, mix in it Borax beaten very
fine, of the bigness of a small Nut, and some Essence of Pearl beaten very
fine; mingle it all together very well, and it is done.

Pomatum for the Lips.
TAKE four Ounces of fresh new Butter, an Ounce of Virgin Wax, melt them; being
melted throw in it black Grapes, boil the whole a quarter of an Hour; in the
mean while bruise the Grapes with a Spoon: strain after that your Pomatum
through a fine Linen Cloth, to take away the dregs of the Grapes. Then put the
Pomatum on the Fire again; pour over it two spoonfuls of Orange*flower-water,
and boil it again another boiling: Bruise Orcanet the bigness of a Bean in a
Poringer, allay it with a little of Orange-flower-water, and pour it over your
Pomatum; then work it well with a Spoon, and take it off the Fire, and it is
done. Being cold lay it in Boxes or Pots. You may keep that sort of Pomatum two
years very good. It is excellent for Sore and Scabby Lips.

A Receipt to make a Liquid Paste of Almonds, to wash Hands without Water.
TAKE a Pound of bitter Almonds, scald them, peel them, and dry them; then beat
them in a marble Mortar a long while, that no lumps remain; pour over it a
little Milk to wet it, and make it into a Paste. Keep it aside.

Beat the Crum of the whitest Penny Loaf, with a little Milk, and make it in a
Paste; then mix in the Mortar the Almond Paste with the Bread; add to it ten
Yolks of Eggs, without the Tread: beat them altogether very well, pouring by
degrees some Milk, stirring and allaying still the Paste; you may pour so three
pints of Milk; then put it all in a Kettle over the Fire, and boil it very
well: Stir it, and turn it continually with a Ladle, till it is well boiled. It
must boil an hour at least. It is enough boiled when it is thick.

Opiate in Powder, to cleanse the Teeth.
TAKE half a Pound of Brick Sand very fine, four Ounces of fine China Powder,
an Ounce of Coral beaten in fine Powder, mix them very well; pour over it half
a Spoonful of Essence of Cinnamon, as much of Cloves Powder: Mingle them all
together very well, and it is done.

Another Sort.
TAKE half a Pound of Brick Sand, four Ounces of China Powder, half an Ounce of
Cinnamon well beaten and mixed well together; it is done.

Another Sort.
TAKE half a Pound of Brick Sand, four Ounces of China Powder, an Ounce of
Coral beaten very fine, a gros of beaten Cloves, two gros of calcined Alom,
half an ounce of crust of Bread burnt, and an Ounce of Conserve of Roses in
Powder; let it all be beaten very fine, and it is done.

Receipt to make Liquid Opiate.
PUT what quantity you please of Syrup of red Cherries in a fine Earthen Pot,
pour into the Syrup Opiate in Powder, of what kind you will, mix it well with a
Spatula; if it is too Liquid throw a little more Powder; if too thick pour more
Syrup; mingle it well, it is done.

When you use it, pour some in a China Dish, and add to it, if you please, half
a Spoonful of Essence of Amber or Cloves, or Cinnamon; it will smell and taste
extraordinary well.

A Treatise of Perfumes* good for the Mouth.
Essence of Amber.
POur in a strong glass Bottle, a Pint of the best Spirit of Wine, beat in a
little Mortar the eighth part of an Ounce (or one Gros) of black Amber or
Ambergreice, and throw it in the Wine; you must also mix half a Gros of the
bladder of Musk very small; then stop the Bottle close, and expose it upon Sand
to the hottest Sun in the Summer for a Fortnight, shake the Bottle two or three
times in a day, when the Sun shines upon it, that the Amber should not stick at
the bottom, but should melt and give its smell to the Spirit of Wine; take away
the Bottle when it rains, and the Sand; for the Sand being heaten by the Sun,
is a great help to Concoct, and bring to Perfection all the Preparations
exposed to the heat of the Sun.

Observe also, That you must not fill the Bottle to the top, least the strength
of the Spirit of Wine break it; after a Month, take it away, and it is done. The
best time to make that Essence is in the Dog Days; if you have a mind to make
less or more of it, put more or less of the Ingredients or things mentioned
before.

Essence of Hypocras.
PUT half a Pint of Spirit of Wine in a strong Glass Bottle, add to it half an
Ounce of Cloves, an Ounce of Cinnamon, a Gros of Ginger, and as much as you can
hold with your Fingers end of Coriander, all well beaten; three or four Grains
of black Amber, or Ambergreice, beaten in a Marble Mortar: Stop the Bottle
well, and expose it to the Sun upon Sand, a whole Month; take it away when it
Rains, and don't fill the Bottle full, as I said before: At the Months end it
is done.

Cachoo Perfumed with Amber, very good for the Mouth.
BEat four Ounces of Cachoo, and ten Grains of Musk together in a Mortar, and
sift them very fine in a Hair Sieve, beating again what remains, and sifting it
again and again; then warm the bottom of the Mortar, and the end of the Pestle;
dissolve eighteen Grains of Ambergriece in the Mortar, pour over it half a
Spoonful of Ambergriece, and the bigness of a Walnut of Gum of Adragant; dip it
in Orange-flower-water, allaying the whole together; put in by degrees your
Cachoo Powder, mingle it and stir it a long while, and beat it well, to mix
your Amber all over: The Paste being made, you must shape the Cachoo thus:

Take a bit of it as big as a Nut in your Hands, roll it to a point, take a
Crum at a time, twist it with your Two Fingers, and you will shape it like a
Mouses turd; wet it a little with Essence of Orange-flowers, that it should not
stick to your Fingers.

Pastils Perfumed good to eat.
TAKE a Pound of double refined Sugar, beat it in a little Mortar with twelve
Grains of Musk, searce it through a hair Sieve very fine; dip in
Orange-flower-water a handful of Gum of Adragant, from Night till the next
Morning: strain it hard through a Linen Cloth, not too Fine nor too Coarse;
then mix your Gum with your Sugar, pouring over it two Gros of Essence of
Amber, work it altogether very well to make a Paste; make it flat with a
rolling Pin, and cut your Pastils of what shape you will: While you cut them,
dry them upon a white Paper in the Air; in the Summer cover them with another
Paper, least the Flies should spoil them; don't lay them up till they are very
dry.

The Moulds to cut Pastils are made of fine Tin, in the shape of a Thimble;
press with one end of the Mould the Past, and turn the Mould, the Pastil
remains in them, blow on the other side and it comes out.

Excellent Hypocras perfumed.
TAKE half a Pound of Sugar, beat it fine, and put it in a Basin, pour over the
Sugar a Pint of Wine, the oldest and the deepest in color is the best, stir
gently your Sugar with a Spoon to melt it, then strain your Wine through a
Straining*bag five or six times; being well clarified pour in it half a
Spoonful of Essence of Hypocras, and stir it with a Spoon; taste if it is
strong enough, if not, pour more Essence and it is done. Pour your Wine quickly
in a Bottle, stop it presently that it should not lose its Spirits; that way is
ready, and better than by Infusion.

Rosa Solis, or perfumed Liquor.
PUT in a Copper Pan over the Fire two Pints of Water and two Pounds of Sugar,
let them boil to the fourth part, then pour in two Spoonfuls of
Orange-flower-water, having boiled a Minute, throw in the White and the Shell
of an Egg well beaten with a Whisk, stir your Egg in your Liquor with the
Whisk, and when it boyls take it off the Fire, strain it through the Bag
several times; being well clarified, pour in it the best Brandy according to
the strength you will have your Rosa Solis. Then pour in Essence of Amber to
your taste more or less, or Essence of Hypocras, and it is done.

Another Liquor perfumed.
MELT a Pound of Sugar in a Pint of old Wine, as you have done to Hypocras,
strain it through the Bag several times; then pour in good Brandy as much as
you think fit, according to the strength of your Liquor, pour also Essence of
Amber to your taste, it is done.

A Treatise of perfumed Sweet-waters.
Angel*water boiled.
PUT in an Earthen Pot five Pints of Water, a Pound of Benjamin, half a Pound
of Storax, an Ounce of Cinnamen, half an Ounce of Cloves, all well beaten, two
Lemons cut in quarters, two or three bits of Calamus: Set the Pot on the Fire,
cover it, and make it boil to the fourth part, then pour the Water in a Basin
and cool it before you pour it in Bottles.

If you want more of that Water, fill your Pot as before, and boil it the same*
that second Water will be almost as good as the first, you may mix them
together if you will.

This done, take out the Dregs left in the bottom of the Pot, before they be
cold, dry them, and make Pastils as before in the Receipt of Pastils; or else
you may use them in several Preparations, as I said in the Treatise of
Wash-balls.

Another sort.
PUT in the Pot two Pints of Orange-flowers, and as much of Rose Water, then
put the same Drugs, and in the same quantity as in the former Receipt, all but
Lemons, add only a Bladder of Musk: Let it boil after the same manner, and
having taken your Water out of the Pot, take also the Dregs, and dry them, they
are very good to make Pastils to burn.

Millefleur, or several sorts of Flower-water.
POUR in a Glass-bottle a Pint of good Angel-water, then beat twelve Grains of
Musk in a little Mortar, allay them with that Water, and pour it all in a
Bottle well stopped. Keep it for your use.

Instead of Musk you may put a Gros of the Bladder of Musk cut small, and it is
very good.

Angel-water distilled in Mare Balneo.
TAKE a Glass Alembick of three pieces, the top or the head, the Bombe, and the
long narrow-necked and round-belly'd Bottle: You must have also a Furnace to
burn Charcoals, and a Kettle or other Vessel alike deep enough to keep the
Water and set the Alembick. Paste some double Paper round about the Bombe just
at the place where the head lies, put the Bottle (or Matras) at the end of the
Pipe to receive the distilling.

You must put in the Bombe a Pint of Water, four Ounces of Benjamin, two Ounces
of Storax, half an Ounce of Cinnamon, two Gros of Cloves, all well beaten, a
bit of Calamus, and a Gros (or the eighth part of an Ounce) of the Bladder of
Musk; the Water distilled out of all these, will be of an extraordinary Sweet
Smell, and very clear. Put the Dregs left in the bottom to dry, and make
Pastils of them to burn.

Carnation-water.
PUT in a Glass Alembick as before, a Pint of Water, and two Ounces of beaten
Cloves; the Water distilled will have a pleasant Smell, because the strength of
the Cloves being sweetened by the Water, smell rather of the Carnation than the
Cloves.

Cinnamon Water.
YOU must put in a Glass Alembick as before, a Pint of Water, and two Ounces of
Cinnamon well beaten, and the distilled Water will have the natural Smell of
Cinnamon.

Thyme-water.
PUT a Pint of Water in the same Glass Alembick, and two handfuls of Thyme, the
distilled Water will smell naturally of the Thyme.

All Aromatic Herbs may be distilled after the same manner; those Herbs being
very strong, keep their Smell as well dry as green; so it is easy to distill
from them Waters, in reading the aforesaid Receipts.

Orange-flower-water distilled in a cold Still.
INfuse two Pounds of Orange-flowers dry in two Pints of Water three or four
hours, then pour it in the Still, and distill it as in the former Receipt, the
Water distilled out of it is good for a great many things, as for Wash-balls,
to make Angel-water, to cleanse Snuff, and serves to perfume all sorts of Skins
and Gloves.

Rose Water.
INfuse three Pounds of Roses in two Pints of Water two or three hours, then
distill them in the Still as you do the Orange-flowers, observe the same Rules,
for they are made after the same manner, you may put less Water, and make it
stronger: But as Rose Water is very much used in cleansing Snuff, and
Orange-water also, you must distill enough when you use it for that purpose;
when you use it for other things you may make it as strong as you will, as I
said before.

The Queen of Hungary's Water.
POUR in a strong Glass-bottle two Pints of Spirit of Wine, two good handfuls
of Rosemary-leaves, a handful of Thyme, half a handful of Sweet-Marjoram the
Leaves only, and as much of Sage, stop the Bottle very well, expose it in the
Sun a whole Month; then you must dissolve the bigness of a Bean of Orcanet with
a little Spirit of Wine, bruise the Orcanet, pour it in your Bottle, and expose
it again to the Sun four or five days and it is done: It will be of a fine Red,
of a sweet Smell, and very strong.

Receipts to make Pastils to burn.
Ordinary Pastils.
BEAT in a Mortar a Pound of common Benjamin, half an Ounce of Cloves, two Gros
of Cinnamon, a bit of Calamus, searce them all together through a hair Sieve,
then dissolve in Water some Gum of Adragant; put in the Mortar your Powder
searced with a Porringer of that Gum, mingle them and beat them together to
make a Paste of it; if your Paste is too soft, add to it more Powder, that way
the Paste is easily done; you have nothing else to do but to flat your Paste
with a Roling-pin, and shape your Pastils in your Moulds, as it is before in the
Receipt of Pastils for the Mouth; dry them, and they are done.

Pastils of Roses made into Wax-Tapers.
BEAT and searce through a Hair Sieve, a Pound of Angel-water dregs, as in the
first Receipt of Waters, use no Lemons, and being in Powder, you must put in
the Mortar a handful of Leaves of Roses, fresh and new gathered, and a
Porringer of Gum of Adragant dissolved in Rose Water, beat the whole together a
long while to make well the Paste, then flat it with a Roling-pin, and cut it
with a Knife into Lozinges.

To shape them in little Tapers, take bits of them, role them in your hands
like Wax-Candles as long as your Finger, make one end flat to stand and dry.
That sort of Pastils light like Candles, and burn to the very last, they give a
most sweet and fragrant Smoke.

Spanish Pastils.
BEAT in Powder and searce through a Hair Sieve, the Dregs of Angel-water, as
in the second Receipt of Angel-water; water; dissolve Gam of Adragant in
Orange-flower-water, and make a Paste of it in the Mortar with your Powder,
then cut your Pastils with your Moulds, dry them and they are done.

Portugal Pastils.
YOU must beat and searce through a Hair Sieve the best Dregs of Angel-water,
then dissolve some Gum of Adragant with Orange-flower-water, and make your
Paste in the Mortar with your Powder and your Gum as before; observe only, you
must make your Paste a little more thick. Then warm the bottom of the Mortar
and the end of the Pestle, and by its heat melt twenty Grains of Amber-griese,
or black Amber, pour over it half a Spoonful of Millefleur-water to dissolve
it; you must pour of that Water to the quantity of half a Wine-glass; then set
your Mortar over a Chasing-dish of Fire, and your Composition being hot, pour
it over your Paste, mingle it well and it is done. Shape your Pastils to your
Moulds, as you have done before, and dry them.

A Receipt to dissolve Gum to make the Paste for Pastils.
DIssolve your Gum in what fort of Water you please, but the Water must not be
over it above an Inch, because you must not drown it presently; and when it has
soakt in the Water, pour some more fresh, and so by degrees till your Gum is
dissolved; it must not be too liquid, but softish and well melted, then use it.

A Receipt to make perfumed Paste for Beads and Medals.
TAKE of Marechal-powder, and make Paste of it with Gum-Adragant and Arabic
dissolved with Millefleur-water, and if your Paste is too soft, put some more
Powder to it, if it is too stiff put more Gum, more or less of both will do, rub
your Moulds with Essence of Flowers, that the Paste should not stick to them;
that Paste will be of Coffee-colour.

Another sort.
TAKE some Perfumes good to perfume other Powders, and make them in a Paste
with Gum dissolved in Orange-flower-water; pour over it half a Spoonful of
Amber; the Pestle will be white; and if you mix a little Vermilion, you may
make it as red as you please: You may make it of a yallow color in putting
some Oker in Powder.

Another sort.
TAKE half of Cyprus-powder, and half of Frangipane-powder, make a Paste with
Gum dissolved with Millefleur-water: The Paste is gray, and of a very sweet
Smell.

Another sort.
TAKE fine Marechale-powder, and half as much of fine Powder of Angel-water
Dregs, make a Paste with some Gum dissolved as before, your Paste will be very
good.

Another sort.
TAKE some perfumed Cyprus-powder, Frangipane-powder, and Perfumes to perfume
other Powder, of all the same quantity, and make a Paste with Gum dissolved
with Orange-flower-water, pour over it a little of Essence of Amber: The Paste
will be of Ash color very fine, and of a sweet and pleasant Smell.

You may make all these Pastils of a strong and good Smell as much as you
please, put only more or less Amber, Musk, and Civet, in the Powders or Waters
dissolved with the Gum.

A Receipt to prepare the Gums for the said Pastes.
DIssolve the Gum of Adragant after the same manner it is prescribed in the
Receipt before that of the Pastes mentioned: You must add to a Porringer of
that Gum, half a Glass of Gum-Arabick pretty thick, then mingle them together,
and use them.

A Treatise of gross Powders a la Marechale, and how to use them.
Gross Powder a la Marechale.
TAKE a Pound of Iris, twelve Ounces of Orange-flowers dry, four Ounces of
Coriander, half a Pound of Roses of Province, two Ounces of Angel-water Dregs,
an Ounce of Calamus, two Ounces of Souchet, half an Ounce of Cloves, beat all
them Drugs in the Mortar one after another, then mix them well together and
it is done.

Another sort.
TAKE twelve Ounces of Iris, half a Pound of Orange-flowers dry, four Ounces of
Roses of Province, four Ounces of Wood of Roses, one Ounce of Benjamin, half an
Ounce of Limon Peels dry, as much of Orange Peels dry, half an Ounce of
Marjoram dry, an Ounce of Souchet, half an Ounce of Calamus, two Gros of
Cinnamon, half an Ounce of Cloves, two Ounces of Wood of Sendal Citrain; beat
all the Drugs one after another in a Mortar; mix them very well together, your
Powder is good.

Another Sort.
TAKE a Pound of Iris Powder, half a Pound of Orange-flowers dry, four Ounces
of Roses of Provins, two Ounces of Wood of Sendal Citrain, one Ounce of
Orange-peels dry; half an Ounce of sweet Marjoram, as much of Lavender dry, an
Ounce of Calamus, two Ounces of Souchet, one Ounce of Benjamin, half an Ounce
of Storax, and half an Ounce of Labdanum; beat all them Drugs in a Mortar, one
after another, and mix them very well; the Powder is made. You may add to all
these Powders sweet Woods.

A Receipt for sweet Bags.
TAke twelve Ounces of common Rose Leaves, a Pound and half of Lavender, twelve
Ounces of sweet Marjoram Leaves, four Ounces of Myrrh Leaves, six Ounces of
Thyme Leaves, four Ounces of Melilot Leaves, one Ounce of Rosemary Leaves, an
Ounce of Bay Leaves, two Ounces of Cloves half beaten, an Ounce of musked
Rose-leaves, as much as you can of Orange-flowers, and of Carnation-flowers;
put all these in a Pot, making a bed of Flowers, and a bed of Salt, and so
again till your pot is full: stop it well, and stir it every other day with a
Stick, exposing it to the hot Sun in the Summer: but take it away when it
Rains, and an hour before the Sun setting at a Years end; fill your sweet Bags
with your prepared Drugs, adding to it some Cypress Powder Perfumed as you
think fit.

Rose Buds.
TAKE what quantity of Rose-Buds you please, the closest Green, and in their
room put as many Cloves, dry them in the Sun between two Papers; they will be
very good to put in your sweet Bags.

You may, if you will, expose them to the Sun, in an Earthen Pot covered with
Paper, and sprinkle them with the best Angel-water, and being dry use them as
before.

Orange Flowers dry.
DRY in the Sun what quantity you will of Orange flowers, between two Papers
very close round about, being dry keep them for your use.

Little sweet Bags.
CUT little Silk Bags square, sow them round about, leave only a slit, and put
in twelve Ounces of Marechale Powder, sow up the slit and it is done. After a
while, if the Bags have lost their smell, take out the Powder, and beat it in a
Mortar, put it again in your Bags, and it will be sweet as before.

Another sort.
CUT your Silk Bags as before, without sowing them, lay upon one piece of your
Bag some of the gross Marechale Powder, then put over it a Bed of Cotton
Perfumed an Inch thick, strew the same Powder over the Cotton; then cover it
with the other piece of Silk, and sow your Bag without shaking it, quilt it and
it is done. You may trim it with Ribbons, or what you please, in the four
corners of the Bags.

Sweet Bags to wear about you.
TAKE some rich silk, cut your Bags of four Inches square, longer if you will;
rub the wrong side of the Silk with Civet, then fill them with gross Marechale
Powder of what sort you will; add to it few Cloves, and a little of the wood of
Sendal Citrain both beaten; it will strengthen and revive the sweet smell. Your
bags being full, sow them, and trim them if you will.

Another sort.
CUT your fine silk Bags as before, of four Inches, and fill them with these
Compositions.

Beat in a little Mortar eight Grains of Musk, and pour over it half a spoonful
of Millefleur Water; add to it four grains of Civet, beat them with the Musk,
pour over it four Drops of Balm of Peru, and a spoonful of several sorts of
Water; having mingled the whole together very well with the Pestle, rub the
wrong side of your Bags gently with it, then fill them with the Composition, in
the first Receipt of sweet Bags, with Cyprus Powder Perfumed, well mixed
together; sow your Bags, trim them as fine as you will, they are done.

Another sort.
TAKE the finest Silk, cut your Bags a little bigger than others before, and
fill them with the following Perfumes.

Heat the bottom of a little Mortar, melt in it eight Grains of Amber, mix with
them four Grains of Civet beaten small with the Pestle; then pour gently over
it two Spoonfuls of Millefleur Water, with the bigness of a Pea of Gum Arabic,
dissolved with the same Water; rub a little the wrong side of your Bags with
the same Composition, then fill them with Cyprus and Frangipane-Powders
Perfumed in the same quantity; mix with it little bits of Bladder of Musk, sow
your Bags, etc.

Fine Basket of Ozier Perfumed, to keep Ladies Cloths in.
GET a Basket of fine Ozier, of what bigness you will, take as much of Silk as
you want to line it; stretch your Silk over an Imbroidering frame; then over
the Silk a Bed of Perfumed Cotton, of the thickness of two Crown Pieces, strew
over the Cotton some of the Marechal Powder, and over the Powder some of the
Sendal Citrain Wood well beaten; then cover it all with the other piece of
Silk, quilt it in Lozinges. This done cut your Silk according to the bottom of
your Basket, of the sides and the cover, bind the edges with silk Galoon, of
the same color of your Silk, then sew it to the Basket very well.

Pockets perfumed for ladies.
THE same Stuff, Perfumes and Quilting, as in the last Receipt, will serve to
Perfume Pockets; cut your Stuff only for Pockets, bend round the Seams with
Silk Galoon, and they are made.

Boxes perfumed for Perriwigs.
THE Perriwig-boxes must be of Wood an Inch thick, half an Ell long, round at
the ends, and in the shape of a Perriwig: To line it, stretch on a Frame a bit
of Silk, and lay over it a Bed of Cotton well perfumed thin and even, strew
over the Cotton the best Powder a la Marechale not too coarse, and over that
Powder a little of Sendal Citron-wood beaten very small: Then cover it all with
the finest Taby rubbed before with the following Preparation; Quilt your Silk
and cut it according to the shape of your Box and the cover, bind the edges
with Silk Galoon of the same color of the Tabby; then line the inside of the
Box, the out*side must be covered with a perfumed sweet Skin, and the edges of
the Skin covered with a gold or silver Galoon, the Lock and Key gilt over.

How to perfume the wrong side of the Tabby.
WARM the bottom of a little Mortar, then melt in it ten Grains of Amber,
stirring it with the Pestle, pour four drops of Orange-flower-water; add to it
six Grains of Civet, then mix it all together very well, and pour over two
Spoonfuls of Millefleur-water, and a piece as big as a Pea of Gum-Arbick
dissolved with the same Water; the whole being well mixed, rub gently with it
the wrong side of the Tabby with a bit of Sponge, and it is done.

Boxes perfumed to keep Linen.
THOSE Boxes must be lined within, covered and perfumed after the same manner
as the Perriwig-boxes, the shape only of these must be like a little Trunk, to
keep fine Linen for Persons of Quality.

To Perfume Toilets.
SWEET Toilets may be prepared of two sorts, the first which differs nothing
from the lining of the Perriwigboxes, is thus prepared. Take as much Silk or
Stuff as you will have your Toilet, stretch it on a Frame, lay over it a Bed of
Cotton perfumed, and the Powder over the Cotton, cover it with what Silk you
will, and Quilt it. If the outside of your Silk was not thick enough to endure
the Preparation you rub it with, add to that Composition some of the
Millefleur-water, have a sufficient quantity of Cotton to soak it, then dry it,
and lay a Bed very thin, and even all over your Powder, or in many places, and
cover it all with your Silk well quilted, and your Toilet is done.

Sweet Toilets as they prepare them at Montpellier.
TAKE new Linen Cloth very strong, not too thick, cut it according to your
Toilets, dip them and wash them in several Waters, then lay them in Angelwater
all night, dry them well, and perfume them thus.

Beat in fine Powder, and pass it through a hair Sieve, two Pounds of Iris, a
Pound of Campane-root, two Ounces of Wood of Roses, and four Ounces of
Sendal-Citrain, one Ounce of Calamus, two Ounces of Souchet, half an Ounce of
Cinnamon, two Gros of Cloves, and half an Ounce of Labdanum, then mix them all
together, put them in a Mortar, and pour over some Gum-Adragant dissolved with
Angel-water; the Gum must be very thin, put Water enough that the Paste be fine
and liquid; rub your Toilets with that Paste on both sides as hard as you can,
rub them even, then let them dry, being almost dry, take a Sponge dipped in
Angel-water, rub your Toilets with it to make them smooth, let them dry again
and they are done.

When they are dry, fold them as you will have them* and keep them between two
Cloths.

Another Preparation of the same.
THE Cloths being washed clean and dry as before, make use of this Composition.

Beat very well one after another, and pass very fine through a hair Sieve, the
following Drugs, two Pounds of Iris, a Pound of Campane-root, two Ounces of
Lemon-peels, an Ounce of dry Orange-peels, an Ounce of Cloves, half a Pound of
Benjamin, four Ounces of Storax, two Ounces of Souchet, and one Ounce of
Labdanum; mix them all together, and make a Paste very thin, as in the former
Receipt, rub your Cloths, prepare them as before, and it is done.

Perfumes to wear about you.
BEAT in a little Mortar the bigness of a Pea of Benjamin, pour over it a few
drops of Balm of Peru; then add to it four Grains of Civet, stir it and mix it
well with the Pestle, and put it with Cotton in your Perfume-box.

Another sort.
WARM the Mortar and melt in it four Grains of Amber infused in a few drops of
Essence of Amber, put to it two Grains of Civet, mix it all, and put it with
Cotton in your Sweet Box.

Another sort.
WARM the Mortar pretty hot as before, melt in it six Grains of Amber dissolved
with four drops of Millefleur-water, add to it four Grains of Musk, stir and
bruise them all together, put it into your little Box with Cotton rubbed with a
Grain of Civet.

Another sort.
BRuise in the Mortar four Grains of Musk, and two Grains of Civet, pour over
it four drops of Balm of Peru, gather it up with Cotton, and put it in your
little Box.

Another sort.
WARM the Mortar, and melt in it twelve Grains of Amber, and six Grains of
Civet, dissolved with some drops of Water; then take a little Cotton dipped in a
few drops of Essence of Cloves and Cinnamon, and take up your Perfume with that
Cotton; put it all in a little Bladder of Musk very close, and wrap it with a
bit of Sweet Skin, sowed round about, you may cover it with another Stuff if
you please.

Another sort.
IN Boxes with several little Partitions, put several Sweet Drugs without any
mixture; as for Example, in one Partition Balm of Peru, in another Civet with
Cotton, and so in others different Perfumes as you like.

Perfumes to burn.
GET a wooden Trunk called a Perfuming Trunk, it is like other Trunks, only
this has a hole at the bottom to put in two or three little Panfuls of Fire to
burn the Perfumes, and when they are burning stop the hole; and at the top of
the Trunk within about half a foot, there is a wooden or wire Grate to hold
what you design to Perfume, turn your Perfume that the Smell should be even
every where, and that the Smoke should not black what you laid on the Grate.
This Receipt will serve for every thing you have a mind to perfume with Smoke.

Cotton perfumed.
LAY your Cotton even upon the Grate, and burn what sort of Pastils you will,
stuff up the Perfuming-Trunk, and it will Smoke very sweetly.

Another sort.
LIght five or six Pastils made in Wax-Candles in the bottom of the Perfuming
Trunk, lay them upon Tiles, and shut up the Trunk.

Another sort.
POUR in a Perfume-Pan, or in a Silver Porringer, Millefleur-water over a Pan
of Fire, and when the Water boyls, he Steam of it will perfume Cotton: You may
boil after the same manner Orange-flower-water, pouring in it before three or
four drops of Essence of Amber, the Smell will be extraordinary fine.

How to Perfume a Room with Smoke.
SHUT all the Windows, light Pastils made in Candles, put them in the corners
of the Room near the Hangings, otherwise heat red-hot the Fire-shovel, pour
over it some Angel or Millefleur-water, or Orange-flower-water, with three
drops of Essence of Amber, the Smoke of it will perfume the Room all over.

Another sort.
PUT in a Perfuming-Pan, or Silver Porringer, what sort of Sweet-water you
like, lay them over Chafing-dishes of Fire, when the Waters boil, the Steem of
them is very Sweet: You may burn all manner of Pastils upon hot Coals.

A Treatise of Perfumed Skins and Gloves.
The manner of Washing Skins for Fans, and Perfuming them with Flowers.
CUT Sheep Skins Dressed, a little bigger than you design them for Fans,
because you must stretch them round about the little Boards, as you will see
hereafter, then wash them so long and so often in several Waters, till the last
Water is very clean, leave them after that in Water till the next day, squeeze
them and dry them upon a Line; being dry, wash them in Orange-flower-water, and
leave them in it till the next day, then take them out, do not squeeze them
much, and hang them on a Line to dry; be careful to take them down while they
are drying, because they must be dressed as soon as they are dry, or else
you will be in danger to tear them and spoil them; then give them what Color you
please on both sides with a Sponge, then stretch them on your Frames, and dry
them in the Air.

The Frames or Moulds for Fans are little Boards, of the thickness of two Crown
Pieces, cut in the shape of your Fans, having points of Needles round about to
stretch the Skins with. Observe that the fleshy part of the Skins must be
always without.

When your Skins are dry, Perfume them as you will find in the Receipts for
Perfuming Skins and Gloves; and while they are upon the little Boards, rub them
only with your Composition on the Fleshy side; being dry take them up to
Perfume them with Flowers: When you design to Perfume them with Flowers, choose
Perfumes where the Civet prevails, or you may use other Perfumes.

Your Fans being thus Prepared, take a Box, and lay in it a bed of Flowers and
a bed of Skins; continue so doing till you fill the Box with both, if you have
plenty of Flowers, put fresh ones every twelve Hours, if not, every twenty four
Hours, do so five or six times, your Skins are well Perfumed: Orangeflowers are
the best for that use.

How to Wash all sorts of great Skins, and Perfume them.
CHoose what Skins you please, Shamays, or Sheeps, Lambs, Kids, or Dogs-Skins;
not prepared before with Yolks of Eggs; for commonly those Skins are so
prepared, to make them fine and limber, but it is contrary to Perfumes, they
must be also dressed.

Wash them as you have done the Skins of Fans, in fair Water; then let them lie
till the next Day: Take them out, squeeze them and dry them upon a Line, then
rub them very well, and soften them; dip them after that in Orange-flower-water
four and twenty hours; take them out of the Water and don't squeeze them much;
being dry, rub them well and stretch them, then color them of what Color you
please, as you will find in this Treatise: Being Colored, Perfume them how you
please, before you use any Flowers, or else you may Perfume them with Flowers
alone, thus;

Your Skins prepared as before, take a Box according to the quantity of your
Skins, lay in a Bed of Flowers and a Bed of Skins, so doing let them lie 24
Hours; then take out your Skins, and hang them open on a Line an Hour to dry;
then rub them well and open them; cover them again with Flowers, as you have
done before five or six Days, and they are done.

The manner of Preparing and Perfuming Gloves.
CLean and Wash your Skins as you have done before; cut and sew your Gloves,
then Color them as you please; if you will Perfume them with other Perfumes,
do it before you Perfume them with Flowers, as you will find hereafter; being
thus prepared, put them in a Box, lay in a Bed of Flowers and a Bed of Skins,
continue so doing till you have no more Gloves nor Flowers; let them lie in the
Box till the next day, for 24 Hours at most, then take them out, dry them in
the Air upon a Line for an Hour; rub them after that well, open them and turn
them, cover them again with fresh Flowers on the wrong side of the Skin;
continue so doing on both sides four or five Days; then rub them, and prepare
them again, they will be well Perfumed. You must Perfume once or twice the
Paper you beat them in, lest it should lessen the smell.

The Gloves and Skins you Perfume with precious Perfumes, as Amber, Musk, and
Civet, will be well Perfumed without any Flowers.

How to Perfume Gloves or Skins before you Perfume them with Flowers.
GRind on a Marble Stone with a Muller, a Gros (or the eighth part of an Ounce)
of Civet, with two or three Drops of Essence of Orange-flowers, or other
Flowers made of Ben Oil, being well mixed together, drop to it a little of
Millefleur-water, then grind alone as big as a Small nut, Gum of Adragant
dissolved with Orange*flower-water; after that mix your Civet, dropping a
little of the Millefleur-water; continue so doing till it is all well mixed
together, then put your Composition in the Mortar; pour more Water in it,
stirring it till it is reduced to a quarter of a Pint; then lay your Perfume
very even on your Gloves with a Sponge, dry them in the Air upon a Line; being
dry, rub them, open them, and Perfume them with Flowers as before.

Perfumes made with Musk.
GRind upon a Marble Stone two Gros of Musk, with three Drops of Essence of
Flowers, as before, and being well mixed, let them lie on the corner of the
Marble; then grind half a Gros of Civet, with a few Drops of the same Essence,
lay it on another corner of your Marble; then grind as big as a Nut Gum of
Adragant dissolved with Millefleur-water, mixed with three or four Drops of
Essence of Amber; after that mix them all together very well with the last
Water, dropping it gently; and when the whole is well mixed with the Water, put
it in a Mortar, pouring more Water, and stirring it with the Pestle, till it is
reduced to half a Pint; then rub your Gloves and Skins, and let them dry.

Another sort.
GRind upon a Marble half a Gros of Civet, with 3 or 4 Drops of Essence of
Flowers, being Grinded put it aside; then grind Gum Adragant, the bigness of a
Small-nut, dissolved with Millefleur Water, then mix your Drugs together with
Millefleur Water, dropping it by degrees; and when it is all well mixed, put it
in a Mortar, pouring more Water to the quantity of half a Pint; then lay it
over your Gloves with a Sponge; dry them, and rub them, open them, and dress
them again; they will be well Perfumed.

Perfume of Ambret.
MIX on the Marble Stone, half a Gros of Civet, with four Drops of
Orange-flowers, or any other, being well mixed put it by; then mix as big as a
Small-nut Gum of Adragant dissolved in Orange-flower-water; after that mix them
well all together, then warm pretty hot the little Mortar, infuse in it one
Gros of Amber, with a little of Essence of Orange-flowers, pouring some of it
by degrees, till it is reduced to a quarter of a Pint; mix again your Civet
with a few Drops of Orange-flower-water; and being well mixed, put it all in the
Mortar, and mix it well, filling with more Water your Mortar, to the quantity
of half a Pint; lay it over your Gloves or Skins with a Sponge, and dry them in
the Air.

Perfume of Rome.
GRind on a Marble half a Gros of Civet, with a few Drops of Essence of
Orange-flower-water, or other Essence, put it by, then mix Gum of Adragant, of
the bigness of a Small-nut, dissolved with Orange-flower-water, mix it all
together very well; then warm the little Mortar, and infuse in it one Gros of
Amber, with a few Drops of Orange-flower-water, pouring more to it by degrees,
till the whole comes to the quantity of a quarter of a Pint; then mix again
your Civet with some Drops of Orange-flower-water; put it all together and mix
it very well with more Water, till it is reduced to half a Pint; Perfume your
Gloves or Skins with it, and dry them.

Another sort.
GRind on a Marble half a Gros of Musk, with a few Drops of Millefleur-water;
lay it by, then bruise as big as a Small nut Gum of Adragant, dissolved in
Orange-flower-water; mix after that the Musk with the Gum, dropping
Orange-flower-water being all well mixed.

Warm the little Mortar, and melt a Gros of Amber, diluted with four Drops of
Essence of Amber, being well infused and melted, pour to it a little of
Millefleur-water; then put your Musk and Amber in the Mortar, mix them very
well together with the Pestle, pouring a Spoonful of Gum Arabick-water; fill
your Mortar with Orange-flower-water to the quantity of half a Pint, and when
you will Perfume your Gloves, put the Mortar over a Chafing Dish of Fire to
keep it warm, and use it as before.

Spanish Perfume.
GRind upon a Marble Stone eighteen Grains of Civet, with a few Drops of
Millefleur-water, lay them by, bruise Gum of Adragant as big as a Small-nut
dissolved in Millefleur-water; then mix the Civet and the Gum together very
well, pouring more of the same Water, till the whole comes to a quarter of a
Pint; Perfume your Gloves with that Composition, and dry them; being dry, rub
them, and open them.

Grind one Gros of Musk upon a Marble, with four or five Drops of Millefleur
water; being well mixed put it by; then warm pretty well the little Mortar, and
melt two Gros of Amber, with half a Spoonful of Millefleur-water to dilute it;
being melted and mixed with that Water, put to it your Musk, and mix them all
very well together with the Pestle, pouring over it half a spoonful of Essence
of Cloves; pour more of the same Water, and fill your Mortar to the quantity of
half a Pint, add to it two Spoonfuls of Gum Arabick-water; when you use that
Composition wash it over a Chafing Dish, and Perfume your Gloves or Skins.

Perfumed Gloves and Skins with Amber.
YOU must grind upon a Marble eighteen Grains of Civer, with half a Spoonful of
Orange-flower-water, then lay it aside; bruise Gum of Adragant of the bigness
of a Small-nut, diluted in Orange-flower-water; then mix the Civet with the Gum
together, pouring some of the same Water by degrees, to the quantity of a
quarter of a Pint, (so Perfume your Gloves and Skins) rub it with a Sponge.
After that warm the little Mortar, and dissolve two Gros of Amber with half a
Spoonful of Orange-flower-water, and four or five Drops of Essence of Amber;
your Amber being dissolved, pour to your Preparation some of the same Water,
stirring it with the Pestle till it is reduced to a quarter of a Pint; add to
it two Spoonfuls of Gum of Arabick-water: All being well mixed together, warm
your Perfume in the Mortar, over a Chafing Dish, and lay it over your Gloves
with a Sponge, and dry them.

When your Gloves and Skins are Perfumed, let them dry upon Lines, then stretch
them with Sticks; dress them again, and lay them up; But Gloves of Dogs or Kids
Skins, must be Oiled; being dry, rubbed and stretched within, turn them the
wrong side out, and prepare them after this manner.

Preparation to Oil Gloves on the wrong side.
BRuise two Gros of Essence of Amber, and two Grains of Civet, with an Ounce of
Essence of Orange-flowers or Jasmin upon your Marble, and mix them well
together; then lay it over the wrong side of your Gloves with a Sponge, dry
them in the Air, dress them again, and they are done.

Observe, that the last Perfume you use, and the most necessary to all sorts of
things you will keep, is to dry well before the Fire the Sheets of Paper you
fold your Perfume in; for though they look dry, they are always moist.

The Manner of Coloring Skins and Gloves.
YOU must Grind upon a Marble Stone the Colors you like best, with a little of
Ben Oil, or with Essence of Jasmin, or Orange-flowers, being well Grinded, pour
some Orange-flower-water by degrees, Grinding still to mix them well; then lay
your Color by upon the Marble; bruise as much of Gum of Adragant as of Color;
your Gum must be dissolved with Orange-flower-water, then mix the Gum and the
Color together; pour over it a little Orange-flower-water; put the whole in an
Earthen Pan; pour more Water, as much as you think fit: Take care not to make
it too thick, then rub your Gloves or Skins with it with a Brush, and let them
dry in the Air; after that rub them and stretch them with Sticks; then Grind a
little bit of your Color with a bit of Gum of Adragant, infused in
Orange-flower-water, and very clear; rub your Gloves or Skins with it, dry them
again, rub them, and dress them again, that last laying will keep the Color a
long while.

Mixture of Colors.
Isabella lively.
A Great deal of White, half as much of Yellow, and two thirds of Yellow and
Red.

Isabella Pale.
A great quantity of White, half as much of Yellow, and half as much of Red.

Nut Color.
Take some Ombre Earth, used by Painters for shadowing, a little of Yellow, a
little of White, and a very little of Red.

Light Nut-Colour.
The same Earth burnt, as much Yellow, a little of White, and the same quantity
of Red.

Brownish Nut-Colour.
The same Earth burnt, a little of black Stone, of Yellow and Red.

Amber Color.
Much of Yellow, little of White and Red.

Gold Color.
Great deal of Yellow, with a little Red.

Flesh Color.
A little of Yellow and White, and more Red then Yellow.

Straw Color.
Much of Yellow, little of White, very little Red, and a great deal of Gum.

Brown Color.
The same Earth burnt, very much of black Stone, a little of Black and Red.

Light Brown.
The same Earth burnt, a little of the black Stone, a little of Red and White.

Frangipane Color.
A little of the same Earth, twice as much of Red, and three times as much of
Yellow.

Light Frangipane.
Little of the same Earth, great deal of Yellow, little of White, and the same
quantity of Red as Yellow.

Olive Color.
The same Earth, a little of Yellow, the quarter part of Red and Yellow.

Wood Color.
A great deal of Yellow, little of White, little of the said Earth, and half as
much of Red as of yellow.

Treatise of Snuff.
The manner of making Snuff.
IF your Tobacco is in Roles, unrole it, and dry it in the Sun; if it is in
Leaves, dry it in the same way, and being dry, beat it in a Mortar. The Sieve
you make use of, must be of Cloth pretty thin, to let the biggest Grains of
your Snuff pass through; you must Sift presently what you beat; for if you beat
it too long, you will reduce to Dust what is in Grains; the whole being in
Powder, wash it after this manner.

How to Cleanse Snuff.
TAke a Bucket, or another Vessel alike, bigger then it need to contain the
Snuff you will cleanse; the Bucket must have a stop to let the Water out when
you will; line your Vessel within in the bottom, and round about the edges,
with a Napkin of very strong and thick Cloth, lest the Snuff should pass
through. Put your Snuff in the Vessel, with Water enough to dip it well; stir
it in the Water, and let it soak till the next day; then pour the Water out,
and squeeze it as much as you can out of the Cloth; pour in it more fresh
Water, and wash your Snuff again, and let it soak as before; do so at least two
or three times at once. This being done, you will squeeze at last your Snuff as
much as you can; then get some Ozier hurdles, covered with strong and thick
Cloth, and dry over them your Snuff in the Sun; don't fail to stir it every
minute, to have it dry all over; when it is very dry, put it in your Bucket
again, with a good quantity of sweet Perfumed Water, of what sort you like
best, Roses, Angel, or Orange-flower-water are the best for Snuff: Let it be in
that Water till the next day, then take it out, squeeze it gently, and let it
dry again upon your hurdles, stirring it very carefully while it is a drying;
being dry, pour over more of the same Water again, making it in a kind of a
Paste; let it be dry once more; being thus dried and cleansed, it will easily
take all manner of Smells of Flowers.

This way to cleanse Snuff is the best; for the Snuff will the better take the
smell you will give it; it is true, you cannot do it without wasting your Snuff
very much; but if you will spare sweet Waters, and not lose much of your Snuff,
here is another manner of cleansing it.

Another way of Cleansing Snuff.
PUT your Snuff to soak in the Water, only once for four and twenty Hours; then
let the Water out, and squeeze the Snuff very well in the Cloth; dry it upon
hurdles, stirring it as before; being dry, pour sweet Water over it, and make
it as a Past; dry it again, and pour more Water to it, and dry it again, then
it is fit to receive what smell you please: If you will Color it Yellow or
Red, you must do it before you Perfume it with Flowers.

How to Color Snuff of Yellow or Red Colors.
TAKE some Oaker, Red or Yellow, which you will; suppose the bigness of an Egg,
mix with it fine white Chalk to temper the Color a little; bruise them upon a
Marble Stone, with half an Ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds; being well mixed, pour
to it some Water by degrees, and mix it in the mean while till it is well mix't
with the Water, lay your Color aside of the Marble; then dilute two Spoon^uls
of Gum Adragant liquid; mix it with your Color, and Grind them again, to mix
them very well; pouring in the mean while Water over it: Then put the whole in
an Earthen Pan; pour more Water, stirring it always, to the quantity of a Pint
or thereabouts. This done, take what quantity of Snuff cleansed you please, and
put it in a Pan or Vessel, and pour over it your Color, working and mixing it
very well with your Hands, making it like a Paste, not-very liquid but well
soaked; leave your Snuff in the Color till the next day; then dry it in the
Sun upon Cloths, stir it as fast as it dries; being dry, prepare a Gum to Gum
it, after this manner:

Bruise upon a Marble Gum Adragant dissolved in sweet Water; pour over it some
Water, bruising still, and make your Gum very thin and clear; pour it in a Pan,
that you may easily put some more Water in it; wet your Hands with that Gum,
and rub your Snuff, and work it with your Hands, till it is Gumm'd every where
over; then let it dry, stirring it every minute. Being very dry, pass your
Snuff through the finest Sieve you can find; it will at that time be fit to be
Perfumed with Flowers or any other Perfume.

Snuff Perfumed with Flowers.
THE Flowers much used for Perfuming Snuff, are Orange-flowerwater, Jasmin,
common Roses, musqued Roses and Tuberoses, other Flowers can hardly Perfume
naturally, unless you use a great quantity of them, and add to them some
Essence of the same Flowers, as you will see in the Receipts for Perfuming Snuff;
but when all is done the smell never last long, as in other Perfumes. Here is
the manner how to use them in Perfuming Snuff.

Get a Wooden Box, as big as you have occasion for, line within with dry Paper,
lay in it a Bed of Snuff an Inch thick, then a Bed of Flowers, and so along
till you have no more of it; let it lay so in the Flowers Twenty four Hours:
then searce your Snuff, to take out the Flowers, and renew them at the same
time; continue so doing four or five days; and when you think your Snuff is
Perfumed enough with Flowers, keep it very close in your Boxes, in a very dry
place; don't meddle with it when the Flowers are within, because it will not
heat.

Another manner of Perfuming Snuff with Flowers.
GET a good quantity of Sheets of Paper dried before the Fire, of the bigness
and shape or thereabouts of your Boxes; prick them all over with a big Pin;
then to Perfume your Snuff with Flowers, lay a Bed of them an Inch thick in the
Box; and over one Sheet of that Paper, and over the Paper a Bed of Flowers, and
another sheet of Paper over the Flowers; lay over that sheet another Bed of
Snuff, and continue so doing till you have none left: So the Flowers are
between two Papers, and the Snuff too, without touching the Flowers; and by
that means the Snuff takes naturally the Smell of the Flowers, because the same
Smell is not corrupted or altered by the Snuff. Change your Flowers according
to the Plenty you have of them; and when you take them out, take up only the
sheets of Paper, and pass your Snuff through a fine hair Sieve to let your
Snuff through and keep in the Flowers. Flower it so four or five days, and it is
done.

Snuff perfumed with Buds of Roses.
TAKE as much Buds of Roses as you will, pluck out the green knots, and in
their room put as many Cloves: Then throw them in a Glass-bottle well stopped,
expose the Bottle to the hot sun three Weeks or a Month; you may use them after
to perfume your Snuff, being cleansed they will give a very sweet Smell to it.

Snuff perfumed with a great many sorts of Flowers.
NOthing else is to be done, but to mix together Snuff perfumed with several
sweet Flowers, and to prepare it so well by more or less of it, that you can
hardly discern which Smell prevails, and it is done.

The manner of making Snuff in Grains of different bigness.
GET several sorts of Sieves, some of thin others of very thick Cloth, and so
according to the courseness of your Cloth, you will make the Grains of your Snuff
in passing it through; you must not searce it but when it is perfumed with
Flowers.

Fine Spanish Snuff.
THE true Spanish Snuff is very fine and redish, to make it take red Snuff in
Grains, beat it in a Mortar, and pass it very fine through a Sieve; and being
cleansed before it is colored, as I prescribe in the beginning of this
Treatise, perfume it only with Flowers, then with some Spanish Perfume or
other, and it is done.

To perfume Snuff well, it is not enough to perfume it with Flowers, you must
use other Perfumes; it is true, being only perfumed with Flowers, it may be
good to be perfumed with the Perfumes we mention hereafter: I leave it to every
ones Fancy, I Will say only this, That the Smell of Flowers does very well, mixed
with the most sweet and precious Smells, and that they are of a stronger and
more lasting Virtue.

I do not mention here several Perfumes very ordinary, which every one may
compose according to his Fancy: I give only the Receipts of the best and most
Curious, it is easy for any body that understands the Smells good for
Perfumes, to make them.

How to Perfume Snuff in Grains, with Perfumes of different Smells.
Cedra or Bergamot Snuff.
IT is not necessary to use Snuff perfumed with Flowers, to perfume it with
Bergamot Essence, it is enough if the Snuff is well cleansed; the reason is,
because the Essence of Bergamot is of a very strong Smell, and penetrates it
all over. Therefore pour only a few drops of it in an Ounce of Snuff, mingle it
well, and it is done.

Snuff of Neroly.
THE Essence of Neroly being of a very strong Smell, use it as you have done
the Essence of Bergamot, the Smell is strong and very fine, if you do not put
too much, for it works through more than the Essence of Bergamot; observe that
if you will have Snuff of Neroly, the Essence must be true and pure, for if it
is mixed in the least, your Snuff will in time be of a Smell very unpleasant.

Pongibon Snuff.
TAKE a Pound of yellow Snuff perfumed with Orange flowers; beat in a little
Mortar twelve Grains of Civet with a bit of Sugar, being well beaten, and mixed
with a little of your Snuff, continue to pour it in the Mortar, mixing it still
with the Pestle, till the Mortar is full; then take it out of the Mortar, add
the remnant of the Pound of your Snuff to what was in the Mortar, and mix it
very well with your hands: After that fill your Mortar half full of the same
Snuff, and pour over it half an Ounce of Essence of Orange-flower-water, mixing
it still with the Pestle, then fill up the Mortar with your Snuff, to mix the
better the Essence: Take the Snuff out of the Mortar again, and mix it well
with the other that was left, and your Snuff is done. It will be of a very
sweet and lasting Smell; and though your Essence is very oily, your Snuff will
not be so, nor the worse, if you do not put more than I prescribe.

If the Snuff is perfumed with Jasmin-flowers, make use of Essence of the same
Flowers, and so of other Flowers. All sorts of Snuff may be perfumed the same
way.

Snuff perfumed with Musk.
TAKE Snuff perfumed with what sort of Flowers you like best, suppose a Pound,
put in a little Mortar twenty Grains of Musk, with a bit of Sugar, beat them
together, then put by degrees your Snuff in the Mortar till it is full,
stirring it all still with the Pestle; then take it out and mix it very well
with the rest of your Snuff.

Snuff perfumed with Spanish Perfume.
TAKE a Pound of Snuff perfumed with any sort of Flowers, beat in a little
Mortar twenty Grains of Musk, with a little lump of Sugar; then put in gently
your Snuff stirring it still: Your Mortar being full, empty it by, and cover it
with the rest of your Snuff, least it should lose its Virtue: Then beat in the
Mortar ten Grains of Civet with a bit of Sugar, and put your Snuff gently to
the top mixing it still; take it out and mix it very well with your hands with
the r^^

Snuff perfumed with Perfume of Rome.
TAKE a Pound of Snuff of what Perfume of Flowers you please; warm the little
Mortar very well, and melt in it twenty Grains of Amber; put in your Snuff by
degrees and stir it still, till your Mortar is half full; then take the Snuff
out, put it by and cover it with the rest: This being done, beat in the same
Mortar ten Grains of Musk with a bit of Sugar, throwing over it your Snuff, and
being well mingled, mix it with the other, and cover it again; you must also
beat five Grains of Civet with a bit of Sugar, mingle it with some of your
Snuff, take it out again, and mix the whole together very well, your Snuff will
be well perfumed.

Snuff perfumed with Perfume of Maltha.
TAKE a Pound of Snuff perfumed with Orange-flowers, warm the little Mortar,
and melt in it twenty Grains of Amber, mix with it a little Snuff, putting
always some of it in the Mortar, and stirring it with the Pestle till your
Mortar is full; then take the Snuff out, and cover it with part of the rest
left; beat after that in the Mortar ten Grains of Civet, with a little Sugar,
throwing more Snuff and mixing it; then take it out, and mix the whole very
well together.

Snuff Amber'd.
TAKE a Pound of Snuff of any Flowers, warm the Water, and melt in it twenty
four Grains of Amber; throw over some Snuff gently, mixing it still with the
Pestle till the Mortar is full, take it out, and mix it with the rest that is
left, it is done.

As in Perfumes every one has his Opinion, and a great many perhaps love Snuff
very well perfumed, some will have it of a sweet Smell, and yet strong, I hope
I have pleased them in my Receipts. For if the Smells are too strong, let them
put more Snuff to it after it has been perfumed, and it will be sweeter, more
or less will do the business, because the Preparations are good: but above all,
keep your Snuff very close in your Boxes, least it should be spoiled and lose
its Virtue and Smell.

FINIS.
ORoonoko, A Tragedy, Written by Tho. Southern. Printed for S. Buckley.


