THE Innocent Usurper; OR, THE DEATH OF THE Lady Jane Gray.

A TRAGEDY.

Written by I. B.

LONDON. Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden, 1694.

(...) MY FRIEND THE STATIONER.
Mr. Bentley,
I Know not how the Town will ^^^sure me for this Epistle of mine, though I have
herein follow in the steps of no mean Author, who before me, made you a Present
of his best Comedy, with this Encomium, that you were a very good Patron. You
never were closesisted to a good Poet, and your Generosity was always suitable
to the Merit of the Author and his Book, and he is freely welcome to your Table
too; if so, you are a Mecaenas, and such I will style you. But now give me
leave to speak a word for my self. This Product of mine, having been fostered,
and kindly received by the Actors, almost to perfectness, was by a Capricio and
hardheartedness of some of the Civil Powers of the Stage, like an Infectious
Offspring, carried back to the Place of its Birth, and now, through the
Incapacity of the Parent, is laid at your Door.

As to the Reflections about ^t, and as being prohibited the Acting, you are an
authentic Witness, and can clear me as to that Point; You know it was written
Ten Tears since, just as it is now, without one little of Alteration, and
therefore I could have no other design in making choice of this Subject, but
its being recommended to me by Friends, for the best Story that ever was put
into a Play. But let me tell the Person that has done me that kinkness: and
that would fain have it a Parallel, that it is no more such, than I am to
Alexander the Great; it is true, Alexander went on two feet and so do I. It is
supposed the Lady Jane wore Petticotes, and can any one be so foolish as to
think her Majesty will for that Reason put them off?

But say they, it has a scurvy Title. Suppose I had called it the Innocent
Adultress, and I hope I might so without calling any Lady's History in question.

This Play then, having been denied the common Justice of a Malefactor, I mean
to speak for it self upon the Stage; in Modesty I may be allowed to say
somewhat in its behalf: It is no whit inferior to what I have done before of
this kind, nay the Characters are much more perfect, and, without vanity, or
offense to my quondam Brothers of the Chime (for now I own my self not one) I
make bold to say that when ever this unfortunate Lady shall have this Vail,
that she is Condemned to, taken off, and be permitted to show her Features, and
Misfortunes in the Theater; I doubt not but she will draw Tears from the fair
Sexes Eyes.

In it I have followed nicely the Truth, and it cannot be judged, in that Age,
when it was written, that I have interwoven any thing with an intent to pattern
with the Times, unless I had been a Conjurer; and that I am sure those that are
Enemies to this Play, will not allow me to be. I will not hold you too long,
Mr. Bentley, for I know you to be a Man of Business, but will only conclude
with a Character which an Author has given of the Lady Jane (hoping it will
make you have the better Opinion of your Bargain) if I can repeat it rightly,
if not, you will pardon me. She had, (says he) the Beauty of Youth, the
Solidity of Old Age, the Learning of a Clerk, the Life of a Saint, and the
Death of a Malefactor. And so, Mr. Bentley, I am,

Your hearty Friend, J. Banks.
Charles Street, October, 5th, 1693.
Actors Names.
And were to be represented by Duke of Northumberland. Mr. Williams. Duke of
Suffolk. Mr. Bowman. Earl of Pembrook. Mr. Kynaston. Lord Gilford Dudly. Mr.
Betterton. Gardner Bishop of Winchester. Mr. Sandford. Lady Jane. Mrs. Barry.
Duchess of Suffolk. Mrs. Betterton.

SCENE, The Tower of LONDON.

THE WORKS OF Mr. Nathaniel Lee, IN ONE VOLUME, CONTAINING These Following
TRAGEDIES; 1. Sophonisba: Or, Hanibal's Overthrow. 2. NERO. 3. Gloriana, Or,
the Court of Augustus Coesar. 4. Alexander the Great. 5. Mythridates, King of
Pontus. 6. Theodotius; or, The Force of Love. 7. Coesar Borgia. 8. Lucius
Iunius Brutus. 9. Constantine. 10. Oedipus, King of Thebes. 11. The Duke of
Guise. 12. The Massacre of Paris. 13. The Princess of Cleve.


LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, in Russel Street in Covent Garden, near the
Piazzas, 1694.

THE Innocent Usurper.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Duke of Suffolk, Attendant. Suff. LET the Sun's fruitful Rays abhor this
Isle,
And smile no more on this unfaithful Land --
Haste, and acquaint your Lady that I want her. [To a Gent. who goes out.
Why does she sleep, when all the World should wake?
Do not the Groans of dying Edward reach her?
That from deep Quarries force condoling Thunder,
And Echo to the Marble Vault of Heaven,
His Prayers? Hear Angels, Cherubims, and Thrones;
And grant, what Man has only power to wish him,
A thousand years.

Enter Duchess of Suffolk. Dutch. What has alarmed my Lord
To be thus early up? Is Edward dead?

Suff. Dead! all the merciful in Heaven forbid.

Dutch. Go to -- Are you a Man? have you that Blood
Yet left within you that your Birth created?
Or did it only boast (hoping to mix
With mine) that you were Noble and Ambitious?
O Gods! that Woman should so far excel
Mankind in every thing, yet be so cursed
To be born Slaves, and live in loathed Subjection!
Sure Woman was the Almighty's first Essay,
And his creating hand did form her Mind
(Vying with all the Beauties of her Body)
With Courage, Wit, Invention, more than Man,
But soon perceiving what he did was wrong,
Left off the charming and unfinished Wonder
(She else had nearest been to the Immortal)
And gave the Reins of Government to you.

Suff. Something of dread hangs heavy on my Soul;
Mistrust, or Conscience, name it what you please,
That bodes Despair to our uncertain hopes --
Frances! I will no further tempt my Fate;
Let Us wash our hands of this disloyal Duke,
And quit Northumberland; for he is a Traitor --
Last night I saw the Spirit of Katherine.

Dutch. Where? in your dreams? or in your shameless fears?
If you have lost the Courage of your Sex,
Behold, and bless the Spirit of thy Wife;
Who holds it nobler to dispose of Crowns,
Like Godlike Roman Consuls, than to wear
The Globe it self; therefore she takes that Scepter,
By Right and Merit hers, and gives thy Daughter --
Has Cranmer witnessed to the Confirmation?

Suff. He and the Council, all have signed at last;
But only Hales stands out with Resolution;
And that most Learned of Judges says it is Treason.

Dutch. The Prince in Power can only judge of that,
And turn the Treason on the Traytor's head --
Here comes Northumberland; the Instrument
Is in his hand. O glorious, happy sight! Neither
The Silver Crescent, nor the Golden Eagle
Is half s' adored an Ensign, as that Parchment. Enter Northumberland.
No more mean Scruples of ignoble fears,
But join with us, and meet this Tide of Glory.
Hail, thou true Successor of Warwick's Fame!

North. Are we alone? the Court has listening Ears,
And Knaves in every corner.

Suff. What Is the News?

Dutch. Great Spirit of Man! Is Edward now no more?

North. He lives, nor could he die till this was done;
This is his Passport, now to Heaven a' goes.

Suff. Alas!

North. What voice was that? We are one mind?

Dutch. Whom left you with the King?

North. Cranmer, and Ridley,
Who has been praying by his Watch this hour,
And such another space will surely end him.

Dutch. What, will he live so long!

Suff. O cruel Panther!

North. He cannot breathe a quarter of that time.
The Woman that pretended to restore him,
Last night was turned away, and the Physicians.
Again were called; who finding him so desperate,
Stood mute, and gazed like Wretches escaped from Fire,
Viewing their Houses and Estates in Flames,
When past their Power to quench the Conflagration.

Dutch. What must be done with Mary when he dies?

North. That has been long debated of in Council,
And wisely thought by all, that Edward's death
Should be kept secret for some time, and Letters
Sent to the Princess in her Brother's Name,
Inviting her to see him ever he dies;
Whom, when she comes, we mean so to secure,
That she shall never have hopes to Reign in England.

Dutch. Whom send you with these Orders?

North. Valiant Sussex.
Who has Commission too, to head some Forces,
And lead 'em with him speedily to Norfolk,
To keep those parts in awe where now she dwells.

Suff. Wisely intended, but I doubt the Person.

North. No Brave Design was ever done alone,
And in Vast Numbers all are to be feared.
Therefore, because we doubt, must none be trusted? Enter Pembrook.
My Lord, left you the King?

Pemb. I came now from him;
But cursed am I who am the first Informer.
The King has left you, me, and all the World --
Alas! he is dead.

Dutch. Sweet Prince!

Pemb. Sweet Prince! Sweet Saint!
Sweet Angel! more, nay Prince of Cherubims!

North. All Tongues be silent yet of his departure,
As is the Grave, or mouth of Death it self.
Madam, find out the Queen in her Apartment;
I call her so, but yet she must not know it,
As likewise Edward's death; the News is stunning;
A Banquet of such Joy should be prepared,
And wisely served to furnish several Feasts. [Exit Dutch.

Pemb. You mist a sight would fix your admiration;
For oh! to see this Miracle depart,
Was such Instruction to Mankind, that all
The Volumes of Disciples, Chronicles of Martyrs
Could never parallel; He lived like Age,
Yet died as if he never had known the World.

Suff. It was an Object full of Dread and Pity.

Pemb. Though Flesh and Blood, his Thoughts were still Divine,
No Vice could ever make Impression there.
Have you not seen the Swan on Isis Stream,
To dive her Downy Neck beneath the Flood,
White as the Snow upon the tops of Cedars;
Then lifting up her Ivory Crest again,
The Crystal Drops despairing slide away,
Leaving no track nor watery stain behind?
Thus he in all his fiercest Blooming Youth,
Harder to Govern than a Raging Steed,
And Hunting Pleasures like the rushing Winds;
Yet then, oh, then, did he hold fast the Reins,
And in the midst of Flames was never scorched.

North. The King, my Lord, died in the same resolve?

Pemb. The last words that he spared from his Devotion,
Were, that his Cousin Jane should after him
Be Queen.

North. May she Reign long, and dye at last like him.

Pemb. If Spirits sent from Heaven were ever doomed
To suffer Penance here in Mortal Bodies,
Sure his was such;
For none but one acquainted with such Joys,
Could part so willingly with Life and Empire,
And long to lay 'em both as Burdens down;
So died this Prince, beneath the stroke of Death,
As silent as the Lamb lies down to sleep;
As Blossoms, when the Tree is shaken, fall;
Or tender Grass before the Mower's hand.

North. My Lord, I doubt not, but the Cause has reached you,
Wherefore the King has Disinherited
His Sisters, Mary and Elizabeth.
King Harry's Marriage with Prince Arthur's Widow;
The Mother of the first, was for that Reason,
By all the Laws of England, disannulled;
Then Anna Bullen in Attainder dead,
By Parliament her Issue was Excluded;
Whereto, I think, your Lordship gave your Vote?

Pemb. I well remember it; 'twas just when Age
Had Priviledg'd me to sit among the Peers.

North. There was another Motive yet more urging;
The Princess Mary is a fierce Bigot;
It Is to be feared, if e're she wears the Crown,
This Reformation which King Harry planted,
And Edward all his Reign with care increased,
She Will blast and turn to Ruin in a Day;
Then yours and mine, and all our choicest Manors,
Like Limbs hacked off from the great See of Rome,
Will soon return to Animate that Monster,
Whilst like a great Coloss he sets his Foot,
And strides over us, as over half the World.

Pemb. These Accidents the young King wisely weighed.

North. There is a third, the like to be avoided;
Lest Harry's Daughter should some Monarch Wed,
Who, having of his own a larger Kingdom,
Should leave us to be Governed by some Proxy,
And make the Less depend upon the Greater.

Pemb. How can we be assured this Queen will not,
We have the like fear of Suffolk's Daughter.

North. There you are come to touch the String that will
Soft Music yield, or jar in England's Ear.
Now Pembrook hear, and Sensure like a Friend;
Believe with all the pitying Powers above,
And purge this Act of an Ambitious stain:
For who is not ignorant, the mighty Dudly,
Whose Rank is next the foremost in three Kingdoms,
And Second to his Prince, Feared and Adored
By all, can add more Glory to his Name,
Were it himself, by Bedding of a Queen,
And be at best but Subject to a Wife --
The Queen has chos'n a Husband.

Pemb. Whom intends she?

North. She is already Married.

Pemb. Ha!

North. Last Night took a Companion in her Bosom,
Disclosed the Beauties of her Mind and Person,
More worth than England's Crown she carries with 'em.
To my best Son, my Loved, my Darling Guilford.

Pemb. Heavens! whither will this Man's Ambition hurl him!
Till he has raised the Ladder of Vain Hopes, Aside:
To such prodigious height, till it has naught
But Airy Clouds to rest upon -- But hold,
It Is now the times Necessity to flatter.
Sir, you surprise me both with Joy and Wonder,
At your Son's strange Promotion to a Crown --
Thus I Congratulate your Hopes, and think
None but so Fortunate and Wise a Man,
As great Northumberland, could bring't to pass.

North. Their Innocent Scenes of Love were acted first
In our young Monarch's Lifetime, long before
She was designed by Edward to Succeed,
And, as a lucky Crime, without my Knowledge
Were privately Contracted -- Judge then you
That know this Miracle of Innocence;
Sooner an Angel would Blaspheme in Heaven,
Than she, to gain the Empire of the World,
Would break her Vow to Gilford; tell me then,
Is there a Man who for Religions Cause,
To fix the Glory of his House for ever,
And join two Lovers Hearts, made one before
By mutual Vows, but would have done as I did?

Pemb. The Ministers above are on your side,
And pleased to make your great Attempt successful.
Heavens! have you not a Bolt in all your store,
Left yet to ram this Traitor to the Center!
Nay me, that knows all this to be the forging of [Aside.
His Brain, yet dare not tell him that he Lies.

North. Haste then, my Lord, you are our Hopes -- have you
The supposed Letters of the King to Mary,
And Council's Order of dispatch?

Pemb. I have;
But mine ever this I hope she has received,
To give her Caution -- Fare you well, my Lord.

North. Yet but a word. If Edward's Death she chance
To hear of, and so miss to fall into our Snare;
By my Command, unknown to all the Council,
Six of the tallest, best appointed Ships,
Are Cruising now about the Coast of Yarmouth,
To intercept her Flight that way.

Pemb. 'Twas Bravely done, and Wisely --
How Villainy betrays it self! Farewell.
Success at home attend you, doubt not mine. [Exit Pemb.

North. Help now you Powers! whether from Heaven or Hell;
Descend, ascend, bring but a Crown, I care not;
That from this Moment may grow up my Basis,
Whilst thus, having completed all my Labors,
Like Hercules I fix my Pillars here,
And by this Foot of ground on which I tread,
Hold and take seizen now of all the rest,
Lighting my Torch at Tudor's short lived flame,
Till Dudly's Name shall blaze in England's Crown,
As long, and feared, as Proud Plantagenet's.
Let none admire, that Thracian Maximin,
A Peasant, once attained the Roman Empire,
Or that Ogothocles a Potter's Son,
With Armies Conquered the Cicilian State;
Since Whirl-winds, Storms, and Earthquakes, root up Towns,
And watery Deluges have drowned whole Countries;
But this to do without the noise of Thunder,
Alone, and with the Fox's Tail unarmed;
The Fame of this is only due to Dudly --
Behold a' comes! the Pledge of all my Wishes!
The Star of my Ambition! for whose sake
I Would wrest the War out of the Giants hand,
And undertake a second fight with Heaven.

Enter Gilford. Gilf. What have I felt! what Ravishing Delight!
What Mines of Pleasure have thou found this Night!
What Mysteries of Love without a Name!
What quenching Cordials, and what killing Flame!
Soft like a Babe she laid me in her Bosom,
Whilst all the night I revell'd in her Arms.
In Dreams of Love, I Have done the like before,
But always waked till now, cheated and poor.

North. O Son of all my hopes! my Darling Gilford!
For whom thy Father feels within his Breast,
What far exceeds the Love of Youth to Beauty.

Gilf. My Lord, my Father!
The Parent of my Life and of my Joys,
The Shrine of all my Offerings, Prayers, and Thanks!
And God of my Obedience here on Earth;
O let me bend beneath your feet for ever.
And kiss the Sacred Ground your steps have blessed.

North. Rise to my Arms, my Son, I do Command thee --
What means my Gilford?

Gilf. O Sir, you Begot me.

North. I did, my Boy; so did my Father me:
And all Mankind came so into the World.
Is that so strange?

Gilf. O Yes, when I have told
What Stars of Blessings ruled when I was Born,
What lavish Plannet Reigned that Night, you will say
My Birth's a Miracle, my Life a wonder.

North. Thy Virtues shine indeed like Prodigies.

Gilf. Was ever Man before Conceived like me!
O speak, when first you won my Mother's Love,
Had you not then the fierce desires of Jove?
Who got Alcides with such vast Delight,
He masked three Suns to make a treble Night;
And joined three bright December Moons in one,
To get so Loved, to make so Blessed a Son.

North. How fares thy Lovely Bride? my Beauteous Daughter?

Gilf. O there you dive into the precious Stream,
That purls through every Vein about my Heart,
The String that when with the least Breath you touch,
A thrilling Music runs through all my Blood,
And every Pulse leaps but to hear her Named.

North. O tell me of her Health -- how fares thy Jane?

Gilf. To see her, is the Blessing of the Eyes;
But to lie by her panting side, and hear
The beatings of her heart, Love's softest Language;
To count the Balmy Sighs her Soul breathes out,
And sweeter Kisses dropping from her Lips,
Are sure the Pleasures that the Immortals feel,
The Springs where Angels every thousand years
Fledge their cast Wings, to make them young again.
And now can you believe, if ever Father
Did make a Son so blessed; if ever Son
Had so much cause as I to bless a Father?

North. True, if thou knew'st the mighty things I Have done.
Prepare with awe, and listen to thy Father.
If this small gust of Passion shakes thy Frame;
Son, I have News will root thee up with Joy --
Would not thy Jane look lovely with a Crown?

Gilf. A Crown! where ever she goes she is the Queen,
And makes her Presence still the Court of Love,
Cupids, like Subjects, waiting on her looks,
Crowns in her Eyes, and Scepters in her Smiles.
She, like the Golden World, in Bed did lie,
Like Conquering Alexander, I lay by;
And what in Ages he could scarce inthrall,
Won in a Night, and Crowned me King of all.

North. Still have you no regard to my Request?
Curb your wild Joy, and listen to my Story;
I lay it on you as my last Commands
I ever must, or dare from hence pronounce.

Gilf. Ha! you have shocked me, Sir, with somewhat which
I fear to know. What is it? I Am all Attention.

North. Young Edward's dead.

Gilf. Alas, that Rose of Kings!
That Sacred Bud of Royalty, ever it
Could blossom into Man! Say not, he is dead.

North. Gilford, your pity spare, and hear me out.
And now you have endured the bitter Rind,
Prepare to taste the luscious Fruit that follows.

Gilf. Methought I heard a Father's voice again.
Say, if he is dead, who must restore our Joys?
Why mourns the Kingdom then without a head?
Whom must I kneel to? whom must we obey?

North. There lives a Prince -- to undeceive you, let
This Posture then instruct you who he is.

Gilf. Why kneels my Father! why do you heap more wonders?

North. Why bends the Subject to his lawful King?
I Am in the presence of my Sovereign.

Gilf. Ha! where? if so, then I must cleave to Earth.
What means my Father! say. I see no Prince,
No Person that I owe Obedience to
But you -- Heaven! what do you intend by this!
Do You rain down Miracles to distract me quite!
Or do you this, to let me know that all
Those Joys I tasted but last night, were mortal?

North. To rid your Soul of racking doubts for ever:
Know that I kneel to you.

Gilf. All Heaven forbid!
Rivers no more shall pay the Ocean duty;
But rushing back, shall mingle with their Source,
And, like a Deluge, drown the Springs, from whence
They flow: Man shall no more have kindly Birth,
But, Viper like, shall gnaw his Passage through the Womb,
Ever this shall be -- For such another crime
Were the Rebellious Angels dashed from Heaven.
So banish me for ever from your Breast,
Damned with my Mother's Wrongs, and Father's Curses,
If ever I suffer this.

North. I bind you, on my Blessing, rise.
By Heaven's Decree, by Edward's Testament,
And by these Letters Patents witnessed to
By the whole Council, Officers of State,
Sworn to by all in places of high Trust
To see this deed performed, he has entailed
The Crown upon his Cousin Jane for ever.

Gilf. What said you, Sir?

North. See, and defer your Wonder. [Shews him the Patent.

Gilf. What Harmony! What Angel's Voice is this!
What Divine Prophet's reaching out a Cruise,
Like him who did the Royal Shepherd Crown.
I see, I read, I Am wrapped, and in a Trance --
O let me, Sir, be sure I am awake, that you
Are not my Father's Image, this a Vision --
Tortures and Hell! If this should prove a Dream!
Mow my Tongue trembles, Palsies shake my Limbs,
And my Joints quiver with the dread of waking.
O come no nearer; for methinks my Body,
As are my hopes, is made of brittle Glass,
And if you touch, you break the Bubble.

North. Wrestle no more with doubts, but haste, my Son,
Swift as an Angel from the Immortal Throne,
Holding a Beamy Garland in his hand
To wreath the Temples of the dying just,
And be the first Salutes her with a Crown,
As both her Merit's and her Beauty's due.

Gilf. O, Sir! bear with my Frailty but this once.
There is a load pulls back my mounting Wishes,
And stops the Tide of overflowing Joy --
Heaven is in Little Pictured in her Soul,
More Virtues, than in all the Saints together;
Beauties and Graces shining in her Looks,
As are enough t'adorn all Womankind,
And Damn the Sex with Pride.

North. What then, my Boy?

Gilf. If then this Angel, or this Goddess should
(Finding too little Charms in England's Crown,
And Gilford's Love) escape from these loathed Arms,
And claim her Seat amongst the Cherubims?

North. Run then, and fetter her in thy Embraces;
Bind her with Crowns, and Chain her with thy Love,
Whilst I in Council will declare your Marriage.

Gilf. Ha! think you I Will be slow in search of Heaven;
To run with Lightning is the Lover's pace;
For my Desires have Wings enough to fly,
Far as the Sun does visit in a day --
But first Instruct me how I must approach her?
What Posture has most dread, and most respect,
That let me choose -- What distance I shall keep?
If I shall stand, sit, kneel, or prostrate fall?
O Father teach me:
For she is now no longer Guilford's Wife,
But Queen -- Sound ye loud Choiristers above,
And join in Consort, when I speak her Title,
With all the shouting World, that She is Queen.

North. Fly, lest some Rival Angel should grow Jealous,
And dare to peep between her Curtains drawn,
And tell the News before thee.

Gilf. Then, in what sillables shall I accost her?
What shall I say? what awful Hail pronounce?
As she is my Sovereign, Empress, or yet higher,
Or in the Phrase of Love, and soft Desire;
Sweeter than Honey dropping from the Comb,
And loftier than the Style of Ancient Rome.
To talk to her, all Language is but poor,
I would have words that never were said before;
The Voice of Cherubims, welcome and kind,
As Prophets in their Heavenly Visions find:
What the first Man in Paradise did sound,
When first he Loved, and was with Beauty Crowned,
With more than can be wished by greedy Life,
Made Lord of all the World, and then a Wife. [Exeunt Omnes.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Northumberland, and Duchess of Suffolk, severally. Dutch. THe spiteful
Stars have Blasted our Designs,
And balanced our proud Hopes with dire Success.
The Royal Game has escaped the Hunter's Net;
For Mary in her speedy way to London,
On what Intelligence it is yet unknown,
Has turned her course, and fled to Framingham.

North. So let it be, our Wishes then are Crowned,
True Courages like Eagles soar on high,
And sink not at the Lure of small Misfortunes.
It Is well she flies, Caesar could wish no more,
Then it is the Victor's part and ours to follow.

Enter Duke of Suffolk, hastily. Suff. My Lord, I bring ill News.

North. What is it my Lord?
Tell it before thou Dyest -- He Is frighted, Madam!
Speak without Trembling -- Is the Tower Besieged?
Did I suspect my Son had such a Heart,
I Would rip his Bosom, tear the Craven thence;
Then dig my own out, and with hands all Gore,
With Pythagorian Art, and God-like Skill,
Plant there a Warlike Eagle's in its stead.

Suff. The Princess May's fled to Framingham;
Where Wharton, Mordant, Beddingfield, and others,
Are with their Warlike Train of Friends resorted.

North. Relate the ill News.

Suff. Six of the Royal Fleet
Have steered themselves into the Port of Yarmouth,
And there Revolted to Sir Thomas Iarningham.

North. The Ships that were employed to seize the Princess! [Aside.
And what is all this to Souls resolved like ours?
Ambition is but base, that dares not leap
Over Mountains of Impossibilities,
High above these, as Atlas to a Molehill;
Was not the World of justling Atoms framed?
No Music can beget an Harmony
Without some discord, nor can Fate bestow
A Crown without some hazard to the Conqueror.
The smoothest Cast at Bowls is seldom known,
Without a Rub to bring it to the mark.

Suff. I fear we have deferred the Publishing
Of the King's Death too long, till it be found
A Cheat.

North. Now is the time -- Where is the Queen?

Dutch. She Is just now up, and parted from her Bedchamber --
Behold she comes this way.

North. And Gilford with her?

Dutch. No.

North. Soon as he appears, withdraw and leave 'em.
My Lord, the Council waits, to whom we'll now
Relate the hidden News of Edward's Death;
Then with the King at Arms our selves will haste,
And, though the Furies gnash their Teeth and grin,
Through all the Ecchoing Streets Proclaim her Queen. [Ex. Dukes.

Enter Lady Jane, Attended. Ia. Saw you my Lord? Mind, listen for his steps.
So early up, and yet so long returning?
My Mother! many a Morning Blessed as this
To me, and many a Night as was the last,
Adorn your Life.

Dutch. All Blessings on my Daughter -- Why that Blush?
And why (as though I chid my Dearest Child)
That sudden Paleness? Do not mock thy Wishes;
Ha! why that Tear? and why that Smile to hide it?
Thy Face is Checkered over with Joy and Sadness,
Like Rain and Sunshine in an April Sky.

Ia. Sure never Virgin was so Blessed as I,
And never Bridal Arms so Rich as these:
The Rose of Youth, the Majesty of Kings,
Mildness of Babes, and Fondness of a Lover,
Are all Angelically mixed in him,
To make your Daughter Happy; yet there is something,
I know not what, hangs like a Clowd betwixt,
And will not let my pregnant Heart bring forth
Those kindly Joys, the Beams of Love have kindled.

Dutch. It Is naught but Fondness and Excess of Passion,
Like Misers Wealth, which often begets a Fear,
Without a Cause, of losing what they covet.

Ia. Why in the Tower! this Palace more befits
A Coronation, than a private Wedding.
Love rather would have chosen some lonely Bower,
Or humble Cottage, than this mighty Prison.
Alas! why at this time! why are we lodged
In the Apartment of the King, and here attended
With more than usual State?

Dutch. It is, my Child,
By the Appointment of his Majesty.

Ia. By his Appointment! say. Then is he well?

Dutch. I do not know.

Ia. Ha! then I fear it is bad;
For every one I ask tells me the same.
Does his devouring Malady increase?
Then Bane to all our Marriage-Sweets for ever.
If he does languish, why should we rejoice?
Why should our Hymen's Torch so proudly blaze,
When he, our brightest Sun, is in Eclipse?
Why should we laugh, and drink deep Draughts of Joy,
When Edward Groans, and all the Nation Weeps?

Dutch. Disturb the quiet of thy Breast no more.
Thou should rejoice to see thy Mother glad.
Her Floods of Sorrow, and her Tides of Bliss,
Are Governed by the Stars of thy Success.
Wines of sweet Relish may be drunk too fast,
And what you are, should not be told in haste. [Exit Dutch.

Ia. Ha! Gone! Was I but yesterday so blessed!
And now a Stranger to my Mother's Breast!
What is the cause, just Heaven, she shuns my sight?
Has then a Wife so changed me in a Night?
What News is that, too great for me to bear?
And yet I dread it is too bad to hear --
But see a' comes, my Oracle of Love!
That will all Doubts from this dear Heart remove;
In whose sweet Tongue's more Music, soft Desire,
Than in Apollo's Voice, or Charming Lyre.

Enter Gilford. Gilf. My Life! My Soul! My Angel, and my Love!

Ia. Come to my Breast, thou faithless Wanderer,
And listen to the Language of my Heart.
The Dove within my Bosom, left alone,
Has pined, and coo'd, and made such piteous Moan!
And in its doleful Cage no rest could get
This long long hour, and all for thee its Mate.

Gilf. Ye Powers that ever felt a Lover's Joy!
Why have ye made such Beauties to destroy!
For here are Arms to bind the Brave and Young,
Nets for the Wise, and Fetters for the Strong.

Ia. O thou loved Man! in whom are sweetly mixed.
Thy Father's Roughness, and thy Mother's Softness.
Where have thou been, thou Darling dear of Love!
Where have thou been, thou Stragler? Thy whole Sex.
Are like the little Robbers of the Hive;
Who having culled the Sweets of every Flower,
Rifl'd their Wealth, and ravished all their Store,
Proud with their Conquest, leave the Plundered Bower
To every Storm, and every Blast that blows;
Thus like the Violet, and the fragrant Rose,
Women Enjoyed, you Banish, and Expose.

Gilf. Atlas would sink beneath this weight of Bliss;
I die, I live, and all with every kiss!
This Downy softness, Snowy white, excels
The Beauty that in yonder Heaven dwells.
O shun me, fly me, banish me -- I fear
These Raptures are too exquisite to bear.

Ia. I charm thee then, by our past Scenes of Love!
By all those Sacred and Religious Rites
Unravelled to our languishing Delights!
By the disclosing of that Gordian Knot,
Which like the greedy Conqueror of the World,
Thou in the Temple of these Arms unfolded!
If there be any thing within this Breast
Worth a kind thought -- O rid it then from Tortures,
And tell me why this place of Blood and Death
Is chosen to be the Seat of tender Love?
Where dreadful Cannons drown soft Lutes and Songs,
And Bullets fly instead of Cupid's Darts.
But first, by all those Ties, again I charge thee,
Inform me of the Welfare of the King.
If he be well, no matter where we are.

Gilf. O then prepare to hear the Joyful Wonder,
Fit only for an Angel's Voice to tell,
And thou to hear -- King Edward by his Will --

Ia. What was it you said? his Will! then is he dead?

Gilf. As Winters Clay -- he is dead; but that is not all.

Ia. Not all!
Is not that more than all the Plagues at once
On England -- Dead! O Heavens! recall that word;
And Trumpet with an Angel's Voice aloud
To all his Subjects Ears, that now are deaf
With howlings, that he lives -- Say, does he live?

Gilf. In Heaven a' does.

Ia. O Gilford! can you say
He Is dead, and not relate it with a Tone
So mournful, that would strike with sudden death
The wretched hearers.

Gilf. Cease, thou profuse and lavish Mourner, cease;
Dudley will else grow jealous of his Shade,
And wish to die to be lamented so.
Tears are but wasted that are spent in Sorrow:
Had thou a Stock would fill the Ocean up,
I bring such News would drain 'em all with Joy.
Shake off those Clouds that shade thy Summer's Beams,
And O! put on, put on with all thy Smiles,
Thy Spring of Beauty straight to welcome Glory. [Kneels.

Ia. What means, my Lord?

Gilf. Start not; for what the Almighty is above,
And Edward was on Earth, even that you are.

Ia. Ha! quickly tell me -- what is that?

Gilf. My Princess, and the Sovereign Queen of England.

Ia. Rise, rise, and flatter those that are Ambitious.

Gilf. I dare not, for the Ocean's not so wide,
Nor distance up from Earth to Heaven so great,
As this vast Space a Crown has made betwixt us.

Ia. Now I have hopes again thou art not serious,
That the King lives, and this is acted all --
Rise to my Breast, and take those fancied Crowns:
Were here the Empire of the World, my Lord
Should share it.

Gilf. Can you be so Heavenly lavish!
Imagine then, thy Beauty's on a Throne,
High as the Star, the Ruler of the Morn,
From whence thou may behold
Joy spread its Wings over all the Ravished Island,
Augusta with her Bells and Trumpets sounding
Jane, Brittain's Empress, and the Ocean's Queen.

Ia. Haste, and in few and plainer words explain you.
Truly I bind you by that Sacred Truth above --
I die to be delivered of this doubt,
But fear the Knowledge will be worse than Death.
What am I? Who are you? And if the King
Be dead (as all the Powers over Life forbid)
Who should the Nation kneel to, but his Sister?

Gilf. Your self.

Ia. My self!

Gilf. Ask me not whom the People,
But whom the Heavens have chosen, whom the King
On his Sick Bed, by Patent, and by Will,
Ordained? And I must answer, only you.

Ia. Ha! Me! Me Heavens! -- Yet, yet recant, my Guilford;
Say this is feigned, and pour not down at once
More Plagues than Earth has left in store to curse us.
Condemn not with thy once melodious Tongue
These Breasts to Banishment, and further too
Than Seas can part us, or than Death can do.

Gilf. What says my Jane! has she not one kind look,
To give the Messenger! nor Gilford too!
Hark, hark, they come, approaching with a Crown? [Shouts within.
A Crown! O Sacred and Immortal sound!
Does not the dazzling Object fill thy Breast
With such AEtherial Brightness, strange Delight,
As Eden's Goddess, when her Eyes were opened,
And saw the World her Subjects, all Obey her?

Ia. Indeed it is not unlike, but has this difference,
She dreaded not the Poison she had swallowed;
This is Damnation, we too surely know,
A Sin will Edge the Flaming Sword of Justice,
To drive us from our Paradise of Love.
Where is the Princess Mary? She Is not Dead?

Gilf. But Disinherited.

Ia. It cannot be, it is such a horrid Act
That is not in the Power of Hell to do.

Gilf. The King, who left it you,
Has cut off both his Sisters from the Throne.

Ia. He durst not, could not -- Oh! he was too good --
'Twas in his Sleep, or else when cruel Pain
Had stole his Senses, that some Devil appeared;
And if it be so, guided his weak hand
To give another's Right, the Nation's Choice,
And Heavens Prerogative away --
Far be the thoughts of such a Guilt from us --
Gilford, I will not take the Crown.

Gilf. Ha!

Ia. Pardon this one denial of thy Jane,
This only Disobedience of thy Wife,
And all the Meekness of a Tender Bride
Is thine hereafter.

Gilf. What! not be a Queen?

Ia. Rouse, rouse my Gilford from this deadly slumber,
Start from this Lethargy of vile Ambition,
A fatal Vision of deceitful Glory;
Lest it should prove with thee, like him who dreamt
That he was mounted on a Precipice,
And, finding it was real when he waked,
Did in a Frenzy to the bottom fall,
And dashed his Bones to pieces.

Gilf. O my Angel!

Ia. Come to these Arms, far safer than a Crown:
Let us the noise of Courts, and Courtiers shun,
And heavier load of interrupting State,
The little God will bend beneath the weight.

Gilf. O, my Goddess!

Ia. Would you this Empire leave, to Reign with Guilt?
This Lambent Crown, for one of drossy Gold?
Shall we this Heaven forego, and Heaven hereafter?
To live and wear the hated Name of Tyrants?
And die the death of Traitors?

Gilf. Ha!

Ia. Do you love me? and do you prize my Love?

Gilf. O Heavens! Why doubts my Soul?

Ia. Would you endure to see this Body then
(Which Heaven and Earth, all Vote to be thy Right)
Torn from thy Embraces, and before thy Face;
By these loved Tresses fastened to the Ground,
This Bosom threatened, and these Beauties mangled;
Ravished, and made the Lustful Victor's Prize?

Gilf. Mothers would see their Infants with less Moans,
Torn from their Breasts, and dashed against the Flints.

Ia. O Gilford! Thou'st Condemned us both, to snatch
The Crown and Mary's Birthright from her Head;
Such Ravishers are we.

Gilf. Forgive thy Husband.

Ia. I know thou would not --
Had I my Sexes Appetite unbound,
Let loose the Raging Woman from her Temper,
And seized the Crown, thou would have child thy Jane,
Pulled from my Head the Sacrilegious Plunder,
And straight restored the Royal Theft again.
Take Counsel of this Faithful Breast that loves thee,
Resolve no more to split upon a Throne,
Let Us wear our Innocence, but not the Crown.

Enter Northumberland, Duke and Duchess of Suffolk, Officers of State, Lords,
Ladies, Attendants and Guards. All kneel. North. Long live the Virtuous, Happy
and Adored
Jane Queen of England, France, and Ireland.

Ia. Kneel not to me, I charge you by those Powers
That first taught Children Duty to their Parents.
Oh! here are some this posture not befits,
Were I the Queen of all the wealthy Globe;
If Angels should descend and worship Men,
It would not be to me so strange a sight --
Rise, or I Will grow thus one with Earth for ever,
Why is all this to me?

North. Be pleased to wear the Imperial Crown of England,
The Sacred Relics of most Pious Edward,
At whose Commands, and by consent of all,
We beg you would Adorn, and put 'em on.

Suff. And make the Widdow'd Nation happy.

Ia. My Lords, whose Crown would you invest me with?

North. Deceased King Edward's.

Ia. And tell me, whose Estate do you now enjoy?

North. My Father's, Madam.

Ia. Could then this most deplored, the best of Kings,
Our Royal Master, Owner of that Crown,
(Suppose the Will) have so much Power to be
Unjust, and take your own Inheritance,
By Law, and Right of Nature, only yours,
And give it to a Stranger?

North. I think not.

Ia. Yet you would take his Crown, his Sister's Right,
And make a Gift of it to me, these Kingdoms
That are as justly now the Princess's Portion,
As are your Father's Lordships yours.

North. Ha! Gilford! --

Ia. I see you are fixed with wonder at my words.

North. Madam --

Ia. Illustrious Parents! Lords, and Country Men,
Why mock you this Unroyal Head with Crowns?
This head that was not made for Rule,
But to Obey; for here is my Lord;
To serve is all the scope of my Ambition.
What me! O Father! Lords, and Counselors!
And all good English Men forbid -- O be not,
Be not so rash, as in the Fable, once
The Woods and Trees, the Rebels of the Forest,
That sought t'elect a Monarch of their own,
And basely chose the Bramble for their King,
Whilst the tall Princely Cedar stood neglected.

Suff. O Child of Virtue!

Dutch. Daughter!

North. Rebellious Boy! Is this all real!

Ia. Are you so soon forgetful of the Wounds,
Whose Scars you carry fresh about you, like
So many gaping Witnesses against you;
When the Revengeful House of Lancaster,
And that of York, did from your selves and Fathers,
By Usurpation drain a Sea of Blood;
When the white Rose
Grew Crimson with the Vitals of the Red,
And the bold Red turned White with the vast Blood
It lost -- That I should be the Agressor.!
The hanging Meteor that should bode your Ruins!
O take me rather, quench me from this Orb,
This Basilisk, and lay me deep in Earth.

Dutch. Degenerate Girl!

North. Furies and Death! Is this in earnest, Madam.

Ia. O that these Drops were Tongues instead of Tears,
And every word a Seraphim to charm you,
With all the Virtues, Graces, Worth of her
That is your Queen; add too, divinely born,
Daughter and Sister to your two late Kings.
Whom do the Savages in Deserts choose
To be their Head, but of the Lyon's Race?
And whom the Feathered Songsters of the Air,
But of the Royal Eagle's Brood? -- Let not
Birds and Brute Beasts instruct your Loyalty.
None but Mankind from smooth Succession strays:
But only Man, nor God, nor King obeys.

North. My Lords, in low Submission to the Queen,
All this more shows her Noble Mind to Govern,
Than just Excuses to refuse the Crown --
You know how deep our hands are in, how close
Our Lives are with this Common Interest joined.
Consult of this within, and in a Moment [Exeunt Officers of State.
I will expect your Resolutions -- Madam,
By all your precious hopes, you are lost and ruined,
Unless you mean to dally with the Crown.
As your uncertain Sex deal all with Love,
And the same Moment both refuse and take it.
Be sudden, for there is now no going back:
Like Caesar you have past the Rubicon;
Therefore resolve like him, and take the Crown.

Dutch. Say not the art Conscious now of shedding Blood;
All we must perish if thou cease to guard us,
Already you are proclaimed through all the Kingdom;
And by a Claim lesser than Mary's, think you!
Was not my Mother, Harry's only Sister?
And every drop of Blood of thine as Royal
As the best vein from whence her Title streams.

North. Ha! mute! Gilford, where is thy boasted Power?
Where Is now thy Empire over her bending Mind?
Thy soft, thy obeyed, thy quick Commands to win her?
Thou speechless too! then we are all betrayed.
It Is so, Madam, we are sold, basely and Cowardly,
Whilst Correspondence with the Candidate
Is held, in hopes that when my Life and all
My wretched Sons are forfeited to Death,
They shall be Heirs, and so of you, my Lord,
Is it not so?

Gilf. O Jane!

Ia. Give me thy hand, let us fall thus low together.
O Father! Mother! far more prized than Life!
And Parent of my Lord, as near my Heart!
By the Divine above, and Just on Earth!
By this dear Pledge that you have given these Arms,
To bind me to your Love thus fast for ever,
Your Safety is the only Charm that binds me,
And Life the Sentence that Condemns me Guilty.

Dutch. What Is to be done? the Storm comes on apace,
And Mary like a Torrent from a Hill,
Will quickly drive us hence, or pour upon us.

Suff. There Is now no hopes in any thing but Flight --
Let us secure our selves.

Dutch. Inglorious Wretch! Shame of thy Mother's Blood!

Suff. Say, what do you intend to do, my Lord?

North. Stay here like Titan, and devour my Race,
To tear him, her, thee, and then my hated self --
Yet I Will be gone -- but whither? that is no matter.
Behold me, O! thou that were once my Son!
But now a Stranger to my Bowels -- Jove hurled
Not Saturn from so proud a height as thou have me.
I, who this Moment in my hand had Crowns,
And Kingdoms with my Breath to give away,
Now am not worth this Spot, this Earth I tread on.

Gilf. O cruel Jane! O most Inhumane Virtue!

North. Yet I will live, and feed this Breast with Curses.
There is this Comfort too, I may run mad;
At worst, but beg and starve out Life, as lately
A Noble Duke of the Lancastrian Line,
That used in Burgundy, by Horsemens sides
To run and crave an Alms -- and so farewell.

Gilf. My Father! Lord! you must not, shall not stir.
Take not your self, take not your Blessing from us.
Lo, at your Feet the worst Delinquent falls;
Spurn this Hard-hearted and Rebellious Son;
Spurn me to Atoms, hence you shall not go;
For thus I Will hold 'em, chain 'em with my Hands,
Wash 'em with Tears, and glue 'em to my Lips --
Take me along, your Son shall be your Shield;
I Will plant my self like Marble round your Heart,
Save you from Want, and guard you from your Foes.

North. Loose me -- Fond Nature will not let me hurt thee;
The Father's in my Heart, and Mother's in my Eyes.
Will thou not let me go, to save my Life?
But see thy Father like a Traitor seized,
Drawn on a Sledge, and mounted on a Gibbet;
Then by the common Executioner
Of Rogues and Thieves, these Bowels to be ripp'd,
And this great Heart yet panting in his hand,
Thrown in the Flames, and burnt before thy Face.

Gilf, Now by the Heavenly Pity in her Soul!
She Will not endure it -- See, she will take the Crown.
And mount the Precipice of yonder Throne;
Were it as high, or Mortal to ascend,
As Atlas, Teneriff, or burning AEtna,
I know my Jane would Travel to the top,
At my Request; one of these Tears should force her. --
Turn best of Fathers, turn; behold, she will,
I see it in her Soul; her Lips are pregnant --
Now, now, they open -- Heavenly Angel, say?
Let thy Tongue speak the Language of thy Eyes,
And save my Father's Life.

Ia. Heaven knows, my Gilford,
How dear's thy Love! How Eloquent thy Tears!
And more, how near thy Father's Danger wracks me;
Yet this I must not yield to; All is none,
To Vultures here, and Daggers in a Throne.

Gilf. Ha! Then I Will search amongst the Stars, or dive
To the bottom, where this Merciless Virtue grows --
Farewell, O most Beloved! And yet most Cruel!
Farewell to those false Dreams of Crowns by Day,
And Heaven by Night; Farewell to Love for ever.
Perhaps when I am Dead, she will take the Crown;
Then of necessity, this way's the best,
To save a Father's Life, and be at rest. [Offers to fall on his Sword.

Ia. Hold, hold, my Love -- Give me this fatal Weapon,
Where is this Throne? Where is this Golden Wreath?
This Magic Circle to Inchant my Brow!
Load me with Crowns, were it the Tripple Crown,
To save your Lives, you shall then put it on.

North. Immortal Crowns reward your Soul for this.

Gilf. Shout, shout aloud, till Angels catch the sound,
And Joy in Heaven, that she on Earth is Crowned. [Shouts,

Scene draws, and discovers the Throne and Regalias: Re-enter Lords. Ia. Is
this the fatal Glory of Mankind!
The dazzling Object that so fires his Mind!
Cursed as in Mines thou art, dug up with pain,
With Labor got, and Sorrow lost again --
Methinks when I ascend you dreadful height, [Putting on the Crown.
I am like one, who when a Storm's in sight,
Climbs up some dangerous Cliff that hits the Skies,
To view the Laboring Barks with weeping Eyes;
How they against the raging Billows strive,
And wonders that the little Wretches live;
But still forgets what slippery place he is on,
How safe they are, how near he is to drown. [Exeunt Omnes.

ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE the Tower. Gardner solus. Guard. YOung Edward dead! the Crown Entailed on
Jane!
All looks like dreadful Truth: for late last night
Suffolk's proud Duchess, and her Pageant Daughter,
Entered these Walls with a profuse Retinue.
Omnipotence! what mean thou! fatal Caesar!
Cursed be the Winds that drove thee on our Shore;
A Storm brought thee to us, and ever since
The Storms of War has lodged within our Bowels.
And cursed be the Foundation of these Walls;
When thou did build this Castle to maintain
Thy ill got Empire, 'twas first reared in Blood,
And since with Blood of Princes often stained;
A Citadel for this Rebellious City,
The Scene of Murders, Slaughterhouse of Kings!
And Court of Hellish Plots -- Ha! yonder comes
Northumberland like a Prodigious Meteor,
That threatens Desolation where it hovers,
Dudley the Great, and Monarch of his Prince. Enter Northumberland with
Attendance, seeing Gardner, offers to pass over the Stage.
My Lord.

North. What says my Lord of Winchester?
You Are breathing in the freshness of the Morning?

Guard. The King's poor Prisoners, Sir, are glad to take
The Benefit of any little Air.
I Have borrowed of my Chains this precious Freedom,
To learn what News; and if the King be dead,
Pray of what Sickness died he then, my Lord?
You can inform me.

North. Why ask you that of me? was I his Doctor?
Besides, that bold Physician that had dared
Consult with Gardner of his precious Health,
I Would have him hanged.

Guard. For giving good Advice.
Come, come, look back, and turn your Eyes at home.
It Is not for me, my Lord, my Sacred Function,
To arm this Breast with Rage to cope with yours.
My Innocence is the best Guard to fight
With Wrongs, and Ghostly Council all my Weapons.
Just Heaven, I fear, too soon will make it known,
What sad Distemper has so long afflicted
The King and Kingdoms, and the Aggressors too.

North. Priest, fare you well, if you begin to Preach.

Guard. My Lord, I hear the Princess Mary's sent for.
Pray Heaven you mean her kind.

North. And dare you question
The King's most Royal dealing with his Sister?

Guard. No, did his Mercy rule without a Curb;
But where Northumberland does Reign, I doubt it.

North. You are a Traitor.

Guard. Proud, bad Man! it is false.
Were both our Breasts laid open to Men's view,
This place had then been yours, and I no Traitor.
Remember that he had two Unkles once --
Oh wretched Land! forgive that I Am so cruel
To rip thy Wounds up with my Tongue afresh
In their Remembrance.

North. Let thy own Bosom now
Judge betwixt thee and the Queen's Godlike Mercy.
That thou the worst of Traitors should be spared
To rail at Rebels Punishment.

Guard. Waving the Scarlet Train of all thy other Murders,
The least of which has Guilt enough to damn thee;
O think of Somerset, that brave good Man!
The Faithful Guard and Patron of his Country,
As well as the Protector of his Prince.
That Cedar was too tall for thee proud Shrub!
And therefore Dudley held the Infant King,
That else had not the Will, nor Strength enough
To give the Blow, and made him with his Left
Cut off his Dear Right Arm.

North. Thou lie, proud Prelate.

Guard. Dispower'd himself by thy pernicious Council,
At once of more than all his bleeding Realms
Have left; of Somerset, who while he lived,
Stood like the Bulwark of his Breast and Kingdoms.
When this was done, 'twas dreaded what would follow;
Alas! 'twas feared, as now it is come to pass,
The Sickness of the King, and woeful Death.

North. Ha!

Guard. Does it sting you? Duke, it is suspected
You deal with Knaves and Sorcerers, else why
Were the Physicians taken from the Patient,
And an old Woman placed to give him Filters?
With withered Chaps, and Eyes like Basilisks,
To fright the King, that, had she not been Witch,
Her looks had bribed a Jury to Condemn her.

North. Though all that can be uttered from the mouth
Of such a Priest, is neither Truth, nor Scandal;
Yet thy vile Language I return upon thee,
And like Infection, it shall seize thee first.
I Will crush thee to a Pedant once again,
And in a Dungeon thou shall howl for this.

Guard. Thou Art base enough to do it; yet I Will urge thee --
Angels now waft the Spirit of the King:
And since he is dead,
There lives a Princess will revenge this Wrong,
When Injured Norfolk, Courtney, and my self,
Shall live to see thy head upon a Pole
As high as yonder Tower.

North. Where are the Guards?
Who gave this Traitor Freedom from his Chamber? [To the Guards.
Dumb! Seize him straight, and clap him fast in Bolts,
Shut him as close as in his Tomb alive --
Go, Coffin him; it is the Queen's Command.
That hour his head is seen without his Dungeon,
Your Villains lives shall pay for the Offense.

Enter Pembrook. Pemb. How Is this, my Lord! what, executing Rigor!
Now when the Nation is all over Gladness?
So near the Presence of that Royal Bride!
Whose Sight, like Heaven, should make this Prison Doors
Fly from their Hinges, and release their Charge --
Let go your Prisoner -- haste, my Lord, to Suffolk,
Where Mary does increase in Power and Strength.
Posthorses wait, to bring you there to Night;
Mean while the Queen shall be the Nation's Charge.

North. Farewell, my Lord; commend me to our Mistress,
Tell her, her Soldier shall return with Laurels --
Why shout you not! why say you not, Amen?
Methinks you are all struck dumb -- So when I left
The Queen, with Orders in my hand, ye all stood mute,
Only the shapes of Men without a Voice:
Ye bowed your heads indeed, but not one cried
God speed the Duke -- No matter, Friends farewell;
In Omens spite Northumberland shall on,
And on this Sword bring Victory to the Town. [Exeunt North. and his Followers.

Pemb. My Lord, pray read these Letters to the Council.

Guard. Ha! This is from the Queen! Pray pardon me;
I mean our True and Lawful Princess Mary.

Pemb. What does she say?

Guard. She writes in the most gentile style of Love,
And mild Persuasion to the Lords in Council,
If they will forsake this Idol, and return
To Her, their True Undoubted Sovereign,
She does pronounce a Free and General Pardon,
With an Oblivion of all Crimes to All,
(Northumberland and the Usurpers only
Excepted) -- Heaven inspire the Altars of your Breasts,
And kindle there your long extinguished Duties;
Then would I bless this hand of Providence,
And the Angel that did guide it.

Pemb. As you wish
So is it come to pass.

Guard. Are you in earnest!
Why did you let Northumberland depart
To Head an Army?

Pemb. It Is of no strength, my Lord,
Besides uncertain; for his chiefest hopes
Are in the Succors we engaged to send him,
Which w' have Disbanded e're they could be raised.
This Traiterous Duke, e're since the Good King's Death,
Confined us Prisoners here, as close as you,
None suffered to stir out by day, at night
The Keys, by Order, brought into the Chamber
Of this Mock-Queen.

Guard. I scarce can guess his meaning.

Pemb. I have Insenc'd the Lords, besides the Sin,
How hard it is to tug against the Stream
Of Royal Right; that e're these Letters came,
All soon resolving to forsake the Usurper;
This Morning one by one released themselves,
And fled to Baynard's Castle to Consult,
Where we have drawn the City to our Party;
Who, for Atonement of their Fault, intend
Straight to Proclaim the Royal Heiress.

Guard. Most Noble, Lord! you have done a double Right,
Restored the Kingdoms, stench'd the Nation's Blood,
And sat the Crown upon a Lawful Head.

Pemb. My Lord, this day Creates your Liberty.
To Morrow's high, and Blessed Meridian Sun,
Sees not himself upon a Throne so Bright,
As you shall shine in Royal Mary's Favor,
Guide of the Realm, and Plannet of the Church.
O Jane! Thou Art on the brink of Royalty --
Back to your Chains, and I to set you free.
Behold she comes -- How unconcerned she treads,
The narrow Plank that is over the boisterous Strand,
Crowns on her Head, but Seas on either hand. [Exeunt Guard. and Pemb.

Enter Jane, Women, and Attendants. Ia. In vain, alas! are Tears to purge this
stain,
When these I hold, and still the Cause retain;
For e're my words can reach the Almighty's Ear,
Thunder from high grows louder than my Prayer.
Methoughts the Diamond Bolts of Heaven were barred,
And straight the noise of falling Crowns I heard;
Which did, like Stars, in broken pieces fly,
And scattered over the Crystal Pavement ly;
Whilst Angels thus aloud Proclaimed, she Dies,
When Virtue Slave to tempting Glory lies,
It Is just it fall Ambition's Sacrifice. [Sits down, and takes Plato*
O Plato! Thou, that when the World was Night,
Taught Heathens how to see, and us the Light;
Whose Mouth, the longing Bees did make their Hive,
A true Presage thy Lips should Honey give.
What say thou now, to ease my troubled Breast?
What Is this? A Tyrant is the greatest Plague Reads.
The Gods can send to Men --
Ha! Tyrant! Ay, that Guilt shall be thy Fame,
And Plato brands thee with that hated Name -- [Lays down the Book, and falls
on the floor
Fetch me the Robes, the Adornments of your King,
And all the Pomp of the Ambitious bring,
Crowns, Scepters, Globes, till they an Hill shall be,
And underneath the Lumber bury me;
A proper Grave for such, who vainly try,
With waxen Wings to mount the Angry Sky.

Enter Gilford. Gilf. O you Blessed Powers! What Prodigy is this?
Is this the day? Are these my Eyes, just Heaven!
What Seeds of Miracles has sown this Wonder!
My Queen beneath the Throne, upon the Floor!
Lift up thy Head most Blessed of Humane Race!
In Tears too! O thou Brittain's Rising Sun!
Thus does thy Rival to the West return,
And leaves the World in blackest Shades to mourn.

Ia. O thou dear Man? Thou soft, thou precious Ruin!
That comes to Tempt me to another fall.
When thou art absent, frightful Visions haunt me,
England's sad Race of Monarchs, some Deposed,
Some Slain with Daggers sticking in their Bosoms,
And others Banished, glaring in their Shrouds,
All threatening me as Author of their Woes;
That Death I seek to rid me of the Pain,
But when thou come, I wish to live again.

Gilf. Immortals! is it possible! Nor Crowns,
Nor Empire, State, nor Lust of Gaudy Power, --
Can tempt thee from thy Adamantine Bounds;
But must like Stars be Foyls, when Cynthia shines,
And like Day-Fires, be buried in Eclipse,
Before this Heaven of Virtue, Sun of Brightness.

Ia. Do thou not feel me tremble? my frighted Soul,
By starts, leaps from my Bosom to my Eyes,
Misjudging every Object that it sees,
And thinks they come from Heaven to give me Doom.

Gilf. For what?

Ia. For Sin, for Usurpation.
O Gilford, clasp me, save me in thy Arms,
Support my burdened Spirits, sinking Head,
Weighed down with Crowns, and loaded with Ambition.
Let Us fly my Love, from this tempestuous State,
Descend betimes from this disturbed high Mountain,
Guarded with Terrors, and with Crowds Besieged,
E're Life gets on the Wing, and Love forsakes
His troubled Nest, to build in Heavens safe Shades.
In Shepherds Clothes, let thee and I repair,
To some lone Vale, like Temp^'s Golden Bowers,
To Love away the Day, and Charm the tedious Hours.

Gilf. It Is but a Night, my Soul! my Happiness!
This Vision of a Crown has lasted me,
And thou have made me weary often already.
Do all, when they have enjoyed this Golden Dream,
So soon Repent?

Ia. Usurpers like our selves.
Alone we shall be Plagued with Ghostly Storms,
Conjured by this our Guilt; amidst our Guards
Be most in fear; at Meals we never shall eat,
Without a Weapon hanging by a Hair,
And pointed over our Heads; and every Night
Our Dreams shall forge Revenging Thunderbolts,
Or else, like Brutus, in our closest Studies,
We shall have Murdered Caesar ever in our eyes;
And when, at last, we are frighted into Frenzy,
Deposed of Crowns, Ambition still will haunt us;
And wretched, as we shall be, think of Reigning,
And act the Tyrant still, although it be
Like mad Men in an Hospital -- O pitied State!

Gilf. Ha! can thou think thy Gilford such a Monster?
O give me way, yet nearer to thy Soul,
Open thy Bosom, and let in this Criminal,
The Shrine, the Sanctuary for all my Fears.
Had I usurped the Universal Rule,
Hunted its Kings like Droves about the World,
Cast all their Crowns in one upon this Head,
And, till it reached the Sky, pil'd Throne on Throne,
For all my Crimes thy Virtues can Atone.
Where shall we turn to rest? for here we walk
On burning Scepters, and on glowing Crowns,
Whilst threatening Clouds are Marching over our heads
To pour like Spouts upon us.

Ia. Let us in some disguise escape this night,
And throw our selves at Royal Mary's Feet;
Then quit for ever this infected Throne;
No more deluded be by Glory's Charms,
We'll find the World in one another Arms. [Both rise.
Our Portion shall the boundless Empire be
Of true Love, Innocence and Liberty;
For here we are --
Shut like the Patriarch in the Ark alone,
View all the Waters, and the World our own,
But yet, alas! Imprisoned in a Throne. [Going out, meets Duke and Duchess of
Suffolk.

Suff. What now! Is this like England's Majesty!
Again in sadness! hunting doleful Corners!
Who have the vast, luxurious Globe to rove in.
Without your Guards! shut from your longing Subjects,
Who, banished from your Chambers, make such moan,
As Birds lament the absence of the Sun.

Dutch. Ungrateful Daughter! more Inhuman Gilford!
Winged with my Royal Right, thou have pitched upon
The highest and most envied Throne in Europe,
And brought into Possession of those Charms,
With whose enjoyment, though enriched with Crowns,
Thou art not satisfied -- Shame of great Dudley's Blood*

Ia. O Mother!

Gilf. Best of Mothers! Parent of my Love!

Dutch. Did I for thee refuse my Claim of Empire!
And, lest the dazzling Crown should tempt my Mind,
Put out the darling light of my Ambition,
That thou should shine the brighter.

Ia. Father!

Dutch. Unnatural Offspring of my Blood!
O shut thy Ears against the Crocodil.
For a few cunning Tears by Gilford shed,
Which he but feigned to save his Father's life,
She did not scruple then to Usurp the Throne,
Which now her Conscience will not let her keep
To save both ours -- O that thou were again
An Infant, sucking at thy Nurses Breast,
And I forewarned thou would have proved so mean,
I would have snatched thee sprawling, from the Nipple,
And stamped thy Brains out, thus, against the Stones.

Ia. How wretched is my State! I either must
My Virtue lose, or Duty to my Parents;
Yet witness all you Angels, and my Mother,
Since either you or I must be a Queen,
That one of us must be the loathed Usurper,
I Am glad the Fate has light upon this Brow;
For I had rather bear the Guilt than you.

Dutch. Do, weep, that I may scorn thee.
By Heaven there is not a Tear shed for so base
A Cause, but draws an angry Curse upon thee.

Ia. O cruel Mother!
Why threatens that beloved harmonious Voice,
Like softest Strings that jar when out of Tune:
That Tongue was made for Blessings, not for Curses.
If you will curse, O curse us from your Presence,
Curse us beyond the Sun's forsaken Bed,
Where we'll be banished, curse us when we are dead.

Gilf. With Heaven consent, that we may straight lay down
This Atlas Load, this weight of Royalty,
This living Grave of Mountains over our heads,
And fly to Mary Heavens Anointed Queen,
To purge this Guilt, and save my Father's Blood;
For here are all the Almighty's Plagues at once.

Dutch. Dull Monster! Idiot! Thousand Fools in one!

Gilf. We lie on Pillows stuffed with Adders stings,
And never eat without the dread of Poisons,
Nor wear the Crown, for fear in putting off,
Like Centaurs Blood, it tear the Flesh away.
No Peace by Day, nor Sleep at Night we find,
For Usurpation ever in our mind.
No place to rest, for when we would lie down
A Guard of Ghosts with Spears surround the Throne.
O set us straight from this Enchantment free,
For they in Hell are more at ease than we.

Dutch. What Guilt! what Centaurs Blood should fright a Queen!
Give me the Crown -- behold it on your Mother;
It sits on me more light than if it were [Puts on the Crown.
A Garland of soft Roses on my Head.
I feel no Poison in it, nor Magic Charm,
Unless it be its Gems that shine to me
Bright as the Eyes of wanton Goddesses,
Or Heavens blew Frame with Studs of Stars adorned.
And I dare sit me down in Edward's Chair, [Sits down.
Without the dread of Royal Ghosts to fright me.
I feel no Adders stings, bus it is as soft
To me as those that lean on Virgins Bosoms.
Should Harry's Corpse, and Richmond's Shade, with all
The Tudors, Grim Plantagenets surround me,
Burst from their Marble Tombs, and gaping Urns,
With Scutcheons, Murrions, Gantlets, Corslets, armed,
that make the Living feared, and Dead more aweful;
^ho' Hell too join, and both conspire my fall,
I Would keep this Place, and Reign in spite of all.

Enter Pembrook, Gardner with the Great Seal, as Chancellor, with the rest of
the Lords, Guards. Suff. Ha!

Dutch. Gardner with the Seal! the Riddle Pembrook!

Ia. What mean you by this Ceremonious silence?
Bring you more guilty Crowns to load me with?
More Serpents in a Wreath to plague this Brow,
Till it is a Gorgon's, or Medusa's head,
To fright my Parents with their Monstrous Birth?
Why is this Prologue of your down-cast looks?

Pemb. O Star! O Brightness! Setting Sun of Virtue!

Ia. What can this mean, but some new horrid Guilt!
What Massacre have I commanded, say?
What Murders has this Cruel Hand proscribed?
Pronounce the Fact, and then the dismal Sentence:
These dreadful Signs are worse than any Death.

Suff. Say, Pembrook.

Dutch. Speak, my Lord.

Pemb. Illustrious Princess! Star of Heavenly Virtue!
O Woman, born to be the Miracle
Of Fate, as well as wonder of thy Sex!
What can this Posture mean? this silent moan?
But signify you must descend the Throne.

Gilf. Ha!

Ia. Say It again.

Pemb. You are no longer Queen.

Ia. Yet, yet once more.

Dutch. Treacherous Impostor! Traitor Pembrook!

Suff. My Lords --

Pemb. And yet to us the satisfaction
Is not more great to plant it where it is due,
Than are our Griefs to take the Crown from you.

Suff. O Jane! we have undone thee.

Ia. O proceed.

Pemb. The Council in Remorse, not hate to you,
At Baynard's Castle first did vote you down,
With whom vast numbers of the City joined,
And all Proclaimed King Harry's Daughter Queen.

Ia. Am I no longer Queen, say you? O joy!
Is this the News your dreadful Aspects threatened?
Now pitying Heaven has heard my Prayers at last.
O Parents! Husband! You, my Lords, rejoice,
And let these Tidings kindle in your Faces
Infectious Joy; for mine is full of Raptures.
Shout all you Host of Angels, shout Mankind,
My loaded Temples I Will with Pomp unbind.
O Parents, Husband, Kindred, Friends, what mean
The Current of these Tears, and heavier Looks?

Suff. O Child, most blessed that ever Parent got!
Thy Virtue makes my Blood in every Vein
(Which ought to prove a Mirror to my Daughter)
Blush to behold the Crystal Stream of thine
To run so pure from such a muddy Fountain.
Why do not join with Heaven to curse this most
Inhumane Father, and this Panther Mother?

Ia. Grieve you to see me lightened of a Crown!
You should have wept when I first put it on.
Now my head's eased, my Conscience freed from pain,
I tread on Air, and I Am my self again.

Pemb. Can you this turn of Fate so bravely bear?

Ia. I can, and put it off as a Disease,
As I would take a Garland of May Flowers,
And throw it from me when the scent is gone.

Pemb. And can you too, forgive this Revolution? [To Gilf.

Gilf. Forgive you! yes, you have so nobly done,
Angels shall envy you the glorious deed.

Ia. Forgive you! Gilford, let us kneel and bless 'em.
O happy Mary! blessed in such a Council!
And Pembrook, none so brave -- you all shall shine
Chief Council to the immortal Throne for this.
All Earth rejoice, and every living thing
Of Iane's deposing joyful Tunes shall sing.
O Sir! O happy Womb that gave me Birth!
Weep, Weep no more, unless your Eyes send forth
Tears of Rich Joy, more kind than Summer's Rain,
Or welcome drops upon the scorching Plain.
Lift up your Thanks with us, the Heavens adore,
That Happy Gilford is a King no more.

Gilf. Shout all for Gladness, 'twere less Sin to Mourn,
When Joy came to the World, when she was Born;
Sing that this Cursed Charm's unloos'd again,
That I am free, and Iane's no longer Queen.
Away my Love, the Beams from yonder Throne*
Are hot and parching as the burning Zone.

Ia. My Lords, farewell; divided here from State,
Gilford and I will make our glad Retreat,
Quit this high ground, nor dread the Brambly Soil,
But make it Pleasant with our Mutual Toil;
And though you see us Poor and Naked driven,
Like our first Parents, from the Groves of Heaven;
Say not, alas! but Act your Queen's Command,
Guarding as Angels the forbidden Land;
And let your Loyalties for ever be,
Like Edens Bounds, to part the Throne and Me. [Exeunt severally.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Pembroke, solus. WEep Heavens, fall Hail and Torrents from the Sky,
And when you have drein'd the Briney Ocean dry,
Weep on, and pour the Watery Globe and Night,
On the World's back, and quench this Orb of Light;
Or, for a dire presage of this black Day,
Throw all your Thunder, sportive Balls away,
Till with one horrid Universal crack,
The frighted Earth, and Frame of Nature shake;
As from wild Chaos, with one stroke 'twas born,
So back to nothing let the Mass return. Enter Duchess of Suffolk.
O Duchess! O thou Cursed and Wretched Mother,
Of all the Virtues of thy Sex in one!

Dutch. What is it you say, my Lord!

Pemb. O never Weep;
For should thou drown the World in Penitence,
Kneel, till your Joints had bored into the Marble,
And worn the Altar Steps away, and prayed,
Till Heaven's Bright Book of Mercy wanted Leafs,
Thy number of Petitions to Record.
Yet all would be in vain to Save thy Soul,
Had thou not brought this Saint into the World.

Dutch. Alas! I was not Born to be so Cursed,
To pull down Vengeance, or worse Death on her.
Nor Fate, nor Malice too, can be so Cruel,
To touch her Life.

Pemb. O Jane! O precious Light!
That thou should be the Offspring of such Night!
Thus to our wonder, Nature often shows,
The Thorniest Brake, may bear the Sweetest Rose.
The rarest Graft, does from the Crab-Tree shoot,
And loathsom'st Soil begets the Richest Fruit.
Wise Providence no sooner did Create,
One Woman by mischance, to be Man's Fate,
But did another make to Save us straight.
O Heaven! O Hell! To Mankind all, or naught!
O deadly Poison! Precious Antidote!
Like Vipers, Good and Bad, ye Virtues have,
To cure the deadly wounds your Fellows gave.

Dutch. Insult not over the Frailties of a Woman,
But for Poor Jane, and for her Sister's sake
That lies in the soft Bosom of thy Son;
Join all thy Power and Interest with the Queen,
And throw 'em with thy self beneath her Feet
To beg for pity, 'midst this Fatal Crew,
Her Father's Life and Hers: She cannot grant you less,
That snatched the Crown from her Unlawful Head,
And put it on her own.

Pemb. Last Night the Queen
Arrived at Greenwich, but Declares by Vow,
She will not see the Town, nor think of Mercy,
Till all are Sentenced, which must be this Morning,
Soon as the Lords are formed in to a Tribunal.
Northumberland by Arrundel Attached,
His greatest Foe, and Posted back to Town,
No sooner was Dismounted from his Horse,
But hurried to his Judges in the Hall.

Dutch. The worst Severity on him, can never
Be thought too Cruel.

Pemb. See, the Horrid Show. Lady Jane, Gilford, Northumberland, with three of
his other Sons, the Marquess of Northampton, and several other Prisoners of
Quality, pass over the Stage Guarded, as to their Trials, in a Solmen Manner.
Behold! and if thou have, nor Eyes, nor Daggers,
To penetrate within thy Marble Heart,
View here a sight would Mortify the Friends,
These thy own Bowels, which the Inhumane hands,
Have torn from thence, and hurled to Execution;
Thy Husband, Daughter, Son in Law, poor Gilford!
The Marquess of Northampton, with his Friends --
The Wretched Dudly too! O pitious Object!
With four of his Unhappy Sons Attended,
In sad Procession, dismal Order come.

Dutch. Ha! Is that Heaven! and are not those her Followers.
A Golden Troop of Angels! No, they are not --
What does that Fiend Northumberland do with her!

Pemb. See, how she takes her Gilford by the Hand,
Smiling upon him, and does seem to say,
It Is a more welcome Coronation Day.
O Blessed and Happy Train! In following her,
Your Crimes are all Atton'd for, and Forgiven,
Thus led by her, you needs must go to Heaven.

Dutch. Ha!

Pemb. Behold the Spoils of thy Luxurious Pride!
The Trophies of thy Female fierce Ambition!
O Woman! Born to put the Sin in thought,
Which your first Mother and the Devil got;
Lest Heaven in Mercy should forget the Stain,
And call the Curse on Mankind back again.

Dutch. Where are they gone?

Pemb. To Hell, where should Northumberland be gone!
To suffer for the Sin that thou have taught 'em;
For thy Ambition, to be scourged with Scepters,
With red hot Crowns their Temples to be seared,
And burning Globes be hurled about their Ears,
Like Tennis Balls, to make the Devils sport.

Dutch. Ha! Have I found thee Ante-Monarchy!
Go, Preach Damnation to thy Cursed Tribe;
I Will hear no more such Doctrine.

Pemb. How she stares!
How wild she talks! Heavens! I have done amiss.
This Sight and Apprehension of my words,
Have turned her Wits.

Dutch. What say thou, Hypocrite? Avaunt --
I find thee now, thou art a Puritan,
A Pulpit Devil; I know thee by thy Cant,
And thy Geneva Tone, thy Cap and Nightcap.

Pemb. Hell!

Dutch. I Will not to Hell; Hell is a Commonwealth,
A Parliament of Rebels.

Pemb. Madam, resume your Wise Courageous Temper.
I was to blame, and meant not this in earnest,
By all my Hopes! I Am sorry for the Attempt.
Your Daughter's Guardian Angel will Protect her,
Call back the Sentence of the Merciless Laws,
And stay the Ax from falling on her Head,
The Queen will --

Dutch. Queen! Did you talk of Queens, and Axes, ha!
Run Slaves, fetch me my Rods and Axes, straight,
Haste to the Forum, usher in your Empress;
Lead to the Senate, and Proclaim my Coming;
Do they deny me Entrance! Down with the Gates,
Off with their Hinges; Seize the Capital,
I Will make 'em know, that I am Caesar's Daughter.
Look, how the fearful Rogues in Scarlet crouch!
Their trembling Joints, and tottering Sconces shake,
Like Heads of Poppy on their quivering Stalks.
Give me the Crown Northumberland, I Will seize it --
Ha! Are you Mute! And will not Vote me then!
Where are my Legions? -- Pile your Faggots round;
Burn this Rebellious Swarm within their Hive,
And set the Gaudy Streets of Rome on Fire --
O! Nero was a Gallant Prince! [Exit Duchess.

Enter Gardner with the Great Seal, Attendants. Guard. Most Noble Lord!
Commanded by the Queen,
I am Commissioned, to make one amongst
The Judges of her Crown, the King's Bench Court;
An Honor, I am Proud of under Pembroke,
Who is to set Chief Justice for the Day.

Pemb. My Lord of Winchester, and Chancellor,
This Favor of our Sovereign is Divine,
Yet not too Great for her we must Arraign.
Why have you left the Court of Peers, my Lords?
How is the Great Northumberland come off?
And the Bold Marquess of Northampton?

Guard. Both are Condemned; but for the Duke of Suffolk,
The Queen has Pardoned him before his Trial.

Pemb. A Happy Omen! may it be the Prologue,
To her more wished for Mercy, to his Daughter.

Guard. The Business of this Grand Consult, was short.
The Haughty Duke, who in Prosperity,
Towr'd like the King of Birds, and vy'd the Sun,
Whilst lesser Flyers of the lower Region,
Flagg'd out of sight, and panted to behold him;
Yet now, in his Disgrace, no humble Quarry,
Dashed from the Pounces of the frightful Hawk,
Did creep and tremble on the ground so vile.

Pemb. The Nature of an Upstart, Base, and Mean,
None more Imperious, Lofty, Proud in Office;
But when Degraded, none more Cringing, Poor, and Fawning.

Guard. He offered but a weak Defense, still Pleading,
That he did Act but by Authority,
And under the Impression of this Seal.
His main Exception, was against the Lords,
Urging they could not be his Lawful Judges,
By whose Commands in Council he Proceeded,
And they with him, Obeyed the Queen in Power.

Pemb. A stunning Question, that.

Guard. 'Twas soon Resolved; this Seal, was proved to be,
The Seal of an Usurper, no more Lawful,
Than any Rebel's putting on a Crown,
Makes a True King -- Then for the Lords,
Would you have all the Council Punished for
The Treason of this foul Rebellious Duke,
That one Man's cursed Ambition drew 'em to?
That were a Cruel Decimation, worse
Than the most Barbarous Justice of Old Rome,
The Innocent to suffer with the Guilty,
As there, perhaps, the Valiant with the Coward.

Pemb. Then my Lord,
For all these strong Exceptions of the Duke,
Since no Attainder was against the Peers,
His Brethren in Guilt, they by our Laws,
Were held as equal Judges as the best.

Guard. They were -- I Will wait on you, my Lord.

As they are going out, Suffolk meets them, and Jane, and Gilford, at at
another Door, as going to their Trials. Guard. My Lord of Suffolk, would you
ought with us?

Ia. Alas, my Father!

Pemb. What would your Grace? The Court does stay, my Lord.

Suff. If you want Woe, to set the nicest touch,
And Master stroke of Sorrow on this Scene?
To make this sad Tribunal more complete
And solemn, than the last, partake of mine.

Pemb. Would you have any thing that we can grant you?

Suff. I run to you for shelter from my Griefs;
But find I must despair to meet it here.
Such Storms of Misery have shook our House,
The Pillars of it crack beneath the weight;
And I am only left to tell the Story.
Ambitious Fires have seared us to the Bone,
Like Lightning pierced, and made its fatal way
Into the inmost Closets of the Mind.

Guard. My Lord --

Suff. The wretched Mother of that woeful Daughter,
The Wife of this Inhumane Flinty Bosom
Is grown Distracted by a furious Grief,
Her Sense dug up, and rooted like a Mine,
Scourged by her Tyrant Sorrow from its Throne,
And, like a Fury, driven about its House.
Alas! she is mad.

Ia. What said my Lord? What speaks my Father?

Suff. Mad as the raging Billows of the Sea,
The bated Panther, or Nemaean Lion;
Or as the Tiger in his search of Prey,
When cruel Appetite had whet his Fury.

Ia. Just Heaven! these are beginnings of the Treat
That we are invited to partake e're long.

Suff. O thou best Child of all thy tender Sex!
Thou Sanctuary of Innocence! Let me adore thee.
It was not long since these Ambitious Arms
Took thee by force, fast bound thee to the Throne,
And put the Crown with Threatenings on thy Head;
For which, my Lords, lift up your awful hands,
And with your Sword of Justice cut 'em off.
These Knees, the vile Examples to the Crowd,
That taught 'em first to bow to my Ambition,
Let 'em do Penance thus, and kneel for ever. [Kneels.

Ia. What means my Lord! I did not think to stain
My haughty and courageous Innocence
With the least drop; but this alas, has wracked me.
My Father's Woes, and Mother's dreadful Story
Has rung a Torrent from my bleding Eyes,
With fiercer pain than Vitals from my Heart:
O best of Fathers! would you bless me, rise,
This is the worst of all Idolatries.

Guard. My Lord of Pembrook, see the Court expects us.

Suff. Stay, stay, you eager Ministers of Fate!
In whose one hand is Life, the other Death.

Pemb. My Lord, what mean you?

Suff. Is it for naught, dear Country Men, you see
A guilty Father kneeling to his Daughter?

Guard. You act against the Justice of our Place,
We dare nor hear, nor suffer this, my Lord;
You must remove from hence till Sentence given.

Ia. Rise, O my Father! Gilford, lend thy hand.
This posture does infect our Innocent Blood,
And makes me guilty of the shame I suffer.

Pemb. My Lord, we must desire you to depart,
Or else desist, and leave us to our Duty.

Suff. First, hear me, Lords, your Breath is as the Gods,
As is the voice of Heaven, pronouncing Justice,
Let not grim Statutes, nor the Judges sway you.
Your Breasts are Oracles, and your Decrees
Inevitable Acts without Appeal.

Guard. This is so great a Fact against the Laws,
Such Boldness to obstruct the course of Justice
We blush to hear, therefore, my Lord, be gone.

Suff. What though the Law has styled her an Usurper,
Turn your Eyes inward, probe 'em to your hearts,
Your Consciences, from whom is no Appeal:
Know that your selves, the Judges, and the Lords
Gave both your Votes, your Threatenings, and your Prayers
To set this Innocent against her Will
Upon the Throne, for which she is now Arraigned,
And for your faults must suffer as a Martyr.

Pemb. My Lord --

Suff. Yet, yet permit me.
Hold you that favor from a Duke, which you
Allow your common Prostitutes of Law?
A mouth stufft with the Frazes of his Client,
Suffer an Advocate to rail for Gain,
A Lawyer for his Fee, and will not hear
A wretched Father for his Daughter plead!

Guard. You Preach to Rocks, and howl unto the Seas,
We Are deaf as they, to what we dare not hear.
You must obey the Dictates of the Law;
And so farewell. Exeunt Pemb. and Guard.

Suff. Go then, but take a Fathers Curse along;
A wretched Father, blast of all his Issue.
May you like me despairing live, like me
See all your Children Slaughtered in your sight,
And when you come to die; (consent to it Heaven!)
If you, to save your selves, condemn this Saint,
May your black Souls on Blasphemy take Wings,
And meet your just Rewards, like Fiends in Hell.

Ia. O Sir!

Suff. Weep not, thou drooping Flower! thou mourning Angel!
Bright as a Cherubim thou shall descend,
Or like a Planet gayer than the Sun,
Sit with the awful Judge of all the World,
At the last day, Arraign 'em at the Bar
Of Heaven, and plunge them into Fires for this.
Jane --

Ia. Sir! O Father!

Suff. O Son! O Daughter of my Bowels!
I bode these Eyes shall never see thee more.
Far as from Earth to the Immortal Dwelling,
This Moment parts thee from thy Wretched Father.
Stain not with Tears the Injustice. nor thy Wrongs,
But let the Task of Weeping all be mine.

Ia. This is a Trial harder to be born
Than that we go to meet with.

Suff. Had thou been set by Tigers in the Desert,
I could have charmed 'em sooner than thy Judges;
Or had been racked upon the milder Ocean,
I could have swam, and born thee over the Billows;
Immured with fires, I could have snatched thee thus,
And held thy Body in these Arms unscorch'd,
Pulled thee from forth the Jaws of Plagues and Famine;
But from inexorable Laws and Judges
I cannot.

Ia. Blame not the Laws, nor mitigate my Crime,
But bless the Queen that saved my Father's life,
Speak Comfort to my Mother, and be Loyal --
Farewell.

Suff. Be Loyal! What a Parodox is that!
Can Suffolk Loyal be when thou art slain!
Preach Loyalty to Lucifer that fell
To Tigers that are robbed, to Fiends in Hell,
But not to me, my Child. A long Farewell. [Ex. Suff.

Scence draws and discovers Pembrook, Gardner, Judges, Officers, and all
Formalities of the Court. Pemb. My Lord Chief Justice, and my Lords the Judges,
I am not ignorant that this great Session,
Is the most prime Prerogative of the Crown,
The highest and most awful Seat of Justice,
And that the Queen presides in Person here
Above all other Courts.

Guard. Room for the Lady; make the Prisoners way.

Pemb. Most Virtuous Lady, we entreat you sit.

Ia. My Lord, you might have spared the style of Virtuous;
Ill sits that Title on Delinquents Brows;
We come to be Arraigned by other Names.

Guard. Now, pray proceed, my Lord.

Pemb. I come not here to alter any Rules;
Neither to act in favor, nor against
The Noble Prisoners now to be Arraigned;
Nor that the Queen suspects your Trust, my Lords.
But know, most equal Judges of the Land,
This most unfortunate, this Princely Lady
Whom you are to try, besides her Godlike Parts,
Such rare and vast Endowments of her Mind,
Which far excel all Paterns of her Sex
That ever went before her; likewise is
Of such high Birth, and of a Line so Sacred,
That the bright Beams proceeding from the Sun
Come not more near to the Imperial Light
That guilds the World, than she is to the Royal Fountain.
Yet so severe, so straightened are our Laws,
She cannot claim the Privilege of her Peers,
Which some this day, though far beneath her Person,
In right of Blood, and Virtues are allowed.

Guard. First, let a Chair be brought.

Pemb. We beg, you would sit down.

Ia. Should I a Criminal, sit down before
My immortal Judge above, and Judges here?
Yet think not, Noble Lords, I hither come
Before my Mind had formed within it self
The fiercest, grim Idea of your Justice,
Which e're a Mortal Guilt could pull from Heaven;
Nor think I can be frighted with your Forms,
Though all your Scarlet Robes shot Flames of Fire,
And all your words were Parthian Darts to hit me;
In my uneasy Pomp I felt the dread,
And when the fatal Crown was on my Head,
This Show was in my Heart.

Gilf. Go on, and strike your Thunder through our Ears,
Shoot all your Barbarous Terms of frightful Laws;
Paint to our Eyes, the Monstrous Shapes of Judgment
Look terrible as executing Angels,
And for your simple Sword, to plague us more,
Produce your whole Artillery of Justice,
I Will bear 'em all, and if I chance to faint,
Steal but a look from hence, and I am healed.

Guard. Proceed in calling Witnesses.

Pemb. Stay -- give me first the Charge -- Most Noble Lady,
It Is the Queen's Pleasure, you should be Arraigned,
Not as vile Rogues and foulest Traitors are.
With one hand trembling, giving my Commission,
And with the other lifted up to Heaven,
She cried alas! and then some Tears that fell
Stopped for a while the rest she had to say.
I give thee this not to be Slave to Statutes,
But curb the rigid Law; be merciful,
Let Royal Pity Seal thy tender Breast,
And if thou weep'st, say 'twas thy Queen that taught thee.
The form of your Indictment you have heard,
I Will only then repeat the substance to you.

Guard. Most Worthy Gentlemen that are the Jury,
Cast your eyes on the Prisoners at the Bar,
And hear my Lord pronounce their mighty Charge.

Pemb. Madam, and you, my Lord, are both Indicted
As false and Perjured Traitors to the Queen --
O that those Syllables
Were Poison to the Tongue from whence they flowed,
Ever I had breath to utter such a sound.
That you, I say, contrived and levied War
Against our Sovereign Lady now the Queen,
And both together Traitorously deposed,
Whilst, Madam, you Usurped the Royal Throne
Of England, and Proclaimed your self its Queen,
Your True and Lawful Sovereign then alive,
And this I think's the Substance of your Charge;
To which you both must plead, and now be Tried.

Guard. What say you? are you Guilty, or not Guilty?

Gilf. My Lord, to this Indictment at the Bar,
As to Deposing of the Queen, to kill her,
And our repeating Murders in her Kingdoms,
To the malicious words as they are laid,
We say we are not guilty; yet intend
No Plea in Bar of Justice; for the Angels
Are not more clear from the vile sin of Devils,
Than were our Souls from such a black Design.
But now, my Lord, to cut this tedious Loom,
That else would be too long a winding up,
And make the cause but short;
To spare your florid Council in the Laws,
Their hoard of Eloquence for time of need,
To let 'em fall like Torrents on the Heads
Of sturdy Malefactors at the Bar;
As to the Offense, the Treason of the mind,
We still persist, and plead our Innocence,
But to the Fact on which the Law takes hold,
We say we are Guilty.

Pemb. Ha! Gilford! Lady! think on what you say.

Guard. You say you are Guilty both?

Pemb. For Heavens sake, pray, my Lord --

Ia. Gilf. We are both Guilty.

Pemb. Seas and vast Mountains fall upon my head
Rather than this be real. See, O Jane!
Thy Judge descending from his Throne of Justice,
Both Sword and Scales he throws beneath thy Feet,
His Life to boot to save thy drop of Blood.
Consider what thou say.

Gilf. Ia. We both are Guilty.

Pemb. O Gilford! say it not for a Kingdom.

Guard. Record their Plea, and this their bold Confession,
They Have owned the Charge, and you must find 'em guilty.

Gilf. Pronounce our Doom, why do you delay our Sentence?

Pemb. O Pattern of the brightest Saint in Heaven!
Recall that word, the Terror of which sound
Has struck thy Judges with a Mortal Wonder;
We had a thousand hopes to save thy life,
But now, alas! have none.

Guard. Madam, and you, my Lord, are both convicted,
And you must now prepare to hear your Sentence;
If you have any thing to say against it,
Or why it should not pass, the Court will hear you.

Ia. What can I say? to beg my Life I will not.

Guard. Then hear the Court -- My Lord, pronounce.

Ia. A word, my Lords.
My Lord of Pembrook, you are our Relation,
The Queen owes to your Loyalty and Virtue
All that she has, the Banishment of Treason,
And this most welcome and applauded Justice.
You, my Lord Chancellor, are Wise and Just,
With Pity that adorns your Pious Function,
And you, my Lords the Judges, read in Statutes,
Learned in the Laws, and Customs of the Nation.
Behold this Noble Youth, undone by me,
This goodly Flower, nipp'd in its tender growth
By me a Poisonous Yew; a fatal Blast!
I do not sue to bar your welcome Justice,
To take my life out of the Scale, but his:
Commend him as an Object to the Queen,
As she would spare a Child that is to be born,
Whose Parent had like me committed Treason,
The thoughtless Infant sleeping in the Womb.

Pemb. Madam, we'll faithfully obey your Pleasure,
And hope the Queen as readily will grant.

Gilf. Hear her not, awful Judges! noble Pembrook!
But let your Godlike Justice strike the Offender;
By me she is here, by my Ambition erred,
And when the Nation all combined to force her,
You all can witness how she bore the Assault,
Stood like the Capitol, Besieged by Gauls,
Whilst the whole Roman Empire was at Stake;
And when nor Prayers, nor Tears, nor Threats could move her,
Her Parents danger, nor my Love so prized;
Till she beheld a Weapon at this Breast,
She stood impregnable to all those Batteries,
And then at last did suffer to be dragged,
More like a Malefactor in a Sledge,
Than in a gaudy Chariot, to be Crowned.
This say, and tell the Queen I was the Traitor.

Pemb. Madam, there is nothing then remains,
But oh! the hardest Task for me to do
That ever Heart, not made of Steel, could think,
Or ever Tongue relate, which is your Sentence,
And which the Law provides for such Offenses.

Ia. Look on me, Gilford, with those healing Eyes;
While we are together, we'll devour our Woes,
And Miseries shall be the Banquet of
Our parting Lives, decked out with gaudy Love.
Pronounce it in the name of Heaven, my Lord.

Pemb. Rise then with me -- O ghastly Audience, hear!
Start up like Spirits in Shrouds, or Statues mute,
Not the least Sense or Motion that you live,
Nor fatal sign of Pulse or Breath appear,
Nor Lips be cursed to say Amen, but mine;
But with that awful silence, pale, and fixed,
As you would hearken to the World's great Doom.

Ia. My Lord, you are too pitiful.

Pemb. And when you see me ready to pronounce,
Wish that this Breath were Poison to infect you,
These weeping Eyes were threatening Comets, rather
These Tears a Deluge that would drown the World.
But oh! I am condemned to speak; and when
Hereafter you would relate a Tale that is sad,
Remember this unhappy Pair, remember
Poor Pembrook thus afflicted as he is
Pronouncing their unwilling Sentence, which
Is this, and this the Court awards.

Gilf. What is it? quick, pronounce; see, we are guarded.
Thus hand in hand, while we are entrenched with Love,
Each gallant Courage is the others Armor.

Pemb. You both are to be carried from this Bar
Unto the Prison, or Place from whence you came,
From whence you are to be drawn upon two Hurdles
Unto the common place of Execution,
Where you, my Lord, must by the Neck be hanged,
Cut down alive, and, in the sight of all,
Your Bowels pulled out, and burnt before your Face,
Your Head first to be severed from your Body,
And Body then divided into Quarters,
Which are to be disposed of by the Queen --
But, Madam, out of Reverence to your Sex,
And for distinctions sake and Modesty,
Your Body must be compassed round with Faggots,
And there be fastened to a Stake, and burnt:
And so, kind Heaven have Mercy on your Souls. [Scene draws: Exeunt omnes
preter Jane, Gilford, and Guards.

Ia. Come to the faithful Partner of thy Bed,
To all thy Wishes and thy Sorrows wed.
Thou Joy! thou Pain! thou Comfort! and thou Grief!
Fear of my Heart! and Pleasure of my Life!
How long shall we be tossed by every Breath,
From Courts to Prisons, and from Prisons to Death!

Gilf. Where must these Halberts lead us? to the Tower?
Our Dungeon now that was our Nuptial Bower.
So fell the Angels that did so aspire,
As I am punished for so rash desire,
To think there so much happiness could be
On Earth, to be possessed of Crowns, and Thee.

Ia. Sweet Harmony of Life, just Music flows
From Souls, and strings, by stops, that interpose;
Always intranc'd, is never to be blessed,
Hunger delights, but Surfeits spoil the Taste.
Love were not Love, nor would you Heaven be dear,
If ever, we enjoyed such Raptures here.

Gilf. Sure never Pair were born by Fate so soon
To kiss the Sun, then driven so quickly down,
Shot like a ponderous Weight, that from the Sky
With greater force does to the Center fly.
Married and Crowned, enjoyed the Nuptial Bed,
Convicted, and to Execution led;
King, Queen, and nothing; all before the Sun
Had twenty of its daily Courses run.

Ia. Behold us here, thus tossed, thus driven, thus hurled,
Gilford and I be warnings to the World;
For popular Applause, and false Renown
Make but a barren Title to a Crown.
A rash Usurper with no Right but these
Rides like a Ship unballast on the Seas;
Flattered with gentle Winds, does proudly Sail;
But when the Billows rage, and Storms prevail,
Her glorious Bulk too empty for its height,
The Sea and dreadful Ruin swallow straight. [Exeunt Omnes.

ACT V. SCENE I.
Northumberland solus. O Cursed Ambition! fatal to Mankind;
Banefull'st of all the Passions of the Mind!
Too big for the Foundation, thou must fall,
And coveting too much, do hazard all.
Nameless and dead, Posterity and thee,
The Branches perished with the fatal Tree.
No Age to come shall speak of Dudley's Name,
Recount his Glories, or his Childrens Fame;
The Seeds that I had Sown to Heaven to shoot,
Stormed in a Night, and shaken with the Root:
Yet the Queen's pious to a Miracle,
Will spare thy Life to save a Soul from Hell.
Bend supple Conscience, when Life's to be gained,
That may be certain, what is hereafter feigned;
We know not what is on the other side the Skreen,
Behind you dreadful Curtain to be seen.
Turn Prodigal, and let the Husks alone,
Rome's an Indulgent Mother to her Son.

Enter Gardner. Guard. I come, my Lord, though loath, at your Request.
To see a Noble Man in Misery,
Northumberland that was so great, in Chains,
Looks like Malicious Triumph in Revenge,
Of the ill Offices I had from him.

North. For which, my Lord, I kneel to be forgiven,
And bend with Sorrow lower than my Fortune;
The frailties of Mankind, wise Angels hide.
Man is but Man, and Heavens best Grace is Pardon;
None can accuse me, nor defend me better.
My Lord of Winchester had rather be
My Confessor, than Witness to Arraign me.

Guard. Rise full of Pardon from above, and me*
If there be ought within the Miters Power,
Or my small Management of State to grant you,
With Charity and Love, professed and real,
With vilest Malice thrown behind my back,
And worst of Injuries forgot; I Will do it.

North. I would forsake this Stepmother to Truth,
This wrong Religion of my own Adoption,
And fain would turn to the true Womb that bore me*
The Natural Parent of my long lost Faith,
But want a Guide, like you, to show the way.

Guard. What said you? are you real, Noble Duke!
The Vault of Heaven shall ring with Hallalujahs,
And Rome for this, Eternal Anthems sing,
That you, my Lord, forsake your fatal Error.

North. By all the Host of Angels that in Choirs
Resound the Praise of one repenting Sinner,
I thirst, I burn, I kneel to be received
Into the Bosom of Rome's Faith again.

Guard. By what strange Miracle were thou, my Son,
Snatched from that stubborn Anvile of Religion
(Which forged so many hardened Heretics)
Into the tender mouldings of the Church?

North. Though still convinced of Rome's Immortal Power,
Charmed with the dazzling hopes of being great,
Feigning what pleased the Headstrong Harry best,
I, for so mean a price as Favor, sold
My dearest Faith, deceived young Edward too;
And knowing Jane in Luther's Heresy,
To be more strongly rooted, than to change,
Ambitious to intail the Crown on Gilford,
Still owned my self a zealous Protestant.
But since, the Prime of Saints that is now in Heaven,
Did once, like me, deny his Lord on Earth,
May not I hope, and you pronounce my Pardon?

Guard. My Lord, my welcome Son, let me embrace you.
But are you grieved for this Apostasy?
A real Catholic now, and do believe
There is no other Faith on Earth to save you,
And are resolved to die in that Opinion?

North. I am, and by my Vows and Tears confirm it.

Guard. O then let me adopt thee.

North. Best of Fathers!
Mine gave me Birth, and launched me to the World,
He lent this Frame, but you an Arm to steer it.
O Pilate of the Soul! blessed Guide to Heaven!
That with the softest and the mildest Function,
Brings Man to Glory through a Milky way.

Guard. Enough.

North. Could I but win my Gilford too in death,
To Seal the Roman Faith with Dudley's Blood,
Then had I all that I can wish.

Guard. O Miracle!
That were a Triumph worthy of the Cause.
Mark me, O gallant Duke.
Bring but young Gilford home to deck Rome's Laurels,
And that proud Champion of their Worship, Jane;
To make thee happy, and reward thee greatly,
The Powers of either World shall be at strife,
I Will give thee Heaven, the Queen shall grant thee Life.

North. Shall they have Mercy too?

Guard. Yes, all shall live.
I Will instantly about it to the Queen,
Who shall send Orders to conduct you to 'em. Enter Duchess of Suffolk.
Behold fallen Man, the Slaughter of Ambition.
Pride like a Vulture, tears the lovely Quarry --
This Woman once an Angel in her Sphere,
Has now within her Breast a greater Hell,
Than those damned Spirits that for her vice so fell.
Why is this Fury let abroad?

Dutch. I come to seek a Virtuous Priest like thee;
And that I may be sure, I hunt by Night,
Grope in the Dark.

Guard. And why by Night?

Dutch. O there is a Reason for it.
For mind me, Sirs, by Day they are as thick
As Whales in Forests, or as Stars at Noon,
So thick they cross the Scent --
Besides by Day we know not one from the other,
They all look grave and wise like Thee, and Godly;
But then at Midnight, mark me, if I find
(As it is a chance, and very rare, my Lords)
One on his knees a Fasting and a Praying,
Then I let loose my Guard of Furies on him,
That worry him to Death -- I Will have no Praying
Amongst your Tribe at all, but in the Pulpit,
Nor Fasting, but at Meals -- Ha! what does ail me!

Guard. A little sick of Pride, a Fit of the Mother.

Dutch. Ha! am I troubled then with thy Disease?
I Will turn Physician first, and kill more Bodies,
Than thou have made despair, and murdered Souls.
Say, Reverend Hypocrites, will thou teach me?

Guard. It Is like she would fall to Physic after eating.

Dutch. Ha! now you talk of eating, rarely thought.
Pray, will your Lordship sup with me to Night?

Guard. Why?

Dutch. I invite you to a Dish you love.

Guard. What is it?

Dutch. It is a fine plump Diocese,
Larded with six fat Parsonages at least,
Besides two Bishoprics of Heretics,
Sticking like Gizards to it in Comendam.

Guard. Malice, and Pride turns Witchcraft straight, or Madness.
This sickness of the Mind ill bodes the Body.
You are not well, Repent, and think of dying.

Dutch. I will not think of Death this twenty
I am non fifty yet, and find my self
As gay and young as any of my Daughters.
Look I not killing, fit to grace the Park? [Looks in her Pocket-Glass.
I Will take the Air to Night -- My Chariot ready.
Hear me, you Slaves, be sure I have my Coach.
Which the Queen said was finer than her own.
I Will have eight Horses too, to draw me thither;
Six is a sneaking number -- Fie upon it;
My Chaplain's Wife, that was my Chamber Maid,
Has six, and has not dubbed her Husband yet a Bishop.

Guard. How her Brain soars, and her Ambition praunces!
The Asp has stung like Tarrantala.

Dutch. So, is my Chariot come? My Lords, farewell.
Would you have any Service where I Am going?

Guard. Where Is that?

Dutch. I Will tell you in your Ear -- to Hell, my Lord:
Resolve to go and bear me company:
My Flanders Mares are somewhat of the heaviest;
But if you please, I Will go your Lordships pace,
And lay fresh Horses to be there betimes.
Will you, my Lord? Come, take me by the hand: [To North.
Hang creeping in a Sledge, it is base and vile.
You that was such a high and towering Falcon,
And flew at naught but Crowns -- Do see that Churchman?
The Devil and he are drawing Cuts to have thee.
I pity thy Estate -- Priest I defy thee.

Guard. How cursed is Madness when it turns Profane!

Dutch. O what a gaudy Kingdom is this Hell!
Courts made of burning Brass, and dropping Gold,
Gallants a riding in hot Emrold Coaches,
Shining like Meteors in the fiery Region,
With Horses that have Flames instead of Wings,
Ladies that scorching Planets have for eyes,
Freckl'd all over with Carbuncles and Rubies,
That glow like Stars, and crackle with the heat.
There sumptuous Bagnio's carved of Rocky Ice,
Here Ponds of liquid Crystal made to bathe in,
That Is colder in degree than Hell is hot.
Who would not be a Knave to be so tortured!

North. Alas, my Lord! she is pitiful.

Dutch. Ha! what a gallant smell of Roman, French,
Italian Essences, and rich Perfumes here are!
It overcomes me, and corrects the steem
Of Hell -- Ha! ha! ha!

Guard. What does she see now?

Dutch. My Lord Northumberland, does your Grace see 'em?

North. See whom?

Dutch Empson and Dudley gaping wide as Famine;
And two stout Fiends with Buckets full of Ore
Pouring the melted Mass into their Mouths,
Which they disgorge into a Leathern Sack,
That Richmond laughing out aloud, does hold
Betwixt 'em -- Ha! ha! ha! [Exeunt.

Gilford and Jane lying on the Floor asleep. A Basket of Flowers and a Garland.
Gilford wakes. Gilf. Who calls! Methought I heard 'em cry awake,
The Ax is ready, and the Scaffold fixed;
For an Immortal Diadem prepare.
The swarming Streets with gazing Crowds are filled,
Turrets and Windows, like a Day of Triumph,
With Tissue hung, and cruel Beauties thronged,
To see us mount the dismal Throne of Death.
Arise, my Soul's courageous Guard, my Jane!
Wake, wake, my Love, thy fatal hour's at hand --
Ha! how she sleeps!
Such were her looks when in my Arms she slep't,
The happy Morning to our Marriage-Night,
Thus heaved her panting Breasts, and thus she smiled.
The bubbling Joys born from our eager Kisses,
Like wanton Spirits dancing on her Lips.
O Virtue most Divine! O form Angellick!
How rich a paint is Innocence to Beauty!
How calm they sleep whom Pious Thoughts have lulled!
What charming Stories do they count in Dreams,
Whose Prayers like thine, are Prologue to their Slumbers!

Ia. Where is my Love! where think thou I have been?
Is this the World, and this the Ground we rest on?
And are we yet the Gulf of Death to pass?

Gilf. Behold, if thou can form within thy mind
That dismal Fall of Waters near to view,
How, like two Arrows, down the Stream it shoots us,
There we must plunge; for lo they come to fetch us.
Where have thou been? what did thy Fancy show thee?

Ia. Methought I softly stole from thee away,
As thou safe sleeping on my Bosom lay,
And, glad that I had passed grim Death alone,
Mounted on Pinions that out-flew the Sun;
But on the Confines of that Heavenly Race
A Warlike Angel stood to Guard the place,
The same whom Sacred Story says to be,
'Twas Raphael sure, or one more great than he;
Who looking terrible (with this Command)
A Beamy Garland put into my hand.
Return, said he, Crown him thou love most dear,
Without thy Gilford there is no entrance here.
At that last word, I starting back did f^y
Swift as a falling Meteor from the Sky,
And come to fetch thee on my Cherubs wings,
Where we will Reign more absolute than Kings.

Gilf. Could thou, alas! thou Darling of my Heart!
Alone to Heaven without thy Gilford part?
Nay, if thy Dreams can foster such a Crime;
No Sleep but Death shall part us from this time.
Like Turtles we have languish'd here in Love,
And will, like loving Angels, dwell above.

Ia. Let me adorn thy Temples, and obey
The Angels and the Deity's Decree.
Behold this Wreath the Beauties of the Field,
The rarest Sweets the Bowers of England yield --
Now Spring and Paradise are on thy Brow, [Puts the Garland on his Head.
And richer Flowers in Eden never grew.
The spotless Ram thus Hymen's Victim dies,
To Love an Offering, Death a* Sacrifice.

Gilf. These lovely Blossoms of the fruitful Year
Are proud that they thy Beauty's Livery wear.
I saw thy hands new mould 'em all the night,
And with thy Fingers turn the Lillies white:
Saw thee too lift the Garland to thy Head,
And with a kiss made every Rose so red.

Ia. Not Incense, nor Arabian Spices smell
So sweet as does the Breath as here does dwell.

Gilf. O Paradise! O Virtue most Divine!
In whom all Graces with all Beauties shine.

Ia. Pity my case, perhaps, when I shall see
This Head without the Body brought to me,
These Lips that were so red, then ghastly pale,
Gasping for Life, that now with Pleasures swell,
No Breath to give thy Harmonious Voice a Tone,
Nor Tongue to tell thy Jane its pitious Moan;
These Eyes, that now my shining Planets are,
Extended, and like angry Meteors glare;
These Locks my Fingers did so often twine,
With Sweets of Amber strew, and Jessamine,
Powdered with Dirt, and matted all with Gore,
(Horrid to view) shall shine like Gold no more.

Gilf. The jealous Queen cannot so cruel be,
But let one Ax, one Moment set us free,
Whilst taking thus our last Farewells like this,
The Blow shall but divide a parting Kiss;
Then as the Steel does to the Loadstone cleave,
We'll meet again, and end the Kiss we leave.

Enter Northumberland Guarded. North. All Blessings reign on Suffolk's happy
Daughter.
New Springs of Love adorn your Faithful Garland:
Health and long Life the Queen by Dudly sends.

Gilf. Are you my Father's Spirit, or kinder Genius,
From the Immortal Region come to chide
Your Gilford's and your Daughter's long delay?
What ever thou art, thus should our knees adore thee,
Or Deity, or Angel, or as feared, my Father!

North. Rise Gilford, rise, I am that Earthly Mould
From whence my Son received this Manly Form;
I once begot thee on a Beauteous Mother;
But now, like Heaven, without a Female Aid,
Have Power to make thee with my Godlike Breath,
And give thee Life, as in the Womb again.

Ia. Blessed Prophet's voice to a despairing Sinner,
Let me again the charming sound devour --
Say, shall thy Gilford? Shall my Husband live?
Speak quickly with a Parent's Zeal, and tell
The welcom'st News that Heaven can send to Jane.

North. Come, sit we down -- I know thou dy'st to hear,
But this transcends even all thy Woman's Longings.
It Is Business of Import I have to say.
What could thou do for this dear precious Youth?
This tender Shoot that longs to grow a Cedar?
This Darling of my Blood, and Joy of thine,
Whose Soul is wov'n by Fate with both our Souls,
And in each others Breast makes two but one,
That I may challenge Pardon of Heaven, and say,
I never did greatly ill, but for his sake
What would thou do to save his life, and mine?

Ia. What would I do! propose the speedy way.
Were I to swim the Sea with these weak Arms,
Kind Heaven should lend me Strength to stem the Waves,
And make the Ocean but a narrow Brook.

Gilf. Quick, quick, my Lord, trembling I ask the means,
What is the Task that she must do for this?
I fear her life must be for mine the Ransom;
If so, be dumb as threatening Meteors rather,
And never word drop from My Father's Tongue
Of any sound, though 'twere to give his Blessing --
Hear him not, pri'thee Jane.

North. Have hopes, my Boy.
Yet is the Adventure hard; I know 'twill shock you.

Ia. Quickly disclose it -- By my hopes you wrack me.
This Wonder? for I am in pain to know
What I can grant, and will not fly to do.

North. It Is meet you know how many Lives depend.
On the least Sentence of your precious Breath,
And what a Train of Happinesses spring,
Or die with this mean Syllable of Ay,
Or No.

Ia. What must I do? the Day runs on a-pace;
The murmurings of the Crowd, alas, I hear,
And Ratlings of the Sledge approach my Ear.

North. Come Gilford, lean thy Head upon her Breast,
And listen to the pantings of her Heart,
And tell me how she bears it -- This it is.
The Queen requires you but to set your Name,
Nay, for the Ransom of our Lives conjures you
To sign this Paper, and to charm you to it,
Know 'twas Indicted by a Man so just,
Whose Life stands Candidate with all the Saints
For Holiness -- it is but to own thy self --

Ia. Is it to own the Blackness of my Crime?
Profess that I am Guilty, and deserve
The Death that I am doomed to suffer? Give't me,
And I Will subscribe my self, I Jane to be
The vilest Traitress Heaven did ever punish.

North. Peruse it.

Ia. I have seen a Bassalisk!
H'as shot his pointed Venom through my Eyes,
And numm'd my Body to a Senceless Clay --
O Gllford! it is not in my Power to save
Thy Life, nor mine from Tortures.

Gilf. Ha! what say thou!

Ia. Judge with thy Eyes if thou can bear the Monster.

North. O Jane! the lowest Ebb of time is now.
Mercy is Heaven's Prerogative and thine,
And this must be dispensed; alas! this Moment --
Nay, I have more to tell thee -- Gilford, hear thou.
The Duke, thy tender Father, so beloved,
Falling into Conspiracy with Wyatt,
Is doomed to suffer with the Fatal Crew --
Thy Life, thy Father's Life, if not thy Gilford's.
Be those the Planets that should bear the Blame.

Ia. Ha!

Gilf. The tempting Fiend goes cunningly to work,
The damning Fruit to our first Parent was
Thus Minister'd by her whom most he loved,
As this is by a Father.

Ia. Ay, my Love!
Would thou for some few years of Life? perhaps
Some days may finish what we prize so dearly;
Would thou consent that I should forfeit Heaven,
My Spotless, Innocent, and Bosom Faith,
Forsake the Truth that was so loved by me,
And lose the Joys of Immortality?

Gilf. I know what I would act were I my Jane;
Were Gilford's safety only in the Balance.
O all you Saints that wear Immortal Crowns!
Spirits of Martyrs that bright Angels are!
Not Racks, nor Tortures, burning Pincers, Fires,
Should make me leave this Faith the most Divine,
Which adorns thee, and thou have made to shine.

Ia. O Young! O Good! O Youth beloved of Heaven!

Gilf. But when I see a Father's Agonies,
Sweating cold Drops with terror, to behold
The Heads-man diving in thy Gilford's Bowels,
And in the Hearts of four unhappy Brothers --
But oh! and which is more than all the Lives
Of all the Sons and Daughters of Mankind,
Thy precious Life, if that is a Crime to save!
You Heavenly Powers, if then it is Sin to change!
The Fact it self would from your doom appeal,
And quash Damnation with the very mention.

North. Ay, there my Son; do, press her, hold her there.

Ia. What is my Husband Traitor to my Soul!
Then I may say, as Caesar did to Brutus,
Do thou too, Gilford, stab me to the Heart!

North. Come, prostrate fall with me -- Lo, at your Feet
The Sad and Miserable Dudley lies;
See on the Ground the Father and the Son,
Thy Husband too that should Command thee all,
And reign the Conquering Rival of thy Soul.
O say the word, thou Woman most Divine!
Quick, ever they come to fetch thee and my Children,
Like a dumb Drove with Pantings to the Shambles.
First they begin with him, and in in thy sight,
Fasten his Manly Body to the Sledge,
Which never was bound before, but in thy Arms.
Then see the Villain with a Butcher's Knife
Ripping his Bowels open to the Throat,
And tearing thence the Heart, he holds to view,
That Heart which did so often in silent Language
Whisper the Story of your Faithful Loves;
But now insenc'd, leaps in the Ruffin's hand,
And cries more fierce, the Cruelty of Jane.
Then, then it stabs, and ever I come to die,
Breaks his poor Father's Heart, and all the Standers by.

Ia. What must be done, must then be done this Moment.
The time is sudden; but the Gate of Heaven
Is easy to be locked, yet hard to open,
It has a Spring without a Key, which when
We shut too rashly, we no more can enter --
I am resolved --

North. Of what?

Ia. Not to be changed till I am dead,
For all the Blood that is threatened to be shed,
Nor for the Crown took lately trom this head.

North. Hell! Scalding Lead! and Sulphures! said thou! ha!
O Jane! think, think of the Pains of Death, remember
Thy tortured Father, and the Womb that bore thee,
Who brought thee not into this Cursed World
With half the Pangs that thou and they must suffer.

Ia. No more, I have inevitably said.

North. Fly Gilford, fly, let us vanish from her Presence.
Damnation came from Woman first, and still
The mischief reigns in her and all the Sex.
O Woman! Woman! false as are thy Beauties!
Thou art a Tempting, Fair, Deceitful Way,
Leading by smooth Degrees to narrow Fastness,
Through which most Mortal Men do slide to Ruin,
But out of Ruin, none.

Gilf. Stay, stay, my Lord.

North. Not were the Ax a falling on my Head,
And she should cry aloud, I turn, I turn;
Were there but one Religion in the World,
I Would sooner die an Atheist, and be Damned,
Than be of one Belief with her.

Gilf. Alas!

North. Since first the Serpent tempted Womankind,
The Snake lies lurking in the Sex's mind.
False! Subtle! Vain! to keep your Faiths secure,
There need a thousand Bolts to bar the Door.
Without, like gilded Sepulchers, you shine,
But opened, full of Rottenness and Sin.
At best, who hopes to find a Goddess there,
Is cheated with a Bubble fraught with Air.
Therefore the safe retreat of Human Life,
Is far from all the Sex, but most a Wife --
Gilford, why should we fear worse pains to feel,
The Married Wretch has sure no other Hell. [Exit North.

Enter Pembrook, Gardner attended. Guard. I met the Duke, your Victim, led to
Death,
Not as we wished, with Roman Laurels Crowned,
Nor with the Visage of a Conqueror,
When it is in your sole Power --

Ia. My Lord, Rome's Markets never were counted cheap;
Which makes me fear (the Purchase being so great)
The price is more than my Estate can pay.

Guard. O thou whose wondrous Mind and Body's blessed
With all the parts and Beauties of thy Sex,
And Excellence of Man! I come not here
To wean an Infant, turn a spleenful Woman
To her resolved and fixed Chymera wed;
But to a Judge, who, though a Child in Years,
Is fit to teach Philosophy a Rule,
And tell the Schools they err.

Ia. Alas, my Lord!
This Flattery bespeaks you more a Courtier
Than an Ambassador from the Court of Heaven.

Guard. Yet, Madam, let it not be thought that you
To cruel Niceness should have such regard,
That Jane out of a sullen Piety --

Ia. My Lord,
You will confess that one Divinity,
One Center moves the Catholic Faith and yours;
That wise Religious are like Skilful Pilots,
May with contrary winds the same way steer,
And meet together in one Port at last.

Guard. There you come close; be wise, and oh! come nearer.
Then since not our Beliefs, but Forms do vary,
This difference only seems 'twixt us and you;
Ours is a nearer Cut, but over a River,
And yours a new invented Way through Deserts.
Who'd then refuse to pass the narrow Water,
And go vast Leagues about for fear of drowning?

Ia. My Lord, I am a Wretch condemned to die,
And now am almost at my Journey's end.
Is this a time to tempt me to draw back,
And tell me I have left a nearer way?

Guard. Yet save your Life, and all their Lives -- Consider,
Say but the word, and this shall hold the Ax.

Ia. Witness, you Powers, so woven is my Belief,
So one with me, that as my Nurses Milk
Infused its Nourishment into my Blood,
Heaven did distill this Balm into my Soul:
Yet had not the Almighty taught me this,
The Truth to me another Godhead is,
A Faith that no Apostasy endures:
Nor envy I that constancy in yours,
Far be my hopes, but you in Heaven may shine,
Live you in yours, and let me die in mine.

Guard. Then since no President from Time can win you,
No Arguments Divine, nor Human Wisdom,
Nor yet those Wretches Lives your Marble Heart
Can turn, you drive the Law to take its course.

Ia. Go on, I dare the utmost of your Malice,
Till with your Cruelty, my Death become,
What was your Justice, Noble Martyrdom.
I see your Plots contrived in dark Cabals,
Your Leopard Consciences, and freckl'd Souls.
All your feigned Zeal, that your great Lord may Reign
Tyrant of Souls, and Landlord of their Gain.

Guard. Haste, lead 'em all to Execution straight,
All that have Names contained within this Pardon,
Her Foolish Father, Proud Northumberland,
And his three other Sons -- Away with 'em:
When that is Acted, as she likes the Show,
Let they begin it! Come, my Lord. [Exeunt Guard. and Pemb

Ia. Come to me, Gilford, cleave thou to my Breast,
Till as one Soul, we one loved Body grow,
And equal Pain, and equal Death divide us.

Gilf. O Jane!

Ia. What dire thoughts possess my Love!

Gilf. Oh!

Ia. Breathe thy Immortal Soul with mine at once,
And let us mount on Wings of Cherubims together.

Gilf. But ever that comes, there is a gloomy Vale,
A Darkness worse than Chaos to be passed;
How shall I wander, how go through the Maze
Without thy hand to guide!

Ia. Thou dearer far
Than new born Babes are to their tender Mothers!
Fear not, my Love, I Will trust thee from thy Jane
No farther than the Nurse her tender Charge
She fain would teach to go, watching its steps,
Beholds it trip; but ever it falls to Ground,
Catches it thus, and hugs it in her Arms.

Gilf. Will thou?

Ia. I Will overtake thee in that dreadful Vale,
Hallow aloud, and cry, My Love, where art thou?
But ever my Voice can reach thee, thou shall spy
The Nuptial Beams fresh kindled in my Eyes,
To bring me to thee stumbling as thou art,
And bear my Child away.

Gilf. Be not so tender if thou mean to part.
Thou give'st me Kisses, and, instead of dreining,
Do pour more Oil into my dying Lamp.

Re-enter Pembrook and Gardner. Ia. My Lords, is my unhappy Father dead?

Pemb. He is no more.
I saw the Ax, as Mortal as the Plague,
In one short space sweep Families away.
Northumberland died sullen, and reserved,
Made a short Speech, and then as short a Prayer;
Begged Pardon of the Queen, and said he died
A real Convert to the Church of Rome.

Ia. Heaven spare his Faults, and Crown his just Intent.

Gilf. Are they all dead?

Pemb. They are.
But oh! how pitiful it was to see!
There lay the Duke with his three Sons, surrounded
Like a vast Oak, its Branches spreading wide,
By some huge Storm laid flat upon the ground.
Thy Father's Death, O Jane! succeeded his.

Gilf. There wanted me to make the Pomp more awful.

Pemb. Permit me, oh! to end this dreadful Tale;
For sure my Tongue was doomed to tell thee Horrors.
Thy Mother likewise, in a Fit of Frenzy,
Resigned her Spirit to that milder Region
Where Souls refine like purest Gold from dross.

Ia. Enough, enough.

Gilf. Break Heart of Adamant, enough.

Ia. Then our turn's next -- lead, which way must we follow?
And where commerce the last Degree of Mortals?
Since like the first of all my Sinful Sex,
I wrought my dearest Husband to his Fall,
It Is just I lead the way to Punishment.

Gilf. By that kind simpathizing Sun, who, to,
Avoid the dismal Object of thy Death,
Is now retired behind you Cloud to mourn,
I swear thou shall not -- By our Loves, I charm thee;
If ever thou were Obedient, or had Virtue,
Let me die first -- Cruel, Hard-hearted Jane!
If thou deny'st me this.

Ia. Thou art my Lord.

Gilf. Come, bring me to your Shambles -- Where Is my Death?

Guard. Draw then that Curtain.

Ia. O hear the tender voice of Pity cry.
Do not disclose that dreadful Scene of Horror,
But lead my Love some other way.

Pemb. Do so.

Gilf. O Jane!
That precious Purple nearest to my Heart.
In whose pure Stream the Soul imbalm'd does lie,
Is not so hugged within my Breast as thou;
Yet we must part -- For lo, the Fight's prepared,
And Honor calls me to begin the Charge.
Remember, Jane --

Ia. Courage, Heroic Gilford!
Face but this Tyrant of the World a Moment,
Then see thy Jane her self shall quickly come,
And bring thee Succors from the Camp of Love,
Shall chase grim Death and all its Fears away.
Farewell.

Gilf. O Dart! there is no Armor against thee,
Darkness and Death attends it on a sudden.
O Star! O Planet of my Life? Farewell.

Ia. No more -- Farewell.

Gilf. When this tempestuous Blast I go to meet,
Has blown my glimmering Flame of Life quite out,
O haste thou Brightness, to relume my Torch.

Ia. Our Loves bright Tapers never shall be extinguished,
This parting's but the Door that is shut between us,
But when that is over, and Death has broke the Bars,
We'll mingle and unite our Beams together.
Let endless silence now, like Seas, divide us;
Thy Lips end all their Charms in this last Kiss,
And lock thy Speech for ever in my Bosom.

Gilf. A Sigh or Groan cannot be called a Word,
Hands, Eyes, and Heart conclude my Mournful Song,
For thy Commands, like Death, have charmed my Tongue.

Pemb. How now, my Lord!
Wants this the Virtue to extract your Pity!
My Eyes are too big loaded to be hid.
Were Bonner in thy place, a' would have wept.
Yet save his Life and thine. [To Jane.

Guard. Lead him away; though stubborn as she is,
We will have Pity on his Youth, my Lord.
Some Reverend Prelate of the Faith be by,
Invoke the Saints, say Mattins for his Soul,
And sprinkle him with Pardon.

Ia. Courage, my Gilford, shut thy Eyes and Ears;
Be Blind and Deaf to all their Tricks and Prayers;
Let not one Superstitious Drop remain,
But with thy Tears wash off the Brinish stain.
Whilst they their Picture-Gods invoke to hear,
Call thou on Luther, Cranmer, Latimer;
One Syllable of theirs shall aid thee more,
Than all the thousand Saints that they adore.

Guard. Away with him.

Gilf. O Jane!

Ia. Turn, turn, my Gilford, one last look again.
Expand thy longing Arms, it is not in vain,
And take my Wishes, though denied thy Jane. [Exit Gilford to Execution.

Pemb. Unhappy Pair! O Innocent Usurper!

Ia. Dry up those Tears, and now with Joy prepare
To do your last kind Office to your Mistress.
When I am dead, and laid upon the Scasfold,
Protect, I pray, these bashful Limbs from Shame,
See not in Death their Innocence exposed,
That when alive, had awful Modesty
To Guard 'em -- Here, receive this Scarf;
It was my Maiden-Present to my Gilford;
In it I wrought the Tale of Iphegenia
(A Fatal Omen of this Fatal Day)
Doomed by her Cruel Parent to be Slain.
In this, when the Ax has done its welcome Office,
Be sure you wrap my Husband's Head, and with it
This Head that is to be Sacrificed to Peace.
Now I am ready. Scene draws, and discovers Gilford and the rest lying upon it
beheaded.
Is then this Pomp of Death, this dreaded Horror*
So talked on, and so feared by all Mankind,
So quickly over! -- Come, bring me to the Test --
Where is my Lord?

Pemb. There.
Look not upon it, methinks it should offend you.

Ia. Not at all.
What signifies this Clay? that mangled Head?
The broken Casket, now the Jewel's fled?
Gilford, I come, this Moment sends me to thee.

Pemb. Yet save thy exquisite and precious Life.

Guard. Do not these dismal Objects stir thee!
No fright, nor fear of Pain can make thee turn!
Yet hear --

Ia. Away with me, were they alive again,
Should Father, Mother, Kindred, all
Joined with this fatal number, with me fall,
And in the very Moment of their Deaths,
Shot Curses on me with their flying Breaths,
To save their gasping Lives, I would not choose
One hour of Immortality to lose.
Sou'd all your torterous Racks on me be tried;
Broil me on Grid-Irons, turn the other side,
Till-the Abortive Infant where it lay
Should from my flaming Intrails burst its way,
To my vowed Faith I Will be for ever true,
In spite of all your Roman Gods, and you. [Curtain falls.

FINIS.

