TWO LETTERS, FROM THE LORD BYRON TO HIS EXCELLENCE THE MARQUIS OF NEW CASTLE,
The one Dated the 2. of January, and the other the 5. of January, 1643.

ALSO, A Letter from Sir Richard Byron, Governor of Newarke, to the Lord
Widdrinton, Dated the 7. of January, 1643.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley. 1643.

My Lord Byrons Letter to his Excellency the Marquis of Newcastle, the Second
day of January, 1643.
I Shall now give your Excellence an account of the Victory it has pleased God
to give a part of this Army, against all the Forces Sir William Brewerton could
make. Upon Christmasse Even last, I had intelligence, that he was marched from
Manchester with sixteen hundred select foot, and eight Cornets of horse, and
that upon Christmas day he was to keep his Rendezvous at Sandbacke within six
miles of my Quarters: Whereupon I resolved to march thither with the Army,
leaving a Regiment of horse and a Regiment of foot for the security of my
Quarters, least they of Nantwich should in the mean time sally forth, but we
came no sooner within view of Sandbacke, but the Rebels retreated in great
confusion, yet in regard of a narrow pass which was betwixt us and them, we
could not overtake any of them, and took up our quarters in theirs that night:
There I was informed by all the Country people, that Brewertons forces were
totally disper'st and returned to their several homes. Whereupon I commanded
Colonel Warren with his Regiment of foot, and my Lord Molineux with his horse
to march back to Crew-house, a strong place possessed by the Rebels, betwixt
Nantwich and Sandbacke, intending to march thither my self with the rest of
the Army the next morning; but as I was upon my march, certain intelligence
was brought me by a Scout I had sent forth, that Brewerton was at Middlewich
with all his Forces, within three miles of us: Whereupon I immedately marched
thither, and our Forlorne-hope discovered seven of their Colors drawn forth
of the Town, and the rest advancing as fast as they could; Upon this, Colonel
Gibson, and my brother Robert Byron advanced with their Regiments, having the
Van that day, Sir Michael Earnley with his Regiment was forced to stay with the
Cannon which stuck in a durty lane, so that, in that particular we were equal,
for they had no Cannon with them, and we could make no use of ours. The Rebels
had possessed themselves of the hedges, and all places of advantage, and gave
excellent fire, being the prime Traine-band men of Lancashire; but our men with
great resolution ran up to them, and after hot dispute, which lasted almost an
hour and a half, bear them out of their hedges, and uttetly routed them, the
horse followed the execution, which was all the service they could do in that
place, and pursued them almost as far as Nantwich, which Garrison the Rebels
quitted the same night, and our men have since possessed themselves of five of
their Colors. We took three hundred prisoners, with all theit Baggage and
Ammunition; at the least six hundred slain, as I am since certainly informed;
all their Arms they threw away in their flight, many inferior Officers are
taken, but their Colonels are too wise to come in danger, yet Brewerton
himself escaped narrowly, for he had two great falls in making too much
haste, wherewith he was so bruised, that he was feign to have one ride behind
him. On our part, fifteen was slain outright, whereof fourteen were of my
brother Roberts Regiment, and amongst the rest himself shot in the leg, but
God be thanked without danger. We are now returned to quarter about Nantwich,
which being now out of hope to be relieved, I believe will not hold out long*
The day after the business of Middlewich, My Lord Mollineux and Colonel
Warren took in Crew-house, and in it above two hundred prisoners, and sixty
horse, with all their Arms. Our strength here is somewhat above four thousand
foot, and one thousand horse, but this I can assure your Excellence, the world
has no better men, nor will they be beaten by any equal number.

My Lord Byrons Letter to his Excellence the Marquis of Newcastle, from
Paddington the fifth day of January, 1643.
My Lord,
SInce I wrote my last Letter to your Excellence, We have taken in another
strong house called Paddington, whereby Nantwich is so locked up, that unless
Brewerton come again with an Army to relieve it, we shall in a short time, I
hope, carry it.

Sir Richard Byrons Letter, Governor of Newark, to the Lord VViddrington, the
seventh of January, 1643.
My Lord,
BEing informed how some of Crumwells troops lay quartred about Lincoln, and
conceiving it very fensible to beat up their quarters, I sent out last night
Sir Gervis ^yres Regiment, and about sixty of Sir Peregrene Bertyes horse, with
a few Dragroons upon that design. They fell into their quarters about seven a
clock this morning at Waddington and Harmeston, and there took a Major, two
Captains, two Leivtenants, one Cornet, and three Colors, besides a hundred
and one and thirty prisoners, whereof some Quarter Masters, Corporalls, and
Trumpets, etc.

FINIS.

