A LETTER TO A Gentleman in the Country, Giving an Account of the Two Insurance
- Offices; THE Fire-Office and Friendly-Society.
YOurs of the 15th Instant I Received; and that I might return a Satisfactory
Answer, I have perused the Settlements of both the Offices: That of the
Fire-Office, and that of the Friendly Society; and have sent you the Printed
Papers of both, with the Observations I have made:

I. Upon the Validity of their Securities. II. Their Interest to preserve the
Insured from Fire. And III. The Charge of Insuring.
The Fund or Securities are these: That of the Fire Office is Ground Rents
[Now] to the Value of Fifty Thousand Pounds, settled upon Trustees, to make good
all Losses from Fire; and to be Increased, as the Number of Houses Insured
Increase.

The Strength of this Security stands upon this Supposition, That the Fund is
so Large, considering the Houses Insured are dispersed at several distances,
That it is very improbable (unless the whole City be Destroyed at once) that
any Loss at One time should exceed the Fund; and then it will be always the
Interest of the Insurers (as of men that have Morgaged their Land for less than
the Value) to pay the Debt when called for, to prevent a greater Loss, since
the Land is of more Value than the Debt.

The Security of the Friendly Society, is the mutual Covenants between the
Insured and Insurers: The Design is thus framed. The Insured deposite into the
hands of the Insurers, Six Shillings, Eight Pence, for Insuring One Hundred
Pound on a Brick House, and double for Timber; and Covenant to pay the residue
of their Premiums when there shall be occasion, not exceeding Thirty Shillings
for One Hundred Pound on a Brick House, and double on Timber, at one Loss. Upon
Condition, That after such a Loss to be at Liberty to go off from the Society:
Also they Covenant to pay Sixteen Pence per Annum for every Hundred Pound
Insured on a Brick House, and double on Timber, for the Insurers trouble and
charge of Holding Stakes, Collecting the Money, and Executing the Office, under
a penalty of Losing their Money deposited; with the Benefit of being after
Insured; and to be Casheired out of the Company, if they do not pay their Rent
within the time limited.

The Insurers Covenant with the Insured: And because they are Trusted with
Money, give Collateral Security, to the Value of Sixteen Thousand Pounds to
perform these Covenants.

1. To pay the Loss out of the Money deposited in their Hands, and Covenanted
to be paid by the Insured, if it be sufficient.

2. To make a proportionable Rate, Collect the Money, and Answer for all those
that are Missing, or prove Insolvent.

3. At the end of the Term, to pay back what is left in their Hands, (except
the Yearly Rent) to each of the Insured.

The Strength of this Security stands upon this Supposition, That the Premiums
deposited, and agreed to be paid by the Insured, are more than sufficient to
pay the Loss: And therefore there is no provision made to pay those Losses
which may at one time exceed the Premiums: For the Sixteen Thousand Pounds is
not Security for the Losses from Fire, but only for the Insolvent.

The Insuring of Houses being a New Design, it is impossible to make a certain
guess of the Strength of this Supposition; but that I might give you some
Satisfaction, I have Examined its Foundation, by Enquiring into the Profits and
Loss of the Fire Office, since their first Beginning, which I find thus:

That the Fire Office in Three Years has Insured Four Thousand Houses; And the
Premiums of one House with another, do Amount to about Four pound ten shillings
the House: Which in the Total, is Eighteen Thousand pounds, and they have
already paid Back for Losses above Seven Thousand pounds, besides Charges.

By which it is plain, That they have Repaid almost half the Premiums, before a
Fourth part of the Terms (the Houses are Insured for) are Expired: For some
Houses are Insured for Seven; some for Eleven; and some for One and Twenty
Years. This Calculation, any man that will Examine their Policy Books, will
find to be True.

So that by what hitherto appears, its most probable, that the Premium will not
be sufficient to pay the Losses; and that this Design seems to be Framed upon
the imaginary Success of the Fire Office, encouraged by the common presumption
generally believed, That men never Set Up a New Invention without Hopes of a
great advantage to themselves; and not remembering how often the first
undertakers are mistaken.

But supposing the Premiums should be more then sufficient to pay the Loss; it
does not appear to me, that any man is Insured for any certain term by the
Friendly Society: For how can any man be Insured for Seven years, which is a
term Certain, when the number of those that are to pay the Loss is Uncertain?

1. From the Forfeiture for Non-payment of Rent. 2. From the Losses occasioning
many to go off. 3. From the daily Expiration of the Terms after the first Seven
years.
So that though the number be sufficient, when a man first Insures. By all, or
any of these three Accidents, there may be too few left to pay the Loss.

And this Argument seems to me to have the greater Force, because the Fire
Office that was first Set Up

Gives Better Security. Better Preserves the Insured from Fire. And Insures At
a Cheaper Rate.
Which when Understood by those of the Friendly Society, It is reasonable to
believe, many of them may alter their minds and go off.

First, The Fire Office gives Better Security, because Land was settled at first
to the Value of Thirty Thousand Pounds, to make good the Loss, before a penny
Premium was received; and the Premiums are settled in Proportion as the number
of Houses Insured increase. But in the Friendly Society you have only the
Premiums for Security.

Secondly, The Older the Fire Office, The Better; but the Friendly Society, The
Older, The Worse* for every Loss that happens to the Friendly Society being
paid out of the Premiums, Lessens the Security: The Security is not so Large,
when every man has paid Ten or Fifteen Shillings a man toward a Loss as
before: for tho by the Covenant, that a man is not at Liberty till after he
has Paid his Thirty Shillings at one Loss, the Security is the Better to Those
whose Houses Are Burnt: Yet it is the Worse for Those that are Not Burnt; for
they run the hazard of Losing the Value of their Houses and More, by paying
Nine and Twenty Shillings a time, or less, toward Other men's Losses. Now both
being Insured, it is the same thing whether their Houses be Lost by Fire, or by
contributing to Others Losses.

But on the contrary, when a Loss happens to the Fire Office, It is paid out of
the Bank of the Office: And the Land [which is the Fund] is never the Less; but
the Older the Office grows, the Better; for as the terms of Insuring wears off,
the Land is less Encumbered; and the Security is the Better to those that
continue.

Secondly, In the Fire Office the Insured are better preserved from Fire, than
in the Friendly Society: It is more the Interest of the Insurers: Because the
Loss is their own; and experience has already shown, how great the advantage
is to the Insured, from those Industrious men they keep to Extinguish the
Fires; like Old Disciplined Soldiers, that do greater things, then Ten times
that Number of Raw and Unexperienced men.

But in the Friendly Society, the Loss is Paid by the Insured; Therefore the
Insurers cannot probably have so much damage when a Fire happens, as will equal
the charge of keeping men to preserve their Houses; for they only run the
hazard of paying for the Insolvent: now it is but a small sum of Money that the
Insured Covenant to pay: Who are generally owners of Houses: And the obligation
not longer than for a year: (for it is not to be supposed, that the Office
should pay for any after they have forfeited their Interest;) So that the
Hazard is but to pay the Overplus of what is not Deposited in their Hands, if
the Loss exceed it, which cannot be considerable.

But if it should; They may (as sometimes the Parish Assessors) Rate those that
are Solvent something the more, to pay for those that are Insolvent: for
considering the terms will daily expire. The many forfeitures and fractions,
that must arise from the disproportion of the Premiums, No account can be made
so plain as to discover it, or at least so easily, as to be worth any man's time
to enquire into it to save a Shilling or two. So that tho those Gentlemen that
now keep The Office, are men of that Known Worth and Honesty, as never to be
suspected; yet by their death it may happen into such men's hands, as may gain
by every Fire.

Thirdly, The Fire Office Insures at a Cheaper Rate; for in the Friendly
Society, you are obliged to pay 6 s. 8 d. down for a hundred Pound in Brick,
and double for Timber; and Covenant to pay your proportion of all the Losses
within the term of seven years, not exceeding Thirty Shillings per Hundred
Pound, and Double for Timber for one Loss, at one time: So that if at several
times the Losses amount to Ten times Thirty Shillings or more, in the Seven
years, you are obliged to pay it. And as the Chance at present appears, (by the
Account of the Fire Office) it is more probable the Loss may Exceed Thirty
Shillings, then be less. Therefore supposing Thirty Shillings for Seven years
the medium; and Nine Shillings Four Pence for the Seven years Rent; and Half a
Crown for the Policy, makes in the Total Forty One Shillings Ten Pence, for
Insuring of an Hundred Pound on a Brick House. Whereas in the Fire Office you
may Insure the same sum, for the same term of years, for Five and Twenty
Shillings, and Two Shillings the Policy; which is one Third Cheaper.

To Conclude, the Friendly Society, is a more Profitable design, than the Fire
Office, for the Insurers: For they have the use of about a fourth part of the
Premiums; And a yearly Rent, which is better than Interest for the remainder;
with the running little or no hazard.

But the Insured are just in the same Condition or rather Worse than if they
had not Insured: For What ever the Loss be; It must be Paid, if ever, by the
Insured, who are Owners of the Houses; And then it is the same thing whether
paid by Contribution, or Parternorship, or by every man's paying singly for his
own. For what is saved by the Contribution, is lost by increase of the Hazard.

For supposing that there are One Hundred Thousand Houses in this City, or
within the Bills of Mortality, and One Thousand of them are Insured by the
Friendly Society; It is then but a Hundred to One, when any Fire Happens, that
some of the Insured Houses are Burnt. And at the same time is one Hundred
Thousand to One against any particular man's House Not Insured, that it is Not
Burnt; So that it is an Equal Chance, That the whole Thousand Houses Insured
Are Burnt, as soon as any particular House Not Insured is Burnt: For a Thousand
Hundreds to One, makes One Hundred Thousand to One. As in the Lottery of the
Royal Oak, It is an equal Chance, That a Quarter Figure, which is Eight to One,
should Turn Up four times, as soon as a Whole Figure once, which is two and
Thirty to One. For Four Eights makes Two and Thirty.

Now to make an Instance of this Insurance; Suppose Three Hundred and Ten Brick
Houses in a Town, worth, one with another, One Hundred Pound; Of which number
Three Hundred Are Insured by the Friendly Society, and Ten are Not Insured: And
suppose it an Equal Chance, That Ten Houses may be every year Burnt. In one
Month Four Houses are Burnt, which Were Insured at Three Hundred Pounds; So
that by Twenty Shillings a House, among Three Hundred, the Loss is paid.
Another Month Two Houses Insured at One Hundred and Fifty Pound, are Burnt,
which comes to Ten Shillings the House. And within the year, Three more. And in
Seven Years and a Half, a fourth part of the Town is (by Ten Houses in a Year)
Burnt and Rebuilt; And no loss at one time, did Amount to Four Hundred and
Fifty Pounds, which is Thirty Shillings a House: And yet upon Stating the
Account, every man has equally Lost a Fourth part of his House: Those that
were Not Burnt, by paying the Premiums, to those that Were Burnt.

And supposing the Society to continue in this Friendship Thirty one Years; The
whole Number of Three Hundred and Ten Houses Are Burnt; The Ten that were Not
Insured, Were Burnt: And of the Three Hundred Insured, Some were Burnt Twice;
Some Thrice; And some Never Burnt: And yet there is no Difference between the
Insured and Not Insured. Betwixt those that Were Burnt; And Not Burnt. For
every Man Lost his House, and every Man equally Paid for the Loss. Those that
were not Burnt, lost their Houses, by Paying for those that were Burnt Twice,
and Thrice: Only those that were Insured Lost their Houses Yearly, by
contributing Ten and Twenty Shillings at a time, toward one another Losses;
and those Not Insured, lost their Houses at Once. But then with this Advantage
all the time, They made use of their own Premiums, Saved the Rent of the
Office, and Trouble of Examining Accounts.

But if the Instance be made, That the Three Hundred Houses were half Brick,
and half Timber, Then the Difference will be Great; for the Timber paying
Double Premium, and receiving it back Single, they will have lost their own
Houses, and also have Paid for the Loss of the Brick Houses.

But the Fire Office is Much Better for the Insured; For the Loss is paid by
the Insurers, and their Land is Morgaged for the Payment: For there can be no
Insurance, unless there be a Fund Settled, that is both Certain and Able to make
good the Loss.

These are the Remarks I have made, to which I Expect your Answer, with your
further Order about Insuring your Houses.

SIR, Your Humble Servant, N. B.
London, Jan. 26. 84.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, in Jewen-Street. 1684. These Papers are to
be had Gratis, at the Fire Office on the Backside of the Royal Exchange.


