LEITOYPGIA THEIOTEPA EPGIA: OR, LITURGY A MOST DIVINE SERVICE: In Answer to a
late Pamphlet Styled, Common Prayer Book no Divine Service.

Wherein, That Authors XXVII Reasons against Liturgies are wholly and clean
taken away;

His LXIX Objections against our most Venerable Service Book are fully
satisfied.

AS ALSO, His XII Arguments against Bishops are clearly answered. (His VI
first, also, retorted.) And his odious and invidious Disparallel 'twixt our
Bishops and Timothy and Titus utterly nulled.

So that, this Tract may well pass for a Reply to the most of the great and
little Exceptions any where made to our Liturgy and Polity; (Grounds, also,
being, therewithal, laid for the satisfying all other, usually made.)

By JOHN BARBON, M. A. and Vicar of Dallington near Northampton.

P. Jerem. VI, 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls: but they said, We will not walk therein.

H. Job VIII, 8, 9. Enquire, I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thy
self to the search of their Fathers. (For we are but of yesterday, and know
nothing, etc.) Shall they not teach thee, and tell thee? etc.

Oxford, Printed by A. and L. Lichfield, Printers to the Univer. 1663.

TO HIS Much Honored Friend, RICHARD RAINSFORD, Knight. Sergeant at Law.
SIR,
I Here offer into your hand, what I have presumed to inscribe with your Name.

There are diverse more dexterous and more sufficient Pens, that have dealt in
this Argument or Theme before me; and, who can, reasonably, be expected to say
what has been left unspoken therein, by those (...), Hooker and Hammond, and
(in some distance of merit) by Fisher?

So that, I am obliged to make my Reader; I mean, to avert his Censure, or
attract his benevolence, or both; which I think and hope to do, by proposition,
First, of the huge importunity of the Adversary, manifesting it self but too
visibly and rifely, now that Liturgy may assume and cherish hopes of a
resurrection in point of estimation and use; and, then, by the consideration
that inclined that holy Ancient to avow, Utile est de iisdem quaestionibus
plures a pluribus fieri libros. diverso stylo; non diversa fide, S. Aug.
That it was profitable, that many should write many Books on the same Debates
or Subjects, with diverse style, provided the faith were not diverse.

For the making it wear your Name, that, I hold a hope, will be soon assoiled,
(if it should have any the least eye of unmeet or unhandsome (for I cannot
force my self to say, of faulty) in it; as by saying that, if my strengths of
mind or Esprit were equal to my wishes, (which can skill to fly high, and make
prospect on great Eminences;) the Issues thereof should know (at this turn) no
other Dedication; so by professing, that if, as Priest of the English Reformed
Church, I can do any thing that speaks (or but lisps) Scholar, it is a Debt you
may lay challenge (were it worth it) unto. For, I own my self greatly obliged
to you for a thousand favors enjoyed from your hands.

The Paper I have answered, in this Tract, is of some reputation in our English
World, as it should seem by the words of an eagre Presbyterian G. F's. Dr
Gauden's Liturgical Considerations considered, Sect. 4. p. 22.
and Antiliturgist. Mr Powel, says he, with whom though I agree not in all
things, has observed sixty nine offensive things in that Liturgy, you may
please to consider them.

Now, as my Cause is perfectly justifiable, and I am most assured in my heart
and conscience, that it cannot suffer prejudice, but in the hand or menagery of
a weak Advocate or unsufficient Patron; so, that it has been much wronged, or
very disadvantageously treated by me, I may, (I hope, with due modesty) say
(exaudiat bona hora!) I am not very conscious to my self, (though privy enough
to manifold defects, otherwise.)

That you are a Son of the Churh of England, and an honourer of the Liturgy
and Government thereof, I know; and can tell my self this also, that malevolent
men and Schismatics afford you the less of their favors (due upon the score
of your great merits,) even Therefore; even because you follow the thing that
good is.

But, Sir, in the right stating of accounts, it is your glory to be unfavour'd
by them, on so noble a stock. Being interpreted, it speaks (what is truly
glorious,) that you are a Reformed Englishman, and seek not for new and
exotic Modes of Religion, (as Gallants, for Modable Clothes,) from other
Countries, whether France, or Scotland.

It Is admirable to see, how passion, and interest blinds and perverts! a matter
exemplified in the Party I oppose, who still continue and poursue their
Schism, though so often overborn and non-plust in argument, and though they
never rise to contend, but they receive the foil; though the admirable Pair,
mentioned above, remain altogether unanswered by them: though the Cause of
Episcopacy has been clearly carried against them (not to mention, here, others)
by the excellent Papers of the late King, in the Isle of Wight: and, lastly,
though their Covenant was so puissantly everted by the invincible
Oxford-Reasons against it. Which being the case of such as pretend to more
light of head, and sincerity of heart, it disedges my wonder quite, that the
Papists (that I mention not other ignobler Sects of men,) maintaining so
untenable a Cause,) should yet persist, resolutely, in it.

I have, here, nothing left in remainder, but to pray (the tenor of my Prayers
for you duly as the day comes,) that God would requite you all your favors,
his benign and gracious Providence has extended to me by you, that he would
conserve you long in health, give you a crude oldage, bless your hopeful
Family. The hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your much obliged humblest Servant in our dearest Lord and Master JESUS
CHRIST, JOHN BARBON.
June XXIV. MDCLXI.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
OUR Author fronts his (petty) Fabric with a Portal very high-roof'd; digs a
Grave of disgrace (to bury Common Prayer) very deep; uses Language fraught
with tragical Accents. But thou will see (what we have showed,) that his
Building is set on a very loose and sandy Foundation; that his (designed) Grave
is not profound enough to forbid a (glorious) Resurrection of Liturgy, whether
Ours, or all other pious well-framed ones; that (as tragical Drames are but
Poems, that is, fictions or fables, many times, so) all the black, and dire
expressions, used by him, in this, affair, are pure inventions, destitute of
all reality.

But, I have Considerations, also, to offer the Christian Reader, for 1
Liturgies in general, 2 for Ours particularly, and 3 for (a third object of
his aversation and declamation) Episcopacy: and, this, prefatorily.

I. For Liturgies in general, I desire my Reader, to consider,

1. That they carry pregnant Analogy to, and have frequent clear Authority
from, the Word of God, in manifold Instances, which who imitate, will not
easily err. (For such Instances I refer to the Margin. Numb. 6. 23. Hos. 14.
22. Joel. 2. 17. Number. 10. 35. illustrated (as it were) by H. David 's
Commentary, Ps. 68. Deuteronomy. 27. 12. The Psalms, also, of David are, for the most
part, liturgical, as 92 entitled, For the Sabbath, Ps. 95. For excitation to
Devotion, the fifteen songs of Degrees, after Ps. 119. and others very many, as
appears by their Authors, Titles, musical Instruments, wherewith the public
worship was celebrated. (See also 2 Chronicles. 29, 30.) See the learned Thorndike
of the service of God in religious Assemblies, c. 7. p. 225, 226, 227.
)

2. Consider the Practice of the Jews, since the time of Ezra, who,
constantly, used set and Prescribed Forms of Prayer, by way of Liturgy. That
certain Forms of Praying (18. in number, which were at length enlarged to an
100. to be used in the daily service) which should be said every day by every
one, by Law or received Custom, were instituted by Ezra and his House, that
is, his Consistory (his one hundred and twenty Colleagues,) to the end that they
might be learned by every man, that so the Prayers of the unskilful might be
as perfect, as of the most eloquent; is the assertion of the learned Mr. Seldom
in his Notes P. 411. 43, 44. 49, 50.
on Eutychius the Patriarch, out of ancient Records of the Jewish Nation. To
which instance or consideration belongs, also, the Samaritans Liturgy, which
the Jews complained, to have been taken away from them by the Emperor Adrian.
Add the Sedar Tehillim, yet in use with the Portugal-Jewes, and the Symbol
Rambam, which the learned Buxtorf affirms, to have been taken out of the
Liturgy of the Jews.


3. Consider, that our Blessed Lord, prescribed a Form (as I prove, and
vindicate, in the Book) to His Disciples; which, that the Apostles, afterward,
observed, in their holy Assemblies, it is upon constat from Justin Martyr,
Apol. 2.
Tertullian Apologet. c. 30.
(a learned and curious Antiquary,) and others, recited by the most honest
George Cassander, in his (excellent) Work about Liturgies.

4. Consider, that there are exstant the public Liturgies, both of the Greeks
or Easterlings (where Popery never reigned) and Latins, Apostles, Fathers, and
their Successors, which are, for the most parts of them, ancient, and
evidently report to us the usage of those (golden) times of the Church. See
Pamelius 's two T^mes about Liturgies, and Cassander, as above.


5. Consider what infinite absurdityes and mischiefs will follow, on the want
of Liturgies, and the permission or abandoning of public Prayer to the dictate
of the private Spirit, as 1. that there will be almost as many distractions in
the public Worship, as enthusiasms, motions, inspirations (pretended) of the
Assemblers. 2. That neither the idiote, (or he that occupies the place of the
unlearned, as we translate, 1 Cor: 14. 16.) no, nor yet the most skillful, will
be able to say Amen, (safely) to the extemporate and uncertain conceptions or
effusions, whether of prayer or thanksgiving. 3. That the ignorant Plebs will
be deprived of due instruction in things sacred and of God, which, for the most
part, is inculcated Colos. 3. 10. teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalm^ and Hym^s, etc.
into them in the Liturgy publicly repeated. 4. That the hungry, raw,
trashy, and empty invention of every man will take precedence of the
deliberate, mature and weighty examinations and discussions of the Church. 5.
That the communion of Saints in joint, united supplications and confessions (a
thing, as well most acceptable with God, as most prevalent) will be wholly
voided and outed. 6. That drowsinesse and non-attention will steal upon the
hearers, while they have no task (no share, in the service,) only graze and
stare, and hang (yawringly) on the uncertain, pumping, fluctuating, endeavors,
and wandering, moveable, desultorie, roving, straggling, confused, wild spirit of
the Prayer-inventor. 7. That orderlinesse and decency in the choice of such
things, as, in the Sacred Scriptures, are to be proposed to the Assembly, or to
be sung, will utterly fall. Now if Psalms and other Musical Pieces were to be
poured forth with the same extemporary suddenness, an unbeleever entering into
the Assembly would rather deem such worshipers to be mad, than that he indeed
saw His worship to be celebrated, who composed and disposed all things in
order, number, and measure. 8. That the Church (flatly against God's word)
would be, necessarily, drawn into Sectarisms and division, when all is to be
left to the gifts and arbitrarie various administrations of Ministers. 9. That
every man shall go to Church bound in the spirit, and not know what
supplications he shall make to God, till the mouth of the Minister shall
declare it; by whom (whatever his gifts or faculties be) the devotion of the
whole Congregation shall be determined and concluded, as to all public
invocation of God, either for matter, or form, otherwise than as his (perh^ps,
sudden) conceit shall minister unto him. 10. That when, by this means, the
Priest shall be, generally, beheld, as the only Minister of the Spirit (where
there is no other public exercise of Religion, but his arbitrarie
administration,) the consciences of men, being, henceforth subdued to an awful
dependence on him, shall find the Ministers (like the Jesuits,) through the
Soveraigntie they hold in matters of Religion, to exercise an external dominion
over their fortunes and estates, also. 11. ^ a This eleventh Head it borrow^d
from his truly most Excellent Majesty in his Divine (...), Med^^a^ion XVI.
((...)) p. 127. And, concerning scandalous passages, and blasphemous
expressions, holy and learned men (says the (rare) Autho^r of the (most
exquisite) View of the New Directorie) would have addea, and given in a large
Cata^ogue of them, did not spity and humenitie, civilitiy and mercy to enemies,
restrain them; p. 16, and 78. See also the Hist. of Presbyt. p. 124.
That what the solitary abilities of private men are many times (even there,
where they make a great noise, and show) the affectations, emptiness,
impertinency, rudeness, confusions, flatnesse, levitie, obscurity, va^n and
ridiculous repetitions, the senseless, and ofttimes blasphemous expressions:
all these, burdened with a most tedious and intolerable length, do sufficiently
convince all men but those, who glory in that Pharisaick way.

On the other hand, Consider the conveniencie and benefits of a godly,
well-composed Liturgy, as 1. that it is, not only a provision against
ignorance, but a necessary hedge, See Thorndike of Relig: Assem: p 405.
mound or fence to the true Religion, to ward off, and keep out all mixtures
and corruptions from a Church, and for the retaining a common profession of all
Catholic verities; the law of supplicating, giving law to believing, Ut legem
credendi, lex statuat supplicandi, Gennad. Eecles. Dogm. 30. Lex supplicandi
est lex credendi, and lex operandi, Coelestinus P. Romanus.
and being a conservatorie of it. 2. that it contributeth very much to the more
reverential, more solemn, complete and auguste worship of the Divine Majesty,
in the Assembly of the Saints. 3. that it is of great advantage, benefit and
comfort to the more judicious, knowing, discerning, well-bred sort of
Christians, so hugely conducing to their security, and to the requisite, that
is, holy, humble and fiducial accommodation, framing or composure of their
hearts or spirits, in God's service. 4. that it is of inestimable adv^ntage to
the populac^e or me^ner people, as in point of Union, un^nimity and peace, so
of edification and growth in spiritual improvements, and (finally) of
salvation. To this sort of men and women, daily variety in Prayer or
Sacraments (as Bishep Gauden Considerations touching the Litu^gy. p. 9, 10, 11,
12. The Minist: prays in an unknown tengue to the poor Countryman, when he
vents what he never heard before; says M. D. W. in's Vindic. of the Form of
Com: Prayers, p. 27.
has more than once, worthily, observed) being much what as Latin Service. In
the rejection and want of which (Liturgy,) what a general decade^cie, in point
of good and Christian tempers and manners, has befell the English people
(otherwise the best-natured and most religious in the World) as to ignorance,
profanitie, superstition, scandal of conversation, villainy of opinions (as of
actions,) faction, irreverence; and how these have beleapred them is as visible
as green: the hand of God punishing Id. ib. p. 40, 41.
them by huge impairements, as-to sound and saving knowledges; as also by
horrible apostasies, as-to the moral and practical, the equitable and
charitable patts of Religion. 5. that it is the standing notification to all
that come, of the condition and terms of our public Communion, their Religion
ann manner of addresses to, and congresse with, God, in His open service, by
warranting us, to say to any, that we would make Converts, This is our
Communion, thus we serve God, hither we would bring you, here we would land
you. See the pious and worthy M^ Oly 's Preface to Mr Herbert 's Pa^tora^, p.
54.
6. that there may be an union and conspiration of tongues at once, and hearts
or spirits, 7. that the verity of the doctrine, the piety, the honesty and
singleness of our desires, petitions and purposes, as also (what much imports,
politically,) the uprightness of our designs, in our Assemblings, may be
pre-secured.

II. For our particular Liturgy, I propose these things following to the Reader
's consideration.

1. Consider, that it was compiled, weighed and surveied by Doctors, Martyrs or
Confessors (men of admirable sincerity) Cranmer, Ridley, Tailor, Jewel,
Grindal, etc. And, on this stock, how ought that of L^rinensis in the Margin
Librum Sacerdotalem quis vestrum resignare audeat, signatum a Confessoribus,
and multorum jam Martyrio consecratum? And a li^^le after: Quomodo fidem eorum
possumns denegare, quorum victoriam praedicamus? V^ncent: contr^ haereses, c.
7. (mihi) p. 12, 13.
to take place!

2. Consider the manner of its composition or frame, namely 1 out of the
Doctrines of very Scripture, 2 in a popular and decent order, consisting of
such things, (for its matter) as might make most for Edification, 3 all things
of stain, and all m^ener of filth o^ blemish, which were rife in Salisburie
Use, that of Lincoln, etc. being dispunged and redressed, and 4 only
whatsoever in the Ancient Liturgies was perfectly according to the balance of
the Sanctuary, thence gathered, and here centred.

3. Consider its Comprehensivenesse, as 1 taking-in all Forms of 1 Timothy 2. 1.
The Confession and Absolution being the preparative part.
Praying, Confession, Supplication, Intercession, giving of Thanks, Praise and
Imprecation, and 2 these all addressed to God alone, 3 all things
idololatrical, superstitious, o^ (otherwise) unsound or unwholesome being wholly
excluded, as invocation of Saints, of the consecrated Bread, the Cross, etc. 4
selecting apt portions of Scripture and Texts, inservient to time, place,
occasion, as also to instruction and edification of the flock or people. 5.
Annexing a brief and easy (but a most excellent, most prudent) Catechism. 6.
Praescribing such gestures Et ^escio quomodo, eumhi motus corporis fieri nisi
animi motu pracedente non possint, eisde^ rursus exterius visibiliter factis
ille interior invisibilis qui eos fecit, augetur: ^^ per hoc ^ordis affectus,
qui ut fierent ista praecessit, qui^ facta sout cre^^it. Aug. De Cura pro
mortuis, c. 5. Exterior cultus est consessio quaedam cultus interioris, Aquinas
1, 2. qu^ 94. ex Augustino.
of sitting, standing, kneeling, in the Worship of God, as very maignly makes
for the reverence, and devotional, humble, awful carriage of that matter. 7. In
ordering also seasonable, devout alternations, Antiphonies or Responsories,
'twixt Priest and People, But I must commend the Orde^s of Answers of the
People, in all places of the Service where it stands. It refreshes their
attention; it teaches them their part at Public Prayers, not to stand by and
censure how well the Minister plays the mouth of the Congregation, etc.
Thorndike of Religious Assemblies, p. 406.
powerfully to cherish, and harmoniously to betoken agreement, love and
charity, and mutual correspondencie; and to discharge and cast-off drowsinesse
or littlesse supinitie; they being as the reverberations and Ecchoings of
fervent, intent and humble affections, as likewise pregnant and quick
excitations and elevations of the spirit, interchangably. 8. Accommodating it
self to all the uses or needs of the Church, as Administration of the (two)
Sacraments, Confirmation of grown persons, Celebration of Matrimony,
Visitation and consolation of the sick, Burial of the dead, Thanksgiving of
Women after Childbirth, Interminations and Exterminations of nororiously evil
or scandalous livers, out of the Church.

4. Consider what suffrages it has obtained of famous men: 1 Isaac Casaubon's,
View of the Directorie, p. 62.
who admired the care of antiquity and purity in this Church of ours,
proclaiming, every where, in his Epistles to all his friends, Quod si me
conjectura non fallit torius Reformationis part integerrima est in Anglia. Uhi
cum studio veritatis, viget studiu^ antiquitatis, etc. Casaub. Epist. Salmas:
quae est CIX. See also his Ep. Ded: praefix. Exercit. ed Baron: If in our
France Reformation had been carried on, without so much varying from the form of
the ancient Church, many thousands more, now most averse from the doctrine of
our Churches, had been converted, Casaub: to Grot: Ep. CCXXI. 6 Kal. Febr.
That there was not, any where in the World, the like to be found, nor ^ver
hoped he to see it, till he came into this Kingdom. 2 Bucer's lb. p. 13, 14.
But, see, also, a copious Tract of Buce^ 's among his Anglicane Writings.
(for the purity and thorow-Reformation of it,) who testified of K. Ed.
VIth-his Common-^rayer-Book, that there was nothing in it, but what was taken
out of the Word of God, or which was not against it, being taken in a good
sense; Upon which occasion, that Book was re-surveyed, and in the particulars
subjects to cavils or contentions, corrected. 3 Gilbertus's Pre^um, fol. 302,
312.
(a German,) who, in a Book of his, published many years since, propounds our
Book of Prayer for a Sample of the Forms of the Ancient Church. 4 Alexander
Alefiut's (a learned Scot,) who translated it into Latin, in K. Edward's time
(where, by the way, our Book is observed to be translated into more languages,
than any Liturgy in the world, again, whatsoever it be:) 5 Peter Vermilius
surnamed Martyr-his (who was, also, one of the Compilers of it, in the
abovesaid (precious) King's time:) 6 Gualter's and the Tigurines-theirs; 7 The
Strasburgians-theirs; and even Our Service is good, and godly, every tittle
grounded on holy Scripture: and with what face do you call it dark*nesse? --
look if any thing be blamable in our Service Book.
8 Deering's, who, in his Defense of Bishop Jewel against Harding, defending
this Venerable Book against him, calumniating (only in general,) and calling
it, Darkness, etc. Yea, 9 See Troubles of Frankfort, p. 30.
Calvin's himself, who, when from Frankford he had received an odious malicious
account of many particulars, in our said, Book, (as will be acknowledged, by
any, that shall compare and confront the narrative, in that matter, with what
he finds,) though he (who, as Archbishop Williams would say, (and it is
visible) had his tolerabiles morositates) were so far esmoved as to call them
ineptias, follies; yet he added the Epithete of, tolerabiles; that though such,
they were yet tolerable. I might add, also, the mention of H. Grorius, who was
known to be a great admirer of the Church of England, ^^ settled under K.
Charles I. and other Princes of H. M. See Dr Hammond's Continuation of the
Defense of Grotius, p. 29. Who, that he also highly reverenced Mr Hooker,
appears by his Letter to Dr Casaubon.
Hereto we (not amiss, nor very uncoheringly) annex 10 Peter du Moulin (the
Father) his (interpretative) testimonial of it, who (as his worthy Son gives us
Letter of a French Protestant to a Scotishman of the Covenant, p. 28. lin. 17.
the Story) being in London, in the year 1615. and observed withal by some
discontented Brethren, that the Reverend man was highly favored by his
Majesty King James (who sent for him,) they came to him with a Bill of
Grievances, to be represented to the King, which (says the Narrator) my Father
having perused, returned it to them again, saying, That the exceptions were
frivolous. In A. B. Bancrofts Sermon at Paul's on 1 John 4. 1. See also E. P 's
testimony mentioned in a Pref. to Archbishop Cranmer 's Book of Un written
Verities. And Bishop Ridley 's words (which he thought should be his last)
against Knox (a man of nature too conte^tious* etc.) their quarrels and
perverse exceptions to the Book-Yet says the H. Martyr, he cannot soundly by
the word of God disprove any thing in it.
Take, also, that very popular Preacher, Mr Baxters See his Book of
Disputations concerning Church Government, dedicated to Richard P.
(of somewhat a like nature.) Who has Printed his express approbation of
sundry things, in our Service Book and Church-Politie, as Organs, Ring in
Marriage, which were (and are) matters of strange dislike (stick with them like
meat offered to an Idol) to his dear Disciplinarian Brethren; as, also, who
professed (as himself has attested in Print In Postscript to Ep. before his
Vain Religion of the formal Hypocrite.
) to Dr. Gauden, That the ^iturgie was unquarrellable, as to Doctrine (taking
things in a candid sense. Well employed, therefore, were the Assemblers, when
they attempted to (correct Magnificat) reform ^ur Articles; and the Reasoners
for Reformation, when they corped at so many severals, in the Doctrine of the
Chapter
)

5. Consider what that most religious and blessed Martyr-Prince K. Charles I.
has delivered, about this concernment, in his most Excellent and Divine
Soliloquies: Meditation XLV. (mihi) p. 124, 125.
As to the matter (says ^e) contained in the Book of Common Prayer, Sober and
Learned men have sufficiently vindicated it against the cavils and exceptions
of those, who thought it a part of piety, to make what profane objections they
could One instance may be mortal sin, in the Litanie, and, deadly sin, Articles
of Rel. Art. XVI
against it; especially for Popery and Superstition; wherein no doubt the
Liturgy was exactly conformed to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
this by all Reformed Churches is confessed to be most sound and orthodox.

6. Consider the admirable unanswered (indeed, unanswerable) labor of a Member
and Son of our Church, who has most learnedly and satisfactorily answered all
the little and great exceptions and charges to, and of, our Book, levied and
exhibited by the Disciplinarians, in all their Pamphlets or Pasquils, gathered
together by him.) Of which Author and book, now under mention, the Reader
shall pardon me, to annex (very much to the interests of our cause) the words
of the choicely learned Dr Meric Casaubon: In his Vindocation of the Lords
Prayer, p. 81, 82.
In very deed (says he) such is my opinion of that incomparable Work, that did
not I believe the World, (that is, the greatest number of men) really mad, in
the true Stoical sense: and that it is some degree of madness (especially,
after long Wars, confusions and alterations of States) to expect it otherwise:
I would persuade men, that have been buyers of books, these 15 or 16 years, to
burn one half, at least, of those books they have bought, (they were as good do
so, as sell them for nothing,) and betake themselves to the reading of Hooker:
not doubting, but by that And that incomparable Hooker: concerning whom I may
much rather s^y, than of hi^ Works of whom it was said and made by Paulus
Thorius, Praeter Apostolicas, post Christi tempora, chartas, Huic peperere
libro secula nulla pa^em, Moun^^gu's Gagg. p. 324.
time they had read him once or twice over accuratelie, they would thank me for
my advice; but God much more, that put it into their hearts to follow it.

7. Consider what was said (and has been admirablie and unanswerably m^de
good, so far as his design led him,) by another Person Dr Hammond, View of the
New Directorie, Pref. 3.
of our Church, a great Saint, of a most Heroic, most Primitive piety (as
well as mighty, most sterling judgment, and most diffused researched learning,)
That ever since the reproaches of men have taken confidence to vent themselves
against this book, (the English Liturgy) there has nothing but air and vapor
been vomitted out against it, objections of little force to conclude any thing,
but only the resolute contumacious, either ignorance or malice of the
Objectors: Whereto may go affixt that of a most elegant Pen, attesting
(consonantlie,) that the book is of so admirable a composure, as that the most
industrious Wits Vocabula and pene syllabas expendendo, says Alesius, the
abovementioned learned Scotc^ man.
of its enemies could never find an Objection of value enough to make a doubt,
or scarce a scruple in a wise Spirit.

8. Cons^der (what is most notoriously certain,) that this very Liturgy has
been a continual float o^ tide of joy and delight to all true Englishmen, to
see and observe the prosperity and flourishing of this Church, in a perpetual
swelling and growth, ever since the establishing of that Protestant Liturgy
and Religion, together, An Italia^ Protestant, for Religions sake flying his
Native habitation, and inquiring where he might best settle himself and family,
was by a grave and learned Divine in Germany, advised hither, with this
recommendation, that, If God had on earth e're a Church triumphant, it was the
Church of England: Dr Na. Bernard in hu (...), etc. from Mr Calendrine, p. 5.
among us; till at last it was grown to such an height, as was certainly never
heard of, in this Kingdom, or in any other part of Europe, also, for these many
hundred years. View of the Directorie, c. 2. p. 49. See what Radzivil 's Son of
Poland, and a Nobleman his Governor thought hereof, in the Life of Bishop
Morton, writ by the worthy Dr Barwick, p. 77.
But, then, the calamity brake in upon us, when the fashion of the structure
not pleasing some capricious builders, they (like Ahaz, when he had been at
Damascus 2 Kings 16. 10.
) (having grasped an undue power,) must needs have the building altered, or
quadrata mutata rotundis; See Mr J. Ma^tin 's late (choice) Sermon* called,
Hosannah, p. 6. Whence Spanhemius called the English, Ocellus ille Ecclesiarum,
etc. Ep: Ded: to A. B. Usher, etc. before Dub; Evan* 3. Vol.
must needs Genevize, or Scottize (unnatural Englishmen!) for Discipline, and
novel models of Worship, when they had the best and primitivest in the World,
in England.

9. Consider, that though the thick-shoo'd rupices and barbari (as the
last-cited (ingenious) person enstyles them) lay the ^nglish Liturgy under
their feet (now, when there are, abroad, so many Demogogues and Sect-masters
especially consid^ring and courting the multitude, in order to their
proselyting them to their several divided imaginations and novell caprices,)
yet certainly, they will never pass muster for good and competent Judges or
Estimatours of things. (Populus dicit, ideo errat.) Tradere turpi fasces
populus Gander, eosdem colit, atque odit, Seneca in Hippolyto.
And, these our new Antiliturgical Masters can have the complaisance of no more
privileges, in this concern, than is the acquisition of the very worst of
Papists, in the Church of Rome (I mean, the Jesuits,) who most of any other
division, in that Communion, influence and sway with that People.

10. Consider, that, as the Disciplinarians loaded our Ltturgie and Polity
with the ugly besmooting appellatives of Popish, Antichristian, etc. So their
very (loose, illegitimate) Establishment (intended,) has very plentifully
heard, in the same kind of language, Ut quod quis fecit patiatur, jus erit
equ^m*
as is visible in Mr Edwards's three Parts of Gangrana, in the Preface to the
Book, entitled, John Baptist, and innumerous Anti John-Presbyter-Pieces. See,
also, a book written by Mr John Spittlehouse, entitled, An ^mbleme of
Antichrist in his threefold Hierarchies of Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbytery.
Also, a description of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity (of their
Lord God the Pope) in his Holiness Deity. Otherwise, Rome ruinated by
Whitehal, or the Papal Crown demolish't; containing a confutation of the
three-degrees of Popery, viz. Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbytery, etc.
And the whole sort of Sectarian anti-Liturgists, that have so virulently
begnawn our Liturgy (Greenwood, Robinson, Johnson, etc.) in themselves, or
followers, have had parallel or semblable high and vehement dislikes to their
compositions: Which, truly, it is easy, (even very soberly and groundedly) to
tax or charge with defects or faults (that will never be, rationally, and
satisfactorily defended or made good,) by but only referring to, or
transcribing some part of the (so often praised) View, Especially, chapter 3. p. 82,
83. etc.
etc. Bishop Taylor's Preface Sect: 46. Where he shows the great imperfection
of the Directorie, in one and thirty particulars.
to his Collection of Offices, or Bishop Andrews's Sermon of Imaginations
(though preached long before the birth of the Mushrome.)

11. Consider, that (^hereas the Puritan and Sectarie will say, that the
Composers of our Liturgy were, indeed, good men, the Composition also good,
for those times, and considering that crepusculous, imperfecter light, they
then had; but that were they now alive, they are persuaded (say the
Directorians Pref. to Directorie.
) they would join with them,) consider (for this,) ^ say, that our B. Reformers
(those of the first Reformation) in Queen Mary's days, flying and living in
Frankford, met with and saw the exceptions or objections, that have been
produced and exhibited by our new Reformers, and yet gave not place to them,
no, not for an hour, were not at all (soon or late) shaken in mind, or removed
from their steadfastness by them, but maintained the Book against them all;
and, after, in Q. Elizabeth's (flourishing) Reign, it was ordained and enacted,
that it alone, and none other (of others devising; no other way of open
Service) should be used, under penalties, See Act for the Vnif^r^ity of
Common Prayer. See Dr Heylin's History of Liturgies.
notwithstanding all the objections of the dissentient Frankfort Brethren,
Passionate) Mr Knox, wit^ingham, etc.
all their new models notwithstanding.

III. For Episcopacy (praeliminarily, and referring to what, according to my
(poor) ability, the Reader has presented unto him in the last part of my
Book,) Consider.

1. The Challenge of that most profound, most candid, modest man Mr. Hooker:
The Augsburg Confess^onists, there, and in their Apology for that Confession,
cap. de Ord. Eccl. and in their Colloquies at Worms and Ratisbon, and diverse
of their Books besides, are for the Order of Bishops.
We require you (Disciplinarians) to find out but one Church upon the face of
the whole earth, that has been ordered by your (Presbyterian) Discipline, or
has not been ordered by ours, that is to say, by Episcopal regiment, sithence
the times that the blessed Apostles were here conversant. There precedes, A
very strange thing sure it were, that such a Discipline as ye speak of should
be taught by Christ and his Apostles in the Word of God, and no Church ever
have found it out, nor received it till this present time; contrariwise, the
Government against which ye bend your selves, be observed every where
throughout all generations and ages of the Christian World, no Church ever
perceiving the Word of God to be against it.

2. Consider, that Calvin himself (the first Author of (that Trojan Horse of
mischiefs) the Presbyterian Government) made not that Model of government (as
is notoriously-well-known) out of judgment, but of pure necessity to comply
with the then-present (exigent) state of Geneva, after the expulsion of their
lawful (secular Governor, and) Bishop, Petrus Balma. The (apparent, visible)
grounds of our assertion, are 1. his public profession of their readiness, to
receive such Bishops, as were the primitive ones; or, otherwise, that they were
to be held and reputed, nullo non anathemate digni, worthy of all Anathema's or
solemn curses. 2. His subscription to the (renowned) Augustane Confession
(which declares for Bishops,) cui, Epist. ad Martin Schaling.
says he, pridem volens ac libens subscripsi, whereto I willingly and
cheerfully subscribed, formerly. 3. His Confession to the Polish King, Epist.
ad Regem Poloniae, p. 140, 141. Ed. Genev. 1576.
which is: The ancient Church instituted Patriarchs, and assigned Primacy to
single Provinces, that Bishops might be better knit together, in the bond of
unity. 4. His description of the charge of a Bishop, that should join himself
to the reformed Church, viz. To do his endeavor that all the Churches within
his Bishopric be purged from error and idolatry, to go before the Curates
(or Pastors) of his Diocese by his example, and to induce them to admit the
Reformation. 5. (And lastly) his Epistles to Arch Bishop Cranmer, the Bishop of
London (Ridley,) and a Bishop of Poland.

5. Consider, for the Zuinglians, especially the Tigurines, howsoever otherwise
disciplinated, how passionately they favor our Episcopal Discipline; which
their learned, and most judicious writings (as of Bullinger, Gualters, etc.)
sufficiently show. And, for the Calvinians, let, Jerome Zanchie's honest
protestation be attended to: I profess, (says he Thesibus de vera
reformandarum Ecclesiarum ratione.
) before God, that in my conscience I repute them no other than Schismatics,
all who make it a part of Reformation of the Church, to have no Bishops, who
should preside over their Presbyters, in degree of authority, where this may be
clearly had. Furthermore, with Mr. Calvin, De necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae
to Cardinal Sadolet, his old Friend.
I deem them worthy of all manner of Anathema's, as many as will not be subject
to that Hierarchy, which submits it self to the Lord Jesus. Even Beza himself
(though very unkind to the Episcopal Order) either allows De diversis gradibus
ministrorum, c. 21. sect. 23. See him also, Epist. 12. ad quosdam Ecclesiarum
Anglicanarum fratres; and Epist. 23. ad Episcopum Grindallum, P 15.
our English Bishops, or else egregiously plays the Sycophant. Doctor Adrianus
a Saravia (however,) out of the Low-Countryes, Abrahamus Scultetus out of the
Palatinate, and Fredericus Spanhemius even from Geneva it self, have sent us
over (as one speaks) sweeter grapes, that is, their sentiments in favor of the
Episcopal Order and our Bishops. This Thesis also, was defended by Pierre du
Moulin (the Father) in the Academy of Sedan, where he was Professor of the
Chair, Thesibus de notis Ecclesiae part. 2. These. 33. See the Letter of a
French Protestant, etc. (citing in behalf of Bishops) Calvin, Zanchie, Bucer
(tract. de reformanda Ecclesia qui invenitur To. 11. constitutionum
Imperialium) Beza, du Moulin 's Buckler of Faith, Chamie^ *in his Book of the
Papal Monarchy, l. 3. c. 14. Art. 11. see him also l. 10. c. 5. l. 10. c. 7.
art. 8. It. c. 5. art. 6. (in this last clause, he says, Bishops were elected
Princes,)
Episcopos Angliae, etc. We assert, that the Bishops of England after their
conversion to the faith and ejuration of Papistry, have been the faithful
Servants of God, nor ought to forsake their title or office of Bishop. We must
add Diodati, Capellus, and other the most learned Frenchmen, lately, and now
living, that believe Episcopacy to be (at least) lawful. There is exstant. a
large List of Reformed Divines on this Subject, with Proofs, that other
Protestant Churches, besides the English, have a succession of Bishops.


6. (And lastly, for this) consider what the most admirable and Illustrious
Grotius has left upon Record, in his Discussio: Where he treats about the
Primacy of the Pope.
Not without cause (says he) would I have, Saravia, Downham, Bilson, to be
read upon this Argument (Episcopacy.) For, so light and foolish is that which
Bucer Gersom Bucer.
and others have written, after and against them, that to have read those, is
to have refuted these; Especially touching the Angels of the Churches,
concerning whom that which the perturbers of Ecclesiastical Order bring, is so
absurd and contrary to the Sacred Text it self, that it deserves not
confutation. Upon which words I stop, and take up a contemplation, The same is
appliable to the late Lord Arch Bishop of Armagh, his Original of
Metropolitanes, and his very learned Dissertation, touching the Lydian Asia.
what the great man would have said, if he had lived to see the (irrefragable)
Dissertations of that most Eminent Doctor Hamond against Blondel, Salmasius
(the prime Champions of Presbytery) and others, together with the several
Defenses of them against the (sorry, yet their very best) exceptions to them, by
the London-Ministers, and Master Owen!

Concerning the premissed Severals (jointly taken) let the Christian Reader
consider and know, that, whatever this Pamphlet has been able to object
against them, whether jointly or severally whether from Scripture or aliunde
(as will be acknowledged, if the following Sheets be read without (unruly)
pre-possessions and (unmanly, peevish) prejudicacies) I have fully and clearly
solved or answered it (and, therewithal, laid grounds, as I pass, for
satisfying or silencing all other the like exceptions, and all even whispers or
murmurs of objection;) so, that this Piece may p^sse for a defense and deletory
against and of, all the Puritanical or Sectarian-feeble Efforts against the
mentioned particulars. In so much as, there remains nothing, but to pray, that
the English people Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.
may be, henceforth, no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of (novel, spurious) doctrine, by the subtilty of men, through
their craftiness for the contriving of deceit. (...).
But keeping the truth ((...),) in love may increase in him in all things which
is the head even Christ; and that this Tract may go forth into a blessing to
every Reader.

Consider what I have, now, said (my Considerations,) and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things!

H. Jerem. 18. 15. Because my people has forgotten me: they have burnt incense
to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways, from the
ancient paths, to walk in paths in a way not cast up.

Psam. 77. 5. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

Quamvis de Scriptura Canonica non proferatur exemplum, etc. Though example be
not brought out of Canonical Scripture, yet we hold the verity of those
Scriptures when we practice this which has pleased the Universal Church,
commended to us by the Authority of the same Scriptures. S. Augustine contra
Cresconium, ^itante Grotio in Voto pro Pace Ecclesiae.

LEITOYPGIA THEIOTEPA EPGIA: OR, LITVRGY A MOST DIVINE SERVICE, etc.
HAVING by a Preface to the Reader, either accounted with our Author about his
Epistle (or therein, referred to the Book, wherein it is satisfied, more
distinctly;) what next insues (like something Prefatory) being collections out
of Smectymnuus (as, indeed, a great part of the (little) strength of his
Pamphlet seems to be of that extract,) and the naked heads, that another
semblable (Disciplinarian or Sectarian) Piece proceeds upon: what is out of
Smec: (being for substance, and sometimes, also, in terms, respersed in the
(slender) maigne or body of the Paper-kite) shall, there, be spoken to. What is
out of The Common Prayer unmasked, by way of heads, or summarily, will
(together with the entire piece, whence we have these (goodly) extraits, fall
under prejudice enough, and receive full and final doom, from the Character,
that the (above cited) learned man (one of the worthy Prebends of Canterbury,)
Doctor Casaubon, has passed upon it, in these words: Postscript to Epist.
prefix't to's Vindic. of the Lo^ds Prayer. ^. ^, 2, 3.
Since this was printed, and ready to come forth, a Book (or Pasquil rather, it
is so full of railing:) entitled, The C. P. B. unmasked, etc. came to my sight,
-- It is such a piece of exquisite Nonsense, of groundless impudent
Sophistry, with bitter railing, and much profane jeering all along, that I must
needs think, they that have patience, -- to read such stuff, without
detestation, may as plausibly be persuaded to sing Ballads, instead of Holy
Hymns, and to think that men serve God best in Tap-houses. The whole strength
of the Book lies in this: The Masse-Book, Breviaries, etc. are idolatrous
Popish-Books; therefore whatsoever is taken out of them, (or may be supposed to
be taken out of them, because to be found there) is Popish and idolatrous. Now
a good part both of the Old and New Testament, besides the whole Book of
Psalms, is to be found in Masse-Books, and Breviaries: is any man so blind
that does not see what will follow? And is it not the same reason for many
Godly prayers and forms: (not to speak of Ceremonies, though it be true of them
also) that were in use in time of purest Christianity; yet to be found in
Masse-Books and Breviaries? Or is it the bare word Mass that turns all into
Idolatry? Why might it not be a good word, what ever it is now, a thousand
years ago? Many ages are not yet passed, when Canticles or the Song of Songs
(as it is in the Original) was called in English, the Ballad of Ballads. Now
many, if not most, Ballads, we now so call, are profane or ridiculous; and that
word now a word of Scorn; therefore the Canticles, or Song of Songs shall be no
longer part of Scripture, but mere Idolatry. Certainly, it must be granted,
that wise Governors, see much more then ordinary men: else such senseless
impious stuff, a man would think, would not be permitted to the public. This
judgment of the (abovenamed) most worthy man may serve, as for an Antidote
against several poisonous passages, in the Book ensuing, so for a legitimate
supersedeas to me and my Read^r, for not looking into that (so branded)
Scriblet; and yet, if it light into my hands, seasonably, I shall (wash his
face for him) make some strictures upon the (doughty) Paper.

But, we enter upon the Book it self, which sets out with a Question, Whether
it is lawful for Magistrates, Ministers, etc. to make stinted Liturgy, and
impose the same? To which the Answer is by him given, It is not Lawful: Of
which Negative, the Reasons, more than a good many, follow; no fewer than XXVII.

But, before we annul his Reasons against, we shall lay down some few (besides
what the Preface has) of many, of our own, for a Liturgy, and, that, imposed.

1. The First is, Because it is lawful to compose and impose the Service of
God. But now, the very notation of Liturgy speaks the Service of God, and
Liturgy was so called at first, from serving or ministering to God. For from
Act. 13. 2. (...) as they were doing their Liturgy to the Lord (as they
ministered to the Lord, say Ours) the Fathers, in all Ages, have called the
Service of God, a Liturgy. And, then, the composed service of God being
perfectly lawful, that it (the same) should, being imposed, commence unlawful,
is abhorrent from all reason, unless lawful Magistrates and Governors (that
impose it) be found the only unlawful things.

2. The Second is, Because that Liturgy (which the Question before us styles,
also, exegetically or explanatively, Common Prayer Book) containing, and being
made-up of Prayers, Confession of Faith, holy Hymns, divine Lessons,
Absolutions and Benedictions, it must be proved, either that the severals are
unlawful; prayers, confessions, etc. singly, unlawful (otherwise, the
Aggregate, or the entire Form or Frame so compounded, will never be concluded
unlawful:) Or else, that the imposing of these so many (good) things alters
their nature, and poisons them; there remaining no third thing, unless,
happily, the intermixture of Praises, etc. with Prayer can be supposed faulty.
Now, there is no man so forsaken of his Christian wits, as to say, any of the
particulars, in their separate consideration, are unlawful acts or things: and
the imposing the performance of them, by lawful Authority, must not be deemed
faultable, for the reason, even now, alleged, which will receive more
strength by and by: the intermixture, which is the last, cannot fall under
(sober) censure, unless we arrive at that pass and pitch of Frenzy, as to
blame the like mixture, in David's Fsalms, which were a standing Office to the
Jewish Nation, not to speak of other pieces of Scripture, nor the practice of
(many) Ministers, in their peculiar own prayers, extemporal ones also, if not
especially, nor even of this Authors own Effusions, all mesled, in this sort.

3. The Third, and last, shall be, Because Prayer is (at least) lawful, and to
bind it on men to pray is lawful. Whence it may be concluded, naturally and
irrefragably, to impose a Liturgy is lawful. For, Liturgy is nothing, but
Prayer in such a mode, dress, accommodation or composure: Now, the mode not
being prescribed, in all Prayer, by God, it is left to private persons, much
more then to public Ones (men in Authority,) so to frame and reigle it, for
the manner (the matter being supposed lawful and good,) as shall seem best to
their wisdoms; and to impose the use thereof (those on their Families, these
upon the Churches) in their Dominions. If the Imposal be the thing, still,
stuck at, besides the reason, already, assigned, we say, (according to the
XXXVIIth Article of the Church of England,) That our Chief Magistrates, the
Kings and Queens of these Kingdoms, have that prerogative, which we see to have
been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, etc.
Now, we know, our of the Sacred Code (the Scriptures,) that one of those godly
Princes (Josiah) besides his destroying of Idolatry, and Repair of the Temple,
Regia sua authoritate obstrinxit: and quamvis propensos Judaeorum animos ne
ipso vivo ab externo Dei cultu deficerent tantam adhibuit disciplinae
severitatem, Tremell: and Junius in 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
made or compelled, all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord their God.
Another of them (King David) 1 Chronicles. 24.
divided the Priests into orders, 1 Chronicles. 25.
constituted the number and offices of the Singers, etc. Nay, and (which is
remarkable) made a change in a constitution or Law of God, concerning the
Levites, viz. Number. 8. 24.
That, whereas God appointed 1 Chronicles: 23. verse. 24. 27.
the attendance of the Levites (that they should serve and do the work of the
Lord) from the age of but five and twenty years and upward till the age of
fifty years old, and then they should cease waiting, v. 25, they were by Him
And the 28th.
inordered, to serve from the age of twenty years and upward, upon a ground
there specified, v. 25. Now, as this alteration cannot, (that twenty fifth
verse forbidding) See Doctor Hammond 's (exact) Account of Mr. Cawdrey 's
Triplex Diatribe, Sect. ^. 105, 106. to which what Mr. Cawdrey has returned,
in his Account andited and discounted, Sect. 4. of Wilworship; p. 160. is
utterly shifting and unsatisfactory, as any that has his eyes in his head, and
not bleared with prejudice, will, upon collation, soon discern and confess.
reasonably, be pretended, to be done, by any other, than Kingly Authority,
(not Prophetical, as one Mr. D. Cawdrey.
would have it, though the pretention be evicted of falsity, by his very
learned Adversary,) so one would think it should for ever stop the mouths of
this, and all other pretenders against the Authority of the Magistrate, about
things Sacred and Divine. One would suppose, that I need nor add the mention of
the instance of King Hezekiah and the Princes, 2 Chronicles. 29, 30. Examples of
Magistrates Compelling the people to serve God, Abraham, Genesis 17, 18. Jacob
Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4. Moses, Joshua, 24, 23. Gedeon, Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 4.
Josiah, 2 Chronicles: 34. 32, 33. Asa 3 Chron. 14, 15. Ch: Manasseh, 2 Chronicles: 33.
15, 16. Darius, Dan: 6. 26. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 29. See S. Augustine Epist.
127. Cont: Crescon: Gram: l. 3. c. 50. contr: Literas Petili^n: l. 2. c. 86.
83. Codex lib. 1. tit. 5. de Haeretic: Socrates l. 1. c. 34. Gr: Lat: 21, 22.
Eusebius. de vit: Constantini, l. 1. c. 37. Theod: l. 5 c. 20.
commanding the Levites to sing praises to the Lord with the words of David and
of Asaph, though Hezekiah and the Church, then had not the very same occasions,
to use them, that David, etc. had. But, we shall have farther occasion to speak
to this, afterward.

We come, now, to his Reasons, Why, it is not lawful to impose a Liturgy,
whereof,

The First is, Because no Magistrate can produce any Authority (Divine, we must
suppose, he means) for so doing; not Commands, Instances, or Examples; if not,
then follows; none must presume upon their utmost peril to introduce the same.
To this we Answer; We have commands: What King Josiah did, he did by command of
the Moral Law, which binds under the Gospel, (...), to serve God by prayer and
praise, in whatever convenient, useful manner composed. And what bound Josiah,
binds our Princes. What should I recount Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject.
etc. or Hebr. 13. 17. Obey them that have the oversight or rule over you, etc?
See, also, 1 Timothy: 2. 3. 1 Pet: 2. 13, 14.
Instances or Examples we have in the same Josiah, and in David, in a matter of
much higher consideration (as some will construe it) than imposing such or such
a mode, or form of God's service, agreeable to his will and mind in all things,
for the matter.

To the Second, Because it is forbid in the second Commandment, and elsewhere,
in Scripture; Liturgies being Ordinances, Traditions, and Rudiments of men, in
God's worship, all which things are, there, forbid: We Answer, by denying the
Minor Proposition (as in syllogism) challenging any man to prove, That
Liturgies are Ordinances, Traditions, and Rudiments of men in the Holy Apostles
sense; and, therefore, whatever the Second Precept That stinted Liturgies are,
no ways against the second Commandment; See Mr. John Ball 's Trial of the
grounds tending to separation, c. 3. per totum, as venerable an Author, sure
(and of the same Family) as Dod or Bifield, if they should, which it is certain
enough, they did not, sa^ the contrary.
forbids, it touches not those: See 12 Add^tional to Bishop Andrews on the
second Commandment, p. 194, 195.
Adjuments of Devotion and the Service of God being no such Rudiments, etc. or
if they be, all prescript forms of Prayer, of what kind soever, are involvable
under the same charge. It were well, if men could, or would penetrate a
little-thought, beyond the shell and surface of words, and learn, or weigh what
these words, that so amuse and affright the Vulgar, do (truly) import;
Ordinances, Traditions, Rudiments. Do 's a Liturgy signify that bill which
the Jews were bound by; signed, as it were, by their own hands against
themselves, by professing to expect justification from the Law? and, yet, this
is the very meaning of handwriting of ordinances, It would better be rendered,
having by his doctrines blotted out the handwriting against us. Hebr. 9. 10.
[Carnal ordinances,] is meant of those transient external constitutions of the
Levitical oeconomie, against eating any unclean meat, etc. or the vain empty,
^ro^hy and pretended knowledge or wisdom of the Gnostics, taken out of the
heathenish Pythagorean Philosophy, as it signifies, Col. 2. 8.
Col. 2. 14. Does it signify external performances about washings, etc. alone
heeded, to the neglect of Gods prime Commands, or the dubbing those things or
inventions with the high style of Gods Commands, which are not, to the
superseding and evacuating of his real Commands? Yet, so, traditions, S. Matthew.
15. 9. and S. Mar. 7. 7, 9, 13. signify. Lastly, does a Liturgy signify or
implie, the observances of the Mosaical Law, very distant and contrary to the
Christian Divinity; or abstinences, out of Heathen or Jewish practices
brought-in? as rudiments imports, Coloss. 2. 8, 20. If the import and sense of
words were considered, and not the sound only, we should not have such
impertinent, irrational exceptions and pleadings, set on foot, and exhibited
against the English Establishment, from the Disciplinarians and the
Anabaptists, their Offspring. The talk, about adding to the Word of God, by
Ceremonies, and, here, by a described prescribed Liturgy, would cease, if, men
knew, or would suffer themselves to consider, what it is, to add to the Word of
God, and what the places forbidding it, do signify; two, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12.
32.
the Pamphlet has, quite beside his purpose. -- To diminish from the Word of
God (says H. Grotius) is, not to do what is commanded: to add to it, to do
otherwise than is commanded, referring to Deuteronomy. 12. 42. d. And reason gives,
that, as they sense these Texts, it is unlawful to add to the Politic Laws of
Moses (to hang a thief, etc.) adding to the Civil and Cerimonial Law, as well
as to the Moral, being thereby interdicted. d Hoc dictum neque traditionibus
scriptum interpretantibus, neque praeceptis humanis legem sepientibus repugnat,
Id. in loc. The LXXII render (...) to keep] (...) ye shall keep, the Latin,
custodite, keep, and the Syriac, sed observate, but keep the commandments, by
that opposition, showing that to be the meaning of not adding or diminishing,
viz. paying an obedience to Gods commands, Dr Hammond against Mr Cawdrey, p. 16,

In the next step, he springs an Objection for us, and against himself, viz.
That the Modes and Circumstances of Worship are left to the determination of
men; but, for an Answer refers. And, we also, for the confirmation of the
Objection, (by him so called) and invalidating his Answer, will remit the
Reader to the same time and place, and, there, not fail to meet, and be meet
with, him.

His third Reason is, Because this teaches a vain Worship, like the traditions
of the Elders, (referring to, and citing S. Matthew. 15. 9, 10. Mark 7. 7, 8.)
But, to these places we have spoken already, and said what, utterly, and for
ever, renders them useless to him, and his co-pretenders. I, now, add, that,
not in our Liturgy, no, nor in our Ceremonies (the most cavilled part of it,)
is there any thing, that falls under the censure of Christ, contained in those
(prohibitive) characters. The Jews (in the places cited) censured, pretended a
tradition, (which was an invention of their own,) to be a law of Gods enacting
Fingamus servu^ ab hero fuisse jussum adesse domi hora diei sexta; serv^m v.
d^mi adesse etia^ and prima (quod non fuit ab hero prohibitum:) Number hoc nomine
in culpa est servus, g. addendo verbis heri? Minime sane* Ni forte dixerit,
cogitaveritve haec verba herum locutum fuisse, mandasseque domi utraque vice
esse. Applicatio haut difficilis est ceremoniis nostris, Cruci in Bapt. etc.
, and set it up against the known Law of God (the saying Corban, to the voiding
of the command of relieving Parents.) This, and nothing else, save what shall
bear some analogy with this, is the crime, there, noted, by teaching for
Doctrines, etc. Now, this is no way chargeable here, on those that acknowledge
(as we do,) that Liturgies, for the mode of Composure (and so Ceremonies, in
themselves) are an Ecclesiastical constitution, and do not so much as pretend
them to be prescribed by Christ, nor by them seek to supplant any thing, that
is appointed by him; but, use them, in perfect subordination to, and compliance
with, all other Moral, or Christian Laws, or Institutions. See the Eminent
Doctors Practical Catechism, l. 2.. 12. p. 235.
Certainly, those that talk or argue thus peremptorily against Liturgies, etc.
are more (or rather, alone, among Protestants) guilty of the importance of
those words, teaching for doctrines, etc. in affirming, that the non-use of
Liturgies (or utter abolition of them, under the highest crimikations) is the
(...), the pleasure, that is, the command or will of God; and the avouching
that, of their own groundless dislikes, peevish prejudic^es, and phanatical
prepossessions (the humors, wills or commands of men, righ,) is the same
crime, as to put the Kings Broad-Seal to a Deed of my own, or His stamp or
impression on that which is not His coin; which as it is crimen Majestatis,
high Treason against the Great King of Heaven and Earth; so, who is, now,
guilty of it, Mr P. and (his Antecessors, in these irrational pretensions) the
unquiet Disciplinarians, or we, that adhere to the orderly English Reformation,
I leave to their consciences to ruminate, and the judging Reader to determine.
I was willing to insist the longer on this matter, because (in my experience)
it drums most in the Vulgar peoples heads, and is inculcated, even to
hoarsenesse by the Disciplinarian (...). And yet, here, shall follow what the
most judicious and incomparable H. Grotius has, on this head, in his Vote for
the Churches Peace: In the Translation of that Piece, by the very worthy and
ingenious Mr Clement Ba^ksdale, which alone I have (now) by me; in the Art: of
Will Worship and the Commandments of men.
Paul in the II. c. Coloss. X. 23. condems not all will worship: for so he had
also condemned Abel 's sacrifice, because it came not from divine command, but
from humane institution, as the Ancients think: but this is it the Apostle
blames, that those voluntary worships were preferred before the worship of
Christ commanded by God; and, for a thing left to liberty, that which was most
necessary was neglected. The commandments of men, wherewith God is worshipped in
vain, both in Isaiah and Matthew, are the Doctrines of men contrary to the
Divine Law: such as those of the false Prophets in Isaiah 's time, teaching
that God might be pacified with sacrifices or other rites without amendment of
life: to which error the Jews are much inclined even to this day. Such also is
that Doctrine of the Pharisees, that he is not bound to feed his parents, who
had said, Whatever may come from me to my parents, be it now dedicated and
vowed to the Temple. The teachers of such things although they honor God with
their lips, have their heart far from him.

He, next, frames an Ob^ection to his arguing out of the aforecited places of
Holy Text, (Mat. 15. etc.) Which is, But the Jewish Elders rejected the
commandments of God, etc. This, as it is truly said or replied, so when he
brings our Liturgic Services under that charge, he loudly affronts truth. For,
those that worship God by a Liturgy, may, and do worship God in spirit and
truth, and it is intolerable boldness (as well as perfect falsity,) to think
and say, that neither Jewish nor Christian Church, when they used Liturgies,
(as we shall show they did,) did, (any of them) worship God in spirit and
truth. Nay, farther, it is one of his own (own, I call him, because by himself
cited) Authors, the admirable Bishop Andrews that will tell him, Sermon of
Worshipping Imaginations, p. 37.
That without Set Forms (which, are tantomount to him (we are dealing withal)
with Liturgies) we cannot serve God in spirit: whereof his reason is, because,
says he, it is plain, that those that give themselves to imagine Concerning
their stops and humines and demurres of humane imperfection (entitled to the
unutterable groans of the spirit,) among the ablest of this opinion, See
Thorndike of Assem. p. 216. 217. See also p. 218. And Dr La^: Wom Beaten ^y^e,
etc. p. 16, 17.
prayer, at the same instant, do so occupy their minds with devising still
what to say next, their spirit is unfruitful, The Minister may better pray
reading, than they pray studying (as they must a^* where is his zeal when he
has sense to look, and scarce knows what comes next, Mr D. Whitby 's Vindic.
of the Form of Com. Prayers, etc. p. 27.
no less than the others (Papist) understanding. And both these, 1. the
understanding of the mind, 2. and the affection of the spirit are there
necessarily required. Neither will the Scriptures he cites afford him the least
countenance, for this his (daring) charge. Worshipping in spirit, etc. S. Joh.
4. 20, 24. being set in opposition only to the appropriating of worship to some
singular places, Jerusalem, or that Mountain, See Josephus lib. Antiq. XII. c.
1.
not to bodily worship, nor is producible as any apology or excuse for the
omission thereof; The Reader is entreated ^o see Mr Mede's Diatribe on John 4
23. where p. 198, 199, 200. he asserts the commendablenesse, yea requisitenesse
of bodily Worship under the Gospel (showing, that this Text is abused as
alleged against it) and gives us two interpretations of it; the first (p.
^01.) is, That to worship God in Spirit and Truth, is to worship him not with
types and shadows of things to come, as in the Old Testament; but according to
the verity of the things exhibited in Christ, according to that, -- Grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ. See the same Evangelist c. 17. v. 17. and Ephesians. 1.
13. and Romans 15. 8. -- no longer with bloody sacrifices, and the Rites and
Ordinances depending thereupon; but in and according to the verity of that
which these Ordinances figured, etc. (...), says Eusebius Demonstr. Evang. l.
1. c. 9. and correspondently diverse other of the Ancients: The second
interpretation (which the said learned Mr Mede most approves) is [in spirit.]
that is, conceiving of him no otherwise then in Spirit; And [in truth,] that
is, not under any corporeal or visible shape, as of a Dove, (...), not fancying
him, as a Body, but as indeed he is a Spirit. See Romans 1. 25. Amos 2. 4. Isay
28. 15. Jer. 16. 19. From which latter sense; he frames this argument for
bodily Worship; To worship what they know, (as the Jews are said to do) and to
worship in Spirit and truth, are taken by our Savior for equivalent; else the
whole sense will be inconvenient. But the Jews worshipped not God without Rites
and Ceremonies, (who yet are supposed to worship him in spirit and truth;)
Ergo, to worship God without Rites and Ceremonies, is, not to worship him in
spirit and truth, according to the meaning here intended. This is his
demonstration, (p. 209.) The Homily against the peril of Idolatry, (p. 3.)
peculiarly applies the Text against worshipping of God in an Image.
however frequently vouched by sundry As^matists, and by a lusty wrench
directed by them against the conjunction Adoratio corporalis in Spiritu fit, in
quantum ex spirituali devotione procedit, and ad came ordinatur, Aquinas 2dae.
2da. qu. 84. art. 1. There should be such correspondency 'twixt soul and body
as between the Living Creatures and wheels -- When those went, these went, etc.
Ezekiel. 1. 21. See Ps 95. 6. S. Luke ^^. 41. Rev. 4. 10. and 11. 16. See Bishop
And. on Comments. Addition 8. p. 103.
of the body with the spirit, in the service of God. And yet, never, (that I
before heard of,) was it urged against Set Forms. (for so he takes Liturgy, as
is apparent, p. 4. l. 9.) And, then for his other places, Isaiah 29. 13. (not
33.) it serves as little to his turn: for, it is boundless calumny to say, That
all those that use the English Common Prayer Book, honor God only with their
mouth or lips, without the application of their heart; and, for the latter part
of the Text [their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men] it is only
a perstriction Homines nempe a Deo non instituti, qui in nudis ritibus, sine
animi emendatione, cultum Dei collocant. Tales doctores erant falsi illorum
temporum prophetae, Grot: in loc:
or rebuke of the false Prophets of those times, as men, who being not
ordained, instituted or s^nt of God, placed the worship of God in naked rites,
without the betterance or am^ndment of the Soul. Now, whether all that love the
Liturgy, be men of this sad character and base alloy, I leave to the
conscience of this Objecter, to pass verdict, when he communes with himself in
his Chamber, and is still.

His Fourth Reason is, Because that only which is needful, in the service of
God, is to be made, etc. A worthy reason! But, he abets it out of Act. 15. 28.
It seemed good, etc. to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary
things. Was ever Scripture more sottishly applied? For shame, know, or
acknowledge, that those words concern a particular emergencie and case (the
danger of the tender-Jew-Christians being scandalized, galled or averted from
Christianity,) if those Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, Of obstaining from
meats offered to Idols, etc. (as they follow verse. 29.) were not, for a while,
observed by the Gentile Converts. Now, will this Author, against his own
(marginal) Rule, (p. 12.) argue from a particular to a general; and, because
these only Necessaries (such, in that juncture, or at that turn) were, then
imposed, conclude, that, therefore, a Form of Prayer must not be made or
imposed, because none of these; or, not necessary as these were, (at that knot
of time?) It Is pity, to insist longer, and distinguish of Necessary or
Necessity; that some things are necessary to the Being or absolutely, others
to the wel-Being, comparatively, on condition, or in a more remiss degree. Who
pretends, that Liturgies are absolutely necessary, or to the Being Of what
needfulnesse Liturgies are, see in the Preface.
of a Church or Child of God, as such? but, then, to the solemn public
worship of God, they are very hugely requisite and needful (if that signify
(as, sure, it does) lower than necessary, and which Mr. P. (when necessary was
in the Text of the Acts,) has put in his proposition, instead thereof; as
ashamed, sure, to pretend, that every thing in the service of God, though,
circumstantials, externals, modes, such or such Forms of prayer, are
necessary.) His Major Proposition [Nothing is to be in God's service, but what
is necessary] being everted, we must come to the proof of his Minor [A
Common Prayer is not necessary.] But, what need his probation, when necessary
being so sensed, as above [absolutely necessary,] it is yielded him? But, yet
let us see, and fillip-away his (four) Proofs of his Assumption or middle
Proposition also. Whereof,

The First is, The Scriptures are a sufficient Directory, etc. Ans: Away, then,
with the Directory for worship of your good Friends, mentioned and praised, p.
14. nay, away with their, and all other Catechismes, Confessions of Faith
(greater and less,) Books of Devotion (the Supply of Prayer for the Ships and
all,) away with all Commentatours, Dod, Bifield on the Commandments, cited by
you, p. 1. And, when you apply what is said, 2 S. Timothy 3. 15. 18. to prayer,
whiles preaching is the business, there, spoken of, do not you fairly shoot
besides the mark?

The Second is, Otherwise, Moses and Christ would have been unfaithful in Gods
House. But, the Answer (very briefly) is: Moses did enjoin Forms of prayer (i.
e. Liturgies,) as is most visible, Number. 6. 23, etc. -- on this wise shall ye
bless, etc. saying unto them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, etc. So,
when the first fruits were brought, the bringer is enjoined to say, as we find,
Deuteronomy. 26. 5. so, also, when their Armies went out, Deuteronomy. 20. 3. Likewise, when
the Ark, set forwards, and rested, Continued by H. David at the removal of the
Ark in his time, Ps. 68. 1.
Number. 10. 35, 36. And, as did Moses, so also did our Lord, in bidding S. Matthew.
6. 9. S. Luke 11. 2.
his Disciples say Our Father, etc. which, that it was a Form, and imposed, we
shall make good, against all exceptions, in due place.

The Third is, Because Gods Church throve best without them, as in the
Primitive times. To which we Answer (be the word [Primitive] narrower or
larger,) that there were stinted Liturgies in the Primitive, and most
flowrishing times of the Church Christian, as soon as Extraordinaries (which
was very early) ceased. By Extraordinaries, I mean the (...), d the Gift of
Prayer, which was a Miracle, as the gift of healing, prophesying, speaking c
See S. Chrysostom: in Romans viii. 26. (...). etc.
with tongues, etc. Of which Charisma or donum I might add (ad abundantiam,)
that it was bestowed (...), on some one, that did pray for the rest, etc. and
teach others how to pray; 2 and that some of the Prayers thus conceived by
them, etc. were received and kept by those, whom they thus taught; 3 lastly,
that these are they, which the Ancients mean by the Liturgies of SS. James,
Mark, etc. Much might be discoursed in deducing and clearing this matter, but,
as studious of brevity, I choose to refer to those (excellent Papers, P. 22,
23, etc and p. 82.
that passed from Doctor Hammond to Mr. Cheynel, where is to be had much
satisfaction, on this head. For close of this, I only ask, whether the times
of Saint Mark, and Saint James were not Primitive times, and whether the Church
of Christ ever flourished more than then, and, by consequence, as appears, then
under Liturgies?

The Fourth, and last, is, Because Ministers ought to be so gifted, as not to
need it. But it is Answered, 1. That what ought to be, is one thing, and what
is, and will be, is another. 2. That the Composers of the Directory told us,
Pref: to Directory, p. 5.
before our Author, though some little-what, differently, that our Lord Christ
pleases to furnish all his Servants whom he calls to that office, (of
Mini^^er) with the g^f^ of Prayer; when as they will never be ab^e to show us
any Evidence from any promise of Christ, in his word, that any such gift shall
be perpetually annexed by him to the Ministry: gifts of healing, making of
Psalms, etc. not pretended to, now ad^yes, having as much promise thence, as
that of prayer: nor can they show, why Christ (if he so furnish them,) may not
be concluded, to help them to the matter of their prayers (^herein yet, the
Directorie's help is called in,) as well as to the form of words: and, we dare
affi^m, that, if the gift of prayer signify an ability of praying in public
without any premeditation, discreetly, and reverently, and so ^s never to
offend against either of those necessaries, every Minister is not furnished with
this gift, some men of very excellent abilityes wanting that sudden
promptness of Elocution or utterance, and choice of words for all their
conceptions; others being naturally modest and bashful, and not endued with
this Charisma of boldness, which is a great part, a special ingredient of
that, which is, here, called the gift of prayer. And, even for those, which
have the former of these, and are not so happy, as to want the latter, that yet
they are not sufficiently gifted for prayer in public, See the Preface.
Experience has sufficiently taught. See the View of the New Directorie, p.
66. sect, 18.
3. Though a M^nister should not need a Liturgy, in some cases (as after
premeditation,) yet he (as able as we, now, s^ppose him) may stand in need of
it, in other some, as when upon sudden Effusion, he prays as he ought not; and
the Liturgy would prevent that: and, farther, enable him to pray more to the
Edification of the People, than he is able to do, who yet is able, in some
degree, to pray as becomes a Minister of Christ, and as he ought to do. See a
Copy of some Papers, passed at Oxford, etc. p. 83.
For, 4. Liturgies are made and imposed, for the behoof of the people also, and
not only of the Priest. For a supply to whose weakness alone, Liturgies are
not composed and enjoined. 5. But, for other ends, according to that well-known
place of Mr. Calvin: In Epistola ad Protectorem Angliae, Ep: 83.
As for a form of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I very much approve, that
it be set or certain, from which it may not be lawful for the Pastors, in
their Function, to depart, that so there may be provision made for the
simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, and that the concent of all the Churches
among themselves may more certaeinly appear. And lastly, also, that the
extravagant levity of some, who affect noveltyes, may be prevented. 6.
Canonical Ordination in the Church of Christ, is that which makes a lawful
Minister, as touching the validity of any act, which appertains to that
vocation, not, as some childishly (says my Author) have imagined, the sound
preaching of the word, (I add) or ability of extemporaneous praying. The cause
why Saint Paul willed Timothy, not to be overhasty in ordaining Ministers,
being, because imposition of hands does consecrate and make them Ministers,
whether they have gifts and qualityes fit for the laudable discharge of their
duties, or no; says the profound and sweet-breathed Mr. Hooker. Eccles. P^lit:
l. 5. sect. 81. p. 448, 449.
7. His places of Scripture Romans 12. 6. etc. 1 Cor: 12. 6. compared with 1 Cor.
14. 13. etc. Jam: 5. 4.
are, either perfectly nothing to the purpose, or else, if one of them (the
second) should be found pertinent, what I have said of the miraculous Gift of
prayer does wholly supersede it, as to this concern.

And, what ^ but now said out of Hooker (with more, that might be fetched, on
that argument, from that rich and inexhaustible anti-Sectarian Penu) will be
sufficient Answer to his Return to an Objection of his own starting* whereof
the sum is, That those Ministers, that are without the gift of prayer, are but
reputedly Ministers, liken Jeroboam's -- But I add, 1. I do not deem him, that
thus railes, worthy to brush or unty the strings of those men's Books, for depth
of holy knowledge, and sublimity of sound godliness, that have not that, which
he calls, the gift of prayer: not, as though sundry of them could not easily
attain the faculty of extempore praying, but because they dislike the use of
it, as too irreverent, and unbeseeming (besides the fruitlesness of the Spirit,
while men imagine and pray, at the same time, as we had it, above) the awful
Majesty of God, in the Assembly of the Saints. 2. Those may have this gift of
prayer, that have not the spirit of prayer. I make no doubt, says (...),
Meditation XVIth. sect. 1^.
King Charles the First of ever-fragrant preciousest memory, but a man may be
very formal in the most extemporary variety; and very fervently devout in the
most wonted expressions. So His Majesty. And, for the spirit of prayer, meaning
the devotional applications, workings and relishes of the Soul in prayer, it is
far from being the enclosure (if it be, indeed, the acquist and possession) of
Extemporalists. 3. Ir is the issue, many times, of a confident boldness,
volubility of a glib tongue, a fervorous Enthusiastic temper of body, industry
in turning-over a Bible or Prayer Book, or a Concordance, of which last Mr John
Clark has, abundantly, given exemplification, in his Holy Incense for the
Censers of the Saints. P. 223, etc.


To his Fifth Reason, Because none of the Old Testament Godly Magistrates did
form, or enjoin a Liturgy: I Answer, That Moses did, as is most apparent,
above. And, it appears, Isai: 38. 20. that the good King Hezekiah did not only
form a set thanksgiving, but used See Ezra's Example, in this matter, in the
Preface.
it (and, so imposed it on himself) all the days of his life. I mention not,
now (again) the imposition of the said King, recorded 2 Chro: 29, 30.

He, next, raises an Objection, That there were Liturgies in the Jewish Church,
etc. and Answers, It can hardly be proved: To which I Return, 1. If it be
proved, it is no matter, whether it be done hardly, or easily. 2. It clearly is
proved, by the Liturgy in Ezrae's time. But, what he adds (suppletorily) to his
Answer, how sottish is it! So, says he, there were Idols, Altars, Groves, etc.
which Answer will militate, irresistibly, (as far as it is allowed for true)
against Prayers in general, and Fasting, etc. For, so, there were, among Jews
and Heathen, Prayers, Fasts, etc. suppose Mr. P's service (so to call it) of
God by prayer and preaching (rightlier, pilpeting, as Sir Tho: Moore was wont
to term it) should be impugned by an Atheist (though, I think a lawful
Governor may (or might) not only lawfully, but usefully do it, i. e. impugn
it by silencing him) and he, to propugne or defend it, should allege the
practice, not only of the Christian, but also of the Jewish Church, might not
his Adversary regest (as pertinently and truly, as himself, here,) Why so they
practiced Idolatry also, and erected Groves, etc?

(...); To his Seventh, Because the Churches of God are not edified thereof by:
I Answer, 1. That I doubt me, he know; not what Edification A man is Edified by
whatsoever it is that advances his intentions toward any work: what-soever is
a fit means to train and guide us in the ways of godliness, must he said to
tend toward the edification Gods people, Thorndike Of Assemblies, p. 186. 18^.
means, when he denies it consequent to the serious and worthy use of a
well-framed, pious Liturgy. Should he mean, by being edified, affected with
sensible consolations, then let him see how wrong his meaning is, by an
excellent and golden discourse, concerning this matter, in a most pious and
curious Piece, called the Returns of Spiritual comfort and grief in a devout
Soul: represented (by intercourse of Letters) to the Lady Falkland; where P.
93, etc.
he shall find, that the outward and sensible sweetness, and affectuousnesse
in Devotions, is many times, * not from God, but from the deceiver, * not the
gift of God, nor no true edification, * not from heaven, heavenly, * a snare of
the Devil's laying, * temptations of the Devil, * the sly and subtle snare of
the hunter * spiritual temptation, however deluded Papists, and silly
Protestants so much admire and hunt after it, and such as can raise it in them.
2. Of solid and sound Edification, or promotion in holiness, the Liturgy is a
fruitful Mother, as I have, plentifully, showed, and more (abundantly) can. To
the Objection, That diverse have got benefit by Liturgies, he Returns: So they
have from the writings of the Papists and Heathens. And I Reply, that those
writings are, in abundant things, good and virtuous, and so far as they are
such, and as such procure benefit, they cast no disparagement on Liturgies. As
neither do God's Judgments (another of his instances,) which are good and
righteous things. As to what he says, of sin's benefiting; for that, and for
another (farther) Answer to his other examples afore-rehearsed, I refer to my
Solution of his fifth Reason or Objection.

His Eighth Reason (a most senseless one,) is, Because a Form and Rule ought
to be so for all Churches of Christ. But, such a Liturgy cannot (at least,
probably) be formed by mere men, for want of agreement in the Composers. To
which we make Answer (though it deserve none) 1. That there is no necessity,
that all Nations should have one Liturgy, (though, I think it a thing to be
wished, as hugely meet and convenient:) If there be no repugnancy, there may be
allowed diversity. 2. That there have been times and places (though our
Protestant Kings Dominions and Reigns should be none of them) when, and where
very many Nations, (as many, as any of his Texts import) have used one same
Liturgy. For, 3. The Canon contained and refer'd-to, in his former Texts, Acts
15. 1, 28. and 16. 4
is promulgate only to the Gentiles, at that time, of Antioch, Syria and
Cilicia, from whom the occasion thereof was taken; but, when they pass
farther, they promulgate them not, as appears by 1 Cor. 8. 9. Where, in that of
Idolothyta, (things sacrificed to Idols,) Paul acknowledges the
Corinthians-their liberty not retrenched, save only in case of Scandal. And,
Baronius Anno 57. n. 58. See Doctor Hammond, Of Herefie, p. 66, 67.
extends this observation to the Th^ssalonians also, upon force of that Text, 1 Thessalonians: 4. 2, 3. And, 4. His other four Texts 1 Cor: 4. 17. and 14. 33. and 16.
1. and 7. 17.
refer not to all Churches (universim,) but to such as Saint Paul planted; but
then SS. John and Pe^er, etc. had their (...) (peculiar places or regions) and
(...) (portions of Apostleship) plantations, as well as he. Therefore, those
Texts do not, necessarily, conclude, That what things were done, or inordered
by Saint Paul, in the Churches of his planting, were done, or brought in
universally, in all other Churches. Which things, 5. are, manifestly, Doctrines
(or things of that reference, at least,) not (the bufinesse, we are about)
Liturgies or Models of Prayer. His instance touching Scotland (that is, ((...))
the good Subjects, there) their refusing that (unfortunate) Liturgy sent them
from England, overthrowes his position; for, the Governors in both Church and
State did agree, to compose and impose that Form of Worship; they were the
Racaille or Rabble, inflamed by the Clergy-Bel-weathers, and the ambitious
Grandees, that sollevated, or tumultuated about it: And, be it, that there were
some diversityes, there was nothing contrariant, in the one to the other, as I
suppose.

His Ninth Reason might well be passed-over, were I not resolved to follow him
(...). Therefore, I demand, 1. Is composing Forms of Prayer, and imposing them
by Lawful Authority, the setting of men's by God's threshold? 2. I what is
perfectly, subordinate to, and compliant, or comporting with, all Christian
Laws, and of high and pregnant advantage to the solemn public, and even
private service of God, so (truly) chargeable? 3. Is the Common Prayer Book,
really, an Idol, or the service of an Idol? for, that is the meaning of the
words [setting the threshold, etc.] Their threshald] i. e. they set their I
dols, and perform their service in my Temple, in places and Chapels near to
the places which are c^^secrated to my service, D^od^^i^in (...).
Is not this man's conscience, where Rachel's Children were? just no where,
just none?

To the Tenth, That no Liturgy of these days is a perfect Rule; and therefore
cannot bind any Saint, etc. because the Rule of Faith and Obedience ought to be
perfect. I Answer, 1. God forbid, that nothing should bind, but what proceeds
from an infallible Spirit, and is (in that sense) perfect: for, if so, what
will become of the bindingnesse of humane Laws, in universum? If it be
excepted, that he speaks of spiritual things: I Answer, 2. What thinks he of
his stock-fathers and good Friends, the Smectymnuuans, or the Scotch-English
Synodians-their Directorie, Confessions, and Book of Discipline which obtained
(I think) an Ordinance Dii Jovis 13. Matt: 1644. An ordinance of Parliament,
establishing and observing this present Directory, throughout the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales.
for the imposing of them? were these perfect? if so, why then did not Mr. P,
and his fellow-Sectaries believe and cleave to them? Nay, 3. His own praying
and Preachments, I doubt not, but he would have all to be bound by; and yet, he
should need a whole Isle of Hellebore, that could judge them perfect. 4. Is it
not enough, that a Composure be according to the word of God, as far as learned
and honest men (using all the means to discern right) can judge; to legitimate
the imposition of it (the civil Authority or Sanction intervening) on all under
their Charge and Rule? Surely, it is, or else all the World will become a great
Amsterdam, or (almost) universal Bedlam.

To his Eleventh, That all prayers are to be made in the Spirit, I say, 1. That
the right use of a pious Liturgy, is praying in the Spirit, and more so, than
extemporary effusions are, or can be. See above, in Ans: to 3d. Reason.
2. Himself, in Return to a very pertinent and true Objection, acknowledges
that good men (and who thinks, wicked men can?) may pray by a Form (where, the
Reader may observe, what he means by Liturgy, even any Form, to all which he is
an enemy) and, yet, pray in the Spirit, too. But, then, 1 he uses a diminuent
or qualifying term [in some sense praying in the Spirit] as if praying in the
Spirit, were so (not only diversified, but) opposed, in sense, as that some
praying in the Spirit were not praying, that is, as if contradictories were
reconcilable! And, 2 he alleges it to be the proper work of the spirit, to
help the infirmities, as well in matter and expressions, as in sighs, etc. Romans
8. 26. (your Friends the Directorians will kon you but small thank for what you
say about Matter; for, they, in their Directory, prescribe that (the matter,
Wbereas Christ's promise is for the matter: for it shall be given you ^^. what
ye shall speak, Mat. 10. 19. Mar: 13. 11. Lu: 12. 12. Poor liberty to leave the
spirit only to supply the place of a Vocabulatie or Copia verborum; See Mr.
Fuller 's Church. Hist: B. 11. p. 223.
) leaving the Spirit of God, only the Idol-God Mercurie's part, to furnish
with language and phrase;) whence he concludes (very bashfully!) that they need
not use stinted Forms. But, Sir, you have hitherto borne us in hand, that they
were utterly unlawful, under a variety of expressions of that unlawfulness:
and but even no^, 'twas setting threshold against God's threshold! Now, if the
non-needfulnesse of u^ng Liturgies, be the thing contended-for: then, bes^des
that I have proved them needful, it is clear, that not-being needful, and
being lawful, are very consistent. Ey, but then he eats his word immediately:
for, this (strict) use of Forms, he concludes to be a limiting and stinting
yea, no less than a quenching of the Spirit, which to do, sure, is highly
unlawful. But, to this last charge, which has made such a noise in the World,
I have many things to Return (briefly:) as,

1. To forbid and stifle all sudden motions of the Spirit, and all pious
ejaculations, is (in some of our men's sense See Doctor Featley 's Dippers
dip't, p. 69, 70. One main Objection (says Doctor Preston) is this. That in
stinted prayer, the spirit is streitned, etc. To this he gives three Answers.
1. They that object it, do the same thing daily in the congregation, whose
spirits are limited or stinted by being hearers of him that prays. 2. It Is no
general tie, etc. 3. The spirit or affections are not tied or restrained by a
set form, there may be largeness of the heart, though there be a limit of
words, Saints daily exercise, set forth and approved by Sibbs and Davenport, p.
80. See him also in his Sermon before King James on St. John 1. 16. p 22.
) to quench the spirit, (in Saint Paul's prohibition.) But then, who, or what
Governors, or what Liturgy does so? 2. What Spirit are they supposed to
consine or limit? God's, or their own? To say, God's, is blasphemy: the spirit
of God blowing and working, where, and how he lists. If they say, their own;
man's, this is most necessary, viz. that his spirit or intention be confined or
tied to the prayer, he reads or says by heart (memoriter;) and, this is rather
a kindling of the spirit. For, in uttering zealous prayers with a fixed
intention, and devout affection, we feel our hearts burn within us. 3. The most
extemporarie prayer of the Minister confines the spirit of the Audience or
People; their spirit (if they will not suffer their minds to wander) being
bound and confined to it, so long as it lasts; and, why should they be more
confined or tied up in spirit, than their Mouth? or, where is it written, that
the one may not be limited, as well as the other? We hear the Blessed Apostle
say, 1 Cor. 14. 32.
The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets; if in prophesying, why
not in praying? The Reader is entreated, to see more of this whole matter, in
an excellent Discourse or Diatribe of Mr. Mede's on S. Matthew. 6. 9. Thus
therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. p. 1 etc. See (particularly) p. 15.
^ut, I Answer, 4 (and finally,) That the Text, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. about quenching
the spirit, is impertinently urged against stinted or set Forms of praying;
this being the apposite genuine sense of that prohibitive precept: See the
excellent Doctor Hammond in Loc: Mr. Thorndike's account of the place is, That
the Apostle thereby prohibits the quenching of the immediate inspirations of
the Holy Ghost, such as they were, by which men were enabled to dis^ern the
secrets of other men's hearts, As in 1 Cor. xiv. 24, 25. By which the Prophets
of Antioch were informed of the will of God, for the sending of Paul and
Barnabas; and those others for the ordination of Timothy, Act: xiii, 2. 1. Tim.
iv 14. By which the truth was revealed unto them, as concerning matter in hand
at their Assem^l^^s, 1 Cor. xiv, 30. And the Rule of the Apostle, if revelation
be made to another as he sits, let the first be silent, is to the same
purpose, of not quenching these inspirations. And the words relate as well to
the gift of Languages, as those in 1 Cor. xiv, 1. Be zealous of spiritual
Graces, especially of Prophesying, being the same with the conclusion of that
Ch: p. 39 Be zealous of Prophesying, but forbid not to speak, with Tongues. Of
Relig. Assem. p. 211, 212, 213.
The gifts of tongues, healing, etc. which were given in form of fire, must be
used accordingly, not quenched with neglect, vanity, wicked life, but preserved
by prayer, thanksgiving, and holy life. Now, this sense of the words is as
distant from what is imposed on them, in the Objection, as (...).

To his Eleventh Reason, Because to for me, etc. a Liturgy, is to exercise
dominion over the faith of God's people: I Return, 1. That to exercise
dominion, in the Scripture by him cited, 2 Cor. 1. 24. relates not at all to
prescribing described helps of Devotion (imposing Liturgies, or Forms of
Prayer) but, to Discipline; the sharpnesle and severity of that; (not sparing,
it is called, verse. 23.) 2. What advantage do the Enjoyners of our Liturgy
design to themselves, by the imposing of it, (other than the spiritual good of
the people, and the quiet of their Kingdoms, which is also, the peoples good?)
Now, that is the meaning of Saint Paul's saying, ((...)) Not that we exercise
dominion, etc. as appears by Saint Matthew. 20. 25. and 1 Pet. 5. 3. 3. The
Apostles did what unquiet spirits (like our Author) would account more
burdenous and domination-like, than the imposing of a godly Liturgy, viz.
inflict the censures, excommunicate, deliver over to Satan, to be possessed or
obsessed by him, and (as a consequent thereof) to have diseases, and sickness,
and death inflicted on them. Now would such tender consciences, as Mr. P's (and
the rest, that pretend to the same frame) brook, such rough treatment, that
charge the prescription of a wholesome Liturgy, so tragically?

To his Twelfth, That then the Rulers of all Nations have the power to form,
and c. Liturgies, and consequently Arian, Popish, and c. Rulers; I Answer, That
they have such power, to compose and impose such Forms, but not as Arian or
Popish, etc. but according to the will and mind of God consigned in his Holy
Word. We plead only for orthodox, pious, not erroneous, superstitious, or
(otherwise) a Logicians call it Sophisma a dicto simpliciter, and it is when
from that which is simply true, somewhat is collected to be true (secundum
quid,) in a certain respect, time, etc.
impious Forms of Devotion. And, the proof, that ours is of this latter alloy,
is a file too hard for his teeth, or those of any its enemies. In this Reason,
then, is a manifest Fallacy, d like this: The Gage or depositum is to be
restored to the Owner, requiring it; therefore a (gagged) Sword to the (mad)
Owner.

To his Thirteenth, That then the Liturgies must alter, as the chief Megistrate
alters opinion (King Ed. 6. Queen Ma. and Queen El. being instanced in:) I
Answer, 1. And, so will other things, besides the Liturgy, the Bible (in
English) will be under interdict, in one of their Reigr^, and released in the
other; or else translated under one of their Governments, contrariantly to what
it is, in the others. Preaching so, or so shall be (respectively to the
Magistrates opinion) commanded or interdicted. And, 2. Whenever this falls
out, you gain an opportunity of exercising your passive virtues, of approving
your constancy, and of obtaining a Crown of Martyrdom (a thing, that men of
your way are not ambitious of, being rather for injurious acting, than
suffering injurie's of God, or your selves, by not comporting with a false way
of Worship.)

To his Fourteenth, That it exposes many Christians to sin against conscience,
or suffer, etc. I Reply, 1. That many pretend conscience when it is any thing,
rather than that (as our own experience, a-late, has given very manifest
information,) humor it may be, prejudice, interest, etc. And, I make no doubt,
tha^ the refusal of Liturgies imposed, is imputable, many times to these, and
the like. 2. We plead only for a wel-composed, sound and pious Liturgy (and
such, I avow, and am ready to prove, is ours,) and none can, conscientiously,
scruple that, nor need to suffer for non-use of it. Whence, 3. if, in some
Nations, where Liturgies are, they are conscientiously scrupled, in whole or in
part, it is because they are not such, as now I spoke of, but erroneous, etc. 4.
If any Godly, (a very equivocal word, as the World go's a) Preachers and
Professors have suffered, for not conforming to Liturgy, it was 1 (I fear) no
part of their Godliness, that called upon them that suffering, and 2 God (I
doubt) will account it a Quis requisivit, who has required this at your hands?
nay, 3 consigne them to damna^^on, for breach of Divine Law enjoining obedience
to lawful Magistrates, in things lawful. 5. Barrow, Penry and Greenwood were,
deservedly and justly, hanged for their offense, and breach of I have known a
man, whose spotless life would seem, to question Adam's Fall, yet would he
startle at the name of Godly, Saint or Holy; says one. When one would have
entered a person, under the character of a Godly man, into the acquaintance and
society off me Gentlemen, one of them starts-back, and cries, Gentlemen, look
to your purses.
Law en^cted, under that most excellent Lady Queen Elizabeth, 23. Eliz: c. 2.
constituting, that offenders (such were the fore-recited Godly ones) should
suffer such pains of death, and forfeiture, as in case of Felony. And, one
would wonder (were it not, that the bypast dismal times have taught us the
prope res una, nil admirari) how Mr. Powel dares plead for seditious Criminals,
whom the good Laws of England have, justly, animadverted against. 6. For,
others, that were displaced, imprisoned, or forced to N. E. etc. I think, I may
safely say, 1 they were none of God's Martyrs or Confessors, 2 that our Bishops
were very See Doctor Heylin's Brief and Moderate Answer to Mr. Hen* Burton: c.
5. 111, 112, 113, 114, 115. They let the bridle too loose for such hard mouths,
Hist: of Eng: etc. Presbyte y c. 18. p 15^.
mild and gentle dealers, in their cases, 3 righteous also they were: for,
their punishments were in a Legal way, according to the Canons: 4 they have
since abundantly licked themselves whole again, making their (I doubt deserved)
sufferings formerly, a title of (rigorous) desert See D^ctor Hammond's
(excellent) Treatise of Taking up the Cross, p. 63.
to the greater portion of secular emoluments and dignityes (enjoyed,)
afterward; and, 5 they have, also, since abundantly revenged themselves upon
their (supposed) persecutours, by a direful wasting persecution of the
(legally established) Church of England, and the truly gallant Fathers, and
many admirable Sons thereof. See (among a thousand instances) the inhumane
carriage of Doctor Drake and Mr Bifield toward Mr. Walter Bushnel Minister of
Box, in his Book on that subject, lately abroad.
7. It was, ever, the temper of that sort of men, to be wondrously techy, and
their way to cry Persecution, if they might not have their humors, though
cross to all Orders of Church and State. Whence, if the (poor) Bishops
endeavored, to reduce them into order, a deal of popular odium was their
portion: So that, they might very appositely take up, and use that saying: Si
non rexero, Deum, si rexero, cives iratos habeam. 8. Some chose Nonconformity,
and caused themselves to be outed their Livirgs, to the end that, in that
unfixed vagabond life, they might drive a more gainful trade; have the in-come
of larger Pensions, than in their fixed station, they had, formerly, received
Tithes. See the View of New Directory, c. 2. sect. 8. p. 54. See also
Salmasius. Def: Reg: and Doctor Gauden's Hiera Dacrua. (the Books I have not,
now, by me to cite the pages.)


To his Fifteenth, Because it maintains National Churches in the days of the
New Testament, which doubtless (says he) is contrary to the Gospel; and, then,
citing Act: 10. 35. and the Apostle's mention of the Churches of Judea,
Galatia, etc. Answer, 1. That national Churches may be (utcunque) maintained
without Liturgies, witness the Kirk of Scotland, which would endure none,
since John Knox's. 2. So to do, is not contrary to the Gospel; and his proofs
are, either vain, or (adversa front) fight against himself. There may be
National Churches, though in every Nation he that fears God, etc. be acceptable
with him; as he that fears God, in this National Church of England. And, even
in that of France, etc. of the Roman Communion, I do^bt not but sundry fear
God, and find his acceptance, whatever such asthmatical-breasted, and
strait-laced Factionists, as our Author, think, or say, to the contrary. 3. If
there were Churches of Judea, and Galatia, etc. (Nations distinct,) then were
there (then) National Churches. 4. National Churches in that sense, as wherein
a Christian Nation has Articles of Religion, and a Model or Form of Worship,
differing, or contrary to those of other Nations, are necessary; because
Christendom is under diverse Kings and Governors, that have chief or
Sovereign Rule; and is (withal) so split into several sentiments and opinions,
touching the things of God, that, unless they will all consent or conspire in
error, or will all embrace truth (whereof the former is to be deprecated or
averted, the latter not hoped, though desired,) it is impossible, that there
should be the like coal^tion into Oneness of Religion, as there was in the
(golden) days of the Apostles. Now, whatever Necessity (truly such)
constrains, it defends or legitimates. Necessitas quicquid cogit defendit,
Senec. Contrcvers. l. 9. Non, necess^tas accersita.
5. If he would have every man allowed, to be of what Religion he pleases to
adopt, and not be bound, to depend upon the National establishment, as to
spirituals, I say, 1. it was not so in the Apostles time, (every one was not
then permitted to opine and maintain, as himself listed:) 2. This course
would take all peace, love and friendly fellowship from a Nation or Kingdom.
3. St. Paul's (...), Heb. 13. 17. Of the dangers of such as obey not their
spiritual Rulers, see a retable place of Calvin. ^n this Text -- fine or optiae
salutis jactura, non --
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give an account, etc. would have no place.

There follow two Objections about National Churches (with their respective
Answers;) but, they are so very sleazy, that, as I cannot but deem them to
proceed out of his own pack, so ^ shall wholly over-leap them, and come to His
Sixteenth Reason, which is, Because it tends to make the seed of the Woman, and
Serpent one, etc. which (he says) is the main end thereof, but contrary to
Scripture. Answer ^. If the seed of the Serpent be taken in a divided sense,
As, God justifies the ungodly, i. e. that were ung^d^y. Romans 4. 5.
that is, if he Book tend, to make that which was such, before, Now not to be,
but to become the other seed, this is very far from blasting the design of
the Book; rather, sets a Character of excellency on it: and yet, this to do,
the Book was designed, and is very apt; however, It requires the preaching of
the Word, assigns the place where the Sermon shall come in, and has prayers
for a blessing upon it, which sure will be allowed influentiall to this end. 2.
It would be considered against the Congregationalists or Independents (of which
kidney Mr. P. and his fellow-Sectaries are,) That the Church is compared to a
Field, Matthew. 13. 12. 24. 38. and 13. 47. See als^ ^ Tim. 2. 20. Phil. 3. ^^ 18
1 These. 2 12. 2 These. 3 11. Matthew. 25. 2. 33. and 3. 12.
where Tares, seen of all men, grow intermingled with the good Corn, and so
shall continue to the end of the World Perplexae sunt iftae duae Civitates
(Domini and Satanae) in hoc seculo, invicemque permistae, S. August. ^e Civ.
Dei l. ^. c. ^5, p. 16. B.
; and, to a Net wherein are Fishes good and bad, and some which comes
thereunto, neither is, nor seems Fish. And, what evil is it, if National (or
Parish) Churches be of like nature with the Universal one? 3. It Is the
judgment of the English Church, after, and consentiently with the Fathers, That
our B. Lord communicated Judas, See D. Hammond 's Practical Catech. p. 462,
463, 464 (irrefragably.) See also Mr. Morice (largely and learnedly) on this
matter, in New Enclosures broken down.
also, who was, then, in full purpose to betray him; and was discovered, before
that, to be a Devil. 4. He know;, that the Scotch-English League illegal
pretended, to aim at this Union, That the Lord might be one, and his Name one,
(you remember the idiome.)

To his Seventeenth, Because the wickedest People do earnestly desire, and
willingly observe it. Ans. 1. By giving God hearty thanks, and sincerely
rejoicing, that the (venerable) Book is in such estimation and honor (more,
than I could have dreamed on U^bem qua^ dicunt Romam, Meli^oee, pu^avi, Stultus
ego, huic nostrae similem -- Virg. Ecl. 1.
) 2. Though he says, they are the wickedest People, that so prize it; I say,
wicked (as well as godly) carries a great homonymie in it, in this age of ours.
Neither are they godly, that these times (mostly) dub so, nor they (many
times) wicked, which they so brand. When men place Religion in opinions, he is
the only godly man, that jumps in judgment with them; all wicked that can not
or will not opine, as they do. 3. For his two Scriptures Exodus 32. 1 etc. Hosea
5. 11.
, as the former concerns the whole V. 3. all the people.
people, and they could not be the wickedest; and so, sure, he is not serious,
when he insinuates the Common Prayer Book, to be an Idol-God, or a Molten Calf;
so, the latter concerns not the people at all, but the Judges; Ephraim is
broken in judgment: because he willingly walked after the commandment, that is,
because, the Judges gave themselves [sordibus See Grotius in Loc. Quoniam
coepit ire post fordes.
], that is, to filthy avarice, says the Chaldee. These Texts then are ((...))
nothing to the purpose. 4. If these same People (the wickedest ones) should
follow and hunt-after Mr. P. and those of his confraternity, and their
Sermonings, he would, no doubt, give them anothergets Testimonial, and pass
the thing under these or the like good words: The people shall be willing in
the day of thy power, Ps. 110. 3.
or, The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force; S. Mat. 11. 12.
or, The Lord has a great Harvest in such or such a place, but laborers want;
or, they had been assimilized to the people, in Exodus C. 35. v. 5. 6.
, so liberal to God's service, as that they were feign to be restrained. So
that, it is seasonable, here, to demand, why Mr. P. permits himself to offend
against Salomons Prohibition, Prove. 20. 10. by having diverse weights? And, it
must not be pl^aded (which, yet he has that Charter of boldness, as to plead
it,) that his and his fellowes-theirs are the pure Ordinances of God, and This,
not:) for, this Plea wanting proof, is but a (shameful) begging of the
Question.

To the Eighteenth, Because the best Rulers, etc. in Judah, did no such thing,
but brought the People back to Gods institution -- set not up any invention of
their own: I Reply, 1. That the best Rulers did compose and impose Liturgies
(that is, Forms,) so did Moses, so Hezekiah, so Ezra, See Answ. to his Reason
fifth.
etc. 2. His Texts Josuah 1. 8. 12, 13. 2 Chro 17. 9. and 34. 15. Nehem. 8. 1.
Ezr: 6. 18.
signify nothing to the purpose, as relating not to Liturgies, any more then
to Sermons, etc. or, if they did, we pretend and pertend that our Liturgy is
according to Gods Word. For, 3. we say, that our Rulers and Reformers did
search the Word of God, and conformed our whole Establishment or Polity to it,
exactly. He that deems otherwise, let him c^nfute Bishop Bilson, Downham, Hall,
and (the invaluable, peerless) Dr Hammond, etc. in defense of Bishops, Dr
Cousins Dean of the Arches, in maintenance of the proceeding in Courts
Ecclesiastical. Bishop Bancroft's two Books touching the pretended Holy
Discipline, and the very judicious Mr R. Hooker, in propugnation of our
Liturgy. Let him or them try his or their teeth, (I say,) upon this file, or
files.

To his Nineteenth, Because it is not lawful to put a yoke on Christ's
Disciples, etc. Answ. 1. That no wonder, such sons of Belial, as some are, take
shadow at all commands There being two precepts, ^ne of obeying Authority, the
other of not giving scandal* that ought to be preferred, especially since in
disobeying there is scandal also: things once indifferent, being made by the
precept of Authority more than indifferent, it is not in our power to omit or
refuse them; the pious Mr G. Uerberts Priest to the Temple, p. 103.

See Calvin for the usefulness of such Ceremonies, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. Sect.
14.


of men, yea, of God too, that thwart or interfere with their interests or
humors. 2. It is most irrationally (but, withal, very impotently) done, to
compare a Godlywell-formed Liturgy with a 1. few, 2. salubrious, 3.
significant Ceremonies (ancient, innocent, and indifferent) to the whole
Mosaical Paedagogie, or Ritual of ceremonies, which had nothing good in them,
but as commanded by God: (for, to that his place, Act. 15. refers) And, 3. we
may say (and make it good against him,) that they were far from being best able
to judge, who have complained of them, as a yoke. It Is the worst wheel in the
Cart that creaks most or first. The World has had good experience, now, of the
Anti-Cerimonians.

To his Twentieth, Because no blessing to be expected on them, as not Commanded
of God: Answ. 1. Forms are commanded, and, therefore, we may (groundedly)
expect his blessing upon the use of them. 2. His Scriptures Exodus 23. 25. Deuteronomy.
7. 9. and 28. 2.
are nothing to the purpose, as will be visible, at the first glance, to him
that looks. 3. Let so many happy days together, be showed in any Kingdom, as,
under the use of the Liturgy, England enjoyed.

To his Twenty first Reason (which is a Dilemma:) Because, if they are
indifferent, they are not to be imposed; if not indifferent, then a prescript
from God is to be showed, under Peril of Will Worship: I Answer to the first
Member, That in themselves, (though highly advantageous, yet they are
indifferent, but, when Authority has interposed, they cease to be so;
indifferent in their nature, Res per se mediae desinunt tales esse ubi pacis
aut ordmis causa lex aut canon factus est, aut consue^udo legis vim accepit Ab
initio non multum refert utrum fiat: constituta autem lege plurimum, air
Aristoteles Nicom: 5. 10. Et qui Ecclesiis singulis aut co^pori universo hanc
adimunt potestatem, adimunt ei quod cognatum est omnibus societatibus: H. Grot.
Annotatis ad Cassandr: ad Art: XV.

Every body social has right to make certain constitutions, for the hinding of
its members. That this right belongs to the Church, also, appears, Act. 15. 28.
Hebr. 13. 17. Grotius 's Discussio, of the power of Princes in Sacris.


but necessary in their practice. To what purpose, else, were they composed;
seeing 'twere as good to have none at all, as for every man to have the
authority, to neglect them See Bishop Andrews XXI. Sermon. of Resur: on 2 Cor:
XI. 15. p. 522.
? necessary, in regard of obedience, peace, uniformitie, if the Magistrates
fiat have passed upon them; for, then, the conscience is concluded, and bound
in vigor of that Oracle, Romans 13. 5. (and, let this be carried in mind, as
applicable to all our Ceremonies.) To the second Member, 1. We shall contend
for ever, that every thing in the service of God is not, need not be under
particular Precept of Scripture, much (we avow, and will maintain it) is to be
left to the Church guided by rules of Prudence, and light of natural Reason;
and this is, profoundly and inexpugnably, evinced by the fatal Pen of Mr Hooker
against T. C. by Dr (Shismaticorum Malleus.)
Hammond, frequently; by Dr Sanderson, etc. 2. There is a good sense of
Will Worship (willing or voluntary Worship,) and this is the only acceptance,
wherein it is taken, in all the Scripture. The Text, which he cites, Col. 2.
23. (which is the only place wherein it is used) has it in a good and savourie
import, as has been, most acutely and most nervously, made out, and
vindicated, by the so often praised Dr Hammond. I shall only touch, one or two
reasons out of the Tract Tract of Will Worship, Sect. 12. p. 43 and Sect. 11.
p. 42. and Sect. ^. p. 41. and Account of Mr Cawdrey's Triplex Diatribe, Sect.
7. p. 114. 115. etc.
(Of Will Worship:) 1. It Is said by the Apostle, Which things have indeed a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, etc. Now, hence it is argued: That,
in respect to which another thing has a show of wisdom or (which is the same)
piety, St Chrysostom and Theophylact on the place render or vary (...) by
(...).
must not it self be something foolish or impious (must be a good thing:) for,
can any thing be represented to me as having so much as a show of piety, in
respect to rage or lust discernable in it? 2. The company wherewith it stands
or goes accompanied (humility, which Calvin turns, here, the reverence of God
and men; undoubtedly a Christian Virtue; punishing, not sparing, or (as Calvin
again, varies the phrase,) mortifying of the body, which, as an act of
self-denial, cannot be unacceptable to Christ) plead for it, and bring up a
good report on it. 3. (...) (by us translated, show) may signify, rationem
sapientiae vel pietatis, real matter of wisdom or piety. But, see the
exquisite Treatise, and its Defense against Mr Cawdrey; and his Annotations on
the place, together with the learned Author of the Additionals Twelfth
Additional (on the second Commandment) p. 194, 195. See Grot. in Col. 23. and
Votum pro pace 100, 101, 102, 103. and Apol. Rivet. Discuss. p. 101, 110, etc.
Bishop Andrews on Mat. 6. ^6. p. 124, etc. and on 1 Cor: 11. 16.
to Bishop Andrews's Pattern of Catechistical Doctrine (in Folio. I have heard
by a very ingeni us Hand, that Mr Dod was of this opinion, as to the word
(...), Col. 2. 23.
) 3. Liturgy in its generical signification (as a Form of Prayer) is under
command; but considered qua Liturgy (a Form, so or so modelled and composed)
it is (as being but a mode) left to the Churches discretion, for its composure
and Frame, as She shall deem it most for edification or Devotion. Remember, all
things are not (no, nor were, under the Old Oeconomie) under particular
praescription.

To his Twenty second, Because the joining of an imperfect thing with a
perfect, for to be a Rule, is to debase the perfect, say (says he) the
learned, particularly Bishop Andrews on II. Com: Answ: 1. I shall not tell
him, that the Work, he cites, is (at least, as he cites it) imperfect, and the
issue of Bishop Andrews, not Bishop Andros, I mean of Bishop A. a Younger man,
not of Bishop A. so consummated, as when he blessed the World with his Sermons,
and other his (tipe) Pieces. Nor, 2. shall I tell him, that it is very
unlikely, that that Personage of immortal renown, would, even when he was
Divinitie-Lecturer in ^embroke-Hall, lay down or assert any thing, that should
cross with, or brand his practice. However, 3. What thinks he of the Old
Scripture (the Law, especially,) which is, now, read as a Rule, and yet, is
imperfect, See H. Grotius De Jure B^lli and Pacis, l. 1. Sect. 6. p. 21, 22.
and (in Annotat:) p. 38 S. Ch^ysost: l. de Virginitate c. 83 (...). Id. in
Oratione filium Patri aequalem, quae est Tomo 6. air in Evangelio ^sse (...).
See also Grotius in Notes on the first Chapter of the (said) book, p. 14, 15.
See likewise Dr Hammond's Copy of some Papers, past at Oxford, etc, p. 41.
in comparison of the New Instrument: perfect, for that state of men; but, an
higher state and (consequently) a more exalted Law or Philosophy was to be
introduced. Now, hereupon, I ask, Does the Old Scripture debase the New? 4.
(But, that 'twould move his gall or spleen) I would say, that the Apocryphal
Scripture, which is a Rule of manners, a secondarie Canon Morum,
Deutero*canonici libri.
Canon or Rule, is, and has been, in all ^ges of the Christian Church, joined,
read, cited with the Canonical (properly, or strictly so called,) and yet, it
has not been, is not, must not be, thought to debase It. 5. What if I should
say, Master, in so saying (as in the Reason,) thou reproachest us, the Geneva,
Dutch See p. 6. of his Pamphlet.
Notes, that fringe the Margin of the Bibles; and the Directorie of his good
Brethren or Fathers. (Con^^er me Directorie.) 6. Nay, what says he, by his own
prayings, and Pilpetings? are not these intended for a Rule (in con^unction
with Gods pure Word,) to his Auditors? and yet, 'twere well, if these were
only imperfect, as humane, and not perfectly Diabolical (too often.) 7. The
Common Prayer Book, is In the fourth Council of Chalcedon, the Book of the
Canons, as well as the Bible, was solemnly brought in at the opening of the
Council, and called for to be read before them, as occasion required. And, it is
sufficiently known what Justellus observes, That the Christian Church was ruled
of old by a double Law. Divine, the Book of the Canonical Scriptures, and
Canonical, the Codex of Canons, called their (...).

See Dr Hammond against Owen, Answer to the Animadversions, p. 4.


not, pretends not to be, a Rule of Faith and Obedience; nor in any such
respect, is it added to the Bible: It Is only an Ad^ument to Devotion; and that
it may produce those advantages, that are naturally consequent from the
apportioned holy use of it, the Civil Sanction has interposed it self, and
imposed it: though this, also, will take place, as a truth, that, because legem
Credendi, lex statuit supplicandi, (as says the Patriarch Gennadius) the
Common Prayer Book, containing an excellent Form of the one, does
(accidentally, yea, and directly, in its Readings, and Confessions of Faith)
reigle and assist the other. 8. If men can call their Sermons (and the
appellation is ordinary) the Word of God And, the title may be brook'd, if, and
while, they are taken from the Word of God, and grounded thereon, and so far as
they depart not from that which is written; Thorndike of Religious Assemblies,
p. 177.
(and so, if That be a Rule, these will lay claim to be no less,) then, sure,
a pious Liturgy, perfectly conform to the Word of God, (the Result of many
grave and learned Heads, and pious Martyrlie Hearts) may lay so much better
pretense to the title, by how much conjoined abilityes (caeteris paribus) are
liker to judge aright what is conform to the Divine Word, and to frame their
Issues and Compositions thereafter, than single divided strengths or endowments
are.

To the Twenty Third, Because they were not known in the Churches, either in
the Apostles time, or for CC years after, citing ^ertullian's [sine monitore
quia, de pectore], Apol. c. 39. and Justin's [(...)] Apol. 2. I Answer
(manifoldly,) 1. Strange, that those, that are Antipaters, in other matters,
count the Fathers as Feathers, and will not be concluded by them, against their
own interests, though as Testifiers in a matter of Fact, should, here, so
promptlie, and peremptorily fly to them, and make use of their Authority. 2.
I say, that his consequence may, reasonably, be denied, and that
reasonableness may be viewed, in the learned Herbert Thorndike's Book, Of
Religious Assemblies p. 232, 233.
. 3. But, not insisting, there, I add, and aver, that no time of the Church
can be shown after the Apostles, and the period of extraordinary Graces,
wherein a prescript form of public Service has not been used; much less,
that any such thing is proved, by the words of the two Fathers cited. They
inform the Powers of the Empire, what the Christians did, at their Assemblies.
And, particularly, for Tertullian, he, in several particulars, showing the
difference 'twixt the Orizons or Devotional Addresses of Heathens and
Christians, tells them (as one of these,) that, whereas they (Heathens) had
their Remembrancers, to suggest the Devotions they addressed to their several
Deities (lest they should pray to Ceres for wine, and Bacckus for corn,) which
he calls Monitours; There is a reason why the Heathen had promp^ers to
suggest unto them the devotions which they addressed to several Deities,
because they counted several Deities properly able to bestow several blessings,
and accordingly held several rites proper for their service, which it was
sacrilege to perform otherwise. Thorndike, Of Assem: 431, 432. (inter Addenda)
where he cites a pertinent place out of Arnob: con: Gentes III. See S. Aug. de
Civ. l. 4, 22 and l. 6. c. 1.
the Christians prayed, without Monitours, because they prayed by heart; the
words (that Father being, always, affected, to imitate the Greek) being a
translation of that, which is called in Greek, (...), in English, to say by
heart: and, so, they could not have showed a passage more pregnant with the
sense they intended to destroy, That they prayed by prescript Form. For
Justine, they should know, that (however they, unskilfullie or partiallie
confound them) there is great difference between, (...), and (...), according
to his ability, and with all his might See this difference confirmed by the
aforesaid learned man from the Hebrew^, in the places cited above and below.
; and, look how much the difference is, the mistake, it makes, is no less,
being thus: They will needs make Justine dream, as much as themselves do, of
making show of men's faculties in conceiving prayers, who speaks of nothing
but their earnestness of Devotion, with which, he says, the Bishop or
Presbyter came to consecrat^ the Eucharist; more proper, without doubt, to that
prime point of Gods service; which he, thus, expresses, That he sends forth
prayers and thanks giving with ALL HIS MIGHT; herein meaning neither more, nor
less, than before, speaking of the Common Prayers of the People, which, he
says, they made, (...) or earnestly. But, for fuller (and highest)
satisfaction, the Reader is besought, to have recourse to the abovesaid learned
man, as directed in the Marg: H. Thorndike of Religious Assemblies, p 234. 235,
236. See the same, also, farther made good, in the same Treatise, p. 335, 338.
See, also, the same Answer, (somewhat) improved, to the Objections out of these
two Fathers, in Dr Featleye's Dippers Dipped, p. 64.
While I say 3. That these are Smectymnuus-their (goodly) Arguments, which like
twice or thrice sodden Coleworts (and as often kicked from the table) are, here,
set before us, by this Anabaptist, (where, let me, by the way, interpose; were
not Archbishop Whitgift, and Mr Hooker Prophets, Prudentia est quaedam
providentia.
when they pronounced, that Puritanisme would be the Mother of Anabaptistry in
England, giving them their very grounds of opinion and practice See Bp
Sanderson 's (excellent) Preface to his XVI. Sermons, 2^
?) 4. Let the Reader take notice, that those Arguments or Objections fight
against all Forms (whether they be Liturgies properly so called, or no,) and
then how senselessely does it follow, for contirmation of his Reason, that
Constantine made Forms for his Soldiers to use: Ergo, there were no other but
extemporarie or conceived prayers, such as were sent forth according to
ability, then used? that is, there were no prescript public Forms, i. e.
Liturgies, because there were such. But, 5. we say, that in the Age An: 250.
with Tertullian, and before Constantine, flourished S. Cyprian upon certain
passages of whose writings, even the Magdeburgian Centurists have, truly,
inferred, Cent: 3.
that in his days, out of all peradventure, they had certain Forms of short
prayers and Responds. And in the fourth Centurie (Constantine's Age) Eusebius,
that wrote his Life, (besides the Ecclesiastical Story of all the times of the
Christian Church, till then,) testifies, that that Emperor commanded an
elaborate or studied Form of Prayer (...), Eusebius. de Vit: Constable. Ed: Rob:
Steph. fol: 150.
to be penned by some Bishop, and used on Lords-daies. In this Age also, the
Council of Laodicea (...).
inordered, That every morning and evening, the same Service or Form of Prayer
should be used. And, some few years after this, the second Council of Milevis
ordered, thus: It Placuit etiam illud, etc. Balsamon upon this Canon, (...),
that is, It seems some Bishops took upon them to say prayers not accustomed.
See Thorndike (as above) p. 242, etc.
seemed good also, that those Prayers or Masses (once a good word,) which have
been allowed in the Council, whether Prefaces or Commendations or Impositions
of hands, be frequented of all; so that, none at all be said in the Church, but
such as have been treated of by the more discreet, or allowed in the Synod,
lest perhaps something against the Faith be proposed, either through ignorance,
or too little heed. And, this was ordained, because inconvenience was
perceived, by the unconformitie of particular Episcopal Churches, upon
alteration made by the Ministers of them, in their Form of Service. Therefore,
it is provided, that the Service to be used, be first approved in the usual
Synod of the Affrican Churches, that all Episcopal Churches of those Provinces
might be conformable. But, this supposes a Form, which those Churches had; how
should, else, provision be made against alteration in it? But, I have stood too
long in Answer to this Reason (ab Authoritate;) but, yet, because it derives
authority from Smec: and (though it has been so often elided, or super seded
from all manner of force,) is yet brought in play, or to the combat (like an
(...),) as appears by this Pamphlet, and another (late one) of G. F. (Fitmin's)
against Dr Gauden's (worthy) Considerations touching the Liturgy, I was
willing to show the groundlesnesse of the pertinacity of the Anti-Liturgists,
by demolishing (an aierie, imaginary, yet whereto they fly, as to a strong,
Piece) this Fortresie of theirs,

The Twenty fourth, which calls Liturgies Elements and Rudiments of the World,
leading men from Christ unto bondage, is (in effect) satisfied already In Answ:
to Reason 2d.
. His Scripture (for, the other, Col. 4. 8. is spoken to, already,) Gal. 4. 3.
speaks of the observation of those first rudiments of the Worship of God, in
the Jews Religion, which, sure, the very-Christian Liturgy of England is not.

The Twenty fifth, Because in matters of Religion, the Word of God only must
prevail, etc. is super seded already, in our Answer to Reason 3d. I add, That
it is true in matters of Faith, importing Heaven and Hell in men's belief, but
not in lesser matters, circumstances, modes, externals, wherein the Scripture
defines nothing, in sundry cases, and which (consequently) are left to the
inordering of the Church. S. Augustine speaking to this matter, on occasion of
fasting on Sundaies, has a Golden Rule. Epist: CXVIII. ad Casulanum. In iis
rebus de quibus nihil statuit Scriptura, mos populi Dei and instituta majorum,
pro lege Dei tenenda sunt.
-- In those things whereto the Scripture appointed no certainty, the use of
the People of God, or the Ordinances of our Fathers must serve for a Law.

To his Twenty Sixth Reason, Because it does derogate from Christ, as both
Prophet and King, as if he had not left sufficient Laws. I Answer; This
Argument (how the Asp sucks poison from the Viper!) was accounted a very
palmarie one by Cartwright and his Puritanical Sectatours, in this Form M. M.
p. 16. and Demonstration of Discipline, c. ^ apud Hooke^ l. 3. p. 112.
: He that was faithful as Moses, left as clear instruction for the Government
(matters) of the Church. But Christ was as faithful as Moses. But, to this we
say many things, 1. That Christ was faithful, and concealed not any part of
his Fathers Will: for, he testified; S. John 17. 8. See Mr Hooker,
Irrefragably, clearing and confirming this matter, against the Puritanes Pope,
l. 3. p. 112, 113, 114. 115. 120, 131. of Eccl: Pol:
I have given them the words which thou gave me; and, yet, this does not
exact, that Christ should ordain such Modes or Circumstances, as the Reason
requires. 2. If such kind of reasoning were good, we might even as directly
conclude the very same, concerning Laws of Secular Regiment, or matters. For,
the Disciplinarians words are these: Ecclesiast: Dis. l. 1.
In the ancient Church of the Jews, God did command, and Moses commit unto
writing, all things pertinent, as well to the Civil, as to the Ecclesiastical
State See Dr Sanderson's ten Lectures de Conscientia, Praelect. 6. 30. p. 246.
(Mr P. may see them in English (though somewhat disguisingly) translated.
. Now, does it derogate from God, as Creator or Father, from his favor or care,
that he has not left such sufficient Laws in Civil things, as he did to and
for the Jews? Can God be hence argued, less to regard our temporal state in
this World, or provide worse than for theirs? Christ meant not to set down
particular positive Laws for all things, so as Moses did; as the very-different
manner of delivering of their respective Laws, plainly shows. Moses had
commandment to gather the Ordinances of God together distinctly, and orderly to
set them down, according to their several kinds (for, each public duty and
office, the Laws belonging thereunto:) Contrarily, the Laws of Christ are
rather mentioned by occasion in the Writings of the Apostles, than any solemn
thing directly written, to comprehend them in legal sort. 4. The Jews, who had
Laws so particularly determining, and so fully instructing them, in all
affairs, were yet, continually, inured with cases See Number. 15 34 and 9. 7. and
29. 5.
exorbitant, and such as their Laws had not provided for. 5. As, says Dr
Sanderson, from Moses giving many Laws both in Rituals and Judicials to the
People of the Jews, we rightly gather, that it was Gods mind and pleasure, that
that People, under that Pedagogie and Discipline, as by a certain Yoke of
servitude, should be so kept, in their duty, as to have but very small
liberty: so, from Christ's imposing but very ^^w Laws of Ceremonies on the
Christian Church, we duly collect, it was Gods intent, that the Magistrate and
People Christian, in such things, should be left to their liberty, etc. Upon
the strength of which Argument, observation, or consideration, he avows, that
scarce any thing could be brought more to incommode their own cause, and more
to establish ours, th^n the argument, which they derive from the comparison
twixt Moses and Christ's faithfulness See the forecite^) ten Lectures,
Pr^^ect: 6. 31. p. 248, 249.
. 6. Even in that People, Wh^ were more strictly ^yed to prescriptions and
forms, then Christians.
many things were done (piously, and with approbation of God,) which were under
no express Command, and wherein they were not guided, by any former
precedents, nor exspected any other warrant, than the use of their reason, and
of prudential discourse See Bishop Sanderson 's Pref: to his XIV. Sermens, and
his ^ectures of Censcience, Lect: 6. p. 248.

See concerning the Fea^t of the Dedication and of P^rim, Dr Hammond against
Cawdrey, particularly c. 7. 17. p. 278. 282.


. What warrant else had Solomon for keeping a Feast of seven days, for the
Dedication of the Altar, 2 Chro. 7. 8, 9.? Or what Hezekiah for continuing the
Feast of unleavened Bread longer, than the time appointed by the Law, 2 Chro.
30. 25? Or what Mordecai and Esther for making an Ordinance, for the yearly
observation of the Feast of Purim, Esth. 9. 20? Or what, lastly, Judas and the
Maccabees, for ordering the feast of the Dedication of the Altar, to be kept
from year to year, at a set season, for eight days together, 1 Mac. 4. 9?
whereat our B. Lord was present, and approved it. We might instance the
building of Synagogues in their Towns; the wearing of sackcloath and ashes,
approved by Christ, S. Matthew. 9. 11, 12. the IV. Feasts, Zech. 8. 19. Dies
jejunii anniversaries non Deus tantum instituerat, sed addiderat aliquos
p^pulus, in ^erum tristium memoriam: quod an populo licear, disp^tari hoc
seculo mirarer, nisi contradicendi libido omnia de certis incerta faceret.
Grot. in c. VII. Zech. v. 3. Vide e^ndem in Esther IX, 23. de diebus Purim; and
in Jer. XXXV. 6.
and other matters. See Hooker, l. 3. p. 94. 95, 121. and l. 5 Sect. 71. p. 389.
Likewise, we might annex, out of the Great H. Grotius's Notes Artic de
Potestate Ecclesiae.
on Cassander, Christ's and his Apostles-their observance of the
Sabbath-daies-journey See Grot. Annot. ad V. Test. in Josh, 3. 4.
, defined or ordained by the wise men of the Jews; his mention of an hour
before and an hour after the Sabbath, added for the more caution; as, also,
concerning (...), Id. in Deuteronomy. 252. de non excedendo quadragenatio numero
plagarum. See also Hooker, l. 3. p. 62. and p, 79.
their not exceeding the number of XI. stripes, 2 Cor. 11. 24. Well says the
(last-cited) pious Person: Concerning internal acts Prelates can command
nothing; nor add any thing to the heads of Faith, or to the Law of God as a
part thereof. Concerning externals they do oblige, so far forth as they (their
laws) serve unto Gods Laws, among which is that, touching the keeping of peace
and order, and avoiding Offenses: just almost as the Physicians precept obliges
to the not-drinking of Wine in such or such health.

I have been the larger on this matter, because this, well established and
fortified, wholly routs abundance of the great and little Exceptions of the
Puritans and Anabaptists to our Liturgy and Polit^e; and because 'twill fairly
disoblige me from speaking to every one of this Author's Reasons or Objections
to them, for as much as, in sundry of them, it is but to make a reference
hither, for their full Answer.

To the Twenty seventh (and last,) Because God does not require Liturgies, and,
therefore, unlawful: I Answer, by saying (besides what is Returred to his first
Reason,) 1. That a solemm public prescript Service of God is required; and
such is a Liturgy. (^emind what I have said for the authority Scriptural of
Forms.) 2. If we could not show the Requirie of them by express Scripture, yet
if they are grounded on Reason, not contrary to H. Writ, according to S.
Augustine, it is enough Epist: 18. Quod non prohibitum est, Ultro permissum
est, Tert.
. But, 3. (for brevities sake) the Reader is referred to the judicious, meek
Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 3. ^. p. 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66. and, indeed, to his
whole third Book, where he shows, how weak and worthless are all the
pretensions of ^^r Cartwright and his followers, That the Scriptures must be
the Rule to direct in all things, even so far as to the taking up of a rush or
straw Hooker l. 3. p. 54.
(T. C's. o^n words.)

ANd, thus, I have washed my hands of his Reasons, such (indeed) as belie their
name, being, for the most part, utterly reasonless, So that, what Cicero Ep: 3.
l. 7. ad At: Caussam solum illa caussa non habet.
said of Caesar's Cause, viz. That it had no cause, is applicable to these
Plea's against Liturgies, they have no reason in them.

Next, he will (having proceeded, thus far, (...)) proceed next (...), Answer the
Arguments, that we levy for Liturgies (sufficiently, (though) cutting the
locks of those Sampsons he means to bind.)

To our 1. Argument for them drawn from their not being prohibited either
directly, or consequentially; and, therefore, lawful. He Answers, by
distinguishing of things civil and spiritual, saying, That, in the former, the
Argument will hold good, not in the latter. But we take away this Answer, by
referring the Reader to full satisfaction, in our Answ: to Reas: 26. His making
Civil things as contradistinct to the worship of God, and things that are mere
indifferent to be (...) (of the same import) I passe-by, without noting, that,
sure, it is not Indifferent, to obey (or otherwise) our Civil Parent, and the
like. But, whereas he makes the Additional of Examples to Commands, for
constituting the entire Rule, in things Spiritual, (excluding practicing upon
Negatives;) this is that inconsiderate, groundless thing, which Dr Sanderson
has noted, and exploded Pref: to his XIV. Sermons, Paragraph 10. p. 101, 102.
. For, the^e being Examples both good and evil, in Scripture, and no way
(according to them) to know, whether (of the two) any Example be, but by having
recourse to Divine Command or Prohibition, who sees not, that their Rule is
resolved, solely, into Commands? and, if, in every thing, both in Worship, and
common Life (as Cartwright extends, and pretends etc.) we must (excluding the
law of Nature, prudential Discourse, common Discretion or Judgment) expect
Commands of Scripture; as it is an Impossible, so the belief of the Whim or
Resuerie, is attended with sad consequences See Hooker l. 2. p. 79. 80.
. His 5 Reasons for this his Answ: are all superseded, by what I have said, in
Answ: to Reas: 26. That so rife in the mouths of our Adversaries (by Misnomer)
called Protestants, fetched from the Command to make all things according to the
pattern in the Mount Exodus 25. 40. etc
, is wholly, thereby, evertuated, as, also, that 2. from the House's Ezekiel: 43.
10, etc.
being under so punctual prescription; 3. that derived from the Prophets
directing of obedience to the Word of God, in all things; 4. the Baptist's,
Christ's, S. Paul's holding the same course, that the Prophets abovesaid did.
To these, and whatever else can be urged in this kind, we say (in the words of
Mr Hooker L. 1. p. 45. Sect. 15. and l. 2 p. 62. and p. 79.
,) To urge any thing upon the Church, requiring that religious assent of
Christian belief, wherewith the words of the holy Prophets are received; to
urge any thing as part of that supernatural and celestially-received truth,
which God has taught, and not to show it in Scripture; this is, evermore, to
be thought unlawful, impious, execrable. Again, The testimonies of God are
true, the testimonies of God are perfect, the testimonies of God are
all-sufficient unto that end, for which they are given. Therefore, accordingly,
we do receive them, we do not think, that in them, God has omitted any thing
needful for his purpose, and left his intent to be accomplished by our
devisings. What the Scripture purposes, that in all points it does perform.
But, then, we say, also (as to this case, and in the same excellent man's
words:) Matters of faith, and in general, matters necessary to salvation, are
of a different nature from ceremonies, order, etc. that the one are necessary
to be expressly contained in the Word of God, or else manifestly collected out
of the same, the other not so; that it is necessary not to receive the one,
unless there be something in Scripture for them: the other free, if nothing
against them be alleged (all which see irrefragably made good throughout his
third Book.)

To his 2. Answ: to the Argument (of his own propounding) for Liturgies, which
is a burdening such latitude or liberty (as is expressed in the Argument) in
things pertaining to God, with ugly consequenir or sequels; as if thence would
be established the five new ments of the Papists, Organs, etc. nay, the Pope
himself. Answ: 1. (Upon supposition of the truth of this Exception,) that
Incommodum non solvit argumentum. 2. That some of those things instanced, are
denied indirectly or consequentially in Scripture: For, the first, the five new
Sacraments (taking Sacrament for an immediate Ordinance or Institution of
Christ's, generally necessary to salvation,) in regard Christ is recorded in H.
Scripture, to have instituted or ordained but two such, the introducing more
such, is indirectly forbidden. In such high matters, we acknowledge that of
Tertullian De Monogamia l. 2.
, The Scripture denies what it notes not Non credius qui^ nonm legimus, S.
Hieron: adv: Helvidiu^. De nonscrip is non est fides.
. For his second instance (Organs,) we hold them perfectly lawful, and fairly
useful; neither are they to be defamed as Jewish; for, it must be proved, that
every thing Jewish (not typical or praesignificative of Christ, nor held with
an opinion of necessary to justification See, below.
) is unlawful, under the Gospel. I will not stand, to demand their reason See
Hooker l. 5. Sect. 38. p. 259. Peter Martyr says, that in Music rightly
ordered, tria bonorum genera, concurrunt: honestum, utile, jucundum. In Judic.
XV.
, why instrumental Music, as a legal Ceremony, is more abrogated, on
abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, than vocal melody (which latter, also, (as
would be noted on the By,) and voice in general, is as well external and
bodily worship, as Gesture, and equally (that is, not at all) derogates from
the worship of the Father, in Spirit and Truth See this observed by the ^earned
Mede Diatribe on S. Joh. 4. 23. p. 200.
.) For his third instance, the Pope, if he be taken for the Universal Monarch
of the Church, having Jurisdiction in, and over all the World, according to his
unlimitted pretensions; we say, he is, by consequence, forbidden in the Word of
God, which plainly declares an equality of power, in all other Apostles, to S.
Peter, as appears, S. John 20. 21. and S. Matthew. 28. 19. and 18. 18. But if the
Pope be taken, as confined in, and by a Patriarchal power, and if he pretend
only to priority of place and dignity, the best See Dr Hammond of S hisme p
86, 87. and his three Defenses ^hereof.
men do not stick to yield it to the Roman Bishop, and the (...) S. Math: 10.
2. -- The first Simon --
, is acknowledged to give it him. 3. What he talks here, of the Bishops-their
Innovations and Superstitions (the calumniatorie Cry of the spiteful Enemies of
that H. Order, here, in England;) to that it is said, 1. that they were not
Innovations, but Renovations of what slacknesse of Governors, a heady Faction,
together with a profane People had brought into dis-use, 2. and if there were
any thing so innovated (really,) it was allowed by Lawh to the King and his
Metropolitan, so to do. And, for Superstitions (though h See Act (1. Eliz. c
2.) for the Uniformity of C. P. p^efi^^ to the Bo^k p. l^s^. See also D^ Heylin
's Coal from the Altar, p. 59, 60, 61, 62.
superstitious people (for, there See Dr Hammonds Tract of superstition, p. 64.
56.

Superstitionem non tantum commit^i actu^^debito, hoc est a Deo non mandato sed
and omissione actus liciti cum ab eo per conscientiam abstines. -- Unde non
tantum superstitiosus est, qui precibus media nocte in Templo Jacobi
Compostellani pe^actis plus t^^buit, quam habitis alibi: sed and qui carne
suilla abstinet, Georgii Ritschelii Dissertatio de Ceremoniis Eccl: Angl. p. 81.

Peccat qui damnat quasi peccata, quae nulla sunt. S. Aug: de lib. arb. l. 3.
c. 15.


is a negative superstition, as well as a positive) importunely and impotently
charged this on the Fathers and Sons of this Church; yet the Church or its
Canons (say what they will) is not truly chargeable (nor any of her constant
true Sons) therewith. 'Twere well, if profaneness (so much worse than
superstition) were not most deservedly chargeable on the Clergy (if they will
brook the title, and it brook them) and People of the anti-Episcopal factions.
What profanitie calls nimietie in worship is like to be true Christianity.

But, he will prove the Minor, viz. That Liturgies are forbidden consequentially,
1. Because they are not commanded, and here, the authority of the
Assemblers-their Catechism is fetched in Answ: But, we humbly take leave, to
reject the authority of Them, and to refer the Answer of him (in this arguing)
to what is, frequently, said above. That they are no Innovation (which is,
also, pretended) is proved, also, before.

To his second Proof, That they are Traditions, etc. of men, not Oracles of
God. (And, are his Preachings and Prayings such?) I have, sufficiently,
Answered, already; and, his Marginal Texts have been (some) considered,
formerly. Of the other remaining, the former (Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33.) concerns the
doing of things that import salvation or damnation, not praying after, or by
such or such a manner, or composure; and his other (Tit. 1. 14.) concerning
commands of men, that turn from the truth, relates to the false doctrines of
those (Gnostics,) which, under pretense of Christian liberty, corrupt
seducible persons, and pervert them from the Gespel: which, with what
pertinencie it is alleged against a holy Liturgy highly advantageous to
edification in the grace and worship of the Gospel, I readily report me.

Next, to a second Ob^ection sprung about the prudential determination of Modes
and Circumstances, as lawful, and (consequently) stinted Forms. ^e return;
Answer, by granting the Objection true of some M^des* as left to humane
determination: but then (by way of consideration) he presents us wirh a Heap of
prooflesse Dictates, as 1. that they must be merely civil and natural. But, if
only these are said to be so left, we lack and require his proof, the
contrary being proved by us, above. And, 2. (the good humor wo^king, or truth
constraining, or the necessity of their practices commanding, being content
(without much stick) to grant, that days, etc. (and so, he yields our
Holie-daies; for, why not as lawful, to set-apart an Anniversarie day, to
celebrate Christ's Nativitie, or Resurrection, etc. as a Parliamentarie
Victory?) and places are so left) yet that these are left to the determination
of the Churches, and Societies of Christians, not to Magistrates or Ministers
only. To which we s^y, 1. Put case, the Supreme Magistrate (the King) by the
advice of his Clergy, with the superaddition of Parliamentarie confirmation,
shall enact a Day or Days to be solemnized, as the years recurre; as this is
not done, by the Magistrate or Ministers only, but, also, by the whole People
(represented in Senate,) so we ask, is it what he would have, in this matter?
If so, he is for Holy Days; if not, yet he will be forced, to yield to the
lawfulness of it, by what we have said to his XXXVIth Reason. 2. I guess by
his mention of the Churches, etc. (in con^unction with his practices, together
with the contemplation of his being an Anabaptist-Proselyte,) that he would
have this power belonging to the Independent Congregations, among themselves.
^ut, as it is true, Non Entis non sunt Accidenti^.
that which has no Being has no Accidents, as Pertinences of it, so those
Congregations having no footing or foundation, M^ Owen would fain have found
comfo^t and countenance h^r^in from the B. Martyr Ignatiu^ 's Epistles; but,
the Bladder of his swol^e conceits is for ever pricked by Dr Ha^mond in His
Answer to Owen's Pref: to his Sain^s Perseverance.
in the Word of God, or Antiquity pure or impure, they must deposite all title
to such power, as is mentioned.

But ^. he would have it considered, that no such thing or things, (at least)
can be imposed under personal or pecuniarie Punishment. To ^^ich we say, That
good Josiah's Example fo^e-alledged (who compelled Chron: 34. ult:
all to serve God) justifies the compulsion to good things, used by the
Magistrate. 2. That Magistrates are not to bear the sword in vain Rom: 13. 4.
: but, if they suffer communions to be dilapidated, here^ies to be Propagated,
etc. they will incur that fault. 3. Let me add, if (particularly) they
suffer the spread and head of Anabaptisterie, they shall not long ^ear their
sword, at all.

He proposes 4. to consideration, That Liturgies appoint how all or most part
of Gods Worship shall be done, as Prayers, Sacraments. Answ. 1. It Is as fit (at
the least,) that Liturgies should so appoi^t, as Mr P. and his fellows, who,
su^e, actually ^etermine the Modes of those Offices they perfo^m. 2. The
Essentials and Substance, in every Institution, are in our Liturgy observed,
as from the Authority of S. Scripture, the Mode of the Office (as reason
requires) being of humane composure.

But, 5. he would have it to be considered, That Gods Word directs in all
Circumstances, by Command or Example; and, therefore, no need of Liturgies.
Answ: On those words [by Command or Example,] I have reflected, already; and
have animadverted, also, on [no need] (instead of, not lawful.) Therefore, not
diverting my self, by any stay on them, to his Reason I say, It is denied; and
pursuantly, we propo^e to be considered, 1. That if any Circumstance of Divine
Worship is left undermined, then his Reason is false, though some others should
be concluded determined. Now, his Proofs extend not to prove all appointed by
God. For, 2. there is nothing, in H. Writ, determined, concerning Vestures of
those that minister about holy things, unless he will have retrived the Jewish
Priests-their Garments, as he would have us determined to pray or worship in
Jewish Houses, (Synagogues;) (and, twill not help him, to mention S. Paul's
Cloak, out of 2 S. Timothy 4. 13. for, that is but the Translators-their
mistake; (...) for a Cloak, instead of a Roll.) 3. Concerning Prayer; whereof
he will have the gesture to be Kneeling See Doctor Hammond in Loc.
, by the authority of Scripture-Examples; why, there are Scripture Examples
also for Standing, as K. Hezekiah and the Princes are said, to bow their heads
and worship H. Grotius says, that was the manner of men praying in grief and
danger. Qui mos orantium in l^ctu aut periculo. Grot. on Dan. 6 10. See him
also on S. Matthew. 6. 5.
; and, it is well known that the Pharisee stood and prayed 2 Chronicles: 29. 30.
, (and, where is that Gesture faulted?) and, the justified Publican, we find S.
Luke 18. 11. -- 13. (...). See 2 Chr. 20. 5. Neh: 9. 4. S. Mar: 11. 25. Sine
stationibus non subsisterer mundus, Prove. Jud: See Bishop Andrews on the
Commandments, p. 216.
praying in the same posture [standing afar off;] and Micah VI, 6. it is but
bowing before the High God. How, then, do Examples fix the Prayer gesture to be
Kneeling? 4. The Synodians, in their Directorie have enacted, that when men
take their seats in the Church, they shall not kneel Direct. p. 10. See below.
(all contrary to the received laudable customs;) that they shall not kneel at
the Eucharist; that they shall not bow toward any place. I, now, would know,
upon what authority of Gods Word are these Ceremonies defi^ed by them: and
shall not add, that the last is an impracticable injunction (to bow, and not
to bow to some place;) the middle one, is not possible, to be evinced out of
Scripture (though our Author would have it so, because it is said, Christ sat
down ^. Luke 22. 14 Si superve^iatquisquam cum lectio celeb^atur, adoret tantu^
Deum, and -- aurem sollici^e accommode^, Iside: Hispalens: de divinis Officiis
l. 1. c: 10.
, when that was to the Passover Supper; but, what His Ges^ure was, at the
Ministration of his Own Supper, is not, there, recorded; and sitting (as there)
is not fit posture for distribation o^ benediction;) and the first is contrary
to Catholic practice. 5. One of his Instances is about Preaching, of which I
ask, Are all the Circumstances and Modes of that defined, also? Where does the
Scripture appoint the choice of such o^ such a Text, where the Division of it
into parts, handling the parts in such a Method, (Doctrines, Reasons, Uses,
Motives Add, that it shall be an hour, or an hour and ha^f long; that it shall
be read, or said ^y heart. etc.
?) Catechizing is suitable to preaching; concerning that, where does the
Scripture determine the Mode, that it shall be by the Method of Questions and
Answers; that the Catechism shall be divided into LII. (answerable to the
Sundaies, in the Year, (among the Jews, the division of the Law into b 2 Timothy*
4. ^.
LIII. or LIVE. greater Sections, and the subdivision of these into lesser?)
Where does God enjoin the mode of reading Scripture by Chapters, and those, as
distinguished into Verses, (though Reading of H. Writ be a religious act of
Gods prescription?) Mr P. I shall suppose, is a singer of Psalms or Hymns in
Meter; but, where does Scripture determine the Circumstance of Meeter, and
setting ^^nes to them? 6. Let it be considered, that God never prescribed, in
Humiliations, the use of sackcloath and ashes, yet used it was without reproof,
and Christ alluding to it See, above.
, confirm^ it, semblably, we may refer it to consideration, that he that was
the Master of the Feast, having his Fe^st-robe only on, should wash the feet
of those, that were with him, where is it inordered, and yet our ^. Lord did so
S. John 13. 15.
? Consider, again, that the Fasting on every Festival Day, till the sixth hour,
is no where commanded the Jews, and yet, by the words Acts 2. 15.
of S. Peter, it is signified, without any tex upon it. These (and more See
Hocker l. 2 p 94.
, that might be added) are Circumstances (if not more,) as no where determined,
so no where reproved, but allowed. 9. There were several things ordained by the
Apostles, which, now, are antiquated, and none, that are sober and cons^stent
in their brains, think meet, to observe them. As, who, now, deem themselves
under obligation, to abstain from blood Acts 15. 20. and 16. 4.
, fears to eat a Pullet, that has not its neck (not broke, but) chopt-off, that
it may bleed; (though some Soldiers of the Sectarian Army were so fond, (to
say the mildest,) as, scrupulously, to observe this; See Edwards's Gangraena
second P^rt.
) ^ho, now, observes the Agapae S. Jude ^ 12.
or Love Feasts; or, thinks meet, that the Eucharist should be celebrated, 1
Co^ 1^. ^0. See B^sh^p A^dr^ws 's Serm^n Of ^orship^ng Imag^nations. p. 39.
after Supper? By all which s^verals it appears, that Examples in Scripture are
not, always, (...) determiners of Circumstances. 10. Let me annex, farther and
f^^^lly (for this,) that (as is, already, observed,) he would have Kneeling
determined as the circumstance of Praying; But, as the (slovenly) ^^rectorie,
never, imposes the Gesture, so all of that Batch of men, and other (pre^^nded)
Illuminatees, seldom, or never, in public, use it, (God's House See M^.
Mede's D^scourse, called, Churches both in, and ever since the Apostles times,
p. 3, 3, 4.
being more vile with them, then their Parlours o^ Closets:) you would deem
them Oliphants, and you would not suppose, that Characterism of the
Presbyterian public Worship too abhorrent from truth, which ^^yes, It Is
sitting still, and hearing of Sermons.

To a Third Argument of ours draw'n from Forms of Praises, as namely, a Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath day Psalm 9^.
, and a Prayer of the afflicted Psalm 102.
, Moses 's Song after deliverance from Egypt and the Red Sea Number: 6. 23*
, Prayers for blessing the People Exo: 15. 33.
, and (finally) our Lord's Prayer S. Matthew: 6 9.
: He will Return many things (after acknowledgment of what none will thank him
for, viz. that there were such Psalms, etc. composed by the Servants of God,)
by way of Exception (but, such as are worthy no manner acceptance:) as,

1. That they were moved by the H. Ghost, and were infallible. And, what then?
what? why, then we must not use their infallible Forms: or, then we may not
compose Forms according to their Patterns, and the tenor of the H. Word of
God. If so, he must pray no more; for, it is too sure, he is not (...) (moved,
carried) of the good Spirit, nor of an infallible Spirit.

2. That they are become Scripture, and so written for our learning. Answ: 1.
And, why not for our devotion, also? Henceforth, let not Mr. P. intersperse o^
interlace Scripture-passages, in his prayings. ^. If all Scripture be given,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works;
then either to present worthy and acceptable prayers unto God, is no piece of
his perfection or of a good work, or else Scripture-patterns of Prayer or
Prayers may be used by him, in order to the discharge of his whole duty,
toward Souls, to his furnishment for all turns, and enablement.

3. He excepts, that this is to argue from an Extraordinary to an Ordinary
practice, which (says he) is not right, bringing instances, to show the
illegitimacy or absurdity of this process. Answ: 1 But, does not this Weapon
cut the throat of his own practice? The Sermons of the Proph^ts and Apostles
were Extraordinary; Ergo, Mr. P. must not preach; nay, their Prayers and
Praises were so; therefore, he must not pray or give praise.

-- (...); It Is pity, to detain my thoughts, or my Reader's eyes with such
stuff. 2. To his Instances: 1 It was not Extraordinary, that Moses should
command punishment of death, to be inflicted on Idolaters; 2 not Extraordinary
for David, to order the external matters of God's service (as Constantine said,
(...), Eusebius: de vit. Constantini See Doctor Hammond's Answ: to Schism
disarmed, c. 5. 6, sect. 9. 11. per tot: of the power of Kings in
Chu^ch-matters.
I am constituted under God, Bishop or Overseer of the things without:) 3 Other
persons as well as Moses and David, might write Scripture, if they could; if
God afforded them the (...), potentia, they would not want the (...) potestas:
3. Circumstances, in these forementioned acts, might be Extraordinary, the
Substances not being so; proportionably as to compose prayers by Inspiration,
is Extraordinary, but to compose prayers in general, or with good and great
assistances of the Spirit (though not with that afflation or incitation from
God, which was peculiar to Prophets, etc.) sure, is Ordinary. But, 4. he,
particularly, excepts to the Lords-Prayer; and, though he will not deny, but
that any Godly man may use it (as he granted of Forms universally, above, p.
2.), yet, 1. not, as the manner is, at the end of his own: and 2. not as a
Form. But, 1 why not at the end of another prayer? what reason, for his dislike
of that course? has the Scripture determined, in this circumstance? Not at
all; at least, he is silent, in the matter. 2 That it is a Form, he says, will
be hard to prove: But, though it be hard, if it be not insuperably hard, we
hope, the business may be achieved Quod ^ere fit non fit: quod vix fit, fit;
Vetus Grammaticorum Regula.
, and with reputation: (...). But, why hard? Why? Because,

1. It was delivered as part of Christ's (first) Mount-Sermon, and as a
direction, like as he directs to fast, etc. at the same time, etc. To which we
say, 1. Though it were a part of his Sermon or Doctrine, nothing hinders, but
that it may be a part of our Devotion See above.
. 2. And, though it be a direction to pray, yet as a Standard for any measure,
dry or liquid, is not only a Rule to other measures, but may be used as a
measure also, it self; and, as a Scrivener's Copy (containing all the Letters,
and combinations thereof) may not only be written-after, in the use of other
Sentences, according to that pattern, but may also, it self, be copied-out: So,
that B. Prayer, though it direct, yet may it, also, it self, be used as a
formal Prayer. 3. In this matter, Christ begins with the Doctrine of praying in
general, and after sundry precepts and instructions, proceeds to a particular
Form: After this manner, etc. which is well observed by the Arabic Translator,
exhibited in the late London-Bible, where we find this division; from v. 5. to
9. the Doctrine of praying, Counsel about prayer: then, a Form of Prayer
Doctrina Orandi. Confilium de Oratione. Then, Formula Orandi. See Doctor
Casaubon's Vindication of the Lord's-Prayer, p. 20.
. 4. When Christ says [(...)] after this manner, the very words (however it
has been argued to the contrary from them) give Christ to have intended a
prescript Form; (however, they importing so much, he would have used some
words, to prevent our mistake, if he had not so intended.) In ordinary
construction, when it is said, You shall say thus; the words that follow,
there, Go and say unto Pharaoh, Thus says the Lord, (often in Exodus;) those
very words there recorded were used by God to Moses when he commissioned him,
See also Gen: 45. 9. See Amos 1, 11. eight times.
are intended, and no other. 5. Otherwise, (had he intended only a model) he
would rather, for prevention of error, have sai'd, Id: ib. p. 27, 28.
Pray, that your sins may be forgiven, etc. as elsewhere, pray that your flight
may be in the summer; whereto (says my Author) may be added (that Emblem of a
Formal Prayer,) Amen, at the end, for corroboration Id: ib: p. 29.
. But then, 6. S. Luke Luk: ^1. ^.
(as if foreseeing, that some would stick at, and argue from the (...)) has
used such words, as leave no ground for scruples and evasions: When ye pray,
say, i. e. do it, in haec verba, use these words and syllables. For, what
phrase is there, to express such a meaning, if this be not? Besides, in this of
S. Luke, the occasion would be considered. It came to pass (says he) as Jesus
was praying -- one of his Disciples sai'd unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as
John also taught his Disciples. From which we gather, that this was the custom
of the Doctors of Israel, to deliver some certain Form of Prayer to their
Disciples, to use, as it were a Badge and Symbolum of their Discipleship, at
least S. John Baptist had done so unto his Disciples, and, thereupon, our
Savior's besought him, that he, also, would give them, in like manner, some
Form of his own making, that they might, also, pray with their Master's Spirit,
as John's did with their's. For, that either our Savior's, or S. John's
Disciples knew not how to pray, till now, 'twere ridiculous, to imagine; they
being both sorts of them Jews, who had their certain set hours of prayer,
which they, constantly, observed, as the third, sixth and ninth, etc. Here
Observe, That this delivery of the Lord's-Prayer in S. Luke, is not the same
with that related by S. Matthew. but another, See Doctor Hammond on S. Luke 11.
3. See Mr. Mede in his Diatribe on S. Mat: 6. 9. p. 3, 4, 5. See also Doctor M.
Casaubon ut supra, p. 31, 3^, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
at another time, and upon another occasion: That of S. Matthew: in the Sermon of
Christ on the Mount --; That of S. Luke upon a special motion of the Disciples,
at a time when himself had done praying; That of S. Matthew: in the second; That
of S. Luke, in the third Year, after his Baptism: Consider, the Text of both,
and you shall find it impossible, to bring them into one, etc. So, as Joseph
sai'd to Pharaoh, Gen: xli, 32.
The dream is doubled unto Pharaoh, because the thing is established by God; in
like manner, the delivery of this Prayer was doubled to the Disciples, that
they, and we might know, thereby, the more certainly, that our Savior intended
and commended it for a set Form of Prayer unto his Church.

2. He Will prove it hard to be proved a Form, Because the Evangelists differ in
relating the particulars, and S. Luke has not the Doxology. Answ: 1. That if
this Argument might take place, when we celebrate the Lord's Supper, we must not
pronounce the words, which Christ spoke, in that action; for, they are related,
in diverse Books See S. Mat. 26. 26. S. Mar. 14. 22. S. Luke 22. 19. compared
with 1 Cor: 11. 24. and 23.
of the Scripture so, that one of the Evangelists, that registered them has not
[Do this in remembrance of me.] 2. That this is a wrong Conclusion, that we
ought not to take heed to the words, under pretense of the difference in them.
Contrarily, whereas God repeats the same thing in diverse words, by so much the
more ought we to mark them, the difference tending to the clearing As, Remit
our debts, is ^xpounded by, Forgive our trespass^s.
of one word by another. 3. To that part of the Argument, that is drawn from
the want of the Doxologie, we, easily, Answer, that This is as if we should
say, We ought not to celebrate the Eucharist, because one of the Evangelists
(S. John) speaks not of it. We have diverse Psalms, which contain but one and
the same subject, (as the XIVth. and LIII;) notwithstand, there is in one a
Clause, which is not in the other: See verse. 5. of the xivth. and verse. 6. of
the liii.
must we suppress them both? See the (worthy) Trea^ise ^y Mr. Des^agne, in
Defense of the Lord's-Prayer, su^joyned to his Tract on the Creed, Obj: 8. p.
3^.
But again, what if we say, the Doxo^ogie was by after-Copies annexed out of
the Liturgies of the ancient Greek Church? See Pract: Catech: l. 3. sect. 2. p.
292. See also, the same Author's VI. Quaeres, Qu^re 1. p. ^^. in a case much
like.
.

3. His third Proof is, That if it were given a^ a Form and impo^ed, it ^as a
sin in the Apostles, etc. not to use it consta^tly; but it appears not (among
the Apostles-their prayers,) that they used it at all. Answ: 1. A Negative
Argument, concerning a Fact, which is not of the essence of Faith, is not good.
We read not in the H. Story, that the Jews, ever, celebrated the year of
Jubilee, Consider, also, that the double po^t^on of El^as spirit p^om^sed to
Elisha ^ King: 11, 10. is not recorded as performed.
one of the greatest points of the Ceremonial Law; yet, without doubt, they did
it; otherwise they would have been censured by God. We read not, that the
Apostles ever baptized in the name of the Divine Persons, named in their
Commission S. Mat^. 8.
(though we re^d of many baptized by them and others:) shall we s^y th^n, that
they did not baptize, in this Form? A very Form of Blessing is prescribed by
God, Numb: vi. 23, In this wise, or, in this set form, say the Assembl^es
Annot: on ^his place.
etc. Yet we do not find it, in the whole Scripture. It is more blessed to give
than to receive, i^ mentioned, Act, xx, 35. ^s one of Christ's memorable
sayi^gs, which yet is not found, in all the Monotessa^on (in none of the four
Evangelists;) We might insist, in many more such I^stances, out of the Old and
New Testament, if need were. So that, (^n our particular) we should, rather,
conclude, Christ dictated this Form, upon their desire; and, therefore, they
used it. 2. Were it not so, the Apostles were endued with a spirit, which
guided them in their Prayers, as well as in their Doctrine. But, have we the
same infallible spirit? See M^^. Jean Despagne, ib. Obs. 7. p. 31.
But, 3. the learned Doctor Casaubon thinks the use of the Lord's-Prayer
alluded-to in Scripture, viz: 1. S. Peter 1, 17. This he deduces, largely; but,
we covet brevity: Thus, then: (...)] Si cognominatis Patrem, Beza, ib.
, signifies, if you call upon him as Father; or, If, in praying, you call him
Father. Then, (...) [that judges without respect of persons,] ((...))
according to every man's works, by the Hebrew Idiotisme amounts to the sense of
[which art in heaven.] For proof of this, he urges Ps. vii, 6, 7. -- See also
Ps: cxv, 2, 3.
for their sakes therefore return thou on high, Whereupon it immediately
follows, The Lord shall judge the people.
i. e. to Heaven (so the sense requires; and all the Rabbis ag^ee:) from
whence God as-to the apprehension of men, is supposed to absent-himself, when
he does not execute judgment, but suffers the wicked, to prevail. The reason
of this speech is, heaven is, properly, The Throne of ^od. Ps: lxvi. 1.
Now, Thrones, among men, are chiefly established for, and by Justice;
therefore, when God's justice appears not among men, they suppose him, for a
time, not to be in his Thro^e, i. e. in Heaven. See Doctor Casaub. Vind. of the
Lord's-Prayer, p. 89, 90, 91, 92, 93 --
4 (and lastly) the miraculous^y-learned G. Cassander has proved, That to
Christ's words in the Lord's Supper, the Apostles added the use of the Lords'
Prayer. Eucharistia sola Oratione Dominica cum gratiarum action primis
temporibus celebrabatur. S. Hierom affirms, that Christ taught his Apostles to
consecrate the Eucharist by the Lords-Prayer, l. 3. contra Pelagium c. 5. S.
Greg. l. 7. Epist. 63. B. Bhenanus in Tert. de Corona Mil. Dominica Oration
habetur in omnibus Liturgiis. See Mr. Lall's Trial of the grounds tending to
separation, c. 2. p. 17 See Doctor Hammond's Copy of some Papers, etc. p 84.
Sicuti quoque tota vetusta Ecclesia* id semper extra controversiam habuit, viz.
Precationem hanc Christi non esse tantum recte precandi normam, sed insuper
quoque rite precandi formam, Divines of Leyden in their Synopsis Theologiae
disp. 36. sect. 33.
See him, in Liturgicis. See also the learned Thorndike of Religious
Assemblies, p. 411.

But, when he is pinched with the so-express undeniable words of S. Luke [when
ye pray, (...), say, Our Father, etc.] he Answers, the meaning seems ('it is but
seems then) to be, that Christ sent his Disciples to the Direction given
before, Matthew: vi. Answ: Here is a miserable [(...)] shift. For, 1. We have
proved, that that is not only a Direction, but a Form. 2. And, in S. Luke's
setting the words, there is nothing, that colors for a reference. Does Mr. P.,
does any Author, when he says vide, videsis, see, look, etc. repeat the whole
of what they have spoken, in the place their Reader is remitted unto? This is
too piteous a device, to detain us; we pass on, therefore,

To a Fourth Argnment for Liturgies, Because it is lawful to pray in set words
found in Scripture: He Returns three things. 1. That to use the same words in
Prayer, out of the vehemency and agony (and, that, by the Spirit,) as Christ,
It was at three several times, and with some interval or distance between each,
and (which deserves a very considerable Remarke,) it was at his Passion, which
(as all times of affliction) was apt to subminister variety of words, that our
B. Lord went thrice, saying the same words.
and some of the Prophets did, at the same time, is no ground for forming a
Book, without any such eminent impulsions of the Spirit. But, to this we say,
1. That this Argument or ^nswer militates, equally, against all stinted Forms,
as Liturgies: for, if we may not frame Prayer-Books without eminent impulsions
by the Spirit, then no single Prayers (though short) without them: But and if
those impulses may be had to the latter, why not in the composing and using the
former? And, 2. does not this destroy even conceived Prayers, also; for, who of
the Extemporalists can, with truth, pretend to those eminent (as that
signifies, extraordinary) impulses, and to that Spirit, that acted in Christ
and the Prophets? But, if those eminent impulses, and that agony by the
Spirit, have a lower, calmer, and more modest sense (as pretended-to, now
adays,) those are no unusual things, in the forming and using Forms or
Liturgy. To what he Returns. 2. That the repet^tion of the same words was by
the same Persons, and peculiar to them, and chiefly at that time, therefore,
etc. We say, 1. That if Christ and the Prophets had used words, delivered or
uttered by others, before them, and, so, (consequently) not peculiar to them
that spoke 'em, and also, (consequently) not at the same time with the first
uttering of them, would they have been, either less vehement, or less by a In
the Dedication of the Temple, Solomon used the very words of the Ps. (132. 9.)
which David vowed, to use, at the bringing in of the Ark into his House. See 2
Chro. 7. 6. and 20. 21. 22. See, also, Ezra 3. 10 11.
the Spirit, or less acceptable to, or prevalent with, God? For, 2. Christ
used prayers with earnestness and agony (and, that, by the Spirit,) which
were endited by others, many Ages before He was incarnate, and upon other
occasions. The xxii. Psalm he repeated ad verbum, wholly, on the Cross, Imo
Christus in cruce pendens deprecationis forma, a Davide tanquam typo antea,
observa^a, usus est, Matthew. 37 46, say the Divines of Leyden (Polyander,
Rive^us, Walaeus, Thysius) in their Synop. Theologiae, Disput. 36. sect. 33.
says the Tradition of the Church, (which may very well be;) however, the
beginning of it, we are sure, by the testimony of the Evangelists, S. Matthew.
27. 46. S. Mar. 15. 31.
he did recite: My God, my God, etc. as, also, those words out of Ps: 31. 5.
Into thy hands I commend, etc. And, again, the great Allelujah (as the Jews
call it) reaching from Ps: cxiii. to the cxiix. inclusively, (that set portion
of Psalms of praise,) our B. Lord sai'd, immediately before his Passion. S.
Matthew 26. 30. Where the vulgar Latin translates hymno dicto, Ours-sung an
hymn, and in the Margin, Psalm. The Original word is (...), which Beza and
Ainsworth, say, should be rendered, having sung the hymns, o^ Psalms.
The Psalms, S. Paul mentions, 1 Cor: xiv, 26. were some of David's or Asaph's
Psalms, and the H. Apostle faults not the Corinthians, for using those Psalms,
but for that every one had a distinct Psalm, and so, did not observe
Uniformity, which the non-observation of (he asserts) obstructed Edification.
After all this, I need not set down the command of K. Hezekiah to the Levites,
to praise the Lord with the words of David and Asaph, 2 Chro: xxix, 30. These
Instances, sure, will give full Warranty to the use of Forms of Prayer and
Praise, recorded in Scripture, and, likewise, of all others, that for matter
and form are holy and sit, though composed by others, etc.

To what he Answers, 3. That from these Instances we may better infer, that no
Form is to be used, till a man is in such an agony or energie of spirit, as
Christ, etc. was: We say, 1. That Christ was not, always, equally earnest, in
his Prayers (much less, those Prophets) as is apparent by S. Luke, saying,
that being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly: S Luk: ^2, 44. (...). See
Doctor Hammond's (...) and The Refuter Refuted, learnedly irresistibly
defending it.
Which pitch of energie, then, must we be in, for to qualify us, to recite the
same words? 2. I ask, were the Levites (but now mentioned) in such an agony or
earnestness, as cannot be reached, now, by Christian Levites, or as David,
etc. the inspired Composers of those Psalms, were in? Surely, no! And, yet,
this hindered not their rehearsing of them, and (no doub^) with acceptance at
God's hands. 3. ^s-to what he adds, that it is not good to argue from an
Extraordinary to an Ordinary, Ab Extraordina^io ad Ordinarium non est
consequentia.
or, from a particular to a General: To this we have sai'd somewhat already, in
our amoving his Answ: to our (as he sets it down) 3d. Objection whereto we,
now, add, that we do not reason, thus: The Prophets by Extraordinary,
immediate calling, gave special Forms of Prayer or Praises to the Church, upon
particular special occasion, which Forms are (as they deserve) parts of the
Canon of Scripture; ^rgo, The Church may do the same, or the like, now. But,
thus we argue (and that, consentiently to Truth:) Holy men have prescribed, and
the Faithful have used, these Forms, not by Ex^raordinarie inspiration, or
esp^c^al injunction. And, Holy inspired men of God, by inspiration gave certain
Hymns, Psalms, and Forms of Prayer to the Church, to be used on special
occasion, which have the due matter and form of pra^se and prayer, in a holy,
fitting and seasonable use; ^rgo, set Liturgies or Forms of Prayer, etc. may be
lawfully and advantageously made use of, as coming from the spirit, and
acceptable to God. Pursuantly hereto, I Will fit him in the Margin, Cum unum
particula^e ab alio partiticula^i pr^batur vi simil tudinis communis to^i
generi sub quo ea particularia continentur, necessario concl^dit.
with a Rule to quit Scores with his, concerning Examples.

To a Fifth Argument for Liturgies, Because it is lawful for the People, to use
a Form, as they do when they join with the Minister; and, therefore, for the
Pastor; He Answers, How can the extemporarie, immediate, conceived Prayer of
the Minister be a Form to the People: If it be, he yields (he says) to it, an
unwritten, unprinted, unhear'd-of, unimposed Form. Concerning which Return, we
Rejoyne several things, 1. That the Argument is strong and ungainsayable, and
'twas that of a man in great reputation with the Enemies of the English
[Church. Doctor John Preston; See above. See, also, of the same j^^gment Mr.
Arthur (...) Ps. ^1. 6^.
For, even in the most extemporaneous Effusions of the Minister, the People's
spirits are as much limited (following of ot^e^wise, than as He leads,) as in
the most stinted, set or prescript Form. 2. Let it be observed, that it wars
against all set Forms, as well as Liturgies. 3. There may be some in the
Auditorie, that may be better at the faculty of extempore-Prayer, than the
then-Mouth is: in this case, will it be unlawful for these abler Ones, to be
stinted to the others's measure, in prayer, for that time? Is it not used in
Mr. P's. meetings sometimes, that the weakest of his Christians be put, to pray
for the rest? 4. But, being content, to grant, that the Minister's extemporarie
eructations, though the People know nothing of them before (and the very
[not-knowing, or not-hearing of it, before] is the apter to stint, yea quench,
yea utterly deprive of an hearty Amen In a stinted prayer, as the judgment of
the people is the freer, to say Amen, by the foreknowledge, and approbation of
the prayer, so the spirit and affections are at an equal f^eedom also (as in a
suddenly-conceived prayer.) See Dr. Bernard declaring, and assert^ng A B.
Usher's opinion, in this matter, p. 312: Of certain Discourses, etc
) are such Prayers (so to cal'em) i. e. Forms, to the Auditors; he says, that
he will yield to such a Form, viz. an unwritten -- unheard of, etc. Form. To which
I say; But, is there such influence or Po^er, in those accidents or external
circumstances (writing, or not writing [heard-of, or unheard-of]) as to make
that, which is lawful in it self and essentially, to become unlawful, or
lawful respectively only, yea, and a breach of the 2d. Commandment? (see his
p. 2.) 2. I shall not stand, to say, (what is most visible, and experimented by
every day's practice of the Orthodox,) that the heart may very well follow the
eye, in reading what is writ or printed, yea better than the invention. See,
above.
3. What he adds, about non-imposition, as we have spoke somewhat to that,
already, above, (and, what is sai'd, but now, about non-writing, etc. is
perfectly applicable to it,) so we, farther, now, annex this, That if it be
unlawful, to impose a Form of Prayer (the Substance thereof being perfectly
allowable, yea and required; the rest being but matter of order, method, words,
and phrases of speech, which are very Circumstances and Accidents;) it is
unlawful, also, to prescribe place, time, and order, for the celebration of
Divine Ordinances, which place, etc. are of the very same nature, and equally
undetermined by the Word of God. For close I observe, that these confident
al-assuming Dictatours, who are so prompt, to accuse the Orthodox of humane
Devises and Impositions, about the matters of Heaven, oh! what intolerable
presumption do, they use in Devising and Imposing their groundless dotard
Conceits, for the Word and mind of ^od!

What he propounds, as a Sixth Objection against the Adversaries of Liturgy, I
willingly slide-by, conceiving it, rather to be some Spectre, that p^esents it
self to Mr. P's Phant'sie (if any man's Imaginative can be so, whether strong,
or weak and distempered,) than any Argument produced for Liturgy, by any lover
and approver thereof.

The Seventh (as he ranges them) of our Arguments for Liturgies, drawn from
Christ's using the same words thrice in Prayer, he refers for Answer to the 4.
Objection. And, thither, also, I am very well content to refer my Reader, for
his satisfaction.

To our Eighth fetched from Christ's using a Hymn after Supper: He Answers,
Why might not Christ, and his Disciples, use one of the Psalms of Scripture,
being in Me^re, and then in use? But I remove this Answer, by observing many
infirm parts in it, as 1. How does this agree with what he laid down, in his
Second Answ. to our Sixth Objection, (p. 12 of his Pamphlet,) which did import,
or insinuate * that same Words or Forms must be used by the same persons, *
must be peculiar to them that spoke them, and, * must be uttered at the same
time See his p. 12. Answer 1.
? None of which were, in this Case. 2. It is as unlawful, to sing stintedly
(especially David's Psalms, (of which this, or these See, above
were) consisting, mostly, of interspersions of Prayer,) as to pray stintedly:
Wherefore, if it were unlawful for Christ, to use stinted Prayer, he knows
what will follow; and, if it were not unlawful, he knows the Consequent, also;
but, little to the comfort of his beloved Hypothesis. 3. He makes the Psalms in
Meter more lawful for use, than in Prose (or, not so metrically composed;)
but, the Meeter of Our Psalms is an humane invention, damned by Mr. P. What
follows? 4. He seems to insinuate (mark his reasoning,) that every thing in
use, among the Jews, was lawful: if so, then (besides that this is directly
cross to his anti-Liturgical humor,) there being many things, in point of
usage, custom, and ceremony, used by them, and uncommanded of God, See, above
they are hence concluded lawful also; and, so, he justifies our Holy days
and Ceremonies, even while he impugnes them (not to extend his words to the
justifiing of corrupt things, introduced into the service of God by them, in
use among them, which as Christ might not use, so he did not, but reproved
them.) 5. ^ut, he has an help at Maw yet, by saying, That this Hymn signifies
an extempore song; as diverse Interpreters, says he, make that distinction
'twixt Hymns and Psalms and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3, 16. ^o which I say, 1.
That Division is naught, where the members divident are coincident, as, here,
spiritual So^gs (one of the members) is with Hymns, if (as it signifies Songs,
so) it signify spiritual, (as sure here, it does.) 2. I dare not take it upon
his word, that Interpreters, here, so distinguish. But, 3. if they should, I'se
show him an Interpreter, that may be allowed to weigh in the balance against
six hundred of them, that interprets, far otherwise; ('it is that glorious man,
(...), Dr. Hammond, on Ephesians. 5. 19. 5.) Who says, that the difference of those
three (...).
must be fetched from the Jews, who have 3. sorts of Cancicles, 1. (...) from
(...) amputavit, a Concise verse, which is here called a Psalm; 2. (...)
Praise, celebration, depredicating of any thing; 3. (...) Canticum or Cantio,
whence is (...) the Song of Songs, and to this answers, here, the (...), and
the word, Spiritual (...).
or Christian added to it, is in opposition to the (...), and the like drunken
sensual Songs and Ovations, in their Bacchanalia, etc. by which it appears,
that the specifical difference of the former of these from the rest, is not,
for that it was an extemporarie thing. 6. But, himself places no great
affiance, in such Interproters, and, therefore, has recourse to others, who
understand no more by [(...) f] than praising God, which Math. 26. 30.
sense he will confirm by such acceptance of the word, (...).
Heb. 11, 12. Answ. 1. That there it is not rendered to praise, but to sing
praise; now, sing we cannot (especially David's Hymns, (out of which this last
place is taken) being disposed by Art Metrical, and bound to the laws of
versifying) extempore. 2. It signifies, I will compose an Ode or Psalm in thy
praise, then sing it, which, sure, cannot be done ex tempore, neither. Now,
these things being so, the Apostle commanding this singing (whatever our
Author says, to elude the matter) did impose or enjoyne the singing of Set
Forms (of praise.)

To the Ninth Argument for Liturgies, Because it is lawful to use a Form in
Preaching, etc. He Answers, in sum, That it is not lawful, to write all a
Sermon verbatim, and then deliver it without any alteration, and after Print,
and then impose it on others; therefore, etc. To which we say 1. That the
Objection may be improved, thus: If Set Psalmodie or See the last Answer.
Hymnologie, if Set Translations of Scripture, Set Confessions and Professions
of Faith, Set Catechismes, and Set penned Sermons be lawful, then are Set
Prayers also lawful. But, those are lawful: Therefore, so are these. 2. What
he speaks against writing a Sermon word for word, delivering it without
addition or substraction, or variation, and, so, injoyning it, is equally
pleadable against the particulars immediately foregoing. 3. Reading (a thing,
that broiles in his breast, A thing that did, also, in Disciplinarians theirs,
Hooker, l. 5. p. 221.
that Sermons should be read) of the S. Scripture (where no liberty is left for
alteration of words and phrases, or adding, etc.) is by Scripture called
Preaching. Act. 15, 21. preach him, being read,
For, so, says Mr Hooker, Bo^k 5. p. 213 sect. 19.
of necessity it must be understood, inasmuch as we know, that the Jews have
always had their weekly readings of the Law of Moses, but that they always
had, in like m^nner, their weekly Sermons upon some part of the Law of Moses,
we no where find. Yea, and the Scripture read is the best of Preaching See Id.
ib. p. 229.
4. This, also, to him (ad hominem) is considerable, that one may preach with
his pen, which comes to the hearer (Reader) without al alteration. I
Evangelize, says Dr. John Reynolds De Romans Eccles Idololat. Praef. ad Com:
Effexiae
, with my hand, and by writing.

To the Tenth Argument for Litutgies, Because it was the practice of the Church
in Scripture-times, and downwards, to have them: He begins to Answer very
fastidiously, but, withal nothing to the purpose of the Argument, which is a
knot too hard for him, e're to untie, (disputing against all Forms, as he
does.) The Bishops, says he, said so, and thought, to prove it: and then, out
of Smec: or the Club-Divines, mentions a mistake of Bishop Andrews, about a
Jewish Liturgy, To which I say, 1. The Bishops were wont, to speak as much
truth, as any of their enemies ever were, and had as much of Christian
simplicity and veracitie; and, what they thought or needed to prove, both in
respect of the learning of the men, and the justifiablenesse of their cause,
could not want advocation. 2. As-to what Bishop Andrews (of immortal memory)
did, in inquiry after the Jewish Liturgy, as I know not now, so at present I
have no commodity to examine, (a thing but needful, when Smectymnuus and his
followers speak for their own, and against their Adversaries interest.) This I
suppose, that the Reverend bishop Hall (now, at rest with God) finally answered
their Pamphlet, whereout this Story I own to have been taken; but, His ^ook, I
have not Since, I find, that B. Hall d^es fu^y prove that the Jews had a Fo^m
of Litur. from Moses 's time; Answ. to the Vind. ^f Smec. p. 3^, etc 5, and 6.
p. 10^.
. 2. As-to what he adds (as reason,) That if there had been any such
(Liturgies,) in Christ's and His Apostles time, doubtless, we should have found
some mention of it, in the Scripture, where is mention of their reading and
preaching in the Synag^gues, and of giving the Book of Isaiah S. Luk: 4. 17.
. I Answer, 1. That the Scriptures silence in this matter, proves nothing. The
Scripture was given, to be the perfect Rule of supernatural Faith and heavenly
manners; but, sets not down, always, particular Observations or Customs, The
practice of ord^narie reading of the Law, in the Assemblies on the Sabbath,
Act: 15. 21.
is not found mentioned, for a long time together; now, is it hence
conclusible, That the Scriptures were not read, in the Assemblies? More
Instances, in this kind, may be given; but, this (in general) we say See the
learned Author of the Additionals to Bishop Andrews, on Co^mandments, Commandm:
3. p. 271. saying thus: Though in matters of Faith, which are of absolute
necessity to salvation for all to know, it may be granted that they are all
expressed in Scripture; yet for other matters that concern the discipline,
order and government of the Church, it was not necessary to have them in
writing (though many of them be occasionally mentioned;) it was sufficient that
they might be known by the daily practice of the Church wherein every one might
read them written in large and capital letters. See Grot: V^t. p. 140, 141. and
Discussio p. 173, 174, etc. See Dr Hammond's Quaeres, Quare 1. per tot. See
also Dr Whitaker disp, de Sacr: Scrip: qu: 6. contr: 2. c. 6.
, That there were many Observances, Vsages and Orders, in (especially) the
Gospel Church, which were well-known to those, who observed, used, etc. them;
but the S. Scriptures do not, sometimes at all, sometimes but glancingly or
allusively reflect or touch them. 3. It follows not (should the Argument be
pressed so far,) that they never had, or used a set Form, because it is not
found, at this day: For, many Antique Monuments are perished and lost. Again,
though Forms now exstant were not entire (with interpolations, etc.) as, now,
they are, till they ceased, to be a Church; yet, many matters contained in
these (disguised) Liturgies might be in use, before: Semblably as it is in or
with the Liturgies, that go under the names of S. Mark, and S. James (thence
surnamed Jacobus Leiturgus.) Hegesippus.
etc. 4. It is undeniable that the Jews used a stinted prescript Form of prayer
and praise or thanksgiving in the celebration of the Passover; and the learned
See L. Brugensis in Ps. 112. Jo: Scaliger de Emen: temp. l. 6. Beza Ann. Maj:
in Mat. 26. 20. Drusius Praeterit: l. 1. in Mat. 26. 30, Ainsworth in Exodus: 12.
8. John Balls Trial of the Grounds tending to separation, c. 7. p. 106.
bring proofs, that our Lord approved the same.

To our Eleventh Argument, That a Liturgy is a good help to those that cannot
pray: He Returns four things. The 1. That it is rather an hinderance: for, were
it not for such Forms, the help of the Spirit of God would be sought and given.
Answ: 1. That this opposes all Forms, equally with Liturgies. 2. What if that
of the famous Hales d should be true -- when the Spirit stirs up a man to
newness of e Hales's Golden Remains, first Sermon on 2 Pet: 3. 16. p. 16.
life, it exhibits not unto him an inventorie of his sins, as hitherto unknown;
but, either supposes them known in the Law of Nature --; or sends him to learn
them from the mouth of his teachers. More than this, in the ordinary
proceedings, of the H. Spirit, in matter of instruction, I yet could never
descrie? Propor^ionably to which I add, the spirit helps to pray, by directing
to good forms of Prayer. Accordingly, 3. the Spirit is our Advocate (Paraclete,
signifies that,) in settling a Ministry to pray and intercede for their several
Corgregations, and enabling them, even in the Apostles times, to form a
Liturgy, to continue in the Church, to that end, and thereby helping our
infirmities, and teaching us to pray, as we ought See Practical Catechism, l.
5. Sect. 3. p. 401.
. 4. Some may not know what things to ask for; now, the Text in Rom: 8. 26.
imports, that the Spirit helps us, in ^he latter, as when we pray, but know not
our selves what is best, no^ consequently, what we ought, to pray for,
particularly, (health, or wealth, or honor,) then Christ joines His helping
hand (...), joines in relieving.
to ours, joine^ His prayers to ours, (for that, which he knows, we most want,)
and so, helps, to relieve us, in all our distresses (...), (by us) rendered,
infirmities. See Dr Hammond in Loc.
. Now, the Spirit, or Christ ^hus suggesting a wise choice of the matter;
words, phrases, o^der, method may still need, and be advantageously supplied by
Forms o^ Liturgies, and without those helps will be wanting, in many, who yet
are worthy Christians.

His second Return is, by a Dilemma, Because they help neither those that have
no grace, nor those that have grace: Not the former, for what good will
Crutches (says he, scurrilously) do to a dead man, as every graceless man is?
But, to this I, easily, Answer, 1. That this will exclude all prayer, whether
stinted or conceived: for, what ability has a dead man, or what good does it
to him, even all prayer put-up by himself? He Is dead, he cannot conceive prayer,
and it is not conceived how he should, or even so much as speak or move his
lips. All the Contra-Remonstrants See Collatio Hagiensis.
(of which number I often discover our Author to be) asscribe no more unto man in
the work of his regeneration (which confines with this matter,) than they
asscribe to him, in his generation, or resurrection.

For, they say, Sicut ad nativitatem suam --
As no man contributes ought of his own to his birth, or to his raising from
the dead; so also to his conversion no man contributes, or confers; but it is
the mere work of the grace of God in Christ, which works in us, not only the
power of believing, but also faith it self. Again, he is dead; and Donteclock, *
counts all his best endeavors, which tend to his salvation, to be vain,
fruitless and conducing more to his hurt, than benefit, before faith and the
spirt of regeneration by unresistible operations (for, so, it is obvious and
necessary to understand his meaning) are infused into him Concludimus omnem
zelum, omnemque curam quam promovendae salvis suae homines adhibent, vanam and
frustrane^ esse, magisque obesse quam prodesse, ante fidem and spiritum
renovationis.
2. But, whereas he says, every natural man is dead, citing Ephesians: II. 1, 5. I
might say, that Symbolical Divinity is little Argumentative. 2. The same
Apostle, afterward, says, that they are but asleep Ephesians: 5. 14. See 1 Timothy: 5.
6.
(speaking of the same, dead men.) 3. I ask, are we all Heathen? for, such
these were, of whom the Apostle speaks. You Heathens lying like so many
carcasses, desperately gone in all kind of sins, but which state you had
contracted by walking, v. 2. That is, for many years together living formerly,
and securely going on in the epidemical sins of the nations, the custom of the
Gentile World. 4. I deny not, that without Christ we are rightly said to be
dead in sins; yet, 'twil be rashness to affirm, all that are called by the
Gospel, to be altogether without Christ. 5. I say, all unregenerate persons,
indeed, are dead, but in a figurative sense. It Is certainly true, no
unregenerate person lives in Christ, even because he wants faith: mean while,
how will it be proved, that we all lost this faith, or the power of it, in
Adam, so as to be said, to be dead to it, by our nature, properly so called?
This is easily appliable to the case before us. But, 'twill be farther cleared,
by our Answer to his third Return, which is,

3. If he have grace, he wants no crutches, because he is cured. To which we
say, 1. that his so often men^ion of the (wooden) Metaphor (crutches) imports,
that, naturally, we are only debilitated or maimed, not dead; and, does not
this cross with what he said before, That we were dead? 2. Crutches implying
but impotencie and imperfection; there may be many so impotent and imperfect in
Grace (Babes in Christ, Lambs of the Flock,) as to need helps, which, at their
very weakest, they are not so dead, but that, by the preventing Grace of
Christ, (which offers Omnibus offertur Dei misericordia. Nemo illius expers
est, nisi qui renuit; S. Bernard, Sermon. 1. in Purif. Mar.
it self to all, for their quickening,) they may make use of. 3. It may be, and
is, often, so, that a man may have excellent sentiments, and very gracious
conceptions, which yet (wanting utterance, and command of expression or
phrase,) he cannot meetly Fieri autem potest, ut recte quis sentiat, and id
quod sentit poli te eloqui non possit, Cicero Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. mihi p. 3.
express, and herein a Form will stead him very much, that he be not rash with
his mouth Eccles. 5. 2.
. 4. The Service of God, in great and solemn Assemblies, exacts greater
maturitie, solemnity, decency and exactness; therefore, a well-formed
Liturgy is highly requisite, in this case; which we shall, farther, speak
unto, when we have heard

His 4. Return, which is, That if the lame should use it, yet no reason, why
the cured, also, should. To which I oppose the Reverend Calvin's so-well-known
saying. Epist. 87.
Quod ad formulam precum, etc. (which I have set down, above.) Whereby appears,
that there are other reasons than the being lame (the obviating novellizing in
some, and that the Consent of the Churches may have the more certain Constat;)
why these Crutches (as he will call them) should be (under obligation, to be)
leaned, or walked on.

And, thus, we have routed all his Parade of Answers to our Arguments (so many
as he is pleased to muster, and accoustred or furnished with weapons so very
much rebated in their edges, as he thinks good for his interests;) and are,
now, to attaque another Body of Arguments against our particular (venerable)
Book, which by Puritans, and (their spawn) Brownists and Phanaticks of all
sorts, on one side, and the Papists on the other (like our B. Lord between two
thieves) has been and is, still, crucified. This Body of Objections is levied
(in part) out of Smectymnuus, under the high style of Godly and learned
Presbyterian Ministers. To which Character, we shall say but this, That [Godly]
is often the Badge of a Party or Faction; but, Christ has given us a sure
Characteristick, S. Matthew. 7. 20. And, these we know by their fruits. For the
title [learned,] its a very modified one as applied to some men, and there are,
that are learned (as Curio was eloquent) to the public mischief. malo pub^ico.
(...), Democrates. Et, (...), Id.
Well, the Issue of this Club of Divines is now, again midwiv'd into the World,
to annoy truth, peace and order ('Twere well, if the Antidote were republished,
also, That the Children of this world (too much so, in some particulars) might
not be more diligent than the children of light.) But, out it is come, with a
strange Metamorphosis, of a Hill Areopagi for Areopagitae. It was a
constitution of those admired Sons of Justice, the Areopagi. p. 1. And this
piece of incrudition is well (I wis) excused, by citing of Chaucer 's writing
semyramus for semiramis, etc, See their Animadversions upon the Remonstrants
Defense against Smectymnuus, p. 6,
or Street into a man, Mar's-street or Areopagus put for the severe Judges,
that sat in the Place, so styled.

After his Laudative, and the enumeration of the particular Names of this
zealous Cluster, he produces their Arguments against our Liturgy, whereof

The 1. is, That it symbolizeth or agrees so much with the Popish Mass, as
that the Pope would have consented to the use of it, might he but confirm it;
and, that K. Edw: 6th told the Devonshire-Rebels Cambden in Anno 1560
(contending for the Mass) that, though it seemed to them a new Service, 'twas
indeed no other than the old; and, therefore, if good in Latin, good in
English. To which, I say, 1 (and it is appliable to all his Reasons following;)
that this, and the rest are used, only ad conflandam invidiam, and more to
entangle or ensnare weak people, and breed scruples in their minds. For, to
them, that look at, or behold all Liturgies as images or inventions of men
forbidden, in the second Commandment, this Objection, and the others that
follow, are perfectly in^^gnificant, in sober reasoning. But, (more
particularly to this, and the following Reasons) we say, 2. that it is childish,
to think, that Truth is to be measured, by its opposition to the Church of
Rome's Religion, and that the more distant we are from that Church, the more
truth we possess. 3, It is grossly false, that it symbolizeth any farther with
the Portuis or Mass, than these agree to sound doctrine and devotion: The
matter thereof consisting of 1. Scripture-Readings in a known tongue; 2.
Invocation of God in the sole intercession or mediation of Jesus Christ, and
not 3. Upon Angels or Saints departed, 4. For the living and not for the dead.
5. The right administration of the Sacraments, and Psalmodie. Now, are these
things Popish? Is the celebration of the Eucharist sub utraque (both with bread
and cup,) in remembrance of Christ's death and passion See the Office of
Communion.
, who by one oblation of himself once offered has made a full, perfect and
sufficient oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the World; is thi^ (J
say) any piece of the Mass, or is not that (in the propriety of the now-use of
the Word) put for (what is quite contrary to this) 1 unbloody 2 sacrifice of the
Body of Christ, which the ^ Priest does ^ continually offer up for the quick 5
and dead. Whence it follows, 4. That the matter is good, and if the form of
words should be allowed, to be taken out of the Masse-Book, what the least
blame can there be affixt on that? Will expressions derived from even Heathens,
and used in a Sermon (which to do, is very lawful See Bishop Andrews 's
Sermon: of Worshipping Imaginations, p. 31, 32. Egeon Askewe's Apology for the
use of the Fathers and secular learning in Sermons, published 1605. Bishop
King's XLth Lecture on Jonas.

Dr Fleming (says my Author) in an Excellent Vniversity-Sermon determined it
lawful: so (says he) did Dr House against Dr Reynolds, who upon this Sermon
disclaimed the contrary opinion. See all this in a little Book called, A Brief
View of the state of the Chapter of E. as it stood in Q. El. and K. Ja. Reigns, by
Sir John Harrington, p. 153, 154, 155. See also Dr Chaloner's Sermons, Sermon: on
Tit. ^. 13. p. 6. etc.


, not being used, for the expressing any evil or erroneous matter, supposed and
proved, to be left out,) conclude the Sermon, wherein they are respersed, to be
Heathenish or the device of an Heathen? Whereon I frame this Dilemma, if our
Liturgy symbolize with the Popish Mass, it does so, either in respect of the
Matter, or the Form. Not of the Matter: for, that which duly brooks the name of
Popish (or, as they will have it, Antichristian) the foul and gross errors, are
expurged. Not of the Form: for, order and phrase, is not, properly,
Antichristian or Popish (in that sense.) 5. The agreeing of our Liturgy with
the Mass, in all things but the crasse errors thereof, speaks the Composers
of it, to have title to Christ's blessedness, S. Matthew. ^. 9.
Blessed are the peacemakers or the peaceable (for, so, the (...)
word will signify:) which words are, also, a sufficient Warranty for any, to
endeavor peace, to repair the breaches in the Church, and to make Psalm. 122. 3.
Jerusalem a City, which is at unity in it self; when it may be done, without
any breach of charity, or wrong to Faith. Well! say they what they will, that
hunch Pacem utroque cubito proturbant.
away peace with both elbows, and would have our divisions and quarrels Qui
aeterna cupiunt esse dissidia; Votum pro pace Ecclesiae.
eternal (as Grotius speaks,) it is an amiable thing to live peaceably with all
men, as far as it is Romans 12. 18.
possible, and as much as in us is, and to make no wider ruptures in Christ's
seamlesse coat, than is of rigorous necessity. 6. About the Popes consent to
the confirming ou^ L^turgie, when I have Answered, That acts of this nature, or
perhaps for their turn at all points, the Popes have been willing, to multiply
above what was required or necessary, to gain consideration and honor, and
farther advantage to themselves; let Trial of the grounds tending to
separation, c. 8. p. 152 153.
Mr Ball tell them, That the Papists cannot sincerely approve our public
Service, but they must condemn and detest their own, their prayers in an
unknown tongue, their praying to Saints departed, much more to feined Saints;
their receiving in one kind; their unbloody sacrifice; their real presence,
etc. And if for the first 11. years of Q. Eliz. the Papists came to our
Churches and Service, what can we (says he) think, but that the hand of the
Lord was with us at that time for good, when without division we sought him,
and he was pleased so to honor us, that our Adversaries should at least
feignedly submit themselves? We say, that the English Liturgy gathered
according We do not, like the Israelites, borrow any Jewels of the Egyptians,
but like Laban to Jacob, we search their houses, to see wha^ Jewels they have
of ours, which were left us by the Primitive Fathers. And, dare be bold to say
as Laban (with a far better title) These Ceremonies be my Ceremonies, these
prayers be my prayers, as he of his daughters, etc. Mr D. Wh. Vind, of the Form
of C. Prayers, p. 36.
to the Modules of the Fathers, the most pure of them, is not a collection out
of the Romish Missal, but a refining of that ancient Liturgy, which heretofore
had been stained or impurated by the Mass; those things being justly cast out,
which were unjustly added, to the Liturgy of purer antiquity. No translation
of the Mass, but a restitution of the former antique liturgy, with the
intersertion of diverse Prayers used by the H. Ancients, conformly to Sacred
Scriptures.

His second Reason (out of Smec:) is, Because it was framed on purpose to bring
Papists to Church: Answ: 1. That this sets a good If S. Paul, by being a Jew to
the Jew, could hope to gain the Jew, why should not we (without being Papists
to the Papists, but only Christians wherein they are so too) expect to gain the
Papists also? View of the New Direct, p. 63. Sect. 15. Se^ also p. 62. (most
satisfactorily.)
character, both upon the Composers, and the Composition, that They designed,
and It was framed, and both, so, as not, in the least, prejudicing Truth or
Charity (to the Protestant English,) to convert any Act. 26. 18.
to turn them from darkness to light. 2. The aim of our Reformers was, to
compose a public Service, and Polity Ecclesiastical, conform (as near as they
could) to the Primitive Church, that so all the Children of that Church,
enjoying such a Liturgy, etc. might serve God purely and like the H.
Primitives. We, Accessimus autem quantum maxim potuimus, etc Apolog Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, mihi. p. 170.
says the excellent Bishop Jewel, came as near as possibly we could, to the
Church of the Apostles, and of the Ancient Catholic Bishops, and Fathers,
which we know as yet kept her integrity, and was, as Tertullian speaks, an
incorrupt or pure Virgin, not yet defiled with idolatry, nor any grievous or
public error: nor only our Doctrine, but also our Sacraments, and the Form
of our Public Prayers, we have directed or framed to their Rites and
Institutes: and, as we know Christ, and almost all the pious to have done,
Religion by them (Papists) foully neglected and depraved, we have recalled or
brought back to its origin and first beginnings. 3. What the design and
process of our old authentic legal Reformers were, malevolent and
schismatical Smectymnuans must not teach us. We have it told us by a man, that
will strike scale against six hundred of them, the most candid, veracious,
profoundly learned Mr Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 4. Sect. 14. a p. 163. ad p. 168.
where (p. 165.) he considers this Objection of T. C's producing.
.

His Third Reason is, Because it is so much idolized, called Divine Service.
Answ. 1. Was there never a Parliament in the World, idolized by its Adherents
(Mr P. among them,) and, yet, sure, its whether admirers or adorers, thought
not meet, that It should be abolished, or suffer an Ostracisme or Petalisme?
were there not some Ministers (Smectymnuus as chief,) that were idolized, all
their false tendries and heterodoxies swallowed without all discretion or
discussion Beloved, I speak it confidently, that the greatest part of the
deserters of the Chapter of E. are more, at best as much, liable to a charge of
implicit faith, as any Romanist whatever; the having men's persons in
admiration, having clearly (I had almost said, alone) seduced them into their
schism, errors, and heresies: of which (I am satisfied) they are never able to
give any rational account, beyond the credit of their teachers, who to them are
Scripture, Canons, Church, and what not, Mr Jo: Martin, in his (excellent)
Sermon, called Hosannah, p. 24, ^5.
, as the very Oracles of God, and with as implicit a faith as any proposition
(whatever) of the Romish Church, is entertained and believed by any of the
Bigots of that Persuasion? And yet these men pass with Mr P. for learned and
Godly, and not to be deprived or silenced, I warrant you, by his good will,
unless (what report speaks him,) he be turned Anabaptist. Nay, was not
Preaching idolized also, getting the Monopoly of all Gods service, (and as
Moses's Rod the Egyptians-theirs,) swallowing them all up; the wretched,
finatical, Rosicrucian, chemical, chimerical Pilpetings of some heterodox and
ignorant plebeian-spirited Pulpitiers, in special? Must Preaching, therefore,
be put down, and the wooden Bells (in that H. Martyr's phrase) every where
continue without Clappers? 2. But, we say, it is no more, than we must o^ can
expect, that ill-talented anti-interested persons should account every thing,
which they dislike and damn (and would idolize, in one sense) to be too much
honored, and idolized, though (indeed) it have but a just proportion and pitch
of respect and reverence: And, this is the very case, here. 3. And for his
mention of Divine Service, in this matter, 1. I am sure, it has as good title
as his, nay, as any man's Sermons have, to be enstyled, the Word of God (I may
without violation of modesty say, a better.) 2. Divine Service, is no more than
the Service of the Divinity or of God, and then, sure, the words have nothing,
that too much aggrandizeth the Book. We need not add 3. that it is not
unordinarie, to find Casaubon, Salmasius, Scaliger, Grotius, Divine Augustine,
divine Drusius, See Kellet's Miscellanies, and alios. Divinitas dicitur
orationis, libri, rei gestae, hominis and aliarum re^um, Viv: in Aug: l. 7. c.
1.
etc. to be called divine men, without any exception to the title or Eulogie,
and, then, in this sense also, I should well hope, our B^ok, might be called,
Divine Service. 4. His idle story I let pass, and believe the man said
honestly, and nothing amiss. 5. So, I need not allege (to balance this
ametrio (if so it be) the immoderate scorn (Antiochus's tearing the Law) and
villanious usage, that (precious) Book has found, (even in a moderate
Adversaries judgment too too extreme and vile.)

His Fourth Reason (from the Brotherhood) is, Because many distaste it. Answ: 1.
Alas! their palates. But 2. (and seriously,) his pen speaks too short; He
should have spoken in the more amazing (because more Scriptural) Phrase, and
have said, Many were offended or scandalled at it. But, then 3. this signifies,
but that they were displeased with, or angry at, it (not, in the only
Scripture-sense of scandal, made to sin by it See Doctor Hammond, of Scandal,
p. 26. 10. and p. 35. 33, etc. See also Dr Tailors great Exemplar. Part third.
Discourse 17. Of scandal, or Giving and Taking Offense, p. 463.
;) and, then, his distinction may well take place; There are two sorts of men,
1 some are angry, and 2 some care not (or, have no reason to care) for it. 4.
It Is piteous, I must straight forgo, what another takes distaste at. 5. There Is
an 1 offense given, and an 2 an offense taken only; the distaste or offense
from the Book, is to be arranged to the second member of the distinction. 6. We
are offended with their Church Polities, their exterminations of Bishops, their
unsound Articles of Doctrine, their discarding of Tithes, the unprimitivenesse
of several matters, in their Church-Establishments: must we, therefore,
denounce war against them (preach Evangelium armatum, as Ronsard said of some
body) and make them forgo their settlements? 7. The loyal Sons, and Daughters
of the Church (which were, once, the more numerous, and, I am sure, ought,
ever, to be the more considerable) will be distasted, if these things be taken
away. And is not (in all congruitie of reason) more regard to be had of a Son,
than a Rebel? 8. Several great Clerks beyond Sea have highly approved our
Liturgy (not to speak of our Church Government, by numbers of them highly
approved, and earnestly wished See Bishop Hall's Episcopacy by Divine Right,
Part 1. 3. a p. 10. ad p. 17. See in my Preface.
,) Casaubon, Gilbertus, etc. as in the Preface.

His Fifth Reason is, Because it differs much from Liturgies, in other
Churches, The Liturgy of Scotland composed by John Knox, is observed, to be,
in many things, like ours. Some of their forms of words are directly all one
with ours, others with some small additions retaining our forms.
which yet are not enjoined. Answ: 1. Why should our Liturgy be more taxed for
disconformitie to theirs, than theirs for not symbolizing with ours? And,
'twill be an unreasonable begging of the Question, to say, theirs are better
than ours, when the highly learned Mons. Casaubon preferred it, not only to his
own (that of the French Protestant-Churches) but to all, that ever he saw or
heard of, in modern times: when, again, 'twas part of Dr Featleys Manifesto
Dippers dipped, p. 81.
and challenge, That the Common Prayer Book of England is the most complete,
perfect and exact Liturgy, now extant in the Christian World; and, much to the
same purpose, has Bishop Gauden, in the words our Margin ^do in all ^umble and
^onscientio^^ freedom express my judgment, ^^ highly appro^ing, yea and
admiring (since I lately perused it more seriousl^) the piety, prudence,
competency, aptitude of the Liturg^e of the Church of England, as the best of
any ancient or modern, that ever I saw. And, I think, I have seen the most and
best of them; Considerations touching the Liturgy, p. 30.
exhibits. And 2 it is not out of all dispute, that in other Reformed Churches,
the reading or using of a stinted Form is not constant, exacted Compare the
prayer, which Beza used constantly, before and after Sermon with the
Geneva-Common Prayer Book. See Mr Joh. Ball's T^yal, etc. c. 7. p. 121, 122.
of every Minister, at all times. 3. Their practice (one way or other) yields
but small comfort or countenance to those men, who condemn all Liturgies, as
vain, superfluous, humane inventions, a strange ^orship, and breach of the
second Commandment.

He adds (as of himself, now, but the Assemblers Directorie has the same
Exception, and, before them, also, it was that of Johnson, Greenwood, Robinson,
etc. and all the rable-rout of Sectaries) a Sixth Reason, Because it tends to
maintain a lazy, scandalous Ministry, Answ: 1. That there is no affinity
'twixt a Liturgy and an idle Ministry. For, in the Primitive Church the
abettours, maintainers, and, in part, devisers of Liturgies, have and will
(when the Sea Gul^elm: Apollonii his L^tter or Tract to the Assembly, in which,
toward the close, he speaks, in defense of set Forms. (The Book is, also, in
English.) See S. Aug-Tract 9. in Joh 8. 12. and 16. and 21, 29, 35, 37, 50.
^ossidoni^s in Vita Aug. c. 21 etc. Aug. de verb: Do*mini in Evang. Ser. 15. De
verb. Apost Ser. 5, 6.
names of their and Liturgies enemies shall be forgotten, as their carcaises)
be of ever precious and sweetest memory, and renown for their uncessant and
indefatigable labors, in preaching, etc. S. S. Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Augustine were some of the Hero's I mean. Oh! their learning and zeal
(confessed by the Adversaries!) [Ye heard yesterday, ye shall hear to morrow]
how risely do they occur in their Sermons or Tractates (as they call their
Sermons!) S. Augustine, even to extremest sickness preached in his Church,
cheerfully and boldly, without any intermission. And, others, before and about
those times, are famed for the like industry; but, all this while a Liturgy
was in use. Likewise, they pressed the knowledge of Scriptures, residence,
diligence in reading, meditation and instruction of the people, as necessary
duties. When Religion was reformed, in those whom God stirred up to that work,
how stupendous and even miraculous was the pains and industry in preaching,
and yet generally, they liked and framed a public Form of stinted Liturgy. 2.
The Directorie as little provides against a lazy Ministry: for, as a many
Ministers that are for that, use stinted Forms of Prayer (yea and they that
would be thought, to pray extempore, make (sundry) that show See the sweet and
ingenious Tract, called England's faith Monitour and Reprover.
by some number of penned Prayers, which variety, they would fain have
venditated for extemporarinesse;) so it is but turning the heads of Prayers laid
down directionwise, in the Directorie, into a formal Prayer (which the
Composers suspected would happen,) and the matter's done, without any more
^-do. 3. The Liturgy is complained of, See Hooker, 1. 5. 32. p. 205.
for the tiring burdensome length of it, and can he be lazy, that
conscientiously officiates by it, and loves so to do Nor does the Directorie
secure any from laziness, seeing nothing ^ut lungs and sides may be used in
the deliverie of any extempore prayer; See Fullers Chapter Hist. B. 11. p. 223.
?

To his Seventh Reason drawn from the sufferings of some whom he will term Godly,
I have said enough already Answ. to Reas XIV.
, and shall add no more, merely out of study of all possible brevitie.

His Eighth is, Because it has tended to harden many Papists in their false
Religion, as seeing us come so near them. Answ. 1. How near we come to them
(or, rather, how maignly distant we are from them) appears, in good part, by my
Answ. to his First Reason against our Book. 2. By a (...) or Violentum, I may
argue thus, (upon better grounds,) To come as much of the way, No Church ought
f^rther to separate it self from the Chapter of Rome, either in Doctrine or
Cerem^nie, than she has departed from her self, when she was in her
flourishing, and best estate, and from Jesus Christ our L. and Head: K. James
Conf. at Hamp. Court, p. 77. See also Hist: of Presbyt. p. ^3.

Whether is a servant (much more, a Brother) that is rep^ehended a^ much for
his diligence, as for his neglect, for his good and faithful, as for his ill
and false service, more likely thereby to amend his faults, than he that is
seasonably and ^eekly reproved for his miscariages only? etc. View of the New
D^ectorie, Sect. 15. p. 62.

(...), S. Ignat Ep ad Pol^carpum. p. 205. Edit. Vedelia^ae*


and as near to an Adversary, as truth will give leave, is a mean to soften,
because it speaks and expresses that lovely, melting and charming quality of
ingenuitie and candor. 3. To oppose all things promiscuously (truth or
falsehood, right or wrong) in an Adversary, is the course to harden him in all
his Tenets and Practices. 'Twas the Summer Sun, not the Northern wind, that
made the man cast off his Cloak. 4. Because when he sees true and Antique
Tenets and Usages equally impugned with false and novel, he colourably
persuades himself, that he has reason on his side, and that his Opposite aims
only at his shame, conquest and vassalage. 5. That (as has been said, above)
is not always truest, that is remotest from Rome; and Truth is a Ladi^, that
deserves, eternally, to be courted, and never forsaken, in the least matter or
manner. 6. To what he annexes, about confirming of ignorant scandalous people
among us, thinking themselves true Christians, by conforming thereto (to the
Liturgy,) I Reply, 1 that there may be in ignorant scandalous people, some
good things, some (though lesser) knowledge, some (though weaker) exercise of
conscience; and if they are confirmed in these, and not in their ignorance, or
scandalousnesse, by the Book, I pray, where is the harm? And, 2 if it should
confirm them in these latter (worse,) it is but by accident only, that it does
so, by abuse of the holy Book; and, then, what by this is more affixt on the
Book, than is affixable on the Judgments, or even Mercies of God, which,
accidentally, obdure, and make wanton, some men? 3. If they would conform to
that Book, I make no question, but they would be true Christians (of
another-gets Stamp and Worth, than Mr P. and his fellows, or his
Puritan-Progenitours;) and, then, to think they are so, may be so ordered, as
to have nothing blameable in it.

His Ninth Reason is, Because it teaches things, that are heathenish, as to
call the Months, Januarie, etc, Days, Mondaies, etc. from the Saxon-Idols.
Answ. 1. That (by his leave, and look again) this is not to teach things, but
to call names S, Luke complies so far with custom, as to call Mars-street, and
the Areopagite. Consider these following names retained after Baptism
Dionysiu^, Act. 17. 33 Apol^o^, i^. 18 2^. Phebe, Romans 16. 1. and Hermas,
Her^es, v 14. Epaproditus, Phil. 2. ^5. Epiphras, Col 1. 7.
. 2. Those names are very lawful and allowable. For 3. no reason is there, why
the fault of those, that imposed these names, in so doing should prejudice us,
who (as all know) use only, by way of mere distinction, the names, which they
g^ve out of superstition. Are we c^lpable of superstition, because they were,
who first invented them? The ((...)) sign and name of the ship, Dioscuri or
Castor and Pollux Acts XXIX. 11. superstitiously given thereto, defiles not S.
Lukes pen, who but distinguishes that Ship from others. If to Daniel there had
been given no other name, but only Belteshazzer H. Dan. IV, 5,
, in honor of the Babylonian Belti Vide S^alig. de E^end. Temporum, l. 6. p.
277.
, should the idolatry of the namers cleave to every one so termi^g him by way
of personal difference only? Were it not, says Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect.
13. p. 206.
, to satisfy the minds of the s^mple sort of men, these nice curiosities are
not worth the labor, which we bestow to answer them. 4. But, he adjoyns, that
we use Jewish names, as Priests, Altars, Sacrifices. Answ: to the first of
those three words, 1. We use Minister as often as Priest, and why sometimes one,
sometimes another, let him see in Dr Sparrow's Rationale on the
Common Prayer Book p. 389, 390, etc.
? The word Priest is not Jewish: for Priest is the English of Presbyter, and
not of Sacerdos, there being, in our Torgue, no word in use, for Sacerdos;
Priest, which we use for both, being improperly used for a Sacrificer, as
Sacerdos signifies, but naturally expressing a Presbyter; the name whereby the
Apostles call themselves, and those which succeed them, in their charge. For
none can deny, that our word Priest is corrupted of Presbyter It may not be
amiss, perhaps, to note, that, within the compass of 2. the (old) Transl^tor
of Calvin's Institutions, turns it Priest, six several times, l. 4. Inst. cap.
3. 7, 8.
. Our Ancestors, the Saxons, first used Preoster, which by a farther
contraction became Priest, and Priest. The High and Low Dutch have Priester,
the French Prestre, Italian Prete, but the Spaniard only speaks full
Presbytero The Reader is entreated, to see a Discourse on this matter, in Mr
Mede's Diatribes, Diat. on 1 Cor. 4. 1. p. 115.
. 3. The word Priest is a better and fitter Apellative, than that of Minister,
for four weighty Reasons, set down, a p. 115. ad p. 118.
in the learned Author, cited in Marg: in the same Diatriba. And yet he prefers
(as also does Mr Hooker L. 5. Sect. 78. p. 417, 418, 419.
) Presbyter (at full) to it; and this was used, in the so much maligned
clamoured Scotch Liturgy See also Dr* H. Savage, one of the Kings Chaplains,
Of this word Priest, in his Reasons, showing no necessity of a Reformation.
. 4. As S. Paul applies 1 Cor. 15. 39. See Hooker, ubi supra
the name flesh, to that very substance of fishes, which proportion^bly
corresponds to flesh, though it be in nature another thing; so the Fathers
call, usually, the Ministry of the Gospel Priesthood, in regard of what the
Gospel has proportionable to ancient Sacrifices, viz. the Communion of Christ's
Body and Blood. 5. For any danger impending from the use of the word; when the
People hear the name, it draws no more their minds to any cogitation of
sacrifice, than the name of Senator or Alderman, to thought of old age. These
two last Answers defending the use of the name, in case it should have some
connotation, or reference to sacrificing. See Dr Sparrows Rationale, p. 259,
260. where also another reason is set down with these two thence extracted.
5. Altars have authority from the Gospel, S. Matthew. 5. 13. If thou bring thy
gift to the Altar, etc. Now, that the Offerings here mentioned, were not a
Jewish perishing Rite, but a duty of the Gospel, to continue, (and,
consequently, the word, Altar, must be looked upon, as to continue name and
thing, under the Gospel;) it is underaken to be proved by good and solid reasons
by some h. 'Twill not be amiss, to touch at those Reasons, which are; See
Bellarmine, In Scriptorib: Ecclesiast: See Medes (...), p. 8. and alibi.
that all Why do they use the word Sabbath, so superstitiously, when that is a
Jewish word? See Mr Fisher 's Defense of Christmasse-Festival.
the rest of the Sermon (whereof the Text mentioned, is a part) is Gospel, and
of Duties obliging Christians; therefore, this; Habemus nos fideles ^ltare,
etc. in Loc: See Chrysostom. Theophylact, Occumenius in Loc. Haymo says,
Altar Ecclesiae est, ubi quotidie corpus consecratur Christi. Remigius,
Habemus ergo Altar Ecclesiae, ubi consecratur ^o^pu Dominicum.
and, before all the Precepts, this severe sanction is prefac'd, whosoever
shall break, etc. Altars, also, are authorized from Hebr. XIII, 10. of which
says Sedulius, (who lived Sermon Of the Worshipping Imaginations, p. 35: See
also his Answer to Card: ^erron. p. 6. ^.
An. 430. and excerpted all his Notes on S. Paul's Epistles from Origin,
Ambrose, Hierom, and Austine, and, therefore, his authority is the more
considerable,) We Enchiridii ad Laurent: c. 120. Edit: Danaei.
the Faithful have an Altar, besides the Altar of the Jews, whence we partake
of the Body and blood of Christ. And, universallie, the Fathers speak of
Altars every where, in their Works, material Altars, for improper Sacrifices.
6. Concerning the Word Sacrafice, Bishop Andrews in c. 14. Marci. See Mede's
Christian Sacrifice, p. 488, 497, 504.
accounts it an imagination or fancy, to take Ombrage at the word. Many among
us, says he, fancy only a Sacrament in this action (breaking of bread) and
look strange at the mention of a sacrifice: whereas we not only use it as a
nourishment spiritual (as that it is, too) but as a mean also, to renew a
covenant with God, by virtue of that sacrifice, as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. I.
5. So our Savior Christ telle^h us in the Institution, Luk: XXII, 10. and the
Apostle, Hebr. XIII. 10. And the Old Writers use no less, the word sacrifice,
than Sacrament; Altar, than Table; Offer, than Eat; but both indifferently, to
show there is both. For, a taste; See S. Austine: Missam audire dicitur qui
Liturgiam ^uscult^r. Missas tenere est Ecclesiasticos conventus agere. Hence,
Missarum solennia celebrare, Gratian: de consecrat: did: ca^: 12.
Cum ergo sacrificii sive altaris sive quarumcunque eleemosynarum, etc. and
Bid: * Ambros. Epist: 35. l. 5:
Ecclesiae mos obtinutt, ut sacrificium altaris, etc. ^7. As to his Charge of
Popiso names, Christmasse, etc. I say, the name is not Popish: if it be so
deemed, because of the termination, mass, I ^ver, ^ that even missa or mass
is not Popish (far antienter than Popery,) it signifying, anciently, the
Worship of God; h consisting in public Prayers, Thanksgivings, Confession of
Faith, Reading of the Scriptures, Receiving the Eucharist (and, so, the ancient
Mass, and Liturgy were the same.) But, 2 the ending here mass, and in
Michaelmasse, etc. signifies a Feast The old Saxon word mae^^an, and from
thence the English Mes^^ and Mass si^nifies a feast, and accordingly with
them, any holy or festival day, i^ alled mae^^an ^ae^, M^^^-day, and, so says
Varro, does the Greek (...), and the Latin Messa, from whence the common ward
Mensa is but lightly removed, and signifies the meat, and not the table only;
and all this from the Latin Missa, because ad mensam mittitur, it is sent or
served up to the table, Dr Hammonds s^xth Quaere Of the Festivals of the
Church, Sect. 56. p. 455, 456.
; so that, Christmasse is the Feast of Christ, etc. I need not add, 3 from
Bishop Andrews I^ Sermon third, on the Nativitie, on Gal. III, 4. 5.
(whose authority he can value, when it serves (seemingly) for his turn,) that
Christmasse (Christi missa, all one with Christi missio,) is the sending of
Christ, and, so, it is far enough from the Romish Mass or Liturgy.

His Tenth Reason is, Because it is a very imperfect Form, there being many
things wanting, that we ought to pray for, etc. Answ: 1. By reference to my
Answ: to his Fifth Reason against our Liturgy. 2. By saying to his two
Instances of that (supposed) imperfection, [No Prayer for assurance; Nor any
for sending forth Laborers, etc.] that the former is not needful, nay not
useful to be prayed for. S. Augustine says De Correp. and Gratia, c. 13. See
H, Grotii Anamadversion^^ in Animadversiones Andreae Rive^i, ad Art. IV. p. 18.
See also his Disquisitio Pelagiana, p. 199, 130, 131, 132. See also, ib. p.
160, etc. Scriptura dicit, Beatus homo qui semper est pavidus [Prov. 28. 14.]
and nunquam est de salute propria men's secura sapientis-quis de perpetua
incolumitate securus? Quod si utique non est, ficuti neque esse debet, etc.
Sal^^an: ad Eccl: Cath: l. 2. mihi p. 379.
, Who of the multitude of the Faithful, while he lives in this mortality, may
presums himself, to be in the number of the praedestinate? because this is
needful to be concealed, in this place (or, world) for fear of elation or
pride. Elsewhere, He says, * That in the tentation of this life, security is
not expedient: * That none can be secure, save when this life is finished,
which is a tentation upon the earth: * That those that live righteously and
piously are found uncertain of their preseverance it self: * That it is
profitable for all, or well nigh all, in regard of a most wholesome humility,
not to be able to know what (for qualities or conditions) they shall be. And
Prosper d has the like in sundry places: So that, instead of any blame
imputable to our Book, in this affair, it is highly to be applauded, as being a
Transcript, not only of Primitive Devotion, but of Primitive Doctrine, also.
And, let novitie give over affronting Antiquity. Definat incessere novitas
ve^ustatem, Dictum Coelestini P.
3. Let me add this; How unsafe it is to rely on (what some call) Assurance,
is too visible, by the late traitorous Regicides, with b Ad Obje ctionem
Vincentii XII. Praedestinatio Dei apud nos dum in praesentis vitae peticulo
versamur, incerta est.
whom there was nothing (poor men! I could heartily wish, it might have been
groundedlie, so Utinam nemo pereat, Nazianz.
) but Heavenward, ho! though a company of facinorous Impenitents. Certainly, a
gracious tenor of a holy life is (if not the only, yet) the most sure and
chief assurance. Altera est Quaestio de certitudine pro futuro* Hic datur magis
bona spes quam certitudo, spes qualis, est in honesta matrona, quae cum semper
casta fuerit, etiam in posterum talis esse vult, and futurum esse confidit,
ideoque non me^uit anxie ne se maritus repudiet. Haec spes sollicitudinem and
cautionem non excludit. Quamdiu^. vivimus in certamine sumus, ut ai^ l. 2.
contra Pelag. Hieronymus. Bernard. Certitudinem utique non habemus, sed spei
fiducia consolatur nos. 1 Cor. 10. 12: Phil. 2. 12. Grot. Annot. ad Cassand. ad
Art. IV.
For his other Instance and charge of imperfection [no Prayer for Laborers,
etc.] it is, also, utterly causeless: For, has not our Liturgy an excellent
Prayer for the Whole State of Christ's Church militant here in earth? and,
therein, does not the Chuch beseech the Divine Majesty to inspire continually
the universal Church with the spirit of truth, etc? Does She not pray in the
Collect for S. Barnabe's Day, See also the Collect for S. Bartholomew's Day,
and others.
That the Lord Almighty would not suffer us to be destitute of his manifold
gifts, nor yet of grace to use them always to his honor and glory. So we have
satisfied his Exceptions, and challenge him to find any such Defective
Omissions.

His Eleventh is, Because there are so many unwarrantable and offensive things
therein. Answ: For his offensive things, I have accounted (somewhat) in Answ:
to his Fourth Reas. against our Book. For his Unwarrantables, we will view them
distinctly, and apply Answer to them, accordingly.

The 1. is, Adding and diminishing from Scripture, endeavored to be proved by
that sentence praeliminarie to our Book. At what time soever, etc. Ezekiel. XVIII,
21. 22. Answ. 1. That the Accuser knows not what adding, etc. is. Let him learn
it above, in my Answ. to's Twenty fifth Reas. against Liturgies. 2. He adds
here, for proof, Prove. 30. 6. But let him, here, also, take with him Grotius's
Note on the words, He Addit, qui aliter quam Deus imperat facit, ut dictu^ ad
Deuteronomy. IV, 2 Grot. in Loc.
adds, that does otherwise, than God commands. He brings for proof, also, Rev.
22. 18. To which we say, 1 What if that be only the adjuration (...).
of the Scribe, (whereof there are examples,) which was the learned Mr Lively's
conjecture? 2 We say, ^t is a symbolical, and Prophetical form of expressing
the certainty, and immutabilitie of this Prophecy; and, that it imports,
also, the absoluteness and perfection of it, in order to public use, that it
should be the one Prophecy given to the Christian Church, which should bring
Divine Authority along with it, as sent with a commission from Heaven; and,
therefore, now, no new doctrine was, farther, to be expected, by the Christian
Church, and whosoever taught any, as a rule Though many excellent things were
written afterward, Josephus cont. Appion: l. 1. and there might be some
Prophets after S. John, as Justin tells us, That the gift of Prophecy
remained, in the Church, till his time. See Dr Hammond in Rev. XXII. 18.
of Faith and Life, and pretended Revelation * for it, should fall under the
censure denounced on false Prophets, Deuteronomy. XIII. and under S. Paul's Anathema,
Gal. 1. 8, 9. Now, let him apply this to his Charge, if he can. 3. To the
particular place contested, I say, 1 It Is cited according to the sense, though
not the words. And, the same petulant censure ever and anon, in that manner.
Concerning the several ways of citing in the N. and O. Testament, 1 as to the
words, 2 as to the sense alone, 3 as to the type fulfilled, 4 as to the
analogy, 5 (...) or indefinitely, 6 (...) or precisely, 7 (...) or summarily,
See in Bishop P^ideaux his Fasciculus Controvers^arum, p. 24. See, also,
Hooker. l. 5. 19. p. 213, 214. See also, concerning the place in Ezekiel.
(particularly,) Bishop Gauden 's Considerations, etc. p. 24. etc. which Answ.
Mr Firmin has not, cannot firmly overthrow.
For instance, see a pregnant place, Hebr. X, 5, 6. cited out of Ps. XL, 6, 7,
8. And, this Answ: may be snarled at, but it can, never, be rationallie
everted. 2 Thus,, it is also ordinary for the Fathers, not to cite precisely
the words, but the sense only, many times.

The 2. Vnjust^fiable wherewith he charges our Book, is, Our leaving out many
Books of Scripture, never to be read thooughout the year; charging it as
contrary to 2 Timothy 3. 16: Answ: 1. By asking, in the learned Thorndike's
words: Of the Service of God at Religious Assemblies, p. 403.
What will any man say now to the Order of reading the Scriptures, once a year,
in the Church? Shall this be the thanks of the Church of England, for renewing
that religious Order of the Ancient Church, and providing a public course, for
the people to become acquainted with the Scripture, To say, that it is out of
the Breviarie or Mass? 2. Be it known to him, we leave out none of the
Scriptures, in our yearly lecture, or reading of them, as if we thought them
not divinely i^spired or unprofitable, but allowing them to be (...), we think
that some Chapters may be well omitted in public, as being either 1 such as
have been read already, upon which score the Chronicles are omitted, being, for
the most part, the same So VII. of Nehem.
with the Books of Kings, read before; or, 2 such as having, for the main, been
read already, either in the same Book, or some other, (the case of certain
chapters, in some other Books;) or, 3 such as being full of Genealogies, S^,
for this cause are emi^ted, Genesis 10, 11, 24, Exodus 6. likewise S. Matt: ^. 1.
to 18 v. Luke 3. 22. to end. Some Chapters are not read, because Ceremonial, as
Exodus: 25. to 32, and 35. to the end ^th Book. Levit. 1. to 18. and 21. to 26.
also the last Chapter in Numb. and those two in Deuteronomy. 14. and 23. So, those are
left that describe Places, Josh. 15. to 23. Those also that are prophetically
mystical, as all Salomons Song, and many Chap. in Ezekiel, especially 9 last, and
Rev. 2. to 22.
or some other matter counted less profitable for ordinary Hearers: as, the
nine last Chapters of Ezekiel, the first eight of the first of Chronicles, how
would such Hearers be edified by? Were not men resolved, to keep up their
animosities, though never so causeless and groundless, they would never
quarrel, in this, and the like cases. But, (...) (or, rather, (...)) (...), is a
saying no older, than true. 3. With what brow (unless of brass) dares he say,
we never read throughout the whole year, Levit: Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther,
Lamentations, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, Zephaniah, Haggai, 2 Thessalonians: 2 John,
or even the 3 of John, or Philemon? Pray, Mr P. look o'r the Calendar, and see,
whether these Books of S. Scripture are not appointed, to be read.

His 3. Unwarrantable is, Gross alterations and differences, in, and between
the Translations, used in our Church, as 1 Psalm: XIV. in the New Translation
there are but 7. v. but, in the Service Book, 11. But, 1. I ask, Is not that
Surplusage of 4 v. Canonical Scripture; and, then, what great matter is it,
where they are, (so it be pertinently) inserted Neither can any error hereby
^rise, if the References be well set in the Book: for it is well observed, that
the English references ^re better for use than most of* the Genevian Notes,
etc: Fisher 's Def. of (...). 2. c. 4. p* 286.
? 2. We say, the third v. There is none that does goods no not one,] being an
Hyperbole, which Paul also uses of the times before the Gospel, was the
occasion why, also, those things which follo^ from v. 13. to 18. inclusively
were inserted, here, into some Greek Books, the Latin also, Ethiopick and
Arabic. Our Book, therefore, has very good company, in doing what it has
done. 3. His next instance is in Ps: CVI, 30. where, instead of [executed
Judgment] (after the Hebrew and Greek. and Numb. 25. 7, etc.) there is, prayed.
1 A heavy fault, (if any.) But, 2 the Hebrew Palal will bear both
significations, to execute judgment, and to pray, and both are good, says
Bishop Andrews, that vast Polyglot c See his Sermon preached in the time of
Pestilence on Ps. CVI, 29, 30. ^. 160. and 164. The Hebr. in other places
signifies to pray, 1 Samuel 2. 1. and 25. Jonah 2. i. The Greeks, also, trenslate
it as we do [(...)] intimating a prayer ^onjoyned to his valiant act: by b^th
which ^e wrought the atto^ement. And we find not in O^ Test. that Moses said, I
fear and quake, etc. Fisher 's Def. of Lit. l. 2. c. 4. p. 295. The Childee,
reads, prayed.
and Critic. 4. His other instances in Ps. XXII, 31. 'twixt [a seed] and [my
seed,] in Ps. XL, 9. 'twixt [righteousness] and [thy righteousness,] in Ps.
CV. 25. 'twixt [God turned] and [whose heart turned] will be for ever
satisfied, by saying, that the Church intends not to aver, all that is read in
the Church, to be truly translated; (if so, what had been the case of the
Church Universal, when it had no Scripture of the Old T. but the Greek, and the
traductions of it c?) a See Bellarmine de Verbo Dei l. 2. c. 6.
2 Will the Carpers at our Translation employ themselves, and all they can make
or procure, to turn but that one Book of Psalms, and undertake to put their
work, beyond the Dye of a considerable number of just Exceptions? If they will,
I am ready (says a learned man) to forfeit for one. It is sufficient, that
what is read in the b Audierunt homines quod non c^gnoverunt and perturbati
sunt, says S. Augustine ^ut of his experience, Sermon: cxliv. de Tempore.
Church is more fit for the edification of it, than the change thereof, whereof
S. Augustine's experience was, d Men hear, says he, what they are not wonted
to, and are much troubled. 3 How shameless a partiality is it, that men
should be so quick and penetrant, as to see many faults in the Old Translation
of the Psalms, and to passe-by all the extreme barbarismes, the spurious
additions, and the false translations, which the Psalms in Meeter contain? 4.
It was well disputed in the Council History of Council of Trent, by Paolo
Sarpio Veneto, l. 2. p, 155. See Ball of Separation, c. 9. p. 174.
of Trent, by Aloysius of Catanea, from S. Jerome and Cardinal Cajetane, that
no Translation is infallible, nor the Translatour equally assisted with the
Spirit, as the Author; whence, it is natural, to conclude, that, if no
Translation may be read in the Church, but that which is free from all error,
then none at all ought, to be read; for there are none, in which there are not
mistakes. And, 5. those in our Psalter, are not such, as touch faith and
manners, and other slips must be comported with, till we have a translation
given by inspiration, as the Originals. For, 6. even K. James's Translation,
elaborated by so many learned men (xlvii) how many (...) or over-sights, and
(...) or misses have Dr Robert Gell Essay ^n the New Tran^lation, in Folio. e
In his fadmirable) Paraphra^e, and ^. on. N. Test^ment, pass^n in marg:
and Dr Henry Hammonde discovered in it? 7. For the last of his instances (out
of Ps. CV, 25.) I think, the Old Translation has done very well, in rendering
the place, according to the sense only; for, the letter is apt, to make men
account God the cause and author of sin (a very spread opinion, in our days.)
Now, God did, no otherwise, turn their (the Egyptians) hearts, than by
multiplying his People. As the dispositions or minds of men are, so the works
of God, either make them better, or worse, Limus ut h^^ duresc^t, and haec ut
cera liques^it. Uno eod^mque igni^^^*
as fi^e soft as wax, and hardens mud. But, the Reader is also 8. and lastly
increated to see Mr Hooker l. 5. 19. p. 213, etc. and, The Rationale ^ p. 498.
ad p. 406. and Fisher l. 2. chapter 5. p. 280, etc.

His 4. Unwarrantable is, Because some (short) Chapters are appointed, to be
begun, in the middle of them, destroying connection. Answ. 1. That those (...)
Portions or seg^^s. Note, that exceptions are taken to the division of the
Bible into Chap: and verse. in several places.
of Epistles and Gospels are apportioned and fitted to the capacity of the
Hearers, and are so far from distracting or dividing the mind, as that they
rise and grow from these easier things, to matters of greater amplitude. 2. Of
his Instances I find not the latter, Luke 2. 10. (and he may as well strike
blindfold, as but now, above.) And, for his former, out of Titus 3. 4. (the
second Lesson for Evening Service on Christ-mass-day;) the beginning of the
reading is very apt, leaving out [But after that,] and beginning: The kindness
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works, etc.

His 5. Unjustifyable is, The appointing many Chapters to be read See Dr Edward
Kellets Miscellanies of Divinity concerning the Apocrypha, l. 2. c. 16. p.
145, 146, and l. 3. c. 2. p. 183. b No wise or g^od man ever did it, (or w^^ds
to that effect) says Dr Gell, Pref. to his Essay on New Translation.
out of the Apocrypha, when yet in Pref: to the Book, it is said, That there is
nothing ordained to be read, but the Scriptures. Answ: 1. That, herein, also,
we imitate the Ancient Church, which avowed the Apocryphals, to be read, for
the directing of Manners, though not as a Rule of Faith; and, this is one of
the faults Not only the Books called Apocrypha, but Clement 's Epistle (Eusebius.
Ecc. Hist. l 4. c. 23.) and the Lives of Martyrs were read, Con* Carth: III. c.
47*
and novel singularities of the (illegitimate) Directorie, that it interdicts
all parts of the Apocryphal Books. 2. Let it be showed, that nothing is to be
read or heard, in the Church, c but what is of inspiration of the H. Ghost. If
so, 3. what will become of a number of good Sermons, which, though never so
good, 'twill be too great a daring, to say, they are inspired? 4. Let it be
conscientiously (with reason, and without prejudicacie) inquired, Whether the
reading of them promote or hinder the Church's edification. In which respect,
says a learned man, Thorndike Of Service of God at Religious Assemblies, p.
404.
so far is it from me, to put out some Apocrypha, that I would rather put in
the first of Maccabees, as describing the fulfilling of some of Daniels
Prophecies It is a Key especially to 8. and 9. Chap.
, and the then-State of Gods people. 5. I shall f So Wisdom (c. 16, 17.) opens
the story of Exodus about the ten Plag^es. Ecclesiasticus is a Comment to
Proverbs. The sixth of Bar^e is a most famous Epitome of sundry things in
Moses, Psalms, Prophets, against Idolatry, Fisher Def. of Li^. l. 2. c. 1. p.
215, 216. Scaliger de emendat: tempor: l. 5, says, The first Book of the
Maccabees is opus eximium. Again, Tu preslantiam hujus libri jam dudum scis. in
Epist. D^^fio. See Alb. Gen^ilis upon it, exquisitely defending it.
not ask (as one, and he a knowing Protestant, does,) What reason is there, why
the Song of Solomon should be Canon, and other useful Books, that bear his
name, Apocrypha? Why the Revelation put into the Canon, CCC. years after
Christ, and some Gospels (bearing the Apostles names) left out; but the
Authority of the Church? I would not believe the Scripture, says S. Austine,
did not the Churches Authority move me. ^. Its acknowledged, that those Books
are holy, ecclesiastical and sacred; that to term them divine (as, in
excellency, next to the properly-so-called,) is not to exceed, in honoring
them; yea, even that the whole Church, as well at first, as since, has most
worthily approved their fitness for the public information of life and
manners: this much, I say, is acknowledged, even by them Harm: Confess. ^1.
B^lg^ca Con^a^t: VI. Lubert: de princip: Christ^dogm: l. 1. c. 5:
, who yet, receive not the same, for any part of Canonical Scripture, and are
ready, to instance, wherein they seem, to contain matter faulnie, and scarce
agreeable with H. Scripture. So little does such their supposed faultiness, in
moderate men's judgment, enforce the non-reading them publicly. 7. If the
Scriptures asscribe righteousness to men, who, by that asscription or Euiogie,
are not cleared from all faults, why may not these (so despised I heard a
Presbyteri^n Preacher, out of a Pulpit in Northampton call them, That stinking
lake, betwixt two clear fountains, Os durum! K. James at Hampton.
Court-Conference, upon occasion of a needless exception taken by Dr Rey: to a
passage in Ecclus, What trow ye, said the King, makes those men so angry with
Ecclus? I think he was a Bishop, or else they would never use him so.
) Pieces, wherein so many perfections occur, retain the title of Holy, only
because some ((...)) conceited singular men, out of their ((...), or, (...))
over-weeningnesse, or malignitie, can show a word or sentence in them, which
may be liable to suspicion unto us, who only conjecture their meaning, and use
not the like industry, to conciliate and fish forth their true import, as we
do for the other Scriptures. But, 8. what if they should appear perfectly
justifiable, in all those seeming errors, that are so clamoured, (and our
Church for reading them) in them? Grotius could do as much, as man I may want
none of the works of this great personage: I have a particular esteem of all
that comes from him, and besides the solidity of his learning, the strength of
his reasoning, and the graces of his language, I observe therein a certain
character of honesty, which persuades me, that excepting our Religion, from
which he is unhappily a stranger, be may be confided in for all things else.
B^lsac's Fam. Ler, B. 5. l. 35, p. 138.
can do. Hear what he says, The Christian Church, or certainly great parts
thereof, have believed, that there is nothing in those Books, which well agrees
not with those which all acknowledge. Certain things are, here, wont to be
objected, to which in our Annotations on those Books, we answer Annotata ad
Cassand: Art. de Canonicis Scripturis.
. Now, because the sundry Ministers in their Reasons showing a necessity of
Reformation, instance in the passage of Asmodeus, the evil spirit, Tob. 3. 10.
If we consider, See Mede 's Diatr* on J^h. 10. 20. He has a Devil, etc.
that the Hebrews are wont to asscribe all diseases * to Devils, because
Devils, by Gods permission, make use of natural causes, and that this Asmodeus
is, in the Thalmudical Writings, called, King of the Devils *; that he has his
name from (...), which, in Syriac, is, to destroy; * and that this fell out (as
it is probable,) by some vice or disease of Sarahs body (And, therefore, Sarah,
in the Greek, in way of opprobrie, is called (...); See beneath, 25. in ours
15.) these things, I say, considered, that manner of unlikelihood is there in
it? Therefore, well might Dr Savage say (in Return to this their Objection,) In
defense of the Angel who guided Tobias.
I have heard of as unlikely a matter, as this; however it is not impossible.
They instance again, in Tobit 12, 19. [Alms does deliver from death, and shall
purge away all sin.] Which, what speaks it more, See Dr Ed. Kellet 's
Miscellanies, l. 2. c. 16. p 145.
or other, than Daniel's advice to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27. [Break off thy
sins by righteousness, etc.] And, this the Vulgar renders, redime (redeem,)
Theodotian, (...). Neither ought it to offend any, says Grotius In Loc.
, that, to the works of penitence, in which Alms excel, should be attributed
what agrees properly to penitence; for, such a Metonymie or Synechdoche is very
frequent. Chrysostom, for (...) (redeem) cites Secunda ^d Theodorum.
(...), in the same sense. And, what more, or other does this signify, than
what S. Luke says, See Grot. ad Luc. XI. Deum ve^o propit^u^ reddi per
poenitentiae opera, eo sensu recte dicitur, quo in veritate and inisericordiae
expiari iniquitatesdicit. Salo^o, Pro. 16. 6. Grot. Animad. in Anim. Rivet. p.
54: Note, that [righteousnes] here signifies, Alms deeds; so in Matthew. 6. 1.
some Copies read (...) for (...). See Pract. Cat. l. 3. 1. p. 245.
c. 11. 41. But, rather give alms of such things as you have: and behold all
things are clean unto you? Nay, what does it signify, but the very thing we
read Prove. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness
delivers from death? But, the Reader is besought, to see Mr Mede on this
matter, where Diatribe, on Ps. 113, 6. (espe^ially) p. 312.
he interprets this place of Tobit, and the now-mentioned of the Proverbs, as
perfectly equivalent. I shall not stand, to justify the other excepted places
of the Apocrypha, because I would be brief; yet, this I shall stay to say, That
the Reader shall find them lovely, I add and sound, or savoury, if he reads
them (imprejudicately) with Grotius's perpetual notes upon them. Yet, 9.
(supposing the word supposable) I say, that what, happily, might serve, to
withhold from giving them the authority and dignity of eximiously Canonical
Scripture, will not, as effectually, serve to exclude them altogether the
Church, and that public use, wherein they are only held, as profitable for
instruction. Now (10. and lastly,) for the peoples more plain instruction (as
the Sea Hieronym: P^ef. ad Libr^^ Salomonis, August. de praed: Sanct: l. 1. c.
14. Gl^ss. Ord: and Lyr. ad P^ol: Hieron: in T^b.
ancient use has been,) we read them, in our Churches, yet not as Scripture; in
which matter all men know our avowed and declared opinion; touching the
difference, whereby we sever them from the Scripture. I refer the Reader to
farther (and full) satisfaction, on this head, to Mr Hooker L 5. Sect. 20. p.
218, 219, ^^0.
My self have the longer insisted on it, because the lecture of the Apocrypha
does not easily digest with some, that are not Bigots of Sectarism. As to his,
[Caveat omnia Apocrypha] in Marg. We say, 1. That that counsel of S. Jerome to
Laeta may be, in relation to matters of Faith, not Manners; that she should be
cautious, how she built upon them, for the establishing the former, not the
regulating the latter. 2. S. Jerome (I may humbly say) is but one Doctor S.
Hie^onym. in P^aef: ad Proverbia -- ait. utiles eos esse ad adificationem
plebis, non ad Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum authori^atem confirma^da^.
; and, besides that his Authority will be slighted by our Author and his
(...), in other matters, we may be allowed to think, that some, in these latter
times, have opened some (...) (...) Theocriti veteres no^a^ut Critici, ut and
Vi^gilis; ex qui^us expedire se non pote^ant. S. l. mas. Ep l. 1. Ep 4.
Beve^ovicio.
, which in former were not understood. 3. Again, yet it may be in reference to
some suspected places, wherein Laeta was to proceed, by art and judgment (her
own, or learned men's,) which is the sense Mr Hooker ib. p. 220.
puts upon this place of the learned Father, in this Argument; who yet, adds:
But surely the arguments that should bind us, not to read them publicly at
all, must be stronger, than yet we have heard any.

What the Pref. says, That there is nothing ordained, to be read, but the
Scriptures, is soon satisfied, by saying, that that excludes Legends and
fabulous stories, etc. What he adds, out of the Synods Catechism is answered,
1. by saying, We value not the Authority of such illegal hackney-Synods, or
(to use the Scotch word, for a Scotized Meeting) Assemblies, 2 that the proofs,
Luke 24. 27, 44. Rom 32. 2 Pet 1. ^1.
they bring, prove nothing; for, there are other Scriptures, beside Moses, the
Psalms and Prophets, as Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Lamentations, fourth Book of
Kings, etc.

Why he sets down only some few Chapters, out of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus,
when we read them all, I know not, unless he be a combatant akin to the
Andabatae.

As-to his Sixth Uuwarrantable of our Book, That it calls the Writings of the
Prophets, Acts, Revelation, Epistles, affixing a List of Instances. To his List
(aforesaid) we say, 1 It is, blunderingly and untruly, set down. E. G. where
finds he Isa. 7. 17. It should be 10th, and, then, it is a proper lesson, indeed
for an Epistle? Where Act, 2. 1. 11. 17. 10. 24? 2. The Epistle for
Christmass-day is out of Hebr. 1. 1. (which, sure, is an Epistle, visibly
contrary to what he pretends.) 3. We say, that the denomination or style
(fitly enough, and not without precedent sacred Thus, not to mention the Book
of P^^lms enstyled David's, nor that of Proverbs, called Salomons; the Book of
the Acts is named of the Apostles, and yet the actions of Stephen, Silas,
Apollos, etc. are therein described. But see Ambr. Fisher Def. of Lit. l. 1. c.
3. p. 39. and l. 2. c. 5. p. 302. and Bishop Traylor 's Collection of Offices,
in Prof. Sest. 27.
and profane) is (...), from, and according to, the greater number, which sure,
are out of the Epistles of S. Paul, etc. 4. The whole Word of God is his
Epistle to Mankind Quid estautem Scriptura sacra, nisi Epistola omnipotentis
Dei ad Creaturam? Gregor: l. 4. Epist. 48. ad Theodorum Medicum.
; and yet if it be said, Why then are not the Gospels, also, called Epistles?
the third Answer, (in this Paragraph) gives the account.

To his Seventh, That we call the days of the Week by the names of Idols,
Answ. 1. By referring to our Answ: to his Ninth Object. against our Book, (in
his p. 14.) 2. To his places of Scripture, where prohibition is made, Not to
mention the names of the Heathen Gods; and, where the Days are called, the
first, second, third, etc. To the former I say, 1 that Prohibition was peculiar
to that imperfect people, and prone to Idol^trie; under which danger and
proclivitie no Christians are toward the Idols instanced. 2 He does beat
himself Propria vineta caedit.
with those places; for, the Jews were, thereby, forbid to pronounce Therefore
for (...) the said (...); for (...) and so, in the rest, see Grot. in Exodus
xxiii. 14.

His place, Hos. 2. 17: signifies that God would so punish them for their
idolatry to Baal, v. 8.-13. that they shall not dare to use that word, out of
horror to that name, which was given to an Idol: Did we worship Juisco, etc.
or were we so punished, for so worshipping?

That it may be lawful to mention an idolatrous name without reproof, Mr Ainsw.
the Brownist (in Paget's Arrow against the Brown: p. 142, etc) acknowledges,
and instances in Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzer, and others.

Not all mention of Idolatr. names is forbidden, but only either swearing by
Idols, or praising or approving, or maintaining supersition toward them, or
giving scandal by them, Ley 's Tract of the Sabbath, p. 43. (pleading for the
name, Sunday.)

The name Sabbath may be, and is become a snare to many weak ones, and
especially in reading the Scrip: for wheresoever they find the name Sabbath,
they presently conceive it to be meant of the Lords day, and many times by this
means fall into flat Judaism, as appears by their quoting the O. T. in the
question in hand, Gilbert Ironfides VII Question of the Sabbath, q. 3. c. 1^.
p. 122. and see also the ^^^rned Editor of Bishop Andrews on the Commandments,
Annot. ^1. p. 273, ^74, ^75.


their names, that they might be the farther removed from veneration of them;
but Mr P. makes no difficulti^, to pronounce Tuisco, Wooden. To the latter
places; 1 that, though the Scriptures so reckon, we are not bound, so to count,
any more than to wear their Garments; much less than we are, to use their
Judicial Laws: the matters are civil, and we are at our liberty. 2 That their
Months, also, were called the first, second, etc. months, and yet we find, they
had other names or designations; the Month Abib, Nisan, Zif, Bull; and Tizri
answering to our September, which is no more denominated from an Idol, than it.
So that, this Objection is vanished, also; and, 'twere pity, to spend so much
time about it, but that these men love, to be angry at Cockals ((...).)

To his Eighth, That we dedicate days to the Angel Michael, the Apostles, etc.
Answ. 1. It is not only lawful, but laudable, to fix a Remark of honor on
all, who have lived Christianly, and especially who have died, in testimony of
the Truth of that profession; and, therefore, to enstyle some days, by the
names of Saints, who were, either born, or martyred, (or some eminent
occurrence befell them,) on those days; (which is, also, accommodable to
Angels) whose Days are hallowed, by the holy exercises thereon performed,
commomorating and recounting of their virtuous and exemplarie Lives, constant
and courageous Deaths or Martyrdoms, etc. and giving God (who is glorified By
fest^val solemnities ^^ set-daies, we dedicate and sanctify to God the memory
of his benefits; lest unthankful forgetfulness should creep upon us* in course
of time, S: Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c. 4:
and honored in his Saints) thanks for them; their lightsome examples,
directing us in the ways of all virtues, and giving us confidence, that they
having, here, pleased God, and attained an endless glorious end, we may (if we
be not wanting to our selves) arrive at the same. 2. Fo his Texts, that, Exodus
31. 15. [six days may work be done, etc.] makes nothing to his purpose; the
words are not preceptive, but premissive (more than they appear to be,
Thornd^ke of Assemb: p 255, etc. Without doubt it was always a gross
inconsequenc^ to imagine an office of the 2d Table, of laboring in ordinary
work, to be commanded by a law of the first Table: but without doubt it was
always a gross inconvenience, to imagine God to give a command here, which we
must suppose him to cross afterward in the law of Moses, when he comes to
appoin^ New Mons and other Solemnities to be obser^ed on these six d^ies.
Therefore when the Commandment says, six d^ies thou SHALL labor, the meaning
is, six ^^mes thou (may) labor -- So it is translated Exodus xxxi, 1^. And in
the Heb. the same word stands for both senses, etc. See also Dr Ha^mond's
Account against Mr Cawdrey, p. 46. See S. H^e^^m^ in Gal. 4. 10. See likewise
M^^^e's Diacr: 3d part, on Deuteronomy ^6. 16. p. 6^2, etc.
elsewhere) [may be, not must be] Exodus 20. 9. God requires one day in seven,
and allows us six, not denying us the freedom, if we be so devote, to
consecrate some part of that number, also, to him and his public service. And,
the Argument may be retorted, and so, by Rebound, himself and his Confederates
in opinion are condemned, (in that which they allow,) as to their own (dear)
practice, who kept Parliament-Festivals and Fasts: against which (were it that
the occasion of setting those days apart had been lawful) the Text alleged,
in their sense, of it, fights (...), thus: You are commanded, to labor six
days: Ergo, etc. for, so sensed it takes away as well occasional Holy Days as
set and recurrent Ones. His other Texts (Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16.) make nothing,
at all, for him, neither. For, those places belong not, at all, to Christian
Feasts. The words, there, may possibly relate to Jewish Feasts (as may seem
likely, from the mention of their willingness, to be under the Law a); and,
then the Daies] will signify Sabbaths, the Months] V. 21.
new moons or months, the times] their anniversarie feasts, and the stars]
their sabbatick years and Jubilees. No prejudice to Christian Festivals thus,
hence. For, though the Jewish Observations were Feasts, like these; yet were
they not forbidden as Feasts, but only as Jewish (now, when they were
antiquated or out-dated by Christ,) and, so, as ill symptoms in Christians,
intimating their preferring of Judaism, and depending on those legal
observances for justification. Or else possibly the words may refer to Heathen
Observances, and, so, the mention b of the Heathenisme, wherein they had V. 8.
lived, does seem to incline or carry them; and, S. Ambrose interprets them
accordingly; and, then, the meaning will be, that they observed ominous days,
as the Gentiles were wont to do. And, these, again, have nothing common with
Christian Festivals See Pract. ^at. l 2 Sect. 12 p. 234, ^35.
. 3. Tertullian was so far from conceiving, from this Text, how any man could
possibly call in question the Christian-Church her Days, that, from the
observation of them, he argues, and proves; Si omn^m in tetum de^o^ionem
tempo^um and dierum e^act Apost^lus, cur Pas^ha cele: i^amus, etc. Lib. adv.
Psychich^s, p. 651. Even the Novatians (or Cathari) were not against Easter,
Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 20.
it could not be the Apostles intent or design, simply to condemn all
observance of such times. 4. We have shown abundantly, that anniversarie
recurrent Fasts and Feasts were set apart by men, without particular precept
from God, without check or reproof See Answ: to Reas: xxvi. against Liturgies,
in his p. 8.
, even under that state, Mr Cawd^ey in his Acce^^^ audited, etc, would have the
Feast of Purim, to be ordained, Esth. ix, 27. by Mordecai, either as he was a
Prophet, or as it was a civil (no Holy) day But how knows he, that He was a
Prophet* And would he trust the story of the Maccab. that Judas, who
instituted the Feast of Ded: etc. was a Prophet? And that it was a Holy Day see
six Reasons in Bish. And: Sermon on Esth: ix. 21. p. ^007, 1008.
wherein, as to children, matters were so minutely and particularly prescribed
and enjoined; then, much more is it lawful, to set them apart, now. 5. His
place out of Coloss. would not have Christians condemned or sentenced for or by
observing (as types or shadows of Christianity) the Jewish Feasts, new Moons
or Sabbaths: which being the sense of the words, let him tell me, how they
intercommune with our Festivals. I Will not observe, that [Sabbaths,] about which
some have made such a Jewish do, is, here, put among the shadows, that are to
vanish, in the presence of Christianity That (...), entire and continual
Feast, that a Chtistians life ought to be, now, under the N. Testament, Orig.
cont: Cells. l. 8. p. 404. See Bishop And: against Tra^k, a speech inter opera
posthuma.
, the substance. This may concern the supercilious impugners of our Festivals.
6. We reckon Sunday, as one of the Holy Days These to be observed for
Holy Days, and none other. That is to say, All Sundaies in the year, etc: See
the Preliminaries to the Service Book.
: We call it not Sabbath, because, as Bishop White has observed *, it is no
where called so, by the H. Ancients. I have, says he, Treatise of the
Sabbath Day, p. 301, 202. See him also in his Examination of the little
Dialogue distinguishing 'twixt the mystical and spiritual Sabbath typed and
represented by the Sabbath of the fourth Com: etc. p. 109. And ib. p. 37.
applying this distinction not in a proper or literal, but in a mystical and
analogical sense.
diligently searched into Antiquity, and observed in the Fathers their form of
speech, when they treat of the Lord's Day: and I find it far different from the
usual language of the Fathers, to style the Lord's Day the Sabbath: and that
they, by the name Sabbath, either understand the old Legal Sabbath, taken away
by Christ; or the spiritual and mystical Sabbath, which was typed and
represented, by the Sabbath of the Fourth Commandment. And when the Ancient
Fathers distinguish and give proper names, to the peculiar days of the week
they always style the Saturday (...) Sabbatum See Dr Heylin's Respondet
Petrus, (about the beginning.)
, the Sabbath: and the Sunday, or first day of the Week Dominicum, the
Lord's Day. 7. And, yet, in regard of that which is proportionable, in our
Sunday, to the Sabbath, we may style it Sabbath; so does once or twice (as I
have observed) Bishop Andrews In his third Sermon: on Resur: p. 406, 407. and on
Acts 2. 1, 2, etc. p. 595. So our Homilies, Hom: of the Time and Place of
Prayer, p. 102, 164, 166. Ecclesiastical Canons, Can: LXXth. So in Edm: Reeves
Christian Divinity, aliquoties. See more instances in Ley's Treatise of the
Sabbath, ch: ^5. per tot. The Disciplinarians were went to style this [the
Sabbath] a Jewish name. The Rhemists [on Rev. 1. 10.] mislike the name, Sunday,
[as Heathenish,] Fishers Def: of (...). l. 1. c, 3. p. 19.
, once our Canons of 1603. 8. As-to his Exception unto our dedicating one Day
to all Saints, we say, ^ if it be lawful (^s it is proved to be,) to set a-pa^t
one Day, in honor (suprose) of S. John, etc. then, it must be, likewise, so,
to set-apart a Day, for many; or all. 2. The reason of the Church's so doing,
is, because we cannot particularly. commemorate (for the b^rthen) every one of
the Saints, in whom God's graces have been il^^strious: and, because in those
Feasts celeb^ate^ particularly, we are ^ustly supposable, to have failed in
duty, th^o^gh infirmity, or neg^igence. And, 9. not every thing that Pagans,
o^ Papists do is evil, or if it be vitiated, by evil adherences or
circumstances, those being retrenched, or redressed by us, what remains (being
good) is lawful (and praise-worthie,) to be performed. 10. When we place
holiness, and confidence of acceptance with God, in the bare setting apart
such Da^es (or, even the services performed on them) without reformation of
life, the [wash you, make you clean, etc.] then, Isaiah 1. 12. is appliceble to
us, in this matter, not otherwise; or, if it be, it is to the treading Gods
Courts, etc. too.

To his Ninth Unwarrantable, The Ministers being called Priests: Answ: 1. By
referring to our Answ: to his Ninth Reas. against our Lit: 2. By adding, that
S. Paul implies 1 Cor: 9. 13.
, that the Ministers of the Gospel might be entitled Priests [They which
minister about holy things, live or feed of the things of the Temple, etc.] his
reasoning being deduced from the Priests, Temple, Altar: They which wait at the
altar, are partakers with the altar: therefore, or so, etc. 2. And, it is the
style used by the ^ven in B. Ign^tius*s Epistles, we read (unless we list to
be^ieve Ve^^lius leg^^s, Ep. ^^ Ph^ladel^hen^^: (...) and (...), Ep.
^^^my^nenses.
H. Ancients, whose Discourses of the Ministry, are enstyled, of the
Priesthood (...). De ^^^^dotio.
. 3. It Is Bishop Downham's Observation (men skewing at the word Priest, only
because used in the Church of Rome,) that if we had differed from them, so it
had been, by styling Ministers Sacrificers, no offense had been taken thereat,
(so slight and easy is that legerdemain, which will serve to del^de the
vulgar, as was, excellently, observed by the golden pen (...). (...). ^ied 1^.
mihi p 133.
of K. Charles I.) Besides, 4. there is only a change of the Priestho^d, Heb^:
7. 12. See ^. (...) l. 4. ^4.
no abolitoon or nulling of it, and, so, a Pri^sthood, and so the word Priest,
still, lawful. 5. But, to an Obj. plead^ng for the word Priest, from 1 Pet. 2.
9. -- a royal Priesthood; and, for that of Clergy, from c. 5. 3. he Replies,
It Is to be meant, of all Then, from Rev. 1, 6 we may ^^ well argue, (...) there
should be no King in (...), Compa^e i^ ^^. ^. with c. 60. 21. ^^e also ^er. 33.
17*
Believers, universally: to which I say, I what if, as we need not, so we
produce not (though he does) this place of Scripture, to prove the lawfulness
of the word Priest, in our sense of it? 2. This place, yet, may be applied,
fairlie, to that end: for, it speaks of no other thing than what is affirmed,
in the very same words, of the Jewish nation, Exodus: 19. 6: where yet, God had
his Priests and Highpriests, also See this place (^^ply) (...) Bishep T^ylor's
Clerus D^m^^^ Of the Divine institution of the Office Ministerial, Sect. 5.
number. 9. p. 32.
3. This separated Order may analegically be called the Tribe of Levi, because
they are (as they were,) by divine appointment, set apart and consecrated, to
o^^^ciate in holy things, and peculiarly appear before, or draw near to, the
Lord. 4. So they may be called his Clergy Persons sacred-were the Priests and
Levites in the O. T. and now in the N. the Christian Clergy. or Clerus; ^o
called from the beginning of Christian Antiquity, ^ither because they are the
Lords (...), or P^rtion, which the Church dedicated to him out of her self,
(namely, as the Levites, etc. Number: 8. 11.) or because, their inheritance and
livelihood is the Lords (...). I pre^er the first, etc. M. Mede Diatr^ on S.
Matthew 6. 9. Luke 11. 2. Sanctificetur nomen tuum, p. 62 63. See too hi^ Diat^^
on Deuteronomy. 33. ^. Est Clorus Ecclesia, and Clerus Ecclesia, and Cle us Ecclesia
(...) Ecclesia est ^o^s D^m^^. quae oma^s includit fideles, ^ Pet: 2. 5. Ap^c:
1. 6. Clerus Eccle^x su^ ^^tae inter ^^del spe (...) legiti^e vocatae ad manus
m^nisterii, Act: 13. 2. T^. 1. 5. Bishop (...) E^se: Con^: p ^17.
. [(...), lot or po^tion] (though the faithful People are so too, in a lower
different import,) because they are peculiarly so. And, there is that
distinction owned in the Scriptures, whence this irrefragable Argument is
derivable: What God has distinguished, no man may blend. Ergo, Not Priests and
People (or, which is the same, Clergy, and Laity.) See, under the Law, Number:
18. 20. under the Prophets, Hos: 4, 4. 9. Mal. 2. 7. under the Gospel, Acts 20.
28. Gal: 6. 6. Hebr. 13. 17. where the Flock and Pastors are clearly
distinguished This distinction is founded in the law of nature, the Indians
having their B^achmanes, etc. See Gen: 14. 18. and 47. 22. Exodus 2 16.
. 5 Whereas he says, the Ministers owning themselves, as of the Tribe of Levi,
(in what sense we have heard,) ought, to suffer the punishment (banishment
enacted by Law against Jews:) I shall quit scores with him, by telling him of a
Law, in Justinian's Code (...): qu^ rebapt^zare, etc. ult^mo supplicio
per^^lletur.
made against Anabaptists (of which Tribe he is:) and concerning the punishment
they under-went at Vienna in Germany, let him see Gastius; De (...) An^^^pe:
l. 1.
and Mr How, in his Continuation p. 4^6, and 5^9.
of Hollinshead, how they have fared in England.

To his Tenth. The People's praying and bly with the Minister, charged with
confusion and contrariety to good order, Answ: 1. That (...) (our Author)
m^st not be allowed, to brand that, with his sootie Characterisms, which the
wole Church of God, for so many Ages, has, from the example of pure
Antiquity, designed, and used. 2. That the place, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
he cites, condemns it not, but approves it: for, 1 it is decent, because
according to custom, which is the rule and measure of decency: See Doctor
Hammond's (...).
2 It Is (...), according to appointment, as it is visible: whence it is most
apparent; that the charges are due to himself and his Partisans. 3. It Is not
only docent and orderly, but also hugely useful See Thorndike of the service
of God at Religious Assemblies, c. 10. p. 401, 406.

See also Hocker l. 5. Sect. 39. p. 206, and p. 262.


, to quicken devotion, recall diverted scattered thoughts; in a word, to engage
every one, to be made no idle or unprofitable spectator of the service, (not to
come to our Churches, to hear much, say little, and do nothing, as Bishop
Prideaux characters Euchologia^ or, the Doctrine of Practical Praying, p. 46,
47.
the Devotion of the late days.) 4. He speaks against all utterance of a loud
voice by the People, when, even in the Chapter by him cited, it is clearly
signified V. 116.
, to have been the fashion, in S: Paul's time, for the Layman (...).
to say, Amen (audibly, no doubt.) I shall not, 5. speak of what is in Exodus:
15, 21. See also v. 1. concerning Moses and the children of Israel. See,
likewise, 1 Samuel xviii, 7. Hunc amoebaum versum alternis canebant. Besides
diverse patterns in the Psalms of such interchangable singing. See Junius on
Exodus 15.
(pertinent to this matter:) Miriam the Prophetesse's answering the women
(praecentrices) in these words, Sing ye to the Lord, etc.

To his Eleventh, The singing of the Lessons, etc. when as there is no command
from God, nor practice of the Churches of God. Answ: 1. That the Modes of Gods
Service (whether plain singing, or plain saying,) are not under particular
precept, but left to humane prudence, etc. For, 2. the Rubric (by him touched)
inorders, that the Lessons, etc. shall be sung in a plain tune, after the
manner of distinct reading. So S. Athanasius commends the singing Vt legentibus
sint qu^m cantantibus similiores.
, wherein they are liker readers, than chanters. Such is ours to be, but like
fair long reading, with modulation of the voice. What Church in all the world,
before Geneva, had the Mode of singing, now used in our Churches? And where,
then, is the practice of the Churches of God, to countenance this new manner?
4. Sure, it will be lawful to sing (after that, beforementioned, Cathedral
way) other parts of the Service, as well as David's Psalms, in prose: and more
lawful (one would think) to sing them so, than as they are translated by
Sternhold, Hopkins and Wisdom, guilty of those extreme barbarisms, spurious
additions, and false translatings (as I have noted, before;) which yet, the
Clerk must usher in with a [Let us sing to the praise and glory of God,] All
men being bare, when the Psalm is sung, though not when the Psalms are read;
See Dr Heylins Examen Historicum, p. 130.

Cantus precum, Anathematum -- actionis solennitati and excitanda devotioni
haud segniter conferunt, Bishop Pride: Faf: Contr: p. 244.


as if the reading of the Psalms were not as much to the praise and glory of
^od, as the singing of such a rude and barbarous translation. 5. What do
[Mattens and] Even-Song import, but that the Service (in comportance with the
name) should be sung (or the greatest part of it?) Which name, 6. is not new,
and therefore our Church is not the only Church, that used this course. And,
7. if other Churches do not practice it, ours being (I make no question) the
best reformed, in the world, they ought to conform (and be censured for
disconformitie) to us, not we to them.

To his Twelfth Unwarrantable, which is, That the Te Deum, etc. is to be read
daily throughout the year. Answ: 1. Why not? How many Preachers (even
(causeless) enemies to the Liturgy) use one and the same Prayer before their
Sermon, all a life long? Even Calvin did so constantly, without alteration,
Beza in vita Calvini.
and Beza also, before and after Sermon, etc. likewise, Dr Sibbes (whose Form
is printed) and others. For, 2 his Exception strikes at all Forms whatsoever,
that they may not, still, be used. 3. There is not par ratio, the same reason
of Preaching and Praying; the former being (mainly, what the name teaching, so
superstitioussie used by some, imports) to teach what was not known before
(and, so, must be various;) the latter but to crave, or thank for, the same
standing unalterable blessings, bestowed, or to be bestowed; save in some rarer
cases o^ emergencies, for which there is, or standing provision likewise, or
the Church emergentlie and extra ordinem interposes. 4. However, when we proved
Liturgies or prescript Forms lawful (which is abundantly performed, above,) we
have (comprehensivelie) proved this Divine Hymn (together with the rest) to be
la^ful, to be used still and still. 5. To his carping at the Latin Titles of
the Hymns, Te Deum, etc. as importing a seeking uniformitie with the Papists,
we say 1 We affect not dis-conformitie to them, any farther then it appears,
they are truly dis-conform to truth. N^y, 2 we profess, to affect conformity
with them, usque ad ara^, and do account them our Brethren, though greatly
erroneous. 3 It Is for him and such as he, to run so far from ancient Truths,
and commendable Practices or Usages (out of hate to Rome,) till they run into
Phanaticisme, and (some) even into Atheism ((...).) 4 It Is extremest unc
aritie, to charge the faithful Sons of this Church, with tendencie to Popery,
Hae manus Trojam crigent! Parvas habet spes Roma, si tabes habet.
when the Composers of the Liturgy fried a faggot in opposition thereto, and
their Followers, of this Age, have done so much by nervous excellent writings,
and s^ffered so much, by an ungrateful, besotted, fascinated (...);
people, and a plebeian Tribe of seditious Priests, against (and rather than
they would turn to) the Church of Rome. But, this is what we must exspect from
Schismatics.

To his Thirteenth, Because there is a difference made, in the Te Deum, 'twixt
Angels, Cherubim and Seraphim, importing (the Papistical) nine Orders of
Angels. Answ: 1. If the mention, here, exceped-to, import as he would have it,
Popery is much more ancient, than I ever did, or now can be made to, believe it
to be. For, that divine and admirable Called anciently (...), a triumphant song.
Form is thought (generally) to be composed, ^elman: in Basil: T. 1. p. 179.
apud View of Directorie, p. 25. some say, miracuiously.
by S. Augustine and Ambrose; on the day that S. Ambrose baptized S. Austine,
and fitted to that purpose, with an acknowledgment of the S. Trinity, in
reference to S. Austin's convers^on from Manichaisme. 2. The nine Orders of
Angels are found in Dionysius Areopagita (at least, an About an: Chri: 254 he
wrote. For, it appea^s by (...): l. ^ that The^d^^ Pres^yter about the year 410
debated the question, Whether that writer were Dioxysius mentioned in the
(...). And, of this no doubt has been made; but that he was a very ancient and
learned Author. Antiquissimus and elegantissimus Scriptor, says ^a^a^^on.
ancient Author,) and though the Book, under his name, De Ecclesiastica
Hierarchia, possibly may be supposititions, yet the thing it self Gregorius M.
Hom: (...). in ^^a^gel:
testifies to be accepted for Dionysius's own. Nescie^^es inesse and in
incredibili verum, and in v^^is^mil^ mendacius, Minu^i Felicis ^^^avius, mihi p
^8. (...), Michaelem Archang^lum non Christum deno^^^e, rec^ptior est
sen^enti^, inde an^^ ^^^^pitur De^m celebrandi. ab. in (...) nobis Angelorum
ministerium, in ^^ic^^elis (...), bishop Pride: Fasc: Contr: p. ^37 See
Calv^^ns^. l 2. c. 2. ^. 15.
While, under this head, he charges us with setting apart Days for Michael,
and all Angels, we say our so doing is ^usrifiable, as appears above in Answ:
to his Eighth Unw: 4. When he says, 1 It Is very probable, that by Michael is
understood Christ himself, we easily say, 1 What is very probable is not
always true (^s nor what is true, always probable.) 2 It Is improbable
(utterly,) that Michael should mean Christ: for, it is said, there, of Michael,
he durst not, etc. h But, sure, Christ durst so much, i. e. use reproachful
words toward the Devil, his apostate Creature and subject. And, this place
refers to Zech: 3. 2. (for, the body of Moses, here, contended about, was the
Temple of the Jews, which God commanded to be reedified; see Dr Hammond in
Loc.) 3 In the place of the Rev. 12. 9. Christ is called Michael, because
Christ is the keeper of the Christian nation, as Michael was ((...)) of the
Jewish See Grot: in Dan: 10. 13. 21. and 1^. 1. Quem ad Michaelis modum and
ultra depingit Apocalipsis, Id. ib.
4 Again, if Christ be the Archangel, when it is said, he shall descend with the
v^c: of the Archangel 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
, he must descend with his own voice, and be God's Trumpeter. So that, though
Maresius, in's heat of disputation with Volkelius, would have Michael the
Archangel, to be evermo^e understood of Christ, yet the Apostle evidently
distinguishes the Lord from the Archangel, in that place. And, this the Latin
Church, which was always thought sound enough, in the doctrine of the B.
Trinity, has declared to be her sense, in her Festival to the honor of S.
Michael. 5. To what he has (in's Marg:) of but one (...), Clem. Al. Stro. 1.
6. That there are seven principal Angels, ca^l^d Archangels, as Michael,
Gabriel, Raphael, Jerechmiel, etc. called, Principes prima^ii, Dan: x. and
(...) by S. Paul to Tim. Ep. i. c. 5. v. 21. and (...) (i.) (...), See Mr Mede
Diatr: on Zach: 4. 10. (irrefragably.) So false is that of (the diligent
Collector) Mr Edward Leigh, that we read no where in Scripture of Archangel,
but Christ is understood, Notes on N. Test: in 1 Thessalonians: 4. 16.
Archangel, (when yet, we say [therefore with Angels and Archangels -- ]) out
of Dan. 10. 13. and 12, 1. we say, 1 It neither imports, that there is but one
Archangel, nor does it signify that that one is Christ. For, it expresses the
first of the Angels, the keeper of the first, that is, the Jewish Nation See
Gro^: in Dan. 10. 13, 21. and 12. 1, 2.
. 2 It Is not (...), but (...), in the voice of an Archangel (as it would be
rendered) Consider, also, Rev: 12. 7, 11. where it is said, that Michael and his
Angels overcame, etc. by the blood of the Lamb,
6. Our setting apart a Day, in honor of God, for indulging us the
ministeries, assistances and examples of Michael, etc. is not concluded faulty
from Coloss. 11. 18. for, we do not worship Angels, as Mediators to God, (the
thing condemned, in that place See Dr Hammond in Loc.
,) nor in any other sense.

To his Fourteenth Unwarrantable, That in our Benedicite after the spirits and
souls of the righteous called upon, to bless the Lord, Ananias, etc. are
called upon, etc. as if they were not included in the former. Answ: 1. It Is a
sottish Exception, for the spirits, etc. of the righteous, are those which are
in Paradise, and so distinct from those, here, en earth, as were Ananias, etc.
See Gr^tius in L^:
2. I Will put him a semblable Instance, (and let him condeme (if he dare) a
piece of the Canon) Ps. 8. 7. All sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the
field. See another such Instance 1 Co^: 9 5. as well as other Apostles, and as
the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. Does he deni^ the Lords Brethren and
(...), to be Apostles?
Here, I may ask, (as well and as wisely, as he,) Are not sheep and oxen,
beasts of the field? (...)!

To his Fifteenth, Because Benedictus (being part of a Chapter) is to be used.
Answ: 1. And, why not? Why, trow, not this, and the other New-Testament-Hymns,
as well as the Old Testament (David's, or Asaph's) Hymns? 2. Some of David's
Psalms are parts of Chapters, as Ps. 15. Ps. 96. etc. parts, I say, of Chapter 16.
of 1 Chronicles: May they not, therefore, be sung, or used Hymn -- or Psalmwise? I
shame, to spend ink, thus. 3. But, Benedictus is appointed, to be said in
English, which implies, it is used in Latin, in the Romish Church. Oh! this is
the Achilles, that kills us! Why, man, in the Church of Rome, they read all the
Scriptures, and commen^ upon them laboriously: must not we do so, therefore? 4.
As-to his saying, that this encourages them, we have spoken to that, already,
in Answ: to his Obj: 8. against our Book. 5. Parker's authority weighs not
against a feather with us, as being a hot-brained Schismatic, whom his
Folio-Book on the Cross does sufficiently arraign, for a conceited, self-full,
rash person, though, otherwise, of good sufficiency in literature, and whom I
would not have, thus, charactered, did not truth, as warrant, so enforce me.

To his Sixteenth, That we make [he descended into hell] part of one Article of
the Creed. Answ: 1. Does not he so, too? Say, Sir, do you reject the Christian
Creed, or do you substitute other words, for those? If the former, you are
concluded to be (what, I hope, you are not) an Infidel: if the latter, you fall
under the Characters of presumptuous, and temerarious in a high degree. 2. Why
must we (retaining those words) make Christ descend into the place of the
damned? The Assemblers, at the fag-end of their Catechis^, set down the Creed,
and yet, do not so interpret: The (...) Dr Hammond does not so interpret them
Pract: Cat: l. 5. ^ p. ^88. 2^^. 2^6.
. 3. But, what will he say 10 ^^: 16, 11* Act: 2. ^7. 3^. Because thou will not
leave my soul i^ bell, etc. Bishop Andrews is of some authority with him; be
So (...) and (...).
says In the ^reed Analyzed, p. 174. of Holy Devotions.
, from S. Austine Epist: 99.
upon this Article, Non immerito creditue, It is not without cause that we
believe, that Christ, according to his soul, was in hell: the Scripture is
plain for it, being foretold by the Prophet David ^s: 16. 1^.
, and evidently expounded by the Apostle's application Acts ^. 31.
of (that Text) Thou will not leave my soul in h^ll. And he concludes
peremptorily, with this Question, Quis ergo nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse
apud inferos Christum? Who therefore but an infidel will deny, that Christ was
in hell? 4 His Texts M^t. 1^. 40. Ephesians. 4. 8.
prove nothing; for, the one signifies he was ent^^rbed, and the other that he
was enwombed, and so he might be, and yet go into ^ell, too. 5. Going, he went
to triumph, and was, there, in a good estate, as our Writers hold, which is
contrary to the erroneous tenet and sense of the Romanists. 6. When will he,
or his part-takers solidly satisfy the learned Volume of Bishop Bilson, Of
Christ's descent into hell (that of the damned?) All this while ^ have concealed
my own (poor) sentiment, either way. It Is enough for me, to have confuted this
so very petulant Adversary.

To his Seventeenth, Because the Priest and People salute and complement one
with another. Answ: 1. Such interchangeable salutations (which, also, are
prayers for each other,) as this [The Lord be with you, etc.] are excellent
provocations to love and charity, toward one another. 2. They are (extending
the words to Interlocutories in general) Incentives See Pref*
of Devotion, being, as it were, the laying of glowing coals one upon another,
which presently kindle one the other, and make the flame the greater Dr Daniel
Featl^ye's Dippe^s, etc p. 7^.
. 3. And, because he lacked (in singing of the Lessons) the practice of the
Church; let him know, this way was used, by the Ancients (and esteemed by them
a beauty, no blemish in their ^iturgies,) so antientlie, that Pliny the
Nephew Epist: ad Traja^um. See Dr B^^s's Postills upon those words, Cum
spiritutuo, p. ^8.
, who lived within a hundred years of Christ, sends word to Trajan E: These
Christians before day sing Hymns by turns or Catches (alterna^im) to one
Christ, whom they esteem a God. But, thus, also, the Angels practiced, Is, 6.
3. And the Seraphim ^ried one to another; Holy, holy, holy -- The Council of
Braccaria c. 21.
tells us, that this form of interchangable salutation or apprecation, the
Eastern Churches received from the Apostles. I close this, with the excellent
words of a learned man, Mr John Ma^tin, in h^s Se^mon called, Hos^nn^^, p. 1.
speaking on these words [O Lord. I beseech thee, send now prosporitie] (they
are, says he) (...) (...), a quick ^arnest prayer, the pattern of the
Antiphonies in our Liturgy, the choicest part of all, and therefore the Devil
shoots most of his arrows against it, even bitter words.

To his Eighteenth, The Minister's standing up between one prayer and another:
the Prayer not being so long, as to be so soon tired with k^eeling: Answ: 1.
This Excep^ion would make one, that were not somewhat knowing and wary,
believe, that, at the end of every such particular prayer, we rise from our
knees, which is most notoriously false. For, 2. in praying we kneel: indeed, if
the Priest perform any authoritative act (because acts of authority See Hooker
l. 5. Sect: 30. p. 248.
are not to be done kneeling; rather in a standing posture,) as in Absolution,
and Blessing of the People, etc. then we stand. 3. It was one of T. C's. and
the Brethren's Charges on our Liturgy, that it was too Id. l. 5. p. 205, Sect.
32,
long, (and in that respect, burdensome) and, here, is an intimation, that the
Prayers are not long enough. But, sure, 1 if they were not divided into
Collects and diverse portions (but all put into one continuate prayer) they are
of a very competent, (and of due) length. 2 They are generally (as thus
dispensed) as long as Christ's short Form, wherein, yet, S. Chrysostom says,
H^mil: de Ann: fol: 965.
he taught us the measure or length due to our Prayers. Whereunto may be
annexed, 3 that from universal consent Cassian De ins^it: A^^nachor: l. 2. ^
10. apud. View of Directorie, p. 21 ^cili^s cen^ent breves orationes, sed
creberrimas fieri. Ut Diaboli infidiantis jacula succinct^ brevi^ate vi^emus.
tells us, that the way deemed most profitable, is to have short Prayers, but
very thick or frequent, upon this (their) consideration, that we may avoid (by
such course of succinct brevity) the darts of the Devil lying in ambush.
Consonantly, S. Austine Epist. cxxi. c. 10. But a greater (I wis* than
Augustine, T. C. scanoalcusly faults ours as short cuts and shreddings. See
Hooker l. 5. Sect. 33. p. 252. But. ^ Sanctis pete perfectis exemplum.
commends the many short (dart-like) Prayers of the Brethren in Egypt.

To his Nineteenth Vnjustifiable, The chopping and mincing of Prayer between
Priest and People, likening them to charms. Answ: 1. With his tongue he will
prevail, who is lord over it? not Reason, nor (I doubt me) Conscience. 2. These
interlocutorie Forms of speech (in the most profound judgment of Mr Hooker) See
him c^red above, in (...): ^o ^9th Vnw: where most of what is said is
pertinent, here, also.
are nothing else, but most effectual, partly testifications, and partly
inflammations of all piety. 3 and, they are l^kewise (as abovesaid) great
conciliatours of friendship and love 'twixt the People among themselves, and
between them and the Minister. Read Ps: 122, and argue thence, a minori ad
majus. While, 4. his (and his like-their) longsome Prayings a In answering
after the Praecentor the (...) the extremes of the verse proved from Philo to
have been the practice of the Essene^; from Eusebius: of the Primitive Christians
(learned from the Jews, who also now use Anti^hones or Responsories in their
Synagogues) from the Seraphims, Esaias 6. from the use of the Hebr: (...) which
natively signifying to answer is used also for to sing, as in Ps: 147. 7. Is.
22. 7. Number: 21. 17. Exodus: 32: 18. and in other places: but, especially out of
Ezr. 3. 11. whence our manner of praying, and praising God, alternis vicitus,
is derived; See Mr Mede Diatr. on 1 Cor. 11. 5. p. 255, 256, 257.
(wherein the People are not engaged, to bear their parts, as with us) charm
the senses, and stupifie the attention of the People, and make them dream o'r
the Service of God, tyring them with an hour, two or three's prayer, till like
young Eutychus, Act. 20. 9.
through weariness, they be taken up dead (asleep) at our feet See Mr Paul
Baine's Life prefixed to his Commentary on the Ephesians. di^allowing (though a
Puritan) these long Prayers, which some so plume and pride themselves in, p.
ult. of his life. Amos 8. 5.
. Thus, causing more than a fullness in Divine Worship, (a very dangerous
matter;) making men apt, to complain, (as they, in the Prophet of the new moon
and Sabbath, when will they be gone?) when will it be done? Let thy words be
few says Solomon, Eccl. 5. 2. No commendation (says S. Austine, sutablie)
that he was long at prayer, in as much as there may be much speaking, and but
little praying. Epist: cxxi. qu^ est p^obae viduae. Multa loquut^o, non multa
precatio. Non in sermon multo, sed diuturno affectu, Id:


To his Twentieth, about the Creed of Athanasius, wherein he animadverts the
Article of Christ's descent into hell (for which we have al^eady sufficiently
accounted;) and, that yet, it should be said, That this is the Catholic Faith,
which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be saved. Answ* 1. It argues
intolerable sauciness, for him to vellicate and arraign those precious [(...)
or] treasures of the Church, the Creeds, which deserve far more authority,
than any writings of men (whoever) now; being that Regulafidei, etc. that one,
only immovable, and unreformable Rule of Faith, as Tertu^ian De velandis
Virgin. c. 1.
calls it. And, therefore, 2. when he says, there are other expressions as
liable to exception; as it speaks monstro^s frowardness and sauciness, so
is's no matter of wondering, to those who have lived in an Age leacherously
addicted, (...), to remove ancient landmarks, and ambitiously bent, to walk in
paths not cast up, and which even throws dirt upon the Divinest Prayer of our
Lord; not sticking to say See Dr M^ Ca^^ubon's Vindic. of the Lord's Prayer, p.
17.
(and that, often,) That if he were alive again, he would be ashamed of that
Prayer; and, thanking God, they had forgotten it; daring, also, to profess,
that See Edward's Gang^aena. Rich. Powel Vic. of Ll^nigon in Breckn. shire, one
of the A^provers in the Act for Propag. of the Gospel, and Itinerant Preacher
in that County, often delivered in his Sermons, That the Lords-Prayer was a
rotten prayer, S^rena Vavas. p: 8.
Christ in such or such a saying of His was in darkness, when he spoke it. 3.
The Close of that Creed must be interpreted by i^s opposition to those
heresies, that had invaded the Church, and ^^ich were acts of carnalitie in
them that broached and maintained them, against the Apostolical Doctrine, and
contradictorie to that foundation, which had been resolved on, as necessary to
bring the World to the obedience of Christ, and were therefore to be
anathematized after this manner, and with detestation branded, and banished out
of the Church; Not that it was hereby defended to be a damnable sin to f^il in
the understanding, or believing the full matter of any of those Explications
(in that Creed,) before they were propounded, and when it might more reasonably
be deemed not to be any fault of the will, to which this were imputable Dr
Hammond of Fundamentals, p. 97 c. 10. Sect. 3. Non simpliciores and minus
capaces, sed perverse doctrinam Trinitatis opp^gnantes a salute excludit,
Bishop Pride. Fasc. Contr, p. 239. See Leo's Answ: apud V^ssium de t^ibus
symbolis.
.

To his Twenty first, The Litanies being to be read on Wednesdaies and
Fridaies, and at other times, when it shall be commanded by the Ordinary;
which argue, (says he) compliance with the Papists; and, he asserts the equal
fitness of every Minister, to judge of the meetnesse of the times to read it.
Answ: 1. To do as Papists do is not (as abovesaid; no, not though T. C. would
rather have us symbolize with Mahomedans) reprovable, but where their practices
are in vitio and reprovable, of which sort this is none. 2. It is rather a
comportance with the Greek Church, which keeps those days more solemn Fasts,
because the Bridgroom was then taken from us; sold by Judas on Wednesday, and
murdered by Jews on Friday Constitutious of the Apost, v. 14. vii. See also
Epiphanius ^dv: A^^ium.
; which are very excell^nt grounds of Fasting, Humiliation and Litanie, that
is, earnest prayer. 3. It is the Charge of the Ordinary, to appoint, when the
Litanie is to be used extraordinarily Inasmuch as nothing should be done but
by public c^^sen^ and authority.
(not ordinarily.) And, 4. it is extraordinary presumption and folly, to
ass^^mo, and think every Minister (or himself) as wise, and discerning of the
times, as a Father and Bishop of the Church, (the superior Ordinary) so far
excelling (in years, use of things, judgment, gravity,) inferior Priests,
ordinarily; much more, as all those Fathers jointly, (and authoritatively
acting.)

To his Twenty second, Because (in the Litanie,) the Minister propounds the
matter of the Prayer, but the People pray, Good Lord, deliver us, etc. Answ: 1.
But, sure, what the Minister utters, then, is part of the Prayer (the matter,
as well as the form being part of the compositum;) and the Minister, too, does,
or may, softly,) pray what the People say. 2. Were it not so, let him tell (if
he can) what harm there is in it. For, (not only in this quarel'd, but
nonparel'd Of all pieces of Service give me the Litanie, it is so substantial
and powerful, that it is able to make a man devout by violence; it commands a
zeal, and seizes upon the soul of any impartial hearer, D. W's Vindic. etc. p.
32. The Litanie (says one) is a common treasure to all good devotion.* In
caeteri^ alios omnes vicit in hoc seipsam; said of Orig. in Cantic.
piece of our Liturgy, but) in the Prayers before Sermon (all that are, not
voluntary, but under precept of our Law) this course of suggesting the matters
or heads to the hearers, to be by them summed up in the Lords-Prayer, was not
unusal heretofore, and is, now, in some use See Mr Sanderofts (excellent)
Sermon, on Tit. 1. 5.
; and it is called moving the people to pray, or bidding of prayers. Some
footsteps See Dr Heylin's little Tract. on this subject, at the end of his
History of Liturgies.
of which practice are to be found in Bishop Andrew's Sermons. 3. All liberty
(though he would insinuate the contrary) is left to the People, to utter any
holy and wholesome prayers, in private. (I am sure, the use of the Liturgy,
save in the late evil days, was cheerfully permitted, both in public, and
private.) That, which he aims at, I suppose, is, that it was not permitted
Schismatics and mal-contents, to haunt and heard together in houses, under
pretense Quorum tituli remedium habent, pixides ve^enum, (Lact. l. 3. c. 15. of
some Apoth^caries boxes.)
of God's Service, and there to utter their stomachs against established Laws
and Governors, both in Church and State, under the mark of dispensing, and
partaking God's Ordinances. Forgive us this wrong! Hac licentia omnes
deteriores sumus. 4. Whereas he excepts; But women are not permitted to speak
in the Church, that is, says he, to pray, citing 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. I must
needs cry out, Cor Zenodoti! and then (seriously) tell him, the Apostle speaks
(1 Cor. 14. ^4.) particularly of Prophesying and teaching, and in 1 Timothy: 2. 14.
he lays down, (it is true,) a more general rule, but yet such an one, as
forbids only all such speaking, as in which authority is used or usurped over
the man. Now, when the woman prays (in our Assemblies,) does she, (I demand)
(...), Note here, that, to speak in a Church-Assembly, by way of teaching and
instructing others, is an act of superiority, which therefore, a woman might
not do, because her sex was to be in subjection, and so to appear before God in
Garb and Posture, which consi^^ed therewith, that it, they might not speak, to
instruct men in the Church, but to God she might* Mede Dia^ribe on 1 Cor, 11.
5. p. 249,
usurp authority over her husband, or does she prophecy or preach?

To his Twenty third, The many Tautol^gies in it, Good Lord deliver us, being
used 8. times, etc. and the use of the Lord's-Prayer, at least 4. times in
Morning-Service, which is vain repetition forbidden, Mat: 6. 7. and condemned
by us in Extemporalists. Answ: 1. This to do, is most perfectly lawful, from
the example of our Lord, within no great space praying, in the same [form of]
words, thrice S. Matt. 36. 44.
. And, from the precedent of H. David in Ps. 136. where every ver. (26. in
number) is closed with [For his mercy endures for ever.] 2. It comes not under
the censure mentioned, in that we do not lengthen our Prayers with idle
tautologies, after the manner of the Heathen, as thinking (for so did they,) we
shall have our Prayers granted, through multiplicitie of the words used, or by
the long noise Kings 18. 27.
thereof, or that we shall make them more intelligible to God. 3. Our Forms are
perfectly faultlesle, whereas the battologie, condemned by Christ, in the place
above, meant S Mat. 7. 8.
(as the best Glossarie tells us,) Polylogie, Argologie, Acyrologie, long,
idle, unseasonable talking, or, forms; and, therefore, in Munsters Hebrew, the
sense of Christ's prohibition is, in these words, Do not multiply words
unprofitablie. 4. Whereas, 4. our Author, and such as he, by their long
confused, incondite prayers, would persuade us, that they thought, much babbling
after the Heat^e^ manner, were ac^eptable to God, and took it (according to the
Pharisees imagination of long Prayers, S. Mat. 22. 14.) to be a part of
holiness. In which (says the Bishop of Wi^chester, Sermon of Wo^shiping
(...), p. 37.
,) who so marks them, shall ^ind, they commit both faults; that of the Pharisee
in tedious length, procuring many time^ nauseam spiritus, a d^ngerous passion:
and the other of the Heathen, in fond repetitions, tautologies, inconsequences,
and all the absurd^^ies, which may fall into such manner of speech. Adding,
Cyprian says, it was ever in Christ's Chapter counted an absurd thing (which some
count their glory) ventilari preces inconditis vocibus. 5. That the Lords
prayer is often repeated, I have known as great Puritan^ as any were. use the
Lord Prayer twice at every Sermon, in the beginning, at the end, Montagu's
Gagg: p. 323.
has this (most reasonable) account: Christ commands us, when we pra^
solemnly, to say his prayer. Now, in our Book, there being several Services,
for several occasions, for several days, for several times in the day, and
even that which is assigned to one time so discontinued by Psalms, Hymns,
Lessons, that it becomes, in a manner, two Services, clearly two times of
Prayer, we have so assigned it, as to be once repeated in every such part of
Service. And, why that which must be necessarily The Directorie says, i^ may
be commendably used, in it (divine Service)
used, in obedience to Christ, in the prayers of the Church, and being repeated
oftener than once, shall be useful to him, that was not come at first saying,
or may be said more attentively by him, who had, before, been too negl^gent
Many are not present at the rehearsal of the Lords Prayer, s^eing the mulct of
absence is not inflicted, if men come whilst the Psalms are in reading.
Fisher's Def. of Lit. l. 1. c. 6. p. 52.
, should be necessary to be used but once, (and not once, by our Author's good
will,) when all men's zeal or understanding of so divine a Form, or (perhaps)
presence at that part of Service; shall not necessarily go along with it See
the View of New Direct. p. ^8.
, let him, or any, tell, if they can.

To his Twenty Fourth Unwarrantable, excepting against the word [deadly sin,]
implying the Popish distinction of sins venial and mortal. Answ: 1. Here we
have good company; for, that famous and far*spread Augustane Confession uses
it Qu^ ver^ obtemperant pravis cupiditatibus and agunt contra conscientiam;
versantur in peccatis mortalibus, nec fidei justitia^ nec justitiam bonorum
operum retinent, p. 14.
, 2. The excellent (Protestant) Melancthon has it often, in his Common-Places;
once, where De discrim* pecc. Mortali^ ac Venialis* mihi, p. 3.
he uses these words. But, there is a certain other kind of actions, which are
of that nature, that they who commit them, fall out (or from) the grace of God,
cease to be accounted just, and are damned unless they repent; these actions
are called mortal sins. Again ib p 4* 5. and alibi. See Musculus also us^ng
this distinction, Loc. de Peccat^ Sect. 5. (p^rticularly*) Vrsin. Cat. de pec.
d^st. p. 59. Daven* praelect. de just. act. c. 35, p. 431 and Hoard's Souls
misery ^. 2. p. 91. Note, also, that the Papists make simple fornication
either no sin, or b^t a ^e^ial sin* while we account it a deadly
one-fornication and all other deadly sin*
, This degree therefore, is to be held in actions, that it is a mortal sin, to
do against conscience, that is, to approve somewhat, or do some work or deed,
which the conscience judges to displease God: And yet again, his Answer to
Langaeus: That the spirit does not abide in those who commit mortal sins, that
is, deeds against conscience. 3. This difference (of sins mortal and venial) is
taken from the Ancients, who call sins great, grievouser, coming under querel
In ^ue^el^m venien^io.
or aggrievance, mortal, lethal, mortiferous, damnable; which with one stroke
destroy the soul; one whereof is attended with subsequent damnation, crimes
whereof S. Paul says, That they which do such things, shall not in^e^it the
Kingdom of God: to which that of Tertul^ian appertains, But, an a^ulterer and a
fornicatour, who does not straight, upon the commission of the sin, pronounce,
a dead man? Of which kind of crime S. Augustine, See Groti^s's Discu^si,
D^alysis ^n^ ^^ Rive^^, D^ pecca^is ^n r^atibus and (...) commod^,
interp^et^^t, (...) m^destias, G^ot. An^^i in Anim: Riv. ad Art. 4. p. ^0. de
vo^e me^iri.
in Tractate X^I. gives these examples, murder, adultery, any uncleanness of
fornications, theft, fraud, sacrilege, and the rest of that nature. But, other
there are, which they call more light, minute, small, daily delicts of
righteous men, and without which no man leads his life, etc. So that after all
this I ask, 4. Whether our Church had not reason, to speak, as she did, in the
place excepted to? Oh, how lovely is it in her, to imitate the pious Ancients,
and other excellent men, where they speak (as here,) nothing but words of truth
and soberness! 5. Even some of the Papists speak so, in this matter, as no
moderate Protestant may refuse, to subscribe to their opinion. Venial sin is
venial only by the mercy of God, says one Bishop of R^chester (Fisher) Resut.
xxxii. art^u^heri.
. Others John Gerson ter^^d p^r^^ de vit. Spirit. Sect. 1. J^cob Almain ^^puse.
^^. 3. ^ 10.
of 'em say, that sin mortal and venial -- are only distinguished, by respect
to divine grace, which impu^es that sin, etc. Now, sure, when and where Papists
speak Protestantly, what should forbid our speaking as do Papists, (especially,
having the countenance and authority of the H. Fathers, and other (admirable)
men?) 6. His Texts Romans 5. 12. ^^6. ^^.
import, that See Bishop (...) Vn^m Necesser^m. Sect. 3. chapter 3. p. 128.

Many sins ^^ genere [in respect of the matter] or ^x im^erfection^ ^ctus [^s
not done with a full consent] may be said to be veni^l. neg^tive, and per non
ab^ationem principii remissionis [grace.] D^. ^ield of the Church l. 3. c. 9.
p. ^^8. ex Card. Cajetan.


no sin for the smalnesse of the matter, or in the whole kind is venial, b^t
(aque) damnable and deadly, in the accounts of the Dvine justice, which we,
freely, grant (and, our use of the word mor^tal (as appears) does no way
prejudice that concession;) but yet, (concentriently to what is said of mortal
sins,) there may be sins venial by the imperfection of the agent, as when a
thing is done ignorantly, or by surprise, or inadvertencie: which is not,
indeed, a kind of sins, but a manner of making all sins venial, i. e. apt for
pardon; for, by the imperfection of the agent or the act, all great sins in
their nature, may become little in their malice and guilt. And, even the sin
unto death, 1 S. John v, 16. See Dr Hammond in Loc. Some si^s mortal, others
veni^l, because some are forgiven, others not, according to the quality of the
sin, and the part^ sinning, All ^re venial ex even^^ ^oo by the blood of
Christ, and true repentance.
might have been venial, in this sense, if obstinacy against admonition, and
incorrigiblenesse under the censure of the Church, had not made it (...).

To his Twenty fifth, Our praying against sudden death, Answ: 1. Our prayer,
here, imports The Reader may please to see a (^eau^ecus) Discourse on this
subject, in Mr Hooker, l. 5. 46. p. 276, 277, 278.
a twofold desire, 1 that death when it comes, may give us some convenient
respite; or 2 (if God de^ie us that, yet) that we may have wisdom, to provide
always before hand, that those evils overtake us not, which unexspected death
does use, to bring upon careless men; and though it be sudden in it self, yet
that, in regard of our prepared minds, it may not be sudden. And, surely,
these being good things, the praying for them, is not under interdict in
Scripture, but rather as much allowed there, as the praying for (lawful)
temporals, or even spirituals. For, 2. in the latter import (assigned) of the
petition, we pray for preparation for death (which sure, includes repentance,)
and, so, is not burdened or pressed with any deformed consequences, of confirming
ignorant Protestants in evil principles: of which sort are not those he
reckons, 1 That repentance lies in our power: (for, so, supposing the
preventing, etc. grace of God, (which is ever ready to such as wilfully
repulse it not) it is; how else can it be under See the M^eter of the fifth
verse in fourth Psalm (which I cite, because more reverence is paid to them, by
the Vo^ge, than to our reading Psalms:) And in your chambers qu^etly, see you
your selves convert.
exhortation?) 2 That repentance must be a man's last act (else he cannot be
saved;) for, so, it must be, because repentance is a state of life, and must
reach from Conversion to our Death, repentance (as for, so) from dead works
Hebr. vi. 1.
, which we must, always, be under; (repentance being not some one bare act of
change, but a lasting durable state of new life O tima ^^nitentia vita nova.
, called, also, regeneration, the new creature, living a godly life.) So that,
3 we do not exclude such as die suddenly or violently from salvation; for,
they may have this repentance, I speak of; and those that have the mercy of
dying treatably, may add some advantages Is it not some comfort to die with
renewed faith, repentance, recon^iliation, and setting of the house in order?
Some of the elect die with more scandal, and less j^y of conscience, ye^ ^
enjoy less joys in heaven, than others of their brethren; and may nor we pray
for the best g^ft? Fisher Def. of Lit. l 1. c 8. p 85.
to it, by reinforcing and heightening their sorrow (for the sins of the
unregenerate, and the failours, lapses and infirmities of the regenerate life,)
their love to God, and charity to men, and other ways; by which they are
privileged over the other. 3. By this Answ: all his Texts * of Scripture
(whereof some are impertinent enough) are intercepted. 4. If the Ancients
prayed for sudden death, 1 you tell us not, who those Ancients were Some good
men have prayed against sudden death, as our Martyr-Reformers, Cranmer, Ridley,
etc. [whom ^e thinks well of, see his p. 42.] who taught us, thus to pray.
: they might do amiss, in so doing, for ought appears, as well as the H.
Prophet Elijah did. For, as it may be good sometimes, to desire the retardation
of death; so it may be ill, to pray the accleration (or hastening) of it. 2
Surely, it is better dying like Cyrus in Xenophon, or Plato in Socrates, than to
finish as those, of whom Elihu Job 34. 20.
speaks, momento moriuntur. Better to die as Jacob Hebr. 11. 2^.
, Moses Deuteronomy. 33.
, Joshua Joshua 24.
, David 1 Kings 2. The frequency and fearfulness of Earthq^akes gave the first
^ccasion to that passage in the Litany, -- From judden death-Doctor Hackwel's
Apol. l. 2. 4.
, than as Ananias, etc. 5. We shall yet annex this, That, if the petition be
taken, as it is in the Latin phrase, it cannot possibly fall under their
displeasure, A morte improv^sa libera, etc. He that foresees not death, being
utterly unable to be provided for it, and whosoever is not so, must needsly
eternally perish.

To his Twenty sixth Unwarrantable, The desiring to be delivered by Christ's
Circumcision, Baptism, Fasting, Temptation, yea Burial. Answ: 1. They are very
passionate strains, [by thine Agony, etc.] all of them being a compendious and
very useful recapitulation of the Gospel-storie, a recognition of the chief
media of our Salvation, and a vehement obtestation T^ke that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. I
beseech you br^thren, by the coming of our L. J. C.
by the meritorious Actions and Passions of Christ. 2. These things, recounted
in the Litanie, be the undoubted effectual means of our Salvation, and ought we
not, then, to pray, that God would save us by these means from wrath, etc? 3.
'Twas very well said of H. Zanchie (a more moderate man, than many others, and,
whose saying that was, Non novi istam Reformatorum mundi Theologiam,) that, in
the Roman Church he always was pleased with those two things: one, that they
conclude their prayers, through Jesus Christ our Lord Exposit. Praecept. 2ae.
tit. de Invotatione.
: the other, that they express the parts of our Mediator, and the acts of his
office, adding by thy cross and wounds, etc. 4. Why adds he [yea, Burial?] as
if that were not a piece of the Mediators Exinanition, and a meritorious
suffering, to continue three days deprived of life, under the d^min^on of
death, sustaining the squalors and dishonours of the grave. 5. As to the
Exception that some take (it seems he does not; and it seems too, whoever takes
the Exception (though even Papists,) it must be matter of charge against our
Book) at the word, By, as if (forsooth) it imported an Oath. We say, that [by]
signifies, (and, that most usually) the instrumental cause, or means Media
sunista liberationis and (...), non Exo^^is^^i form^la. Bishop P^id. Fasc.
Contr. p. 240.
, and in that fense it is accepted in our Litanie, not swearing or averring
therein any thing, to be so or so, by Christ's Nativitie, etc. but praying God,
to deliver us, etc. by these meritorious passages of our dear Redeemer, etc.
Those that quarrel at such innocent blameless things, would (...). 6. The [by]
being thus proved purely lawful (and more,) it is not the often using it can make
it unlawful, (by changing its nature,) what ever he, or his capricious
overweening co-opiners deem (not to say, dream.)

To his Twenty seventh, Our praying, that God would bring into the way of truth
all such as have erred. Answ: 1. This Obj. is reproachful to (express)
Scripture (as well as the Litanie.) For, does not S. Paul exhort (and, so,
command) that prayers be made for all 1 Timothy 11. 1, 4. See Gal. vi, 10. S. Mat.
v. 45.
men. For, God will have * all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. 2. And, because there are no ((...)) contrarieties in Scripture, his
two Texts John 17. 9. 1 John: 5. 16.
must not serve in this warfare. Which, 3. are easily showed, not to have any
force in this matter; Christ (though not at that time, and for those particular
requests) praying for the World; even his very enemies and S. Luke 23. 34.
crucifiers. And. S. John does not forbid us, to pray for those that sin unto
death, but only does not command, (...), of that I say not that he should
pray. The words amount not to a Negative but rather to a toleration, that they
might pray if they would, etc. Dr Hey'yn's Theol. Vett. l. 3. c. 5. p. 44^.
to pray for them, or does not promise any good success to the praye^s, etc.
It notes the suspension of the Prayers of the Church, or the inefficaciousnesse
of them. And, again, we may pray to God for them, that he would send some
temporal punishment upon such insensate incorrigible sinners, as the only
reserve behind, to make impression upon them, which is the advice of Clemens
Alexandrinus Stro^at^s l. 7.

To his Twenty eighth, Our praying for a sort of people called Cura^es (a name
and office, says he, not known in the Bible) distinct from Bishops and
Pastors. Answ. 1. Sir, they are a sort of Priests, (not people.) 2. For the
Name, Mr Ball Against Can, p. 142, 143.
shall tell him, that Parsons, Vicars, Curates, etc. are but various titles
given to the same Ministry in diverse persons, which is Evangelical, etc.
And, to contend about the bare name and title of Parson (and, so, of Curate,
etc.) is vain and frivolous. 2. For, the Office, by Curates, here, are not
meant stipendiaries See Rationale on the Commom P. p. 89.
, as now it is used to signify, but all those whether Parsons or Vicars, to
whom the Bishop, who is chief Pastor under Christ, has committed the cure of
souls of some of the flock; and so are the Bishop's Curates And, so, [Curate]
in Prayer for the Ch Militant, is [Minister] in the Litany
. 3. For Bishops and Pastors, I suppose them two names of the same (or
much-alike) signification (Pastor, Apud veteres Pastorum nomen vix in veniri,
nisi cum de Episcopis Ioquuntur. Bishop Andrews's Resp. ad Epist. Pet.
Molinaei. And Binius in not. ad Council. excepts against a fragment of the Synod
of Rhemes, for claiming to undue Antiquity, upon this account. Eo quod titulum
Pastoris tribuat Par^^ho, cross to the usance of antienter Ages, Binius in
Conc. To. 3. part 2. p. 978. See Doctor Heylyn's History of Episcopacie l. 1.
c. 6. n, 13. See likewise Dr Hammond's Dispatches Dispatched, p. 701, 737.
in the ancient times of the Church, signifying (appropriately) the Bishop. 4.
To his scoptical) Note, we say, Quin sine Rivali; and pray, that where any of
the H. Tribe have not comported and complied with their titles or names, there
may be an answerablenesse hereafter 'twixt them, and the styles may belong to
them ex vero. O Lord, indue thy Ministers with Righteousness.

To his Twenty ninth Unwarrantable, The taking of God's name so many times
irreverently in our mouths, in saying, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have,
etc. Answ: 1. It Is false, that we use his name, in those (short, but quick and
lively) petitions, irreverently: for, 1 we use it, in his (reverend) Service,
and 2 we use them with reverential impressions upon our spirits, in the use
thereof; and 3 if it should chance, to be otherwise with some, in this latter
particular, yet first that is none of the Litanies (or Churches) guilt, and
secondly (if such arguing were good) it would take away the use of the
Lords-Prayer, Creed, Bible, because, in the use, or reading of these, some
deport themselves not so reverentially and awfully, as they ought. 2. His Texts
Exodus: 20. 7. Levit: 19. 1^.
speak, primarily, against perjurie (though perhaps, foolish and wanton using
of ^ods name, though without Oaths, is reducible thither;) and this is the
polluting of Gods name, in the latter of his quotations. Now, sure, we swear
not, when we say, Lord, etc. nor foolishly, or want only use God's name. 3. How
often have the Extemporarians irreverently, (because idely, emptily,
unseasonably, futilously) used the august name of God and Christ, in their
effusions? Turpe est Doctori, etc. (to return him his piece of Latin.) That
this return is due, shall appear by the words of one, that was once a (...) and
Ringleader, in the Puritan-faction, and speaks upon good experience. Now
(says he) what worship or prayers do you use? I am ashamed to name the
boldness and folly of some, who scarce able to utter three words orderly, will
yet take upon them to babble out a tedious, long and fluttering Prayer, wherein
every tenth word shall be the repeating of O Heavenly Father, O merciful
Father, O dear Father, O good Lord, O merciful God, etc. and all things so
foolishly packed together, that their praying seems rather to be the prattling
of an infant that would tell some great tale, but cannot bit of it See Bishop
Ban^rof^'s Sermon preached at Paul's Cross on 1 John 41. p. 55.
.

To his Thirtieth, That 1 the Collect for Christ-masse-day, is to be read till
New-years-day, and yet the Collect says, [this day to be born.] What (says
he) could he be born that day, and six days after? excepting the same to
Easter Day, etc. their Collects. Answ: 1. The first of those days is the
original, the rest are all copies or transcripts thereof: the feast continuing,
the rest are the same in Ecclesiastical account, though the first be the
principal. 2. The word Day is, here, used, in the Scripture-notion, wherein it
signifies (not as ordinarily,) the whole time designed to one and the same
purpose, though it lasts several natural days; see Examples in Marg. The time
of visitation called a day. S. Luke 19. 42, 44. The time of life, called a day,
S. Joh. 9. 4. especially (and directly (to our purpose) Heb. 3. 13. -- daily
while it is called, This day. See Rationale, p. 268, 269.
3. It Is most visibly false, that we say (which yet, he blindly or wilfully
charges us, to say) this day, on Easter and Ascension-daies. 4. When he
proceeds to except, That it is more than all the learned Clerks in Eng. or
Italy can prove, that Christ was born, either on that, or in the month
December, we say, 1 why in Eng: or Italy? Forsooth, he would, here, insinuate
(his old Coccysm) the calumny he has expressed in fat and express words,
already, more than once, that we symbolize with Papists. But, he may inform
himself, that Protestants, also, keep that day, not only Lutherans, nor only
they of the Augustane way, but even the Helvetians, See the Helverian
Confession, Artic. 24.
and French: They observe reverently (says In a lettes of a French Protestant
to a Scotishman, of the Covenant.
Peter du Moulin the Son *) the Days of Christmasse, Easter, Ascension,
Pentecost. And, when they have Sermons upon week-daies (at Charenton on
Thorsdaies,) they will change the day, when there is a Holie-day of some note,
in the Week. Where this, and other Feasts of Christ are taken away, they are
wished for by sober members of those Churches, as by that noble and learned
Lord Philip Morney du Plessis; and Monsieur Andrew Rivet a learned French
Protestant constantly preached on that Day. So that he might have ranged us
with better company. 5. But, however, we must prove By what place of Scripture
may it be preved, that this day, May 26. is the Lord's Day. See the sage,
moderate, and learned Zanchie's three Reasons for Holy days, in 4 tum
Praec^ptum.
, that He was born on that Day. But, we say, 1 If we could, the men of this
kidney would as much observe it, as now they do. This Plea, therefore, is but a
pretext for a schismatizing quarrellous humor. 2 What if we are mistaken in
the Day, yet the matter of the mistake is of no greater moment or weight, than
(a very ordinary and incident thing) the false calculation of And, such, even
Mr Cawdrey (as bitter as he is) allows it to be, in his Account audited, etc.
p. 395, 396. Of which Piece, see Dr Creed's Certificate or Character in his
(learned) Refuter refuted, Ep. to the Reader.
day: a very pardonable mistake, sure, to such as, reallie and unfeignedlie,
think, they are not mistaken, and who perform the business of the day, as
substantiallie and completelie on a mistaken (supposed) Day, as they could do
on the true (supposed) one! But, 3 we have and observe the right day: for,
first, They, says S. Chrysostom, a which knew those Records (the Roman censual
Tables) exactlie, and that had ((...)) a long time celebrated it as from an
ancient Tradition, have now sent us knowledge: and secondly, there is a
(genuine) Apostolical (and, so, at least, greatly ancient) Canon, that has
(in this affair) these words: Also that you constitute an anniversarie Feast,
at the Nativitie of the Lord Christ, on the Day on which he was born, and that
was the 25th c of the first Canun (i. e. of December,) for this is the
principal of all the Feasts, etc. adding a specification of the day of Christ's
Baptism: and, thirdly, Hom. in not. ad Antioch.
both the Greek and Latin Churches, which had such very sharp contentions
about the time of keeping Easter, have yet sweetly and uniformly agreed in
this: and, fourthly, let our Author, or any other Enemy to our Festivities
(solidly) answer, what is laid down for this Festival in the Practical Catechism
A Persian Calender or Ephemeris places it on the same day also. So the Syriac
and Coptic or Aegypt^an Churches; So likewise, says the old Cosmographer
Malela, did the East-parts of the Romans Emp. See Mr Gregory's Notes on the Bible.
; in the fourth Quaere, Hospinian (no friend to the Church in these things)
confesses, that, from the most ancient times, ^t was celebrated on the 25. of
December, which he proves out of Theophilus a very ancient Bishop of Cesarea
Palestinae, who lived about the time of Commodus and Severus.
Of the Festivals of the Church, by the same eminent Author, and the learned Dr
John Pearson's litt^e Tract styled, Christ's Birth not mis-timed: L. 2. 13. p.
234. etc.
and lastly, I need not add, that we are in possession p. 441.
, and, therefore, if he will dispossess us, and deny the Day or Month, he must
bring his proofs, and, those, most cogent, irrefragable ones. Now, does he
produce such? 6. All that he says, is, That he was rather born in September,
See also Suqire Fishers Treatise for it; Festorum Metropolis by Mr Allan
Blayney; Dr Warmstreys Vindication of the Nativity, etc. in Answ. to Joseph
Hemings.
which he would prove by this, in that it might be figured, etc. by the Feast
of Tabernacles, h Melior est conditio possidentis.
i Gr Nyssen. fixes it (under the style of (...).) in that point or period of
time, (...), i. e. about the Winter-Solstice, Homil, de Nativit. Christi.
on 15th day of the Month; and that the Jews, and diverse learned Christians
hold that the first day of that Feast shadowed his Birth, etc. and that John
seems to allude unto it, John 1. 14. But, we say to this, 1 to impugn a
Tradition and Practice, so universallie for time, and place used, and so
strongly delivered, he should not come with his dwining feeble words but
rather,] and [which might,] and talk of [shadowings and seemings and allusions]
and tell us of the Jews, and diverse learned Christians,] but name no one
Indeed, I find, that Scal^ger and some other Chronologers endeavor to have him
born in September; as the account of their Reasons is set down by Mr Mede,
Diatr. Pars III. on Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16, 17. p. 618. etc. but he owns not the
opinion, and says (at close)-no time can be unlawfully chosen for such a duty.
But see the Authorities above.
. This is no proper suant process, in this so daring (...) (or undertaking) 2
If his being born in the seventh month, might be held forth by the Feast of
Tabernacles, it also might not, (besides, that many things might be, which
never were, or shall be.) Say, man, (if you will say any thing of force) that it
was, etc. and prove what you say. 3 If that Feast shadowed his birth, there is
no necessity, it should shadow it, as-to the Day and Month. 4 The (...), he
dwelt among us Or, rather had his Tabernacle among us. Or, Tabernacled in us.
] in S. John, alludes not to the Feast of Tabernacles, but to the [ambulatorie
Church of God] the Tabernacle of Testimony. And, the comparison lies herein;
first, as in that, God was pleased to dwell, so in this flesh of ours, as in a
Tabernacle, the Son of God appeared among us most gloriously: secondly, as
that had in it the Law, that ministration only of death, 2 Cor. 3. 7. he, now,
in the Tabernacle of his flesh, is all full of grace, that is, exceeding
mercy: thirdly, whereas the whole business of that Tabernacle was nothing
but shadows, he has brought the substance and truth with him See v. 17.
. 7. and lastly, To oppose the truth of a matter of Fact with probable
Reasons, when as there was, never, any thing so surely done, but a witty
prompt head might be able, to find out sophical likely Arguments, to persuade
the contrary, is a way of proceeding, that becomes no wise or sober man.

To his Thirty first, The Collect's (at the Purification of Saint Marie)
running thus -- That as thy only begotten Son was this day presented in the
Temple -- which (says he) is as uncertain as the other, and does wonderfully
in his attempts (too long, to be set down, entirely,) to prove it. Answ: 1.
What if the day be uncertain, as the case was put of Christmasse-Day? 2. If it
be but as uncertain, as the other (Christmasse-Day,) it is very fairlie certain.
3. It is most certain, this is the right day; for it is the just XLth day after
the Birth, according to the constitution of the Law, Lev, 12. 4. I shall lay
the words before (...), and the Reader's eyes, v. 2. speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, If a woman have -- born a man-child, then she shall be unclean
seven days -- v. 3. And in the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised. v. 4. And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying
three and thirty days: She shall touch no hallowed things nor come unto the
Sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled His diebus post
septem i^les primos, puerpera a Sanctuario: antum abstinet, Grot. in Loc.
. Let Mr P. add 33. and 3. to 7. and tell, how many it makes, and, thence,
consider, whence the beginning of the continuance in the blood of her purifying
is dated. So nothing of cause has this man to carp, in this matter.

Here Is somewhat annexed, as taxable, viz. That the Mass is left in the Book,
as Christmasse. Answ. To this we have given full satisfaction, above, in Answ.
to his Ninth. Obj. against our Book.

But, he will spring an Objection for the name, That it is with relation to Christ
the male. Answ. But, who gave him a Letter of Attorney, to make this Plea for
us? This is like Mr Hemings's See Doctor Wa^mst^y's Answ. to Hemings; and the
(learned and most exact) Answ to him also, in 6. Quaere's, p. 455.
derivation of it from Christman.

To his Thirty second Unwarrantable, as being an imitation of the Ceremonial
Law, Levit. 1. 11.) The Priest's standing at the North-side of the Table. Answ.
1. That every thing used in the Ceremonial Law is necessarily to be abolished,
he can never prove, and I have said enough to it above, and am like yet, to say
more, below. 2. If the Priest should stand at the West Side, it would be
thought superstition, because the face is turned to the East, as if it referred
to worshipping toward the East (though the Ancients offered up their Hymns and
Orisons to God, fixing their eyes (...) Author Qu. and Refpp. ad Orthod. Q. 18.
, toward, or on, the Eastern parts, (whence also in Tertullian's Inde
suspicio, quod inoluorit, nos ad Orientis re^ionem preca^^. See Mr Gregory's
(of Chr. Ch.) his very learned Observations on some passages of Scripture,
concerning praying toward the E^st, amply and excellently, p. 88, etc.
, time, the Christians were accused, to worship the Sun.) Or else, it would be
said, It hindered the hearing of the People, On the East Side (as our
Communion-Tables are now sited) he cannot stand. And, why, ('tro^,) should he
stand on the South Side? Is there not superstition, in pitching on this part,
in this manner?

To his Thirty third, That the People are appointed to kneel, at the rehearsal
of the Commandments, contrary to Nehem. 8. 2. Answ. 1. One posture suits
hearing a Sermon; another, confession of sins, and prayer for pardon of, and
strength against them. The People in Neh: heard the Law in nature of a Sermon
(as is most evident;) therefore they stood: ours, as a prayer, therefore, they
use a prayer-gesture. 2. However, this practice cannot be defamed with the
style of Popery, for, 'twas no part of our Service (nor of any Church) till
King Edw. IV's second Lit: 3. That it is a very profitable part of Devotion,
being made use of, as it ought, see it asserted and cleared by the (excellent)
View of the Directorie p. 32.
. 4. Whereas he quarrels (under this head,) that the Priest is appointed, to
stand at the prayer (in the Communion) for the King: to that we say, in regard
the Ministers of the Gospel (according to S. Paul, Compare it with Hebr. 8. 3,
4. by which collation it will appea^, that the words High Priest and Priest are
premiscuously used.
Heb. 5. 1.) are appointed, by God, to offer up sacrifices of Prayers, etc. of
the Chapter for the People; thus to stand between God and them, and to show this
his Office, in those Services, he is directed to stand See the Rationale, p.
77, 78, 79.
. 5. Did he not behold things with colored Spectacles, he would never say, in
these things we walk contrary to God, but that we study, and have happily
found, a way by decency Etiam habitu corporis placere Deo, Cyprian.
, etc. to comport with his holy mind. 6. For his term, Fanatics, cast on us,
we shall say but this, that he is master of his tongue, and we (we hope) are
Lords of our passions, at least we are so of our ears Minus qui saeviunt,
sapiunt magis.
. And, no matter what Mr P. says, when a greater than he will gainsay it, as
the most meek Hooker said to Travers.

The Objection next ensuing, and the Answ. thereunto returned by him, I
willingly pass over, as having (in effect) often spoke to it, sufficiently.

To his Thirty fourth, The appointing of Offerings to be paid to the Curate,
which (says he) is to continue the (abrogated) Ceremonial Law. Answ. 1,
Oblations are an high part of God's Service and worship, taught by the light of
nature and right reason, which enjoins us to honor God with our substance,
Prove. 3. 9. (and the Proverbs of Solomon are not truths peculiar to the Jewish
State, under the Old T. but extensive even to us Christians; and more
peculiarly to faithful Christians, than to them, (many of them)) as well as
with our bodies and souls. Bring presents unto him that ought to be feared,
says Ps. 76. 2. See 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
David. This Duty of Offerings was practiced by the Father. before the Law with
benign and gracious acceptance, as by Abel,s Genesis 4. 4. It was under command
in the Law, Exodus 25. 2 and the Gospel confirms it, from our Savior's own
mouth, Mat. 5. 23. and the Offerings of the wisemen were highly commended, S.
Mat. 2. 11. For the sentiment and practice of the H. Ancients, see the Marg. S
Epiphan. ^aeres 80. S Ireneaeus l 4 c. 34. S Hier^nym Ep. ad Heliodom.
And, especially, when the S. Eucharist was partaken, it was the ancient
custom, before receiving, etc. to come into the Choire, and offer at the H.
Table, says Theodoret Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 17.
. 2. The Texts Coloss. 2. 14. Hebr. 9. 10.
he cites are nothing to the purpose, and therefore I pass them by, (having
said what is abovesaid, for the perpetual unabrogated practice of Oblations or
Offerings.)

To his Thirty fifth, That in the administration of the Communion, there is
added words of our own, to the words of Christ's Institution, as, Preserve thy
body and Soul, etc. Answ: 1. Jecur Cratetis! The setting down of the
Institution of Christ is, in another part of the same Office (above,) and there
it is most entire, without interpolation, addition or substraction -- who in the
same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body, etc. (to the end of that part.)
2. After this, what harm is it, (when the H. Communion is distributed,) to use
the sense or sum (rather than the express words) of Christ's Institution, by
way of Prayer? A most commendable lovely practice! 3. We have re^d of a
conceited Minister (of the novel edition,) who did as much as this (his charge)
comes to; but, as to sobriety, decency or gravitie, nothing so, but most
ridiculously, Here, Dare thou take it? To another, Take this, and love
Christ's Ministers better; so to a third, Here take it and leave your lying; to
a fourth, Take heed the Devil enter not into thee, and the like Bishop Gauden's
Considerations touching the Liturgy, p. 20, 21.
.

To his Thirty sixth, The Priest's being appointed to kneel at one Prayer, and
stand at next. Answ: I have answered sufficiently, already, in Answ: to 33
(pretended) Vnw. I now add, How knows he, that we do not also stand at the
Collect for the day in mediately succeeding the Collect for the King, after the
recital of the Commandments?


To his Thirty seventh, Because it is said, Rubric at the Communion.
he shall receive the Sacrament, and other Rites. Where, he asks, what Rites?
Answ: 1 His have of accusing, makes him o're-look some advantages: it is said
(in the same place) [he shall receive the Sacraments (in the plural) and other
-- ] This had he seen* he might have cried out, What Sacraments? What? do they
make seven with the Papists? 2. I answer to the matter he has seen, to charge
us withal, first. And, 1 the party to communicate may need, and desire
absolution, in case of scandalous and conscience-wasting Vastantia conscientiam.
sins. 2 He may receive confirmation, in case he has never received that, or
the Communion, before. These, sure, are Rites, nor can they be done without
Rites. But, 3 I Will gratify my Reader, about the word Sacraments (here;) first,
it may signify Bread and Wine, which being integral simila^ie parts, receive
the denomination of the whole. Secondly, with S. Paul, the Cup of blessing is
called 1 Cor. x. 16. See Dr H. Savage's Reasons showing no necessity of
Reformation.
the Communion. The Bread, also, is called the Communion: So, that both
integral parts are called, by the Appellative of the Integrum. But, now,
Communion and Sacrament are (in this matter) both one, for substance.

To his Thirty Eighth, Kneeling in the Sacrament, which is (says he) an
unseemly Gesture at Supper, agreeing with the Papists, not Christ, and adoring
Christ's Body by its sign: Answ: 1. Our Kneeling at Communion is the Gesture of
Piety. If we did, there, present our selves, but to make some show or dumb
resemblance of a spiritual feast, it may be, that Sitting were the seemlier or
more fitting Ceremony: But, coming as Receivers of inestimable grace, at the
hands of God, what better beseems our bodies, at that hour, than to be sensible
witnesses of minds unfeignedly humbled The Feast indeed requires sitting,
because it is a Feast; but man': unpreparednesse asks kneeling. He that comes
to the Sacrament, has the confidence of a Guest, and he that kneels,
confesses himself an unwor^hy one, and therefore differs from other Feasters:
but he that sits or lies, puts up to an Apostle: Contentiousnesse in a feast of
charity is more scandalous then any posture, says that ^arely pious man, Mr G.
Herbe^t Pastoral, p. 92, 93.
? Christ did what custom and long usage had made fit; we that which fitness
and long usage has made usual, says Mr Hooker L. 5. 68 p. 366. Injungitur
tantum ut (...), and reciptura nostris ut gestus summae reverentiae tanto
mysteri, debitus, Fasc. Cont. p. 241.
. 2. Excellent men have thought, that God has given the Church some right over
the Sacraments. For my part, says Grotius In vot^ pro pace Ecclesiae, De
Baptismo Infantum.
, speaking of Baptism, I acquiesce in the authority of the Church, to whom God
has given the Sacraments and some right over them. Again, great has, always,
been the liberty of the Church, in the time, place, and manner of such things
His Adversary Rivet confesses, the Church has some right over the Rites of
the Sacraments. See the same H. Grotius in Discuss. about Infant Bapt.

Ego Ecclesiae satis auctoritatis puto a Christo datum ad ordinanda talia quae
sacris literis non repugnant, neque videre possum eur illicitum fit loca
Scripturae non verbis tantum, sed and rebus exprimere, Animadv. in An^mad. etc.


. Christ varied, in communicating of the Passover, from the prescript order,
Exodus: 12. 11. where it is imported, that it was to be eaten standing; but He did
it lying See Willet in Loc.
. 4. Christ's Table Gesture, at the delivering it, is no argument for Sitting,
as well because it is not manifest by the Text, that he used that save only at
the Passover, from which this Supper of the Lord was distinct, and was
celebrated by blessing and breaking, and giving the bread, etc. to which some
other Gesture might be more proper and commodious; and, because Christ's
Gesture, in that, is no more obligingly exemplarie to us, than his doing it
after Supper, See Bish Sande^son's 3d Lecture of Con^cience 20, and 16, 17, 18,
19, 21.
(and called by the H. Ghost the Lord's Supper) was to the Apostles, who yet
did it fasting, Act: 13. 2. and generally took it before the Agapae See View of
Direct p. 22.
. 5. We are herein, like the Ancient Christians: When I receive, I worship or
adore ((...),) says S. John Climacus ib. p. 298.
. It Is a sin, not to adore, when we receive this Sacrament, says S. Aug: ^n
Psalm* 98.
The old custom was to receive it after the manner of Adoration, says S:
Cyrill. Cateth: Mist. v.
So, that, herein, we complie no more or farther with Papists, than they with
the Church of Christ. However, 6. it is better to symbolize with the Papists,
than the Socinians (a kind of modern Arians,) who stubbornly impugning, or
gainsaying Christ's Divinity, though it no robbery to be equal with him, and
sit down with him at his Table The first that ever did sit after their fashion
was the Pope, to express his State, says the Bishop of D^wne and Conner, in a
Speech, called, A full Confutation of the C^v. p. 22.
. But, against this it was determined in the Reformed Church in Poland, in a
general Synod Anno MDLXXXIII.
, That sitting should not be in use at the Lord's Table: whereof the Reason was
assigned by them: For, this Ceremony is not used in the Churches Christian;
and is only proper to unbelieving Arians, placing themselves in equal throne
or seat with our Lord. 7. We should not feed the Papists with Scandals, (as one
says) as Dogs be fed with bones See the Controversy debated about Kneeling at
Eucha^ist, by James Watts of Woednosbor^ugh in Kent. See also Thomas Baybodies
Just Apology for the Gesture of Kneeling in the act of Receiving, etc.
. 8. Our Kneeling at the time of receiving the Sacrament, is only a kneeling
to God in prayer, which cannot be faulted, unless it be a fault to worship
Christ, or to choose that time, or place, to do it, in the lowliest manner,
when, and where he is eminently represented by the Priest, and offered by God
to us. 9. Our Church only adores Christ in the Action, in which certainly
Christ is, and not the Elements themselves, nor Christ's Body, locally present
under the shape of those Elements. 10. If we should do as the French do, Walk
to the Table, and there, with a Conge, Receive e, it is a wonder but See P. du
Moulin's Letter to a Scotishman, p. 29
quarrel would be picked from our symbolizing with the Jews, in their
Ceremonials (for, is this any other, than a mere Egyptian-Passeover-custome?)
11. Some run so far ((...)) from Papists, as that they have no consideraton of
what is infinitely worse) profaneness (which wonderfully abounds.)

To his Thirty ninth, The Priests giving it to every one in particular, and
saying, Take, eat, etc. for this is contrary, says he, to the way and words
of Christ, who said to his Disciples, in general, etc. This is my Body, etc.
Answ: 1. Seeing God by Sacraments applies, in particular, the grace, which
himself has provided for the good and benefit of all mankind, no reason, why,
administering the Sacraments, we should forbear, to express that, in our forms
of speech, which he by his H. Gospel teaches all to believe. 2. In the one
Sacrament, I baptize thee, displeases not. If, eat thou, in the other, offend,
their (for, this was the Disciplinarians Exception) phantsies are no Rules, for
Churches to follow. 3. It Is uncertain, whether Christ spoke generally once to
all, or to every one, in particular. His words are recorded, in that form,
which serves best, for setting down, with Historical brevitie, what was spoken;
are no manifest proof, that he spoke but once to all. 4. That we, in speaking
to every Communicant, do amiss, it will not be proved, were it clear, that
herein we do otherwise, than did our Lord See Answ. to 38. Vnw. True of them.
Anima animae sensus est. Tertull.
. 5. The quarrellers little weigh, how dull, heavy, and almost without sense,
the greatest part of the common multitude every where is, while they think it,
either unmeet or unnecessarie, to put them in mind, even man by man,
(especially, at that time,) whereabout they are. See Hooker l. 5. 68: p. 365,
396.


To his Fortieth Unw: That People must partake three times a year: where he
asks, Why not every Lord's Day, or Month, as did the Primitives? Answ: 1. The
Church sets this number down, as the minimum quoc sic, in case She can get it
received no oftener. So backward are men to the things of God and of their
souls, that they are very unapt (no^, in this great declension of Christian
zeal and Piety,) to partake of that mystical Board, often: yet, seldomer to
Receive, it is made punishable, and no Every Parishioner shall -- Rubric ult:
after Communion.
parishionar shall escape, if he does not receive it so often. 2. If he could
redress the slacknesse, ^egligence, infrequencie and contemptuousnesse, we
should owe him very much. 3. The very Apostles receded from their first
frequencie, from every day Acts 21. 46.
(possibly,) to every Lord's Day Acts 20. 7.
. 4. The Divines of our Church call for frequencie (as does See first
Exhortation before Communion. See also the Rubricks after the Communion; Upon
the holy days (if there be no Communion.) etc. The same is more plain by the
Rubric of Edw. VI first Ed. after Exhortation.
the Church it self:) Whereas, says Bishop Andrews, Sermon of Imaginations
upon Acts 2. 4^. p. 36.
we continue in the Doctrine and Prayers of the Church, we do many times
dis-continue this action, a whole year together. These long intermissions (so
that, if it be panis annuus, once a year received, we think our duty
discharged) are also (no doubt) a second Imagination, in our common practice.
For sure, we should continue also in this part, and the frequenting of it, if
not so often as the Primitive Church did (which either thrice in the week, or
at least once, did communicate) yet, as often as the Church does celebrate;
which (I think) should do better, to celebrate more often But which of our
Writers call not for frequencie. See Pract. C^t: l. 6. 4. p 475, 476. Bishop
Taylor's Great Exemplar, Disc: of Eucharist, Number: ^8, p. 505, etc. and his
other Devotional Pieces.
. 5. I stand not, to exact, for his saying, The Primitive Christians received
every month, proof from Scripture, where I find no such thing inordered,
precisely. 6. While, here, also, he excepts at the injoyning of the weekly
Receiving in Cathedral, etc. Churches, where are many Priests, It Is Ministers,
Sir, in the Rubric, and you alter not the word, but because you think it of ill
savor.
as not allowing that difference, seeing the common People, he says, need as
often as they. We say, 1 But will they be as willing, as they? Are they as little
impedited, as they? If their dovotion should somewhat serve, would they not
think it a huge oppression of their purses, to ^e at the charge of buying Bread
and Wine so often, when, most an end, they had rather never communicate of
Christ's Blood, than that their Purses should bleed, in the least? 4 He speaks,
as if he lived in Plato's Republic (as we may accommodate,) not in Romulus his
Dregs. 5 Is not more holiness required of the Clergy, Priests, or Spiritual
men, (the man will be offended at the words) then of the Laity, h etc. 7. We
have proved, that Clergy and Laity are, truly, distinguished (that, as an
order by it self,) and, in that sense, we do make a Church of Clerks, distinct
from a Churh g -quicquid de a^^is omnibus dictum est, magis absque dubio ad eos
pe^^inet, qui exemplo esse omnibus debent, and q^^s utiq^e tan^^ antista
e^^xteris oportet devotione, quan^o antist^nt omnibus d^gnitate -- and quos tam
m^gni esse exempli in omnibus Deus volu^t, ut eos ad singularem vivendi no^m^m
non novae tantum, sed etiam antiquae legis severitate constringeret -- Vnde est
quod eis Salvator ipse in Evangelio non (...) i^ voluntarium sed imperativum
offic^um perfectionis indici^, Salvian: ad Eccles. Cath^l: l 2. p. 3^3.
of Christians. 8. The number of Priests and Deacons, that as well answer their
Function, as they have a propriety in their Names, while he fears, I pray God
to increase it. 9. ^uch will, and do more mind their souls, than their bodies;
to which yet, a morsel of bread would yield but little refection or gusto. 9.
His hard words he may enjoy, without a rival.

To his Forty first, That every Parishioner must reckon at Easter with the
Parson, Vicar or Curate; where, says he, find you, that Christ, etc. did so
reckon? Answ. 1. They needed not, because Christians then See Acts 4. 34, 35.
wore not their name for nothing, were Christians, liberal, zealous, loved
Religion. 2. S. Paul (one of Christ's Apostles) robbed 2 Cor: 11. 8. See 1 Cor:
9. 4.
other Churches, and took wages And can he take wages without reckoning? 1 Cor:
9. 14. should be translated: So has God appointed or given order to those
which p^^ach the Gospel, that they should live of the Gospel. See. Mede Diatr.
in Loc. p. 328.
of them. 3. It is a Canon of the same H. Apostle's, injoyning the pay of our
maintenance: Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teaches in all his Goods, Gal: 6. 6. (...).
as the Rhemists read it, very rightly. 4. That there is no man in the Kingdom,
who pays any thing of his own, toward the maintenance and support of his
Parish-Minister, but his Easter-Offering Two pence at E^ster, or i^ some parts
(perhaps) a little more.
, is undertaken to be proved by Dr Heylin In a little T^act called, The
unde^eiving of the Peop^^ i^ the point of Tithes, p. 15. In that T^^ct, he
observes, that Melchisede^ ^y^hed ((...)) Abraham (to import, 'twas not of mere
courtesi^, or (...) in Ab^ah^m) H^b^. 7 6, (To which add v. 9. (...), Abraham
was ^y^^ed. See ^ls^ (...), v. 5) See the (...). Vet. l 2. c. 13. ^. 288. 297.
: and, sure, then, the Clergy may not be thought burdensome to the purses of
the People. 6. If Christ did not, it will not follow, that we may not, as is
cleared often, abundantly. 6. Whereas he asks, in what Bible we find those
names? I ask him also, in what Bible, he finds Trinity, Person, Sacrament?
It Is in vain to quarrel harmless names, when the things vested with them,
cannot be impugned (reasonably.) 3 Such are these: the name of Vicar and Curate
Of Curate, see above.
are of obvious sense. Parson is so called from the French Person, because he
personates or represents his Church. 7. That any refused the Communion to
People, that could not pay for it: 1 I am not bound, to believe, upon his word.
2 That would not (some stiff proud Schismatic) I rather believe, if yet that
be probable: For, that Rubric Se^ Cowels Interpreter, in ^he Word.
says, The Bread and ^ne shall be provided at the charge: of the Parish, and
the Parish shall be discharged by order of their houses every Sunday (that,
sure, is after the susception of the Sacr^ment.) 8. That i After ^he Communion.
any was raised off her knees at the Sacrament, therefore, 1 I know not, need
not believe, 3 allow not, if it were so, 4 judge not, till I hear allegata and
probata, 5 know well, an enemy says this, and 6 am able to tell othergets
stories of himself.

To his Forty second, Our confessing, that, in the Primitive times, Baptism was
ministered [but* twice in the year, Was not ^^mnonly minis^^ed but e^ two times
^ubr.
Easter and Whitsuntide; yet, says he, it is ordered, that the People shall be
often admonished, not to defer Baptism longer than till the Sunday or other Holy
Day next following the Birth, adding, and asking, Does not this savor
strongly, that Baptism is looked upon, as necessary to salvation? Answ: ^or
certain, the man combats winking, there being no such thing, in the Rubric,
as what is (in the latter part) cited by him; the Rubric only saying:
Wherefore, the People are to be admonished, that it is most convenient, that
Baptism should not be ministered but upon Sundaies and other Holy days, when
the most number of People may come together. 2. Can those words found what be
infers from them? Nothing less. 3. The close of the Rubric giving leave (if
necessity so requires) to baptize at all times. 4. [At home] may seem, to
found it, indeed, and the Prodromi and Symmists of our Author, there ground
their Exception: whereto we say, it dreams not of Limbus puerorum (as some
urge,) or such a necessity of the Means (as he) without which the Infant must
necessarily forfeit salvation, but the necessity of Precept, whereby all are
bound, who delay to attend to the means and Sacrament proposed by God; and of
the direct ordinary means Medii non si^t quo non potest, sed sine q^^ non
s^let conferrig^atia Ch^isti ad s^lutem. Sacramenia funt causae instr^mentales
Meta^ (...).
, without which Infants dying are out of the course of salvation, and so far
forlorn. Of the dignity and necessity of Baptism, see Act. 2. 38. 22. 16.
Ephesians. 5. 26, Tit. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Col, 2. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Mar. 1, 4. 16.
16.

To his Forty third, about Holy Days, etc. we h^ve said enough, in sundry
places. Yet we add, 1. The Primitive or Apostolical Church did observe
Holydaies. Did he, never hear of the contests about Easter, having their
Original in the different Traditions of the Apostles, S. S. John and Philip
pro^uced by Polycrates for the (...), as S. Peter and others by P. Victor, for
the other side? 2. See 1 Co^ 5. 8. (...), let us keep the ^east (P^^chal) or
Holy Day, And truly upon this word [cere^remu^] may the ^east of our Easter
seem to be ^ounded. There is not only a warrant, but an order ^or making it a
Feast* And sure howsoever it will fall out wi^h other feasts, this of Easter,
if there we^e nothing else, hat the Con^^versie, that was about the ^ime of
keeping i^, in the very pr^^e of the (...) Church, even immediately after the
Apo(...) it were enough to show it was then generally agreed of al^, such a
Feast was to be kept, (...) the Apostles themselves kep^ it (...) in his
lear^ed (...) on the Text, asse^(...) 4. (...). see also h^s 13. (...) upon 1
Cor. 2^ (...) p. 51^. 523* etc.
as Rev. 1. 10. See Doctor Hammond against Mr Cawdrey, p. 244.
3. How ancient the celebration of Christs's Nativitie is, I have declared, and
proved that it was celebrated in the Primitive Church, (if that will content
him.) 4. I might in^^ance other Feasts, also. 5. To his Texts I have
accommodated, already, particular (solid) Answers* 6. To the authority of
Beza, I oppose that of a far greater Greek Critic, and learneder Divine, (...)
Dr Hammond, whom see on Gal: 14. 10.

To his ^orty fourth, That we say in a Prayer After the Communion
[those things which for unworthiness we dare not ask,* which, taies he, is
contrary to Scripture. Answ: 1. Hereby we acknowledge, that we ought not, in
respect of our unworthiness; howbeit, for the Merits of Christ we ought, to
approach the Throne of Grace. And, this satisfies his Texts J^hn 16 2^ etc.
Ephesians: 3. 12. 1 John: 5 14.
. 2. The good Ce^urion's S. Matthew. 8. 8.
Lord, I am not worthy, etc.] and S. Peter's S. Luke 5. 8.
[Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord,] do more than countenance this
expression, in Prayer. 3. What is, here, imported other, than what fell from H.
Daniel's mouth P. Daniel 9 18. Spes mihi magna subest, dum te mitissime Caesar,
Spes mihi, respicio cum mea facta, cadit, Ovid.
: For we do not present our supplication before thee for our own
righteousness, but for thy great mercies? 4. Wherever sin is inherent, and a
fighter, there must be, necessitate causae sin being an actual cause) an
unworthiness of God's favor, and blind This refers to that part of the
Collect (not here excepted to) [and for our blindness we cannot ask.]
ignorance, (not in necessary precepts of Faith,) but, in Contingents, with
what particular blessing, when, where, how God will bless sinners. 5. That
which we, for our unworthiness, are afraid When we say [which we for our
unworthiness da^e not] we intimate that yet we dare through the dignity of
Christ. Accordingly, in another (...) we say, which our Prayer dare not presume
to ask For fear, see Prove. 23. 14. Phil. 2 12. Is: 6. 3. To doubt in regard of
Christ, is diff^^ence, to demurre in regard of our own imbeci^itie, true
l^wsinesse.
to crave, our Prayer is, that God, for the worthiness of his Son, would,
notwithstanding, vouchsafe to grant. The knowledge of our own unworthiness is
not without belief in the merits of Christ. 6. Our fear excludes not that
boldness which becomes Saints. And, if our Author's and the late
Deformers-their b^lanesse or familiarity with God, savours not of this fear,
it approaches too nigh to that irreverent confidence, wherewith true humility
can never stand See Hooker l. 5. 47. p. 278, 279.
. But, 7. let it be considered, whether Bishop Prideaux nicked it not, when he
said, Happily our Reformators fear, lest they should approach God, too
submissely, and humbly; and, therefore, the Centurion's and Peter's expressions
of humility do not make for their sanctified palate Non it^ f^cit (...)
salivam, Fase: Controv. p. 243.
.

To his Forty fifth, Our Rubric's saying, That if necessity so require, the
Children, etc. Where says he, Christ and the Apostles mention or such
necessity. Answ. 1. I have spoken to this already, a little above. 2. Chri^
does mention such a necessity, S. John 3. 5. Except a man be born of water,
etc. Where Christ's affirming the no possibility of entering the Kingdom of
God, without being born again, both of water and of the Holy Ghost (and not of
one of them,) cannot be doubted, to make Baptism regularly and directly
necessaries. I believe one ^aptism for the remission of sins, Cons^antin^pel*
Creed.
3. To what, here, he says of Augustine and Ambrose (to whom he might have
added Jerome) their not being baptized, till about the Age of XXX. Y; therefore,
in those times they judged not such a necessity of Baptism. I say, 1 He never
defers any authority or regard to the Fathers-their, either Positions or
Practices, but only when they seem to make for him. 2 Do the Producers of
these Instances assent unto and approve them; and define it (thence) imitable
and examplarie, not to baptize any before that Age? 3. Baptism, in those
Fathers times, and before their Lirth, was ^fforded Children, and deemed as
necessary to them, as we repute it, 4. S. Austin's Doctrine is confessed, to
be extremely ^^trarie to the delay of Baptism in Children, whence he was
styled, the hard Father of Infants. 5: And, the grounds of deferring the
Baptism of some, in that Age, were not such as were allowed, by the then
present Church, but ^ffects of the opinion of a greater (not of the ^esse)
necessity of Baptism, and, so, the unfittest evidences, that could have been
pitched on, to infer the desired conclusion. But, I earnestly refer the Reader
to that Being the IVth of his VI. Quaere's, p. 239. And, for this (great)
Author's opinion about the Necessity of Baptiz^ng Infants, see (particularly)
p 221, 232, 233, 234* 235, 236, 237* 239. 242. and 300.
most admirable irresistible Treatise of Inf^nt Baptism by Dr Hammond. 6. To
what he says, That our Private Baptism is contrary to that of Christ and
John's, we say, 1 our Church conforms, as much as conveniently may be, to the
usages and cus^^ms of Primitive Antiquity; yet in case of necessity (which
defends what it constrains,) and poursuing Christ's Rule, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice, S. Mat. 12. 7. She permits, and provides, that a Child may
be baptized, in any decent place, at any time. 2 There Is nothing ob^ectable
against this care and indulgence of the Church, who chooses, rather, to omit
solemnities, than endanger souls, by wanting the essentials, which
(solemnities) are, also, added, if the Child lives See first Rub^: in Private
Baptism.
. 3. It Is possible, that (though not our B. Lord, who is recorded, not to have
baptized at all, S. John 4. 2*
yet) the Apostles might baptize privately, though they are recorded, to have
baptized in public, and not recorded to have so done in private Unless these
may pass for P^v. Baptitigings, Acts 8. 36. and Acts 16. 33.
. 4. We may by, by a Violentum, thus retort the Argument The practice of the
Apostles was, to baptize, at any time, as occasion required, and in fountains
and rivers. Therefore, etc.

To his Forty sixth Unwarrantable, That Red Sea (is said) to figure Christ's
holy Baptism. Answ: 1. And, does it not so? Is it not express Scripture? 1
Cor: 10. 1. Moreover, brethren, I would not See Hooker l. 5. p 319, 320, 321*
(...)
that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and
all passed through the Sea. 2. v* and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud
and in the sea -- 6. v. Now these things were our figures So, in Marg: (...).
, etc. the sea, therefore, was a type, figure, etc. of Christ's, or our
Baptism, or the sea did figure Christ's holy baptism. Baptized (as in the
cloud, so) in the sea. (...). 2: When he says, It rather signisies the
miserable estate of sinners by nature, out of which Christ loads them, we say;
But, sure, the slaverie of Egypt signifies that, as the Devil is the spiritual
Pharaoh, etc. and Moses leading them, etc. Christ's redeeming them; but a mean
whereby he dos it, is Baptism, which was figured by the ^ed sea.

To (...) Forty seventh, That God did by the Baptism of Christ sanctify the
^^od Jordan, etc. for the mystical washing away of sin; where he (...), there is
no Scripture for this. Answ: 1. But there is Scripture for it, (...) 3. 13. S.
Luke 2. 21. On which latter place, says the ((...)) ^^shop Andrews Serm^on S.
Luke 3. 21. p. 677. Christ sanctified the Element of water in Jordan to the
mystical washing of sin.
, Take Christ by himself, as severed (...) us; and no reason in the World, to
baptize him. He (...) it no^. Needed it not? Nay, take him so; Jordan had (...)
need ^o come to Him, then He to Jordan, to be cleansed. Lavit ^quas ipse, non
aquae ips^m, the waters were baptized by Him, they baptized Him not: He went
into them, Ut aquae nos purga^urae prius per ipsum purgarentur (It is
Epiphanius In Anchorato:
) that they which should cleanse us, might by Him first be cleansed; so He
received no cleanness, no virtue, but virtue He gave to Jordan, to the waters,
to the Sacrament it self Consonantly, S. Aug: in 29. Sermon* de Tempore, Christus
in Jordanis aqui^ consecravit aquas in rep^rationem humani gene^is sub
Baptismo. Et pau^o post, Et quia per ^niversum mund^m Sacramentum Baptismi
humano generi opus erat, omnibus a uis benediction^m dedi^, quand^ in Jordanis
alvum uniea a^ singulari pietate decendit: Tunc enim Christum D^minum non tam
lavit unda, quam lota est. (...), Ign^t. Ep. ad Ethes. Christ's holy body
sanctified the waters, as, for his illustrious presence elsewhere the Scripture
calls the place the holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1. 13.
. 2. The outward part of Baptism ('it is true) alone, which is but the cleansing
of the body, does not save, but that which is signified, as it is the
Sacrament of Initiation, is of richer contents, delivers first out of the
deluge of sin, and then of destruction attending; and this is the sense of 1
Pet. 3. 21. and, so, there is no contrariety therein to what the Liturgy here
says. 3. When he says, If so, (as before) I wonder the Bishops are not
Anabaptists, and baptize not in Rivers. I say, 1 to baptize in Rivers, is not
the denotation or importance of Anabaptists; but to rebaptize those that are
baptized in infancy, and it is extended to signify such as baptize not, till
years of discretion, discourse or reason; (or till they are men and women.) 2
We can well baptize, in a River We a knowledge, the water in the Font is not
consecrated (as the Elemen^s a^e, in the other Sacrament,) without which
Consecration it is available to Baptism, for ought is contained in the words
o^jected.
, if there be not any better conveniencie afforded. 3 It Is regard to the
prayers of consecration, the public authority separating the Church or
Chapel for it, and God's love of order, and the reasonable customs of
Religion Add, and the consideration of the more respect and reverence of the
Sacrament.
, that m^ke us choose, to do it in them. 4. The Rites of Baptism, in the First
times, were performed in Fountains and Rivers, there being many Converts, and
(as most hold) no provision of other Baptisteries (thence called Fonts), in
those Ages.

To his Forty eighth, The use of Godfathers, etc. and their Answering, instead
of the Child, and the Childrens being thus said, to perform Faith and
Repentance: Where he says, no such thing as Sureties was practiced in
Christ's, etc. times. Answ: 1. His Friends the Genevans have Godfathers and
Godmothers, in Baptism; and, therefore, for their dear sakes, he should have
Quod si nec f^atris, nec te mea gratia tangit, At generis mise^e^e tui -- O^id:
Met: I. II Janius in Annot: ad Isai. 8 2. A^que ex hoc ritu p^ofectum esse
illum nostr^m constat, quo certi hom nes speci a^^^, maxim ve^o cal^mi^osis
temporiius (ut ifla futura erant) adbiientur testes accessus ad Christ^m, and
ad Eccl^siam per Baptismum, and n^minis Baptismo inditi ex quo ritu Prophet a
occasionem samps^^, ut test^s filii sui ad alterum h^c singula^e testimonium
adhi^eret. Has vulgus compatres and commatres, Graecio^im (...) ^ppellarunt.
spared us, in this point. 2. It was a known Law among the Romans, and the
wisest Laws of the World, and reasonable men allowed it, that the Tutors or
Guardians might stipulate, bargain or contract for their Minors or Pupils, to
their benefit. 3. Among the Jews, from whence Christ was pleased, to transcribe
this sacred Rite of Baptism, this custom also was to be found, of the
Congregation or Rulers thereof, to Answer for the Infant* which, see abundantly
proved, in the (...) Dr Hammond's Quaere Of the Baptizing of Infants, p. 188.
and p. 287.
, out of pregnant Testimonies of the choicest Jewish Writers. 3. Thus it was,
in the ancient pure Church of Christ, as witnesses S. Austine Acc^mmodat illis
Matter ^^^l^sia aliorum ^edes ut ^enian^. alio^um co^^t credant, aliorum
linguam, ut sateantur. See S. C^^^^ost: in Ps. 1 T^rtul. l. de Bsptiss. c. 8.
Platina in vit. Hygini Episc^pi R^mani and Martyris, an Dom: 144,
: Our Mother the Church lends them others feet, heart, and tongue, that they
may come and believe, and confess, and so be capable of Baptism. 4. Those
Answers, etc. signify not their affirmation, that those Infants, do, then
actually, believe (which is the thing charged of untruth,) any more than a
Tutor stipulaeting, as the Proxy of his Pupil, can truly be said, to affirm,
that the Pupil makes such a ba^gain, of which he knows, that he knows nothing.
All that is understood, by such speeches of the Godfathers, is, that that is
the manner of Proxies stipulating or bargaining for others, and that unless
those others, when they come to full age, think fit to perform, in their own
persons, what was thus stipulated, by their Proxies, they shall reap no benefit
of that Covenant See Doctor Hammond's 6th Quaere, p. 289, 290.
. The words are to be interpreted, I believe, i. e. this Child stands bound, by
these presents, to believe, and is not to expect any benefit of this Covenant,
except, when he comes to years, he do actually (and, de praesenti, then)
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, etc. for which we, that do
believe them all, have, now, in his behalf, and to his benefit, undertaken it
Ibid: (excellently.)
. 5. Children in the Apostles Age, being brought by others, that were
themselves baptized, were baptized also, upon their request, and upon a general
declaration of the ends of Baptism before the Congregation, which were the
terms upon which the Infant was supposed, to enter into Covenant. But, soon
after, when the Church was formed into standing Congregations, and the Vow of
Baptism was contrived into a settled Form, as every Catechumen or instructed
Proselyte answered for himself, so every one, that was not able to do so, was
by some persons of the Congregation (in this particular, representing the
whole) brought to the (...), or Font, and the Questions being asked, as in the
baptism of the adulti (grown persons,) those that brought them, and so ^elpt
them to legs, were their Proxies also, and helped them to torgues See ib: p.
288, 289.
. 6. To this purpose is the Testimony of the ancient and learned Writer, under
the name of Dionysius Areopagita Eccles: Hierarch* c. 7. Edit: Morel: p. 233.
, who proposes the Question, as that which may seem to profane persons (i. e.
heathens) ridiculous, Why Children, which cannot yet understand Divine things,
are made partakers of the sacred birth from God, that is, evidently of
baptism, adding to the same head also, that others, in their stead, pronounce
the abrenuntiations and Divine Confessions. And, his Answer is, I that many
things, e p. 234.
which are unknown by us, why they are done, have yet ca^ses worthy of God. 2
That we affirm of this the same things, which our divine Officers of the
Church, being instructed by Divine tradition, have brought down unto us; and,
again, our Divine Guides (that is, the Apostles, says Maximus his Scholiast)
considering this, appointed that Infants should thus be admitted, according to
the sacred manner. So that 7. we allege our custom so we^l founded, and
authorized against their Exception, and avow (in vigor of S. Paul's Rule 1
Cor. 11. 16. See Bishop Andrew's Sermon upon that Text.
,) that they are (very blamably) contentious, to oppose it. 8. The Repentance
mentioned In the Answ. to 7th Qu: in the Catech: of the Liturgy.
, is an act of the heart, that is, a afirm resolution of amendment, and what is
that, but a kind of Vow, that they will do it, (and so believe, A Vow of
believing for the fu^ure.
also,) when being capacitated and fitted by Age, and abilities of
understanding and instruction, they shall be thus enabled and strengthened by
Christ. Now, this Vow or Oath, the Child is supposed to make at the Font,
though not with it is own mouth, yet by Proxies, by Sureties Some (to salve
Repentance by Sureties) urge, that one person may partic^pate of the benefits
of Christ, by the faith of ^n other, whereof we have (as an evident and
sufficient testimony) the example of he Centu^ion's Servant healed by the
virtue of his Master's faith. S Mat. 8. 10, 13. See the like Mat 9. 2, Luke 8.
50. compared with Col: 2. 12. Man. 15, ^8. See Dr H^ylyn's Theol. V^t.
Audition. Fol. 45^, in 3^. ^ I need not urge that of (...) (in Hom. in Die
Ascens.) Certe dig^^m, etc. Ce^t^inly i^ i^ ^^et or reasonable, that they who
are polluted by the sin of their car^al p^ren^s, should be saved by the says
of their spiritual parents.
, who do not so much promise, that he shall do so, as answer and speak, in his
stead by way of subs^itution, representing the Infant's voice, and taking upon
them an obligation, for the Infant. The Sureties (to the purport of what was
said, but a little before) do not undertake, that the Child is so qualified
already, but they being the S^bstitutes of the Child, the Child by them
promises, that he or she will thus perform, hereafter See Pr^ct: C^t^l. 6. 2.
p. 34, 35, -- 37.
. And, by this he knows, how that is true (which he denies,) that the Children
do perform such things by them. 10. I make no question (what ever he says, to
the contrary,) that many Consponsors or Sureties do perform their promise, in
bringing the Children, thus undertook for, to hear Sermons, give them many good
counsels and exhortations, and Rebukes too (when seasonable,) and supply them
with good Books; in a word, h^ld themselves religiously and very closely
concerned, to see to their promise, in this matter: though, for many
God-children, of themselves prompt, and by their Parents obligued, to frequent
Sermons, there will be no such need for God-sibs, to interpose. Let no^ him,
out of a proud (...), think himself and his part-takers, to have monopolized
Conscience to themselves. 11. His Texts Mat: 3. 6. etc.
are all, now, s^perseded.

To his Forty ninth, The Cross in Baptism, of which he says, That it has
more warrant from the Pope, than from Christ, etc. Answ: 1. The Cross is a
Ceremony, the use whereof has been profitable, though we observe it not, as
the Ordinance of God, but of man, (as holding many such things to be very
lawful to be practiced, which are neither commanded nor directed by God,
provided, and as long as the contrary is not directed: and, that if such be
practiced, upon grounds of supposed obedience, either to Christ or his
Apostles, or the Church of God, and upon Charitative ends, they will be found
commendable, and highly reasonable.) If of these (whereof the Sign of the
Cross in the Forehead is one) and other the like disciplines or customs thou
requirest a Law of the Scriptures, thou shall fine none, etc. says Tertullian
Harum and aliarum, etc. traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo
confirmatrix, and fides observatrix. Rationem traditioni, consuetudini, fidei,
patrocinaturam aut ipse perspicies, aut ab aliquo qui perspexerit disces, De
Corona militis mihi p. 34. Edit: de la Bar,
. 2. It Is Pedigree is to be fetched (as we see by this Testimony, and numerous
others. SS. Cyprian, Ad plebem Thibari consistentem, Ep. 6. Epist. l. 4. p.
131. Ed: Er^sm: Muniatur frons ut signum Dei incolume servetur. Et Sermon. 5. de
Lapsis p. 216. Frons cum signo Dei pura, Diaboli corenam far non potuit,
coronae se Domini reservavit. See Hocker l. 5. Sect. 65. p. 340. etc.
Augustine (in Ps: 33.) etc. higher far than Popery. 3. Though the faith of
Christ, in our hearts, a^me us with patience, constancy and courage, yet dare
we not despise the very meanest helps, that are inservient thereto, though in
the lowest degree of furtherance or service toward the highest Services, that
God requires at our hands; and, there is a good, and advantageous use of this
Ceremony, nor is it superfluous, that Christ has his mark applied to that
part, where bashfulnesse appears, in token that they which are Christians
should, at no time, be ashamed of his ignominy, of which there is, even in
this Age, great store, Christ being honored, far and wide, with disdain and
scorn enough, the only service, which they do to Christ, in the daily exercise
of Religion treading down some men See also Mr Mede's Diatribe on S. Mat. 10.
41. p. 347. (an eminent instance.) Take also Mr Mede's account (somewhat
different) of the Original of the Cr^sse: Indeed, says he, it is a natural
Decorum for servants and vassals, by some mark or cognizance to testify who is
their Lord and Master: In the Rev. the worshippers of the Beast receive, his
mark, and the worshippers of the Lamb carry his mark, and his Father's in their
Foreheads. Hence came the first use of the Cross in Baptism, as the mark of
Christ, the Deity to whom we are initiated; and the same afterward used in
all Benedictions and Prayers and Thanksgivings, in token they were done in the
name and merits of Christ crucified so that in the Primitive Chapter this rite was
no more, but that wherewith we conclude all our Prayers and Thanksgivings, when
we say, Through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Diatr. in Ezekiel, 20. 22 p.
236:
, 4. The Original, says Grotius Annot. ad Cassand. See him also Annot: ad V.
Test. in 1 Samuel 10. 1: and in Exodus 29. 7. and in Genesis 12. 8.
, of these things, (whereof the Cross is one) which are not necessary in
Baptism, is this, That those people from whom Christianity came to other, did
much love, to sign fie eximious or eminent things, not with words only, but
with things, and when they saw Christ, incuring the diseases of the body, to
have used certain symboles or ^ings, the touch of the ears, spettle, and the
like, and were sure, that those corporal cures did bear before them the image
or resemblance of spiritual healing, they used the same symboles to signify
the healing of minds, which betides those that come over from idolatry, or
else from corrupt Judaism to the heavenly Doctrine of Christ -- Thus, because
it is promised Christians, that they shall be Kings and P^iests, therefore
there was adjoined to the imposition of hands, a twofold urction, in the top of
the head, and in the forehead: because, as the Jews teach us, on the crown,
after the manner of a Crown, Kings were wont to be anointed, but in the
forehead, by way of a decussis or Cross, Priests. Now, till it be proved, that
the practices of the Jews (all, even those not prefigurative of Christ,) are
not to be used by Christians, here is a very fair and excellent account of the
use of the Cross. Here he says, that some of the Papists by our Cross
justify theirs: to which we Answer, 4. They may justify the use of the
Cross, as we use it, from greater authority than ours, viz: from the practice
of the ancient pure Church of Christ universal Whereupon the old Chrians were
called, Religiosi Crucis. See Mountagu's Answ: to the G^gg^^. (...). 320
; and, as they use it, they cannot justify it, from our usage. For, 5. there
is as great a difference between the Cross, which superstition among the
Papists honors as Christ, and that Ceremony of the Cross which serves
only for a sign of remembrance, as between the Altars which Josiah destroyed 1
Chro: 34.
, because they were instruments of mere Idolatry, and that which the Tribe of
Reuben with others erected near Jordane Jos^: 22. 10.
, at first (through misunderstanding) under dislike, but at last vindicated to
the satisfaction of all. For, 7. ho^ very far our Cross is removed from
Superstition or Idolatry our XXXth Canon MDCIII, does fully satisfy all men;
of which Canon, says the famous Monsieur de Thou or Thuanus Lib 1^1.
(the glory of the Romish Synagogues) as a knowing English Knight Sr S^non
D'Ewes. See also (that excellent writer) ^p. Sanderson's Pref. to Dr Bernard's
Clavi trabales.
called him.) The Ceremony of the Cross is retained explicated in Baptism,
but so, and with so many cautions used, that all reverence of the Sacrosanct
sign seems to be abolished, rather than confirmed. Now, this Th^anus was a most
moderate Papist, and so near a Protestant (if he were not one,) as that he was
^ain to be Apologized for, after he was dead.

To his Fiftieth, That the Minister says, That the Children are regenerated,
meaning by Baptism, whereas, says he, they should be regenerated before
Dicitur quidem^ non^allis, concedendam non ^ss; Regenerationem, nist per
verbum, quod est semen Der: Petrus quippe ait, pitori Epist. cap. 1. nos esse
renatos, haud qu^quam semine corruptibili, sed incorrupti^ bili, quod est sermo
Dei* Caeterum ad id respondemus, de adultis hominibus id esse intelligendum* De
infantibus anon it^ rem se habere, ni^^ velimus H^braeorum filios melioris
facere sortis, quam Christianarum, P. Vermilius Martyr. Loc. Com. p. 838.
citing some Scriptures Acts 8. 27, etc.
, that speak of the Baptism of grown persons. Answ: 1. But, does not Scripture
give us authority, so to speak, S John 3. 3, (...). -- except a man be born
again, etc. And, -- except a man be born of water, etc. and, that the Baptized
were born again, and, that, as if born of a new Mother, (as it is often said in
the Talmud,) was so vulgar a ^otion among the Jews, that, v. 10. Christ wonders
at Nicodemus, that he understood it not: Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things See Titus 3. 5, where Paul calls it the later or
washing of Regeneration.
? 2. It Is a known thing, that all the Ancient Church-Writers understand
Baptism by the Scripture- (...), being born again, or regenerate. And,
Fevardentius upon Irenaeus, on those wo^ds of that Father, l. 2. adv: Haereses,
c. 39. Christ came to save all by himself, all, I say, who are born again unto
God by him, says, that this ^renascuatur, Omnes venit Christus per ^emet
^psum, etc. qui per eum rena^cuntur in Deum, etc. Dominica and Apostolica
Phrasi See Doctor Hammond's IVth Quaere, p. 191.
are born again] is after the style of Christ and his Apostles, so that the
propriette of the Phrase is solemnly received into the Church of baptismal
Regeneration, new Birth, etc. noting thereby the goodness of God, to make this
new Covenant of mercy to us, and the strict obligation, that lies on all that
are baptized, by that grace of God there made-over to them, to walk in newness
of life. So far, therefore, is it from being a fault, in our Excellent Mother,
to use this expression, as that it is her great praise, aiming (with neglect of
(...)) as at the usage of Primitive Antiquity in all her Services, so at their
modes of speaking. 3. When from these words, and two passages in Private
Baptism, one in the Cat: and one in the last Rubr: before Confirm: he
concludes, that this is a most clear proof, that the Sacrament confers Grace
See Jewel's Def. of the Apol: part II. c: 11. Sect. 3. Homily of Salvation, p.
2. p 17. See also Hooker l. 5. Sect. 60. p. 315. Tertul: de Bapt. c. 5. S.
Cypr. de Bapt. Christi. (...). Ny^sen in Orat: de Bapt. Christi. (...).
, we say, 1 As Baptism is an Institution of Christ, so it gives a virtue to the
external act, and to the words pronounced by the Minister, so far as to make
them Members of Christ, and Children of God, and heirs of his Kingdom ^b. p.
355.
And, the Ancient Fathers, who knew the Sacred Dialect (grounding, among
others, on that place, 1 Co^: 7. 14.) call Baptism Sanctification -- he that is
born is to be baptized and sanctified, says Cyprian Epist. 5.
; -- it is better they should be sanctified without sense, etc. says Nazianzen
Orat. 4. Paris: edit. Tom 1. p. 658. A.
; and again, -- let it be sanctified from it is infancy p. 647. D. See D^ctor
Ha^^mend against T^mbes p. 59, 101.
. 2 The fear of being continued in the state of Original Guilt, as it is indeed
to be considered, so it has been greatly considered in this matter, whence the
Church has delivered it for certain Doctrine, that Children being baptized
have all things necessary to their salvation, and are undoubtedly saved It is
a great truth, in as much as no other Ceremony is required on our parts; and
the promise of God makes it sure on his part. Therefore, if they cast not
themselves into doubtings, charity bids us not to doubt of their Salvation, Dr
Savage's Reas. etc. See Gal. 3. 26, 27. compared with Romans 8. 17. 1 S. Pet. 3.
21 Baptism saves ^s. See S. Aug. Feria 2 post. Dom. Palmar: S. Ch^yfost. Him.
11. in Ep. ad Romans c. 6. Con^. Milev. can. 6.
. 4. so his Text of Scripture, we say, That the same things are not required of
Infants, to make them susceptible of Baptism, that is of adult persons: that,
which is required in one of Age, and must be, actually, in him, before he be
admitted to Baptism, is not, thus, pre*required in an Infant, but only
required in the future; and to those, though of mature Age and knowledge, till
after they be baptized, is not (in the Church writi^gs) the word or style
(...), believers, be^owed; illuminate (...).
and believers being all one, promiscuously used, for those that have received
Baptism, in opposition to Catechumeni, those that have not yet attained it. 5.
I pass by what some See Mr Tho. Bedford's Sermon: on Rom: 6. 7. p. 5. See Bishop
Davenant's Epist to Dr Ward. p. 25, etc. and Dr Sa. Ward's Tract called Thesis
Professor is, p. 117, etc. and Vindicatio Thesews, p. 180, etc. all published
by Mr Tho. Bedford, 1650.
say for salving this phrase [are regenerate,] by disti^guishing of a twofold
Regeneration, and resolving what is, here, spoken of, to be a regeneration
suting the infant state, available thereto, and to it a state of salvation;
there being, meanwhile, another kind or degree of Regeneration, under
requirie, for grown persons. I pretermit, likewise, what other's answer, viz.
that they are regenerated, Sacramento tenus, or judicio Charitatis
Regenerationem tantum externam and S^cramentalem spandet Baptismus, qu^m
internam spiritus sancti regenerationem per fi^ere ex charitate prenunciat
Ecclesia, Bishop Pride, Fas^. Con^r. p. 240.
, semblably as some excuse S. Austin's often asserting the final falling away of
sundry, who have been regenerated and justified (though, let me say,
sufficiently contrariantly to that H. Father's mind, who lays down and uses
that tenet, as a means, to prove his absolute Decrees.) But, what is abovesaid
is most perfectly satisfactorie. 6. When he says, If this be true, then e^ther
all baptized are saved, or else they may fall from grace, I say, 1 After we
have received the H. Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and by the grace of
God, (we may) arise again, and amend our lives. Most confident I am, that this
is the truth of God, upon the strength of numerous pregnant examples and
places, throughout the Bible: the Angels in Heaven, Adam in Paradise, David,
Solomon; Ezekiel. 3. 20. 18. 24. These for precedents and texts in the Old
Testament. For the New, these; S* Peter Whose retu^n from his Fall with bitter
tears, is called by Christ, Conversion, S. Luke 22. 39.
, Hymenaeus 1 Timothy 1. 20.
, Alexander, and Philetus 2 Timothy 2, 17
, whole Churches Rev. 2, 3.
; See, also the (most unanswerable) places in the 4th and 10th to Hebrews; in
the 10th especially consider v. 26. most especially v. 28. compared with 39
See, likewise, 1 Cor: 10. 12 and 1^. Pet. 2. 21.
. Among the Examples, I frame an Argument from Judas, thus: Those that are
given by the Father to Christ, and come unto him, are (truly) regenerated, S.
John 6. 32. But, Judas (and, so, many others) was given unto Christ; and,
therefore, came to Christ, S. John 17. 2. Of those whom thou have given me I
have lost none, but the son of perdition. E^go. Another Argument is (in this
Instance) derivable from the word [lost] (from his very Apostasy:) He that
Apostatized from Christ, was once comne to Christ. But, Judas (the son of
perdition or loss) Apostatized from Christ: therefore, he was comne to him;
therefore, convered, regenerated, given to Christ. 7. His places of Scripture
are soon satisfied: The first does not import, that Simon M. did not, truly,
believe, as others, received to Baptism: the imprecation, v. 20. that his
money might be with him to destruction Acts 8. 13. 20, 21.
, signifies S. Peter's refusal, to receive his money, and his declaring, that
the offering of itshould bring mischief upon himself, for th^nking so meanly of
that Apostolical Privilege: while v. 21. imports, that he should, never, have
any part of that Privilege, nor right of d^spensing o^ administering those holy
things, because his design in desiring it, ^as merely the getting of an opinion
of power to himself. His second Text (...)
has been spoken to already, to satisfaction. His third 1 Pet. 3. 21.
, of the Water that shall be a i John 4. 14. See Mr J. Goodwin excellently
satisfying this Text, ^edem. Red. chapter 11. Sect. 10, 11* etc. p. 232, 233. as
also, that of 1 S. Pet. 1. 23. ib. ch^ 10. Sect. 33, 34, etc. p. 199, 200.
Well of Water springing up into everlasting life, is to be interpreted, that
such the water is of its own nature; But, what if that fountainwater of a
divine special quality, be damned up, or the stream cut off or diverted, by the
man's default? Proportionately, the incorruptible seed, 1 S. Pet: 1. 23. is
meant, that, by it is own nature, such it is; But, what if a man cast it forth:
so, the (...), S. Mat. 13. 21. imports a good root, but not sufficiently fast
and firm, in a (volatile) bottom, or in sand. His last John 10. 27, 28.
signifies, that Christ's sheep, provided, (or while) they keep close to him,
no devourer shall, ever, be able to annoy, etc.

To his Fifty first, That the Godfathers name the Child, when as the Parents
did it, in Scripture. Answ: 1. Always? When the Rulers of the Consistory
Gemara Babylon tit: Chet. c. ^. and ^he Gl^sse thereon, apud Dr Hammond's IVth
Quaere, p. 188. and 287.
, or of the House of Judgment (or the Triumviri that, among the Jews were set
over Baptism) baptize the little or young stranger or Proselyte, and take care
of it, and, so, are made to it a father, did the Parents, then, give the Name?
2. The Parents with us do give or impose the Name, the Sureties (with the
consent and good liking of the Parents) only declaring it, at the Font. The
Parents, in former times (as being the Conveighers of the Children's Original
pollution, where-from they are, now, to be washed) having not been admitted,
once to be present at their Baptism. 3. Most congruous it is, that they, who
give them their Christendom, should give them the Name, that is the Badge
thereof, (called therefore, the Christian Name;) that their spiritual Fathers
should give them that Name which they received at their spiritual Birth, and
which when it is asked, What it is [what's your name?] signifies as much as,
What Religion do you profess? 4. We are not, now, bound up by such
Circumstantial Precedents; and, therefore, (to speak, a truth) too many words
have been used in answering so hungry an Exception.

To the Fifty second, The saying that there are two Sacraments, as generally
necessary to salvation; wherein (says he) is implied, that more may be. Answ:
1. I have answered to this, already. 2. I add, but not as Sacraments
absolutely necessary to salvation unto all, but which are rather (though,
ordinarily, called Sacraments See Grotius's Discussio, Of the Baptism of
Insants: And Doctor Hammond's Pref: to Dispatcher Dispatched, p. 15, 16.
) Sacramentals among the Ancients, and own in a general notion the name of
Sacrament, but do not, properly, or principally claim to the thing it self.

To his Fifty third, That the Minister is enjoined (in Priv. Bapt. not,
Communion, as he, twice, has it,) to call upon God, and say the Lord's-Prayer,
if the time will suffer. Where says he, Mark here, how the Minister is in such
have, or the Child in such danger, that they may not have time to say the
Lords-Prayer. Answ: Nothing, here, unreasonable, that should deserve his
denotation infami digito Persius.
. For, though the Lord's-Prayer (as it well merits) is used in all our
Services, yet in extreme streights of time (when great need shall compel, says
the Rubr:) and in danger of imminent death, when the Baptism is necessitated,
to be transacted in have, it is reasonably omitted.

To his Fifty fourth, That the Rubric says, None shall be admitted to the
Lord's Supper, but those that are confirmed. Where he s^ies, That there is no
such prohibition in Scripture: Answ. 1. Confirmation is See Dr Hammond's
excellent and most amicable Diatribe, de Confirmati^ne against (or with) Mons:
Dailla.
a most ancient Christian Custom, highly tending to edification, grounded on
Acts 8. 17. 14. 22. 19. 6. and (as many will) Hebr. 6. 2. 2. Being thus
grounded on Scripture, for the substance, for time of administering it, the
Church may interpose and dispose. 3. Whereupon, as it was in the first times
administered, presently after Baptism, so since, upon the excellent (three)
Reasons, alleged in the Liturgy Rubries bef. the Catech.
, that (first) order has been, of a long time, disused and antiquated, and
this latter order, used by our Church, generally obtained, throughout the
Christian World. 4. How meet is it, that the Child's Baptisme-Bond should be,
first, singly, and solemnly, owned, and the Obligation his Sureties made, in
his Baptism, be taken-off, from his Susceptors, into his own name, by a firm,
public, renewed promise commenced or entered before many and reverend
Witnesses, e're he engage in a new Bond; that one Sacrament receive its
completion, before he be admitted to the attrectation or receiving of another;
first complete that of Initiation or Entrance, before that of some perfection?
5. As there is no such prohibition in Scripture (meaning, as-to the time,) so
there is no command to the contrary, and then the Christian Church is at her
liberty, for such a Circumstance, as the timing of a thing so or so, upon such
weighty Reasons, as* fore-refer'd to. 6. If, (as he says) the great^st number
of the people, in most Parishes, are never visited Supponitur, non, ut opo^tet,
semper p^nitur, nec discipl^^ae detra^it l^udandae, sed executioni vindicandae,
Bishop Pride: Fasc. Contr. p. 245. Their seldomer Confirmation is referred by
some, partly to the short holding of their seas, par^ly to their infinite
molestations and infestasions; partly (and principally) to the disdain and
obstinacy of the people, being Puritan-ridden.
, or confirmed by the Bishops; assimilizing their case to a Master forbidding
his Servants meat, till he come to cut it: and he comes not perhaps in seven
years, if at all; I say, 1 If this case be set, and scene laid in our late
dismal days, it may well be as he suggests; but, then, he knows, whom to
thank, that the Bishops were not admitted, to do their office. If he means of
soberer, better times, this is (I hope) a fiction of a case, which must be
proved (as well as said,) to be no figment, and, that, a very gross one. I
need but refer him to the Life p. 15. Of the usefulness and benefits of
Confirmation (and his wish, that it were frequenter,) See Doctor Tho: Jackson
of Justifying Faith, 3. p. 413* mihi.
of Bishop Lake, to let him see (by one, but, that, a very worthy Instance,)
how remote from truth, this suggestion (as, unlimitedly, set down) is.

To the Fifty fifth, That the Bishop says, We have laid our hands, when (says
he) he himself only has done it; which he remarks for a Kingly style. Answ:
1. It Is no allowable process, to argue from practice, to Laws. The Office of
Confirmation requires, or supposes, that the Bishops have assistants or
associates in the wo^k; and, if it be not so, in practice, they are wiser and
better able, than I am, to justify their carriage, in this particular. Whereto
yet, 2. I can say, that, as in the Book of Consecrating and Ordering Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, it is required, that others lay hands with the Bishops,
and yet, there is no necessity of it, to the validity of that holy
transaction, (as we shall hear below, in our Defense of Bishops,) so, also,
semblably may it be, in this affair. From all which, 3. appe^rs, that here is
no such (supposed) affectation of Regal Dialect.

But, how seely is that, (which as it is not figured for a distinct Exception,
so, in truth, it is, perfectly, nullius numeri) that, in the Catech: the
Minister's Exhortation is called a Question, and the Lord's Prayer an Answer?
Ans: 1. Good Sir, does not the Minister inquire, or demand, whether the Scholar
can say the Lord's-Prayer [Let me hear, if thou can say the Lord's-Prayer,]
and is not that a Question? Whereto when the Child satisfies, by reciting the
Prayer, does he not Answer? On this man's Exceptions may well be inscribed
(...)! For his Margin, we say, that 'twixt him, etc. and the Quakers, there is
but too much symbolization, and they are (...), easily mutuallie-transmutable;
but, as much difference between them, and the Bishops, as 'twixt the bounds of
Mysia Ephesians: 5. 23, 24. 25, 29, 3^. See the (excellent) Exhortation prefixed to
the Service of Matrimony. Since Marriage therefore so clearly represents this
mystery, and this use is holy and sacred: what error is it to say that marriage
is consecrated to this mystery? Bishop Hall's Apol: against Brownists, Sect.
38. p. 563.
and the Phrygians, betwixt which a vast sea was interposed.

(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
To his Ffty sixth, That Matrimony is frequentlie called Holy; which he
grants, to be true in opposition to uncleanness; but yet, suspects, that
[holy] signifies, or refers to [Sacrament,] in compliance with the Papists.
Answ: 1. Here Is candid, charitable dealing! In his judgment, Marriage rightly
brooks the Epithete, holy, and only a possible suspicion (for, so it is, [it
may be suspected]) must huissier-in his quarrel to the expression. 2. It Is (not
charity, but) justice (strict justice,) to resolve, that we have no aim, to
make Marriage any other, than a Sacramental. 3. Holy, sure, it is (in a higher
sense, than he sets it in,) when S. Paul thinks fit to resemble by it * the
union 'twixt Christ and his Church, and when it is called by him, * a great
Mystery, where the Vulgar has, magnum Sacramentum. 4. Marriage is a Covenant,
that makes a wife, Malachi 2. 14. but holy Scripture calls it the Covenant of
God, Prove. 2. 17. forgets the Covenant of her God. It is, also, a Vow or
Oath made, in Gods holy presence.

To his Fifty seventh, which excepts to these words (in the Office of
Matrimony) viz. that so many as be coupled together otherwise, than God's word
does allow, are not joined together by God, neither is their matrimony lawful;
where says he, the sense and end of the words are doubtful. Answ: 1. Be it so;
sure, what is doubtful to him, may be manifest and clear enough to others of
less prejudicacie, and more capacity. 2. Himself affords some Instances,
wherein Matrimony is unlawful, and not according to God's Word, as when
believers and unbelievers, true worshipers and idolaters, Children without
consent of Parents The want whereof (though) makes it not a nullitie.
are joined in Marriage, etc. Though Marriage [in general] were instituted by God
(as he says, truly,) yet does not that make lawful all Marriages, such as are
unduly qualified (Leah instead Do penance is often used by the translator of
Calvin's Institutions, as l. 3. c. 3. 5 and 18. and ib: c. 4. 1. and 13.
of Rachel, the man an Eunuch or Androgyne, diseased with Leprosy, Epilepsie,
or any such contagious disease concealed, etc.) As, by God Kings reign, yet
not all that King it, or sit in the Thrones of Kings (as the late Tyrants,) who
have only God's permission, not his appointment. So that, 3. though marriage,
lawfully contracted, have an indissoluble bond, as all the Scholemen say L. IV.
sent ntiarum, d. 26. Non licet aliter fidelibus nubere, and si liceret, non
expediret. Tert: ad Vxor: l. 2. mihi p. 435.
, yet they reckon many things (some, but now touched by us,) that forbid
Marriage, before made, and that re^ard it, when made: such as are error of the
person (our first Instance,) kindred, a former bond, affinity, etc. Take them
in their own words:

Error, conditio, Votum, cognatio, crimen,
Cultus disparitas, jus, ordo, ligamen, honestas,
Si sit affinis, si forte coire nequibis.
Haec socianda vetant, conjugia facta retardant.
To his Fifty eighth Unwarrantable, Tying Marriage to the Minister, and so,
says he, making it holy, which in it self is but civil * and Ibelieve, says
one, if it were looked into, there have been, within these 4 last years, more
Adulteries and uncleanness, than in seven years before [by taking marriage out
of the Church.
natural, and belonged rather to the Civil Magistrate, * than to the Minister
to perform, citing Ruth 4. 11. etc. Answ: 1. The bond of Wedlock has been,
always, more or less esteemed of, as a thing religious and sacred. The title,
which the very Heathen themselves do thereto, often, give, is holy -- (...),
Diony^: Halica^n: l. 2. c. 4.
, and their entitling the special care of it to the gods, Juno, Cupid and Venus
imports the like. And, when the Jews or Hebrews term the Rites or Orders, which
were instituted in the solemnization of Marriage, by the name of conjugal
sanctifications (Kidduschin In Rituali Hebr: de benedict: Nuptiar: See Hooker
l. 5. Sect 75, p. 398.
,) what do they other, than symbolize, herein, with those Disciples of nature?
And, this farther appears, by the usages or practices of both Graecians and
Romans (Heathen), whereof the former, usually, repaired to the Temple, for the
consummation of their Marriages; where, in the presence of the Priest, they
engaged themselves by Oath interchangably, and they had their Sacrifices and
Offerings, to Minerva an Heifer, to Diana, Baskets: Mariage-gifts, and nuptial
Vows to Juno; the Nuptial Ceremonies being transacted by the (...): semblably,
among the Romans, the Preparatories or Praeludia to their Marriages, the
presence and Omen of Soothsayers -- Viniet cum signatoribus Auspex. Juvenal.
Sa^* X.
, were provided by the man and the woman; and, after this was performed,
certain Solemnities were used by the Pontifex, c See Rhodigin: Antiq: l. 2.
and, afterward, a solemn Sacrifice was offered. 3. The Nuptials of all their
Children were celebrated by the Patriarchs, who, by virtue of their
Primogeniture, were Priests, and in that capacity did bless and sanctify
their Children's Marriages See Gen: 24. 60.
. The latter Hebrews solemnized marriage under a Tabernacle or Tent (set upon
four bars, over against the Synagogue,) called (says Elias Thisbita) in their
speech Hhupha (...). See Maymonides in Cuppa.
or Cuppa *. The Tabernacle or Nuptial Chamber it self was called, the House of
Praise, the Epithalamium or Mariage-song was enstyled Hillulim To this Tent
David. Ps. 19. 5. Joel 2. 16. Christ, S. Mat. 15: 1. S. Luke 12. 36. allude.
(...). It was, says Musculus in Ps. 128. in Loc.
, that is, praises or lauds. The form of this Praise or Blessing is, at large,
described by (that learned Chronologer) Genebrard, whereof the sum is in
Godwin's Antiquities L. 6. p. 258.
. Thus, these things were religiously observed by these Nations, and all other
whether Civil or Barbarous, and, this, surely, by tradition from Noah,
Methusalem, Adam, and, so, God who consecrated the Mariage-Bond of our first
Parents, not merely as man and wife, but as servants in covenant with Him,
blessed them as well, as their seed, was to bruise the Serpent's head, as they
were to people the whole earth. Which act was menaged by God, rather as
representing the Priestly Office, than that of Kings. 4. The first Monarch,
that gave his name to Christ, Lusius, by the advice of Eleutherius P. gave
Rules founded on Scripture for Marriage, unviolably observed through the
Heptarchie of the Saxons, till Ina's days, then till Edw: Conf. M. Charta, our
times. 5. I shall mention the Authority (which must weight with him) of the
Composers of the Directorie, who (p. 28.) have these words: Because such as
marry are to marry in the Lord, etc. we judge it expedient, that Marriage be
solemnized by a lawful Minister, etc. 6. I might touch our Legal Form of
Solemnization of Matrimony, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament. So that,
7. we may conclude from the Premises, that, as the first step of the
Matrimonial Process takes-in the consent of Parties, and of their respective
Parents, the second, of Magistrates, etc. (these in an Oeconomical, and
Politic capacity, common to Turks and Heathens with us;) so, there is a higher
gradual perfection, which exacts the consent and blessing of the Church of God,
as the Parties contrahent are Children or Members thereof. And, the binding and
blessing of these Bands, and making them, truly, sacred, by the Bishop's or
Presbyter's hands, was, always, accounted necessary, from the Apostles days,
through all Ages of the Church, all the World over See in ample collection of
Testimonies to this purpose, in Dr Hammond's Vindication of his Dissertations,
etc. c. 3. Sect. 3. p. 154 155.
. It becomes, says S. Ignatius Epist: ad Polycarp. See Hornbecks summa
controvers: de Brownistis, p. 677.
, those that marie, and are married with the mind of the Bishop to make the
union. What the Church knits, says Tertull: Ad Vx^rem, l. 2. c. ult: p. 43^
Ed: de la Bar. Id: de pudicitia. c. 4. Conc: Carthag: IV. Can: 13.
and oblation confirms, and the benediction seals, the Angels declare, the
Father (Almighty) ratifies. The Priests which are in the whole world, blessing
the beginnings of Marriage, consecrating them, and associating them in the
Mysteries, says Arnobius or Hyginus De Praedes^inator: H^resi:
. 7. S. S. Augustine's and Ambrose's examples were produced by him, when they
seemed to serve his turn. Now, the former being desired, to celebrate a
Marriage, answered Epist: 133.
, he would, provided the Mother of the child were present, whose consent is
necessary: the latter contends Ambros: Ep. 7. ad Vigilium.
, that, persons of diverse Religions should not be matched together, because
they could not have a joint benediction under the Sacerdotal Veil; which
imports, that, then, marriage appertained to the Priestly Office; and, says
Peter Vermilius In L. 1. Regum, p. 25. See S. Aug: approbation of this advice
of S: Ambr. in vita per Possido^ium.
, by these words of Ambrose we under stand, that Matrimony was solemnized in
Temples. 8. * In regard Marriage is to be sanctified, by the Word of God and
Prayer, 1 S. Tim: 4. 3, 4. * in regard it is to be done to edification, 1 Cor:
16. 26. * in regard all things are to be done decently and in order, 1 Cor: 14.
40. * and in other regards many, meet and requisite it is, that Marriage be
solemnized by the Priest. 9. What is cited out of Ruth, is but a H. Grot. in
Loc.
form of apprecation in marriage, now also used by the Jews, which does not
exclude the solemnization by a Priest (though not mentioned;) for, then, it
would exclude it, now, also. 10. If it were in the power of the Jewish Church
See Hooker l. 3. Sect. 7. p. 95.

See the Dowry-bill in Godwin's Jewish Antiq: (out of the Babyl-Talmud,) l. 6,
p. 361. See Bishop Gauden's little Tract Of Marriages by a Minister.


, to institute the Order of Burial, and the Rites of Marriage, with such like,
being matters apperteining to the Church, yet not any where prescribed in the
Law (but were by the Church's discretion instituted,) why should it be thought
unreasonable (saving what has been said, before,) for the Church (Jewish or
Christian,) to appropriate this transaction or service to a Priest?

To his ^ifty ninth, The use of the Ring in Marriage, making it essential to it.
Answ: 1. It Is reputed by us no more essential thereunto, than the Cross to
Baptism: indifferent in themselves, ceasing so to be, when enjoined by lawful
Authority. For, 2. it serves as a Token only, of our intended endless
continuance in that, which we ought never to retract or revoke, that is,
Marriage, which is such, (a Contract or Tie never to be dissolved or rescinded,
but by death.) Fitly, therefore, is that especial pledge of fidelity (in that
notion always used) applied to this matter. For, some of the H. Fathers
Isidor: de Eccles: Offictis l. 2. c. 19.
think the cause why the Christians use it, to be, either to testify mutual
love, or, rather, to serve for a Pledge of Conjunction in heart and mind. 2.
What Rite or Custom (says Hooker L. 5. Sect. 73* p. 398, 399.
) is there so harmless, wherein the wit of man, bending it self to derision,
may not easily find somewhat, to scorn, and jest-at? Where, he go's on to
parallel the four-corner'd Garment overspread in time of Espousals; praying
over a Cup, and delivering it at their Mariage-Feast, etc. as things whereat,
by one lewdly affected, might be taken as just occasion of scornful cavil, as
at the use of the Ring, etc. 3. If (as some object) it be thought, to savor of
Ethnic usages According to that of Tertull: -- cum aurum nulla no^at praeter
unico digito, etc. Apol. c. 6. mihi p. 672. A.
, we justly Return, that, as the Heathen Temples Consider the Kiss of
Charity, called the holy K^ss, Romans 16. 16. drawn from a civil custom in the
East, yet converted and amplified by the Apostle, etc. as there we see,
commanded by him.
passed into the use of Christians, so, also, may the Ring, with other things,
be transferred and accommodated to pious uses.

To the Sixtieth, The Man's promising, with my body I thee worship; where
says he, civil worship is due only from an inferior to a superior, as the
Woman is not. Answ: 1. There is some kind of Worship, which may be exhibited to
man (or, woman,) 1 Chronicles: 29. 20. -- and worshipped the Lord and the King. See
S. Luke 14. 10.
This, onwards, for the satisfying of this (...) of all, with them. Next, and
2. I might mention what Mr Hooker l. 5. Sect. 73, p. 399.
has out of the civil Laws, touching two sorts of Wives, the primarie, and
half wife, the former of whom this phrase did distinguish from the other. Put,
3. I may say, that this antiquated out-dated phrase means nothing else, than, I
give thee power of my body (corpore te meo dignor; or, dignum censeo, or (as
the Latin Translation of the Book renders it,) f See Fase: Contr: p. 241. See
also Amb: Fisher's Defense of Liturgy l. 1. chapter 17. p. 184.
with my body I honor thee, according to that, 1 Cor: 7. 4. where the Greek
word, (...), signifies, to have liberty, privilege, property, authority (see
(...), S. Joh: 1. 12.) which but little differs from worship. For, what greater
secular worship or dignity can there be, than for a man to give-up or
surrender the propriety of his body to his wife? 4. I much like the Answer of
the (pious) Author of the Rationale Of Marrimonie, p. 3^^*
, That to worship, here, signifies, to make worshipful or honorable, which
sensing has authentication from the old Translation (used by our Book) of 1 Samuel 2. 30. which is, Him that worships me I will worship, i. e. make
worshipful, for that only way can God be said, to worship man. 5. (and lastly)
Let it be considered, that Godwin's Moses and Aaron.
this very phrase was used by the Jews, as appears by the Dowry bill, taken by
Bertram out of the Babylon Talmud L. 6. p. 261.
, some of the words whereof are -- Be unto me a Wife, etc. and according to the
Word of God, (N. B.) will worship, honor, maintain and govern thee, according
to the manner of the husbands among the Jews, which do worship, honor, etc.
their wives faithfully. By which we see, how well-grounded, the (squeamish)
offenses of the Puritan, etc. at our Book, are.

To his Sixty first Vnjustifiable, That (in Matrimony) one prayer is to be
omitted, when the Woman is past Childbirth; where says he, sure they are very
skilful Parsons, etc. that can judge this. Answ: 1. Surely, Sir, this is no
such hard matter, as you would make it. Certainly there are some married (for
other ends, than procreation of children,) which we may groundedly suppose,
will never have children. For, though our Women (the English being of greater
longevitie) may bear children longer, than the Spanish or French, (as an
ingenious Mr James Howel's Instructions for Foreign Travail (mihi) p. 214* 215.
Traveller and Writer has observed;) these ceasing to bear about forty, ours
not till about fifty, yet when the woman is comne to that quot of years, or is
considerably older, it is fairly judicable (upon a reason in nature, easily
assignable,) that (though there be some rarer cases, to the contrary,) she
will have no children, especially her Lord being old, also. 2. His insulse,
malicious and despiteous scoff, that follows, we let pass, as resolved (...).
Pray God, my soul may be bound in the same bundle (of life, no doubt!) with the
devout conscientious users of our (holy and venerable) Book!

To his next (which he mis-figures, 59th) That the new-maried Of Matrimony.
persons (the same day of their Marriage) must receive the Communion; where
says he, they that will understand rule or reason for this practice, must go
to Rome at least. Answ: 1. His Hooker l. ^. 73. p. 399.
word will be taken before that of six hundred of Mr P. that said, To end the
public solemnity of Marriage, with receiving the B. Sacrament, is a custom so
religious and so holy That the parties might be put in mind of mingling
spiritual with earthly joy, as also 2 of the end of Matrimony, i. e. the
enlarging the number of the Saints, whole Communion is most lively represented
in the Lord's* S. 3 of the union of Christ and his Church, here, most plainly
exhibited.
, that, if the Church of England, be blamable in this respect, it is not for
suffering it to be so much, but rather for not providing, that it may be more
put in ure. 2. Even the Laws of Romulus, says Dionys: Halic: Antiq. l. 3.
concerning Marriage are, therefore, extolled above the rest among the Heathens
which were before, in that they established the use of certain special
solemnities, whereby the minds of men were drawn, to make the greater
conscience of Wedlock, etc. To like purpose, if there be any thing in Christian
Religion, strong and effectual, it is the H. Sacrament. 3. In the place cited a
little above, Tertullian says, Whence shall I be able, to declare the
felicity of that Matrimony, which the Church fastens, and the Sacrament
Oblatio. Ergo ad sacrum quod hic Oblationis nomine intelligit, sponsus and
sponsa conveniebant, etc. B. Rhenanus in Loc.
confirms! 4. If men's luxury and brutishness has made this Service (so
holy, and so behoofeful (the Communion being the great strengthener of the
soul,)) to seem out of season at this time (when yet our Rubric exacts it
indispensably, at the time of Espousals) no manner reason that the Church
should lay-down her requisition for the receiving of the Sacrament, unto their
unexpressible good. 5. And now, sure, the reason of this Injunction is obvious
and neere-hand enough, neither is it beyond the sea, that he should say, who
shall go over the sea for us, that we may understand it, and do it Deuteronomy. 30. 13.
. 6. Clandestine Marriages, which he, here, (rudely) mentions, we are far enough
from approving; and, for his scoptical and false charging the Church and
Liturgies of England therewith (a wrong most gross!) we return S. Stephan's,
(...) Acts 7. 60.
!

To his next (Sixtieth,) That (in Vis. of the Sick) it is said, I absolve thee
from all thy sins, which power, says he, God has not given to any person See
Doctor Boys's Postills p. 523. edit. MDCXXIX.
. Answ: 1. Absolution Christ solemnly stated on the Priest in his Disciples, by
several acts, first to S. Peter, as the mouth of the Apostles, Mat: 16. 19.
then by way of promise to them altogether, ib. 18: 18. then by way of actual
instating it on them, breathing that power, and the H. Ghost on them together,
John 20. 23. and is most distinctly named by Jam. 5. 15. (...), (not, they
shall be forgiven, as if it were (...), (for, (...), sins, being a Faem: plur:
will not agree with the Verb (...), of the Sing: Number.) and belonged only to
Gods act of pardoni^g him, but) impersonally, Pardon or Absolution shall be
given him absolvet^r e^.
. Apparent, therefore, it is, that God has given this power to lawful Priests
or Ministers. 2. For the (...) or Manner, we say, it is not by proper authority
directly and absolutely, which belongs only to God Isa: 43. 25. Ps: 32. 25. S.
Mat: 9. 2, 5, 6. Aliud est baptizare per ministerium, aliud per potestatem and
authoritatem, S. Aug. (...), Rom: 3. 9. See 1 Timothy* 1, 4. S. Joh: 17. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. their works sake, and 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. So in Retaining sins, 2 Cor
10. 6. H. Jerem: 1* 10. Ezekiel: 43. 3. (where see our Marg*) Lev. 13. 3. and
ali^i, where we [pronounce him unclean,] and v. 6. [pronounce him clean,] it is
according to the Heb^: and Gr: shall cleanse, shall pollute him. See S. Jerome
l. 7. Esaias c. 23. Lombard: l. 4. Sent: did. 14. Numb. 6. 23. compared with v.
27.
, but potestate vicaria, by a deputed, derivative, minister^al, stewardly,
limited power, so as that it is not their work properly, but of the H. Ghost,
who remitteth sins by them, as his Stewards or Substitutes, dispensing things
according to the will of their Master. 3. The Form of words, in this affair,
has sometimes been Indicative, sometimes Precative, sometimes Declarative, all
which Modes of Absolving our Church uses; the first in the place now excepted
to, the second at the Communion of the H. Eucharist, and the third at the
beginning of Lit: who knows, whether, therein, aiming, to express an
indifferency, as-to forms? 4. We say, it is done authoritative, by a
commissionated delegated Power committed to the Priest from God, designative,
and so ex Officio that no other man, no, nor Angel can do it, 2 Cor: 5. 19.
authoritatively, I say, in this sense, as it may stand with declarative, just
as the Officer, whose place it is, solemly to make Proclamation of the Royal
Pardon, does it authoritatively, and without authorization would not dare to do
it. And, therefore, our Exceptioner may see, it is no such adventure (as he
would have it,) to say, I absolve thee. 5. Yet some go higher, upon the
authority of S. Chrysostom's words, Hom. V. in Isai: Heaven ^aites and
expects the sentence of the Priest here on earth; the Lord follows the servant,
and what the servant rightly binds or looses, etc. that the Lord confirms, etc.
They cite also S. Gregory, b S. Aug: S. Cyprian Hom: 26. in Evangelia. The
judgment of man goes before the judgment of God, say the Ancients.
, etc. And whereas our Book has three several Forms (as we saw, above,) those
that maintain this last opinion, in this concern See Rationase, p. 18. eib: p.
23, 24.
, pronounce them, in sense and virtue, to be the same; for, as when a Prince
has granted a Commission to any servant of his, to release out of Prison all
Pen^tent Offenders whatsoever, it were all one in effect, as-to the Prisoner's
discharge, whether this servant says, By virtue of a Commission granted to me,
under the Prince's hand and seal, which here I show, I release this prisoner:
Or thus, The Prince, who has given me this Commission, he pardons you. Or
lastly, The Prince pardon and deliver you; the Prince standing*by, and
confirming the word of his servant. See Id. ib. p. 26, 27. Where, he refers for
Instances of Forms of Absolution^ as full as any the Chapter of E. uses, unto
Ar^udius desacrd Paenit: l. 4. c. 3. and Goar in Euchol, Graec. See Dr Heylin's
Respondet Petrus, on this matter; And his Theologia Vet^eru^. l. 3. c. 6. p.
458, 459, 460.
Even of old, there was used in the Greek Church as full a form, as any the
Church of England uses. It Is true, it was not written, nor set down in their
Ritual, but delivered from hand to hand, down to these times, and constantly
used by them in their private Absolutions. For, when the Penitent came to the
Spiritual man (so they called their Confessor,) for Absolution, entreating
him, in their vulgar language, (...), I beseech you, Sir, absolve me! The
Confessor or Spiritual man, if he thought him fit for pardon, answered, (...),
I absolve thee. So that, if our confession and repentance be hearty and
serious, this Absolution is effectual, as if God from Heaven did pronounce it.
6. His Texts (levied to serve against this truth) are (the two former, 2 Cor:
2. 6. -- and Gal: 6. 1.) for our assertion, as speaking of persons under the
Censures, to be absolved by the Church, that is, by the Governors of it, in an
authoritative way; by absolution freed from Satan, to whom he, in the former
place, was delivered, 1 Cor: 5. 5. -- Excommunicate, put under the Censures
(so, that satisfies his third Scripture.)) And, his fourth, Mat. 18. 18.
musters under us, as is visible above, in this Paragraph.

To the next (Sixty first.) That the Communion is appointed, to be given, when
a man is sick at home, and in the time of Plague, etc. upon special request of
the diseased, at what time the Minister alone may Communicate with him. Where
says he, such a Communion is Rubr: at Priv: Com:
not warranted by the Word, and cannot but be Popish, both in the end and
manner. Answ: 1. It Is warranted by God's Word, for the manner, S. Mat: 18. 18,
19. For where two, etc. are gathered together in my name, there am I, etc.
Communion is, also, 'twixt few Cae^erum non obstat hoc quo m^n^s agro^us
aliquis simul cum domesticis suis, aut certe simul cum Pr^s^yter^s and Diaconis
communicet. Est ^n. Communio e^am inter pau^os, Grotii Annot. ad Cass
desolitariis Missis.
. 2. It Is not Popish, because with them (Papists,) the business is transacted
solely and solitarilie by the Priest. 3. The Council of Trent's Vote eatenus is
good Protestancie, See Grot. Animadv. in Animadv. A. Riv. de sol. miss p. 5.
when it wishes, that, in every Mass, the faithful communicate also in the
Sacramental perception of the Eucharist. 4. Neither can the end be Popish or
unwarrantable: for, it expressing the Church's great care for the sick, that
nothing may be wanting, on her part, for the saving of his or her soul, has
the Authority of the renowned Nicene Conc: Nic: Can: 13: Cod: Vniv: E^cl. See
Counc: of Aurange c. 3.
Synod (older, sure, than Popery) in these words: To every one that is ready
to depart the World, let the Bishop after examination impart the H. Eucharist,
if he desire it, adding, that this is the ancient law, that if any one depart
this life, he be by no means deprived of the last and necessary viaticum,
voiage-food or provision, which is none other but the H. Communion, as is
evident. Whereby appears, that, of the Puritan, and their Extract's imputation
of Popery, at every turn, we may say what the admirable Hooker L. 5. 71. p.
379.
says of imputation of Papist, and the breeding of superstition (so
frequentlie, but so groundlesselie charged;) They are now become such common
guests, that no man can think it discourteous, to let them go as they come. To
which answers that of another most excellent Personage; View of Direct; Sect:
39. p. 36, 37.
Superstition is a strange Vbiquitarie, ready to fly and affix it self to any
thing, they will have it. And, that it is, no way, (what yet he pretends)
contrary to the nature of a Communion, appears as evident. 5. It Is false (what
he says,) that the Minister is tied to go; it is (in the Rubr:) may, not must,
and, that, upon request. 6. It Is untrue (what he pretends, too) that this is
contrary to 1 Cor: 10, 11. which equally discharges all care of Visitation of
any sick, by any persons. 7. The Priest is not to go, unless he find himself
bound in conscience, or can secure himself from infection. 8. It Is no way
contrary (another of his pure pretenses) to the Rubr: in the end of Pub: Com:
that requires greater numbers in other cases, which cannot be done in this, and,
therefore, is not required, here. And, now, after all this goodly exception, we
may cry:

Lucilius.
Pergula Pictorum, very nihil, omnia falsa. To his next (Sixty second,)
Appointing singing at Barials, which, says he, is contrary to Jam: 5. 13.
Answ: 1. Singing is as seasonable in grief, as in joy, in as much as it,
admirably expresses, or represents the turns and varieties of all passions,
whereto the mind is subject. And, our own experience prompts us, that, at some
melody we are more inclined to heaviness and sorrow. 2. We sing, even here,
upon the score, and out of the affection, of joy, and triumph, in consideration
of a beatified Resurrection from the squalors and dishonesties of the grave, I
am the Resurrection and the Life (some of the words we sing.) So that it is a
holy insultation over death; O Death, where is thy sting, 1 Cor: 15. 55.
, etc. And, therefore, thanks be to God, who gives us this victory v. 57.
, etc. 3. S. Chrysostom represents Hom: IV. in Heb^:
this, to be the usage of his times, when he mentions bright torches as of
Championt, and Hymns of glorification, all which, says he, are expressions of
Joy, whereby in a sacred valor we laugh at death, whereas, continues he, if we
be dejected and a la mort (as they say) we calumniate and put a disreputation
on the death of Christ, whereby he has vanquished death See S. Jerome Ep. 30.
ad Ocean. de Fabiold. See also Dienys: Eccl: Hier. c. 7. par. 1. mentioning
Hymn^ of gratulation to God, upon this occasion.
. 4. I would ask, Whether David, in time of sorrow, never composed one of his
holy Odes, and then played it to his Harp? 5. Among the Jews and Heathens their
Ceremonies of Burials, these two there were, to augment grief, first Minstrels,
who, with their sad tunes, inclined the affections of the people to mourning
(which asserts what I said first, on this matter,) with pipes Majoris aetatis
funera ad tubas proferre solebant: minoris v. aetatis ad tibias, Servius in
Aeneid. l. v. Tibia cui suetum teneras deduce^e Manes. Lege Phrygum maesta --
Statius, Thebaid: l. 6. v. 121.
and trumpets: secondly, women Called* praef^ca^; quasi in hoc ipsum
praefectas. See Godwin's Jewish Antiq. l. 6. c. 5, p. 211, 212.
hired, to sing at Burials, for the same purpose, P. Jerem: 9. 17. S. Mat: 9.
23. 6. To the place of S. James; We sing not, as we are afflicted, but as we
are merry, upon the stock or account abovesaid; and, thus, by our Prayers,
and singing of Thanks givings, in a time of complicated joy and sorrow, we
perfectly fulfill the H. Apostle's Precept.

To his next (Sixty third,) That (at Burials) we say, The soul of our dear
Brother here departed, of every one buried, adding, that they have a large
faith, that can believe, that all they bury are such. Answ: 1. Yes, because
some are dear Sisters. 2. Why does he not mention that terrible Mormo and rock
of offense [in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life,] said
over every one, that is interred? Which if he had, then 3. we would say, that
such words are the voice and censure of hope, and charity, not of certainty
and confidence, in as much as it belongs not to us, but to our B. Lord, in the
last judgment, to distinguish the Goats from the Sheep S. Mat. 25. 32.
. A charitable overweening is, certainly, better, than a censorious, stark,
rigid uncharitableness See Bishop Hall's Apology against Brownists. Sect. 44.
p. 568. Go and learn how much better it is, to call them our Brothers, which
are nor, in harmless overweening and over-hoping of charity, than to call
them no Brothers which are, in a proud and censorious uncharitableness*
. 4. A wicked man may be called dear to us, as such, though not in a Christian
consideration (and yet, even in such a consideration, by virtue of the common
Band of Christianity, they ought to be (somewhat) dear to us;) and a Brother
he may be called, as well as they are called Saints, (and the appellation is
very usual in Scripture,) that are such but in profession. 5. The Church
designed and hoped (and accordingly, incomparably provided) as otherwise, so by
a vigo^ous execution of Displine, Excommunication, etc. (And note, that it is
only such a certainty, as hope admits of,) to make all her Members holy, and
then these words were very apposite; and when her Children degenerate, it may
(I humbly, and under correction, suppose) not be unlawful, to leave out the
[dear,] and [eternal life.] 6. Notwithstanding his scoffs, we shall be ready, to
count him, and his fellows Brethren, semblably as the Catholics did the
Donatists, equally enraged against them, their Worship, their Churches, as
these are against ours.

To his Sixty fourth, Our Reading and Praying over the dead, without any
Command or Example in Scripture. Answ: 1. It Is well, it is not praying for the
dead, or to the dead, the sottish imputations of non-sense-malice, so clearly
confuted by the Prayers, then, used. 2. So long as the contrary is not
prescribed or commanded, (as-for example, that, if it be good, must be resolved
into command,) we are very safe, as has been, abundantly, made good, above. 3.
How if we want not the example of the Jewish and Christian Church, in this
matter? For, though it be not recorded in Scripture, there might be such
things; for, while the World stands, (says Hooker Eceles. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 75.
p. 403. (See him, also, l. 3. Sect. 7. p. 95.)
) they shall never be able, to prove that all things, which either the one or
the other (Jewish or Christian Church) did use at Burials, are set down in holy
Scripture, which does not any where, of purpose, deliver the whole manner or
form thereof, but touches sometime one thing, and sometime another, which was
in use, as special occasions require any of them, to be either mentioned, or
insinuated. 4. Were it so as is pretended, we demand, has Christ so deprived
his Church of judgment, that what Rites or Orders soever the latter Ages
thereof have devised, they must, needsly, be inconvenient? 5. It 's probable,
Id. ib.
that the Ancient Jews had, heretofore, (in regard the Modern ones have, now) a
Form of Funeral-Prayers, not borrowed (^e may be sure) of the (hated)
Christians. 6. It is Mr Hooker's complaint ib.
, in this instance, That, in these miserable days, under the color of
removing superstitious abuses, the most effectual mears, both to testify and
strengthen true Religion, are plucked at, and, in some places, even pulled up,
by the very roots.

To his Sixty fifth, That in Churching of Women, we apply Ps: 121. to the
Woman, which is meant of the Church of God. Answ: 1. The Psalm was penned See
Grot: in Ps. 121.
(and, accordingly, is meant,) concerning the time, wherein there was War with
Absalom. 2. Why not thus appliable, as well as what was said to Joshua Josh: 1.
5.
in particular, should be applied to every faithful Christian, Hebr: 13. 5. For
he has said, I will never leave thee, etc.? 3. Why not as well as the Psalms
of David and Asaph applied to Hezekiah's time, and the Churches case then, 2 Chronicles: 29. 30. though the occasions of both states were not the same, and
accordingly the expressions not (all) equally suitable and proper? 4. By this
use of the Psalm, at this time, is not intended, to persuade, that it was
penned for this occasion; but because it (at the beginning) tells the Woman,
that all her help comes from God, etc. the body, also, thereof being very
pertinent and fit, as is made apparent, in the Rationale p. 358.
, in Churching of Women. 4. If the Churching of Women be questioned by any (as
by this Author, I do, here, find, it is; being, also, (in good time, no doubt!)
left out in the Directorie;) the Reader is heartily referred to a most
satisfactorie and most excellent Discourse of it, in the View of the New
Directorie Sect. 43. p. 39, 40, 41.
. 6. And, yet hear, in this matter, the meek Hooker: L, 5. Sect. 74. p. 400.
401.
It Is but the overflowing of the gall, which causes the Woman's absence from
the Church during her time of lying-in, to be traduced and interpreted, as
though she were so long judged unholy, and were thereby shut-out or sequestered
from the House of God, according to the ancient Levitical Law. Whereas the very
Canon Did. 5. c. Haec quae in lege, etc. Nune autem statim post partum
Ecclesiam ingredi nonprohibetur. Leo Constit. x. Quod profecto non tam propter
muliebrem immunditiem, etc. Where s^e two or three excellent Reasons of this
Abstention.
it self does not so hold, but directly professes the contrary -- although
her abstaining from public Assemblies, and her abode in separation, for the
time, be most convenient. But the Old and New Disciplinarians will needs set up
Schools of Ingratitude.

To his Sixty sixth, That the Woman is enjoined, to offer her accustomed
Offering. Where says he, Is not this, to bring them back to the Law of Moses?
Lev. 12. Answ. 1. I have already accounted for Offerings, and proved them
Christian and lawful. 2. Not every Concerning Oblations, that some may become
due by Law or Custom, see the lea^ned Editor of Bishop Andrews on the
Commandments, Add. 28. p. 308.
imitation of Ceremonies and Usages among the Jews is now unlawful, but,
contrariwise, many of the Jewish Ceremonies were imitated by Christ himself,
under the Gospel, as the abovesaid excellent Doctor In his IVth Quaere.
has abundantly showed, in the place afore-cited, out of that excellent
Protestant Paulus Fagius's Notes on the Targum. 3. When we come to give thanks
for some extraordinary blessing received, then it is requi^^te, and reasonable,
that, not only in word, but in deed, also, we should thank God, by bringing a
Present to him, as is required, in Ps. 76. 11. 4. To his reproach of leading
cap^ive silly Women, if he be not conscious to whom it belongs, let it even
vanish, as no concernment of ours.

To his Sixty seventh Unw: The mention and approbation of Lent and Penance,
where he says, that these words are as honey, etc. to the Papists, and that it
was not so from the beginning. Answ: 1. Our Lent imports no more, than a
Spring-Fast (Lent, in the Saxon, being Spring) and the Jews (the People of God)
had (herein a fair precedent for us) their public, set, anniversarie Fasts, as
the great Day of Expiation Levit. 13. Is. 58. Jer. 36. 6.
, etc. instituted by God, and some instituted by men (yet, constantly,
observed,) as the four mentioned in Zech: 8. 19. and Christ's Disciples were to
fast See S. Mat. 9. 14, 15. S. Mar. 2. 18, 19, 20. S. Luke 5. 33, 34. 35.
, when he was taken from them, that is, ever since his Asscension, etc. so
that, (without need, to add many other most obvious indisputably satisfactorie
proofs) Fasting in general, nor set See Luke ^. 36. 38. Acts 10. and 13.
public annually-recurrent Fasts cannot fall under a just reproof. 2. As this
will conclude our Lenten-Fast lawful, so that, will appear, farther, so to be,
by the occasion of it, which was the imitation (so far as we can reach That we
might, as far as we are able, conform to Christ's practice, and suffer with
him, here, that we may reign with him, hereafter, S. Aug. Ep. exix.
) of Christ's example of forty Days abstinence S. Mat. 4. 2.
. Whereupon says S. Jerome Ep. 54. ad Marcellam.
, We fast one forty days, in a fit or convenient time, according to the
Tradition of the Apostles. To him accords S. Epiphanius, in making it an
Apostolical Tradition. And, for the Practice of it, S. Basil Hom. 2. Je junio.
may be spokesman for all the Ancients, where he says, that there was no Age,
nor Place but knew it, and observed it See, in Doctor Fearley's Handmaid to
Devotion, Of the Lent-Fast, in Lent's Devotion, a p. 588. ad p. 619. and p.
617, 618. 619. in Answ. to Quest. IVth is showed, how our Lent-Fast differs
from the Popish.

See also Doctor Field of the Church l. 3. c. 19. p. 106, 107. and the (...) Dr
Gunning in his most full and irrefragable Tract on this subject.


. 3. For the Penance our Church mentions, it is that of the Primitive Church,
(not of the Romish,) which had her Penance, as well as the Popish, though not
the same: whereupon, it is, most ignorantly (to say the best,) done of our
Author, from Penance (in the general) common to both Churches, to make, as if
we concluded their Church, to be the Primitive. 4. The Primitive Penance was
sackcloth, ashes, humicubations or lying on the ground, etc. which have
authority from the Scripture, and the Church's Practice of old. We have the
Example of H. David for it 1 Samuel 1^. 16.
; And David (says the H. Text) fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the
earth. On which words, says Grotius in Loc.
, Fasting, sying upon the ground (...).
, squalor illuvies.
, lying apart from the Wife, vile garments, weepings are the aliments of
Prayer, which all David, here, used, as appears in this v. and 20, 21, 24. See
Isai: 58. 5. of the days of (...): Is it such a fast as I have chosen? to
afflict his soul for a day As it is in Marg. Per diem significat exiguo te^pore*
quid fit se affligere explicent sequentia, Grot. in Loc.
(that is, a little time) to bow down his head as a bull-rush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? all which are mentioned as the usual Rites of
Penitents. To, the same purpose we have, also, in the N. Testament, 2 Cor: 7.
11. a mention of the denial of themselves lawful liberties, by way of Penance,
for their inordinacies, when some had the Censures of the Church inflicted on
them, -- (...); yea, what revenge? What the Practice of the best days of
Christ's Church was, in this concern, appears very clearly by S. Epiphanius
against the Heretic Aerius Haeres. 75. Concerning the service and long
Penances of the Primitive Church, see Grot. Discuss. where he shows, how much
otherwise (i. e. how tenderly) the Calvinizers deal with notorious offenders,
than the Ancient Chapter did.
. 5. By all this it is more than manifest (in spite of his contrary
avouchment,) that, ab origin fuit ita, it was so from the beginning.

To his Sixty eighth, That our Book says, That (Godly) Discipline is much to
be wished for; where says he, is not that to wish Penance and Popery? Answ.
1. If it be a Godly Discipline, it deserves to be wished for; and, that it is
not, as he has not, so he (nor those of his combination, in these matters)
shall never be able, to prove or evict. 2. We wish for the Primitive Penance
See Hooker l. 5. 71. p. 154.
. Which 3. is ill joined with Popery. 4. As to the word, Penance, it is of it
self a good word, the very same with penitence (whence it is corrupted or
contracted.) 5. The place in Mat: 3. 8. is (verbatim) thus translated: h Do (or
make) therefore fruits worthy of repentance, penitence, or (...), etc.
penance. The old Latin Translation, (which is elder than Popery, and has
the approbation of many excellent Protestants See John Boys of Ely, Vet.
Interp. cum Beza -- collat: published by Mr Sandcroft: and P. Fagius Praef. in
Ve^s. Chald. in Pentat. and Dr Walton's Pref. to his Introd: ad Lect. ling.
Orient. p. 80. 81. where he cites Beza, de Dieu, Casaub^n, G^otius commending
this Translation.
) uses poenitentia, not resipiscentia, to translate (...); and (...), it
translates, agite poenitentiam* and that is the phrase of Ancient
Church-Writers. 7. In that Office or Service (whereout the Exception is made,)
the word, repentance, is three times used, once more than, penance. 8. When he
excepts (in Marg:) here, to the Curses (in the Commination) out of Deuteronomy: 27. as
being no part of the public Worship, to be performed by the Priests, but only
done on Mount Ebal by four of the Tribes only, and (concluding,) therefore,
not fit for the Gospel-daies. Answ: 1. A Rite supported with such a Pattern or
Precedent does not, sure, deserve to be condemned. 2. It Is answered, that the
place is a Type of the Day of Judgment; that, as all the People were to say,
Amen, at their entrance into the Earthly Canaan) to the Curses denounced
against the wicked; so all the Saints, at their entrance into the Heavenly
Canaan, are to say, Amen, that is, to approve of the condemnation of them See
Dr Savage's Reasons showing no necessity of Reformation.
. 3. To avoid which condemnation, hereafter, it imports us, to condemn our
selves, here. That, therefore, men may so do, may be brought to humisiation,
contrition, self-condemnation, and exsecration of their sins, is this
(powerful) Is not that her (the Chapter of England's) Exhortation ^n the
Commination) be ginning at [Now seeing that all they be accursed, etc.] so
divine a delivery, as the like in brief can scarce be showed in the writings of
any Church, or of any Writer? Is it not worthy to be most often read of every
man, woman and child? etc. And a little above; Does she not in a most wonderful
divine manner declare as it were the sum of the everlasting doctrine of Jesus
Christ (in that Exhort.?) Edm. Reeve's Christian Dovinitie, etc. c. 61. p 177.
means of moving sinners to repentance (being denunciations against particular
sins under the Law, attested by the People with an Amen of acknowledgment,
only that every such offender is by the Law cursed, and which, without their
acknowledgment will be true to all irrepentants (and therefore, nothing of
cursing or imprecating, as ignorant men, but tender over their sins, conceit,))
inordered by the Liturgy, as an awakener of such and all others, out of their
security, and to hazen them to make out to the putting in practice all
Christian means of repentance, etc. 4. After this, we may dare to demand, why
this should not be exemplarie to the times of the Gospel, which is both a Law
Christus non tantum ut Redemptor, cui omnes fidant, sed ut legislator cui
obediant, Conc. Trid. Sess. VI. can. 21.

The Christian Religion was called in the best times of it, Christiana lex; and
the Bishops, Christianae legis Episcopi. And, all the ancient Fathers liked the
term well; and took it upon them, Bishop Andrews, Sermon* XVII on Nativ, on Ps.
2. 7. p. 162.


, and has most formidable curses to all unreformed pertinatious sinners! 4.
They were the Deuteronomy. ^7. 14, the Levites] that is, some of the Priests, the
Levites, Josh. 8. 33 their Office was to teach Jacob God 's judgment, and
Israel his Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. and is the solemn blessing was by the Levites
usually, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. so here the curses were by the^ pronounced to the people,
A in sworth in Loc.
Priests the Levites (as appears, v. 14.) that were the only men, who were
designed, to curse. And, the ordinary denunciation of Curses, in time to come,
was charged (as a Service, especially incumbent on them) upon the Levites
alone, of all men.

To his Sixty ninth, The having of two pieces of Latin in one of (the last)
Prayers after the Communion-Book. Answ: 1. How knows he, that this Prayer was
made for the ignorant? and, sure, for the knowing, it is as lawful to pray in
Latin or Greek, as in English. 2. These Latins are Englished, and, so, are as
lawful to be said, as Abba, Father; and, so, also, even the ignorant may pray
them with understanding (of the sense;) and, so, again, not contrary to his
Text 1 Cor. ^4.
. 3. There Is nothing like Papistry, in the whole Prayer, and therefore it is
horrible uncharitableness, for using two or three (very Evangelical) words of
an innocent common Language, to infer, that the user died with the Faith of
Papists in his heart. (...) S. Jude v. 10.
. 4. When, upon the Title of the Prayer [A Prayer to be said, etc.] he has
this Observe [mark, not prayed,] the man, sure, is owner of the Poet's Pindar.
(...), to make such a very silly Exception, which lies equally against
Scripture it self: When ye pray, say S. Luke (...) See S. Mat. 26. 39, 42, 44
S. Mar. 4. 39. Luke 22. 42.
.

To his last, That that piece of the Litanie (which was in K. Edw: IV*s
Liturgies, 1st and 2d and in the Litur. so K. H. ^'s time; See A. B. L^ud's
Speech, in Star Chamber p. 35.
viz. From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his de^estable
enormities, good Lord deliver us! is left-out in ours. Answ: 1. It was so in Q.
Elizabeth's time also, and so, no Innovation or Popery chargable on the Renowned
William Laud, L. A. B. C. or the (so by-named) Ganterburians, as was the cry of
Mr Burton and his (...) and (...). 2. It was left out, upon conceit or belief,
that it was (as, sure, it was,) a very great scandal and offense to all those
in England, affected to the Church of Rome, who are as apt, to take offense,
now as then; and as much consideration is to be had of them, now, as then;
scandal being, ever, to be avoided, (...) much as may be, and the matter being
of no greater moment, than this (reallie) is of. Therefore 3. as it was done,
then, of a good intent, so no man, at that time, was found, to quarrel the doing
of it, as our Author, after Mr Burton See Dr Heylin's Answer to Mr Burton, c.
7. p. 158.
, now, does. 4. The Queen or King and Her or His Metropolitan, have power, to
make such alterations as these, as is (I suppose) proved, above. 5. And, so,
his malicious Question is satisfied, Whether it was liking to, fear of, or
compliance with, the Pope? Neither so, nor so, nor so. 6. For his impertinent
Sarcasme, I say, as S. Cyprian did, L, 3^. Ep. 3^.
upon some such occasion, Non oportet me paria cum illo facere.

And, thus, I have done with his former Undertaking, and (clearly) showed how
weak and worthless it is. We, now, remove our Pen to the next.

THE DEFENSE. OF EPISCOPACY.
WHat remains of his Pamphlet is about Bishops, against whom, his

First Argument (in sum) is this: Because it is absolutely forbidden by
Christ and S. Peter, that any Minister (extraordinary or ordinary) should
exercise Lordship.

His Proofs are out of Matthew: 20. 25. Luke 22. 25. 1 Pet: 5. 1, 3.

Answ: 1. I deny his Consequence, that is, I deny, that, because S. Peter
forbids the Clergy (...); therefore, there must be no Bishops, or no Bishops
honored with the Title of Lords As he said well, Because they themselves are
usually styled Masters, are they therefore, the Masters of their Church? Bishop
Hall's Episcopacy by Divine Right, Part second, p. 175
. For, 2. that Greek word concerns not either of these matters* importing only
the Practice of the Heathen rulers, Kings or Emperors, Procuratours or other
(secular) Governors over them, who used their power, in order to their own
profit and greatness (as in H. Neh. 5. 15. where the word, (...), is used of
those Governors, there mentioned,) acted as (...), masters of their People,
and, that, not only by dominion over their persons, but over their estates
too, so far as to maintain all their state, splendour and greatness belonging
to them, out of the People's Purses, by way of tributes and taxes and the like;
all the pomp and expenses of their Families and Courts being fetched out of
their Subjects Purses and persons, (which Samuel told the Israelites, would be
the manner of their King, if they Primatus, in quis, da^na^ur verbo Dei, Mat: 16
Lu. 22. Jo. p. Imo non primatus, sed ambito and tyrannis, D. Paraeus Epist.
1614. to Hungaria Churches.
would have one, 1 Samuel 8. 11.) Now, when Ecclesiastical Rulers make use and
advantage of Ecclesiastical power forcibly to squeeze gain out of men, over and
above the portion, which is allotted by the Church to their maintenance, they
fall under this charge of (...) and (...), not otherwise. Surely, Bishops and
Lord-Bishops may be, and be very guiltless of this practice, as (actually)
many (God be thanked!) of ours were. 3. Some answer (not much differentlie from
what I have, but now,) That (...) signifies tyrannical (...) non est
simpliciter habere potestate^, sed potestate uti tyrannice adversus subditos,
and sicuti explicat Theophylactus, (...), Casau. in S Luke 10. 42: p. 423.
governing or dominion (the Preposition, (...), being, commonly, taken in the
worst sense, as in Catachresis, Catabaptistae, Cataphyryges:) accordingly,
(though to rule tyrannically, abusing power If any shall come in with that
ignorant mistake, that this is to Lord it over God's heritage -- they must know
that it is not the bearing the Title, or the having answerable Revenue, that is
guilty of such usurpation, but the arrogating a power over men's conscience,
which the Papal Consistory do 's. Episcopacy and Presbytery confidered, etc.
by Dr H. Fern, p. 10. Whereby is s^tisfied what Sr Ed: De^ing has, Speech, p.
24, etc.
be, here, forbidden,) a paternal, moderate, lawful power, such as of good
Bishops, is not under interdict, here. 4. The word, (...), in the place (by him
cited) of S. Luke, being in the Geneva-Translation, MDLXIX. turned, gracious
Lords, (though it signifies, benefactours (...), Aristot: Pol. l. 3. Inter
mult^ quae fidei noeene hoe non minimum est, quod versionem quisque attempe^at
ad suas sententias: etc.

Sua cuique Deus fir diracupido. Hoc v. annon e^t idola collere? imo semet
collocare in templ^ Dei? si libeat i^^um lacum su^ere (...); Grotii Animad^, in
Animadv. A. R^v. p. 12.


, and the words should run: Their Princes called benefactors exercise
authority over them.) was wont to be made ^n Argument against the Title of
Lord-Bishops, together with the style [his or your Grace;] but, now, it is
fairly laid asleep, and so should (...), (...), and (...), as urged against the
due power, or function of Bishops. For, 5. (besides what has been, already,
said, to strip this Reason of all armor of proof,) 'twill equally militate
against the Lords Temporal, as against the Bishops (the Lords Spiritual;) for,
neither should those be like the Lords of the Gentiles, in the forementioned
regards.

But, we shall Retort his Argument, from the very next verses, in the two
Evangelists, to those cited: He that is greatest among you, let him be your
minister, or as the younger, (as that signifies Officer;) thus:

If there must be one greatest among the many Ministers, one that should be a
(continung) Minister or servant to them, or for them, one that serves,
relieves, provides-for 'em (the Office, directly, of a Governor;) then there
is to be an Imparitie among them, which is contrary to the Presbyterian or
Sectarian Equality.

But, so and such there ought to be.

Therefore, there must be a standing Inequality or Superiority in authority,
power and jurisdiction (and not only in dignity.)

Again: If our B. Lord had meant, to forbid all Priestly Jurisdiction Another
Argument may be fetched from S. Mat. 28. v. and S. Luke 27. v. by the
comparison there: As you have me for an example, whom though you justly and
truly call Lord and Master (for sol am,) yet I am among you as he that serves.
Albeit that all the LXX. had the power immediately from Christ, yet it is as
evident, that our Savior made a clear difference between the XII. Apostles,
and the rest of the Disciples, which is set down by three of the Evangelists,
whereof S. Mark calls it an Ordination, c. 3. 15. and S. Luke says of them he
chose 12. c. 6. 13. etc His Majesty's third Paper to the Ministers at Newport.
p. 343. Consider the mention of 12. thrones, not 70. Mat. 19. 28. Consider the
style (by an Article of eminence,) (...), the twelve, as Patriarchs of the
Church. Consider that Joseph Justus chosen Bishop, Acts 1. 23. was one of the
seventy; Dorotheus in Synops^.
of this nature, he would have said (where 'twas natural, and needful, to say
so:) I will have no Powers, Degrees, and Ranks among you, one above and over
another or others, as now between the High Priest, inferior Priests and
Levites.

But, He forbids no such matter, etc. (only interdicts such inslaving
dominion, and domineering rule, as the Lords of the Gentiles, etc.) Therefore,
etc.

And, so, his places of H. Text are far enough from affording an Argument, like
David's stone (as he says and hoasts,) to knock the Goliath of Episcopacy on
the forehead; if it be such, it will rebound and (mortally) wound him, and his
lewd cause, and lay it a-bleeding, yea, dead, for ever. To his

Second Argument (summarily) this: Because to put one Bishop over diverse
particular Churches, is directly contrary to what the Spirit of God has
appointed, and therefore must needs be unlawful.

His Proof: Because the H. Ghost has appointed several Bishops in one
particular Church, which he confirms from Acts 20. 28. Phil. 1. 1.

Answ: 1. We deny the Minor (if this lie as a Categorical Syllogism,) and
say, that there is no validity in his Proofs. The Elders of Ephesus mentioned,
Acts 20. 28. were Bishops in the restrained Ecclesiastical sense, as distinct
from, and above Presbyters, in the modern notion of it, (Bishops, either of the
Asian Church of that whole Region, or at least of the Ephesian Province.) A
most credible person S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 14, Ab Epbeso, and reliquis
civi^atibus convo^atos esse.
living near those times, being an Auditour of S. Polycarp the first Bishop of
Smyrna, not contradicted by any contemporarie, yields a very competent
authority to prove this, when it is his testimony of these Ephesine Elders;
that they were the Bishops of all Asia *, called together from Ephesus *, and
the rest of the nearest Cities adjoining ** Note Ephesus was the chief
Metropolis of all Asia.
it. And it is a Maxim of the Greek Scholiast on 1. S. Peter 1. 5. The Book of
the Acts used to call the Bishops, Elders (...).
. But, because these Authorities will be of no value with my Author, 2. We Will
see what Proof of our Assertion, Scripture yields, and, first, (of this kind)
occurs, S. Paul's Address to them, in this style, v. 18. Ye know from the
first day I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons; which is an address to the Elders of Asia, indefinitely. Again,
secondly, we produce those words, v. 25. And now behold, I know that ye all,
among whom I have gone preaching, etc. which evidently addresses the speech,
not only to the Inhabitants, or the (pretendable) Elders of one City, but to
all those (as many as were then present,) among whom he had gone preaching the
faith of Christ See Oeenmenius on S. John 2. -- going through all the Region,
and preaching the Gospel.
; and not only to those of Ephesus. For Proof of this last, see Acts 19. 21.
And v. 2. (express places.) Thirdly, there is no reason to imagine, that S.
Paul, taking his solemn last leave of them, v. 38. should not so much consider
them, as to call for, or desire to see, any of the rest of his Sons, the
Governors of the inferior Churches, to whom he had committed that numerous
flock, now so universllie in danger of Wolves See Doctor Hammond on Acts 11. 30.
. 3. To his other place, Phil. 1. 1. mentioning only Bishops and Deacons and
consequently (as they interpret) Presbyters (in the Modern Notion) and Deacons,
and no Bishop; we say, 1 some take the words, as belonging to the persons
saluting, and not to the persons saluted, to this sense: Paul and Timotheus
with the Bishops and Deacons to the Saints at Philippi, etc. 2 Some, and, that,
with great probability, affirm Epaphroditus was, then, actually Bishop of
Philippi, but not to be mentioned, in the Inscription of the Epistle, because
he was not then at Philippi, but with S. Paul at Rome, when that Epistle was
written. 3 Others say, that though it be, as is pretended (Bishops being
interpreted of Presbyters, and, so excluding Bishops, as that signifies persons
having a majoritie, prelacy or superiority, over many (inferior) Presbyters,
within a certain Precinct,) yet it is not thereby evicted, that there is no
other standing Office in the Church, besides; there appearing (say those See
His Majesty's ^d Paper delivered to the Ministers attending at Newport, p. 270.
and p. (especially) 408.
, that thus answer) another manifest Reason, why that of Bishops might not be
so proper, to be mentioned, in that place, viz. because in the Church which the
Apostles themselves planted, they placed Presbyters under them, for the Office
of Teaching, and took upon themselves the care, and reserved in their own hands
the power, of Governing these Churches, for a longer, or shorter time, as they
saw it expedient for the propagating of the Gospel, before they set Bishops
over them; and so (say they) it may be probable, that there was, as yet, no
Bishops set-over the Church of Philippi, when S. Paul writ his Epistle to them.
4 Others, again, (lastly) say See Doctor Hammond's Dissertations Diss. 4. c. 7.
to the end of that Dissert.
, that the Bishops, here, signifies, as distinct from Presbyters (as Bishops,
they say, constantly and always do; and, if not Elders, also, constantly so,
yet, rarely otherwise; *) Philippi being a Metropolis (...)-a prime City.
of one part of Macedonia, Acts 16. 12. and Epaphroditus being their Bishop, in
S. Paul's time, (as Theodoret In 1 Timothy 3. 1.
and others, resolve from his being called, their Apostle, Phil. 2. 25.) who
had under him many Bishops, and these they, in the place contested; all of them
subordinate to him, as their Metropolitan. So many answers have we, for the
enerving all force of this (so seemingly-strong, and so strongly insisted-on)
testimony from Phil: 1. 1. and for the salving our Hypothesis against it, and
it is like.

And, thus, we Retort the Argument;

That which is directly contrary to what the Spirit of God has appointed,
must needs be unlawful.

But, to deny the putting one Bishop over diverse Churches, (and
consequently, the asserting the Presbyterians, etc. their (...), paritie or
equality) is the former. And

Therefore, it is the latter (that is, unlawful.) See, above.

To his Third Argument, which is this (in effect.)

Diocesan Bishops is contrary to that order which the Apostles appointed in
the Churches of the Gentiles, and therefore unlawful.

His Proofs: Acts 4. 23. Tit: 1. 5, 7.

Answ: 1. We have answered this, already, sufficiently (in our Solution of his
last:) That, certainly, which is proved not to be contrary (but according) to
the Spirit's appointment, was not contrary (but consonant) to the Apostles,
(who followed the conduct of the B. Spirit, in their Establishments) their
order, appointment, or setting up. 2. His two Proofs make not, at all for him
(nay, make against him, as we shall, straight, show,) being of this import,
that Paul and Barnabas (in the former) consecrated Bishops for the believers,
Church by Church, or one in every City, at Lystra one, at Iconium another, etc.
and (in the latter,) that Titus was by S. Paul constituted Bishop of Crete, to
ordain Bishops, in each City of that Island. (...), in one place, and (...), in
the other, being (...) (words of equal import,) and best rendered
(respectively,) Church by Church, and City by City; in every Church, and, so,
in every City, one Elder or Bishop: and, accordingly, to ordain, etc. in every
Church (in the Acts,) and to constitute Elders in every City, (Tit. 1.) are
(...), of the same sense; every City having a Bishop in it, and, so, being
called a Church, to which the believers, in all the parts about it, belonged,
and that ^ishop having power, to make as many inferior Officers in that
Church, as he thought good.

Now, thus, we Retort his Argument:

That order which is contrary to the order, which the Apostles set up in the
Churches, etc. is unlawful.

But, the rejecting of Diocesan The word Diocese signified a larger extent of
Jurisdiction, than now it does. See Doctor Hammnod's Treatise of Schism, p. 56,
57, 102, 158.
Bishops (whether Lords, or not Lords, of which Title we have, and shall, give
farther account) is contrary to that order of the Apostles.

Therefore, it is unlawful.

Again; If Paul and Barnabas Apostles in Lycaonia, and Metrapolitane Titus in
Crete constituted or ordained, in each Church (i. e. in each City) a Dicesan
Bishop, then Diocesan Bishops are not contrary to the Apostles order, etc.
(but, the contrary to this lies under that charge.)

But, the former is true (as appears;) and, Therefore, the latter. And, now,
let him judge, who they are, that are in danger of that dreadful place (by him
cited,) Levit: 26. 24, 41. Let him and all consider 1 Cor: 11. 1. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2
These. 3. 9.
To his

Fourth Argument (in extract) this: Because Diocesan power is an Office, that
makes a man incapable of performing the Duties belonging properly to his
Function, and therefore it is unlawful.

He Proves the Proposition, by proposal to consideration of the Duties
belonging to the Function of Bishops, viz. to know his Flock, watch over them,
feed and comfort them, resolve their doubts, visit them, administer the
Lord's Supper often to them, etc.

Answ: 1. This Reason, if it be carried home, will batter Kingly Government, as
well as Episcopacie: for, Kings and Princes cannot do the parts of their Duty
in such wise, as is, here, exacted of the Bishops, that is, in their proper
persons. To feed the flock, strengthen the diseased, heal the sick, bind up the
broken, reducing that which was driven away, the seeking the lost, is, says
the H. Prophet C. 34. v. 2, 4 See H. Grot. in Loc. Excisd jam urbe, causas
Propheta excidii commemorat Principum crimina (qui Postores dicuntur. Jer. 2.
18. 3. 15. 10. 11. and Platoni de Repub. 4.) and B. And. on Commandments, p.
377.
Ezekiel, their duty; but, these things they cannot do, but by procuration or
deputation, as they command, supervise, inspect and see-to, the doing of them.
And, so, what the Bishop cannot personally do, he can do deputatively See Doctor
Allestry's (lare excellent) Sermon on Acts 13. 2. p. 25.
. 2. It fights against the appointment of the H. Ghost, and the order of the
Apostles, who placed, sometimes, one person over larger extents of Regions,
otherwhiles in equal Dioceses with those of our Bishops. These, (...), for
repelling all force of this Objection But, then, 3. the Bishop can perform some
part of his great and formidable task or province, and what is beyond the
sphere of his personal immediate inspection and agencie, is by him committed to
others, to see-into and perform; Presbyters being assumed in partem operis or
oneris or ^fficii, and therefore to be termed Presbyteri partiarii or
secundarii. Besides the Deans and Prebends in Cathedral Churches, answering to
the City-Presbyters, (assumed for counsil and assistance 1 Cor. 12. 28 helps in
governments. See also 1 Cor. 11. ult.
to the bishop,) in those firster times; Archdeacons, (derived from (and
something analogizing to) the Bishop's-Deacon) dubbed with the Additional,
Arch, to distinguish them from those other Deacons, that attended on
Presbyters, in their Charge. Those being sent by the Bishops, upon all
occasions, into every part of his Diocese, to observe how all things went, and
at length they were entrusted by the Bishop, to judge and redress smaller
abuses: the Rural (to distinguish him from the Cathedral, chief of the
Presbyters in the Mother-City) Called, also, Arch-Presbyter. These names are as
ancient as S. Hierom.
Dean, chief over the several Deaneries, whereinto the Diocese (for better
Government-sake) was divided, who imparted Orders from the Bishop, inquired
into doctrine taught the People, and redressed lighter matters: Rural Bishops
These in England were s^ff^agan Bishops some of them contin^ing in the first
year of Q El^z.
having power of Ordination, performing the Episcopal Office, in places remote
from the Metropolis or Mother-City, where, (and at what times) the Bishop could
not be present personally. For the easier, and quicker dispatch, in Causes
Testimentarie (or, of Wills,) Matrimonial, Decimal, (or, about Tithes) (referred
by Kings, etc. (becomne Christian) for honoring the Bishops, to their hearing
and judgment, though, otherwise, Civil Causes,) by the Bishops are employed, in
the exercise of Jurisdiction, under the names of Chancellours, etc. learned
Civilians, at fitting Helps in Government See Dr Field of the Church, l. 5 p
150, etc.
(undoubtedly) as Presbyterian Aldermen or Lay Elders, though at first
entertained as Assessours, to suggest what was Law in doubtful Cases, and
Judges in such Causes, as have been by the grace of Emperors, permitted to the
sentence of the Church. See Episcopacy and Presbytery considered.
So that, the Bishop, making use of so many Assistants and Messengers, and (as
the Jews known Rule is) Apostolus cujusque est ut quisque.
every one's Apostle being as himself, (to which our Lord seems to refer, S.
Matthew. 10. 40.) the Bishop may be said, to do all that they do, and so, know
the flock, watch over them, etc. (as above:) while the life of the Bishop is
spent in his own immediate and personal doing his proportion of the severals
(besides supervising, watching and laboring, that all the rest be rightly
done.) A Part Onus Angelicis humeris formidandum, S. Chrysostom.
sufficiently burdenous, God give the Heart equally zealous!

But, we Retors his Argument, thus:

That Office (or part) which makes a man utterly incapable of performing the
Duties belonging to his Office, is unlawful.

But, the rejecting Bishoply Power makes a Minister (so to call him) utterly
incapable, etc. and,

Therefore, the rejection of Episcopal Power, is unlawful.

For, where no Ordination, no Priesthood or Ministry, (where ordination (upon
casting out and off Bishops) by Presbyters, the Orders are nullities, (and,
what, then, by consequence unavoidable, are their Acts of Priesthood?)) Hear,
to this purpose, Panormitan L. 1. Decretal: de Consuctudin: c. 4.
(a Writer which Smec: have cited for them): Thou see, here, that such
Ordination hinders the impression of the Character, for if Presbyters do de
facto confer it, they collate or impart nothing. Remember the case Socrates ^.
1. Eccl. Hist. c. 10.

See Bishop Hall's Episcopacy by Divine Right, Part 2. 15. for this Story of
Ischyras, where also others of like nature are set down. Quo pacto igitur
Presbyter Ischyras, aut quo tandem authore constitutus, etc. A thanas. Apol. 2.
See Bishop Bilson's Perpet: Government, c. 13. See the censure of Colluthus's
fact in Socrat. l. 1. c. 20. (...) --


of Ischyras made Presbyter by Colluthus Presbyter, and how that mock-Orders
was nulled, by the Church. To his

Fourth, This (in brief.) Diocesan Bishops do necessarily introduce the Pope's
Power over the Churches, etc. Therefore, unlawful.

His Proof: Because they have Ordination from him, because they have it from
the Archbishop, who has his from the Pope, or else he is no Minister, and so
cannot ordain others, Bishops, etc.

Answ: 1. The Papists say, we have no lawful Priesthood, because it is not
derived from their chief Bishop (the Pope,) and the scattered Bands of
Sectaries say the same thing, upon a ground (not the same, but) contradictorie
thereto, namely, because our Orders derive from Rome. Which dealing, is a very
good and auspicious symptom of truth, in our Ord^nation (and, Consecration)
because Nature, in the mouth of her great Secretary, has pronounced (which is
applicable, also, to our divine Liturgy,) that the middle virtue is most
infallibly and certainly, hereby, known, that it is accused by either Extreme,
as guilty of (its opposite or enemy) the other Extreme. Some resemblance
whereto carries that usual Saying of a great Officer b (once) of this State,
when coming from the Chancerie, to sit a Thomas Lord Coventry.
down at Dinner, he would say, Surely to day I have dealt equally, for I have
displeased both sides. 2. What, if our Bishops, in the first Consecration in K.
Henry the 8's. as in K. Edw: the 6's days had their consecration (in part)
from the Greek Church, by those Bishops of Sidon See Mr Mason de Min^sterio
Anglicano.
, that then assisted? 3. Distinguishing 'twixt ab and per, from and through,
(the Fountain and the Canale,) we say our Bishops received their Ordination
from the Bishops, the Apostles, though running through Popish times; of which
yet it ressents no more, since our Reformation, than the three youths of the
Captivity, coming out of the Furnace, smelt of the fire. 4. While our Bishops
were in subjection to the Bishop of Rome, they had from him, only a mandatorie
Nomination (like that of (or, from) Kings, now,) being consecrated by Bishops
within themselves, here, who alone imposing hands, alone gave the Ordination.
5. What of Christ's Institution Inter doctrinae corruptelo^ mansit semper
vocationis and ord^nationis legitima disciplina, quoad su^st^ntiam sa^^m, etc.
Bishop Prid-Fas C^ntr. p. 248.
was remanent among the Papists, our Bishops might receive, without contracting
the polluted adherences of the corrupted part, properly their o^n According to
that of H. Jerem: ^5. 19.
: They retaining the Fundamentals of Religion (which thing they did and do,)
the Orders derived from them, are va^id (some part of the Bark un-cut, may
transmit the Sap.) 6. Baptism by them administ^ed was not, is not renewed (no,
nor Popish-Priestly Orders.) A mutilated, maimed Father begets an entire,
perfect man, as the circumcised Father, a child with a Prepuce. Essentials My
d^fence for your Ministry is, that the Form, Receive the H. Ghost, -- whose
sins, etc. does sufficiently comprehend the authority, etc. Bishop Bedel's
Letter to Mr Wadesworth, a transfuga to Rome, p. 157. apud Doctor Bernard's
certain Disc^urses, etc. p. 227.
observed, Superstructures and Corruptions in the Transmittents do not cassate
or void it. 7. The Succession by Imposition of hands, in the Jewish Church,
where the Sons of Aaron were, often, worse, than the worser sort of the Romish
Clergy can be, by Idolatry See, and argue from Ezekiel: 16. 20. to this matter.
-- my children --
, etc. was not questioned after a Reformation, though derived from filthy
hands. 8. The Succession, in our Lord's time, was no whit better, and yet He
was circumcised by them, they offered for him in the Temple, and he sends his
Cured to the Priests, with a [Go, show your-selves to the Priests, and offer,
etc.] frequently. 9. In the IV. Centuries after, the Orthodox were hatched
under the Wings of the Arian Priests, as say the Fathers S. S. Basil and
Hilarie, and there ensued no rejection of the succeeding Priests, made such by
persons as bad as the Romish Priests (generally speaking.) 'Twas Wisdom, in
that sober Age, to account a Jewel no whit the worse, or of less virtue, by
being delivered, by a dirtie hand. This may vindicate our Ordination, which we
account absolutely necessary to an authoritative Priesthood or Ministry,
the causa sine qua non (as he speaks.) See Jerem. 23. 21. Romans 10. 14. Hebr: 5.
4. S. Cyprian speaking of the Heresies and Impostors of his time (de Vnitate
Eccl. p. 23.) chooses, to give this as a principal part of their character Hi
sunt, etc. These are they, that of their own accord, without God's appointment,
set themselves up among the temerarious assemblers, who constitute themselves
Rulers without any Law of Ordination, who assume the name of Bishops, when no
man gives them the power, and so sit in ^he chair of pestilence.

See Doctor Hammond's most excellent Trearise of Ordination, Quaere Vth, where
the So^inians Arguments (of which our Author relisher) are accurately answered,
p. 271, etc.


13. That our Episcopacy (upon that stock of Orders) will bring in the Pope, is
a groudnlesse, malicious Surmize; 1 that the greatest Enemies, and Opposers of
the Pope, our Reverend Bishops and learned Writers (that lived in obedience to
them,) whom to reckon is no easy task, as Jewel, Downham, Abbot, Andrews,
Whites, Usher, Mountague, Chillingworth, Jackson, Hammond, Tailor, Cosens, etc.
who have written so fully, so learnedly, and so admirably against them, and
have applied (through an error, it may be,) that in 2 Thessalonians. 2. about the man
of sin, and that of Babylon, Rev. 17. (some of the forenamed) to him: 2 that
they, who suffered Martyrdom, in opposition to the Popish Religion, Bishop
Cranmer, Ridley, etc. and have since undergone a (...) or fiery Trial from the
Presbyterians, and other Schismatics of (from) this Church, for their unshaken
adherence to its Tendries or Deliveries, Laws and Usages: that these, I say,
should necessarily introduce the Pope's Power over the Churches, is a thing,
that can never enter into any man's head, unless his brains are adle, and his
wits (not to say, his charity or honesty) are utterly fled. Especially, when
it shall be known (what Bishop Sanderson Pref: to 14. Sermons, 18
will tell us, is very well known to many,) What rejoicing that Vote of the
long Parliament (for pulling down Episcopacie) brought to the Romish Party, and
how even in Rome it self they sang their Jo Paeans upon the tidings thereof,
and said triumphantly: Now the day is ours, Now is the fatal blow given to the
Protestant Religion in England!

But, we Retort the Argument, thus:

That which does necessarily introduce the Pope's Power over the Churches, etc.
is unlawful.

But, to deny due and right (that is, Episcopal) Ordination (which is
corsequent to denying Diocesan Bishops) will necessarily introduce the Pope's
Power, etc.

Ergo, to deny Episcopal Ordination by Diocesan Bishops, is unlawful

For, who will not, rather, be of a Church, where there is true Mission and
Succession as-to substance, than in one, where (as some will not doubt to say)
all (Sacraments, etc.) are Nullities. See the last Retortion. And, hear (after
what we heard from the Bishop of Lincoln (then Dr Sanderson) what that
excellent Archbishop Whitgift tells T. C. I know, that those sects and
heresies gave strength unto Antichrist, and at the length were one special
means of placing him in his Throne, even as, also, I am persuaded, that he
works as effectually, at this day, by your stirs and contentions, whereby he
has, and will more prevail against the Church of England, than by any other
means, whatsoever. What mischief the Puritans did in Q. E. time, Camden (in
Annal:) tells, Pontifi^iis plaudentibus* multasque in suas part^s
pertrahentibus, quasi nulla esset in Ecclesia Anglican^ uni as.


To his two Objections, that he produces as for us, and then Answers, I need
say nothing, having, sufficiently, superseded all usefulness thereof, by my
Return to his last Argument. Yet, this I add, which will state and clear the
matter of Archbishops, and the Consecration, by them performed (which is the
concern of those said Objections and Answers,) That the Government of the
Church Christian by Bishops, Priests and Deacons does perfectly answer that in
the Jewish Church by the Chief Priest, Priests and Levites, those chief Priests
being called Praelates, Antistites, Praesules of the Sea Bishop Andrews's Form
of Ch: Government before and after Christ, p. 1. 6, 117.
Priest and Levites, who were to take care, that those inferior Orders should
perform their Employments or Functions committed to them. Mo^v, as among these,
(as appears, Number: 3. 24, 30, 35.) Eleazar the Son of Aaron was the Prelate of
the Prelates (...) Such were S. S. Timothy, Tuus, James Bishop of Jerusalem,
John, Ignatius P^lycarp, etc.
, so the Archbishop rules, or presides over, the Bishops, as a clear
Transcript or Copy of what was instituted by God, in the Church of the Jews,
and may, therefore, own its derivation from thence, and not from the Heathens
Models of Government. This of Archbishops is not a distinct order from
Bishops, but only a Dignity A distinction for order of Government, not a new
Officer, K^ Chapter ^. below
, (with authority proportionable,) in the Church above them, instituted for
the preserving of unity, and many other good uses. So, when a Bishop is to be
consecrated, the Archbishop or Metropolitan authorizes it, and in person, or
by his Deputy See the Book of Making and Conse^^ing, etc. in Cons^^r of ^n
Arch Bishop ^. Bish.
assists in it, and the forementioned Bishop has (according to the ancient
Canons) hands imposed upon him, by three or four ^ishops. Here, in England,
when Card: Pool, Archbishop of C. died, Q. E. assigned Matthew Parker, to be
his Successor in the vacancie of that See, who, that he was regularly
consecrated (whatever that pellucid, or, rather, thick-skin'd lie, of the
Nag's-head in Chep*fide London, which the Oxford-Greek-Professour John Neal
told Thomas Bluet the Priest, pretends to the contrary) appears most
lucule^tly, out of the Public Records and Registers, and is vindicated by Mr
Archdeacon Mason, in his Book de Minist: Anglic: to the indubitable
satisfaction of all men, that will but open their eyes; and F. Oldcorn, though
living and dying in the Roman Communion, did say (because there is no defense
against a flaile, no resisting evident demo^stration,) That these our Registers
were authentical. By what has beed said, his (idle) talk of the ^nglish
Bishops-their Grandfather (...), etc. ^liad. 4. (...): 255.
, and the place where these Foxes His Cant. 2. 15. Take us the little foxes,]
is, says, Diodati in Loc: a command given, to repress, and to put out
Heretics, which grow up together with the truth of the Gospel. It may be said
of some, Dum vis esse prado, fies pr^di.
(as he will call them) will be kennel'd, is rendered, perfectly, empty of
truth, and reason, though not of venime and calumny. But, what Cato the Elder
said to one Lentulus spitting in his mouth, viz. Hereafter (says he) I shall
have somewhat, to answer them, who deny thee to have o^; may I say concerning
this broad (and black) mouth of the Author. Nevertheless;

(...)

(...). To his

Sixth Argument, whereof the quintessence is this: Because the Order, etc. of
Diocesan Bishops has many unscriptural Offices depending, which are branches
thereof. Therefore, it is unlawful.

His Proof (having said something, partly falsely, partly impertinently, for
the Major) his proof, I say, of the Minor is, by reckoningup, Deans, etc.

Answ: 1. Those inferior Officers, though they depend upon the Bishop, yet are
no branches of his Office (much less of his Order.) 2. Why not some Officers
added since the Scripture-times, as well as antiquated and laid aside, since,
as, for example, Widows 2 Timothy: 5. 9.
? Why not as lawfully some Officers taken-in by the Church, as by, his friends,
the Smectymnuans, an Order (which was in the Church before single Presbyters)
put out? 4. Why not Deans, etc. yea, Chancellours, as well as Presbyterie's
Ruling-Elders, an Office not above an hundred years old, and of which in
Scripture, or in the ancient Church, there appears nec vola, nec vestigium See
Mr Mede's Diatribe on 1 Timothy* 5. 17. p. 296.
? 5. Why not, as well as a new different Function made of the same Office, by
the same New-fanglers; Elders-Preachers being divided by them into Pastors and
Doctors, whom they sever in function; limiting the one to See S. Chrysostom in
Ephesians. 4. 11. S. Jerome in both his Commentaries on that Epist. Omnis enim Pastor
Doctor est.

Pastores a and Doctores, quos maxim ut discerneremus voluisti eosdem puto
esse, sicut and tibi visum est, ut non alios Pastores, alios Doctores
intelligeremus. Hos n^ sicut unum aliquod duobu^ nominibus complexus est, S.
Aug. Epist. 109. ad Paulinum.


his Exhortation only, the other to point of Doctrine only? 6. Why not, as
well as a new sort of Deacons (men of occupation and trade, See more
Authorities in Bishop Andr. Form of Ch: Government before and after Christ, p.
124.
to deal with the Church-stock, and care of the poor only,) added against the
sense of all Antiquity, ever reckoning of that Calling, as a Step or Degree to
the Ministry, out of 1 Timothy 3. 13? See Justin Apolog: 2. ad Antoninum,
Tertullian de Baptismo, S. Cyprian Sermon. 4. de lapsis See Bishop Andrews's
Sermon: Of Worshipping Imaginations p. 34.
, etc. 7. Himself does account Bishops (and much more, Archbishops or
Metropolitans) un-Scriptural Officers, and yet we have proved, that they must,
and ought to, be in the Church, upon Scripture-authoritie, and (because some
men are sai'd, to give more deference to him, than to it) upon Mr Calvin's
authority too, who counsilled the K. of Poland, not only to constitute
Bishops in every Province, but Archbishops, also, above them. ^. There were in
the ancient Church, Subdeacons There is no question but these minor orders or
degrees were very ancient. For Cyprian makes mention of one Mettius a
Subdeacon, and Nicepharus an Acoluthe, Cy p. l* 2. Epist. 10. See him also, l.
2. Ep. 5 and l. 4. Ep. 5. and 55. 13. 14.
, Acoluthes, Exoreists, Lectors, Ostiaries, etc. which were, lawfully, then,
deemed to be had, though not mentioned in the Scripture (neither commanded nor
exemplified.) 9. We have retained oney the three Scriptu e-Orders You shall do
well, to show the proh^bition of our Savior against addition of more Officers
in the Church, than he named, and yet in one sense I do not conceive that the
Chapter of England ha^h added any; for an Archbishop is only a distinction for
order of Government, not a new Officer, and so of the rest; and of this kind, I
believe, there are diverse now in Scotland, which you will not condemn, as the
Moderators of Assemblies, and others. His Majesty's thi^^ Paper to Henderson,
mi^t, p. 340
; and for the several Officers under, or appertaining to, the first of them,
though not Original and Apostolic, were introduced upon good and necessaries
grounds, as has appeared above. 10. There is no reason, that the Garment of
the Spouse, (the Church) should, now, be as straight, as at first; and,
therefore, though no more Degrees of Ecclesiastical Order may be admitted, than
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, yet, Services, Officers (which must, by all
means, be distinguished from the three Degrees, in the Power of Ecclesiastical
Order) may, reasonably, be admitted; and, such are Deans, Archdeacons, etc.
(Titles, namely, of Office) as the state of the Church does need (now, that the
World is entered into it,) Degrees of Order, still continuing the same, as they
were from the first begin^ing Hooker l. 5. 78. p. 423. 423.
. See Cornelius P. R. in his Epist: ap Eusebius. Hist: Eccl: l. 6. c. 42. Epiphan.
in Epitome Doctr. Catholicae. See Dr Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 25. p. 488,
489, and Bishop Andrews's Stricturae, p. 12.


His Argument we, thus, Retore:

They that reject an Order and Office which, in it self, is jure Divino, and
go's attended with many useful Helps, Services or Offices, needful in this
state of the Church, do that which is unlawful.

But, the Presbyterians, and our Author, etc. do so. Therefore, they do what is
unlawful.

The Major (which alone needs Proof) is, already, abundantly, proved.

For his scurrile language, it is a thing we are so acquainted with, e're this,
that, without being esmoved at it, we may dismiss it. But, what he says,
about Paul's scoffing Anani^u, Acts 23. 3. from whose (supposed) irregularitie
in the Office of High Priest, he fetches, S. Paul's (...), I wist not; I touch,
and say, 1 S. Paul spoke not Ironically, but seriously; to this effect: I
considered not sufficiently my duty to one in authority, though unduly
obtained, which does not allow me, to revile him; made unlawful, Exodus: 22. 28.
2 For his arguing from Ananias, (who was not ^n High Priest of God's
appointment, no, nor yet the High Priest put in by the Roman Procurator See
Doctor Hammond on ^. Luk 3. 6.
at this time) to our Bishops, viz. that, because the one was irregular in the
Office, the others, also, are so, too; when, (as has been proved) these have
their potestatem or function from God, and it is evident they have the
exercitium of it, by the allowance and approbation of the lawful secular
Magistrate, it is a gross Non-sequitur or Paralogisme.

To his Seventh Argument (not, now, fettered in the Laws of Syllogism:)
Because there is no diff^rence made in the Scripture between Bishops and other
Gospel Ministers, called Elders.

Citing Acts 20. 17. and 28.

Answ: 1. Some (of the Episcopal judgment) yield, that the names of Bishop and
Presbyter are confounded or used promiscu^ns^y, who yet, from that
indistirction of the name, are far enough removed from granting a Samenesse in
the Offices, if Presbyter be taken in the modern sense. 2. I have said and
proved, that Bishops, (and it is uncertain, whether ^resbyters, also, do not,)
constantly signify Bishops, in the notion of these days; and we, then, proved
them, so to signify, in (two of his places instanced, for the contrary.)
Phil: 1. 1. Tit: 1. 5, 6, 7. 3. Though the words Disciple and Minister be used
of Bishops and Archbishops, yet those being general words, and comprehending
all, that give-up their names to Christ, and such as, indefinitely, are
authorized to publish Christ's Gospel (respectively,) they hinder not, but that
there may be distinct Orders and Dignities passing thereunder. As the Captains,
Field-Officers, yea, General himself may be, and are called Soldiers. 4. When
he wills his Reader, to Note, that, where the Church Officers are mentioned in
Scripture, the Bishops are never named, as a distinct Order from the Elders,
but only from the Deacons a; we say, 1 What if the former Text spoke nothing ^
^om: 12. 6, ^^ and Ephesians. 4. (...) Bishop (...) of ^orshiping ^^^gi^^tions (...).
etc.
at all of Church Governors? Origin, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierom,
Occumenius, having created of that Epistle, not one of them b applies this
place to Church Government, nor finds the distributer ((...), in 8. v. not
(...) in 7. v.) to signify the Deacon (as the Disciplinarians would have it,)
not that (...), qui miseretur, signifies (their) Widow. 2 In the latter Text,
there is no mention of Deacons at all (no, nor Presbyters in the importance of
our times;) the Pastors and Teachers, there, being Bishops resident, and
governing particular Churches, and instructing them, also. But 3 we say, that,
when these Ep^stles were written, there were no single Presbyters in the World,
there being, then, no more holy Orders, than the Bishop, and the Deacon. Which
thing has been; irrefragably, made good, in the Dissertations of Episcopacie,
against David Blondel and others, by the most eminent Dr Hammond, out of SS.
Epiphanius, l. 1. c. 1. Co^^. Aerium.
(who fetches it from the (...), the profoundest Histories) and Clemens Romanus
Epist. ad Corin^h: p. 54, See the Vindic: of the Dissertations from ^he
London-Ministers, p. 6 (...).
an Apostolical person, who says, The Apostles constituted their first fruits
(of Converts) into Bishops and Deacons, of those which should after believe.

He next proposes an Ob^ection (designing some kindness to the Prelatists,)
thus: Yea, there is mention made of Helps and Governments, 1 Cor: 12. 28. To
which he Answers, If any can spy out Episcopacie here, I am sure nor here, nor
elsewhere can they find their Lord Bishops.

Answ: 1. We can spy Bishops here, teachers (in the third place) signifying
Bishops, herein only different from Prophets (immediately precedent,) that
they taught, out of the instructions which they had themselves received,
without any special revelation. 2. What, if we cannot find Lord-Bishop in name,
we can find Diocesan Bishops in power, yea, and having greater power, than our
Lord-Bishops have; for, the miracles, gifts of healing (i. e. powers inflicting
diseases, and death it self upon the disobedient, and gifts of healing them,
that received the faith, etc.) were, then, as endowments of these Teachers
(that is, Bishops, in the restrained Ecclesiastical sense) and no Officers, as
he thinks them, weening they might be s^pposeable, to be Bishops, but far off
removed from Apostles, etc.) 3. For the Title of Lord, that is only an
Additament, or Ornament, which the Piety of Christian Kings has bestowed on
deserving Churchmen, and does not, can not make the Bishop, really and
substantially, to differ from what he was in the Primitive times, any more than
the Additions of Arms or Ornaments can make a body, really and substantially,
to differ from it self, naked or divested of the same, as K. Charles told the
Ministers in the Isle of Wight In his Majesty's 2d Papet.
, which was also confessed and assented to by them, then In the Ministers their
2d Paper.

See also, (...). mihi p. 143. Meditar. 17. (...), fellow laborers, the word
signifies, v. 3. so (...), v. 9.


4. We do not think, that, though Priscilla, being a Woman, and yet, a Helper c
of S. Paul, as also Aquila, Rom: 16. 3. were no Bishops, yet such may be styled
Helpers, (confident we are, fellow-souldier Archippus Philem. 1, 2. See Dr
Hammond in Col. 4. 17.
is the same with Archippus Bishop of Colosse) who were Bishops, viz: Helpers
in Christ Jesus, promoting the Gospel of Christ, doing their best, to bring
many to the Faith. 5. To his wish, that the Bishops were Helpers of good
Ministers, as Timothy, so as to carry a poor, painful, persecuted Preacher's
Cloak, Books, etc. We Return, that he would have you, (by these words) well
know, that he is one of those poor, painful, persecuted preachers (which titles
we shall, anon, see, how he deserves;) and would, also, insinuate, that our
Bishops were, never, any Helpers of such* when yet, it is well-known, they have
been an Asylum or Refuge to tommy persecuted Forrairers, and, also, have been,
these latter years, on the persecuted hand, by ungrateful, refractarie and
cruel Ministers, their Sons and Subjects, (as they ought to have continued.) 6.
If he (with those of his wi^g) would give their voices for such Bishops, as,
being Chief, are servants, we can, truly, tell them, we shall have their
suffrage for a many of our Bishops. 7. If they will allow them the chief care over
so many, as they have converted, their power will be (what er'e they say) very
great. Of the Primitive Bishops, some having converted whose Countries
(respectively;) and, for our Protestant English Bishops, who were they, that
made (as c^ief Instruments) England, Protestant? were they not Bishops,
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Ferrar, Hooper, etc? (Nay, the Conversion of this
Land to Christianity was, under the free and great grace of God, by the
ministry of Bishops.) Who translated the H. Bible out of the Originals into
English their Mother Tongue, for their reading, but Bishops and Episcopal men?
Who expounded them so elaborately, for their understanding of them, but
Bishops, etc? Who baptized and ins^ructed them and their Forefathers? Bishops.
-- ^ Is this your kindness to your friends? Do you thus requite them, O
foolish people ^ Sam. 16. ^^. Deuteronomy: 32, 6.
and unwise?

To his ^ighth Arg: Because they are created by men, viz. Kings or Princes, in
whose Dominions they are.

Answ: 1. The King designs, not ordains the Bishop, no nor does he immediately
And yet, if it be so, see what Hocker s^ies for the ^^etness and reason^
^^nesse of that course, in that segment of his Polity, which Dr Bonard has
communicated to the world, in hit Clavi ^rabales.
choose, but by the Dean and Chapter, to whom he commends the person, to be
consecrated, Himself neither imposing him upon them, nor consecrating him. The
King's Mandate gives not power of Ordaining (which Bishops consecratours have,
intrinsecally, annexed to their Office:) it is only a Warrant, to accommodate
or apply this potesias or (...) to the person named in the Royal Mandamus. 2.
His rude Simile about the Bull and the Ox, here, halts; for, the man makes the
Bull an Ox, yet the King does not (as it is visible, by what is said) make the
man a Bishop, the power of doing that being of Apostolical derivation, and
(consequently) of Divine Origination. Therefore, here, is appliable that of old
Ennius,

Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, aliis monstrant viam.

And, 3. we believe, (though I have not commodity, to examine it, now,) that
the L. Chief Justice Cook, De Jure Regi^ Ecclesiastico, he says, ^ Instit. 2.
648. That all the Bishoprics of this ^ealm are of the Kings foundation* that
they were originally donative, and not elective: and that the full right of in
restiture was in the King, who signified his pleasure therein by delivery of a
Ring and a Cro^icistaff to the person by him elected and nominated for that
Office.
has nothing, that clashes with what I have said, in this matter: however, he
was a Common-Lawyer only, and, so, capable of mistaking, in matters of this
nature.

To his Ninth, Because they depend upon man, which (s^ies he) the true
Ministers of Christ never did; and, because Episcopacie cannot stand without
being supported by the hand of the chief Magistrate.

Answ: 1. And can Presbytery, or any Church Government, peaceably, stand,
without the countenance and support of Soverain Princes? 2. What was the
reason, that Mr Calvin, in his new Device, gave the People such share in the
Church Government, but for the gaining thereby ^n admission and support of, and
for it? 3. Who, in the late days of Usurpation, more courted and fawned upon
the Tyrants, for favor and supportation for their several Mushroom-Models,
than --? Has not God promised to the Christian Church, that Isai. 49. 33.
Kings should ^e their Nursing-Fathers, etc? And does not their being so,
import supportance to the Clergy, the Chiefs of the Church? Our Bishops were
as unlikelie, unworthilie-to-depend on man, as any Clergy in the World, as
having, through the favor of Princes, been honored with the (envied) Tities
of Lords, and their Sees, by the piety of former times, endowed with fair and
large Revenues; whereof the reason is assigned in the Statute: 24 H. 8^^* c. 12.
For the due administering of what belongs to their places, and to keep them
from corrupt and sinister affections, etc. It was King James's Maxim (derived
from a profound experience;) none of the Bishops-theirs (as he affixes it,) No
Bishop, no King, which that most pious Martyrly Prince his Son verified, by his
own most-tragical example. 7. If, (as he says) the Proverb be truer, No King,
no Bishop, it seems thereby, that Bishops are deemed useful to them (to Kings,)
who think it needful for them, as Kings, to have Bishops in their Kingdoms.
And, therefore, 8. that Kings cannot very well (nay, not at all) subsist
without them: Wherein (says (...). Meditat. 17. p. 138. 8 vo.
the late-mentioned B. Prince) so far, indeed Reason of State does induce me,
to approve that Government (of Bishops,) above any other, as I find it
impossible for a Prince, to preserve the State in quiet, unless he has such
an influence on Churchmen, and they such a dependence on Him, as may best
restrain the seditious exorbitancies of Ministers tongues; who, with the keys
of Heaven, have so far the keys of the People's hearts, as they prevail much by
their Oratorie, to let in, or shut out, both peace and loyalty, etc. And,
says Bishop ^ramhal: Answ: to Militiere, p. 115. where he refers to Instances
in the Pope's Nuncio in Ireland, and the Presbyterian Faction in Scotland.
Certainly, they who were the contrivers and principal actors, in this
business, did more malign Episcopacy for Monarchies sake, than Monarchies for
Episcopacies. So that, Kingly, and Episcopal Government may be compared to the
sweet and advantageous combination of the Vine and Elm.

-- Alterius sic altera poscit opem --
Et conjurant amice. --
To his Tenth Arg: Because they do imitate the Priests of the Law so much in
respect of their different Degrees and Orders, as Archbishops answering the
High Priest, etc.

Answ: 1. But, if Christ and his holy Apostles did accommodate the Jewish
Institutions and Vsages to the requisites of the Christian Church, in this
matter, as in others very many; then, though this be an imitation of the Jews,
it is, however, perfectly Christian. and we have proved, above, that it was so
done, in this very matter. 2. It is most sure, that a Rite, formerly, commanded
the Jews, not See Dr Field of the Chur. Book 5. p.
as significative of the future Messiah, but as decent in the worship of God,
without 1 any depending on it for Justification, without 2 any opinion that the
Jewish Law obliges us, and without 3 any fear of being persecuted by the Jews,
or consequent 4 compliance with them (the only not-observing of which
Cautions, in the matter of Circumsition, and some of their other Ceremonies,
caused S. Paul, so to inveigh against Judaizing, Gal: * 5. 2. 5. 2, 4, 13. * 6.
12, 13, 14. * 5. 11.) may, now, be prescribed by the Christian Church, merely
as an humane institution, judging that decent or useful, now, which was so,
then; and in this case, if nothing else can be objected against it, save only,
that God thought fit, to prescribe it to his own people, there will be little
fear of danger in, or fault to be found with, any such usage, says (most
excellently,) the divinest Author of the View of the New Directorie, 13. p. 41.
3. That which S. Paul taxes, Gal: 3, 3. is the doctrine of the Ebionites,
touching the observation of the Jewish Law; that they were altogether bound to
retain the Legal Service or Judaical Religion, and that the Faith in Christ,
and living according to it, would not prove sufficient, to save them; observing
the bodily, Legal Religion, and, thereupon, rejecting Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3.
c. (...).
the Epistles of S. Paul, calling him an Apostle from the Law, and using the
Gospel, which is called the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and no other;
Observing the Sabbath, and all their other Observances, Circumcision, etc. Now,
what affinicie has this to our imitating a Jewish Practice (qualified, as
above,) only as decent or advantageous, not as any ways necessary, nor as
importing our obligation to that Law, now by Christ abrogated?

But, how (says the Ob^. by himself propounded can they (Choristers, Organs,
Altars, Sacrifices, Oblations, Purification of Women, Garments, etc.) be
Jewish, and yet Popish? To which he Answers: very well: for, the Bapists are in
a manner perfect imitators of the Jews, etc.

Answ: 1. For imitation of Jews, how far it may be lawful to imitate them in
their Usages, we saw but now. 2. For imtation of Papists (as our Vsages are,
here, (and, elsewhere) branded for Popish,) to be Popish is no more, than to
partake of the manners, customs o^ ordinances of the Popes, which when, in plain
terms, it is not forbidden in Scripture, how should it come to pass, that to
partake of them, must needs be unlawful? For the Popes were the Bishops of
Rome, of which the foremost or leading ones, having both for Doctrine and
Conversation been glorious Members of the Church of Christ, the Church of Rome
grew so renowned, as that for judgment in Religious matters, they bare away the
bell of Reputation, and were to these Western Churches the makers of many
wholesome Ordinances in Religion, and the eminent supporters thereof. Now
Corruptions, after, growing among them, though their depravations ought, by all
means, to be dis^arded, yet are not their Ordinances, therefore, corrupt, or
rejectable, because they were the Acts of Popes, but as things by them enacted
or acted contrary to the Word of God. So that, they are no farther unlawful,
then as they are demonstrable, to to be repugnant to that Cynosure or Rule.
And, if this cannot be shown, we may no more, for Respect of Persons (though
Popes) Isai: v. 20.
call good evil, or evil good, than, for personal regards, we may violate God's
Commands. Nor is it more to be abhorred, as a Popish Corruption, to use the
Ordinances of Popes, or practice the Vsages brought-in by them, (provided they
be not evil in themselves,) than the Blessing of God's People, in the words
Balaam blessed them withal, is to be detested, as a Balaamitish Corruption. The
(condemnatorie) Names of Popish, Jewish, Heathenish, etc. intend only, that
the thing condemned, communicates in the nature of those things, wherein they
were especially corrupt, (respectively), and not of their Indifferent actings,
and much less of the nature of their Excellents. Whence it is clearly
conclusble, to be Popish, (as neither to be Jewish, etc.) simply, is no
argument of necessary faultiness: It must be proved, therefore, (before any
charge of evil is affixable on these things, or usages, wherein we
inter-commune with the Papists,) that they are Popish in appropriate malign
sense, which will not, can not, ever, be done, as has, partly, appeared
already, and when farther instances shall be musiered, will be made apparent in
them also. 2. I have spoke to that prejudicate misprision (as learned and very
worthy Mede Diatribe on Matthew: 6. 9. Luke 9. 2. p. 75. 76. See also the same
learned man. among his Posthame Pieces, in a Letter of his to Mr Herthb. p.
663. where he gives instances of this. In things for which we find no new ru^e
given in the N. Test: there we are referred to the analogy of the Old, Id:
Diati: part 3d of the Holiness of the Church, p. 53.
calls it) of many, That the measure of truth and falsehood, best and worst, is
the greater or lesser distance from Popery (when as Popery, also, cont^ineth
much of Chr^stianitie,) or that which is most destructive of the man of man of
sin is, always, most warrantable and safe, to be embraced. If it were, there
be some in the World (whose Religion we would be loath to admit of,) that would
be found more Orthodox and better reformed Christians, than any of us all. 3.
It Is Calumny in exaltation, to say, it was the aim of some of the late
Bishops, or that they intended to unite England to Rome, as is visible to all
whose eyes are not bleared or seeled with envy or malice, by the writings and
carriages of several Bishops and Doctors, that were most under that imputation
from the Plebs, and Plebeian (tribuntian-spirited) Priests. I might instance
the R. F. in God John Bramhal Answer to De, la Militiere, Tract of Schism,
Replication to the Bishop of Chalcedon, (...).
Primate (now) of Ireland, the R. Bishop of Durham Dr Cosens His worthy work on
the selves. Apocrypha.
, of whom Mons. Daille, the famous French Minister said Bestiae sunt and quidem
fanatici, etc. Dr Heylyn's Examen Historicum, p. 294.
, They are beasts, and indeed Phanaticks, who suspect him of Popery, from which
you will scarce find any more estranged; together with others many, whose
recital would be needless, or useless. So that 4. there is no fear of the
present Bishops (even when their wings are grow'n (as he insinuates, with
little charity,)) that they would endeavor, to bring England to Rome; if they
be like their Predecessors, or but constant to themselves.

To his Eleventh Argument, Because Diocesan Power is more than the Apostles
exercised, either jointly or apart, they not imposing their Canons, but only
recommending them, Act: 15. 29.

Answ: 1. I have shown, that they did exercise more power, than our Bishops. 2.
The words [ -- from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well,] which he
will have to be a recommendation, as distinguished against ^ Decree, was a
Decree (so styled by himself, and by the holy writer of the Acts, c. 16. v. 4.
delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained -- ] yea, who durst
have refused what, he says, was but recommended, without guilt of sin? 3. The
injoyning them those Abstinences, is called a laying upon them a great burden
of necessary things v. 28.
. 4. What they thus decreed or inordered (whether consigned to Scripture,
(which yet, these were) or not) were (equally) binding, as-to the conscience,
where the matters were of the same alloy: and therefore, he talks weakly, to
say, they imposed not their Canons (except the pure Scripture, the true Rule,
etc.) 5. Seeing the Government of the Church is committed to the Bishops, Hebr:
13. 17. and there is no government without right, ^^ ordain or constitute some
certain things, therefore Bishops with the^ Presbyters in their own Church, and
in Council in many Churches, may constitute some things, though not according
to Divine Right, nor so, as that their Constitutions should be equalled to
Divine Law, (much less, preferred before 'em,) but 1 for (...); according to
that Precept, 1 Cor: 11. 16. and 14. 33. 2 for averting scandals of the weak,
to which matter that Decree, Act: 15. 20. is, usually, referred: 3 for the
better gaining of minds to Godliness, of which relation are the stated or set
Fasts used through all the Churches in the World, etc. See Grot: Annot: in
Cassandr: de Potestate Ecclesiastied. Potestas Ecclesiae Praepositis, ut
quaedam constituant pacis and ordin is and majoris utili^atis causa, quae nos
obligent, negari non debet. Id, Animadv. i^ Animadv: etc. p. 62.
6. The XX. Article of the Ch: of Eng: says expressly, That the Church has
power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of Faith.
7: Paul commands Bishops, to take care for the ordering of God's Public
Service, 1 S. Tim: 2. 1. where the words refer not to the private Devotions of
particular persons, but to the Divine public Service of the Church, as S.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius among the Ancients, Estius the Romanist
for the Church of Rome, and, also, Calvin for the Protestants, have
interpreted. 8. For what he adds, about exercising dominion, or (as he puts it,
in marg:) lordship, over the faith of Christians, which (says he) Paul an
Apostle, and Timothy a Bishop would not do; we have considered the place, 2
Cor: 1. 24.
as, also, the matter, here, charged, already, and showed that our Bishops lie
not under that guilt (to be sure, they are not necessitated, by their Function,
so to do.)

To his Twelfth and last Argument, fetched from a Comparison instituted between
them, and the Bishops mentioned in Scripture, particularly Timothy and Titus,
whereupon we are presented with XV. positive Characters of those holy Bishops,
together with XXIV. disparallels 'twixt them, and our Bishops.

Answ: 1. To argue from the personal abuse of the Office to the non-use,
Vnwarrantablenesse, Un-Scripturalnesse, or Necessity of the Abolition of the
Office, is a most irrational process. 2. The faults (possibly) of some few men
of an Order or Function ought not, to be diffused upon all of that Calling,
even by congruitie of pure-natural Reason:

Parcito paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes. 3. In his several heads of
Description of Bishop Timothy, and Titus, we shall show some particulars to
be, either falsely assigned, or peculiar and restrained to those first times;
and, then, demonstrate the other Characterisms, to belong to our Bishops, also.
1 The Choice of the persons was, never, in the People, as appears by Cl:
Romanus's Testimony (above cited,) which exhibits, that the Bishops were made,
before there were any believers, to choose. So that, it is not imaginable, how
the examination and approbation could belong to the people or the whole Church,
when those, over whom they were constituted, were not, yet, come-in, but they
were made Bishops (...), of those which should after come into the Faith See
Doctor Hammond's Answer to Owen's Animedversions, etc. p. 88.
. The people's choice, therefore, was (nor is) no way, required to, nor
constitutive of, the being or constitution of Bishops, which was complete, and
stood valid without it, though 'twas most happy, when the People's acceptance
followed. And, for the choice of the Episcopi gregis (as some will call them,
as contradistinct to Episcopi Pastorum,) they are, indeed, chosen by the
consent of the People; but, that, (for the avoiding of factions, and tumults,
Add, and out of respect to those Lords of such Country towns, where were
Titles or Churches endowed with maintenance out of their own Lands, etc. who,
'twas thought fit should, therefore have great interest in the choosing of
Clerks in such places; which purpose is Justinian's Decree to Novel. Constit.
123. c. 18. and Canon Conc. Toletan: Yet were they not called Lords of such
places after dedication to God, but Patrons, etc. The like is said of Emperors
and Kings in reference to both Bishops and Presbyters. See Dr Field of the
Church, l. 5. ^. 54. p. 695. ib. c. 55. p. 701:
etc. incident to Popular Elections) transferred upon the King, and the
(respective) Patrons. 2 Of his Texts referred unto, the first, Act: 6. 3.
imports, it is true, that the Nomination or Choice of the persons of the
Deacons, there, was committed to the Community or Society of Christians, but
that, 1 by the Appointment of the Apostles declared to them, v. 2, 3. 2 they
had by the Apostles these bounds set them, first, to take seven (the number not
left arbitrarie;) secondly, to pitch on men generally known and well reputed
of; thirdly, with these qualifications, 1 Faith, supposed in the (...), some of
you, that is, Believers, Christians, 2 fullness of the H. Ghost, extrordinarie
Gifts, 3 fullness of Wisdom, fitted by all these for this employment. And, when
by the Apostles Appointment, together with the observation of these prescribed
Rules, the multitude had sought-out the persons, then, still, the Apostles
reserve the (...), the Ordination or Constitution of them, to themselves, v. 3.
and, so, in other Churches, the Testimony, concerning the qualifications of
the persons was referred to the Church. Now, as this is all, we can grant him,
so it is not that, he designs. Of his other place, (though I discern not, so
easily, the pertinencie of it to this matter, yet;) I set for the sum of it,
That the whole Church indeed, joined in the choosing, and sending Messengers to
Antioch with the Apostles and Elders, or Bishops of Judea; but, that, with a
discernable distinction; The Apostles and Elders, as they, whose Decree or
Appointment it was [it pleased or seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, to
send chosen men,] the choice and mission belonging to them, and the persons
sent men of them, Bishops of the Council, but, this, with the knowledge, and
approbation of the whole Church joined with them, as those that were
Accessories, not Principals, in the sending. Neither, v. 23. were the Brethren,
members of the Council, nor had voices in it; they only joined with the
Apostles and Bishops, showing their consent and approbation, and submission to
the Decree of the Council. * It Is acknowledged, that Timothy and Titus
traveled about, preaching, (and, in that respect, they may be styled,
itinerant preachers.) But, then, 1 it is one of the things, that is yielded and
accounted extraordinary, in those first ^fficers of the Church, viz. the
Extent of their Precinct or Diocese, which, of the Evangelists, also, was the
whole World, or those special parts of it, which the Apostles had allotted to
one another; whither when they could not go themselves, the Evangelists were
sent; so that, they, then, were to make great and often journeys, and be much
upon Removes, in those times; and 2 became resiant or fix^ also, at length, as
is (or will be) manifest. * It Is acknowledged, that they were Attendants and
Ministers to the Apostles, and were Messengers of the Churches; but, this,
visibly, was an Extraordinary, unless the Apostles should revive again upon
Earth, and the Bishops attend them, and be sent by them, etc. Why, therefore,
does he not say, also, that S. Timothy was circumcised, and then exact, that
our Bishops (that they may be like Timothy, etc.) be circumcised, also; for,
this is no more an Extraordinary, than the other? 4. Our Bishops may be
Evangelists, by making known the Gospel to them, that know it not, calling them
to the Faith, which is the peculiar notion or importance of (...), and (...),
to Evangelize, and to preach, and (...), S. Mat. 28. 19. to gather Disciples,
as those words are opposed to teaching, Acts 15. 35. and v. 45. and as (...),
the word, differs from doctrine, 1 S. Tim. 5. 17. See Doctor Hammond in N.
Testament mihi p. 659. and 359.
For, where there are any, within their line, or lawful reach, not called to
the Faith, they can, and will (no doubt,) either travel or journey themselves,
to make the Faith known unto them, which is to be Evangelists; or,
authoritatively employ others to do it, which is to be (what they are called,
in the firster Writers) Apostles. And, though (as Timothy was Bishop and
Evangelist, too) they, also, may, thus, be both; yet they need not (in this
state of the Church) be sent to other Churches, when by some of their present
(so envied) Officers, they may, in their absence, have the effect of the matter
done, in very due and requisite manner. * Now, the rest of the Character will,
very perfectly, fit our English Bishops: * They were begotten again, and
converted by the Gospel, * are true Disciples and servants of Jesus Christ, *
men of good report, * inwardly and really affected to the People of God (truly
such) as [Fathers, and] brethren, * well acquainted with the Scriptures, etc.
and having a gift to prophecy (i. e. to See Mede's Diatr: 1 Cor: 11 5 p. 351,
notify the Will of God unto the People,) * ordained solemnly by fasting and
prayer See the Book of Ordination.
in imitation of the Apostles, Acts 13. 3. observing IV. Ember-daies, by
Fasting and Prayer to prepare for the Ordination of Church Officers,
(immediately consequent to every such Week,) * either by the Apostles,
Presbyters or Elders, (which, what they signify, viz. Bishops, is showed,
above) of the same Church or Churches they were of; * were, and are diligent
laborers in the work of Christ and his Gospel, and may be called Paul's (yea,
God's) work-fellows Fellow Laborers of God, (...), 1 Cor: 3. 9.
, * were, and are naturally (...), sincerely.
careful of the things of Christ, and of the welfare of Christians, * were,
and are much refreshed in, and among the Saints and Churches of Christ, * were
persecuted, imprisoned, and in bondage for professing, preaching and practicing
the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, (witness our Queen-Marie-Martyr-Bishops,
and the imprisonment (of twelve of them at once, for about 18. Months,) sad
diminutions and sufferings of all our Bishops, in our late Marian days,) *
were, and are such as ordained Bishops or Elders, etc. according to the
appointment of the Apostles, * lastly, were, and are, doubtless, blameless,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, etc.

Next, ensues his Negative Description of our Bishops.

Now, for the unravelling of his List of Dissimilitudes, I shall lay down these
Rules (as Praeliminaries thereto.)*

I. The abuses of Persons are, by no means, to be transferred on a (Divine)
Institution. Patet.

II. It Is a Rule of the Smectymnuans (in Assembly, Pref: to Directorie.
) To hold forth such things as are of Divine Institution in every Ordinance,
and that other things be set forth according to the Rules of Christian
Prudence, agreeable to the general Rules of God's Word.

III. Besides matters of Faith, many things were institute, for the Government,
Order and Peace of the Churches, which, it was not necessary, should be
prescribed, because it was sufficient, that, being by use it self, brought into
Churches, by the Apostles, that very use of them acquainted men's eyes and
knowledges with them, with sufficient conspicuousnesse. And yet, nevertheless,
in the Apostolical Writings, also, there are some vestigia or traces thereof;
not, that 'twas the principal purpose of the Apostles, to write of them, but
because sometimes occasions were given, to glance at them. See H. Grot: passim,
in his Eristicks.
See above. Patet.

IV. Though the substance of Religion is unalterable, and no new parts of
worship or Religion may be added, yet Circumstances and Adjuncts or
Accommodations may lawfully be allowed. Or, thus;

Inventions of men in Substantials of Divine Worship is unlawful, but
Circumstantials may lawfully be invented by men. Often manifested, above.

V. There Is Authority sufficient, by Christ, given to the Church, for the
ordering of such matters, which are not repugnant to Scripture. See above, often.

VI. It was lawful, to do some certain things, (among the Jew,) whereby the
Precepts of the Law were helped, more than hindered. And, Christ teaches, S.
Matthew: 23. 3. that they are to be observed; even as, now, also those things are
to be observed, which the Rulers of the Church do command and inorder, Acts 15.
28.

VII. It is not necessary, nor yet expedient, that the Elections of the
Bishops, and some other Circumstantials, touching their Persons or Office,
should be, in all respects, the same, under Christian Princes, as it was when
Christians lived among Pagans, and under Persecution. K. Charles I. His second
Paper to the Ministers in the Isle of Wight, p. 274. (not denied by them)
Patet.

VIII. There are some things, (in this matter) de jure Divino, spiritual, as
the Order of Bishops or Episcopacie; other de jure humano, civil, that is,
their civil Honor, secular Power, Temporalities, Revenues, as to be Barons in
Parl^ament, to judge in causes Temporal, etc. grounded on 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Now, therefore, when he says, That Timothy and Titus were not (as appears by
Scripture)

1. Chosen to their Office by Deans and Chapters. It admits Answer from several
of the Positions, but now set down.

2. Created by any earthly Kings or Prin^es. Answ: Neither are ours, as has
been shown above. Where see, in what sense.

3. Consecrated and confirmed by any Archbishop. Answ. It Is false, as has been
made apparent, in Archbishop Timothy and Titus, ordaining other Bishops (so
called, in a distinct sense.)

4. Did not call themselves, neither were they called, See 1 Samuel 1, 26. Hannah
calling Eli, Lord, and 1 King. 18. 7. Obadiah calling Elias so. Si Domini
appellentur, vel ex Principu^^ indultis, vel ex subditorum reverentia, non
invidendus est illis talis titulorum usus, sed usurpatio. Dominus and Magister*
serv^ram lavat pedes, S. Joh: 13. 13, 14. and fastus superioribus objectus
aliquoties conculcatur, sub humilita^ts pratextu ab infer^oribus, sed majori
fastu. Bishop Pride: Fasc: Contr: p. 211. See Bishop Hall's Episcopacie by
Divine Right, Part. 2d ^ 17. about the Titles of our Bishops, p. 174* 175 See
also Bishop D^wnham (on the same Argument,) l. 3. c. 6. It appears not to me.
but the lawfulness of the titles of Master and Father given to Ministers, is
as dispurable from the Scripture, as that of my Lord. Terms of accommodation by
a (Presbyterian) Country Minister, p. 14.
Lords. It receives Answer from the VIIth and VIIIth Rules.

5. Did not swear Canonical Obedience to any Archbishop. Answ: 1. How knows he
that? 2. Neither did he swear (that we read) Allegiance to the secular
Magistrate. 3. Besides, it admits satisfaction from sundry of the Rules or
Considerations, above.

6. Did not require any whom they ordained, to swear Can: Obedience to them.
Answ: as before.

7. Did not ask the Ministers they Ordained, at their Ordination, Will you
reverentlie obey your Ordinary, etc? Answ: as before.

8. When they ordained, etc. did not say, Receive the H. Ghost, and, take
authority to Preach, etc. Answ: 1. Receive, etc. S. John 20. 22. signifies,
not, 1 sanctifying Graces, had before; nor 2 extraordinary Gifts, given at
Pentecost, fifty days after; but 3 sacerdotal Power of Officiating and
dispensing those sacred Ministrations, whereto the promise of the spirit is
annex't, and wherethrough, as thorough a Canale, this Divine Water is
conveyed, for the good and benefit of others, by them as Stewards. Accipite
Potestatem Spiritualem, says L. 5. ^ 77. p. 112, 113, etc. See also Bishop
Andrew's IXth Sermon* of the Sending of the H. Ghost. p. 695. where he reckons
the Apostleship, or the very Office to be a Grace, one of the Graces, without
doubt of the H. S. See likewise Dr Heylyn's Theol. Vet. l. 3. p. 356, 396, 369.
and (on the verb^ solennia) 369.
Hooker. 2. It may signify, also, a Prayer. Take the Gift of the Spirit for an
infused Gift, so the words are used by way of Impetration. Take it for Office,
so they are used by way of Collation, as was Archbishop Usher's Judgment. And,
sure, our Bishops are capable of this; and, this Oil poured on the heads of
Apostles, descended farther and lower, even to the skirts of their garments
(that is, to the Bishops, their Successors, in these days) Ps: 133. 2. 3.
Take thou authority,] signifies authority for Officiating and exercising
Ministerial abilities, and transfering it to others, as this Commission to
Officiate was transferred to S. Timothy, 2 Ep: 2. 2. (called, a Gift, 1 Timothy: 4.
14. 2 Timothy 1. 16.)

9. Tendered no Book Archbishop Bancroft in Sermon. at S. Paul's on 1 S. Joh: 4.
1. tells us (p. 40, etc.) that there is not a reformed Church in Christendom,
which does not require subscription, (at the least) of their Ministers;
instancing in Geneva, Germany as to the Augustane Conf^iting Melancthon
against heretical and (in this matter) licentious, Osiander; the practice of
Emperors and Kings, and, generally, of all Christians in times past, together
with the VIIIth Canon of the Counc. of Nice.
of Articles, Canons or Common Prayer, etc. nor required any, to swear such
things. Answ: S. Paul gave Timothy a short Summarie of the chief things that
were to be believed by all, in opposition to all gro^ing Heresies. Of the
nature to which (...), i. e. short Form, are our Articles for Credenda (as our
Book of Canons answers the Apostles Diataxes;) and our Common Prayer Book (as,
it is a venerable Formularie of Primitive Devotion, so) it is an excellent Hedge,
to keep out Errors, so to retain a Common profession of Catholic Verities.

10. Did not lay hands upon any, to ordain them, before they were elected.
Answ: The only true and proper act of Ordination is, to invest men with that
Power, which do'th make them Ministers by consecrating their persons to God,
and his Service, in holy things, whether they exercise that Power, or no. a

11. Did not intermedle in civil and secular affairs, etc. Answ. 1. 1. How
should they, under persecuting Heathen Emperors? 2. Why may not Princes give
honor to what Subjects they please? And 3. why not Churchmen, now, as capable
of Civil Honor, and Power, as under the old Law; when, what Religious King was
there, ever, among the Jews, who had not, continually, the High Priest to
second him, in all his affairs? See Deuteronomy. 17. 9. etc. Gen: 14. 18. Melchisedek.
King and Priest. Consider Eli Priest and Judge forty years, Samuel thirty,
Maccabees after Capt. Rulers in both Civ. and Eccl. Causes. See Bishop
Dav^nant's Determination, in this matter qu. 11 (our Author may have it in
English, in Mr Jer. Stephens Apol. for Bishops.) See, also, A. B. Williams's
Speech re-published by the same Author, p. (especially) 93, 94. See too, Bishop
Pride Fasc: Contr. p. 217, etc.
Aaron next to Moses, Eleazar to Joshua, David with Zad^c and Abiathar, Solomon
and Azariah, Joas and Johajada, Josiah with Hilkiah, Jehosaphat and Amariah.
It Is well with the Church when Godly Prophets hang, as precious Earrings at
the Prince's ears, said a Divine. 4. See Rule VIIth and VIIIth above.

12. Had no stately Palaces, Answ: 1. How should they, in times, and under
Governments enemies to their Profession? 2. By the Apostles Argument, 1 Cor: 9.
13, 14. the Ministry of the Gospel should be as well provided for, as the
Levitical. But, now, 3. such, and so many Allowances See Trelenie, The
Vndeceiving of the People in point of Tithes, p. 6, 7, etc.
had the Priests and Levites, that, setting-by their Corn and Cattle, and all
manner of Increase, their Maintenance had far exceeded that of the English
Clergy, and adding unto these the Tithes of all creatures tythable, it does
more than double it. They were possessed of forty eight Cities, and the
Territories round about them, extending every way, for the space of two
thousand Cubits; which, in so small a Country, was a greater proproportion, than
the Rents received by the Clergy, for all the Bishoprics and Chapter-lands,
in the Realm of England. All that the Church (Cathedral, or Parochial) has,
falls short of the proportion, which God allotted to the Tribe of Levi.

13. Had no High-Commission-Courts, nor Country-Courts, to convene People.
Answ: 1. They had Jurisdiction though, and exercised it with great severitie.
2. Look Rules IVth, Vth, VIth, etc.

14. Had no such Officers under them as Deans, etc. Answ: 1. I have,
sufficiently, accounted for them, already. View the Positions.

15. Used no such Oaths as that ex Officio, etc, or the etc. Oath, etc. Answ:
1. For the former Oath, it is very lawful, as appears, 1 by our Savior's
practice, S. Mat: 26. 63, 64. The High-Prtest said unto him, I adjure thee by
the living God, etc. which adjuration, Christ obeyed; and, by the practice
under Moses's Law, in case of Loan or Trust, Exodus: 22. 10, 11. of Jealousy,
Numb. 5. 19. of Trespass, 1 King: 8. 31. of prohibited Marriages, Ezr. 10. 5.
11. 2 In that it is such an Oath as may be taken in truth, judgment and
righteousness, the Qualifications required in an Oath, by Jeremie the Prophet,
c. 4. 2. as might be showed, distinctly, and irrefragably, if I did not study
haste. 3 And, that usual Objection See Bishop Andrewes's Sermon. of the
lawfulness of swearing. on Jer. 4. 2. p. 47. and on the Commandments, p. 242.
and his Posthuma.
, Nemo tenetur scipsum prodere, etc. No man is bound, to betray or accuse
himself, etc. is Answered by Aquinas, That the man does not betray himself, but
he is accused by another, inasmuch as a necessity of answering is imposed on
him by him, whom he is b^und, to obey. Non ipse seprodit, sed ab alio proditur,
dum ei necessitas respondendi imponitur per eum eui obedire tenetur. See Doctor
Featley's Dippers, etc. a p 95. ad p. 101. Doctor Heylin's moderate Answ: to
Burt^^ c. 1. a p. 11. ad p. 16. Ambr: Fisher's Def: of Liturgies l. 1. c. 17.
p. 178, 179. But, especially Dr Cosins in Q. Elizabeth's time Dean of the
Arches, part 3. c. 15.
2. For the et-caetera Oath (as they scoff it,) it is answered, 1 that the
[etc.] was unhappily and improvidently left in it: 2 that the integrity of the
meaning of such as composed it, has found belief in the hearts of honest men,
as the very knowing Gentleman Hamon le Strange, Hist. of K. Charles I.
Mr Thom: Fuller Appeal of injured Innocence, part 3. p. 40. See, also, Dr
Heylin's Observations o^ H. le Strange (abovesaid) his Hist.
. Which latter, in his Church-Storie, vouches one, whom he very highly praises,
that gives this very good account of that [etc.] It was only inserted, to save
the enumeration of many mean Officers in the Church, whose mention was beneath
the dignity of an Oath, and would but clog the same, which may very well pass
for our 3 Answer e Fuller's Ch: Hist. Book 9. p. 171.
in this concern 4 If all this could no be pleaded (enough, to satisfy all
imprejudicate, candid minds,) it is, perfectly, freed from all the
accriminations of Smec: and the Covenanting party, unless they will condemn
themselves, for their interpretative [etc.] incorporated into the body of the
Covenant, whereby People are bound, to defend the Privileges of Parliament,
though what they be is unknown to most, that take the same.

16. Did not impose Penance, Fines, etc. Answered above, and the Rule^
satisfied it.

17. Did not wear Scarlet-Gowns, Mitres, Lawn-sleeves, etc. Answ: 1. This is
often discharged, above: they were under Persecution; and some of these things
were imitated from the Jews (which to do, is proved, perfectly, lawful, as
above,) 3. They are significative Vests (and, therefore, the better,) as
Purple-Gowns betoken zeal, etc.

18* Did not sell Livings for money, nor give them as Dowries, etc. with their
Daughters, etc. Answ: 1. from the first Rule. 2. Why not, if the men be,
otherwise, deserving?

19. Did not silence Ministers under the Notion of Puritans, and factious
persons, but only by sound Doctrine. Answ: 1. But was there no (...), excision
or cutting off, Gal: 5. 12. (...), rejection, Tit. 3. 10. delivering unto
Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20. 1 Col. 5. 5.
and is not this silencing, and worse? 2. We have vindicated the demeanor of
our Bishops toward such Refractaries, already. 3. Had the Directorie, or any
other (new) Model of Church Service or Government been set-up, here; should the
conscientious Episcaparian dissenting (though, unseditiously) have fared better
(...) (* (...).)
than they did, under our Legally-established, (and, withal) Primitive Church
Government, and Divine-Liturgie? 4. Vitus is commanded, Titus 1. 11, 13.
to stop such persons mouths, by not permitting them, to vent their de^eits,
and by rebuking them sharply, that is, by inflicting the Ce^sures of the Church
upon them. See Doctor Hammond in Loc.

20. Did not cause any of the Believers, to be presented, fined Compellite ^t
introeant, S. Luke 14. 23. Must be foris necess^tas, ut sit intus volunta^ In
S. A^g time, there were diverse Donatists that by compulsion were converted, and
thanked the Emperor for compelling them. See Bishop Andrews on ^he
Commandments, p. 380. See also here above: Hither some refer S. Luke 14, 23.
and Revel: 2. 20.
, imprisoned or banished under the notion of Sectaries, etc. Answ. 1. How
should they, when themselves were not countenanced by the state secular? 2.
Giving to Satan, for him to instict diseases (and consequent thereon) death,
(which they, often, did, as appears) was as bad as all this. 3. S. Austin
distinguishes improbus infidelis, and improbus fidelis; and (I doubt me) the
Believers, our Author is concerned for, are of the latter sort at least, as
h^'s, sufficiently, appeared, by their dismal and desperate actings. You have
killed the people of the Lord, was once the Cry for such as these, Numb: 16. 41.

21. Did not require the sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdicton, like
Demetrius. Answ: 1. Diotrephes 3 Ep. S. Joh. v 9.
, he would say. 2, It is fit, and useful, that the Presbyters, there, present,
should lay-on their hands by the hand of the Bishop, and so, join in the Prayer
for a benediction; but, there is nothing producible (no, not from the IVth
Counc. of Cath: can: 20, nor IId produced by the London-Presbyterians, in their
Jus Divinum See Doctor Hammond's Answer to it, p. 185, 186. (...), (an: Apost.
XL. the reason is there annex't, (...); says the Co^nc: of Laodicea Can. 56.
See also the Counc: of Arles Can. 19. apud Doctor Hammond's Vindic. against the
London. Ministers, p. 158. See also Tertul. de Baptismo c. 17. and de corona
Mil: and Just. Martyr Apol. 8.
,) that a Presbyter might not be ordained, without the presence of Presbyters.
3. The custom is, still, retained in our Church, in all Ordinations of
Presbyters and Deacons. 4. Jurisdiction spiritual is in them alone, save as
they impart it.

22. Did not neglect to preach the Gospel. etc. Answ: 1. I plead not for any
negligence in the great work belonging to the Episcopal Office. 2. When S. Paul
commissionates Titus, [For this cause left I thee in Creet, etc.] Tit: 1. 5. he
mentions Jurisdicton, and Ordination, not Preaching. 2. Ruling is a prime part
of the Episcopal Office, and a great work, to do it well, so that it may have
reason, to supersede much of Preaching: For, as one, Dr Allestry in his
Consecration Sermon, above cited, p. ^7.
choicely, observes, notwithstanding all S. Paul's assistances of Spirit, he
does reckon that care, that came upon him daily from the Churches, among his
persecutions, and it sums up his Catalogue of sufferings 2 Cor: 9. 28. Such
various necessities there are, by which Government is distracted, and knows not
how to temper it self to them. 4. Therefore, some will answer, that it is not
fit, a Bishop should preach so frequently, in his own person, as others of his
Clergy, considering he has a Diocese to Rule; and they would put this
Question: Is it fit for the General of an Army, (now, the Church is resembled
to an Army with Banners, Cant: 6. 4.) that is to order the whole Army, to
fight as much, in his own person, as an inferior Commander, or a common
Soldier? If he engage himself, in his own person, to the neglecting of his
Office as General, he may, happily, be reputed the more popularly valiant; but,
withal, it is a very great adventure, if he destroy not himself, and his whole
Army, by it. 5. The Bishop ought to preach, in's own person, and, that,
frequentlie, the oftener, the better, with regard had to his years, and other
parts of his Duty; not so, as to neglect the oversight of the several
Preachers under him, as-to observing, encouraging, and ordering them; if
otherwise, it is probable, he may live and die the more popular man; but to have
bestowed more time in the severals specified had been better and more edifying
for his Diocese, and their souls health.

24. Did not remove from one Diocese to another for greater prepreferment.
Answ: 1. from Rule first. 2. It may be, they remove, for a better Competencie
Given to hospitality] 1 Timothy: 3. 2. that is, says Hierom, that he receive the
strangers, entertain the native, and in a word admit all comers; adding, if a
Layman entertain but two or three, Hospitalitatis officium implebit. Episcopus
nis^ omnes receperit, inhumanus est.
, that they may live more according to their venerable state, and be more
hospitable. 3. I shall dig, and delve, and plant, in what ground soever my
master sets me. If he ^ake me to a larger field, complain you not of the loss,
while the Church may gain. -- Even Parents, when the Prince commands, leave
their families, and go to wa^fa^^, By Hall's Epistles, Decad. 1. Ep. 9. to Sir
Robert Drury and his Lady, concerning my removal from them.
They may remove, for the greater preferment or promotion of God's glory and
service.

Thus, we have run over his tale of Vnlikes, which he concludes with these
words: Two such Bishops as Timothy, etc. were worth a whole Thrave of Lord
Bishops. Unless they were such as Cyprian, etc. Cranmer, etc.

Answ: 1. Our Bishops pretend nor to be equal (in the sense, here, intended) to
SS. Timothy and Titus (as neither ought the haters of Bishops lay challenge to
equal worths with them, as conceived no Bishops.) 2. We have had Bishops, that
may be, truly, thought, to bear up to pitch of excellencies with Cyprian,
Ambrose, Chrysostom: Witness our Whitgifts, our Jewels, our Andrews-es, our
Lakes, etc. 3. Though they should not be perfectly their matches, yet they may
have been good Bishops; it is somewhat, also, in secundis consistere. 4. These
forenamed Ancients were ^ishops in the distinct, appropriate or limited sense
(yea, Archbishops, S. Cyprian is called (...), Conc: Constant: in Trullo, can.
11. S. Ignatius (whose Successor S. Chrysostom was in that See) in his Epistle
to the Romans, styleth himself, (...).
) therefore, if he can digest these as Bishops, he can digest all Bishops, as
far as their Function, according to the so trite Rules, Quidquid convenit tali
qua tali, convenit omni tali, and, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia. 5. I
ask him, whether Cranmer (who, also, was an Arch bishop,) Ridley (and Hooper)
were not our Bishops, yea and those, that gave us a Liturgy, and our (so
defamed) Liturgy and Ceremonies, and who were so maligned and hated by the
Puritans and Sectarians of those times, of whom when any good is spoken by such
as our Author, it is (I fear) but ad conflandam invidiam on their Successors
(not out of love to themselves.) 6. Here, also, we may apply that of our
Savior, S. Luke 11. 47, 48. Woe unto you, for ye build the sepulchers of the
Prophets, and your fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow
the deeds of your fathers, for they indeed killed them, and ye build their
sepulchers. 7. Certainly, we may, without miracles, or before inversions of the
course of Nature, have such Bishops as Cranmer, etc. and as ready to lay down
their lives against Popish Errors, or in opposition to Puritan or Sectarian
Principles and Practices; as, also, I believe, we, now, have. 8. He whose house
is of glass (says the Proverb) ought to take care how he throws stones at
other men's (according to two of his own Sawes. Turpe est Doctori cum culpa
reda^guit ipsum. and, Qui paratus est in alterum dicere, ips^m opertet se care^
vitio.
) But, now, that our Author is hugelie guilty or criminous, I might show by
the pen of a Protectorian In ^ paper called, Strena V^v^* (...)
(no Prelatist.) Yet, I Because re*crimination is no purgation. 2 Because, (I
thank God, I can truly say) I love not to display men's vices, though, here, it
might be useful at once and lawful, and but a just allowable return to his
aspersing the English Clergy, (Fathers and Sons:) and 3 because he is not
(...), as Caligula's Sue^on: in Caio Caes: Caligul^, c. 47.
word was, I could be content, to let this part alone.

Yet, for a (...) or taste, let us draw-up a Disparallel between Tim^thie etc.
(an Itinerant Preacher, as he calls him) and himself and, that, in his Method.

Reader, These Errata's being found by a second per^sal of the Author, after
the Book was finished, is the reason of their being Printed here, there being no
room any were else.

Pref. p. 3. l. 14. ^. graze. p. 12. l. 24. r. may. Book, p. 5. l 8. ^. Gideon.
p. 8. l. 7. for X, r. V. p. 27. 4 ^* ^v. ib. l. 18. r. (...). p. 33. l. 17.
add, out of the prous Gerson. p. 64. tit. r retained. p. 75. l. 9. r. for. p.
74. l. 7. r. 7. p. 76. l. 27. r. they. p. 77. l. 11. r. about. p. 84. l. 21. r.
chaeism. p. 89. l. ^. marg: 1. The. p. 90* l 25. r* (...). p. 91. l. 23. r.
herd. p. 96. tit: r. Circumcision, ^^. p. 109. l. 9^. (...). p 1^5. ^ult. r.
perception. p. 118. l. 3. r. no. p. 120. l. 25. ^. Lawgivers. p. 13^. l. 8.
after many, r. (too many.) p. 133. l. 15. dele in. p. 135. l. 30. r. dignam. p.
139. l. 20* marg: r: Veter^m. p. 147. l. 25. r. VI's. p. 150. l. pen. r.
colere. p. 153. l. 10. r. Churches. p. 156. l. 1^. marg: dele 150, etc. p. 162.
l. 19. add they. p. 170. ^. 9. r. tribunitian. p. 179. l. 29. r. they. p. 177.
l. 6. r. of. p 189. tit: r. Oath. p. 190. tit. r. Apocalyptical. p. 193. l. ^^.
dele porch. p. ult. in Addend. l. 2. post, Christi, add, in. ib. l. 12. r.
Nemesis. ib. l. 11. r. decisive.

Timothy and Titus were not (as appears by Scripture)
1 Counterfeiters of holy Orders (and so, Preachers without calling) But, so
was he. p. 2. and 12.
2 Preached no seditious Doctrine against lawful Covernours. But, so did he,
says my Author. ^. 3.
3 Did not cheat and seduce poor souls, by spreading errors, diverse years. But
so did he. ib: and p. 4.
4 Did not preach (all they could possibly) for the rooting-out of Ministry,
branding the Calling as Antichristian, and rendering the persons by all
scandalous aspersions (as my Informer languages it,) to become odious to the
people. ^ut, so did he. ib;
5 Were not like Demetrius and his fellow-tradesmen, the whole devotion of
whose worship, the Silver-shrines took up. Yet, such was he. ib:
6 Had not, beside a (Parliament)-yearly Stipend of a hundred pounds, vast
emoluments out of sequestered benefices, the while protesting and vowing before
God and men (usually in Sermons) that they never received a penny for their
pains and preaching. But, so did he. ib: and p. 4, 5.
7 Did not by Preaching advance (as other errors, so) the Millenarian error,
with an intent to destroy Magistracy. But, so, did he. p. 5, and 10.
8 Were not proud Luciferian Enthusiasts. But, so, by several Instances, he
appears to be. p. 5, 6.
9 Did not horribly blaspheme and abuse Scripture, and vilify Baptism. But,
so did he, as appears often. ib. and p. 6.
10 Did not approve and be* Saint Blasphemers and Debauche*s or Felo's de se.
But, so did he. ^b: and p. 7.
11 Did not tea^h, that it were a good deed, to cut the throats of all orthodox
Ministers. But, so did he, (under the name of all the old Ministers. p. 8.
12 Were not incompassionate and ^ruel. But, so was he, as appears manifoldly.
p. 9. etc.
13 Preached not against what they practiced. But, so did he, ib.
(decrying Tithes, an gathering them.) 14 Were not unspeak^ble oppressors,
faithless dealers. But, so was he. p. 10, 11, 1^*
15 Were not obscene, nor used spureous speeches (especially in Sermons.) But,
so was he, as often appears. p. 7, ^*

But, I restrain my self from the farther pursuit of this matter, and propose
it to the Reader, whether the condemnation of our Church Government and Service
by such a person, be not a very vocal strong advocate for it, according to that
of Tertullian concerning Nero Sed ^ali dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam
gloriamur. Qui enim scit illum, intelligere potest, non nisi aliquid bonum
grande a Nerone damnatum. Apol. adv. Gentes c. 5. mihi p. 670.
, Whom, says he, who so knows, may understand that it was some grand Good,
that was condemned by Nero.

In the next place, after a Cast of his Billings-gate or Horse-Rhetorick, which
we leave as fit for a person of such a character (as you have heard:) he will
propose some Objections (against himself) for Bishops, which he will have not
to be many, and any of them, easily, answered. These are (...) uttered (...):
but we may say;

Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu? Let Us behold! Enter, therefore,
his first Objection.

Obj: 1. Were there not Bishops in the days of the Apostles? Was not Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete?

To this he Answers, There is no Scripture, that proves either of them to be
Bishops at all, much less of those places.

To this we Answer, 1. That we have spoke to this matter before. 2. We, now,
show out of (the Scriptures) the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, that they
were, indeed, Bishops, 1 Because they are commanded and directed, to ordain
Presbyters by a wary and suspense Imposition of hands 1 Timothy: 5. 22. Tit: 1. 5.
, which S. Hierome Except^ ordinatione, Ep: 85. ad Evagr. (...), Ch^ysost: Hom.
in 1 Tom.
acknowledges, to belong only to Bishops; 2 to restrain 1 Timothy 1. 3.
heterodox Teachers; 3 to direct and promote public, prayers ib: 2. 1.
; to honor above others the Elders that rule well, especially them that labor
in the word and doctrine ib: 5. 17*
; against such as are accused, to determine nothing lightly, save under two or
three competent witnesses ib: v. 20. 3 John 9, 10. (if Diotrephes were a
Presbyter)
; 6 to rebuke Tit. 1. 5.
the obstinate, publicly, in all men's fights, for the terror of others,
which cannot agree to one Presbyter over another, by reason of confusion; 7 to
correct or authoritatively redress such things as are, at any time, wanting,
or out of order k; 8 to deliver or commit such things, as ^ ib. v. 10.
they had received from S. Paul, to faithful men, able to teach others 2 Timothy
2. ^.
; 9 to give rules concerning Christian Discipline Tit. 3. 10*
. Now, these things being, for the most part, to be exercised on Presbyters in
the strict sense, are to be exercised by none, but Bishops. 2. Peter du Moulin
the Son tells us, that his learned Father, in his Bible full of Marginal Notes,
written with his own hand, expounds (one of the above cited Texts) Tit: 1. 5.
For this cause left I thee, etc. thus: It must needs be that some prelacie
(...).
was given to Titus over the rest of his Symmistae, and the Right of
Ordination: As also, what is said to Timothy, Receive not an accusation
against an Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 19. does seem to give to Timothy a Tribunal over
Ministers. Add, also, that of the Angel of Ephesus Rev. 2. 1. where is but one
Angel mentioned, though there were many Priests in the City, (says he.)
: Nor if Superiority were an evil thing, would authority have been given to
the Apostles over the rest. These (says the Son) are his private and serious
thoughts upon that point, wherein he sought no man's satisfaction, but his own.
See a Letter of a French Protestant about the Covenant. p. 19, 20.


This Answer I, thus, draw-up into Argument:

They who are commanded, to censure, rebuke See Epiphanius Haer. 75.
, and correct, with all authority, not to permit themselves to be despised, to
stop the mouths of vain and unruly talkers, to repress foolish questions and
vain bablings, to excommunicate the refractarie and obstinate, to try and prov^
those who desire the Office of a Bishop, and accordingly as they are found
worthy o^ otherwise, to admit, or refuse them, etc. have the Power of
Jurisdiction Spiritual, i. e. ate Bishops (in appropriate sense.)

But, Timothy and Titus are commanded, to do these severals, 1 Timothy: 4. 11, 12.
3. 10. 5. 17, 19, 20. 6. 17. Tit. 1. 11, 13. 3. 10.

Therefore, Timothy, etc* have Power of Jurisdiction spiritual, and,
consequently, are Bishops.

His second Obj: runs, thus: What? Does not Paul, in ^is Subscriptions, direct
his Epistle, to them as such, 2 Timothy: 4. end. Tit: 3. end? To which he Answers,
1 that the Subscriptions at the end of all S. Paul's Epistles seem, to be added
by men since; and were not written by Paul.

Answ: 1. For those Epistolarie Post-scripts, (though we should lay no great
weight on them, yet) they are to be held of great Antiquity, and, therefore,
such, as, in question of Fact, where there appears no strong evidence, to
weaken their belief (as we shall see anon, that there appears none) ought not
to be, lighty, rejected See his Majesty's second Paper to the Ministers
Newport, p. 288.
. 2. Though they should not convince, as Canonical, yet they show the sense of
the Church of former times, as in way of History, as do the four Titles of the
Gospels, which once dispunged, who would be able, to distinguish S. Matthew's
from S. Mark's, or S. John's from S. Luke's Gospel? 3. As the Greek Church's
retaining of SS. James's, Basil's, Chrysostom's Liturgies, (though those
Pieces are, perhaps, (...), and not, purelie, the same, as those Authors (truly
those) left them,) is yet an Argument of great authority to any prudent man,
that there were such things, as Liturgies of their penning: So, in that there
were such Subscriptions, of ancient times affix't to these Epistles, wherein
Timothy and Titus are declared Bishops, it is an indication, that the Church of
those times so reputed them, i. e. Bishops. 4. If those Post-fixes have no
reverence payable to them, but are to be slighted (which yet, by no means, they
are, How ancient the subscriptions of the Apostolical Epistles are, though it
is not certain among the learned if they bear not the same date with the
Epistles themselves, (the contrary whereof neither is nor can be demonstrated)
yet they are undoubtedly very ancient, and of great authority, Dr Featley's
Sacra Nemests, 8. p. 50.
) we have evidences enough, otherwise, to prove the right of enstyling Timothy
and Titus Bishops in Ecclesiastical sense. See, above.

A Second Argument, in the guise of an Answer, to prove these Subscriptions
addititious, is, because (says he) it is evident, that some of them are
contradictorie to the very Epistles, whereto they are affixed. But, I Answer,
this must not be said only, but showed, otherwise, we put it off (justly) with
a, voluntary dictum!

But, he will not only say, that these Post-scripts seem to be of after-addition,
but he will prove it, 1. From Timothy* and Titus being Evangelists, and, so, not
tied to one Church, but accompanying the Apostles from Country to Country:
(this is the sum of his first Argument) Answ: 1. I need not say, that they were
not Evangelists, the Scripture (according to some The Scripture does not any
where affirm of Titus, nor clearly prove of Timothy, that they were (by
peculiar Office) Evangelists, third Paper to the Ministers at Newport, p. 347.
,) no where implying any such thing of Titus, nor (will some say) does that of
Paul to Timothy, 2 Ep. 4. 5. -- do the work of an Evangelist, prove him, to
have been an Evangelist only, more than that which immediately follows
[fulfil thy (...),] which we translate [Ministerie,] proves him, to be only a
Deacon. 2. That Timothy and Titus acted as Evangelists, is not only denied,
but (in some men's judgments) clearlie refuted by Scultetus, Gerhard, and
others; yea, even with scorn rejected by Gillespee and Rutherford, etc. rigid
Presbyterians. 3. That Timothy and Titus were Bishops, is confirmed, not only
by the consentient testimony of all Antiquity (even Jerome himself having
recorded it, that they were Bishops, and, that, of S. Paul's Ordination;) and
acknowledged by very many late Divines: and, a Catalogue of 27. Bishops of
Ephesus lineally descending from Timothy, out of good Records is vouched by Dr
Reynolds against Heart, and by other Writers King's 3d Paper, p 266, 267. and
His 3d Paper, p. 345, etc. (...), says the Council of Chalced on, at the time
of their Session, Act: IId.
. 4. Yet, we say, they might be Evangelists, and Bishops, too, at the same
time; those that were sent out with Power of Preaching, might have other
superior Powers also, of ordaining Bishops, etc. when the Apostle, that sent
them, thought fit, to allow it, as of Mark it is said, that being sent into
Egypt by S. Peter, he constituted Annianus Bishop of Alexandria See Doctor
Hammond in N. Test: mihi p. 659.
. 5. That they were removed from Ephesus and Crete to other places, has but
very weak Proofs. Some that have, exactly, out of Scripture, compared the times
and orders of the several Journies and Stations of S. Paul and Timothy, have
demonstrated the contrary, concerning that particular. 6. Neither does their
motion from Church to Church hinder, but that they might, afterward, be fixed
at Ephesus and in Crete. Neither, again, does their being Bishops at Ephesus,
and Crete, let but that they might, afterward, for propagation of the Gospel,
be, by the Apostles Appointment, often employed, elsewhere; and, therefore,
though it appear from 2 Timothy 4. 9. and Tit: 3. 12. that they were called away
from these places, yet that does no more conclude, that they were not Bishops
thereof, or that they might as well be called Bishops of other Churches; than
it might have been concluded from the attendance of the Divines of the
Parliament's Westminster-Assemblie, that they were not Parsons or Vicars of
their several Parishes. See His Majesty's 2d Paper, p. 267. and 3d Paper p 347.
and 349 and 350.


His second Argument (extracted into this sum) is drawn from Ephesus's being
ONE CHURCH in ONE CITY, wherein were diverse Bishops, and if so, how could
Timothy be a single Bishop, there? and if those Bishops were chosen and
ordained in Ephesus, while Timothy was attending Paul, how could he be the
first Bishop there, as the Subscription calls him? Answ: 1. There were many
Bishops in, not of Ephesus, at the time mentioned See, above.
, Act: 20. 17. 2. Timothy might very well be a single Bishop, there, over many
single Presbyters, (if any such there were, belonging to the Church of that
City, and not rather Deacons, as was showed, above.) 3. And, so, it is obvious,
to conceive, how the Postscript of the Epistle is verified, viz: Timothy was
the first Bishop of Ephesus.

His third Arg. (sum'd up) is, thus, drawn from Titus being Archbishop of
Crete, if the Subscription be true, in regard 1 it had a hundred Cities (...).
in it; and, 2 he in them ordained Bishops. And, why should Titus be Bishop of
so many Cities, and Timothy his equal (at least,) but of one City or Church,
as Ephesus was? Answ: 1. Titus was, certainly, Archbishop or Metropolitan of
Crete. 2. Crete had at some times more, at other times fewer, Cities; but, at
the time of writing this Epistle, it had C. Cities. 3. And yet, no such
disparitie in Power or Regencie, 'twixt Timothy and Titus; for Timothy, also,
was Metropolitan. They are S. Chrysostom's words Hom: XV. in 1 Timothy: 5. 15.
, (...), etc. it is manifest, that Timothy was entrusted with more Churches
than one, even with a whole Nation, that of Asia, and therefore S. Paul
discourses to him of Elders or Bishops; and, by Eusebius he is styled (...),
Eccl, Hist. l. 2. c. (...).
Bishop of the Province about Ephesus. So that, 4. a Synod of Bishops (as he
closes, scoffinglie) need not strain much, to resolve this (doughtie) dout or
knot.

A Third Object: he brings, is thus framed by him: But, in the Epistle directed
to the Seven Churches of Asia, there is mention only of one Angel. To this he
returns 4. things: First, that in Ephesus (one of the Seven) there were diverse
Bishops. Answ: The very contrary has been clearly shown. He adds, that, Rev.
2. 24.
in the Church of Thyatira the H. Ghost writes to you and the rest, etc. which
were more than one. Answ: The reading in the ancient Manuscripts (particularly,
the King's, Tecla's manuscript) leave out the [(...),] and read, thus; (...),
but to you I say the rest, which are in Thyatira] And, this takes away all
force from the Objection; for, the former part of the Epistle belonging to the
Angel, who permitted Jezabel, and to them that committed fornication with her,
the the [But] in the front, seperates the (...), you the rest from the Angel;
and those other, formerly spoken to; and, therefore the (...), you] cannot,
possibly, be the Angel, wherein all the strenth of the Obj: consists. 2. The
ordinary reading has been, irrefragably, proved by the most eminent Dr
Hammond See his Vindication against the London. Ministers Jus divinum 8.
throughout.
, not to confirm the pretensions of the Anti-Episcoparians, whose words for
brevitye's sake I recite not. But, in stead of them, take the late King's: But,
following, says His Majesty, the ordinary Copies, the difference is not
great; such manner of Apostrophe's, by changing the number, or turning the
speech to another person, being very usual, both in Prophetic Writings, such
as this book of Revelation is, and in Epistles of this nature writ to one, but
with reference to many others, therein concerned. Beza expounds it, (...), to
you (that is, the Angel as President, and his Colleagues the other Presbyters)
and to the rest, that is, to the whole Flock or People; which manner of
speaking might be illustrated, by the like forms of speech, to be used in a
Letter written to a Corporation, wherein the Major and Aldermen especially, but
the whole Town generally, were concerned, but directed to the Major alone, etc.

Secondly, he returns, that one Angel is commonly taken for diverse; she^ing,
that all the Officers in the Congregation were entire and one. Answ: 1. This
is, perfectly, (...), a piteous begging of the Question (which yet, the
London-Provincialists were guilty of, before this our Retailer of their
(sleazy) wares,) which must not See the same excellent Doctor, ib.. 10. p. 48.
be had for the asking. 2. Though Church be a collective body, and so, one
Church is known, to consist of many men; yet Angel is not of that nature, one
Angel signifies neither many men, nor many Angels,

Thirdly he returns, that if there were but one in those Churches, then the
order in those, and other Churches, would not be the same, as was showed
before, Phil. 1. 1. Act: 14. 23. Answ: The very same! Bishops there, and
Bishops here (solitary Governors.)

Fourthly he returns, that suppose there was but one, etc. and their power did
not extend farther (as, says he, there is no ground, to believe, it did) then
they were not Diocesans. Answ: They were, they were! for, though but one Bishop
of one City, yet the Territory adjoining was under his inspection; now, the
City and (...).
Adjacence, the Territory or Region lying thereto, makes the Diocese, as might
be, abundantly, showed, but for retrenching of tediousness.

A Fourth and last Obj: by him produced as against himself, is: The Government
of Bishops is ancient, of fifteen hundred years standing; therefore, lawful. To
which he answers, The Devil and Antichrist may make that plea, as well. Answ:
This (Antiquity) is a good presumption, that this Government is lawful,
according to that of the learned Father Tertullian: Illud verum quod primum,
adulterinum quod posterius. 2. What is so ancient, as to be devolvable upon
Apostolical Institution, Is caryingly argued-for from the Antiquity of it. 3.
This is not our only (of six hundred Arguments) for Episcopacie, That it is
ancient; but, we assert it from S. Scripture, undoubted By all that we have
said to assert the rights of Presbytery, we do not intend to invalid the
ancient and Apostolical institution of Episcopal preeminence: But, we believe
that wheresoever it is established conformably to the ancient Canons, it must
be carefully preserved, and wheresoever by some heat of contention, or
otherwise it has been put down, it ought reverently to be restored; was
Blondel's conclusion of his Apologia, etc.
Catholic Tradition, consentient Testimony of the Ancient Church; Topics
from which we draw such Proofs and Arguments, as that all the Smects and Sects
in the World will, never, be able to bear up against, with any even color, for
their not coming-in and submitting to a truth, so evident, so attested. 4. Do
not even the Novellists themselves, Presbyterians, Independants, etc. plead
antiquity and primoevitie for their several new-fangle aerie Models? It Is not
worth the while, to speak to his ugly Instances of the Devil and Antichrist,
which may as well be applied to Moses's Writings, the ever-blessed Gospel, etc.
when we praise them for Antiquity. 6. Old things hear well in Scriptures, the
Old paths, the Ancient of days. Aetas per sevenerabilts, Calvin. Senectus est
vestigium aeternitatis.


What remains of the Pamphlet is soon dispatched, by these few following
Strictures.

If we read Church-Historie, we shall, readily, discern, how no other
Government of the Church had any footing in any place, but Episcopacie, till
about an hundred years ago, when Mundus senes^en^ patitur phantasias.

We have, sufficiently, proved the no-difference 'twixt the Bishops of the
three first Centenaries, and Ours, in Essentials, in Accessionals or other
Extrinsecals there may be some difference, and, also, in the Manners (of some.)

We say, also, the Controversy is about the Power of Bishops (which we have
proved, to belong to single persons, in a standing Majoritie or Prelacie;) and,
the very Name of Bishop has been shown (though, here, some strive not,) to
belong, ever, and only, to them.

We acknowledge the Word of God a perfect Rule, as to all supernatural Truths:
But, as to matters of external Regimen or Polity, it is not, always, so full
or clear, (for the reason assigned, somewhere, above,) as not to need some
elucidation from the Monuments of the Church.

We will, joyfullie, bring our Episcopal Metal (as he calls it) to this
Touchstone (God's H. Word) and are sure, it will hold there, when all other
Forms, Plats or Models of Church-Regimen will be found adulterate Coin. If
this will make him honor it is gray-hairs, and receive and reverence it as the
right Heir, we are ascertained, it will not want its Honor, Reception,
Reverence, Inheritance.

Council: Nic: I. Can. VI. (...). S. Aug. Non est a Consuetudine recedendum,
nisi rationi adversetur.

Cum Consuetudini Veritas suffragatur, nihil opertet firmius retinieri.

Habet ut in aetatibus authoritatem Senectus, sic in exemplis Antiquitas.

Out of Mr G. Herbert 's Church Porch, p. 102. The British Church.
I Joy, dear Mother, when I view
Thy perfect lineaments, and hue,
Both sweet and bright.
Beauty in thee takes up her place,
And dates her Letters from thy face,
When she does write.
A fine aspect in fit array,
Neither too mean, nor yet too gay,
Shows who is best.
Outlandish looks may not compare:
For all they either painted are,
Or else undrest.
She on the hills, who wantonly
Allureth all in hopes to be
By her preferred,
Has kissed so long her painted shrines,
That even her face by kissing shines,
For her reward.
She in the valley is so shie
Of dressing, that her hair does lie about her ears:
While she avoids her neighbors pride,
She wholly goes on the other side,
And nothing wears.
But, dearest Mother, (what those miss)
The mean thy praise and glory is,
And long may be.
Blessed be God, whose love it was
To double-moat thee with his grace,
And none but thee.
THE END.
ERRATA.
OF: Ded. p. 1. l. 16. r. (...). Pref: p. 12. l. 4. r. Gualter. ib. p. 13. l.
20. r. deletery. Book, p. 6. l. 33. r. Ceremonial. p. 7. marg l. 6. r. v. g.
ib. marg. l. ult. r. Womock's. p. 9. ult: marg: r. Commandments. p. 11. l. 28.
r. flourishing. p. 15. tit: r. than one. p. 17. marg: l. 5. add, for. p* 19.
tit. add, a. p. 20. marg. l. 27. r. some. p. 21. l. 2. r. doubt, p. 23. l. pen.
dele). p. 25. tit. r. Leiturgies. p. 27. l. 6. marg: r (...). p. 29. tit: for,
r. by. p, 30. l. 25. r. African. p. 35. l. to. r. evirtuated. ib. l. ult. r.
consequents. p. 36. l. 22. r. unlimi^ed* ib. marg: l. 3. r. credim us. p. 37.
l. 17. r. in. p. 40. l. 3. r. Ceremonies. ib. l. 24. r. it. Semblably, p. 42.
l. 2. r. illegitimacy. ib. l. 7. r. (...). p. 43. l. 2. p. 46. l. 2^: dele the.
p. 48. marg. l. 10. add, and. p. 51. marg. l. 10. add, the. p. 54. marg. l. 5.
r. (...) -- p. 55. marg. l. 6. r. salutis. p. 56. l. 1. 1, 83. p. 66. l. 13. r.
sacrifice. p. 69. l. 9. after censure, add, will smite the Apostles, who use
Texts of the O. Test. p. 70. l. 7. r. (...). ib. l. 23 r. good. p. 93. l. 33.
r. add, in p. 94. l. 8. r. crimes. ib. l. 13. r. commode, l. 14. r.
interpretari, ib r. morose. ib. l. 16. r. modestia. ib. l. 17. r. anim: ib. l.
29. r. consent -- p. 170 l. 17. r. sophistical. p. 102. marg. l. 3. r. illos.
p. 106. l. 14. r. (...). p. 116. l. 1. r. not, 2. ib. l. 7. marg r. sine. p.
117. l. 7. add, our. p. 118. l. 3. or, r. no. p. ^^9. l. 12 r. (...). p. 119.
l. 37. marg. r. descendit. ib. l. 38. r. (...). ib. r. (...). p 72. l. 5. r.
(...). p. 73. l. 15 r. r. faulty. p. 74. l. 18. r. Theodotion. p. 76. l. 31.
marg. r. Tuisco. p. 78. l. 16. r. Years] p. 79. l. ^2. p. 79. l. 33. marg. r.
3^. p. 81. l. 30 r. Ecclesiae. p. 82. l. 1. r. whole p. 84. l. 16. r. to be.
ib. l. 36. marg. r. mendacium. p. 85. l. 8. marg. r. Apocalypsis. p. 90. tit.
r. Athanasius. p. 9^. l. 9. r. may. p. 92. l. 2. r. loud. p. 123. l. 14. r.
others. p. 124. l. 33. r. Synagogue: p. 125. marg. l. 33. r. orum. p. 1^8. l.
5. r. the. p. 129. marg. l. pen. r. infestations. p. 131. l. 3. r. (...). p.
132. l. 7. after, bond, r. (...). ib. marg. the first note must be transferred
to p. 146. l. 4. p. 133. l. 20. r. Lucius. p. 134. l. 1. r. married. p. 135. l.
18. dele c. p. 136. tit. r. bearing. p. 137. l. 22. r. Leiturgie. ib. l. 33 r.
(...). p. 140. l. 8. r. imitation. ib. r. Papists p. 145. l. 6. and ib. l. 19.
and p. 146. l. 6. r. penance. p. 146. l. 13. after, Amen, r. (p. 155. l. ult.
r. doctrine, p. 156: marg. l. 4. add, p. 157. l. 28. r. and. p. 161. l. 12.
marg. r. praedo. ib. l. pen.* r. a. p. 145. l. 14. r. (...). 14^. marg. l. 7.
r. ambitio. ib. l. 10. r. Hungarian. p. 169. l. 3. r. malign. There are other
lesser faults, as in comma's and otherwise, which I must remit to the candor
of the Reader.

ADDENDA.
Add to p. 43. l. 19. Orat-Dominicam esse formulam precationis quoque-praeter
quam verba Christi ejus commendationem, sic igitur orate, Mat. 6. 9. and quando
oratis, dicite, Luke 11. 3. ipsa etiam formula, qua proposita, arguit: nam
formulam orationiis principium ejus, and finis totusque adeo contextus
significas, Hoornbeck, Sum. Controv. de Brownist. p. 681.

Add to p. 62. bottom. Hence those desperate Counsils, sit still and do
nothing, doing undoes you, Blake of the Covenant, p. 66.

Add to p. 80. It Is Bishop Devenant's observation, that the Fathers call Gospel
Ministers, Priests.

Add to p. 75. l. 31. The members of the Synod were not elected nor nominated
by the body of the Clergy, neither had they any decisice, but only consultive
and deliberative suffrages, Sacra Nemi^^s, p. 5.

Add to p. 128. l. 14. about giving names to the child: It appears the Priest
was wont before at the Church-door to ask the name of the parents. Slatyer's
Cat. p. 18.


