THE Shepherds Calendar: Newly Augmented and Corrected.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson, And are to be sold by Francis Grove near
the Sarazens-head on Snow-Hill, without Newgate. MDCLVI.



Here begins the Prologue.
THis Book (gentle Reader) was first corruptly printed in France, and after
that at the cost and charges of Richard Pinson newly translated and reprinted,
although not so faithfully as the Original Copy required. Therefore it is once
again over-seen and perused, that the same may be at length correspondent to
the Authors mind, and very profitable for the Reader, because this Book does
teach many things, that we be bound to learn and know on pain of everlasting
death, as the Laws of God shows us how we may know to keep his Commandments,
and to know the remedies to with-stand deadly sin, there be many men and women
think themselves wise, and know and learn many things, but that they be bound
to learn and know that they know not.

As first, the Ten Commandments of God, and the Five Commandments of the
Church, That every Creature that purposes to be saved, should learn and know,
and have them as perfect as their Paternoster. You people, how will you
confess you, and if you break any of the Ten Commandments, and you know not
them? Truly there is but a few that know them; therefore ye that do not know
them, do your diligence to learn them; for ye be bound to learn them as well
as to learn your Paternoster. For how can you keep our Lords Commandments and
ye know them not? And ye be bound to break not one of them on pain of
Damnation, for and if thou breakest one thou breakest all. Offend the Law in
one point, and offend it in all; for if thou break one thou do not Gods
bidding, for he bids thee break none. And all that ye do in this World
here, if it be not of God, or in God, or for God, all is in vain; you should
not occupy your self in vain matters, but in reading of good Books, for vanity
engendereth vain thoughts, and destroys devotion in man. What need have we to
study on a thing that is naught? study on your Sin, and what Grace by God in
you is wrought. Also in this Book is many more matters, look in the Table
following.

The Table of the Calendar of Shepherds. This is the Table of this present
Book of the Shepherds Calendar, drawn out of French into English, with many
more godly editions than be Chaptered, newly put thereto.
FIrst the Prologue of the Author, that says that every man may live lxxiv.
years at the least, and they that die before that term, it is by evil
government, and by violence, or outrage of themselves in their youth. Cap.
primo The second Prologue of the great Master Shepherd, that proves true by
good argument all that the first Shepherd says. cap. 2. Also a Calendar with
the figures of every Saint that is hallowed in the year, in the which is the
figures, the hours, and the moments, and the new Moons. cap. 3. The Table of
the moveable feasts, with the compound manual. cap. 4. The Table to know and
understand every day what sign the Moon is in. cap. 5. Also in the figure of
the eclipse of the Sun and the Moon, the days, hours, and moments, cap. 6. The
Trees and branches of virtues and vices. cap. 7. The pains of hell, and how
they be ordained for every deadly sin, which is showed by figures. cap. 8. The
garden and field of all virtues, shewe^h a man how he should know whether he be
in the state of the grace of God or not. cap. 9. A noble declaration of the
seven principal petitions of the Pater noster, and also the Ave Maria: of the
three salutations of which the Angel Gabriell made the first, the second was
made by Saint Elizabeth, and the third makes our Mother holy Church. cap. 10.
Also the Credo in English of the 12. articles of our faith. cap. 11. Also the
ten Commandments in English, and the five commandments of the Church
Catholic. cap. 12. Also a figure of a man in a ship that shows the
unstablenesse of this transitory world. cap. 13. Also to teach a man to know
the field of virtues. cap. 14. Also a shepherds ballad, that shows his
frailty. cap. 15. Also a ballad of a woman shepherd, that profits greatly.
cap. 16. Also a ballad of death, that bids a man beware in time. cap. 17.
Also the ten commandments of the devil, and the reward that they shall have
that keep them. cap. 18. Another ballad that Saint John shows in the
apocalypse, of the black Horse that death rides upon. cap. 19. A Ballad how
Princes and States should govern them. Chapter 20. The trees and branches of
virtues and vices with the seven virtues against the seven deadly sins. c. 21.
Also a figure that shows how the twelve signs reign in man's body, and which
be good, and which be bad. c. 22. A picture of the phisnomy of man's body, and
shows in what parts the seven Planets has domination in man. c. 23. And
after the number of the Bones in Man's body follows a Picture that shows of
all the Veins in the body, and how to be let blood in them. c. 24. To know
whether a man be like to be sick or no, and to heal them that be sick. c. 25
And also here shows of the replexion of evil humors; and also for to cleanse
them. c. 26 Also how men should govern them in the four quarters of the year.
c. 27 Also how men should do when Physic does fail them for health of body and
soul, made in a Ballad Royal. c. 28 Also to show men what is good for the
brain, the eyes, the throat, the breast, the heart and stomach, properly
declared. c. 29 Also the contrary, to show what is evil for the brain, the
eyes, the throat, the breast, the heart and stomach, following by and by. And a
good drink for the pestilence. c. 30 Also of the four Elements, and the
similitude of the Earth, and how every Planet is one above another, and which
be masculine and feminine. c. 31 A crafty figure of the world, with the twelve
signs going about, an also of the movings of the Heavens with the Planets..32
Also of the equinoctial and the Zodiac which is in their heaven, which
contains the firmament and all under it with a picture of a Spire. c. 33 Of
Solstitium of Summer, Solstitium of Winter, with a figure of the Zodiac. c. 34
Of the rising and descending of the signs in the Horizon: c. 35 And also of the
division of the earth, and the regions, with a picture of the mobile. c. 36 Of
the variation that is in many habitations and regions of the earth. c. 37 Also
of the twelve stars fixed, that shows what shall happen unto them that are
born under them. c. 38 Also a figure of the twelve hours, as much in earth as in
heaven. c. 39 Also pictures of the seven Planets, to know in what hour they do
reign the day and night, and tells which be bad and which be good, and
shows how the children shall be disposed that shall be born under them. c. 40
Also pictures of the four complexions, to show and know the condition of each
complexion, and to know by a man's color what he is of any of all four, and how
he is disposed of nature. c. 41 Also here follows the judgment of the man's
face and body, as Aristotle wrote to King Alexander, the condition of man, and
the properties in the visages of man, but by the grace of God, good conditions,
grace, prayers, fastings, and blessings, these five withstand unkindly
condition. c. 42 Also a picture of the Pomyaw, that shows a man to know every
hour of the night what is a Clock, before midnight and after. c. 43 Also then
follow pictures of the impressions of the air, of the flying dragon and the
leaping kiddes, the way to S. James, and the seven stars, of the burning
Pillar, and of the fiery Spear, and of the flaming bushes or trees, that other
while fails, and the flying star, and the blazing stars, and of
five-tailed stars, and of the bearded star, with the Epitaph of a
Thunderbolt. c. 44 Also how the Moon changes twelve times in the year, so
likewise man's conditions change twelve times in the year. c. 45 Of the
commodities of the twelve months in the year, with the twelve ages of man. c.
46 Of an assault against a Snail. c. 47 Also follows the meditation of the
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that Shepherds and simple people ought to
have in hearing of their divine service. c. 48 The saying of the dead man. c.
49 How every man and woman ought to cease of their sins at the sounding of a
dreadful horn. c. 50 To know the fortunes and destinies of a man born under the
twelve signs, after Ptolomeus Prince of Astronomy. c. 51 Also follows the
twelve months, with the pictures of the twelve signs, that shows the fortunes
of men and women that are born under them, so that they know in what month and
day they were born. c. 52 Also here tells of the ten Christian Nations, that
is to say, to show the certain points that much Heathen people do believe of
their faith, but not in all, and therefore we begin first with our faith. c. 53
Also follows a few Proverbs. c. 54 The Authors Ballad. c. 55 Also good drink
for the Pestilence, which is not chaptered.
Thus ends the Table of the present Book.
The Shepherds Calendar.
The art science, and practice of the great Calendar of Shepherds, by example
right fertile, and profitable unto all manner of people, and easy to be
understood by man's wit, with diverse additions newly adjoined thereto, as
hereafter follows.

CHAP. I. A great question asked between the Shepherds touching the stars, and
an answer made to the same question.



THe Shepherds in a morning before the day being in the fields, beheld the
firmament that was fixed full of stars, one amongst the other said to his
fellow, I demand of thee how many stars be on the twelve parts of the Zodiac*
that is under one sign only. The other shepherd answered and said, let be
found a piece of land in a plain Country, as upon the plain of Salisbury, and
that the said piece of land be xl miles long, and xxiiii. miles broad. After
that, take great long nails with great broad heads, as the nails be that are
made for cart-wheeles, as many as shall suffice for the said piece of land, and
let the said nails be stricken unto the heads, in the said piece of land, four
fingers distant one from another, till that the piece of land be covered over
from one side to the other: I say that there be as many stars contained under
one sign only as there should be nails struck in the foresaid piece of land,
and there is as many under each of the other, and to the equipollent by the
other places of the firmament. The first Shepherd demanded how will thou prove
it? the second answered and said, that no man is bound nor tied to prove things
unpossible, and that it ought to suffice for shepherds touching this matter to
believe simply without overmuch inquiry, of that their predecessors shepherds
have said before.

Husbondrye


Thus ends the Astrology of shepherds, with the knowledge that they have of
the stars, planets, and movings of the skies.
Hereafter follows the saying of the shepherd to the Plowman.
How Plow men should do.
PIers go thou to plow* and take with thee thy wife,
Delve and draw, sow barley, wheat, and rye,
Of one make ten, this is perfect life,
As says Aristotle in his Philosophy.
Thou need not study to know Astrology
For if the weather be not to thy pleasance.
Thank ever God, of his divine ordinance.
Thus ends the Plowman.
The Author.
IN the end of this book
Who so list for to look,
Therein he shall see,
A ballad that says this.
He that many books reads,
Cunning shall he be,
Wisdom is soon caught,
In many leaves it is sought,
And some does it find.
But sloth that no book bought,
For reason takes no thought,
His thrift comes behind.
And many one does say,
That Clarks ne tell may,
What shall befall.
They that this do report,
Be of the peevish sort,
That little good can at all,
They know that drink does slake the thirst,
And when their eyes is full of dust,
Yet may they sit and shale peason,
For and Clerks show them books of cunning,
They bid them lay them up a sunneing,
Unto another season.
And if we speak of Astronomy,
They will say it is a great lie,
For they ken no other reason:
But all that knows good and better,
As gentlemen that loves sweet and sweeter,
Wisdom with them is not geason.
The Prologue of the Author that put this Book in writing.


AS here before time there was a Shepherd keeping Sheep in the Fields, which
was no Clerk, nor had no understanding of the literal sense, nor of no manner
of Scripture, nor Writing, but of his Natural wit and understanding said;
Howbeit though living and dying be all at the pleasure of Almighty GOD, yet man
may live by the course of Nature lxxii. years or more. This was his reason. And
he says, as much time as a man has to grow in beauty, length, breadth, and
strength, so much time has he to wax old and feeble to his end: But the term
to grow in beauty, height and strength, is xxxvi, year, and the term to wax
old, feeble, and weak, and turn to the earth ward, which is in all together
lxxii. year. that he ought to live by course of nature. And they that dye
before this time, often it is by violence and outrage done to their complexion
and nature. But they that live above this term, is by good regiment and
ensignments, after the which a man has governned himself. To this purpose of
living and dying, the said shepherd says, the thing that we desire most in
this world, is to live long, and the thing that we most fear, is to dye soon:
thus he travailed his understanding, and made great diligence to know and to do
things possible and requisite for to live long whole, and joyfully, which this
present compost and Calendar of Shepherds shows and teaches. Wherefore we
will show you of the bodies celestial, and of their nature and movings: and
this present book is named the compost, for it comprehends fully all the
compost, and more, for the days, hours, and moments, and the new Moons, and
the Eclipse of the Sun and the Moon, and the signs that the Moon is in every
day, and this book was made for them that be no Clarks: to bring them to great
understanding.

He said also that the desire to live long was in his soul, the which always
lasts, wherefore he would that his desire was accomplished after death as
before. He said, since the soul dies not, and in her is the desire to live long,
it should be an infallible pain, not to live after death, as before, for he that
lives not after his corporal death, shall not have that that he has desired,
that is to wit, to live long, and should abide in eternal pain if his desire
were not accomplished. So concluded the said Shepherd necessary things for him
and other to know, and do that which appertains to live after death, as
before. And truth it is, that he which lives but the life of this world only,
though he lived an hundred year, he lived not properly long: but he should
live long, that at the end of this present life should begin the life eternal
that is to say, the life everlasting in heaven. So a man ought to perform his
life in this world corporally, that he may live spiritually without end. For as
he said, one shall live everlasting without dying, and when he has the
perdurable life, he shall be perfect. And also by this point, and none
otherwise, shall be accomplished the desire of long living in this world. The
foresaid Shepherd also knowledged, that the life of this world was soon past
and gone, wherefore this Shepherd thought that lxxii. years in this vale of
wretched misery is but a little and a small term of life to the everlasting,
the which never shall have ending. And therefore he says he that offers
himself here to live virtuously in this world, after this life he shall receive
the sweet life that is sure and lasts ever without end. For though a man
lived here an C. year and more, it is but a little term to the life to come.
Therefore says this shepherd, I will live soberly with these small temporal
goods that Jesus has lent me, and ever to exile the desire of worldly riches
and worldly worship. For they that labor for it, and have love to their goods,
and vain worships, often it parts man from the heavenly treasure. It shuts
man's heart, that God may not enter, and builds man a place of no rest in the
low land of darkness.

CHAP. II. Hereafter follows another Prologue of the Master Shepherd, that
shows and proves the Authors Prologue true, that is before rehearsed, and so
the shepherds dispute one with another, but this that follows, the Master
shepherd says to the other, of the division of this Calendar.


Here begins the Master Shepherd.
IT is to be understood, that there be in the year four quarters, that are
called Ver, Aestas, Autumnus, and Hyems* These de the four seasons of the year,
as Prime-time is the spring of the year, as February, March, and April, these
three months.

Then comes Summer, as May, June, and July: and these three months every
herb, grain, and tree is in his kind, and in his most strength and fairness,
even at the highest.

Then comes Autumn, as August, September, and October, then all these fruits
wax ripe, and be gathered and housed.

Then comes November, December, and January, and these three months be the
Winter, the time of little profit. We Shepherds say that the age of man is
lxxii. years, and that we liken but to one whole year, for evermore we take six
years to every month, as January, or February and so forth; for as the year
changes by the twelve months, into twelve sundry manners, so does a man change
himself twelve times in his life by twelve ages, and every age lasts six
year, if so be that he live to lxxii. for three times six makes eighteen, and
six times six makes xxxvi. And then is man at the best, and also at the
highest, and twelve times six makes lxxii. and that is the age of a man.

Thus must ye reckon for every month six year or else it may be understood by
the four quarters and seasons of the year: So man is divided into four parts,
as to youth, strength, wisdom, and age: He to be xviii. year young, xviii.
year strong, xviii. year in wisdom, and the fourth xviii year to go to the
full age of lxxii.

And now to show you how man changes xii. times, as the xii months do.
TAke the first six year of January, the which is for no virtue nor strength,
in that season nothing on the earth grows. So man after he is born, till he
be six year of age, is without wit, strength, or cunning, and may do nothing
that profits.

Then comes February, and then the days begin to wax in length, and the Sun
more hotter, then the fields begin to wax green: So the other six years till
he come to twelve, the child begins to grow bigger, and serve, and learn
such as is taught him.

Then comes March, in the which the laborer sows the earth, and planteth
trees, and edifieth houses: the child in these six years waxes big to learn
doctrine and science, and to be fair and honest, for then he is xviii years of
age.

Then comes April, that the earth and the trees are covered in green and
flowers, and in every part goods increase abundantly: then comes the child to
gather the sweet flowers of hardiness, but then beware that the cold winds and
storms of vices beat not down the flowers of good manners, that he should
bring man to honor, for then he is xxiiii. year old.

Then comes May, that is both fair and pleasant, for then birds sing in woods
and Forests night and day, the Sun shines hot: and as then is man most
joyful and pleasant, and of livelier strength, and seeks plays, sports, and
lusty pastime, for then he is full xxx years.

Then comes June, and then is the sun highest in his meridional, he may
ascend no higher in his station, his glimering golden beams ripe^s the corn;
and when a man is xxxvi. year, he may ascend no more, for then has nature
given him beauty and strength at the full, and ripeneth the seeds of perfect
understanding.

Then comes July, that our fruits been set a sunning, and our corn a
hardening, but then the Sun begins a little for to descend downward; so man
then goes from youth toward age, and begins to acquaint him with sadness,
for then he is xlii. year.

After that then comes August, then we gather in our corn, and also the
fruits of the earth; and then does man his diligence to gather for to find
himself withal, in the time that he may neither get nor win, and then after
that vi. years, is he xlviii. year old.

Then comes September, that wines be made, and the fruits of trees be
gathered. And then therewithal he does freshly begin to garnish his house
and make provision of needful things for to live in winter, which draws very
near and then is man in his most joyful and courageous estate, prosperous in
wisdom, purposing to gather, and keep as much as should be sufficient for him
in his old age, when he may gather no more, and these six years makes him live.
years.

And then comes October, that all is into the foresaid house gathered but
corn, and also other manner fruits; And also the labourer sows new seeds in
the earth, for the year to come. And then he that sows naught shall naught
gather. And then in these other six years, a man shall take himself unto God
for to do penance and good works, and then the benefits the year after his
death he may gather, and have spiritual profit, and then is man full in the
term lx. year.

Then comes November, that the days are very short, and the sun in manner
gives little heat, and the trees lose their leaves. The fields that were green
look hory and gray. When all manner of herbs be hid in the ground, and then
appears no flowers: And then winter is come that a man has understanding of
age, and has lost his kindly heat and strength: His teeth begin to rot, and
also to chatter, and then has he no more hope of long life, but desires to
come to the life everlasting, and these six for this month makes him lx. and
six years.

Then comes December, full of cold, with frost and snow, with great winds and
stormy weather, that a man may not labor nor naught do: the sun is then at the
lowest that it may desce^d, then the trees and the earth is hid in snow, then
is it good to hold them nigh the fire, and to spend the goods that they
gathered in summer: For then begins man's hair to wax white and gray, and his
body crooked and feeble, and then he loses the perfect understa^ding, and that
six years makes him full lxxii. year, and if he live any more, it is by his
good guiding and dieting in his youth. Howbeit, it is possible that a man may
live till he be an hundred years of age, but there are but few that come
thereto.

Wherefore I Shepherd said moreover, that of living or dying the heavenly
bodies may stir a man both to good and evil without doubt of a surety: but
yet may a man withstand it by his own free will, to do what he will himself
good or bad evermore. Above the which inclination is the might and will of God,
that longs the life of man by his goodness, or to take it short by his
justice.

Wherefore we will show you of the bodies celestial, and of the nature and
movings: and this present book is named the Compost, for it comprehends fully
all the compost and more, for the days* hours, and moments, and the new Moons,
and the eclipse of the Sun and Moon, and of the sign that the Moon is in every
day, and this book was made for them that are no Clerks, to bring them to great
understanding.

And this Calender is divided into five parts.

The first, of our signs of the compost and the Calendar.

The second is, the tree of vices with the pains of hell.

The third is, the way of health of man: the tree of virtues.

The fourth is physic and governance of health.

The fifth is, Astrology and physnomy, for to understand many deceivings, and
which they be by likelihood, the which by nature are inclined and can do them,
as you shall read ere you come to the end.

For to have the Shepherds understanding of their Calendar, ye should
understand that the year is the measure of the time that the sun passes the
twelve signs, returning to his first point, and is divided into the twelve
months.

As January, February, March, and so forth to December.

So the sun in these twelve months passes by twelve signs one time.

The days of his entering into the signs in the Calendar, and the days also when
he parts the year, as the xii. months into lii. weeks, three hundred sixty
and five days, and when bysext is, it is threescore and vi. one day, is xxiv.
hours, every hour lx minutes. After these divisions ye must understand for
every year three things.

The first speaks of the Golden number.

The second of the letter dominicall

And the third is the letter tabular, in the which lies all the chief
knowledge of this Calendar, for the which letter and number to understand all
that they would, whether it be past or to come, ye shall put three figures
after the Calendar, of the which the first shall show the value and declaration
of the two other, and it is to be underst^^d that in four years, there is one
Bys^xt, the which has one day more than the other, and also has two letters
dominicals signed in one of the foresaid figures, and changes the latter day
of S. Matthew, the which is vigill, and is put with the day upon one letter by
himself.

Also the letters Ferials of this Calendar, be to be understood as they of the
other kalenders, before the which are the numbers, and the other three after
the letters ferials. First, for because the letters descends low, is the
golden number above the day of the new Moon. And the which to be the hour and
moments of the said month: which when they are in service before noon of the
day above there. And when they are black service for afternoon of the same day
in the places of the number, betokens that number where it is. The natural
day is to be understood from midnight to midnight xxiv hours, and shall serve
the said numbers for the letters Ferials, xix. year complete from the year that
this Calendar was made one thousand four hundred fourscore and seventeen, unto
the year one thousand five hundred and sixteen. In the which year shall begin
all to serve this golden number, and the other numbers after the letters
ferials, all in the manner as they be before for the other xix years.

And all the remnant of the compost, and of the calendar is perpetual for the
golden number, so shall they be xxxviii. years, of the which years, one
thousand four hundred fourscore and seventeen is the first. The feasts of the
calendar are in their days, of the which the solennall are in red and storied
in the unity, nigh the which unity in the end of the bodies, above every day is
one letter of the A. b. c. for to understand in what signs the Moon is in that
day. And yet the said letters and the rubrish, for the which shall be one
figure before the Calendar, which shall show how they should understand it.
This year of this present Calendar, which began to have course the first day of
January.M.CCCC.xcvii. In the which reigns for the golden number sixteen. The
letter dominical A. The letter tabular f. and b. In the first lines, and their
figures nearest the golden number xvi. the year of this Calendar.

To know the letter Dominical by the verse underneath. Filius esto dei coelum
bonus accipe gratis. Or by these other verses here following.

Fructus alit Canos el gelica bellica danos.
El genitir bona dat Finis amara cadat.
Dat floris anni caler ejus gaudia busti,
Cambit edens griffo boabel dicens fiat agur.
For to set the month.

A, dam, de, ge, bat, er, go, ci, phos, a, dri, phos. For the golden number,
and the new Moon.

Ter, nus, un, din, nod, octo, sex, quinque, tred, ambo, ve, cem, duc, Septem.
quin, quar, tus, doc, io, ta, no, vem, vi, quar.

An ingenious practice or Compost of Shepherds. Newly and subtly shepherds
have found a short practice for to know the golden number, the letter
dominicall, and the tabular letters, as ensues, the which for subtilty is
difficil to be understood, if first it be not showed by such as understand it
well, but as to this it behooves not to tarry and travel, for cause of the
figures that ensigneth and shows how to find and know the said practice.

Finis canos agur ejus bona fructus,
Dicens anni and bellica griffo dant amara
El cambet gaudit dat alit fiet color
Genitrix danos boabel flores cadat gelica
Edens busti*
Four secrets of the Compost of Shepherds.

Mobilis alta dies C, currens aureus octo
Sexdeno cum D, non erit inferior,
B, Veneris sancta, sed quinque tred ambo Maria,
Nec erit in toto dicens similis simul octo.
The manner to know the festival days on the hand* and on what days they be.
WHo so will know on his hand when the holy days falls, take heed of the same
letters. A. b c. d e. f. g. The days of the week be vii. one for Sunday, and
for the other days vi. Put them in the joints of the left hand on iiii*
fingers, and with the right hand they ought to be marked for the more
certainty. A b c. on the back of the hand, and g. above, d e f. within the
hand, Then ye ought to know in what place every month should be* A little after
dam of g. b E. g. c. be on the month of the little finger. F. a. on the leach
finger. February and March on the learh finger together* April on g. May on b.
June on the middle finger above ^* July upon g. and August upon c. September
upon f. October on a. of the fourth finger; Then November above d. and December
above f. of the little finger. And thus the twelve months be set on the fingers.

After, bran, pen, cru, lucy, the Embre days be set truly.

In each of these two lines here under, be as many sillables as there be
festival days in the year, and every day ought to be set on the joints of the
left hand as is showed here in this present book.
January.
Cir, o, ia, nus, e, pi, lu, fe, la, nus, et, keu, fe, man, mar, an.
Pis, ca, fab, ag, vin, cen, ti, pau, lum, iul, ag, que; ba, tilde.
February.
Bre, pur, blas, et, a, ue, fe, bru, o, sco, la, sli, ca, va, lent.
Iul, con, um, ge, tur, cum, pe, tro, math, so, ci, e, tur.
March.
Mo, sed, mar, ci, us, bal, to, duth, kes, con, gre, go, ri, um, bo.
Pat, ed, ward, cuth, be, ne, ca, pe, ma, ri, am, ge, ni, tri, cem.
April.
Gil, gip, ric, et, am, bro, si, i, dat, a, pril, le, on, eu, fe, ti, bur, ci.
Post, al, phe, fe, sta, ge, or, mar, ci, que, vi, ta, lis.
May.
Phi, li, cruc, may, i, un, la, tin, nic, gor, de, ne, re, i, que,
Post, e, a, don, se, qui, tur, post, fall, phe, sest, ta, ger, ad, en, pe, que.
June.
Nic, mar, in, bo, ni, fa, med, co, lum, bar, ba, ci, ba, vi, ti.
Bo, mar, marg, ed, ward, si, mil, la, ba, el, io, le, on, pe, pau.
July.
Ser, ui, iul, mar, ti, ni, tho, mo, que, fra, be, dic, ti, suth, un, ken.
Ar, nulf, marg, prax, mag, ap, cris, ia, an, dor, sam, sun, ob, gre.
August.
Pe, steph, aug, gust, trans, do, ci, to, lau, ti, bur, ri, ip, on.
Sump, ta, sit, a, mag, ni, bar, tho, lo, ruff, ag, io, oon, fell, on, cut.
September.
E, gis, sep, cup, bert, ha, bet, not, gort, gone, pro, thy, que, curt.
Lam, ber, ti, quo, math, ma, mar, te, cle, fer, cip, da, con, mich, ier.
October.
Rem, le, o, fran, ci, fi, mar, tunc, dig, er, a, ni, a, ed.
Post, lu, cas, iu, in, de, to, ma, cris, pi, ni, si, no, nis, quin.
November.
Om, nis, tunc, sanc, ti, le, o, mar, ti, bri, ci, a, ni, a, ed.
Pre, te, cle, gri, ka, li, ni, a, que, sat, an.
December.
E, le, gi, bar, ba, ni, co, con, cep, et, lu, ce, i al ma.
O, sa, pi, en, que, tho, mas, pro, pe, not, steph, io, tho, me, sil.
How every month praises it self of some good property.
January.
I Make me to be called Janivere,
In my time is great storms of coldness,
For unto me no month of the year
May compare, if I advance me doubtless,
For in my time was (as clarks do express)
Circumcised the Lord omnipotent,
And adored by Kings of the Orient.
February.
I am February the most hardy,
In my season, the pure mother Virginal
Offered her son in the Temple truly,
Making to God a present special
Of Jesus Christ the King of kings all,
Between the arms of the Bishop Simeon,
To whom pray we to have his remission.
March.
March am I called in nobleness flourishing,
Which among months, am of great Nobless,
For in my time all the fruits do bud and spring,
To the service of man in great largess,
And Lent is in me, the time of holiness,
That every man ought to have repentance
Of his sins done by long continuance.
April.
Among all months I am justly April,
Fresh and wholesome unto each creature,
And in my time the dulcet drops distill,
Called Crystal, as Poets put in Scripture,
Causing all stones the longer to endure,
In my time was the resurrection
Of God and man, by divine election.
May.
Of all the months in the year I am King,
Fourishing in beauty excellently,
For in my time in virtue is all thing,
Fields and Meads spread most beautiously,
And birds sing with right sweet harmony,
Rejoicing lovers, with hot love all endued
With fragrant flowers all about renewed.

June.
Who of my season takes right good heed,
Ought not at all my name to ad^ul*
For in my time, for all the commons weed,
From sheep is shorn all the flesh and wool,
And had in merchandise by great ships full,
Over the sea; wherefore we ought to pray
Unto our Lord, and thank him night and day.
July.
If that my time were praised all aright,
Among all months* I am one of the chief,
For I enripe through my great force and might,
Fruits of the earth to man and beasts relief,
Feeding horses, kine, muttons, and strong beef,
With other properties that I could tell;
But I must pass, I may no longer dwell.
August.
I am named the hot month of August,
For redolent heat of Phoebus brightness,
In my time each man ought for to have lust
To labor in harvest, with great business,
To reap and sheef, eschuing idleness,
And rise early with great diligence,
Thanking our Lord of his great providence.
September.
Who can my name perfectly remember,
With the commodities of my season,
Ought of right to call me September,
Plenteous of goods by all manner of reason,
As wheat, rye, oats, beans, fitches and peason,
Of which fruit every man ought to have in store,
To live directly, and thank the Lord therefore.
October.
Among the other October I hight,
Friend unto Vintners naturally,
And in my time Bacchus is ready dight,
All manner of wine to press and clarify,
Of which is sacred, as we see daily,
The blessed body of Christ in sign of flesh and blood,
Which is our hope, refection and food.

November.
I November will not abide behind,
To show my kindly worthiness and ure,
For in my time the blastes of the wind
Abateth leaves, and sheddeth their verdure
Wherefore every prudent creature
Ought for to live right as they should die.
For all things in me takes end naturally.
December.
December every man does me call,
In whose time the mother inviolate
Delivered was in an old Ox stall,
Of Jesus Christ Gods own Son incarnate,
Wherefore I think me the most fortunate
Of all the other, to whom pray we then
That we may come unto his bliss, Amen.
The beginnings and ends of the four seasons of the year.
THe first Prime time that thus does begin,
From mid February unto mid May;
And from mid May, Summer is entered in,
To mid August; and then is Harvest day;
And from that time Winter enters always
On Saint Clements day, who so takes heed,
And mid February it fails indeed.

Thus ends the praise of the xii. months, with the beginnings and endings of
the four quarters And after follows the figure for to know in what sign the
Moon is every day.
This figure is for to know in what sign the moon is every day, and the
declaration is of the letters of the sign of the Calendar hereafter following.
i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x xi xii xiii xiv xv xvi xvii xviii xix Aries y n
c v l us s h z p e u m a s i and q f Aries z o d u m a s i and q f x n b t k us
r g Aries and p e x ^ b t k us r g y o c v l a s h Taurus us q f y o c v l a s
h z p d u m b s i Taurus a r g z p d u m b s i and q e x n c t k Gemini b s h
and q e x n c t k us r f y o d v l Gemini c s i us r f y o d v l a s g z p e u
m Cancer d t k a s g z p e u m b s h and q f x n Cancer e v l b s h and q f x n
c t i us r g y o Leo f u m c t i us r g y o d v k a s h z p Leo g x n d v k a s
h z p e u l b s i and q Leo h y o e u l b s i and q f x m c t k us r Virgo i z
p f x m c t k us r g y n d v l a s Virgo k and q g y n d v l a s h z o e u m b
s Libra l us r h z o e u m b s i and p f x n c t Libra m a s i and p f x n c t
k us q g y o d v Scorpio n b s k us q g y ^ d v l ^ r h z p e u Scorpio o c ^ l
a r h z p ^ u m ^ s i and q f x Sagittarius p d ^ m b f i and q f x n c s k us
r g y Sagittarius q ^ u n ^ ^ k us ^ g y ^ d t l a s h z Sagittarius r f x o d
t l a s h z p c v m b s i and Capricornus s g y p e v m b s i and q f u n c t k
us Capricornus s h z q f u n c t k us r g x o d v l a Aquarius t i and r g x o
d v l a s h y p e u m b Aquarius v k us s h y p e u m b s i z q f x n c Pisces
u l a s i z q f x n c t k and r g y o d Pisces x m b t k and r g y o d v l us s
h z p e Pisces y n c v l us s h z p e u m a s i and q f

By this figure here above, a man may know in what sign the moon is every day,
and the declaration is of the A.b.c. letters that are in the calendar at the
ends of the lines, and be named the letters of the signs, wherefore mark well
first the letter of the Calendar, on the day that ye would have, then look out
the said Letter in the figure here above, in the line descending under the
Golden number that runs.

Then look at the head of the lines, whereas as is written the names of the
signs, and it that beholds directly overthwart the figure to the said letters
is it that the Moon is in that day. And like as one golden number for a year,
so the said line under the golden number serves alone for the same year, as in
the year of his Calendar, we have xvi. for the golden number* the line under
xvi. serves all the said year, and when we have xvii. the line under xvii
shall serve to the year that xvii. is for the golden number, and so forth of
the other.

VT coelum signis praesurgens est duodenis,
Sic hominis corpus assimulatur eis,
Nam caput and facies, Aries sibi gaudet habere,
Gutturis and colli jus tibi Taure detur,
Brachia cum manibus Geminis sunt apta decenter,
Naturam Cancri pectoris aula gerit:
At Leo vult stomachum, renes sibi vendicat idem,
Sed intestinis Virgo praeesse petit,
Ambas Libra nates, ambas sibi vendicat hancas,
Scorpio vult anum, vultque pudenda sibi,
Inde Sagittarius is coxis vult dominari,
Amborum genuum vim Capricornus habet,
Regnat in Aquario cruri um vis apta decenter,
Piscibus and demum congrua planta pedum.
Saturnus niger. Jupiter viridis. Mars rubeus est. Sol croceus. Venus albus.
Mercurius and Luna varii sunt; dum quisquis regnat nascitur puer sic coloratus.

The declaration of the Latin here above.
THat is to say, that the twelve signs have dominion over the body of man,
divided by the parts, as the signs divide the firmament, and every sign
beholds and governs the parts of the body, so as it is said above, and
afterward shall be showed by figures, and is declared more plainly and
faithfully. Such like of Planets is said of their colors, but of their natures
and prop^^ties of the parts of the bodies* the which governs and beholds,
more at full shall you hear at length.

Also of the twelve months natures, March, April, and May, are very hot and
moist, that signifies blood and air; June, July and August, is Summer, and
signifies hot and dry, choler, manhood, fear* September, October and November
is harvest, and betokens cold and dry, and age, melancholy, and earth.
December, January, and February, is winter, and betokens cold and moist,
childhood, phlegm and water.



CAlled I am January the cold,
In Christmas season good fire I love,
Young Jesus that sometime Judas sold
In me was circumcised for man's behoove;
Three Kings sought the son of God above,
They kneeled down, and did him homage with love,
To God their Lord, that is man's own brother.
CHAP. III. Hereafter follows a Calendar with the figures of every Saint that
is hallowed in the year, in the which is the figures, the hours, the months,
and the new Moons.
January has 31 days, the Moon 30

In I^no claris, calidisque cibis potiaris.
Atque decens potus, post sercula sit tibi notus,
Laedit enim medo tunc potatus, ut been credo.
Balnea tutius intres, and venam scindere ^ures.
viii iv ix A viii iii ^vli Circumcisio Domini. xvi v vii b Octa. S. Stephen. c
xvi iv Octa S. Iohannis. v o ii d v vii lv Octava sanctorum Inno. e Octa sa.
Thome martyr. xi iv xii f xiii vi Epiphania Domini. g iii ix xlv Felicis and
Ianua. o i xxxvii A sa. Luciani. x ix iv b x viii xli sa. Iudi. xviii vi xiii c
xviii iv xvi Pauli prim* he^emite. d Lini Bishop. Sol in Aqua vii viii vi e vii
o xxxv Archadii martyr. f February. sa. Hillary. xv v xxxlv g x^ i viii Felici
presbyter. A iii viii ii S. Maur. abbot. iv x xxxi b sa. Marcelli Bishop. xii x
xli c xii o xvi Sulp* Bishop. x xi lii d sa* Pisce virgin. ix v xi e x xvii
Wolstan Bishop. f ix v li Fabian and Sebastian. xvii o xxxiii g xvii ii xlvii
sa. Agnetis. A iv xii Vincent martyr. vi vi xxxv b iv xii sa* Emerancian. c sa.
Timothy. ^iv ii xvii d Conversion of Paul. e xiv i xxxix Policarp Bishop. iii
ii xxi f iii vi xlv Julian Bishop. xi xi xx g Agneus secundo. xix vi xxxv A xi
vii xxxvi Valeri. bishop and mart. b xix vi xxvii Batild virg. c Saturnini and
Victoris.



February has 28. days, the Moon 27.

Nascitur occulta febris Februario multa,
Potibus and escis, si caute vivere velis,
Tunc cave frigorem, de pollice funde cruorem
Fuge mellis favum pectoris qui morbos curabit.
viii v xii d ^iii i xvi Bridgi. and Ignasii. xvi o vi e xvi viii xxxi
Purification of Mary. f S. Blasi Bishop. xxxvii g v ii xxv S. Gilbert Bishop. A
xiii x xxii S. Agathe virg. xiii iii lviii b Vedasti and Amandi. xi o iv c ii x
lv sa. Anguli virg. x vi lix d x vii xliv Paul Bishop. e sa. Apollony virg.
xviii ix ii f xvi iii iii Sol in P^ces g vii i live Eufrasie virg. vi i xvi A
sa. Eulaly. b v vii xxxv sa. Wolfrani. xv xi xv c sa. Valentine Bishop. iv xiii
lv d iv ii xxvi Faustin and Ioniti. xii o xxxiii e Julian virg. i vii xli f xli
o xxiii Policron bishop and martyr* g i viii xxix Simon bishop and martyr. ix
iv xvi A ix xv xxx Sabin and Julian mar. b xvii iv lix Mildred virg. xvii vi
xvi c Sanctorum lxix. d vi viii lviii Cathedra sancti Petri. vi i x e Policarp.
Locus biferti. f xiv vi i Matthew Apostle xiv iv xii g Invention of S. Paul. iii
i xiii A iii ix xlviii S Nestor mart. o xi b xi viii liii S, Augustine. c Oswald
bishop and con.

It is to be noted, that the golden numbers show the days, hours, and minutes
of the new Moons, the red numbers for the forenoon, and the black numbers for
the afternoon, on the same day that the numbers demonstrateth.



March has 31. days, the Moon 30.

Martius humores gignit, variosque dolores,
Sum cibum pure, cocturas si placet ure,
Balnea sunt sana, sed quae superflua vana:
Vena nec addenda, nec potio sit tribuenda.
vii viii xxxvi d xix iii iiii sa. David bishop. e viii o l sa. Cedde bishop. f
xv i xlvi Martini et Asteri. xvi vi x g sa. Adrian Mart. v x xlviii A v vii
xxxix Foce, Eusebii, Perpetue. b Victoris et Victorini. xiii xx c xiii o xii
Perpetue et Felic. ii ix xix d ii ix xlvi Depositio sancti Felicis. e
Quadraginta mart. x iiii xlviii f x v xx sa. Agapite virg. xviii o xli g xviii
ii xlvi Sol in Aries. Equinoct. A S. George bishop. vii vi xlv b viii v i
Theodore mart. c xv xv ii xii d iiii i xxxiv sa. Longin mart. iv i xlii e xii
xviii 33 Aprilis. Boniface bishop. xii ix xxxv f x 33 Patricii bishop. g
Edwardi regis. i v lii A ix v xxx Joseph. sponsi Mary. ix v vii b o liii sa.
Cuthbert. c xvii Benedict abbot. xvii xi xlv d viii iii Affrodici bishop. e vi
i Theodore presbyter. vi vi iiii f lvii Agapite mart. g xiiii Annunciatio
Dominica. iiii iiii vi A iii ix xlvii Castoris Martyris. ^ii iii xlviii b xlix
Resurrectio Domini^^ ^i^ v xxxvii c xi v Dorothe virg. ^ix vii xlix d xix xxxv
Quintin mart. e viii xlv sa. Quirine mart. vii o xv f o xl Adelme bishop.



April has 30. days, the Moon 29.

Hic probat in vere, vires Aprilis habere,
Cuncta nascuntur, pori nun caperiuntur,
In quo scalpescit, corpus sanguis quoque crescit
Ergo salvatur venterque cruor, minuatur.
g sa. Gildardi. ^^ A xvi vi xlvii Mary Egyptiace. b Richard Bish. o xx c v i
xliii Ambrose Bish. x li d xiii x lv sa. Martin* e Sixte Bishop. x lviii f ii
vi xlix Gereonis and Victoris. ii lix g ^ l xlii sa Ruffi. A sa. Augustini. iii
xliii b ^vii iii xi Decollatio Iohannis bap. c vi vii xix Felicis and Audaci.
xi xxxi d So^ in Tau. Cuthburg virg. ii li e Michael in monte. xi 34 f ^^ v x
May g ^^ vii xlvi Translatio Etheldred. vi xxii vi xlv Octava sancti Laurent.
iiii xxxvi b i i xlvi sa. Magni mart. c ^x i xxx Lodovici Bishop. vi xx d sa.
Agapite. e xv^i vi xxxix sa. Bernard. iii liiii f Octava assump. Mary. g vi vi
vii Vigilia. viii xxx A Lodovici Regis. xi xxxix b xliii ix xxxvi sa. Severini.
xviii xxxii c ii x xi Mark Evangelist. d Cleti Bishop and Confess. ii o e vi ii
xxx sa. Anastasti Bishop. ix o f xix xi li Sep. Vigilia. g Assumptio be^^e
Mary. iii lvi A vii ii xxii sa. Rochi.



May has 31. days, the Moon 30.

Maio secure laxiti sit tibi curae,
Scindatur vena, sed potio datur amaena,
Cum calidis rebus, sunt fercula seu speciebus,
Potibus abstructa sit salvia cum bened^cta.
viii iii lvi b viii Philip and Jacob. vi xi xiii c xvi iii xxxv sa. Anastasi
Bishop. v ix xli d xvii Inventio sancti crucis. e Festum corone spinee. xiiii
vi xxi f xiii vi xx sa. Godard. ii xvi g ii xxxiiii Iohannis ante port. lat. A
x xxx John de Beverlaco. x i xvii b Apparitio Michaelis. c xvii iii xli
Translatio Nicholai. xviii vii xxi d Gordian and Epimachi. vii xxxiiii e x xxx
sa. Anthon. mar. xv vi xix f xvi Nerei, Archilei and Pancra. g xv xviii xii Sol
in Gemini. vii viii A iiii i ix Boniface mar. iii xxiii b xij ix lvii Isidore
mar. c i lix Brandin bish. and Confessor. i iiii xi d viii Translation of
Bernard. xx viii xxxiii e x i Diascor. mar. f S. Dunston. g vii ii xli s.
Bernard. xvii vii ii A xx Helen. regine. xi viii xx b vi ix Julian virg. c vi
Desider. mar. xiiii vi xlvi d xiiii ii i Trans. Francisci. iii i xlix e iii x
xl sa. Adelme. xi x xliiii f ix xliii Augustine Anglorum Apost. xx xi xx g Bid
presbyter. A xix lix S. German. vii vii iiii b ii Coronis Martyr. xvi ix xlv c
viii o liiii s. Felicis Bishop. d vi xli sa. Petronille virg.



June has 30 days the Moon 29.

In Iunio Gentes, perturbat medo bibentes,
Atque novellarum fuste potus serviciarum,
Ne noceat colera, valet refectio vita,
Lactucae frondes ede, je junus bibe fontes.
v vii v e v iii xii Sancti Nichomedis. xiii i liii f xvi ii xviii Sancti
Marcellini. xi xii ii g ii x xv s. Erasmi martyris. A sancti Petrocii. x i
xliiii b x v lv s. Boniface Bishop. c Melonis Archbishop. xviii xi v d xviii vi
xxv Translatio Wulstan. e Sancti Wilhelmi. vii iii xlix f vii i Trans. of
Edmundi. xv v ix g xv xvii ix Translatio sanc. Iuonis. iiii i xlix A iiii xxvi
xlii Barnabe Apostle. b xii xi xiiii S. Basil. xii i i c Iuli Sol in Cancer
solsticium. i iiii d i vii iii S. Basil Bishop. lviii e ix viii xxiii Vic and
modesti. ix x f Trans. of Richard. g S. Botolph. xvii vi A xvii v xxx Marci and
Marcellina. xii b xxiii Gervasi and prothasi. vi v c Trans. of Edward. xiiii i
liii d xiiii ix xvii Walburge Virgin. iii ix xviii e ix xviii s. Alban. Martyr.
xi viii xxxvi f iii Etheldred Vigilia. xxxv g viii xiii Not. of S. John
Baptist. xix lii A xi xxviii Trans. of Eligi Bishop. vii b xi x John and Paul.
viii ix c viii xv S. Cressent martyr. xxi d x sa. Leon Bishop. e Peter and Paul
Apostles. xvi vi xv f xvi i ii Commemoration of Paul



July has 31 days the Moon 30

Qui vult solamer, Julio hic probat medicamen.
Venam non scindat, ne ventrem potio ledat,
Somnum cupescat* and bal^ea cuncta pavescat,
Prodest recens unda, alvum cum salvia munda.
v iix ix g v i v Octa. John Baptist. xiii x xxix A xiii viii lvii Visitatio
beat Marie. b Translatio Thome Ap. ii x lix c ii iiii liiii Translatio sancti
Mar. d x iiii xxxix sa. Zoe virg. x iii vi e Octava Peter and Paul. f
Translatio Thom. mar xviii o xlviii g xviii ix xxxi Depositio Grimbald. vii v
vii A ^ii iii lii sa. Cerill Bishop. xv l xlv b Septem fratrum mar. iiii viii
xlvi c xv xlvi Translatio Benedici. d iiii ix xxxix Naboris and Felicis. xii i
li e xii vi xxxix sa. privati martyr. f i v l Sol in Leo Dles Canic. i vii v g
Translatio Swithin. A ix ix xlii August trans. Osmund. ix i xlix b sa. Kenelmi
regis. c xvii vii xxx sa. Arnulph Bishop. xviii viii xliii d Rufini and
Iustini. vi ^i x e vi x xi Margaret Virgin. xiiii iiii lvii f xiiii ix xxi
Praxedis virg. g xxii Mary Magdalen. iiii vii o A iii iv xix sa. Apollinatis.
xi viii xl b xi o lvii Christin virg. Vigilia. iii c S. Jacob Apostle* xix vii
d xix ix xlx Anne mother of Mary. viii x xliiii e septem dormientium. f viii
xliii Sampson Bishop. xvi ii xii g xvi xi lix Felicis and sociorum eius. v ix
vii A v ix lii Abdon and senins. b sa. Germani.



August has 31. days, the Moon 30.

Quisquis sub Augusto, vivat medicamine justo,
Raro dormiat, and aestum coi^^m quoque vitet,
Balnea non curet, nec multum comestio duret,
Nemo laxari debet, vel phlebothomari.
xiii ix o c xiii iiii xxx Petri ad vincula. d ii iii xvii Stephani Bish. ii x
v e x iiii xxx Inventio san. Stephani. x vi ii f Iustini Presbyteri. g Oswaldi.
Festum nivis. xviii xiii xxx A xiii o xlv Transfiguratio Domini. vii xxiiii xvi
b Festum nominis Jesus. xv viii lviii c vii v xliii sa. Ciriac. d xv ix liii
Vigilia. iiii v v e iiii xv lxiii sa Laurentii. xi f xii iiii xi Tiburtii mar.
^ iiii ii g Clare virg. x xxxvi A vi lix Hypolite and sociorum eius. ix b xii
xlviii Sep. Vigilia. iii lvi c Assumptio beat. Mary. xvii d Sol in Virg. sa.
Rochi. vi ii xi e xviii viii iii Octava sanct. Laurent. x viii f vi viii lii
sa. Magni mart. g Lodovici Bishop. xiiii vi xvi A xiiii iiii xlv sa. Agapite.
vi li b xiii o xlix sa. Bernard. xi c Octava assum. Mary. xix viii xvii d xi v
ii Vigilia. viii l e Bartholomew Apost. viii f xix v xii Lodovici Regis. xvi xi
lxvi g viii x lix sa. Severini. ix lviii A xvi ix lix sa. Ruffi. v b sa.
Augustini. xiii v iii c v v lviii Decollatio Iohannis bap. x xi d i lix Felicis
and Audaci. e Cuthburg. virg.



September has 30* days the Moon

Fructus maturi, Septembris sunt valituri,
Et pira cum vino, panis cum lacte caprino.
Aqua de urtica, tibi poto fertur amica
Tunc venam pandas, species cum semine mandas
ii ii xxxiii f ii ix xiiii S. Egidii. g x vi sa. Anthonii. x x xx A x
Ordinatio sa. Greg. b xviii iiii Translatio sant. Cuth. xviii i xviii c vii vi
vii sa. Bertini. vii x xlvi d l sa. Eugen^i. xv v x e xv vi iiii iii xlix f iii
i xxvi Nativitas Mary. g xiii v o sa. Gorgonii. xii viii xi A i x xxxv Silvii
Bishop. b xliii Prothi and Iacinti. ^ iii v c ii v xxxii Martiniani Bishop. d
October. Maurelii Bishop. ix vii li e xvii ix vii Exaltatio s. ^ru. Sol in Li.
xvii xi xvii f Octa. beat Mary. g vi vi xliii Edithe virgin. v^ vi xv A xiii i
xliii Lambert bishop and mart. xiiii vi xviii b Victoris and Corone. c iii xi
xxxix Ianuarii mart. iii ix xxxi d sa. Eustachii virg. xi xxxix e xi iii xli
Saint Marth^i Apostoli. f xix x xx Mauricii et sociorum eius. xi xi viii g
Tecle Virgin. vi x lvi A xviii iii xix Andochii Martyr. b xvi vii 38 Firmini
Bishop and mart. xvi vi xxxvii c v ii xxxii Cyprian. and Iustini. v ii iiii d
Cosme and Damiani. e xiii ii ix Exuperii Bishop. xiii ii x f ii v x S. Michael
Archangel. g Hieronimi presbyter.



October has 31. days, the Moon 30.

October vina praebet cum carne ferina,
Nec non aucina caro valet and volucrina.
Quamvis sint sana, tunc est repletio vana.
Quantum vis comede, sed non praecordia laede
^ vii lii A viii S. Remigy. b S. Leodigary. ^ xiii xv c Candidi mart. xviii o
xix d xxii Francis Confessor. vii xx iii e Apollinarii martyr. xv iiii xxxvi f
vii vi vi sa. Fidis. g xv iii o Marci and Marcellian. ^i v xxii ^ iii sa.
Pelagy. vii b xii ix xlvii Dionysi and Rustic. xii ii c Gereonis and Victoris.
xli d i iiii xxxvi Sancti Nigasii. ^ vii i e Sancti Wilfredi. ^^ x f ix v lvi
Translatio sancti Ed. xxxiii g Sol in Scor. Sancti Calixte epis. xvii viii xlix
A xviii viii xli Wulfrani episcopi. vi iii b vi iii xxxv Nove. Michael in mon.
c xiiii o liii Translatio Etheldred. xiiii ix xx d Luke Evangelist. xlv e ii i
xxv Fredeswide virginis. iii ii li f Austreberte virginis. xi ix xxxi g x xxxvi
xi. M. virginum. xix o A Mary Salmone. lii b xix iii 38 Sancti Romani. viii ix
lii c viii xviii xiv Sancti Magloric. ^vi iiii d xvi v x Cripini and
Trispiniani. e v ^ xvi Euaristi episcopi. ^ iii xvi f Florentii mar. Vigilia.
xx g viii v xx Simon and Jude. ^^ii vii A Germane Capuani vii b Marcissi Bishop
^ iii c Sanct. Quintini vigil.



November has 30. days, the Moon 29.

Hoc tibi scire datur, quod reuma Novembre creatur,
Quaeque nociva vita tua sint preciosa die^a,
Balnea cum Venere tunc nullum constat habere.
Potio sit sana, valde atque minuta bona.
x vii xlvii d xi v xii Feast of all Saints. e Commemora. animar. xviii x
xlviii f xviii viii lii Wenefred virgin. vii v xliv g vii vi xxviii s. Amantii.
xv vi xxi A Leti presbyteri. ^v lv b xv i xxxvi Leonard abbot. c iv xv Wilbrod
Bishop d xii ix Quatuor coronatorum. xix viii vi e xvii v Theodore martyr. i x
xxv f December s. Martin Bishop. g i xxix saint Martin. xi x lix A ix ii ^xxix
Pattern martyr. xvii vi xxx b xvii s. Brici Bishop. c vi ii Trans. Erkin. Sol in
sag vi iii ii d vi sa. Macuti bishop e ^v iv xiv sa. Edmund Archbishop. xiv
iii iii f sa. Hugonis Bishop. iii ix lvi g iii vii xlvii Octav. s. mart. A vii
xxxv sa. Elizabeth. vi v b xi iii xvi s. Edmund Regis. xix xxviii c xi xxxviii
Presentatio martyr. vii viii d xix Cicely virg xvii e viii xi vi sa. Clement
bishop. xvi f xvi sa. Grigosoni. v vi xiii g v xi live Katherine virg. xlvii A
xxi Lini bishop. b xii v Agricole and vitalis. xiii vii c o Rufi mart. iii xxx
d ii Saturn and Sisini. x x lii e x S. Andrew Apostle.



December has 31. days, the Moon 30.

Sanae sunt membris, calidae res mense Decembris.
Frigus vitetur, capitalis vena scindatur:
Lotio si^ vana, sed vasis potio cara,
Sit tepidus potus, frigori contrary totus.
x x lv f x xxi o sa. Eligi Bishop. xvi^ viii xlvi g xvi iix xvi sa. Lybian.
vii v xvi A Depositio Osmu. xv x b vii v viii sa. Barbare. c xv i xliv Sabba
Abbot. ^v iv xxxiv d Nicholas bishop and Con. e iv ii xxxvi Octava Andrew
Apostle. f xii xi xxxiv Conception of Mary. xii o xvi g* Cyprian abbot. i ix
xxviii A i v vi sa Eulalie. ix x xxvi b ix vii vii sa. Damasce Pope. c Sol in
Cay. Paul bishop. Solstitium. xvii v xli d xvii v xlvi Lucy Virgin. vi iv xx e
vi i ii Ianuari. xiv live f Valeri bishop. g xiv vi xlviii O sapientia. A sa.
Lazari bishop. iv iv live b iii o xl sa. Gratian. xi ix xxi c sa. Venesie virg.
xix xi xxxiii d xi vi xxxix Iuli Martyr vigilia. e xix x v Thom. Apostle viii
vi xxxi f viii xlx xxii Triginta martyr. xvi vii liii g xvi ii xxiv Victory
virg. A Sanctarum virginum. v xi xlix b ^v o lvii Nativity of our Lord* c sa
Stephen. xiii x o d xiii vi xxii sa. John. e sa. Innocents* ii o live f ii i
viii sa. Tho. martyr. g x v xl Trans. of Jacob. o vi A saint Silvester.



Letter Dominicall. Letter tabular. The exposition, valor, and signification
of the letters of the tabular figure, that be in the second line after the
Dominical letter. Moveable feasts Intervals Septugessime. Easter in Rogacion.
s. Whitsunday in From Christmas to Lent. From Whitsunday to saint John. From
Whitsunday to advent. January, March, April May, Week, day, Week, day, d b
xviii xxiii xxvi x v 5 6 3 29 Friday. e c xix xxiv xxvii xi v 6 6 2 29
Thursday. f d xx xxv xxviii xii v 5 6 1 29 Wednesday. g e xxi xxvi xxix xiii vi
1 6 29 Tuesday. A f xxii xxvii xxx xiv vi 2 5 6 29 Monday. b g xxiii xxviii May
xv vi 3 5 5 29 Sunday. c h xxiv xxix ii xvi vi 4 5 4 28 Saturday. d i xxv xxx
iii xvii vi 5 5 3 28 Friday. e k xxvi xxxi iv xviii vi 6 5 2 28 Thursday. ^ l
xxvii April v xix vi 5 5 1 28 Wednesday. g m xxviii ii vi xx vii 1 5 28
Tuesday. A n xxix iii vii xxi vii 2 4 6 27 Monday. b o xxx iv viii xxii vii 3 4
5 27 Sunday. c p xxxi v ix xxiii vii 4 4 4 27 Saturday. d q February vi x xiv
vii 5 4 3 27 Friday. e r ii vii xi xxv vii 6 4 2 27 Thursday. f s iii viii xii
xxvi vii 4 1 27 Wednesday. g t iv ix xiii xxvii viii 1 4 27 Tuesday. A u v x
xiv xxviii viii 2 3 6 27 Monday. b a vi xi xv xxix viii 3 5 26 Sunday. c b vii
xii xvi xxx viii 4 3 4 26 Saturday. d c viii xiii xvii xxxi viii 5 3 3 26
Friday. e d ix xiv xviii June viii 6 3 26 Thursday. f e x xv xix ii viii 3 1 26
Wednesday. g f xi xvi xx iii ix 1 26 Tuesday. A g xi xvii xxi iv ix 2 2 6 25
Monday. b h xiii xviii xxii v ix 3 2 5 25 Sunday. e i xiv xix xxiii vi ix 4 2 4
25 Saturday. d k xv xx xxiv vii ix 5 2 3 25 Friday. e l xvi xvi xxv viii ix 6 2
2 25 Thursday. f m xvii xxii xx^i ix ix 2 1 25 Wednesday. g n xviii xxiii xxvii
x x 1 25 Tuesday. A o xix xxiv xxviii xi x 2 1 6 25 Monday. b p xx xxv xxix xii
x 3 1 5 25 Sunday. c q xxi xxx xiii x 4 1 4 25 Saturday. d r xxii xxxi

The figure of the letter tabular, which is declared by the two present
figures, the first for the black letters, the second for the red letters.
b b c b bd i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x xi xii xiii xiv xv xvi xvii xviii
xix s k i o f f p o b o n s k k o f f l o k g s c o r m t i l ^ g g t c ^ p p t
l l q g g m q c h h ^ l d b g g m m r h h v e d q n a n m r f h n e ^ q i a f e
r i b n k e k i a f ^ r b b o n s k k o f f k ^ b ^ g s k k p f ^ l l o g g t c
o p m o l l q g g t d ^ p p v l l q h g m n e h h ^ e d q h a m m r i i v e e q
^ a n m r i ^ n e e k t a f ^ r i b n l e k k ^ f i s b b o ^ s k k p f f l ^ b
o g ^ k k p g e l l o g g c d e p m v l q h h t d d p p o m l q h h m q d n d e
e q h a n m a i ^ v e c q o n n n r i i o e e k k a f f s i b o l e k k v f f s
c b o o t k k k g f l p c ^ g t l l p g g i i o g g t d d p ^ v m l q h h t b d
q p v m l b h h n r d i i v e e r d a n ^ r i f o e ^ r o a n n s i i o f e k k
o f f s c d o o t ^ k b g f s c ^ o a t l k p g g l l e ^ g t l o p g g m i c h
h t d d q q v m m q h ^ n d o q s v m e c h b n n o f i a e e r b a n n s i i r
f e r r b n n s k i o f f k b o g t o c ^ o o o l k g g s c e p o t l s g g m m
c b h t l d q g h m m c h h p d d q q v m m r p ^ n e d b l ^ m e v i h n n e i
i a f e r b b n n

This present figure is to find the letter tabular, and proceeds as the
figure follows of the Dominicall letters, and it is behovefull to know the
Golden number for the year that ye will know, and in the line that descends
downward under the said number is the letter tabular: even so of the Dominicall
Letter in the figure hereafter. And you must know that a Golden number,
Dominicall letter, and a letter tabular serves always for a year, save when it
is bissext that been two dominicall letters, and also two tabular letters as
above. It ought to be known that the Dominicall letters and the letters
tabular, be in the first line under the Golden number xvi. for the year of this
present Calendar, that is M.CCCC.xcvii. and so of the other.

The figure for to find the golden number and the letter Dominicall together
for evermore.
b b c b d b ^ ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x xi xii xiii xiv xv xvi xvii xviii
xix. f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f d r cb a g f de c b a gf e d c va g f ^ d^ b a
g fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ^d ^b a gf e ^ c ^a g ^ e d^ b a g fe d c b ag f e
d ^b a g ^ ed e b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d e b ag f e d cb a g f cd c
b a gf e d c ba g f ^ dc b a g fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c d a gf e d c ba
g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g
fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e
d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c
b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba
g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e d ^b a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g
fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e
d cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e ^ cb a g f ed c
b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d ^ b ag f e d cb a g f ed c d a gf e d c ba
g f e dc b a g fe d c^ b ag f e b cb a g f ed c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g
fe d c b ag f e d cb a g f ed c b a fg e d e ba g f e dc b a g fe d c b ag f e
d cb a g e dc c b a gf e d c ba g f e dc b a g fe d c e ag f e d cd a g f ed c
b a gf e d c ba g

In this present figure it behooves to behold the golden number of the year
that ye will know, and in the line right under the golden number always is the
letter dominicall, c* upon the golden number, viii. high Easter, and when it
falls that they come both together, Corpus Christi, and Saint John's day be
all in one day, d* upon xvi. signifies the lowest Easter. And when it falls
that Candelmas and shrove monday comes together. b signifies all about where
it is when it falls with the golden number, upon the which is our Lady day in
March on good Friday.

CHAP. V. A Figure perpetual for Easter, and other moveable Feasts.
i ii iii iv v A a x A m xxvi A a xvi A a ix A m xxvi b a x b m xxvij b a xvij
b a iij b m xxvii c a xi c m xxviij c a xviij c a iv c m xxviii d a xii d m
xxix d a xix d a v d m xxix e a vi e m xxx e a xx e a v e m xxiii f a vii f m
xxxi f a xxiv f a vij f m xxiv g a vii g m i g a xxv g a viij g m xxv vi vij
viij ix x A a xvi A a ij A a xxiv A a ix A a ij b a xvii b a iij b a xxiv b a x
b a iij c a xviii c a iv c a xxv c a xi c m xxviii d a vii d a v d a xix d a
xii d m xxix e a xiii e a vi e a xx e a xiij e m xxx f a xiiii f m xxxi f a x x
f xiv f m xxxi g a xv g a i g a xxij g a viii g ai xi xij xiij xiv x v A a xvi
A a ix A a xxvi A a xvi A a ij b a xvii b a x b m 27 b a xvii b a iij c a xviii
c a xi c m 28 c a xviii c a iv d a xix d a v d m 29 d a xix d a v e a xx e a vi
e m 30 e a xiij e a vi f a xxi f a vij f m xxi f a xiv f a vij g a xxii g a
viij g m xxv g a xv g a viij xvi xvij xviiii xix A m xxv A a xvi A a ij A a
xiij b m xxviii b a x b a iij b a xiv c m xxviii c a xi c a vi c a xviij d m
xxii d a xii d a v d a xix e m xxiii e a xiij e m 30 e a xx f m xxiv f a xiv f
m 31 f a xxi g ^ xx^v g a xv g a i g a xxij

Upon the letter Dominicall next under the golden number, that runs is
Easter day, for the year of the golden number, a signifies April, insignifieth
March, and the number of the said Letters is the number of the days of the
month that Easter shall fall upon.

CHAP. VI. The figure of the Eclipse of the Sun and the Moon, the days hours,
and moments.
M.d.lxxii. the Eclipse of the moon the 17. day of october, xiii hours, lxii.
minutes. M.d.lxix. the Eclipse of the Moon the second day of March, xx. hours.
4. min. M.d.lxx. the Eclipse of the moon the 20. day of february v. hours, 39.
minutes. M.d.lxx. the Eclipse of the moon the xv. day of August, ix* hours
xvii. minutes.



M.d.lxxii. the Eclipse of the moon the xv. day of June, ix. hours* lxii.
minutes. M.d.lxxiii. the Eclipse of the moon the viii. day of December. 7. hours,
38. minutes. M d.lxxiiii. the Eclipse of the sun the xiii. day of november,
iii. hours, 52. minutes. M.d.lxxvi. the Eclipse of the sun the 7. day of
October, x. hours, lii. minutes.



M.d.lxxvii. the Eclipse of the moon the 2. day of April, 8. hours, xviii.
minutes. M.d. 78. the Eclipse of the moon the 26. day of september, xii. hours,
36 minutes. M.d.lxxviii. the Eclipse of the moon the 15. day of september. 13
hours viii minutes. M.d.lxxx. the Eclipse of the moon the 31. day of January,
x. hours, vi. minutes.



M.d.lxxxi. the Eclipse of the moon the 19. day of January, 11. hours 6.
minutes. M.d.lxxxii. the Eclipse of the Moon the 15. day of July, xvi hours, 48
minutes. M.d.lxxxiii. the Eclipse of the sun the 19. day of June, 16. hours,
53. minutes. M.d.lxxxiiii. the Eclipse of the sun the xix day of April xvii
hours, xxvii minutes.



M.d.lxxxv. the Eclipse of the moon the viii. day of November, xiii. hours xii.
min. M.d.lxxxvi. the Eclipse of the moon the xvi. day of september, 8. hours,
lviii minutes. M d.lxxxvii. the Eclipse of the moon the second day of March 15.
hours xiv. mi. M.d.lxxxviii. the Eclipse of the moon the 25. day of August xvii
hours xxiii. minutes.



M.d.lxxxix. the Eclipse of the moon, the 15. day of August, 7. hours 53.
minutes. M.d.xc. the Eclipse of the Sun the 20. day of July, 19 hours, 38.
minutes. M.d.xc. the Eclipse of the moon the xxx day of december. 8. hours i.
minute. M.d.xci. the Eclipse of the Sun the 10. day of July 36. hours, 36
minutes.



M v c.xc the Eclipse of the moon the xix. day of december, xvii hours xxiv
minutes. M v c.xci. the Eclipse of the moon the xiii. day of June, x hours
xxiiii. minutes: M.v c.xcii. the Eclipse of the moon, the 8. day of december,
viii. hours xxiii minutes, M v.c.xciii. the Eclipse of the sun the.xx. day of
May, two hours xxxvi m.



M.v.cxciiii the Eclipse of the moon the viii. day of october. xix hours 28.
minutes. M v c xcv the Eclipse of the moon the xiii. day of April* xvi. hours
liii. minutes. M v c.xcv the Eclispe of the Sun* the xxiii. of September the i
hour, xiii. minutes. M v.c.xcvi. the Eclipse of the moon, the ii day of April,
ix. hours, xlix minutes.



M.v.c.xcvii. the Eclipse of the moon the x. day of february, 18. hours 57.
min. M.v.c.xcviii. the Eclipse of the sun, the 24 day of February, 12. hours
11. minutes. M.v.c.xcviii. the Eclipse of the moon, the vi. of August, vii.
hours, lviii minutes. M.v.c.cxix. the Eclipse of the moon the 30. day of
January, 19. hours, 6 minutes.



M vi.c the Eclipse of the sun, the 30. day of June, one hour, xxxiii. minutes.
M.vi.c.i. the Eclipse of the moon the 29. day of novem. vii. hours, 38.
minutes. M.vi c.i. the Eclipse of the Sun the 14. day of December. ii hours,
liiii. minutes. M.vi c.ii. the Eclipse of the moon the xxv. of May, vii. hours
xxxvi. minutes.



M vi.c.iii. the Eclipse of the moon the xiiii. day of May, xii. hours l.
minutes. M vi c. iii. the Eclipse of the moon* the viii. day of november, vii.
hours 37. minutes. M.vi c.iv. the Eclipse of the moon, the 24. day of March the
ix. hours, 42. minutes. M.vi c.v. the Eclipse of the moon, the 24. day of
March, at viii a clock at night.



M.vi.c.v. the Eclipse of the moon the 17. day of septem. a quarter past 4. in
the morn. M.vi.c.v the Eclipse of the sun, the 2. day of October. half an hour
past one a clock. M.vi.c.vi. there is no Eclipse to be seen. M.vi.c.vii. the
Eclipse of the moon the 27. day of August, half an hour past 2 in them.



M.vi.c viii the Eclipse of the sun the 3^. day of July* a quarter past 3. a
clock. M.vi.c.xi. the Eclipse of the Moon the 10. day of January, a quar. fore
2, in the morn. M.vi.c.ix. the Eclipse of the moon the 6. day of July, a
quarter past xi at night. M.vi.c.x. the Eclipse of the moon the xxvi of July,
at 4. a clock in the morning.



M.vi.c. 10. the Eclipse of the moon the 20. day of December. at 3. a clock in the
morn. M vi.c. 11. the Eclipse of the moon the 3. of May, at sunsetting totally
darkened.



All the Eclipses of the Sun be in the day, and of the Moon by night. And ye
shall with the Eclipse of the Sun and of the Moon appears sometime ohterwise
than we see it, for the Eclipse of the Sun may well be by night and the Eclipse
of the Moon may be by day, but such Eclipse appears not to us Shepherds.

NO marvel that man's mind is mutable,
And will you know wherefore and why*
For he is made of things variable,
As of hot, cold, moist, and dry,
The wit is light and passes lightly,
And since we be made of four changeable
How should man be steadfast and stable?
An Eclipse shall be mavelous to behold,
Through which many shall be the worse,
For many shall find neither silver nor gold,
It shall be so dark within their purse.

Pocula Ianus amat.
Tangere crura cave quum luna videbit aquosa,
Insere tunc plantas: excelsas erige turres,
Et si carpis iter tunc tardius ad loca transi.
Febrius urgeo clamat.
Pisces habens lunam noli curare podagram,
Carpe viam tutus, sit potio modo salubris.
Martius arva colit.
Nil capiti noceas Aries cum luna refulget,
De vena minuas, and balnea tutius intres,
Non tangas aures, nec barbam radere debes.
Aprilis florida prodit.
Arbor plantetur cum in luna Taurus habetur,
Non minuas tamen, edifices, nec semina sparges,
Et medicus caveat cum ferro tangere collum.
Ros and flos nemorum Maio sunt comes amorum.
Brachia non minuas cum lustrat luna Gemellos,
Unguibus and manibus cum ferro curra negitur,
Nunquam sortabis a promissore petitum.
Dat Iunius faena.
Pectus pulmo jecur in Cancro non minuantur,
Somnia falsa vides utilis sit emptio rerum,
Potio sumatur, securus perge viator.
Iulio resecatur avena.
Cor gravat and stomachum cum cernit Luna Leonem,
Non facies vestes nec ad convivia vades,
Et nil ore vomas, nec sumas tunc medicinam.
Augustus spicas.
Lunam Virgo tenens uxorem ducere noli,
Viscera cum costis caveas tractare cruorem,
Semen datur agro, dubites intrare carinam.
September colligit uvas.
Libra Lunam tenens nemo genitalia tangat,
Aut renes, nates nec iter capere debes,
Extremam partem Librae cum luna tenebit.
Seminat October.
Scorpius augmentat morbos in part pudenda,
Vulnera non cures, caveas ascendere naves,
Et si carpis iter timeas de morte ruinam.
Spoliat virgulta November.
Luna nocet femori, per parts mota Sagitta,
Vngues vel crines poteris pra^^cindere tuto,
De vena minuas, and balnea tutius intres.

Quaerit habere cibum porcum mactando December.
Capra nocet genibus ipsam cum Luna tenebit,
Intrat aqua novam citius curabitur aeger,
Fundamenta ruunt modicum tunc durat id ipsum.
Epilogus sequitur omnium supra dictorum.
QVae viri antiqui potuerunt scribere libris,
Decurrendo polum constanti mente rotundum,
AEreasque domos temptando and sydera cuncta,
Quaeque fluunt ex his, quomodo nunc sol moveatur,
Intus habes collecta brevi compendio and art.
De duodecim signis.
Signorum princeps, Aries, and Taurus and Urna,
Tindaride juvenes, and fervida brachia Cancri,
Herculeusque Leo Nemeae pavor, asmaque Virgo,
Libra jugo aequaliter pendent: and scorpius acris
Centaurusque senex Chiron, and cornua Capri,
Dilectusque Iovi puer, and duo sidera Pisces.
Idem de signis.
Corniger in primis Aries, and corniger alter,
Taurus, item Gemini: sequitur quos Cancer adustus,
Terribilisque ferae species, and justa puella,
Libra, simul nigrum portans in acumine virus,
Centaurusque biformis adest: pelagique puella,
Et qui portat aquam puer urniger, and duo Pisces.
De quatuor partibus anni. De vere
Verque novum stabit cinctum florente corona,
Pingens purpureo venantia prata color,
Ver pallidum vario nectit^ de flore coronas,
Vere novo lectis decorantur floribus arva,
Veris honos tepidum floret: vere omnia rident.
De aestate.
Stabat nuda aestas and spicea serta gerebat,
Horridaque Aethiopis signis imitata figuram,
Scindit agros aestas Phaebeis ignibus ardens,
Torrida fert arvis aestas frugifera mella,
Flava Ceres aestatis habet sua tempore regna.
De autumno.
Stabat and Autumnus calcatis surdibus uvis,
Libra per autumnum musto spumantia fervent.
Pomifer Autumnus tenero dat palmite fructum,

Vite coronatas Autumnus degravat ulnos,
Faecundos Autumn locos de vitibus imples.
De Hyeme*
Stabat Hyems glacies canos hirsuta capillos,
Cujus nix humeros circundat, flumina montes
Praecipitant, semperque riget glacie horrida barba*
Albentes haec durat aquas and flumina nectit,
Tristis Hyems niveo montes velamine vestit.
CHAP. VII. Hereafter follows the second part of the Compost and Calendar,
which shows of the tree of Vices, and of the pains of Hell.
IN the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost Amen, We purpose to show
the tree of vices, for sinners to take example by, to understand their sins:
which is divided in twelve principal parts, after the seven deadly sins, and
each deadly sin is likened to a tree, and every tree having eight small
branches, and all these seven trees come out of one tree by it self* that is,
evil and comes of one beginning, and that is the devil, and it bideth an end
that is, everlasting damnation, which is ordained for all them that seek not
remedy betimes by penance and repentance of their life in time.

After this tree of vices follows the pains of hell, to show the lay people
what punishment is ordained for every deadly sin, and that the people may
better show their sins in contrition* and make clean their conscience, and that
they may be the houses of God* so that virtues may grow and fructify to the
profit of their souls. The first great branch of the tree of vices, is pride
and he has xvii. branches grow in out of him, as vain glory of himself,
vainglory of the world* praising himself in evil, boasting of sin, inobedient
disdain* to tempt God, excess, dispraising* false goodness hardiness,
presumption, rebellion, obstination, sin wittingly, communing of the sacrament,
shame to do good Out of every the which branches springs three branches, and
out of every the said three branches grows three small branches, to the
number of sevenscore and thirteen, and in so many manner of ways ye may sin in
the sin of pride, which is the root and beginning of all the seven deadly sins,
and therefore shall be showed first of pride* and after the other six sins as
they follow in order.



The i. branch of Pride. Vainglory of himself.
Seeking joy and not the glory of God.
When any weeneth his goods come of himself. Or that such goods be due for
their merits. If they believe to have, or to know more than they do
Hypocrisy.
Dissembling by words to be better than they be, Seeming by works to be good
and be not. Desiring praise for his good deeds by other
Dispraising themselves for to have praise.
To dispraise his deeds that other should praise them To repent his doings
because they be dispraised. Dispraising himself that others may praise him.

The ii. branch of Pride. Vainglory of the world.
For riches.
When they ween to be the better for their goods. Or weeneth to be worse
without them. To be ashamed that they lack riches in their need.
For pompes.
Delighting him to have a great household* Rejoicing them in the fair shape of
their bodies. Or in new fashion* or multitude of his clothes.
For honors.
When they desire to be honored with other good Willing to be honored and
dread. Or to the end it may be said that they be mighty.

The iii. branch of Pride. Glad of evil doing.
Declaring their sins.
For to be praised of cursed and unhappy people. Or for to show that they be
prompt to evil doing. Delighting in recordation of his evil deeds.
Being glad that they be evil.
For that they love the friendship of the world. Or for they doubt not the
righteousness of God. Or else they love not God with their heart.
To have no shame of evil doing.
For they know not which is virtue ne vice. Nor to amend themselves be not
willing. For to be seen gladly when he does evil.

The iiii. branch of Pride. Boasting of sin.
Praising thy self.
Openly before all folks or few. Or secretly before one, or by himself. Seeking
occasion for to be praised only*
In showing themselves better than they be
Covering their evils that they be not seen* Telling their good deeds that
they may be known Hiding their sins that they appear not great.
Weening that they be wise and be not.
To be great in judgment with himself only. Dispraising the understanding of
other* Preferring their own virtue before the grace of God

The v. branch of Pride. Inobedience.
Openly gainsaying.
Dispraising his master or them that be above him. Dispraising the merits that
come of obedience. Desiring to be such that he may gainsay others.
Doing unduly all that they ought to do.
When negligently they do that they ought to do. Or when they do it otherwise
than appertains. Or to let damage and to have profit.
For to require grace importunate.
When they have custom in sin and fall often therein. Enviously and frowardly
asking grace for it. Insatiatly persevering without amending.

The vi. branch of Pride. Disdain.
Dispraising other.
For their ignorance and fault of understanding. For their poverty and
scarceness of riches. For their sickness and default of members.
Preferring themselves before other.
Showing himself cunning in some works. In praising their deeds dispraise them
of other. In considering of less than he, exalt himself.
Dispraising other less than himself.
That will compare themselves for riches or science. Or they which be almost as
great as he. Or which in things abovesaid are above him.

The vii. branch of Pride. To tempt God.
Desiring to sinful living.
For they consider but sensible things. For they will not believe things they
see not. To judge things to come or they happen.
To expose themselves in peril.
To believe themselves that God should deliver them Or to dispraise and dye in
such dangerous peril. Or believe in destinys that otherwise it may not be
Not helping themselves from peril.
For they will use no reason for to help themselves. For they will use their
own folly without counsel. For they be too slothful, not willing to labor.

The viii. branch of Pride* Excess.
To go before thy betters unworthily.
Usurping the might that they ought not to have. Exceeding the power to them
committed or given. Treating them evil that be under their puissance.
To abstain them overmuch*
For they be less worthy in such authority. For they are too cruel to them
that be subject. To make himself hated and may profit by fair speech.
To oppress the poor men or servants.
By might or riches of his friends. For violence that the sovereigns may do.
For the riches or great goods that they have.

The ix. branch of Pride. Disprasing.
Putting his soul in peril.
Being in deadly sin without repenting him. Being in sin and care not for to
know it. Or to understand it and rejoice of it.
Caring not for things to come.
Not believing the life to come for the good people* Believing the life to
come, but not steadfastly. Or to believe it well, and not amend their lives.
Prefer the body to the soul.
Being diligent to the body, and negligent to the soul Desiring temporal goods
and not spiritual* Nourishing continually the flesh in delights.

The x. branch of Pride. False goodness.
Unrightful to be dispraised.
For his presumption, arrogance and pride. For his vainglory* vantuing and
praising. Or for to show to live of advantage.
Unjustly willing to be praised.
When thy delight in worldly lovings* When they have dread to be dispraised,
For to desire to be honored without cause.
To do good in an evil intent.
For ignorance when they believe not to do good. Wickedly do good in hope that
it shall turn to evil. Fraudulently doing it for to deceive other.

The xi. branch of Pride. Hardness.
Being unkind in their deeds.
To be presumptuous, and not prove the truth. By entreating over straightly the
rightful things* Traveling more than of right them that be just.
To be fierce and over cruel.
When there is none affection ne love unto other. To find new manners to do
evil. To have no shame to do cruelty.
Importunity.
When one desires a thing ever continually. Or when one is overhasty to have
his duty. Or to be over envious in asking it.

The xii. branch of Pride. Presumption.
Believe no man but themself.
In gainsaying always in the deeds of other* Not believing that other then do
good for God. For his own deeds to be content of himself.
Speaking of high things.
Exalting himself and showing that he is great. To contrary his neighbors, or
other such. In blaspheming God and holy Saints.
Believe more in himself than he should do.
When any will not know their own defaults. When any dispraiseth the faults of
other. Undertaking to come that they may not.

The xiii. branch of Pride. Rebellion.
Harden him self in fighting.
That may not suf^er patiently to be smitten. To grudge against the will of
God. For to be smitten, blaspheme God and his saints*
Resist to God.
To let any good to be done, Not to help to do good when they may, Or to be
sorry that any body should do good.
To uphold evil.
For to do sin more liberally. For familiarity that they have to him that
sins. Or that this sin that they defend.

The xiiii. branch of Pride. Obstination.
By fasting.
Will not hear their betters to teach them good. Ne to do thereafter n^ mendeth
them no^. Wilfully to do evil for to be mended.
Not willing to forsake evil doing.
For they will not leave their evil custom* Or else they give not them to do
good. Or that they rejoice them in evil doing.
To be hardened in evil.
To do against things that are doubtful. To believe that thing good that is
not* To give themselves to evil without remedy.

The xv branch of Pride. Sin wittingly.
Sinning deadly.
By presumption or understanding to do evil. Or by ignorance that they will not
understand. Desiring and provoking themself to do evil.
Sinning venially.
For to follow evil company For custom to do any venial sin* To end one sin
that they may end another.
In thought deadly or venially.
By cogitations in their heart only. By words said lightly. Or by work done
undiscreetly.

The xvi. branch of Pride. Co^muning of the sacra.
Singing of service.
And to be in any heresy. Or to be in suits of cursing. Or wittingly in deadly
sin.
Ministering the sacraments.
Less than his duty and unworthily. Without reverence and undevoutly. Without
doing their duty to the people discreetly.
Receive the body of Jesus Christ.
Without honor, devotion and reverence. Theftously, and of that they should
not receive it To say against them that are more wiser than he

The xvii. branch of Pride. Shame to do good
Willing to be good and have shame.
By weakness and fault of courage. For to love negligently any good that may
be. By weening that it is shame which is honor.
Having shame to be good and is not.
When they will accomplish the will of any person. Or when any loves that
which is not good. Or when they be sloathfull for to do good.
For to be like them that be evil.
When they rejoice them in evil company. To show the damage of himself and
other. For to obtain that he desires.


Here ends the branches and small spraies of the sin of Pride, and
hereafter follows the branches and spraies of Envy, and the names of them all
in order as they come. The first is noisomeness, the second is Detraction, the
third is Adulation, the fourth Susurration, the fifth sin is against the holy
Ghost, the sixth Suspection, the seventh Accusation, the eighth Excusation, the
ix. Vnthankfullnesse, the x. to judge, the xi. Substraction, the twelfth
drawing other to sin, the thirteenth false love.
The first branch of Envy. Noysomness.
Sorrow of the wealth of his neighbor.
For to desire thy neighbors harm. For thou may not sustain to see his
wealth. To the end that thou may oppress them in misery.
Not glad of the wealth of his neighbor.
When he has done injury in time past, Or has not given to thee that thou
requiredst. Or thou may not see the increasing of his good.
To be glad of his neighbors hurt.
That thou do to him, or art causer. Or of that other does and not thy self.
Or that he suffers by the justice divine.

The ii. branch of Envy. Detraction.
For cause of lightness.
By evil accustomance so for to do. Or to accomplish the will of some folk.
Not taking heed if their words may annoy other.
For cruel hate.
Finding any ill that is not good ne faithful. In reporting that they heard
say* or that it is true To say they have heard ill by other and have not.
In lying wittingly.
To the end to cause some to have trouble and damage. To the end that no wealth
come to him they hate. Or to the end that he be thereby defamed.

The iii. branch of Envy. Adulation.
To annoy under color of good favor.
To say that they know the which they know not. That they understand to be
greater than it is. Nourish, sustain, or defend other in folly.
Nourish ill in fair semblance.
Saying that profits or noyeth by flattery. Sometime flatter venial,
sometime mortal, Saying evil behind, and fair before.
Holding his peace suffering to do ill.
For to have any winning or profit, For to compare or please some person, Or
not to lose the love of him that does evil.

The iiii. branch of Envy. Susurration.
Causing discord and strife*
By persuasions moving the parties. Or by false tales and making of lesings,
And in reporting of cursed language.
Making strife to last long.
For thou will have a man's love only, Or thou would have help to annoy
another. Or not caring for the wealth of them that be at discord,
Not laboring for peace.
By malice, that thou would not have the peace made. For thou will not travel
for to make peace. And being diligent to travel for it.

The v. branch of Envy. Sin aga. the holy ghost.
Slandering the good people.
Turning their good name into evil. Seeking means for to trouble their minds.
Withdrawing them from the love of people.
Weening that it is pain to serve God.
In abusing them of the graces of God. Being sloathfull in doing good works.
Not loving God.
Not helping the good people.
The which suffers for the love of God, Or for penance of their sins, Or for
to get the glory of our Lord.

The vi. branch of Envy. Suspection.
To believe too soon.
By whatsoever occasion indifferently. To believe any thing that is said
shortly, Be it true or false without any advisement.
Believing over faithfully.
That the which thou should not believe. Or that thou art over light in
believing, Or that thou iudgest the good without discretion,
Often times to believe.
Things unbeleevable and which may not be. When diverse times thou have been
deceived, For thou may not but believe.

The vii. branch of Envy. Accusation.
Of troth.
When it is for vengeance of him that is accused. When it is for lightness that
they have to accuse other. Or to please him to whom they do accuse unto.
Falsely.
When they find the evil with which they accuse. When they know him that they
accuse not guilty. When they accuse the guilty because of hate.
Of doubtful things.
Seeking occasion to noy him that is accused. Affirming to be true the
uncertainty of their accuse. Imposing the harm that they ween be, and know it
not

The viii. branch of Envy. Excusation.
By words
Which be doubtful having double understanding. Manifestly, and which they
know to be false. Seeking occasion to hide the evil deed.
By force of swearing.
Putting the fault on him that did it not. For to show himself innocent of the
fault. For to avoid the punishment of his fault.
By the holy gospel.
Though he be constrained to forswear him. And worse if they do it wilfully. Or
to swear ere they know wherefore they swear.

The ix branch of Envy. Vnthankfullnesse.
Not knowing the benefits of God.
How much or how well they have done. By what bounty for without desert he
gives us them. Or what thing is worthy to retribute to himself.
Doing ill for good.
To him which did help thee in thy need. Unto him which counseled thee in thy
necessity. Unto him that defended and kept thee from peril.
Not yielding goodness for goodness.
But done evil to him that has done thee good. Neither do evil nor good to
him that did thee good. For receiving a great benefit yield a small.

The x branch of Envy. To Judge.
The deeds of other not appertaining.
By ignorance ere they know him. In doubt of that which they know not. Or to
judge without being required,
Doing false judgments.
For any gifts received or to receive. For love or for hate. Lightly for
certain malice.
Evil to be good or contrarily.
By lightness for they been accustomed. Or so to do weening to do it by sport.
Or wittingly willing for to annoy another.

The xi branch of Envy. Substraction.
In temporal things.
Not giving to the poor goods that be superfluous. Retaining lawful goods
without departing. Goods that are exposed in evil usages
In spiritual things.
Not being busy about the salvation of sinners. Not admonishing sinners to
leave their sin. Not showing to other the good that they can.
Or of Counsel.
Not giving counsel to them that ask it. Or giving evil counsel willingly.
Not counselling when they may them that do ill.

The xii. of branch of Envy. Drawing other to sin.
By example.
When they do evil before their subjects. When any leads another in company
to do ill. Or under the color of good do great hurt.
By counsel.
Drawing the great to ill, that thine may show less. Or by their sin more
delectably, And be glad that they consent to sin with them.
By force.
Of requiring or admonishing. Not ceasing till they consent to evil. By
oppression, and in constraining them.

The xiii. branch of Envy. False love.
For the love and favor of man.
Them that favor thee and do thy will: Them that may noy thee to the end they
do not. To the end thou may be seen gentle and meek.
For earthly profit.
Feigning thee to be a friend to him, and art not. Feigning that thou love
him more than thou do. Showing to be his friend, and art his enemy.
For fleshly humanity.
Defending or sustaining any in their evil. Promoting them which art not
worthy to be. For to labor to live more deliciously.


Here ends the branches and small spraies of Envy, and follows the branches
and small sprays of wrath, as Iniquity, Hatred, Continual, Consenting,
Frowardly, Homicide, Vengeance, Impatience, Clamor, Blasphemy. And out of each
of these ten branches, comes nine other small branches, and so the whole
number is xcix. branches, the which lets a man that he may not love Good ne
his own soul, and for this sin it is hard to be accustomed in a man, and be
saved.
The i. branch of Wrath. Iniquity,
Mocking himself.
Leting other to love that mocketh thee, For declarations that thou have in
mocking. Or that thou art accustomed so to do.
Cursing.
Other in his thought without speaking. Or of his mouth by words. Sowing
discord and noise between people.
Deceiving.
Giving wilful counsel for to do evil. Awaiting the sinner for to do evil.
Seeing sin, and not reprove it when they may.

The ii. branch of Wrath. Hatred.
Discord.
By manifests and rancours. Seeming a friend and have rancour at the heart For
to make peace and keep malice in thy mind
Injury.
In defaming other. In taking his goods from him. In hurting his body or his
good name.
Conspiration.
to schismatise or procure division in the Church Coniuring in persons in good
or in evil. Conspiring in any works.

The iii. branch of Wrath. Continuing in vility.
Reprevings.
Pepreeve the poverty in which they are. The flagellations that they have or
had. Or that they be come of a poor kindred.
Sharp words.
Provoking other to anger. Full of repreeving and iniurys. Such as may bear
hurt and damage,
Greeving his neighbors.
By outrageous words and sayings. By hurting of his person, or homicide. For to
take from him his goods or renown.

The iiii. branch of Wrath. Consenting.
Not amending
When they have domination upon the sinner. Or when he is familiar with them.
That helps to do evil and might let it.
Rejoicing in evil.
Praising and rejoicing the sinners. And not to mourn for the sin they have
done. Nor correcting them that be evil.
Hoping to do evil.
By help that thou give to them. For thou defendest them that do evil. By
counsel that thou give.

The v. branch of Wrath. Frowardly.
Impugning goodness.
Believing in any heresy. For to have meat and drink. For the love of one and
hate of another.
Hanting strifes.
By customance, for the rejoice in them. By manifest hate that they will make
appear. By secret rancours in their hearts.
Strife by words
As in questions inutile and froward. For to show his science. For to gainsay
him to whom they speak.

The vi. branch of Wrath. Homicide.
In defending.
Having will to slay and kill. Himself or other without will to slay. To slay
unadvisedly or ignorantly.
Slaying wilfully.
By treason. By hate. For he which they slay is good.
Which they ween not to evil.
Weening to do well and do slay some man. In coniecturing any thing ioyously.
Or by him give any medicine.

The vii. branch of Wrath. Vengeance.
For wrong doing.
Saying semblable injuries. In saying more greater injuries. Or injuries though
that they been less.
Weening that it be his damage and is not.
Noying him that corrects thee for thy wealth. Or do evil to him that does
thee good, If it displease thee they have done for thy weal.
By fault of something.
If any gives or lends thee not their goods. That he has not done that he
is not bound to do. Or has not helped thee to do thy ill will.

The viii. branch of Wrath. Impatience.
In judgments of God.
When that which pleases God displeases thee. Or for the will of God pleases
thee not. Or thou hate that which God would have done*
In his wretchedness.
If thou be in any malady or sickness. Or if thou be in great poverty and
need. Or if thou have any troubles or adversitys.
Of wrongs of his neighbors.
For they have missaid thee in words, Or they have misdone to thy person. Or
they have misdone in thy goods.

The ix. branch of Wrath. Clamor.
Debate for in utile things.
As of beauty and fairness of women. Or of his lineage, friends and parents. Or
of things which do annoy.
To make leasing and false tales.
By very malice and hate. By vaunting, craking, and boasting. By fraud and
unfaithfullnesse,
Clattering.
To vanquish by force of speaking. Or for to annoy by clattering. Or for
pleasure that they take in it:

The x. branch of Wrath. Blaspheming.
Knowing of God the which appertains not to him.
As of his sovereign, might, and puissance. Or of great goodness in us. Or of
his right wise justice.
Affirming of good things unworthily.
By any error in which they be. For dread and fear of loosing. For covetise of
winning.
To say that is good that is not
In believing as does Idolaters. In opinion by evil understanding. Doing
against the ordinances of the Church.


Here ends the br^nches and small spraies of the sin of Wrath. And
hereafter follows the xvii. branches of Sloth, as Evil thought, Annoy of
wealth, readiness to evil Pusilanimity Evil will, breaking vows,
Impenitence, Infidelity, Ignorance, Vain Sorrow, slowly, evil hope, Curiosity,
Idleness, Evagation, letting to do good, Desolation. Out of the which xvii.
branches comes Cliv small branches, which brings a man to everlasting
damnation and pains perpetual.
The first branch of Sloth. Ev^l thought.
Superfluous thoughts.
To delight in thinking evil. Thinking that sin is a sweet thing. Long abiding
in thinking evil.
Dolorous cogitations.
How they may hurt any secretly. That imputes his deed unto other. How doing
evil they may be said good.
Detestable thought.
How they may do evil. How doing evil they may persevere How they may resist
to the good.

The ii. branch of Sloth. Annoy of wealth.
To sin by custom.
For that other sins in like wise. For the custom is so for to do. For
there is none that reproves the evil doing.
Sinning by malice.
When any loves evil, and does accomplish it. When any loves the good and
does it not. When any hates the good and loves the evil.
Or by desire not to love it.
When any does good against his will. When any rejoices not in doing good.
When it displeases them not if they do evil.

The iii. branch of Sloth. Readiness to ill.
By constance.
In leaving the good which they know. Changing often times their purpose and
counsel. Weak in adversity, and raise himself in prosperity.
By pusillanimity.
Withdrawing him from the good. Mistrusting in the grace of God. Fearing to
begin any good thing.
By curiosity.
Seeking new things and unprofitable. Pleasantly to hear tales and fables.
Seeking new tidings by his own will.

The iiii. branch of Sloth. Pusillanimity.
Dread where they ought not.
Dreading that which is to come is no damage. Loosing the spiritual goods for
the temporal. If temporal adversity seem over grievous.
Dread more than they should
Making great sorrow for that thou have lost. Sorrowing that they have which
they desire. Making sorrow if any thing hap against thy will
Dread them they should not.
As detractors when thou live justly. As defending the evil for to please
them. Or it noyeth them not if any do well.

The v. branch of Sloth. Evil will.
Will to do evil.
That it be to the dishonor of God To the damage and prejudice of his
neighbors. To the damnation of the soul.
Customably for to do evil.
For the declaration of thy evil. For the displeasure of the good. For they do
that which they please and will.
Delighting in evil as much as they may.
Not resisting evil cogitations. Loving evil delectations. Appetiting that
they may delight in evil.

The vi. branch of Sloth. Breaking vows.
By negligence.
When any makes a vow and mispraiseth to do it. That does less to vow then he
has promised. That fullfilleth not his vow as he should
By forgetting.
Of secret vows or things to them belonging. Of vow promised to himself or
other. Of vow made to enter into religion.
By dispraising.
Not accomplishing his vow when he may Or that may not and does none other good
semblable Or that they have no letting for to accomplish it.

The vii. branch of Sloth. Impenitence.
Living and do no penance.
By final penance and never to repent. By delation from day to day of
repenting. By misprising that they will not repent them.
Not having shame to sin.
When after sin they be ready to sin again. When they shame not of the sin they
have done. Or without sorrow rejoice them to have done ill.
Purpose for to sin.
Being in will to accomplish mortal sin. After they have sinned purpose to
abide in it. Seeking occasion to fall into every sin.

The viii. branch of Sloth. Infidelity.
Not believing that they should believe.
As the Jews believed, and other unfaithful men. That will not hear the
articles of the faith. Or that hears them and will not believe in them.
Believing that they should not.
In false Gods as do the Sarazens. In Idols or in some Simulachres. Or believe
in devilish things as witches do.
Believing unstedfastly.
Doubt in that they ought to believe steadfastly. Believe, and not steadfastly as
they ought to do. Easily to let himself be deceived of his faith.

The ix. branch of Sloth. Ignorance.
Indiscretion.
Do without counsel which should be counseled. Doing without manner they
ought to hold. Doing without wisdom things that is needful.
That they ought to understand.
Dispraising knowledge, and will not be taught. Not traveling to learn that
they ought to know. Not purposing and not caring for to learn.
Not willing to know.
For they run, and will take no pain to learn. For to have excusation of not
knowing. For sloth and negligence of learning.

The x. branch of Sloth. Vain sorrow.
In noysomness of living.
When good things be displeasant. When all things been annoying. When all that
they do is done heavily.
False hope.
Presuming too much of the mercy of God. Not going from sin, trust in the mercy
of God. Living in sin without the dread of God.
Dispraising.
For the straightness of justice of God. For the greatness of the sin that
they have co^mited. To mistrust in the mercy of God.

The xi. branch of Sloth. Slownesse.
Toward forbidden things.
When any exposes him too much in peril of sin. When any are too much assured
for to do sin. When any exposes him too much in temptations.
Toward wholesome counsel.
Not willing to be good, and leave the doing ill. Not honoring the good, and
love it better than the ill. Dispraising the counsel of good folk.
Toward the commandment
Not doing the commandment that they ought. Dispraising the commandment, or
him that made it. Not loving any thing that is commanded.

The xii. branch of Sloth. Evil hope.
Despise men of good fame.
Continuing in doing evil operations. In having hope to do evil all only. Or
doing them both together.
Not fearing shame.
Not caring what thing is said of thee. Nor caring if any be slandered by thee.
Not seeking that any be edified by thee.
Doing good in evil intention.
Fraudulently and thou know it well. Without discretion not caring to whom
nor how. Cauteously for thou will not know it.

The xiii. branch of Sloth. Curiosity.
Seeking unprofitable things.
Willing to understand the thing that is cause of sin Laboring to confound
other by force of language. For to be called wise of Idiots and fools.
Delighting to vain things.
To draw and go to such as be dissolutio^s. Or that they do and make dissolute.
Or make thee take heed unto all vanities.
Doing that none other can do.
Making new things that were never seen. Or that they learn things that be
evil. Or things that be only for to make folk laugh.

The xiv. branch of Sloth. Idleness.
Ceasing to do good.
That is to say, good cogitations. To good words. And to good works.
Seeking to do evil.
That is, to know the concupiscence of the flesh. The concupisence of the eyne
is avarice. And to live proudly.
Not resisting to do evil.
For love that they have to evil. For annoy they have to goodness. For
negligence of themselves.

The xv. branch of Sloth. Evagation.
In idle things.
Exposing him in vanities. Not withdrawing him from vanities. Willing to abide
in vanities.
Or delectable things.
For they been evil and pleasant. Abiding by long time and space. When thy
will is thereunto provoked.
And wicked things.
How cautiously they may endomage and hurt. Or the more grievously hinder. Or
the more longer annoy.

The xvi. branch of Sloth. Letting to do good.
Consenting to them that do evil.
By malice for to accomplish their will. For hate that they have to the good
folk. Or for hate of good they might do.
Not helping the good.
When they may have no profit without they help. There as they be in peril.
Whereas they defail without having succor.
Hindering the good.
As by himself. Or by other persons. Or hold from them that they owe them.

The xvii. branch of Sloth. Dissolution.
As in vain things.
In the beholding folk sporting them by vanity. Setting their eye to behold any
vanity. Being in places popular and public.
In wanton things.
In lusts of the body. In lightness of courage. By force of singing and
crying*
Or in foolish rejoicing.
By laughing too much and over long. To be without gravity when they should be
so To provoke other to laugh.


Here begins the twenty branches and boughs of Covetise, as compunction,
Rapine, Usury, withholding debt, Not yielding committed, Simony, Sacrilege,
Theft, being proprietary, taking gifts uniustly, To have too much, Expending
abundantly, Fraud, false compunction, Leasing, Swearing, Forswearing, False
witness, Plays, being vagabond. Of the which twenty branches comes other
small twiggs or branches to the number of an hundred and thirty. And so the
whole number of them is an hundred and fifty.

The first branch of Covetise. Compunction.
Solicitude of thought.
Forget the spiritual goods for the temporal goods. Be negligent to the
spiritual, dilligent to the temporal. Dispraise the goods of the soul for them
of the body.
How to win without convenance.
Holding that without noysance they ne may. Procuring goods of other for to
have profit. Willing to have profit for their solicitude.
And may not withdraw them from it.
Getting temporal goods by great delectation. Being holden in love to get
temporal goods. Or to vaunt him to get more than he can.

The ii. branch of Covetise. Rapine.
Taking by force the goods of other.
To his subjects, or less than he. To his enemies by what manner that it be.
To his neighbor by subtle mean.
Doing violence.
To his subjects for him of temporal goods. Or likewise by spiritual things
with threatenings. Or in spiritual things making promises.
By curveis and subsedies.
Doing unduly without right and reason. Or that before they were accustomed so
to do. Or that they be done by force of threatenings.

The iii. branch of Covetise. Usury.
By covenant made.
When any sels the dearer because of abiding. Lend money to have more largely.
Or for because they lend and do abide.
Without covenant, but in hope.
Not lend without they have a pledge. Or by signs to be sure to win by lending.
When any receives or lends to have benefit.
To sell for more for giving days,
As be open usurers. Or that they think to get money by they sell. Or by
accustomance so for to sell.

The iiii. branch of Covetise. Withholding.
Denying it.
Debt thou know well thou do owe. Or the debt thou have forgotten. The
which is openly know that thou owe.
Or stealing it.
Hoping to give it him another time. Without will to give it him, though thou
may. Not having power to pay, and ask no mercy.
To forget it.
Which be paid and ask it him again. Not giving children that they have of
their friends Detaining willingly that to other belongs.

The v. branch of Covetise. not yield. things commised
Withholding them by deed.
By strength or violence distribute them to himself. By fraud make them to lose
them that owe them. Saying they hold them under color of love,
Defer for to yield them.
To the end mean while they may profit them. Or that by some mean they may keep
them. Or to have meed for yielding them.
Lending them to other.
To have recompense for such lending. By curiosity to lend that which is not
his. By ambition to say is his which is not*

The vi. branch of Covetise. Simony.
Selling spiritual things by words.
To people adulterous by their flattering. By leading of process and to
unworthy people. By the evil words of other.
Selling spiritual things. by price.
And taken before such thing be common. Or taken after they be common. Putting
cause wherefore the same was not.
Selling spiritual things by prayers.
Sometime doing with threatenings. Or sometime without threatenings. And sometime
with violence and force.

The vii. branch of Covetise. Sacrilege.
Taking sacred things in holy places.
As the goods of the Church to be taken in the Church Withholding dismes and
things of the (...) Taking the goods of the Church undeserved
Or hallowed things in place not hallowed.
Taking the goods of the Church where they ^e Unworthily distributing the goods
of the (...) A lay man having dismes saying to be his.
Or things not hallowed in holy places.
By quests or any thing longing to the Church All goods for surety put in the
Church. Things or casualties to them allowed

The viii. branch of Covetise. Theft.
stealing without it be known.
For him that thou robbst did thee damage aforetime. Or thou do it of thy
proper malice. Or for thy simpleness and ignorance.
Having the goods of other hiding them.
For to withhold them more peaceably. For fear to be punished. Or for thou will
always persevere in ill.
Consenting to him that does evil.
For it pleases thee that such robbery be done. Or thou have profit by such
robbery. Or for thou fear him that does such theft.

The ix. branch of Covetise. Being proprietary.
A religious of the goods of his religion.
To have without knowledge of his prelate. Or by consent of the prelate which
appertains not. Or have license to approper too much to him.
Men or women married.
When one has good without knowledge of the other. Or that one gives too much
to his kin. When one spends privily the common goods.
Of the patrimony of the crucifixe.
In taking more than of necessity. Unworthily and where it appertains not to
be. Spending it in evil usage.

The x. branch of Covetise. Taking gifts uniustly.
To do hurt.
And for to bear damage unto other. In accusing other wrongfully Or sometime
accusing for a just cause.
To cause dishonesty.
As for to make treason or conspiration. To make immundicity and dishonest
things. Or in taking both the adverse parties.
To sell justice.
To the end to do his particular profit. Hasting justice, and to wrong him that
has right. Deferring to do right to him it longs to.

The xi. branch of Covetise. Having too much.
Getting overmuch
By violence done for friends, or for silver. Or by usury uniustly common to.
Or by frauds and deceptions acquired.
Withholding overmuch.
To the end they may be more honored and dread. To the end to have the more
their delights. Or to have more possessions than other.
Sorrowing (...) they can not get.
For envy of them that be ^icher than he. By delighting him in riches. For fear
to have scarcity of good.

The xii. branch of Covetise. Spending abundantly.
Things justly gotten.
Giving uniustly not caring to whom. Leesing disordinately the goods they have.
Abusing and foolish using they know well.
Things uniustly gotten.
In retaining them against conscience. Doing alms with rapine and usury.
Spending them in carnalities.
Things not being his.
In approprying them to his singular usage. Or approprying them to the usage of
other. Spending them superfluously on other persons.

The xiii. branch of Covetise. Fraud.
In forecastings.
By promises that they may receive. By threatenings in like wise. Or by sweet
words,
Being double
Showing fair semblance for the good of other. Or by such semblant diffame
other. Or by fair semblant to hurt other.
Procuring evil.
To him that weeneth thou art his friend, To him thou know to be thine
enemy. Or indifferently to his friend or enemy.

The xiv. branch of Covetise. False compunction
Evil reckoning.
Of that they owe to other justly. Of that which is ought by any ways. Or that
which is ought to other than him.
When they do know it and yield it not.
For dread to yield it, or to be noted. For shame they have to do it. For
avarice and love of retaining.
Consenting to evil, and do it not.
Holding his peace of that he knows. Doing help to him that misreckoneth.
Willing to hinder him that is misreckoned.

The xv. branch of Covetise. Leasing.
For merriness
For covetise to please. For pleasance that they have of leasing. Lightly to
swear for they know not.
To make other to win.
Hiding that hurts none ne helps other. Sometime that it before temporal
goods. Sometime to prove any person.
Fraudulently.
That profits sometime, and sometime noyeth. That profits to none, and
noyeth to some. In the doctrine and promise of religion*

The xvi. branch of Covetise. Swearing.
The members of God.
In contemning God and his Saints. For to show that he is fierce. Or that they
take pleasure to do injury to God.
Oftentimes.
By evil custom to swear often. For pleasure that they have to swear. For
contemptment of him they swear.
Incautely.
Not taking heed what they swear. Doing ill to verify that they swear for. Not
considering that oaths should be kept.

The xvii. branch of Covetise. Forswearing.
By words.
Dolorously to deceive and beguile. Unwisely of that they know not. Willingly
of what they know not.
By faith interposed.
In receiving any of the sacraments of the Church* In the false things that be
lawful. Or in things that be not lawful.
by touching of things made.
Swearing untruly in will to deceive other. Or swearing truth, weening to swear
false. Or that swears false weening it to be true.

The xviii. branch of Covetise. False witness.
That thing which they know not.
Bearing witness of the thing they know not. Witnessing the thing wherein they
be ignorant. Dissembling to be ignorant of they know not.
The thing that they do know.
For praise they have or ought to have. For love of him for whom they be
witness. For malice that they will not say the truth.
The thing that they ween to know.
For false opinion they have of the thing. Say the thing is true, and know it
not. Not inquiring for the truth, and may well.

The xix. branch of Covetise. Plays.
Which be defended.
As plays made by enchantment. Dishonesties in provoking to dishonesty. Or the
which may greatly noy.
That be perilous.
For pleasance of himself to please other. By accustomance to make such plays.
Or in hope to have winning to do such plays.
With persons not appertaining.
A lay man to play with a religious. Or a lay man with a Priest or Clerk. Or
with any man of penance.

The xx. branch of Covetise. Being vagabond.
For to seek ways for to be idle.
Feigning themselves and be not. Doing such fantasy without necessity. Or in
so doing for to deceive other.
To be idle.
Among such as travel and labor. Or among them feigning to be sick and are
whole. Or showing themselves more sick than they be.
To obtemper their will.
In sustaining things sharp to sustain. Deceiving by feigned words or by envy.
Weening to live without any thing that is needful


Here ends the branches and small spraies of the sin of Covetise, and here
follows the five branches of Gluttony, each of them to follow other in order,
as to seek delicate meats, greediness, delicious dressing, eating without
hour, to make excess. Out of the which five branches springs and grows
small spraies to the number of xlv. the which brings every man and woman that
planteth them in the arbor of their bodies unto delectation, unto the kitchen
of infernal gulf, there to be fed and made satiate with the Devil the chief
cook of the kitchen of hell.
The first branch of Gluttony. seeking delicate meats.
For the good savor.
Against the profit of the soul. Against the health of the body. Against the
health of both together.
For the great novelty.
For novelty that it is delicious. Eating fruits because they were good and
ripe. By compositions of the conditions required.
In diverse apparelling.
By customance, so well to dress it. By lightness to be over-abundant without
need. By affection and pleasure that they take.

The ii. branch of Gluttony Greediness.
In appetiting.
Meats more precious than longs for them. Mean meats and be not content with
them. Less meats than the state where they be requ^red
Too much delighting.
In being curious to fill his belly. Not serving God for filling of his womb.
Eating too often without keeping any hour.
To much filling them.
As much as they may devour meats. When he may fill him and not being content.
Not parting to the poor such meat as they have.

The iii. branch of Gluttony. Delicious dressing^
By diverse ma^ners.
For to satisfy all his desires. Not refusing to his belly any thing it
desires. Not refusing any evil appetite.
Or exquisitely.
By art otherwise than other makes. By study how well that be difficil to do.
By labor and pain that they take to dress them.
Condignly.
Needful by diverse manners of matters. Delicious for the sweet and fragrant
savors. Sumptuous* not caring for any cost.

The iiii. branch of Gluttony. Eating without hour.
Out of time.
Before a lawful hour, and without necessity. Or after, when the lawful hour
is past. Or what hour it be, against commandment.
Many times.
What thing thou appetitest to eat. Manifestly* that other may know it. Or
secretly, when thou only wilt.
Unlawfully.
As on fasting days to eat flesh. In place, as eating in the Church. As meat,
as eating forbidden things.

The v. branch of Gluttony. To make excess.
In quantity of meats.
Eating more than is needful. Eating so much that it grieveth to soul and
body. Doing damage under color of sickness.
In over deer meats.
Not caring what they cost if they be delectable. Over delicious, and therefore
more dear. Dispraising meats of light price.
Using other men's tables.
For lechery and licorousnesse. For company that they may eat the more. For to
fulfill the better their appetite.


Here ends the branches and small spraies of Gluttony, and hereafter
follows the v. branches and spraies of Lechery, as they follow and ensue one
after another, the which be these, Lechery, Immundicity, not giving the debt,
abusing of his five wits, and Superfluity: out of the which branches, issues
and grows many other small branches and spraies, to the number of xlv. The
which branches if they be fixed and set in the inward delight of a man or
woman, will make them grow to the eternal perdition both of body and soul.
The first branch of Letchery. Letchery.
Fornication.
With all women married and widows. With a maiden yet being a virgin. With
common women, or them that are corrupt.
Adultery.
When a man companieth with other than his wife. Or women with other than their
husbands. Or that they be both in marriage.
Excess.
With man or woman of their lineage. With any men or women of their affinity. Or
that the one party be of religion.

The ii. branch of Letchery. Immundicity.
Of thought.
Long delectation of thinking of Letchery. Giving consent to such delectation.
Enforcing him to accomplish his will by work.
Of body.
Pollution by night by too much eating and drinking By habitation or company of
women. Evil cogitation to accomplish such work.
Of both together.
Moving or touching the flesh by delectation. Accomplishing work and of will
naturally. Or any wise not naturally.

The iii. branch of Letchery. Not giving the debt.
For hate.
When they love other than their party. When they know that they be not loved
of their party. Or they are despightfull and rigorous.
For to show traveling.
For they fear the infernal pains. For dread to have poverty. For fear of
labor that they have of nourishing.
For abomination.
Some have abomination in that they be accustomed. Or for immundicity of the
work. When any dispraise or hate the company of his party.

The iv. branch of Letchery. Abusing thy five wits.
Exposing themselves in peril.
Sometime by reason of some persons. And other times danger of the place. And
other seasons by reason of the time.
Not drawing from it.
Of the work when they know it is naught. From the peril, and know it is
dangerous. Or for they provoke to such work in peril.
Delighting them in it.
In the work and sin of the flesh. Or desire and will to accomplish it. Or in
thought and memory to have done it.

The v. branch of Letchery. Superfluity.
In clothing.
In Jewels, rings, signets, and ouches. In preciousness of gowns, girdles, and
clothing. In the composition or fashion newly gotten.
By delights.
By wantonness of children playing or being idle. By delication of their body
taking all their eases. In doing all that the heart desires.
By expense.
Spending largely for the praise of the world. Giving where it appertains not
to give. For his delights has spent too much of his goods.


Here ends the branches of all the seven deadly sins as they be before
rehearsed, with all the small branches. Also showing how three comes of the
great branches each by himself. And out of them three grows ix. and in every
branch has small spraies springing out of them. So there is no man or woman
living, but he sins venially, as it is written, Septies in die cadit j^stus.
Lo if the righteous man do sin seven times a day by venial sins, then we
wretched sinners how often do we sin in a day? God wot, full often. But yet for
venial sin is many remedies. Also for deadly sin is few remedies, and but
four specially, as Confession, Contrition, Satisfaction, and Penance. But the
first is, thou must be sorry for the sins. Secondly to make a meek
confession. Thirdly, do satisfaction. And fourthly, perform thy penance
adjoined by thy confessor, for penance is debt that we must pay to God for
sin committed, and therefore never look to have forgiveness of thy sins
without repentance. And sin is perilous before the Lord Jesus Christ, for
three manner of reasons. The first* he gives no warning when he smites thee.
The second, for as he finds thee, so he will judge thee. The third, when thou
art dead, remedy is past and gone.
CHAP. VIII. Here follows the pains of hell comminatories of sins, to
punish the sins as Lazarus recounted after that he was risen, as he had seen in
the parts infernal, as it appears by these figures ensuing one after another.


Our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, a little before his blessed passion,
being in Bethany, entered into the house of a man named Simon, for to take his
corporal refection: And as he was sitting at the table with his Apostles and
Disciples, there being Lazarus brother to Mary Magdalen and Martha, the which
our Lord had raised from death to life, the which thing Simon doubted, and
prayed our Lord for to command Lazarus to show before the assistants what he had
seen in the other world: and our Lord gave him leave to speak. And then the
said Lazarus recounted how that he had seen in the parts infernal of hell, many
great and intolerable pains, whereas sinful men and women were pained. First
of pride, and consequently of all the seven deadly sins, each pain by himself.

FIrst said Lazarus, I have seen in hell wheels right high, set on an hill, the
which was to look on in manner of mils, incessantly turning about by great
impetuosity, roaring and whirling as it were thunder. And the wheles were fixed
full of hooks and cramp^irons of iron and steel, and on them were hanged and
turned the proud men and women for their pride, with their Prince, captain, and
master, Lucifer.



PRide among all other sins, is a king, a captain, and master: and as a king
has a great company of people, in the same manner has pride a great company of
vices. And as a king keeps that which is his, in like wise does pride keep
the proud folk that be in his jurisdiction. Great sign of reprobation it is to
persevere long in pride. Pride then is a sin that displeases God above all
other sins, as much as humility pleases him among virtues. And there is no
sin that makes a man more semblable to the Devil than pride does. For the
proud man will not be as other men, but he must be as the Pharisie with the
devil. And for that the proud man will inhance himself above other men* the
devil does with him as the Crow having a hard nut in her bil, the which she may
not crack, she bears it up a hie in the air, and then lets it fall upon a
stone whereon it breaks, and then she descends and eats it. In like wise
the devil raises the proud man and woman for to let them fall in the hard
pains of hell. As much difference is between pride and humility, as the chafe
and the corn, for the chafe is light and mounteth high, and the wind carries
it about, and so is lost, and the corn which is heavy abides low on the
ground, and is gathered up and put in garners of the farmer, and is kept for
the common profit, and the chafe is burnt, lost, and devoured of beasts. And
in this wise are the proud people raised and enhansed through the entisement of
the fiend of hell, and then fall down by the moist rain of death, which makes
them heavy, and causes them to tumble by the strength of their superbious
blasts into the furnace everlasting, and there to be burnt and devoured with
the horrible beasts of hell. Secondly, said Lazarus, I have seen in hell a
flood frozen as ice, wherein the envious men and women were plunged unto the
navel, and then suddenly came over them a right cold and a great wind, that
greeved, and pained them right sore, and when they would evite and eschew the
wonderful blasts of the wind, they plunged into the water with great shouts
and cries lamentable to hear.



These be the envious People.
ENvy is dolor and sorrow of the heart at the Felicity and prosperity of
other, the which sin is soveraignly cursed, for that is it contrary to Charity,
that is sovereign head of all virtues, whereby it is great sign of reprobation,
for by it the fiends know them that shall be damned, as Charity is sign of
salvation, and whereby God knows who shall be saved. Envious people be
fellows unto the Devil. For if so be that an envious man do win, then he is
very glad, and if he lose, he is evil angry with them. Envious men be so
infect and corrupt, that good odors to them stinketh, and sweet things unto
them seem sour, in like wise is the good name and prosperity of other, but
stinking things, and sour to them be sweet, the which be vices, reproaches,
adversities and evil fortunes, that they know or hear said of other. The
envious folk seek their wealth in the adversity of other, as when of the harm
of other, they seek the good in rejoicing them, but with this they be not yet
satisfied, but of a new they be tormented, for they have not such joy without
displeasure and affliction of the heart, whereby they be tormented, for he
that seeks his wealth in the adversity of another, is like to him that
seeks the fire in the bottom of a water, or looks for wool on an Vrchins
back, the which things be but follies and abusions. Envy is but the goods and
felicitys of this world, for the cursed sin of Envy may not ascend into
Heaven. It is a sin difficil to heal, for it takes root and is fixed in the
heart secretly, wherefore it is hard and impossible to be done away by
medicine, wherefore with great pains is any made whole that is infected with
it. The envious men's tongues be likned unto a three-edged sword, that hurts
and cutteth three manner of ways, The first, he hurts and wounds his own
soul. The second, him that he tells his tale unto, and thirdly, he slays
him by whom he tells his cursed tale.

Thus ends Envy, and follows the History of Wrath.
Wrath.
THirdly said Lazarus, I have seen in Hell, a great Cave tenebrous and obscure,
full of tables like Butchers stalls or great butchery, whereas irefull men and
women were through pierced with trenching knives, and sharp glaives, and with
long spears pierced their bodies, wherewith the most horrible and fearful
butchers of hell hewed, and betrenched them with their glaves and knives,
impitiously without ceasing.



AS peace makes the Conscience of a man to be the dewlling place of God, so
cursed wrath makes it the habitation of the Devil. Wrath efisceth and leeseth
the eye of reason, for in a wrathful man reason is banished: there is nothing
keeps so much the image of God in man, as sweetness, peace, and love, for
Almighty God will be there where peace and concord is, but wrath chaseth them
from man, so that our Lord may h^ve no abiding; the wrathful man is like to a
demoniack, the which has (...) devil within him, causing him to torment and
strive with himself, foaming at the mouth, and gnashing with his teeth, for the
intolerable pain the enemy does unto him. In lik^ wise the wrathful man is
tormented by wrath, and does oftentimes worse than the demoniack, for without
patience they beat the one with the other, saying iniurys, reproaches, villanys
and give themselves to the devel body and soul, and say and do many unlawful
and domageable things By wrath sometime the Devil gets an whole generation
or all a country. When wrath is set, then comes noise, and then vengeance,
that destroieth and loses all* the which happens sometime through one
wrathful man, as an irefull does the which moves and puts strife among
other. The fisher troubles the water that the fish may not see his net, to the
end that they may go therein and be taken: In like sort the Devil troubles a
man by wrath, to the end that he know not the harm that he committed by his
wrathful heart and courage.

FOurthly said Lazarus, I have seen in hell an horrible hall dark and tenebrous
wherein was a great multitude of serpents big and small, whereas slothful men
and women were tormented with bitings and stingings of venomous worms, the
which peirced them through in diverse parts of their bodies wounding them to the
heart with unextinguishible pain.



Of Slothful people.
SLoth is tristesse of spiritual goods, that should be ordained to God,
wherefore they love to serve God as they ought to do with heart and mouth, and
by good operation, who that will love God, ought to know him to be the Redeemer
and Savior of all goodness that we have had and received every day,
knowledging our selves sinners. Great folly it is when by sloth in the time of
this breviate life we gather not goods for the life eternal. But in these days
many be slothful to do well, and diligent to do evil, so that if they were
diligent to do well as they be to do evil, they were right happy: also sloth
is the beginner of sin, and a great enemy to God, for he lets men and women
to serve God, and to know their maker and redeemer, and sender of all goodness
that they have here, they be great fools, that be so slothful here in this
little time of this short life, that will gather no goods to bring the soul to
everlasting life: But now adays people be slothful in doing of good, and full
diligent to evil, and if they were as diligent to do good as evil, they were
full of grace. Now he that will think as after his death is not wise for then
he shall have but the good deeds that he has done in his life before* then
shall he sorrow and plain of the time that he has lost by sloth, and shall
sorrow that he did no good deeds when he had time and space here in this world.

Here ends Sloth, and follows the History of Covetise.
Fifthly said Lazarus, I have seen in the infernal parts a great number of wide
cauldrons, and kettles, full of boiling lead and Oil, with other hot metals
molten, in the which were plunged and dipped the covetous men and women, for to
fulfill and replenish them of their insatiate covetise.



The Covetous Men and Women.
COvetise is a great sin, and wicked in the sight of God. For the covetous man
imagines more to get a penny, than the love of God, and had rather lose God
than one half penny: for oftentimes for a little thing he lies and forsweareth
himself, and sins deadly. The faith, hope, and charity that should be in
God, the covetous man puts in his riches. First faith, for he believes to
have such things the which be necessary for him, sooner for his goods, than by
the gift of God, as if that God might not help him, or as if that God had no
solicitude of his servants.

Also the covetous man has hope to have the more joy and consolations by his
riches than God may give them. And also the covetous man sets all his heart
on his goods, and not on God, and thus the Covetous man and woman have their
charity in their rich chests, coffers and bags. The covetous man has his heart
more on his goods than on God: there as is the heart, there is their love, and
love is charity, and so covetous men have their hearts on their goods. The
Covetous man sins gathering his goods, and in using it evil, and in loving
it overmuch, and sometimes better than he does God; the covetous man is taken
in the net of the devil, by the which he loses everlasting life for small
temporal goods* as the bird does go into the pitfall for a worm, and loses
his life: and as the mouse is taken in a fall or trap, and loses his life for
a little bakon. The covetous men and women be like curs or dogs, the which do
keep cartion, and when their bellies be full they lie down by it and keep away
the birds that they may not eat, but dies for hunger for fault that the curres
have too much. In like wise the covetous men withold the goods that poor men
may get none, and lets them dye for hunger. and holds them in their
subjection, and the devil holds the rich men in his subjection that does the
poor men wrong.

Thus ends the pain for the Covetous men.
Here follows the vi. pain of Hell.
THe vi. pain said Lazarus that I have seen (in Hell is in a vale) a flood foul
and stinking at the brim, in which was a table with towels right dishonestly,
whereas gluttons be fed with toades and other venomous beasts, and had to drink
of the water of the said flood,



THe throat is the gate of the body of man, so when enemies will take the
castle, if they may win the gate they will lightly have all the castle: So when
the devil may win the throat of a man by gluttony, easily he will have the
re^nant, and enter into the body accompanied of sins, for the gluttons consent
unto al vices. And for this cause it were necessary to have a good guard at the
gate, that the devil enter not. For when one holds a horse by the bridle, he
may lead him where he will, so does the devil the gluttenous man where him
list. The servant that is over easily nourished rebelleth often against his
master, the belly over filled with meat and drink is rebel to the soul, so
that it will do no good operations. By gluttony many be dead which might have
lived longer, and so they have bin homicides of themselves, for excess of too
much eating and drinking corrupts the bodies and engendereth sicknesses, the
which often abridgeth and shortneth the lives. And they that nourish well the
flesh, prepare meats for worms, and so the glutton is cook of worms. A man of
worship would be ashamed for to be a cook of a great Lord, more ashamed should
he be, to be a cook for worms. They that live after the desire of the flesh,
live after the rule of the Swine, in eating without measure like an
unreasonable beast. This is the hog as it were an Abbot over gluttonous
people, of whom they hold their order and regule, whereby they be constrained
to keep them in their cloister, that is, in the Tavern, and Alehouses. And
like wise as the hog their Abbot lies in a rotten dunghill or in the miry
puddle, so do they always lie in the stinking infection of gluttony, till they
be drunken and without wit.

The vii. pain said Lazarus, I have seen a field full of deep wells replenished
with fire and sulphur, whereout issued smoke thick and contagious, wherein all
lecherous persons were tormented incessantly with devils.



OF all the vii. deadly sins, Letchery pleases most unto the Devil, for it
fills and corrupts both the body and the soul together, and by Letchery the
Devil wins two souls at once, and many letcherous persons will avaunt
themselves, and say, that they may not have their full desire and lust of that
sin. Letcherous men and women be more deformed and ougly than the devil in
the superaboundance of that sin. He is a foolish merchant that makes a
bargain of the which he knows right well that he shall lose thereby, and
repent him of his bargain again. In like manner of wise, each Letcherous man
has great pain, and spends his goods and his understanding to fulfill and
accomplish his lusts and delights, and after repents him of his expense, and
yet the worst is he is in danger of his soul till he be repentant, and do
sufficient penance. The letcherous men and women living be tormented with
three infernal pains, as heat, stink, and remorse of their Conscience: For
they be hot by concupiscence, they be stinking by their immundicity, for such
sin is all stinking and maculateth the body and soul, where all other sins
file but the soul.

Also they be not without remorse of conscience for the offense they have done
to God, Letchery is the pit of the devil, wherein he makes sinners to fall,
to the which many helps the devil to cast themselves in it, when willingly
they go to the brimme, knowing that the devil will cast them in; good it is
not to hearken to women, better it is, not to behold them, and much better it
is not to touch them. To this sin belongs foul words, villain songs,
dishonest touchings, the which abhors not bawds, harlots, whores, and such
as frequenteth and persevereth in the same.

Thus ends the seven deadly sins, figured each by himself, like as Lazarus
had seen in the parts infernal.
CHAP. IX. Hereafter follows the third part of the Calendar and Compost of
Shepherds, salutary Science, and Garden of virtues.


WHo that will have on a piece of earth great abundance of fruit, first they
ought to take away all things that be noisome, and after labor it well, and
then sow good seeds: In like wise a man should labor and cleanse his
conscience of all his sins, labor by holy meditations, and sow virtues and
good operations, for to gather fruit of everlasting life.

Then since that here before has been spoken of vices rudely and lightly, now
it behooves hereafter to speak of virtues in the third part of this present
book, the which shall be as a little garden, pleasant, full of trees and
flowers, in the which the contemplative person may sport and play, and by good
ensignments gather sundry virtues, and edify himself in good exercise,
wherewith his soul shall be enormed and ordained after his spouse Jesus
Christ, when he shall come to visit and dwell with him. In the beginning of the
which part shall be the Orason dominicall of our Lord, with the declaration the
better to understand it, and the said part shall contain six parts.

The first part shall be the declaration of the said prayer, the second of the
salutation Angelike that Gabriel made to Mary when she conceived her child
Jesus, the third shall be of the twelve articles of our faith, the iv. shall be
of the ten Commandments of the Law, the v. shall be of the field of virtues. For
the first, ye ought to know that by the orison of our Lord, that is the Pater
noster, when we say it we demand of God suffisance of all things necessary,
for salute and help of our souls and of our bodies, not only for us, but for all
other, and for all this cause we ought to have the said orison in great
contemplation, and say it with great devotion unto God And unto young people it
should be taught and said to them, for though they understand it not, yet it
profits them to have the kingdom of heaven and they say it in perfect love
and charity. In the Pater noster we ask seven petitions, by each petition we
may understand seven other things, as the seven Sacraments of holy Church, the
seven gifts of the holy ghost, the seven armours of justice spiritual. The
seven virtues principal that we should exercise. The seven works of mercy
bodily. The seven works of mercy ghostly. The seven deadly sins, that we
should dread. The declaration is this, Our father which art in heaven, thy name
be made holy. In this petition we ask of God our Father to be his Sons, for
otherwise we cannot be called his Sons, nor he our Father, and that his name
may be made by us more holy than any other thing, wherefore we receive the
Sacrament of baptism, without that man may not be made the Son of God, and to
receive the virtue of meekness against pride, and then to cloth the naked and
help the needy both bodily and ghostly. The second is thy kingdom come to us,
in this petition. Insomuch the name of God may not be perfectly hallowed of us
in this world, we ask his realm, in the which perfectly we shall hallow it, for
to that kingdom we be very heirs, This petition is the sacrament of priesthood
by the which we are taught to good works, and the gift of the holy ghost is the
gift of understanding, for to understand and desire the kingdom of heaven, and
we arm us with the helm of largess against covetous. The third petition is, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, for it is the perfect will of God
that his will should be fulfilled, that is his commandment: by this petition
we make obeisance to God in our hearts when we desire to do his will, by this
is understood the sacrament of marriage, by the which we avoid fornication and
the gift of counsel of the holy ghost, for to order our obeisance veritably,
and so we arm us with the armor of salvation against Envy. The fourth petition
is our daily bread give us this day. Here we ask of God to be sustained with
material bread for our bodies, and spiritual bread for our souls, that is the
bread of life the body of Jesus Christ the which we receive by faith, in mind
of his passion. The gift of the holy ghost is strength to be faithful in our
belief, take we the sword of patience against the sin of ire, and visit the
sick men bodily, and use virtue of temperance against wrath* The fifth petition
is forgive us our sins, as we forgive all men, for trust well, he that will
not forgive for the love of God, God will never forgive him his sins. And
these three petitions following we ask of God to be delivered from all evil,
as of the sin that we have done deadly, and by these we ask of God to be
assoiled, and to give us pardon by his mercy, by the which we understand the
sacrament of penance and forgiveness of sin, the holy ghosts gift is science
for to understand the works of mercy, and to escape sin.

And so clothe us with lightness against covetise, and comfort poor prisoners
and give good counsel to them that ask and need it, and take the virtue of
faith against covetise. The vi. petition is, suffer us not to be overcome in
temptation by the second evil that is done, but it may happen and we fall by
the way of temptation. Here we ask of God to be steadfast in the faith, and that
we may gladly do good works in the virtue of hope and strength to do good
deeds, and to withstand temptation, to the which profits to us the sacrament
of confirmation, which gives to us the knowledge of God by the virtue of
verity. The gift of the holy ghost, and so take we the spear of soberness
against gluttony, and comfort Pilgrims by virtue of hope. The vii. petition is
to deliver us from evil. Amen. The third evil, is evil of pain, that sinners
may have if they serve not God, and by this petition we ask that we may be
delivered from all pains, and saved in Paradise, unto this say we all. Amen. By
these we ask, so it be done as we desire. By the which we receive the sacrament
of the latter anointing, which gives us the sure way of salvation, the gift
of the holy ghost is dread of judgments of God, and gird us with the girdle of
chastity against letchery, and bury we them that be dead bodily, and pray for
our enemies ghostly, get in us the virtue of charity, and eschew the sin of
letchery.

Thus ends the Salutary science of the garden of virtues.
CHAP. X. Hereafter follows another declaration of the Pater noster.


Our Father, right mavelous in his creation, sweet and loving, rich of all
goods that be in heaven, mirror of trinity, crown of iocundity, and treasure of
felicity. Holy be thy name, and sweet as honey in our mouth; thou art the
melodious harp that causes devotion to sound in our ears* and to have it
continually by the desire of our hearts. Thy realm come to us, in the which we
shall be ever in joy and rest without trouble, and sure never to lose it. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven: as to love all that thou love, and
to hate all that thou hate, and that we keep evermore thy commandments. Our
daily bread give us to day that is to say, bread of doctrine, bread of penance,
and bread for our bodily sustentation. And forgive us all our sins, that we
have done against thee, against our neighbors, and against our self: Semblably
as we forgive other that have offended us, by words, in our bodies, or our
goods. And suffer not that we be overcome in temptation, that is to say, as by
the devil, the world, and the flesh: But deliver us from all evil works ready
done, and also them for to come.

Here follows the History of the Pater noster row.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Let thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done, as well in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our
daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our trespassers. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever Amen.


IN the story here before, shows the simple people how this holy prayer the
Pater noster should be said to God the father, and to God the son, and God the
holy Ghost, and to none other. The which prayer contains and takes all that
be rightfully asked of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ made it there, to the
intent that we should have more hope and devotion, and he made it on a time
when he taught his Apostles, speally to make orison. And then the disciples
said, Lord and master learn us to pray, and then our Lord opened his holy mouth
and said to his Apostles: when ye will make any prayers, after this manner as
here follows, shall you begin, saying thus.

Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
let us not be led into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Hereafter follows the salutation that the Angel Gabriel made to the
glorious Virgin Mary, with the greeting of the holy woman S. Elizabeth.
Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee.

Blessed art thou of all women, and blessed be the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.



Secondly, in the book of Jesus, the Salutation is such.

Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Blessed be thou amongst all
women, and blessed be the fruit of thy womb, Jesus Christ, Amen.

The salutation of the Angel Gabriel.


IN this salutation is three mysteries. The first is the salutation that the
Angel Gabriel made. The second is the loving commendation that S. Elizabeth
made, mother to S. John Baptist. The third is the supplication that our mother
holy church makes. And they be the most fair words that we can say to our
Lady: that is the Ave Maria, wherein we salute her, praise her, pray her, and
speak to het. And therefore it is only said to her, and not to S. Katherine, nor
to S. Margaret, nor to none other Saint. And if thou demand how thou may
then pray to other saints, I say to thee, thou must pray as our mother holy
Church prays, in saying to Saint Peter, Holy S. Peter, pray for us. S. Thomas
pray for us. That they may pray to God to give us grace, and he forgive us our
sins. And that he give us grace to do his will and penance, and keep his
commandments, and so we shall pray to the saints in heaven after the necessity
that we have.

S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. James the great, S. John, S. Thomas, S. James the
less, S. Philip, S. Bartholomew, S. Matthew, S. Simon, S. Jude, and S.
Matthias.

CHAP XI. Thirdly, in the book of Jesus is salutary science, and is the Credo
which we ought to believe on pain of damnation.


I believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and Earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord. which was conceived of the holy Ghost, and
suffered passion under Ponce Pilate, crucified, dead, and buried, went into
hell, the third day rose from death, Ascended into heaven and siteth on the
right hand of God the Father,



And after shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, The Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, and remission of
sins. The rising of the flesh, The life everlasting, Amen.

SAint Peter put the first article and said, I believe in God the Father
almighty, creator of heaven and earth. Saint Andrew put to the second and
said, I believe in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. Saint James the great
put to the third, saying, I believe that he was conceived of the holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary. Saint John put to the fourth, saying, I believe that
he suffered passion under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. Saint
Thomas put to the fifth, saying, I believe that he descended into hell, and the
third day arose from death to life. Saint James the less put to the sixth,
saying, I believe that he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand
of God the father omnipotent. Saint Philip put to the seventh saying, I believe
that after he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. S. Bartholomew put to
the eight, saying, I believe in the holy Ghost. S. Matthew put to the ninth,
saying I believe in the holy Church Catholic. S. Simon put to the tenth,
saying, I believe the communion of saints and remission of sins Saint Jude
put to the eleventh, saying, I believe the resurrection of the flesh. Saint
Matthias put to the twelfth, saying, I believe the life eternal. Amen.

Here follows the Creed as it ought to be said.
I Believe in God the father almighty creator of heaven and earth, And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. That was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary. Sufferd passion under Ponce Pilate crucified, dead and buried,
Descended into hell, and the third day arose from death. Ascended into heaven,
and sits on the right hand of God the father omnipotent. And after shall
come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost. The holy
Church Catholic. The communion of saints. Remission of sins: Resurrection of
the flesh, and life eternal. Amen.

THis Creed was made and composed by the xii Apostles of our Lord, of the
which every Apostle has put to his Article, as is here above showed in the
Creed, as much of one part as of the other and our faith Catholic is contained
in the said xii. Articles that is the beginning of our health, without which
none may be saved, ne do nothing that is agreeable to God; and faith ought to
be at the heart by knowledge of God, In the mouth, by confession, and praysings
to him in work, by exercising of his commandments and good works, and the
which shows them that so does to have true faith and life, that is to say to
save the^. And how will that faith in heart be good in the mouth also
nevertheless the best is that which lies in good works one does, and is the
same faith that lies in the heart and mouth, for there is but one faith, and
one God. And this same Creed ought to be had and known of every man and woman
having age competent and understanding of reason* and ought for to say it both
in the morning and in the evening every day devoutly, for it is of right great
devotion. Therefore a good christian man as soon as he rises from his bed, and
is arrayed and clothed, kneeleth beside his bed or other where, and first
blesses him with the sign of the cross, and then says Credo in deum, or I
believe in God the father almighty, as is above said. Then after, the Pater
noster to God, and to our Lady the Ave Maria, and afterward recommends him to
his good Angel, in making prayer to him saying, My good Angel, I require thee
to keep and govern me. In like wise when he goes to rest at night. And so at
the least twice in the day, at the morrow and in the evening.

CHAP. XII. Fourthly, In the book of Jesus, is the ten Commandments of the
Law, that God gave to Moses on the Mount of Sinai, for to preach and to teach
the people.
One God only thou shall love and worship perfectly.
By God in vain thou shall not swear, nor by that he made truly.
The Sundays thou shall keep in serving God devoutly.
Father and Mother thou shall honor, and shall live longly.
Manslayer thou shall not be indeed willingly.
Letcherous thou shall not be of thy body, ne consentingly.
No man's good shall thou not steal, nor withhold falsely.
False witness thou shall not hear in any wise lyingly.
The work of the flesh desire, but in marriage only.
The goods of other covet not to have them uniustly.

Fourthly, the said commandments ought to be observed and accomplished upon
pain of everlasting damnation of body and soul, of them have the usage of
reason or without the knowledge of them convenable we may not eschew and fly
the sins, nor have knowledge of them, nor confess us veritably of our sins;
wherefore the ignorance of the common by desire, affection, or other malice,
excuses not them that know them not, but accuses and condemns them, and
therefore our Lord commands them to be had in meditation in their houses and
without, in sleeping and in waking, and in all works. And thus we beholden and
bound to keep them, so that he which never heard speak of them, and thinks
not to do evil, if he trespass in one willingly, and dies soon after, he
should be damned perdurably. By this it appears that ignorance of the
commandments be perilous, wherefore each man and women study for to know
them, and learn the^ such as thou must give a reckoning for, as your children,
servants, and other.



The five Commandments of the Church.
Fifthly, in the book of Jesus been the five Commandments of the holy Church,
which ought to be kept of all them that have usage of reason, after as they be
of power. And it is said after that they be of power, for if the man or woman
that may not confess them, or receive at Easter, or keep the holy day
commanded, or that at the fast of obligation when they have will to do them*
and be lawfully let, sin not. But every man and woman keep them, that
Avarice, Sloth, or desire to see many pleasures, as dances, plays or iuglers,
or dispraising of our mother holy Church, be not cause they trespass the
commandment, to the end they run not in damnati^^* from the which keep us for
the mercy of God. Amen.

Here is to be noted that the transgression of the Commandments of holy Church
obliges deadly sin, and by continuance eternal damnation, as does the
obligation of the commandments of the Law, of whom is spoken before. For they
that hear the Priests reading the commandments in the Church on the Sundays in
the parochial service time, and accomplisheth the said Commandments, hears
God, and does his will, but all that mispraiseth the Priest, and does not their
commandments after the ordinance of the Church, mispraiseth God, and sins
mortally.

CHAP. XIII. Hereafter follows of the man in the Ship, that shows the
unstablenesse of the world.
Qui finem attendit Foelix, and qui been vivit. Ergo quisquis ades precor hic,
sta, perlege, pensa. Mortem praemetuens veniam pete, cortere plara. De reliquis
cautus been fac te crimine serva. Foelix qui potuit tam tutum tangere portum,
Sed miser est quicunque sub peste gehenne. Vive mori presto munda sub mente
quietis, Semita non virtus Deus optimus anchora portus.


GOd guide me right, that once I might
Come to the port of peace,
Mine exchange make, and return take,
That mine enemies may cease.
One me followed, would me have shallowed,
In the gulf dangerous.
With worldly gloss, he does me toss.
Among the waves perilous,
On rases hollow some do me follow,
Enemies me to take.
A great number do smite me under,
I doubt I shall not es^ape.
The fiend with woe, the world also,
My flesh does me trouble,
In wake and sleep to me they creep,
Thus increases my sorrow double.
They bid me not spare, but buy their ware,
As all worldly vanity.
They say hope among for to live long,
Thus do they cumber me.
The world does smile, me to beguile,
And so does the other two.
Now must I seek, some me to keep,
To save me from my foe.
I have found one, even God alone,
I need none other aid.
That by his might put them to flight,
And made them all afraid.
He spoke to me full courteously,
And proffered me full fair,
If I do well, with him to dwell,
In heaven to be his heir.
Versus.
NOs sumus in hoc mundo, sicut navis super mare,
Semper est in periculo, semper timet accubare,
Praevigilanti, nos oportet remigare,
Ne bibamus de poculo dirae mortis and amarae.
Esto homo res fragilis, curis oppressa, labor,
Mortis, judicii, barathri, perplexa timore.
Si virtus sola tutam dat ducere vitam,
Virtus sola potest aeternam condere famam.
Foelicem merita faciunt, non copia rerum.
Grandia non ditant, ditat been grandibus uti.
Discite nunc mortalis, quam sint mortalia vana,
Praecessere patres matres magnique parents:
Nos sequimur, paribus ad mortem passibus imus,
Vnde superbimus, in terram, terra redimus.

Super non fueram, nec ero post tempore pauco,
Millia nunc putrium quorum jam multa voluptas.
Perdita fama silet, anima anxia forsitan ardet.
THe mortal man living in this world, is well compared to a ship on the sea,
or on a perilous river, bearing rich merchandise, which if it come to the port
where the merchant desires, he shall be happy and rich. The ship as soon as it
is entered into the sea, unto the end of her vo^age, night and day is in peril
to be drowned or taken with enemies, for in the sea be perils without number.
Such is the body of man living in the world, the merchandise that he bears,
is his soul, his virtues and good works, the port or haven is death and
paradise for the good, to the which who that goes thither is soveraignly rich,
the sea is the world full of sins: for who that assaieth for to pass it, is
in peril to leese body and soul, and all his goods, and to be drowned in the
sea of hell, from the which God keep us, Amen.

CHAP. XIV. Here follows the field of virtues.
IN walking furthermore in the field of virtues, and in the way of health, for
to come to the tower of sapience, it necessarily behooves to love God, for
without the love of God none ca^ be saved, an^ who that will love him ought
first to know him, for of his knowledge one comes to his love, that is
Charity, the sovereign of all virtues. They knowledge God and love him that
keep his commandments, and they misknow him that do not so, to whom in the
great necessity of their deceasing, and at the day of judgment, shall misknow
them, and say to them, I know ye not, nor wot not what ye be, go ye cursed out
of my company. Knowledge we then God and love him, and if we will do thus, know
we first our self, and by the knowledge of our self, we shall come to the
knowledge and love of God, and the more we know our self the better we shall
know God, and if we be ignorant of our self, we shall have no knowledge of God.
To this purpose we must note one thing and know seven. The thing we must note
is this, whosoever knows himself, knows God, and shall not be damned, and
who is knows not himself, knows not God, and shall not be saved: understand
of them that have wit and discretion with lawful age, of the which knowledge
none is excused after he has sinned deadly, for to say that he was ignorant.
By this appears the ignorance of himself and of God right perilous. Deadly
sin is beginning of all evil, and contrarily, knowledge of God, and of
himself, is sovereign science and virtue, beginning of all goodness. The seven
things we ought to have, been the xii. articles of the faith which we ought to
believe steadfastly. Also the petitions contained in the Pater noster, by the
which we demand all things necessary for our health, and that we ought to hope
in him, also the commandments of the Law, and of the holy Church which
ensigneth us what we should do, and what we should not do, and all things
belonging to the same. Also if we be in the grace of our Lord, or not. And
howbeit we may not know it certainly, nevertheless we may have some
conjectures, which be good to know, and knowledge of GOD. Also knowledge of
himself, by the which things we may come to the true love and charity of God,
to accomplish his commandments, and merit in the realm of heaven, wherein we
shall live perdurably. Of the iii. first is enough said, that is, to know the
twelve articles of the faith, in the which lies our faith and belief, and the
things that we ought to demand of God be contained in the Pater noster, wherein
our hope lies. Also the ten commandments of the Law, and of holy Church,
whereas charity is showed in such as keep them, by probation of the love of
God, and do his commandments and good works. Now will we speak of the other
four, and first of the vocation in which we be, which is the fourth thing that
each man ought to know. Each man ought to know his vocation, and the things
belonging to the same be just and honest for his health, and rest of his
conscience.

A good shepherd ought to know the art of sheep-keeping, and to govern sheep,
and lead them into pastures, and to heal them when they be sick, and sheere
them in season, to the intent, through his default no damage come to his
master. In like wise he that labors the corn, to know what ground were
good for every manner of grain, and ought to till the earth, and when time is,
to sow, weed, reap, and thresh, so that his Master may have no damage by him.
Semblably a Surgion ought to know how to comfort and heal such folks, as he
has charge of, without hiding of his art or Surgery. Consequently a Merchant
ought to know the utterance of his merchandise to others, with no more fraud
than he would himself should have. Also an Advocate or a Proctor ought to know
the rites and customs of places, that by their fault Justice be not perverted.
A Judge also ought to know (both the parties heard) who has right and who has
wrong, and judge equally after true Justice. Also a Priest or a religious man
ought to know their orders* and keep them, and above all things ought to know
the law of God, and teach them unto the ignorant. And thus of all other
vocations. For all them as know not their vocation be not worthy to be, and
live in peril of their souls for their ignorance. The fifth, that all men ought
to know, is, if he have discretion and understanding, to know if he be in the
grace of God or not. And how it be right difficile, for God only knows it,
nevertheless we may have conjectures that shows it, and sufficient for
Shepherds and lay people to know, if they be in the love of the Lord, and if
they have conjecture to be in it, therefore there ought none to repute
themselves just, but ought to humble themselves, and ask him mercy, as makes
sinners become and none other. Principally we ought to know this science when
we will receive the body of Jesus Christ. For who that receives his grace and
goodness, receives his salvation, and who that receives him otherwise,
receives everlasting damnation, of the which thing every man is judge in
himself of his own conscience, and none other. The conjectures whereby we may
know if that we be in the grace of God or not. The first conjecture is when we
do travel for to cleanse our conscience of our faults by penance as much as if
we labored to get some great good, that we be not culpable of any deadly sin
done, or in will to do, nor in any sentence, then it is good coniecturing to
be in the grace of God. The second conjecture that shows in like wise to be
in the grace of God is, when we be more prompt and ready to good* observing
and keeping the commandments of God, and do all good works that we should
have accustomed* The third conjecture is, when we hear gladly the word of God,
as Sermons and good counselors for our salvation. The fourth when we be sorry
and contrite at our heart to have commised and done any sin. The fifth is, when
with good purpose and will of our selves, we persever to keep us from sin in
time to come. These conjectures be they, whereby Shepherds and lay people know
if they be in his grace or not, as much as in them is possible to know. The
sixth thing that every man ought to know is God, for all men ought to know God,
for to accomplish his will and commandment, by the which he would be loved
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all the force that we have,
which we may not do if we know him not, then who that would love God, ought to
know him, and the more that they know him, the more they love him: wherefore
hereafter shall be said how Shepherds and simple people do know him.
Shepherds and simple people for to have knowledge of God, of their possibility
considering 3 things. The first is that they consider the right great riches of
God his puissance, his sovereign dignity, his sovereign nobleness, his
sovereign joy and bliss. The second is, for they consider the right noble,
right great and mavelous operations and works of our Lord God. And the third
consideration is, for they consider the innumerable benefits that they have
received of God, and that continually every day they receive of him, and by
these considerations they come to his cognizance and knowledge. First to know
God, Shepherds and lay people consider his great riches, plenteous abundance
of the goodness that he has, for all the treasures and riches of heaven and
of the earth be his, and all goodness he has made, of the which he is
fountain, creator, and master, and distributeth them largely unto every
creature, and he has no need of any other. Wherefore it behooves to say that he
is right rich. Secondly he is right puissant, for by his great puissance he
has made heaven, earth* and the sea, with all things contained in them, and
might undo them if it were his will, unto the which puissance all other be
subject, and tremble before him for his great excellency. And who that would
consider every work of God, should find enough to marvel on. By the first of
these consideratio^s God is known to be right rich by gifts that he gives to
his friends: and by the second he is known right puissant, for to avenge him on
his enemies. Thirdly he is soveraignly worthy, for all the things of heaven
and earth owes him honor, and reverence, as to their Creator and him that
made them, as we see children honor father and mother of whom they be
descended by a generation: and all things be descended of God by a creation, to
whom ought to be given great reverence, and he is so worthy. Fourthly, he is
soveraignly noble, for who that is soveraignly rich, puissant, and worthy, him
behooves to be soveraignlie noble, but none other but God has riches,
puissance, and dignity as he has, wherefore of such nobles ought to be said
that he is right noble. Fifthly he has sovereign joy, for he that is rich,
puissant, worthy, and right noble, is not without sovereign joy, and this joy
is full of all goodness, and ought to be our felicity, to the which we hope
to come. That is, to know and see God in his sovereign joy, and gladness, for
to have with him eternal joy that ever shall endure. And this is the first
consideration of GOD. that shepherds and other simple people ought to have.
Secondly for to know God, considering his great nobleness and mavelous
works, the bounty and the beauty of the things that he has made, for it is
commonly said, one may know the workman by the work^ Knowledge we then the
work of God, and knowledge we that his beauty and bounty shines in the
operations that he has made, which if they be fair and good, the workman that
has made them must needs be fair and good without comparison, more than any
thing that he has made. Be it considered of the heavens and the things therein
set, what noble and mavelous work, how may one consider their excellence and
beauty. Be it considered also as we may of the earth, the right noble and
mavelous works of God, the gold, the silver, and all manner of metals and
precious stones in it, the fruits that it bears, the trees, the beasts that
it sustaineth, and of the bounty that it nourishes. Be it in like wise
considered of the sea, the rivers, and the fish nourished in them. The weather,
the elements, the air, the winds, and the birds that fly in them, and all the
usage and service of men. And consider the workman that of his puissance has
made all, and by his sapience has right well ordered his works, and governs
them by his great bounty, and by this manner we may know God, as shepherds and
simple folks in considering his work. Thirdly for to know God, consider the
great benefits that we receive daily of him, which may not be numbered for their
great multitude, nor spoken of for their nobleness and dignity, albeit in
their hearts be vi. principally noted. For the which another Shepherd giving
praises to God, said in this manner. Lord God I know thou have endued me with
thy infinite benefits by thy great bounty. First the benefit of thy creation, by
the which thou made me a reasonable man unto thy image and similitude, giving
me body and soul, and raiment to clothe me. Lord thou have given me my wits of
nature, understanding for to govern my life, my health, my beauty, my
strength, and my science for to get my living honestly, I yield to thee graces
and great thanks. Secondly, Lord I know the goodness of my redemption, how by
thy misericordious pity thou boughtst me dearly by the affection of thy most
precious blood, pains, and torments, that for me thou have suffered, and
finally endured death, thou have given me thy body, thy soul, and thy life, for
to keep me from damnation, wherefore humbly I yield to thee graces and great
thanks. Thirdly, Lord I know the goodness of my vocation, how of thy great
grace thou have called me again, for to inherit thy eternal benediction, and
also thou have given unto me faith and knowledge of thine own self, as
baptism, and all the other sacraments that none intendment may comprize their
nobleness and dignity, and that so many times has pardoned me of my sins.
Lord I know that this is to me a singular gift, that thou have not given to
them which have no knowledge of thee, whereof I am more beholding and humbly
bound, I yield thee graces and thanks. Fourthly, Lord I knowledge that thou
have given this world and the things that be therein made for my service and
use, the office, the benefit, and the dignity in the which I am, for sir I bear
your similitude and image, which is reputed right worthy and noble, whereof
humbly I yield thee graces and thanks. Fifthly, Lord thou have given me the sky
and his fair ornaments, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, that the day and
night serves me, giving brightness and light without to be recompensed by me,
whereof I yield to thee graces and thanks. Sixthly, Lord I knowledge thou have
made Paradise ready for to give me, where I shall live with thee in joys
without end, if I do thy will and keep thy commandments, and also I knowledge
thy other infinite goodness each day done to me by thy bounty, the which
ensigneth me to know my God, my Savior, and Redeemer, wherefore I humbly give
thanks to thee. By these considerations Shepherds and simple people
contempleth the bounty of God, and the benefits that they receive of him. And
know we him, and be we not in great knowledge of his benefits, in yielding
thanks and praisings to him, and recompense of your goods in giving to poor
folks for his sake, for ingratitude is a villain sin that much displeases
God. The seventh, and the last thing that each man ought to know, is to know
himself, for it is the best means for to come unto the knowledge of God, and
for to make his salvation, so to know himself first. Diverse folk know many
things that know not themselves, to whom should profit more to know themselves*
than all things in the world. They that know the things of the world love them,
seek them, and keep them, and know not, ne love, ne praise not, ne keep not,
God in like wise, for they know him not. What profits man to win all the
world and lose himself for to be damned? Better it were for him to leese all
the world, if it were his, if he knew himself to be saved. Shepherds say the
needful beginning of his salvation is to know himself, and contrariwise
ignorance of himself is the beginning of damnation, anv of all evil that may
befall unto him.

A question of a Master Shepherd to a simple shepherd, to weet, how he knew
himself, and he said, Shepherd tell me how thou know thy self, what art
thou? answer to me. And he said, I know my self, for I am a Christian man, a
Shepherd. What is it to be a Shepherd? And he answered, unto that thou ask
what man is, I say that man is a substance composed of body and soul, the body
is mortal and made of earth, as beasts be, but the soul is made of spiritual
matter, as Angels be, immortal* My body is come of abominable sin, and as a
sack full of dirt and filth, and meat for worms, my beginning was vile, my
life is pain, labor, fear, and in subjection to death, and my end shall be
woeful: but my soul is created of GOD, nobly and worthily to his own image
and semblance, after the Angels, the most fairest and perfect of all creatures,
by baptism and by faith is made his daughter, his spouse, his heir of his
realm, that is Paradise, and for her nobleness and dignity ought to be a
Lady, and my body as servant ought to obey her, for reason has ordained and
will that it be so: and who that does otherwise, and prefers his body before
his soul, leeseth the usage of reason, and makes himself semblable unto
beasts, descending from noble dignity, into miserable servitude of sensuality,
by the which it is grounded, so that I know my self man. As to the second, he
demands what thing it is to be a Christian man: I answer, in my
understanding, to be a Christian man is to be baptized or christened, and follow
Jesus Christ, of whom we be said Christians for to be baptized, and not to
follow him, or to follow him and not to be baptized saves not man, and
therefore when we receive baptism, we renounce the devil and all his pomps,
and we make promise for to follow Jesus Christ: when we say (we will be
baptized) and who that keeps this promise has the very name of a Christian
man, And who that keeps it not, is a sinner and a liar to God, and servant to
the devil, and is no more christian than a dead man, or a painting on a wall,
we say that is a man. Here demands the master Shepherd, in how many things
the Christian man ought to follow Jesus Christ for to accomplish the promise of
baptism. The simple shepherd answers, I say in six things, the first in
cleanness of conscience, for there is nothing more pleasant to God than a
clean conscience, and it will be made clean in two manners, one is, by baptism
when we receive it, and the other by patience, that is, contrition of heart,
confession of mouth, satisfaction of work, and then when we be clean, we be
pleasant to Jesus Christ, which with the water of his mercy cleanses the
sinners that do penance, and makes them fair. The second thing in which we
ought to follow Jesus Christ, is humility, at the example of him,

Lord of all the world, which humbled him to take our humanity, and became
mortal that was immortal, to live in poverty with us, bare oppropried pain,
and finally suffer to be crucified. Thus the christian man ensuing him ought to
meek himself. The third thing is to hold and love truth, and specially three
truths; the first truth is to know our selves, for we be mortal, and sinful,
and who that dies in sin shall be damned, and this truth withholdeth sin, and
exhorts the sinner to do penance and amend. The second truth is of temporal
goods, for they be transitory and must be left, and this truth dispraiseth them
to desire the heavenly goods that be eternal. The third truth is of God, which
is the joy that all Christian men ought to desire, and this truth draws the
Christian man to love, and induces him to good works for to merit the joys of
Paradise. The fourth thing wherein every man ought to follow Jesus Christ, is
patience in adversity, and in the spirit of life by pennace confirming of our
selves in the estate of Jesus Christ, of whom the life was all in pain and
poverty which he endured for us. The fifth is in compassion of the poor, to the
example of Jesus Christ, that by his mercy healed the poor of all corporal
infirmities, and the sinner of all ghostly sickness, and we by compassion
ought to give of our goods to poor folk, and comfort them bodily and ghostly.
The sixth thing wherein the christian man ought to follow Jesus Christ, is
dolor, devotion, charity, in contemplation of the mysteries of his nativity,
of his death and passion, of his resurrection, of his ascension, and of his
advancing to the judgment, that oftentimes ought to be at our heart by holy
meditations. And as to the last, what thing a shepherd is, I say it is the
knowledge of my vocation, as each has his, as before is said, and also to know
the transgressions of all these aforesaid things, how many times in each we
have transgressed, for many times we have offended God, and who that takes
heed, shall find omissions and offenses without number, the which known, we
ought to doubt and eschew, and do penance And thus it is as I know man is
christian and shepherd.

CHAP. XVI. The ballad of a wise man.
I Know that God has turned me,
And made me to his own likeness;
I know that he has given to me truly;
Soul and body, wit and knowledge ywis,
I know that by right wise true balance,
After my deeds judged shall I be*
I know much, but I wot not the variance,
To understand whereof comes my folly.
I know full well that I shall die,
And yet my life amend not I.
I know in what poverty
Borne a child this earth above.
I know that God has lent to me
Abundance of goods to my behove.
I know that riches can me not save,
And with me I shall bear none away.
I know the more good I have,
The lother I shall be to die.
I know all this faithfully,
And yet my life amend not I.
I know that I have passed
Great part of my days with joy and pleasance.
I know that I have gathered
Sins, and also do little penance.
I know that by ignorance
To excuse me there is no art.
I know that once shall be
When my soul shall depart,
That I shall wish that I had mended me.
I know there is no remedy,
And therefore my life amend will I.
CHAP. XVI. Here follows the ballad of the woman Shepherd, the which Ballad
is very necessary and profitable to look upon.
IN considering my poor humanity,
Above the earth born with great weeping.
I consider my fragility,
My heart is overprest with sinning.
I consider death will come verily,
To take my life, but the hour wot not I.
I consider the devil does watch me,
The world and the flesh on me warreth straightly.
I consider that mine enemies they be three,
That would deliver me from death to death
I consider the many tribulations
Of this world, whereof the life is not clean.

I consider an hundred thousand passions,
That we poor creatures daily fall in:
I consider the longer I live the worse I am,
Wherefore my conscience cries out on me.
I consider for sin some be damned, as the book says*
Which shall ever be delivered from death to death.
I consider that worms shall eat
My sorrowful body, this is credible.
I consider that sinners shall be
At the judgment of God most dreadable.
O Jesus Christ above all things delectable,
Have mercy on me at the dreadful day,
That shall be so mavelous and doutable,
Which my poor soul greatly does fraie,
In you that I put my trust and faith
To save me, that I go not from death.
CHAP. XVII. The song of death to all Christian people.
Though my picture be not to your pleasance,
And if ye think that it be dreadable,

Take in worth, for surely in substance
The sight of it may to you be profitable,
There is no way also more doubtable.
Therefore learn, know your self and see,
Look how I am and thus shall you be.
And take heed of thy self in adventure read I,
For Adams apple we must all die.
Alas worldly people behold my manner,
Sometime I lived with beauteous visage,
Mine eine be gone, I have two holes here.
I am meat for worms in this passage:
Take heed of wealth while ye have the usage,
For as I am thou shall come to dust,
Holed as a thimble what shall thee advance?
Naught but good deeds, thou may me trust.
All with my likeness ye must dance.
The time that I was in this world living,
I was honored of low and hie,
But I kept not my conscience clean from sinning,
Therefore now I do it dear abye.
Lo what avails covetise, pride, and envy,
They be the brands that do bren in hell.
Trust not to your friends when ye be dead, read I,
Nor your executors, for few do well:
But do for thy self ere ever thou die;
And remember while thou art living,
That God blessed all things without nay,
Except sin as accords writing.
The devil cannot claim thee but by sin I say,
Amend therefore betime and go the right way.
I would that I might have but an hour or two,
To do penance in, or half a day,
But while I lived I did none do,
But now my debts I do truly pay.
Thou man I do give better counsel to thee,
If that thou will do after it,
Then ever any was showed to me.
Thou art half warned think on thy pit,
And choose of two ways which thou will fly,
To joy or pain, one of the two,
In weal or woe for ever to sit,
Now at thine own choice thou may go.
For God has given thee free will,
Now choose thee whether thou will do good or ill.

CHAP. XVIII. Hereafter follows the ten Commandments of the devil.
WHo so will do my commandments,
And keep them well and sure,
Shall have in hell great torments,
That evermore shall endure.
Thou shall not fear God nor think of his goodness,
To damn thy soul blaspheme God and his saints,
Evermore thine own will be fast doing.
Deceive men and women, and ever be swearing.
Be drunken hardly upon the holy day,
And cause other to sin if thou may.
Father nor mother look thou love nor dread,
Nor help them never, though they have need.
Hate thy neighbor, and hurt him by envy,
Murder and shed man's blood hardly.
Forgive no man, but be all vengeable.
Be lecherous indeed, and in touching delectable.
Break thy wedlock and spare not.

And to deceive other by falsehood care not.
The goods of other thou shall hold falsely,
And yield it no more, though they speak courteously.
Company often with women, and tempt them to sin,
Desire thy neighbors wife, and his goods to be thine.
Do thus hardly, and care not therefore,
And thou shall dwell with me in hell evermore.
Thou shall ly in frost and fire with sickness and hunger,
And in a thousand pieces thou shall be torn asunder.
Yet shall thou die ever, and never be dead,
Thy meat sha^be toads, and thy drink boiling lead.
Take no thought for the blood that God for thee shed,
And to my kingdom thou shall be straight led.


Here follows the reward of them that keep these commandments aforesaid.
IN hell is great mourning,
Great trouble of crying.
Or thunder and noise roaring,
With great plenty of wild fire,
Beating with great strokes like guns,
With great frost, and water running.
And after that a bitter wind comes.
Which goes through the souls with ire.
There is both thirst and hunger,
Fiends with hooks pulls their flesh.
They fight and curse and each other redeem
With the sight of the devils dreadable.
There is shame and confusion,
Rumor of conscience for evil living.
They curse themselves with great crying,
In stink and smoke evermore lying.
With other great pains innumerable.
Man look that thou beware,
I will smite all at unaware.
CHAP. XIX. It is written in the Apocalypse, that Saint John saw an horse of a
pale color on the which horse sat death, and hell following the horse. The
horse signifies the sinner that has a pale color, for the infirmity of sin,
and bears death, for sin is death to the soul, and hell follows for to
englut and swallow him if he die impenitent.
ABove this horse black and hideous,
Death I am that fiercely do sit.
There is no fairness but sight tedious.
All gay colors I do hit.
My horse runs by dales and hills,
And many he smites dead and killes.
In my trap I take some by every way,
By towns and castles I take my rent,
I will not respite one an hour of a day.
Before me they must needs be present^
I slay all with my mortal knife,
And of duty I take the life.
Hell knows well my killing,
I sleep never but wake and warke,
It follows me ever running.
With my dart I slay weak and stark.
A great number it has of me,
Paradise has not the fourth part,
Scant the tenth part wrong has he.
I cause many to sight at the heart.
Beware, for I give no warning,
Come, at once when I do knock or call,
For if thy book be not sure of reckoning
Thou shall to hell body soul and all.
CHAP. XX. Hereafter follows how every estate should order them, in their
degree.

Of a King.
THe imperial might of a Kings majesty,
On four pillars grounded is governance,
First do right, Justice and equity,
To poor and rich both in a balance,
Then his regal might shall further and advance;
He to be liberal with force and humanity,
And after victory have mercy and pity.
Of a Bishop.
O ye half Gods, flourishing in prudence,
Ye Bishops with your devout pastorality,
Teach the people with delicate eloquence.
Anoint your flock with Christ's divinity.
Feed the poor people with hospitality.
Be meek and chaste in this millitant Church,
Do first your self well example of your urch.
Of Knights.
O ye Knights refulgent in fortitude,
With labor and travail to get love nobly,
Fight for the poor commons that be poor and rude.
And if need be, for the Church thou die.
Love truth, hate wrong and villainy.
Appease the people by thy magnificence,
And unto whom be a shield of defense.
Of Judges.
O ye Judges governing the Law,
Let not your hands be anointed with meed,
Save all true men, rebels hang and draw.
To avoid favor, let righteousness proceed,
For a good name is better than riches indeed.
Some say that Laws truth is laid down,
And therefore love and charity is out of town.
Of Merchants.
O ye merchants that never say ho,
Of lucrous winning you have great pleasure,
Let conscience guide you where ever ye go.
Unto all men give you weight and measure.
Deceive no man, of falsehood take no cure,
Swear none oaths, people to beguile,
All slight and usurie from you excile.

Of Masters.
O ye masters and householders all,
That have servants under your cure,
Put them to labor whatsoever befall.
And let the young folk of awe be in ure.
After their age entreat each creature:
Servants wages pay ye well and even,
If ye do not, it cries vengeance to heaven.
Of all women.
O ye women of each manner degree,
To your husbands, be never disobedient,
Desire not above them the soveraigntie.
For then ye do as Lucifer did incontinent.
That would be above the high God omnipotent:
Shamfastnesse, dread, cleanness and chastity,
Of very right all these in womanhead should be.
The generality.
Go home ye persons and couch not in Court,
To teach Christ servants, and keep the own labor,
Thou niggard sow out thy hoord
In household, and be none extortioner.
Monk pray, preach Friar, Merchant go near and fear,
Dread God, keep his law, and honor your King,
And your reward shall you have at your ending.
Thus ends the estate and order of every degree.
CHAP. XXI. Of the tree of Vices, and after follows the tree of meekness,
mother and root of all virtues.
HEreafter follows the tree of vices, and then after that is the tree of
virtue set, that after every sin beholding, they may look on it as a mirror and
take of the fruit of spiritual refection, and fly the dead tree of vices. For
after the tree of vices follows the signification of every nature named in
the said tree of virtues, and first is humanity or meekness, mother of all
virtues, and root of the tree, the which when it is steadfast, the tree stands
upright, and if it fail, the tree falls with all his branches. Humility is a
voluntary inclination of the thought and courage, coming of the knowledge of
God, and it has seven principal branches that constituteth the tree of
virtues* and they be these. Charitty Faith, Hope, Prudence, Attemperance,
Justice, and Force, and out of every of them comes diverse other virtues as
the tree shows, and is declared afterward compendiously.


The tree of vices.
Pride root of all sins.
Envy.
Detraction. Joy of adversity. Sorrow of prosperity. Homicide. Wickedness.
Susurration. Ill machination.
Covetise.
Theft. Deceiving. Forswearing. Usury. Rapine. Treason. Simony.

The large way.
Ire.
Woodnesse. Indignation. Clamor. Blaspheming. Great courage. Noise. Hate.
Vain glory.
Singularity* Discord. Inobedience. Presumption. Boasting. Obstination.
Hypocrisy.

The fruit of the flesh.
Glutony.
Foolish rejoicing. Immundicity. Too much speaking. Eating by leisure. Obtuse
wit. Lickernesse. Drunkenness.
Sloth.
Idleness. Err in the faith. Tristesse. Omission. Despair.
Lechery.
Unstableness. Love the world. Blind thought. Love of himself. Precination.
Hatred of God. Vnconsideration. Wantonness. Incontinence.


The tree of virtues.
Meeknes root of all virtues.
Force.
Felicity. Confidence. Tolerance. Rest. Stablenesse. Perseverance.
Magnificence.
Justice.
Law. Straightness. Equity. Correction. Observance. Judgment. Verity.

The narrow way.
Te^perance.
Discretion. Moderality. Taciturnity. Fasting. Soberness. Affliction.
Dispraising.
Prudence.
Dread of God. Counsel. Memory. Intelligence. Providence. Deliberation.
Reason.

The fruit of the soul.
Hope.
Contemplation. Joy. Honesty. Confession. Patience. Compunction. Longanimitie.
Faith.
Religion. Cleanness. Obedience. Chastity. Continence. Affection. Virginity.
Charity.
Grace. Pity. Peace. Sweetness. Mercy. Forgivenes. Compassion. Benignity.
Concord.


Of Charity.
CHarity is a right high virtue above all other, and is an ardent desire well
ordained to love God and his neighbor, and these be the branches, grace, peace
pity, sweetness, mercy, indulgence, compass^on, benignity, and concord. Grace
is, by the which is showed an effectual service of benevolence amongst friends,
from one friend to another. Peace is tranquillity and rest well ordained of the
courages of them that be concording unto God. Pity is affection and desire to
succor and help each one, and comes of sweetness and grace, of benign thought
and courage that one has. Sweetness is by the which tranquillity and rest of
courage of him that is sweet and honest by none improbity, ne by any point of
dishonesty. Mercy is a pitiful virtue and equal dignation to all, with
inclination of compatient courage in them that sustain affliction. Indulgence
is remission of the evil doing of other by the consideration of himself, he
has offended diverse, to have remission of God for the offenses he has done.
Compassion is a virtue the which ingendereth an affection or condolent courage
for the dolor and affliction that he sees in his neighbor. Benignity is an
ardent regard of courage and diligence from one friend to another, with a
replenishing dulsure and sweetness of good manners that one has Concord is a
virtue that comes of covenance of courages concorded and alied in right
undefiled, in such sort as they abide united and conjoined steadfastly without
duplicity or unstablenesse of thought or courage.

Of Faith.
FAith is a virtue by the true knowledge of visible things having his thought
elevate in holy studying for to come to the belief of things that we see not,
and these been the branches. Religion, Cleannes, Obedience, Chastity,
Continence, Virginity, and Affection Religion is by the which been exercised
and done the divine services to God, and unto his saints with great reverence
and great diligence, the which services be done ceremonially and sweetly.
Cleannes or virginity is integrate, well, and purely kept, as well in body as
in soul, for the regard that a man has of the love or fear of God. Obedience
is a voluntary and free abnegation and renouncing of his own will by pitiful
devotion Chastity is cleanlines and the honest habitude of all the body by
ardent heat and furiosity of vices so domaged and holden subjects. Continence
is by the which impetuosity of carnal desires been refrained and withholden,
by a moderation of counsel taken of himself or other. Affection is effusion of
pitiful love to his neighbor, coming of a rejoicing conceived of good faith
in them that they love. Liberality is a virtue by the which the liberal
courage is not kept by any manner of covetise, for doing plenteous largition of
his goods without excess, but moderately to them that have need.

Of Hope.
HOpe is a mooving of courage abiding steadfastly to take and have the things
that a man appetiteth and desires, of the which the branches been
contemplation, Joy, Honesty, confession, patience, compunction, and
Longanimity. Contemplation is the death and destruction of carnal affections,
by an interior rejoicing of thought, elevat to comprise high things. Joy is
iocundity spiritual coming of the contempment of the things present and
worldly. Honesty is a shame by the which a man yields himself humble toward
every man, of the which comes a laudable profit, with fair custom and
honesty. Confession is by the which the secret sickness of soul is relevate,
and showed unto the confessor to the praising of God, with hope to have mercy.
Patience is will, and inseparable sufferance of adversary and contrary things*
for hope of eternal glory that we desire to have. Compunction is a dolor of
great value sighing for fear of the compunction divine, or for love of the
payment that we abide. Longanimity is infatigable will to accomplish the holy
and just desires that a man has in his thought.

Of Prudence.
PRudence is diligent keeping of himself with discreet providence, to know and
discern, which is good, and which is bad, and the branches are these: Fear of
God, counsel, memory, Intelligence, Providence, and Deliberation. Fear of God
is a diligent keeping, which wakeneth on a man by faith and good manners of the
divine commandments. Counsel is a subtle regard of thoughts, that the causes
of such things a man would do, or that a man has in government, be well
examined and brought about. Memory is a representation imaginative by regard of
the thought of things preterities and passed that a man has seen and done, or
heard recounted and told. Intelligence is for to dispose by vivacity reasonably
or evidently the state of the time present, or of the things that been now.
Providence is that that by which a man gathers in him the advancement of
things to come by prudent subtlety and regard of things passed. Deliberation
is a consideration replenished maturity and esperance to foresee the beginning
of such things as one has delibered and purposed to do or make.

Of Attemperance.
ATtemperance is a steadfast and a discreet domination of reason, against the
impiteous movings of the courage in things illicit and unlawful, and these be
his branches. Discretion, Morality, Taciturnity, Fasting, Soberness,
Affliction, and dispraising of the world. Descretion is a reason provided and
assured, and moderate of the humane movings, to judge and discern the cause of
all things. Morality is to be tempered and ruled justly and sweetly, by the
manners of them with whom they be conversant keeping always the virtue of
nature. Taciturnity is to attemper himself of inutile and dishonest words, of
the which virtue comes a fruitful rest unto him that so himself moderateth.
Fasting is a virtue of discreet abstinence the which a man keeps, ordained to
wake and keep the sanctified things interiors. Soberness is a virtue pure, and
immaculate attemperance of the one part and of the other of a man, of the body
and soul. Affliction of body is it, by the which the seeds of the wanton and
wilful thoughts, by discreet chastisings be oppressed. Dispraising of the
world is amorous love that a man or a woman has to the spiritual things
coming, and having no regard to the caducke things and transitories of this
world.

Of Justice.
Justice is a virtue whereby grace of community is upholden, and the dignity of
every person is observed, and their own yielded, and the branches be these.
Law, Straightnes, Equity, Correction, Observance, Judgment, and virtue. Law is
by the which all lawful things be commanded to be done, and to defend all
things which ought not to be done. Straightnes is by the which iuridicke
vengeance is prohibited, and straightly is exercised justice to the
transgressors that have offended. Equity is a right worthy retribution of
merit to the balance of Justice, right wisely and justly thought. Correction
is for to inhibite and defend by the bridle of reason all errors, if any be
accustomed for to do any evil. Observance of Swearing is a Justice to
constrain any noisible transgression of Law or Customs promulged to the
People. Judgment is by the which after the merits or demerits of any persons
heard, is that he have torment or suffer death for his evil doing, or guerdon,
and reward for his benefits. Verity is that by the which any sayings or doings
be recited or showed by approvable reason, without to adiust, diminish, or to
make it any otherwise than it is.

Of Force.
FOrce, is for to have a sure and steadfast courage among the adversities of
labors and perils that may happen to come, or into the which a person may fall,
And the branches be these. Magnificence, Confidence, Tolerance, Rest,
Stablenesse, Perseverance, and reason. Magnificence is a joyous clearnes of
courage, administering things laudable and magnificentiall, that is to say, high
or great. Confidence is to arrest and hold strongly his thought and his
courage, by unmovable constance among such things as be adverse and contrary.
Tollerance is quotidianly or daily suffering and bearing the strange
improbities and molests, that is to say, persecutions* opprobries, and injuries
that other folk do. Rest is a virtue by the which a sickerness is given unto
the thought of contentment of the unstableness of transitory things and worldly
vanities. Stableness is to have the thought or courage steadfast and sure
without casting on diverse things by any varying or changing of time or places.
Perseverance is a virtue that establishes and confirms the courage by a
perfection of virtue that is in a man, and be perfect by force of longanimitie.
Reason is a virtue by the which a man commands to do such things as be
concealed and delivered for to come to the end, which a man knows to be good
and utile to be done and had.

Here ends the flower of virtues, and how they be named and signified in the
tree figured.
CHAP. XXII. How Shepherds by calculation and speculation know the xii. signs
in their course reigning and domining over the xii. parts of man's body, and
which be good for letting of blood, and which be indifferent, or evil for the
same.
SOme shepheardes say that man is a little world by himself, for likenesses and
similitudes that he has of the great world, which is the aggregation of the
nine skies, four elements, and all things in them contained. First, a man has
such a likeness in the first mobile, that is the sovereign sky, and principal
parts of the great world. For like as in his first mobile the Zodiake is
divided in xii parts by the xii signs, so man is divided to xii parts and
holds of the signs, every part of his sign as this figure shows. The
signs be these. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces: of the which three be of the
nature of the fire, that is, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, and three of the
nature of the air, Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. And three of the nature of
water, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And three of the nature of earth* Taurus
Virgo, and Capricornus. The first that is Aries, governs the head and face of
man, Taurus the neck and throat bole, Gemini the shoulders, the arms, and
hands, Cancer the breast* sides, milte, and lights, Leo the stomach, the
heart, and the back, Virgo, the belly, and the entrails. Libra the navill the
groines, and the parts under the branches, Scorpio the privy parts, the
genitales, the bladder, and the fundament, Sagittarius the thighs only,
Capricornus the knees only also, Aquarius the legs and from the knees to the
heels and ankles, and Pisces has the feet in his dominion.

A man ought not to make incision* ne touch with iron the member governed of
any sign, the day that the moon is in it, for fear of the great effusion of
blood that might happen, ne in likewise also when the Sun is in it, for the
danger and peril that might ensue.

Hereafter follows the nature of the xii signs.
ARies is good for blood-letting when the Moon is in it, save in the part that
it domineth.

Aries hot and dry, nature of fire, and governs the head and the face of man,
good for bleeding when the moon is in it.

Taurus is evil for bleeding. Taurus is dry and cold, nature of the earth and
governs the neck, and the knot under the throat, and is evil for bleeding.

Gemini is evil for bleeding, Gemini is hot and moist, nature of air, and
governs the shoulders, the arms, and the two hands and ^s evil for bleeding

Cancer is indifferent for bleeding Cancer is cold and moist, nature of water,
and governs the breast, the stomach and the milt, and indifferent that is to
say neither too good nor too bad for letting of blood.

Leo is evil for bleeding. Leo is hot and dry, nature of fire, and governs
the back and the sides and is evil for letting blood.

Virgo is indifferent for bleeding. Virgo is cold and dry, nature of earth, and
governs the womb, and inward parts, and is not good ne very evil for
bleeding.

Libra is right good for bleeding. Libra is hot and moist, nature of air, and
governs the navill, the reins, and the low parts of the womb, and is good
for bleeding.

Scorpio is indifferent for bleeding. Scorpio is cold and moist, nature of
water, and governs the members of man, and is neither good ne bad for
bleeding.

Sagittarius is good for bleeding. Sagittarius is hot and dry, nature of fire,
and governs the thighs, and is good for bleeding.

Capricornus is evil for bleeding Capricornus is cold and dry, nature of
earth, and governs the knees, and is evil for bleeding.

Aquarius is indifferent for bleeding. Aquarius is hot and moist of nature, and
governs the legs, and is neither good ne evil for bleeding

Pisces is indifferent for bleeding. Pisces is cold and moist, nature of water,
and governs the feet, and is neither good ne bad for bleeding.

Aries, Libra, and Sagittarius be right good.

Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio^, Aquarius, and Pisces, be indifferent.

Taurus, Gemini, Leo, and Capricornus, be evil for bleeding.

CHAP. XXIII. A Picture of the Phisnomy of man's body, and shows in what parts
the vii Planets have domination in man.
We may know by this figure the bones and joints of all the parts of the body,
as well within as without, of the head, neck, shoulders, arms, hands, besides
breast, back, haunches, thighs, knees, legs* and of the feet. Which bones
shall be named and numbered hereafter, and it is called the figure Anatomy.



By this figure one may understand the parts of man's body, over the which the
planets have might and domination to keep them from touching any iron, ne to
make incision of blood in the veins that proceed in the time while that the
planet of the said party is conjoined with any other planet malevolent, without
having regard of some good planet that might in cumber and let his evil course.

CHAP. XXIV. The names of the Bones in a man's body, and the number of them,
which is in all two hundred eight and forty.
FIrst on the summet of the head is a bone that covers the brain the which
shepherds call the Capital bone. In the skull be two bones, which be called
parietales, that holds the brain close and steadfast. More lower in the brain
is a bone called the crown of the head, and on the one side and on the other be
two holes, within the which is the pallis or roof bone. In the part behind the
head be four like bones, to the which the chine of the neck holds. The bones
of the nose be two. The bones of the chafts be xi. And of the nether iaw be
two. Above the opposite of the brain there is one behind named collateral. The
bones of the teeth be xxx. eight before, four above, and four underneath, sharp
and trenching for to cut the morsels, and there are four sharp, two above, and
two underneath, and be called conines, for they resemble conies teeth. After
these be 16. that be as they were hammers or grinding teeth, for they chaw and
grind the meat the which is eaten, and there is on every side four above and
four underneath, and then the four teeth of sapience on each side of the chafts
one above and one underneath. In the chine from the head downwards be xxx.
bones, called knots or joints. In the breast before seven bones, and on every
side xii. ribs. By the neck between the head and the shoulders be two bones,
name^ the sheares. After be the two shoulder blades. From the shoulders to each
elbow in each arm is a bone called the adiutor. From the the elbow to the hand
on each arm be two bones that be called cannes. In each hand be vii. bones,
above the palm be four bones, which be called the comb of the hand. The bones
in the fingers in each hand be xv. in every finger three. At the end of the
ridge be the huckle bones, whereto be fastened the two bones of the thighs. In
each knee is a bone, called the knee plate. From the knee to the foot in each
leg be two bones, ealled cannes or marrow-bones. In each foot is a bone,
called the ancle or pin of the foot: behind that ancle is the heel bone in
each foot, the which is the lowest part of a man, and above each foot is a bone
called the hollow bone. In the plant of each foot be iiii. bones, then be the
combs of the feet, in each of which be v bones. The bones in the toes in each
foot be the number of xiiii. Two bones be tofore the belly, for to hold it
steadfast with the two branches. Two bones be in the head behind the ears,
called oculars. We reckon not the tender bones of the end of the shoulders, nor
of the sides, nor diverse little gristles and spelders of bones, for they be
comprehended in the number abovesaid.

Thus ends the Anatomy, and follows the Phlebotomy.

Hereafter follows the names of the veins, and where they rest, and how they
ought to be letten blood.


WE may understand by this figure the number of the veins, and the places of a
man's body where they be, and how they ought to be let blood, and no where else,
so that it be a natural day for blood letting, that the Moon be not new, ne at
the full, ne in the quarter, and that it be in any sign before named good for
bleeding, but if that such sign were that it domineth the member of the which
blood should be letten, for then it ought not for to be touched, ne also that
it be the sign of the sun.

The names of the places where the veins be, are showed by the letters set in
the margent at the beginning of the matter after the form of the Picture.
A The vein in the midst of the forehead would be letten blood for the ache
and pain of the head, and for fevers, lethargy, and for the megrim.

B Above the two ears behind is two veins the which be let blood for to give
clear understanding, and the virtue of light hearing, and for thick breath, and
for doubt of mese^ry.

C In the temples been two veins called the Arteries, for that they pant, the
which been letten blood for to diminish and take away the great repletion and
abundance of blood that is in the brain, that might noy the head and the eyes,
and it is good against the gout, megrim, and diverse other accidents that may
come to the head.

D under the tongue be two veins that been letten blood for a sickness named
the Sequamy, and against the swelling and apostumes of the throat, and against
the Squinancy, by the which a man might die sudainly, for default of such
bleeding.

E In the neck be two veins called Originales, for that they have the course
and abundance of all the blood that governs the body of man, and principally
the head, but they ought not to be let blood without the counsel of the
surgion, and this bleeding avails much to the sickness of Leprosy, when it
comes principally of blood.

F The vein of the heart taken in the arm, profits to take away humors or
ill blood that might hurt the chamber of the heart, or the appurtenance, and it
is good for them that spit blood, that be short winded, by the which a man may
die sudainly by default of such bleeding.

G The vein of the liver taken in the arm, takes and diminishes the great
heat of the body of man, and holds the body in health, and this bleeding is
profitable against the yellow axes and apostumes of the liver, and against the
plurisie, whereby a man may die by fault of such bleeding.

H Between the master finger and the leach, to let blood, helps the dolours
that comes in the stomach and sides, as botches, apostumes, and diverse other
accidents that may come in those places by great abundance of blood and humors.

I In the sides between the womb and the branch, be two veins, of the which
that of the right side is let blood for the Dropsy, and that of the left side
for every sickness that comes about the milt, and they should bleed after
persons be fat or lean, take good heed at four fingers nie the incision, also
they not to make such bleeding without counsel of the surgion.

K In every foot be three veins, of the which three veins, one is under the
ancle of the foot named Sophan, the which is let blood for to diminish and put
out diverse humors, as botches and apostumes that comes about the groynes,
and it profits much to women for to cause their menstruosity to descend and
to fix the emeroydes, that comes in the secret places, and such other like.

L Between the wrest of the foot and the great toe is a vein, the which is
letten blood for diverse sicknesses and inconveniences, as the pestilence, that
takes a person suddenly by the great superabundance of humors, and this
bleeding must be made within a natural day that is to wit, within xxiiii
hours after that the sickness is taken of the patient, and before the fever
come on him, and this bleeding ought to be done after the corpulence of the
patient.

M In the Angels of the eyes be two veins, the which be let blood for the
rednes of the eyes, or water that runeth continually, and for diverse other
sicknesses that may happen and come by over great abundance of humors and blood.

N In the vein of the end of the nose is made a bleeding, the which is good
for a red pimpled face, as be red drops, pustules, small scabs, and other
infections of the heart, that may come therein by the great replexion and
abundance of blood and humors, and it avails against pimpled noses, and other
semblable sickness.

O ^n the mou^^ in the gummes be four veins, that is to wit, two above and two
beneath, the which be let blood for the chafing and canker in the mouth, and
for toothache.

P Between the lip and the chinne is a vein that is letten blood to give
amendment to them that have an evil breath.

Q In each arm be four veins, of the which the vein of the head is the
highest, the second next, is from the heart, the third is of the liver, and the
fourth is from the milt, otherwise called the low liver vain.

R The vein in the head taken in the arm, ought to bleed for to take away the
great replexion and abundance of blood that may annoy the head, the eyes, and
the brain, and avails greatly for transmutable heats, and swelling of the
throat, and to them that has swollen faces and red, and to diverse other
sicknesses that may fall by too great abundance of blood.

S The vein of the milt, otherwise called the low vein, should bleed against
all fever tertians, and quartaines, and it ought to be made a large and less
deep wound then in any other vein, for fear of wind that it may gather and for
more inconvenience, for fear of a sinew that is under it, which is called the
Lezard.

T In each hand be three veins, whereof that above the thumb ought to bleed,
to take away the great heat of the visage, and for the thick blood and humors
that be in the head, this vein evacuateth more then that of the arm.

V Between the little finger and the lech finger is letting of blood that
avails greatly against fever tertians and quartaines, and against fumes, and
diverse other lettings that comes to the paps and the milt.

X In each thigh is a vein, of the which the bleeding avails against the
dolours and swellings of the genitours, and for to avoid and drive out of a
man's body humors that be in the groines.

Y The vein that is under the ancle of the foot without, named Sciat of the
which the bleeding is much worth against the pains of the branches, and for to
make depart and issue diverse humors, which would assemble in the said place,
and avails greatly to women for to restrain their menstruosity when they have
too great abundance.

Thus ends the Anatomy and Flebotomy of the humane bodies, and how one should
understand them.
HEre before we have said of the regard of plannets upon the parts of man, and
the devision and number of the bones of man's body, and now follows to know
when any man is whole or sick, or disposed in any wise to sickness. Wherefore
three things been, by the which Shepherds know when a man is whole or sick,
or disposed to sickness. If he be whole, to maintain and keep him, if he be
sick, to search remedy to heal him. If he be disposed to sickness, to keep
him that he fall not therein. And to know each of the said three things, the
Shepherds put diverse signs. Health properly attemperance, accord, and
equality of the four equalities of man which be hot, cold, dry, and moist. The
which when they be well tempered and equal, that one surmounteth not the
other, then the body of man is whole But when they be unequal and distempered,
that one domineth over another, then a man is sick, or disposed to sickness,
and they be the qualities that the bodies holds of the elements, that they be
made and composed of, to wit, of the fire heat, of the water cold, of the air
moist, and of the earth dry. The which qualities when one is disordered from
the other, then the body is sick. And if that one destroy the other of all,
then the body dies, and the soul departs.

CHAP. XXV. Signs by the which Shepherds know a man whole and well disposed
in his body.
THe first sign whereby Shepherds know a man to be whole and well disposed in
his body, is when he eats and drinks well after the convenance of the
hunger and thirst that he has, without making excess. Also when he disgesteth
lightly, and when that he has eaten and drunken empesheth and grieveth not his
stomach. Also when he feels good sa^vour and appetite in that he eats and
drinks. Also when he is hungry and thirsty at the hours they ought to eat
and drink. And when he rejoices him with merry folk. And when they play
gladly any play of recreaton, with fellows of merry courage. Also when he
plays gladly in fields and woods, to take the sweet air, and sport in
meddowes by waters sides. Also when he eats gladly, and with good appetite of
butter, chees, flawnes, sheeps milk, without leaving any thing in his dish to
send to the almeshouse. And when he sleeps well without raving dream of his
merchandise. Also when he feels him light, and that he waketh well. Also when
he sweateth soon, and that neeseth little or nothing. And when he is neither
too fat nor too lean. Also when he has good color in his face, and that his
wits been all well disposed for to do their operations, as his eyes for to
see, his ears to hear, his nose to smell, etc. And thus we leave off the
continuance of age, the disposition of the body, and also of the time. Of other
signs I say nothing, but these be the most common, and that ought to suffice
for shepherds to know the signs of health.

Signs opposite to the precedents, by which shepherds know when they or other
been sick.
FIrst, when he will not well eat, ne drink, or that they have none appetite
to eat at dinner or supper, or when he finds no savor in that he eats and
drinks, or that he is hungry and may not eat, when his digestion is not good,
or that it be too long. Also when he goes not to the chamber moderately as he
ought to do. Also when he is heavy and sad in joyous companies, when sickness
causes a man to be thoughtfull. Semblably, when he may not sleep nor take his
rest aright and at due hours. Also when his members been heavy, as his head,
his legs, and his arms. And also when he may not walk easily and lightly,
and that he shows not often, and his color is pale and yellow, or when his
wits, as his eyes, his ears, and the other do not kindly their operation. In
likewise when he may not labor and travel. Also when he forgeteth lightly that
which of necessity ought to be kept in memory, and when he spits often, or when
his nostrils abounds in superfluous humors. And when he is negligent in his
works, and when his flesh is blown or swollen, in the visage, in his legs, or
his feet, or when his eyes be hollow in his head. These been the signs that
signifies a man being in sickness, and who that has most of the foresaid
signs, most is sick.

CHAP. XXVI. Of other manner of signs almost semblable to them abovesaid, and
shows the replexion of evil humors, for to be purged of them.
REplexion of evil humors, and disposition of sickness, after the opinion of
Shepherds, the which replexion is known how to purge the said humors that
they engender on sickness and been broken by the signs that follows. First
when a man has over great redness in the face, in the hands, or in the
nails, having also the veins full of blood, or bleed too much at the nose, or
too often, or have pain in the forehead. Also when the ears sounds, and when
the eyes water or be full of gum, and have the understanding troubled, and when
the pulse beats too fast, and when the belly is long resolute and laxe, and
when one has the sight troubled, and eating without appetite. And all the
other signs before said been, by the which one may know the body evil
disposed, and have in it corrupt humors, superfluous and evil.

Thus finish the signs, by the which Shepherds know when they be whole and
well disposed, and other signs apposite by the which they know when they be
sick or ill disposed.

CHAP. XXVII. A division and regime of time, of the which shepherds uses,
after that the season and time requires.
FOr to remedy the sicknesses and infirmities that a man has, and to keep him
from them which he doubts to come. Shepherds say that the time naturally
changes four times a year, and so they divide the year into four quarters,
that is, Ver, Summer, Harvest, and Winter. And in each of these quarters they
govern them as the season requires to their minds, and the better it is for
them. And as the season changes, so change they their manner of living and
doing, and say that changing of time without taking good heed, often
ingendereth infirmities, for that in one time behooveth not to use some meats
which be good at another time, as that used in winter is not good in summer,
and so of the other seasons. And for to know the changing of time after the
said parties, they consider the course of the Sun by the twelve signs, and
say that every of the said four quarters and seasons dureth three months, and
that the Sun passes by three signs that is to wit, in prime time by Pisces,
Aries, and Taurus, and these be the months, February, March, and April, that
the earth and trees rejoices, and charge with green leaves and flowers, as
it is a pleasure to behold. In summer by Gemini, Cancer, and Leo, and the
months been May, June, and July, that the fruits of the earth grows and
ripeneth. In harvest by Virgo, Libra, and Scorpio, and the months been August,
September, and October, that the earth and trees discharges fruits and leaves
and that time each felleth and gathers the fruits. In Winter by Sagittarius,
Capricornus and Aquarius, and the months been November, December and January
that the earth and trees been as dead and unclothed, of leaves, fruits, and of
all greenness. After the which four seasons. Shepherds devises the time that
man may live in four ages, as youth, strength, age, and decrepit, and been
likened to the four seasons of the year: That is to wit, youth to Prime time,
that is hot and moist and as the herbs and trees of the earth grow, so does man
in youth, unto xv years, grow of body, in strength, beauty and vigor. Force is
likened unto summer, hot and dry, and the body of man is in force and vigor,
and enripeneth unto xlv. years. Age is compared to the time of Harvest, cold
and dry, then man leaves off growing and feebleth, and thinks how to gather
and spare for fear of default and need when as he comes to stooping age, and
dureth to lvi years. Decrepit is likened unto the season of the Winter, cold
and humid by abundance of cold humors, and default of natural heat: in which
time man spends that which he had gathered and kept in the time passed, and
if he have spared nothing, he abides poor and naked, as the earth, trees, and
dureth unto lxii. years or more. Prime time is hot and moist, nature of air,
complexion of the sanguine. Summer is hot dry, nature of fire, complexion of
choleric. Harvest is cold and dry, nature of earth, and complexion of the
melancholy. Winter is cold and moist, nature of water, complexion of the
phlegmatic. When complexion is well proportioned it feels it self better
disposed in the time sembable to it, than it does in other times. But for that
every man is not well complexioned, they ought to do as shepherds do, that
is, to take regiment to keep themselves after the seasons, and governs them
by their ensignements and teachings, which they use in every quarter of the
year, to live the longer, wiselier, and merrily.

The regiment for Prime time, March, April, and May.
IN Prime time, shepherds keep themselves meetly well clothed, not over cold,
nor over hot, as with linsie wolsie, Doublets of Fustian, and gowns of a
meetly length, furred with Lamb most commonly. In this time is good letting
blood, to avoid the evil humors that were gathered in the winter time. If
sickness do happen in prime time, it is not of his nature, but proceeds of
the humors gathered in the winter passed. Prime time is a temperat time to take
medicines for them that be corporate and full of thick humors to purge them. In
this time they ought to eat light meats, which do refresh, as Chickens, Kids
with veriuyce, Borage, Beets, yolks of eggs, eggs in moon shine, Roches,
Perches, Pikerels, and all skaled fish. Drink temperate wine, Beer, or Ale, so
that they be not too strong, ne oversweet: for in this time all sweet things
ought not to be used: and a man ought to sleep long in the morning, and not on
the day. The shepherds have a general rule or custom for all seasons, that
avails much against all infirmities and sicknesses, that is, not to leese his
appetite for eating, and never to eat without hunger. Also say they, that all
manner of flesh and fish is better roasted than soden, and if they ben sodden,
to broil them on a Gridyron, on the coals, and they been the more wholesome.

The regiment for the time of Summer, June, July, and August.
THe shepherds in summer been clothed with light gowns and single, their
shirts and sheets that they ly in be linen, for of all cloth it is the
coldest, they have doublets of silk, or Say, or of Canvas, manerly made, and
they eat light meats, as Chickens with veriuyce, young Hares, Rabbets, Lettise,
Purselain, Melons, Gowrds, Cucumbers, Pears, Plumbs, and such fish as are
aforenamed. And also they eat of meats that do refresh. Also they eat little
and often; they break their fast or dine in the morning before the sun arise,
and go to supper ere it descend, and they eat often of the above said meats
and sowrer for to give the man appetite. They eat but little salt meats, and
refrain them from scratching, they drink often fresh water when they be thirsty,
save only at dinner and supper time, and then they do drink feebl green Wine,
single Beer, or small Ale. Also they keep them from over great travel, or over
forcing themselves, for in this time is nothing grievouser than chafing. In
this season they eschew the company of women, and they bathe them often in cold
water to assuage the heat of their bodies enforced by labors. Always they have
with them sugarcandy or other Sugar whereof they take little and often, and
each day in the morning they do force them by coughing and spitting, to void
flegmes, and void them above and below the best that they can, and wash their
hands with fresh water, their mouth and visage.

The regiment for Harvest, September, October, and November.
IN harvest, shepherds been clothed as in Prime time, save their cloths are a
little warmer. In this season they use diligence to purge and cleanse
themselves, bleeding also to temper the humors of their bodies: For it is the
contagiousest season of the year, in the which perilous infirmities happen,
and therefore they eat good and wholesome food, as Capons, Hens, young Pigeons
that begin to fly, and drink good wines, and other good drinks without making
excess. In this season they refrain eating of fruits, for it is a dangerous
season for agues: and they say, that he had never ague that never eat fruit. In
this season they drink no water, and they put no part of them in cold water,
but their hands and face. They keep their hands from cold in the night and
morning, and sleep not in the noon time, and refrain over great travel, and
endure not too much hunger, ne thirst, but eat in due season, and not when
their mawes be full.

The regiment for Winter, December, January, and February.
THe shepherds in winter are clothed in thick gowns of rough cloth hie shorn
well furred with fox. For it is the warmest furring that is, and Cats, Conies,
Lambs, and diverse other thick furs that be good and wholesome. In the winter
shepherds do eat beef, Pork, Brawn of Hearts, Hinds and all kind of venison,
Partriges, Fesants, Hares, fowls of the river and other meats that they love
best: for that is the season of the year that nature suffers greatest plenty
of vittle for the natural heat that is drawn with in the body. In this season
also they drink often strong wines, after their complexion, bastard or Osey.
Twice or thrice in the week they use good spices in their meats: For this is
the wholsomest season of all the year in the which chances no sickness, but
by great excess and outrages done to nature, or by evil government.
Shepherds say also that Prime time is hot and moist, of the nature of air,
complexion of the sanguine, and that in the same season nature rejoices, and
the pores open, and the blood spreads through the veins more than another time.
Summer is hot and dry of the nature of fire, of complexion of choleric, when
one ought to keep him from all things that procure heat, all excess, and hot
meats. Harvest is cold and dry of the nature of earth and complexion of
melancholy, in the which time one ought to keep him from doing excess more
tha^ at other times. But winter is cold and moist, of the nature of water, and
complexion of phlegmatic, then ought a man to keep him warm and meanly to live
in health.

Here is to be noted that a man is made of the four Elements, of which one has
domination always above the other, and that man on whom the fire rules is
said to be choleric, that is to say, hot and dry He on whom the air has rule,
is said to be sanguine: that is to say hot and moist. He on whom the water has
governance, is said to be cold and moist, that is to say phlegmatic. And he on
whom the earth reigns, is said to be melancholy, that is to say, cold and
dry. Of which complexions more shall be spoken in the beginning of physnomy.

CHAP. XXVIII. A regiment of shepherds of certain things good for the body of
man, and of diverse other things opposite to the same.
Good for the Brain.
TO smell the savor of musk, and of quibyles, of camomel, to drink wine
measurably, not to eat too much sage, to cover thy head, of the washing of thy
hands and feet, measurably walking, measurably sleeping, to hear sweet noyses
of minstrelsie or singing, to eat mustard and pepper, to smell the red rose, and
wash thy temples with water of red roses.

Evil for the brain.
All manner brain of beasts, gluttony, drunkenness, late supper, to sleep much
after meat, corrupt air, anger, heaviness, to uncover thy head, to eat softly,
too much heat* too much waking, too much walking, milk, cheese, nuts, to eat
ere thou be hungry, bathing after meat, onions, garlic, great noise, to smell
to a white rose, and much stirring.

Good for the eyes.
The red rose, vervaine, rue, fenell, Salendin, enfrage, pimpernell, oculi
Christi, to plunge thine eyes in clear water, often to look on green color,
measurable sleep, to look in a fair glass, often to wash thy hands and feet,
make the stomach well defied, and to look often on gold also.

Evil for the eyes.
Powder, garlic, onions, hunger, leeks, waking, and wind, hot air, cold air,
drunkenness, gluttony, milk, cheese much beholding of bright things, as well
white as red, mustard, anon to sleep after meat, too much sleeping, too much
waking, too much letting of blood, cole-worts, smoke, all things that is
peppered, lechery, and hot fire before the sight evil baken bread, dust, too
much weeping, all this is evil for the eyes.

Good for the throat.
Honey, sugar, butter, with a little salt, licoras, to suppe soft eggs, Isope,
mean manner of eating and drinking, and sugarcandy, this is good for the throat.

Evil for the throat.
Mustard, much lying upon the breast, pepper, anger, all fixed meats, and all
things roasted, lechery, much walking, too much rest, much drink, much thirst,
much running, smoke of incense, old cheese, (...) or cold, and all sour
things are naught for the throat.

Good for the heart.
Saffron, borage, laughing, joy, musk, cloves, Galingale, Nutmegs, the red
rose, the violet, sugar, mace, before all other things.

Evil for the heart.
Beans, peason, leekes, garlic, onions, heaviness, anger, dread, too much
business, travel, to drink cold water after labor, evil tidings.

Good for the stomach.
Red mints, red roses, cumin, sugar, sage, wormwood, calamit, to vomit every
quarter once, great hunger, every day to stand after meat, and often walking
after meals, every cold thing, Galingale, nutmegs, Vinegar, Pepper, and
measurable sleep,

Evil for the stomach.
All sweet things, for they make the stomach to swell, nuts, old cheese, milk,
honey, marrow bones that be not well soden, to eat ere thou be hungry, to eat
many sorts of meats at one sitting, to drink or thou be a thirst, to eat bread
that is not well baked and all raw flesh, stinking, heaviness, and dread
thought, over great travel, slooping, falling, and all fried meats, too much
bathing after meat, and too much casting, eat when thou art over hot either of
fever or travel, all milk of beasts is evil save of Goats.

For ache of the womb.
Take tansie, rue, and sothernwood, and eat it with salt fasting when thou art
a fret, and it will do it away.

For to restore the liver.
Take a quantity of wild tansie, and stamp it, and drink it with wine or ale
nine days or more, and he shall amend.

For fatness about a man's heart.
Take the juice of fenell and honey, and sees them both together till that it
be hard, and eat it at even and morn, and it shall avoid soon.

For hardness of the womb.
Take two spoonful of the juice of Ivy leaves, and drink thereof three times
in the day, and thou shall be whole.

For the wind in the stomach.
Take cumin and beat it to powder, and mingle it with red wine, and drink it
last at night three days, and he shall be whole.

For the dropsy.
Take chickweed, clythers, ale, and oat-meal, and make pottage therewith, and
use it nine days, and everyday fresh, and he shall be whole.

A good drink for the pestilence.
For the pestilence, take and wash elran a Lilly root and boil it in white
wine, til the one half be wasted, and then give it the sick to drink, and he
shall break out full of bladders, as he were burnt or scalded with hot water,
and they will dry, and the person wax then whole.

CHAP. XXIX Hereafter follows the four elements, and the four complexions of
man, and how, and in what time they reign in man.
Air, Fire, Earth, and Water. The twenty four hours of the day and the night
rules sanguin, choleric, melancholic, and phlegmatic. Six hours after
midnight blood has the mastery, and in the six hours before noon choler
reigns, and six hours after noon reigns melancholy, and six hours before
midnight reigns the phlegmatic. Thus ends the four elements, and the four
complexions.

CHAP. XXX. Here follows the governance of health.
WHo will be whole, and keep himself from sickness,
And resist the stroke of pestilence,
Let him be glad, and void all heaviness,
Flee wicked airs, eschew the presence
Of infect places, causing the violence,
Drinking good wines, of wholesome meats take,
Smell sweet things, and for thy defense
Walk in clean air, and eschew the mists black.
With void stomach outward thee not dress,
Rising up early, with fire have sustain,
Delight in gardens, for the great sweetness.
To be well clad do thy diligence,
Keep well thy self from inconvenience,
In stews ne bathes no soiorne thou make,
Opening of the pores, this does great offense.
Walk in clean air, and eschew the mists black.
Eat no raw flesh for no greediness,
And from fruit keep thine abstinence,
Pullets and Chickens for their tenderness
Eat thou with sauce, spare for no expense.
Veriuice, vinegar, and the influence
Of wholesome spices I dare undertake,
The morrow sleep called golden in sentence,
Great helps against the mists so black.
For health of body, cover from cold thy head,
Eat no raw meats, take good heed hereto,
Drink wholesome wine, feed thee on light bread.
With an appetite rise from thy meat also.
With women aged fleshly have not to do,
Upon thy sleep, drink not off the cup,
Glad toward bed, at morrow both too.
And use never late for to suppe.
And if it so be, that leaches to thee fail,
Then take good heed to use things three,
Temperate diet, temperate travail,
Not malicious, for none adversity,
Meek in trouble, gald in poverty.
Rich with little, content with suffisance.

Never grudging, merry like thy degree.
If physic lack, make this thy governance.
To every tale show thou no credence,
Be not too hasty, ne suddenly vengeable,
To poor folk do thou no violence,
Courtesy of language, of feeding measurable,
On sundry meat not greedy at the table,
In feeding gentle, prudence in daliance,
Close of tongue, of word not deceiveable,
To say the best set always thy pleasance.
Have in hate mouths that be double,
Suffer at thy table no detraction,
Have despite of folk that make trouble,
Of false ravenours and adulation,
Within thy place suffer no division
With thy household, it shall cause increase,
Of all welfare, prosperity and foyson.
With thy neighbors live in rest and peace.
Be cleanly clad after thy estate,
Pass not thy bonds, keep thy promise blive.
With three folk be not at debate,
First with thy better, beware for to strive,
Against thy fellow no quarrel to contrive*
With thy subject to strive it were shame,
Wherefore I counsel, pursue all thy life
To live in peace, and get thee a good name.
Fire at morrow, and toward bed at Eve,
Against mists black, and air of pestilence,
Betimes at service thou shall the better chieve,
First at thy rising, to God do reverence.
Visit the poor with entire diligence,
On all needy have compassion,
And God shall send grace and influence,
Thee to increase, and thy possession.
Suffer no surfets in thy house at night,
Ware of suppers and great excess,
Of nodding heads and candle light.

Of sloth at morrow, and slumbring idleness,
Which of all vices is chief protectresse.
Void all drunkenness, liars and letcherous,
Of all unthrifty exile the Mistress.
That is to say, dice, plays, and hazardous.
After meat beware, make not too long sleep,
Head, foot and stomach preserve aye from cold,
Be not too pensive, of thought take no keep.
After thy rent govern thy household.
Suffer in time, in thy right hand behold,
Swear none other man to beguile.
In youth be lusty, and sad when thou art old.
No worldly joy lasts but a while.
Dine not at morrow before thine appetite.
Clear air and walking makes good digestion.
Between meals drink not for no forward delight.
But thirst or travel give thee occasion.
Over-salt meat does great oppression
To feeble stomachs, when they cannot refrain
From thing contrary to their complexion.
Of greedy hands the stomach has great pain.
Thus in two things stands all thy wealth,
Of soul and body, who list them sue*
Moderat food gives to man his health,
And all surfets then he does eschew.
And charity to soul is due,
This receipt bought is of no pothecary,
Of master Anthony nor of master Hue.
To all indifferent riches di^tary.

Nescio quo certo lenta papavere dormit
Mensque creatorem nescit iniqua suum:
En iterum toto lingua crucifigitur orb,
En iterum patitur dira flagella deus.
Factorem factura suum stimulante tyranno,
Dilectis factis deserit orba suis,
Inde fames venit, inde discordia regum,
Inde cananeis praedatibusque sumus.
Inde premit gladius carnalis spiritualem,
Et vice conversa spiritualis eum;
Hinc subitos Atropos praedatrix occupat artus*
Nec sinit ut doleat paenitet atque miser.
Iure vides igitur quam tecta ligamina nectit,
Immundus mundus haec duo verba simul.
Thus ends the Physic and regiment of health of shepherds.



Coelum caeli Domini, terram autem dedit filiis hominum. Non mortui laudabunt
te Domine, neque omnes qui descendunt in infernum. Sed nos qui vivimus
benedicemus Domino. Quoniam videbimus coelos tuos opera digitorum tuorum lunam
and stellas quae tu fundasti. Quia subjecisti omnia sub pedibus nostris, oves
and boves universas, insuper and pecora campi, volucres coeli, and pisces
maris. Domine Dominus noster, quam admirabile est nomen tuum in universa terra?

CHAP. XXXI. Here follows the shepherds Astrology.
WHo that will, as shepherds that keep sheep in the fields, without knowing
any letter, save only by some figures that they make in little Tables of wood,
have knowledge of the movings and properties of the heavens, And diverse other
things contained in this present compost and Calendar of shepherds, the which
is extract and composed out of their calendar and put in letters, so that each
may comprise and know, as they, things above said. First one ought to know what
the figure is, the disposition of the world, the number and order of the
Elements, and the movings of Skies, appertains to be known of every man of
free condition and noble engine. For it is a fair thing, delectable, profitale
and honest, and therewith it is necessary to have diverse other knowledges, in
especial, for the Astrology of shepherds, which shows how the world is
round as a ball. And after wise men say there is nothing so round as it. For it
is rounder than any thing artificial. And moreover, in this world we see
nothing ne never shall, that is so just and equal round as it self is, and is
composed of the heaven, and the four elements in five princi^all parts. After
that, a person ought to know that the earth is in the middle of the world, for
it is the heaviest element. Upon the earth is the water or the sea, but it
covers not the earth, to the end that men and beasts may live therein, and
the part that is uncovered is called the face of the earth, for it is as the
face of a man always uncovered, and the part which is covered with water, is
as the body of man, which is clothed and hid. On the water is the air, that
incloseth the earth and the water, and is divided into three Regions, one is
low, whereas inhabiteth beasts and birds, another mean, whereas been the
clouds, the which makes the impressions, as lightnings thunder and other, and
is always cold: the third is the highest, whereas is neither wind nor rain, nor
tempest, nor other impressions, and there be some mountains that attain unto
it, as is Olympus, that reaches the highest region of the air, and the element
of fire mounteth to the sky, and the elements sustaineth the skies as pillars
or beams sustaineth a house. Of such mou^tains is one in Af^^c^ named Atlas.

After that is the element of fire, which is neither flame ne coals, but is
pure and invisible, for the great brightness, for so much as the water is more
clear and light than the earth, and the air more clear and light than the
water, of so much the fire is more clear light, and fayrer than air, and the
skies in equipollent been clearer, lighter, and fairer than the fire, the which
turns with the movings of the heavens, and the next region of the air also,
in the which is engendered comets, the which been called stars, for so much as
they be shining and move as stars. After the saying of some shepherds, the
fire is invisible, for his subtilty, and not for his cleernesse, forasmuch as a
thing is more clear, of so much it is the more visible, for we see the skies
well, but not the fire, for it is overmuch more subtle than the air that is
invisible, for the same cause the earth and the water be thick, and therefore
they be visible. The skies be neither properly heavy ne lighht, hard, ne soft,
clear, ne dark, hot, ne cold, sweet, ne sour, color ne sound, ne such other
qualities, save that they be hot in virtue, for they may cause heat here
beneath by their lights, movings and influences, and be improperly hard, for
they may not be divided, ne broken. And also they be improperly colors of
light in some parts, and be thick, as be the parts of the Stars. In the
which, there may no star, nor other party be anusted and put to nor none may
be diminished, ne taken away, and they may neither increase, ne wax less, nor
be of other figure than round, ne they may not change, ne pair, ne wax old, ne
be corrupted, ne altered, but in light only, as in time of the Eclipse of the
Son and Moon, ne they may not rest and stand still, ne turn any other ways,
later ne sooner, in part ne all, ne behave them otherwise, than after their
common course, but by miracle divine, and therefore the Stars and skies be of
another nature than the elements and the things of them composed, the which be
transmutable and corruptible. The Elements and all things of them composed be
enclosed within the first sky, as the yolke of an eg is enclosed within the
white, and the first sky is enclosed of the second, and the second in the
third, and the third in the fourth, and so of the other. The first sky next
the elements is the sky of the Moon, next is the sky of Mercury, and next is
the sky of Venus, then is the sky of the Sun, then is of Mars, then of Jupiter,
and after it of Saturn. And thus be the skies of the planets after their order.
The eighth sky, is of the stars fixed and be called so, for that they move
more regularly, and after one guise than the planets do. Then above, which is
the first mobile: in the which nothing appears, as shepherds may see.

Some shepherds say, above this ninth sky is one Immobile, for it turns
not, and above that is one of crystal, over the which is the sky imperial,
in the which is the throne of God, of the which sky shepherds ought not to
speak, but only of the first mobile, and that it contains all together
called the world. Of one thing they marvel much, that is, how God has
distributed the stars, that he has put none in the ninth sky, and has put so
many in the eight sky, that they may not be numbered, and in each of the other
seven but one only, in calling the sun and the moon stars, as appears in the
figure hereafter.

Hereafter the great master Shepherd shows more plainly of the four
elements, and of the similitude of the earth, and how that every planet is one
above another, and tells which of them be masculine, as these five, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, and Mercury. And of two feminine as Venus and Luna. And
which of them is northerly and southerly, and which be oriental or occidentall.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the movings of the skies and planets.


SOme movings been of the sky and planets that exceed the understanding of
shepherds, as the moving of the firmament, in the which been the stars against
the first mobile in an hundred year one degree, and the moving of the planets
in their eclipses, of the which how well the shepherds be not ignorant of all,
yet they make no mention here, for it suffices them only of two, whereof the
one is from orient into occident above the earth, and from occident to the
orient, under it, that is called the diurnall moving, that is to say, that it
makes from day to day, xxiiii. hours, by the which moving the ninth Sky, that
is the first mobile, draws after, and makes the other Skies to turn that be
under it. The other moving is of the seven planets, and is from occident to
orient above the earth, and from orient into the occident under it, and is
contrary to the first, and be the two movings that shepherds knowledgeth, and
how well they been opposites yet they move continually, and be passible, as is
showed by example. If a ship on the sea came from orient into occident and that
he of his own moving went in the ship softly toward orient, this man should
move a double moving, whereof one should be of the ship and of himself
together, and the other should be of his own moving that he makes softly
toward orient. Semblably, the planets be transported with their sky from orient
to occident by the diurnall moving of the first mobile, but later and otherwise
than the fixed stars, by which each planet has his proper moving, contrary to
the moving of the stars, for the Moon makes a course less in a month about
the earth, than a star fixed, and the sun a course less in a year, and the
other planets in a certain time, each after the quantity of his movings. Thus
it appears that the planets move two movings. Some shepherds suppose by
imagination that all the skies ceased to move by the daily moving, the Moon
would make a course in going from the occident into the orient, in as much time
as lasts now xxvii. days and eight hours, and Mercury, Venus, and Sol would
make in manner course in the space of a year, and Mars, in two year or there
about, and Saturn in thirty year or there about. For now they make their course
or revolutions, and accomplish their proper movings in the time here named. The
proper movings of Planets is not straight from occident to orient, but it is as
sideway, and shepherds see them sensibly, for when they see the moon before a
star one night, the second or third night it is behind, not straight toward
orient, but shall be drawed one time toward Septentrion and another time toward
midday, and this is because of the latitude of the zodiake, in the which be the
xii. signs under whom the Planet reigns.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Equinoctial and Zodiake that be in the twelve skies,
that contains the firmament under it.
IN the concave of the first mobile* shepherds imagine to be the two circles,
and they been there royally, the one is as small as a thread, and it is called
Equinoctial, and the other is large in manner of a girdle, or as a garland of
flowers which they call the Zodiake, and these two circles divide the one and
the other equally, but not straight. For the Zodiak crosses crookedly, and the
places where it crosses been said Equinoctials. For to understand the
Equinoctial, we see sensibly all the sky turn from orient into occident, and it
is called the daily moving or diurnall; then ought one to imagine a straight
line that passes through the middle of the earth, coming from the one end of
the sky to the other, about the which line is made this moving, and the two
ends be two points in the sky that move not, and be called the poles of the
world, of the which one is over us, by the Star of the North, that always
appears unto us, and is the Pole artick or Septentrionall, and the other is
under the earth, always hid, called the pole Antartick, or pole Australl, in
the midst of the which pole, in the first mobile, is the circle equinoctial
equally before in the part, as in the other of the said poles, and after this
circle, is made and measured the daily moving of xxiiii. hours, that is a
natural day, and it is called equinoctial, for that when the Sun is in it,
the day and the night been equal through all the world. The large Zodiake as
is said is in the first mobile, also it is as a girdle mannerly figured and set
with Images of signs intrailed subtly and well composed, and set with fixed
stars as shining Carbuncle or precious gems full of great virtue, set by the
mistress right nobly adorned, in the which Zodiac be iiii. principal points
that divide them equally in 4. parts. One is high, called the solstice of
summer, which when the Sun is entered in Cancer, it is the longest day of
summer; another is low, called the solstice of winter* which is when the sun is
entered in Capricorn, then it is the shortest day of winter, and men call it
equinoctial of harvest, that the Sun enters in Libra, in the month of
September. And the other is called equinoctial of prime time that the Sun
enters in Aries, in the month of March. The which four parts divided each in
3 equal parts, makes twelve parts that be called signs, named Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius,
and Pisces Aries begins in the Equinoctial, and crosses the Zodiac, and
when the sun is there, it begins to decline, that is to say, approaching
Septentrion, and toward us it extends to the orient. Then is Taurus second,
Gemini the third, and so of other as the figure hereafter shows. Also every
sign is divided in xxx. degrees, and be in the Zodiac ccc.^^. degrees, and
every degree divided by 60. minutes, every minute in 60. seconds, every second
into 60. thirds, and this division suffices for shepherds.

CHAP. XXXIV. Here follows the story of the twelve Signs.
Equinoctium autumni. These lines by the which the sun defends of solsticiu^
of summer, in the solst. of winter. Equinoctium primi te^poris. Their six
lines, by the which the sun mounteth of solsticium in winter into the
solsticium of summer.
Shepherds knowledgeth a subtle variation in the skies, and is for three
stars fixed be not under the same degrees of the zodiac, that they were
created, because of the moving of the firmament, the which be against the
first mobile, in an hundred year of one degree, for the which mutation the sun
may have other regard to a star and other signification, than it had in the
time passed, and also when the books were made* for that the star has hanged
his degree or sign under which it was. And this oftentimes causes them that
make prognostications and judgments coming to fail. All the circles of the
sky, been narrow and small, except the Zodiac, which is large, and contains
in length three hundred and threescore degrees and of largeness twelve, the
which largeness is divided by the middle, six Degrees one the on sign, and six
on the other, and this division is made by a line, named Ecl^ptick, and is the
way of the Sun, for the Sun never departs under that line, and thus it is
always in the middle of the Zodiac* but the other planets been always on the
one side, or of the other of the said line, save when they been in the head or
in the tail of the Dragon, as the Moon that passes twice in a month, and it
happen when it renews, it is Eclipse of the Sun, and if it happen the full
Moon, and that it be right under the nadyr of the Sun, it is general Eclips,
and if it be but a part, it is not seen: when it is eclips of the Sun, it is
not general through all the climates, but only in some, but when it is
eclipse of the Moon* it is general over all.

Of two great circles, that is to say, one Meridian* and the other Orison that
intersequeth the one the other, and crosses directly.
Meridian is a great circle imagined on the sky, which passes by the poles of
the world, and by the point of the sky right over our heads, the which is
called Zenith, and when the Sun is come over from Orient unto that circle it is
midday, and therefore it is called Meridian, and the half of that circle is
over the earth, and the other under it, that passes by the point of midnight,
directly opposite to Zenith and when the Sun touches the part of the circle,
it is midnight, and if a man go toward orient or occident, he has new
meridian, and therefore it is sooner midday to them that be toward Orient,
then to other: if a man stand still, his Meridian is one still* or if he go
toward midday or septentrion, but if he stir, he has other Zenith, and
these two circles crosses directly. Orison is a great circle that divides the
part of the sky that we see, from that we see not. And shepherds say, that if
a man were in a plain Country, he should see justly half of the sky, which
they call their emisphery, that is to say, half sphere, and orison is joining
nigh to the earth, of the which orison, the entry is the middle and is the
place in the which we have been: thus each is always in the midst of his orison
and Zenith is the pole, and as a man transporteth him from one place to
another, he is in the other places against the sky, and has other Zenith and
other Orison, all Orison is right or oblik. They have right Orison that abides
under the Equinoctial, and have their Zenith in the Equinoctial, for their
Orison intersequeth and divides the Equinoctial, even by these two poles of
the world, in such wise, that none of the poles of the world is raised above
their Orison ne deprived under it, but they that habit other where than under
the equinoctial have their Orison oblike for their Orison follows and
divides the Equinoctial side way, and not right, and there appears unto
them of all times, one of the poles of the world, raised above their Orison,
and the other be ever hid, so that they see them not, more or less after
diverse habitations, and after that they be of farnesse from the Equinoctial,
and the more that the one pole is raised, the more the orison oblike, and the
other pole deprived* and is to wit, that there is as much distance from the
Orison to the pole, as from the Zenith to the Equinoctial, and that Zenith is
the fourth part of Meridian, or the midst of the bow diurnall, of the which
the two ends be on the Orison. And also that of the Pole unto the Equinoctial,
is the fourth part of all the roundnesse of the skies and also of the Meridian
circle, since it passes by the poles, and crosses the Equinoctial directly.
Example of the Orison of Paris after the opinion of shepherds, over the which
Orison they say that the pole is raised 49. degrees, wherefore they say also,
that from the Zenith of Paris unto the equinoctial be 49. degrees, and that
from the orison unto the Zenith is the fourth part of the Meridian circle, be
xc. degrees, and from the pole to the Zenith be x^i. degrees, and from the pole
unto the solstice of summer be lxii degrees, and from the solstice unto the
equinoctial be 32. degrees, there be from the pole unto the equinoctial 50.
degrees, and is the fourth part of the roundnesse of the sky: from the
equinoctial unto the solstice of winter be 33. degrees* and from the solstice
unto the orison ^8. Thus shall the equinoctial be raised over the orison 12.
degrees, and the solstice of summer 63 degrees, in the which solstice is the
Sun at the hour of noon the longest day of summer, and then it enters into
Cancer, and is most nearest to our habitable parts, that may be. And when the
Sun is in the solstice of winter, the shortest day of the year at the hour of
noon, it enters into Capricornus, and the said solstice is not raised over
the orison of Paris, but 8. degrees. The which elevations and risings a man may
find plainly, so that he know one only, and in every region in like wise after
the situation.

Of the two other great circles of the sky, and four small.
TWo great circles be on the sky, named colures, divides the skies in four
equal parts, and crosses their self directly, the one passes by the poles of
the world, and by the two solstices, and the other by the poles also, and by
the two equinoctials. The first small Circle is called the Circle Artik,
because of the pole Zodiak about the pole Artik, and his like is to his
opposite, named the Circle Antartik. The other two be named Tropikes, the one
of Summer, and the other of Winter. The Tropik of summer is cause of the
solstice of summer, beginning of Cancer, and the Tropik of winter of the
solstice of winter, beginning of Capricorn, and be equally distant one Circle
from the other. Here ought to be noted, that the distances of the pole artik to
the Circle artik, and the distance of the Tropik of summer to the equinoctial,
and that of equinoctial to the Tropik of winter, and from the Circle antartik
to the pole antartik, are just equal, each of 24. degrees and a half or there
about, then the distance from the equinoctial to the tropik of summer, and
from the Circle artik to the pole, make together 47. degrees. The which take
away of the quarter between the pole and the equinoctial, whereas be xc.
degrees, save that there abides 44. that be the distance between the tropik of
Winter, and the Circle antartik, and these Circles be said little, for they be
not so great as the other, nevertheless they be divided each by CCClx. degrees
as the greatest.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the rising and resconsing of the signs in (...).
ORison and hemisphery differed, for orison is the circle that divides the
part of the sky which we see, from that under the earth we see not. Also orison
is a circle that moves not, but as we move from one p^ace to another, but
hemisphery turns continually, for one part rises and mounteth over orison, and
the other part resconseth and enters under it: thus orison rises ne
resconceth. Meridian also rises not ne resconceth. Equinoctial is the
diurnall circle, that rises and resconceth regularly, as much in one hour as
in another, and all in 23. hours. Zodiake the large circle and oblike, whereon
the signs be, rises and resconceth all on a day natural, but not regularly,
for it rises more in one hour than in another, for that is ever over our
orison is oblike and divides the zodiake in two parts, whereof one is over our
orison, and the other underneath. Thus half of the signs rises over our
orison every day artificially, be it short or long, and the other half by
night, wherefore it behooves, that in days which be shorter then the nights,
the signs rises sooner, and in long days more at leisure, and thus the
zodiake rises not regularly in these parts as the equinoctial, but there is
double variation, for half of the zodiac, that is from the beginning of Aries
unto the end of Virgo, altogether takes as much time in rising, as half the
equinoctial that is by it, and they begin to rise in a moment, and end in a
moment also. But this half of the zodiake rises sooner in the beginning, and
this half of the equinoctial more at leisure, and this is called their
obliquement. Also the other half of the zodiake, that is from the beginning of
Libra unto the end of Pisces, and half of the equinoctial that is by it,
begins and loves to rise together, but the equinoctial in that part in the
beginning rises sooner, and the zodiake more at leisure, and this is called
rising directly. And whether that rises sooner the equinoctial or the
zodiake, yet always they end together. Example of the two movings before said,
as if two men went from London to Windsore, and departed both together, and
that at the beginning the one go fast and the other softly, he that goes fast
should be sooner in the midway then the other, but if he that went fast to the
midway go softly and the other fast, they shall be both at once in Windsore.
Also the half of the zodiake from the beginning of Cancer, unto the end of
Sagittary, in rising bears more than half of the Equinoctial, so that this
half rises all right, and the other half of the zodiake rises oblikely.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the divisions of the earth, and of the Regions.
FIrst, ere we speak of the stars, and knowledge that shepherds have, we will
say of the division of the earth, and of the parts after their opinion.
Wherefore it is to be noted that the earth is round, and therefore as a man
goes from one country to another, he has other orison then he had, and there
appears other part of the sky, and if a man went from septentrion strait
toward midday, the pole artike to him shall be less raised, that is to say,
more nigh approaching to the earth, and if he went contrariwise it should be
more raised, that is to say, appearing higher, and therefore if he went toward
midday under a meridian wheel, that the pole artike were less raised over his
orison by the 30. part of one of the vi. parts, of the Arc Meredian, he should
pass the 30. part of the 6. parts of half the circuit on the earth, and to him
the pole should be less raised by one degree, or to the contrary, till it were
more raised of one degree, then he should pass one degree of the circuit of
the earth, of the which all the degrees together be ccc.lx. And one degree of
the earth contains 12. leagues and an half or there about, and every league
is 2. mile. And as the spear of the sky is divided by the four less circles,
five parts called Zones, so the earth is divided into five regions whereof the
first is between the pole artike, and the circle artike. The second is between
the circle artike and the tropike of summer. The third is between the tropike
of summer and the tropike of winter. The fourth is between the tropike of
winter, and the circle Antartike. The fifth between the circle antartike, and
the pole antartike. Of which parts of the earth some shepherds say, that the
first and the fifth be inhabitable for their over great coldness, for they be
too far from the Sun. The third is in the middle, is too near, under the way of
the Sun, and is inhabitable for the great heat. The other two parts the second
and the fourth, be neither too near, ne too far from the Sun, but be moderate
in heat and cold, and therefore they be inhabitable if there be no other
letting: and suppose it be true, yet it is not impossible to pass overthwart
the region under the way of the Sun, called Zone, turned to go from the second
to the fourth. For some shepherds would have passed which would have showed
it, wherefore they say that there is no region habited but the second wherein
we and all other be.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the variation that is for diverse habitations and Regions of
the earth.
Shepherds say, that if it were possible that the earth were inhabited all
about, and pose the case that it were so, first they that inhabit under the
Equinoctial have always the days and the nights equal, and have the two
poles of the world, at the 2. corners of the orison, and may see all the stars,
when they see the two poles, and the sun passes twice a year over them, that
is, when it passes by the equinoctials. Thus the sun is to them the one half
of the year toward the pole artick, and the other half toward the other pole,
and therefore they have two winters in a year without great cold; one is, when
we have winter, and the other when we have summer. Semblably they have two
Summers, one in March, when we have prime time, and the other in September,
when we have harvest, and by this they have four solstices, two high, when the
sun passes by their zenich, and two low, when it declineth one way or other,
and thus they have four umbres or shadows in a year, for when the sun is in
the equinocts twice in the year* in the morning their shadows be in the
occident, and at night in the orient, and then at noon they have no shadows,
but when the Sun is in the signs septentrionals, their shadows be toward the
parts of the signs meridiona^s, and so againward Secondly, they that inhabit
between the equinoctial and the Tropike o^ summer, have in like wise two
summers, and two winters, and four shadows in a year, and they have no
difference of the first, save that they have longer days in summer, and
shorter in winter, for as the Equinoctial lengtheneth, so likewise does the
days in summer, and in that part of the earth is the first climate, and almost
half of the second, and is named Araby, wherein is Ethiopia. Thirdly they that
inhabit under the Tropike of summer, have the Sun over their heads: and at the
day of the solstice of Summer at noon, they have their shadows smaller then we
have, and there is a part of Ethiopia Fourthly, they that be between the
tropike of summer, and the circle Artike have longer days in summer then the
above said, in as much as they be further from the Equinoctial, and shorter in
winter, and they have the sun over their heads, ne toward septentrion, and that
part of the earth we inhabit. Fifthly, they that inhabit under the circle
Artike, have the eclyptike of the Zodiake to their orison, and when the sun is
in the solstice of summer it resconceth not, and thus they have no night but
natural days of 24. hours. Semblably when the Sun is in the solstice of
winter, it is natural day when they have continual night* and that the Sun
rises not to them. Sixthly, they that be between the Circle artike, and the
pole artike have in summer diverse natural days, that be to them one day
artificial without any night. And in winter be many natural days, which are
to them always night, and the more that it approaches the pole, the more is
the artificial day all summer long, and dureth in some place a week, in other a
month in other two, in other three, in other more, and proportionally the night
is greater, for some of the signs be ever on their orison, and some always
under, and as long as the Sun is in the signs above, it is day, and while it
is in the signs underneath, it is night. Seventhly, they that inhabit right
under the Pole, have the Sun half of the year on their horison, and have
continual day, and the other half of the year continual night, and the
equinoctial is in their orison that divides the signs six above and six
beneath wherefore when the sun is in the signs that be high, and toward them,
they have continual day, and when it is in the signs toward midday they have
continual night, and thus in a year they have but one day and one night. And as
it is said of that part of the earth toward the pole Artick, a man may
understand of the other half, and of the habitations toward the pole Antartick.

The division of the earth and of the parts inhabited.
Shepherds and other, as they divide the earth inhabitable in 7. parts, that
they call climates. The first Diamerous. The second Climate Diaciens. The third
Dalixandry. The fourth, Diathodes. The fifth climate Diaromes. The sixth
Daboristines. The seventh Diaripheos. Of the which, each has his longitude
determined, and the latitude also, and the nearer they be to the Equinoctial,
the longer they be, and larger, and proceed in longitude from orient to
occident, and in latitude, from midday to Septentrion. The first climate after
some shepherds contains in length half the circuit of the earth, that is,
two hundred thousand and 4 hundred mile, and it has a hundred thousand and two
hundred mile of length. The second, and so of the other, for the lessening of
the earth coming toward Septentrion. To understand what a climate is, after
the saying of the shepherds. A climate is a space of earth equally large,
whereof the length is from orient to occident, and the breadth is coming from
midday, and from the earth inhabitable, toward the Equinoctial, drawing to
septentrion, as much as an horologe or clock changes not. For in earth
habitable the clocks change vii. times in the breath of the climates. It is of
necessity to say that they be seven, and where the variation of horologes is,
there is the diversity of climates, howbeit that such variation properly ought
to be taken in the midst of the climates, and not in the beginning or end, for
the proximity and covenance the one of the other. Also one climate, has always
a day artificial of summer, shorter or longer then another climate and this day
shows the difference in the midst of every climate, better than the beginning
or end, the which thing we may sensibly know at eye, and thereby judge the
difference of the climates. And it is to be noted that under the Equinoctial,
the days and the nights in all times are equal, each of twelve hours, but
coming toward septentrion the days of summer longs, and the winter days
shorteth, and the more that one approaches septentrion, the more waxes the
days in such wise, that at the five of the last climate the days in summer be
longer by three hours and an half, than they be at the beginning of the first,
and the pole is more raised by 38. degrees. At the beginning of the first
climate, the longest day of summer has 12. houers and xlv. minutes, and in the
pole is raised on the orison 12. degrees and xlv minutes, and the midst of the
climate, the longest day has 13. hours, and the pole raised xvi. degrees and
the latitude dures unto the longest day of summer that is 13. hours, and xv.
minutes, and the pole raised 20. degrees and an half, which largeness is
ccccxl. mile of earth. The second climate begins at the end of the first,
and the midst is there as the day has 12. hours and an half, and the pole is
raised over the oryson 24. degrees and 15. minutes. And the latitude dureth
unto three as the longest day has 13. hours and xlv. minutes, and the pole is
raised xxxii. degrees and an half, and this largeness contains of earth
CCCC. miles just. The third climate begins at the end of the second, and the
midst is there as the day has 13. hours, and the pole is raised 30. degrees
and xlv minutes, and the latitude extends unto there as the longest day has
14. hours, and xv minutes, and the pole is raised 23. degrees, and xi.
minutes. The fourth climate at the end of the third, and the midst is there as
the longest day has 24. hours and an half, and the pole is raised 26. degrees
and 20. minutes, the latitude dureth unto there as the longest day has 13.
hours, and xlv. minutes, and the pole is raised 30. degrees, and the
laregnesse contains of earth ccc. mile. The fifth climate at the end of the
fourth, and the midst is there as the longest day has 15. hours, and the pole
is raised 4^. degrees and 20. minutes, and the latitude dureth unto there as
the longest day has 15. hours, and 15. minutes, and the pole is raised 44.
degrees and an half, and the largeness contains of earth CClii. mile. The
sixth climate at the end of the fifth, and the midst is there as the longest day
has 15. hours and an half, and the pole is raised over the orizon xlv.
degrees and 23. minutes, of which the largeness dureth unto there as the
longest day has 15. hours and xlv minutes, which largeness contains of
earth CCxii. mile. The seventh climate at the end of the sixth, and the midst is
there as the longest day has xvi. hours, and the pole is raised 48. degrees
and xl. minutes, the latitude extends unto there, as the longest day has 16.
hours and 15. minutes, and the pole is raised fifty degrees and an half, and
the largeness of the earth contains 186. mile.

A mavelous consideration of the great understanding of shepherds.
IF case were after the length of the climates, one might go about the earth
from Orient to Occident to his first place, some shepherds say that this
compass may almost be made. Saying that if a man went this compass in 12.
natural days, going regularly toward Occident, and began now at midday, he
should pass every day natural, the twelfth part of the circuit of the earth,
and be 20. degrees, whereof it behooves that the Sun make a course about the
earth, and 30. degrees further or he be returned on the morrow at the meridian
of the said man, and so the said man should have his day and night of 26.
hours, and should be further by the twelfth part of a natural day than if he
rested him, wherefore it follows of necessity, that in twelve natural days
the said man should only have but 11. days and 11. nights, and somewhat less,
and that the Sun should light him but eleven times, and resconce eleven times,
for eleven days, and eleven nights, every day and night of 26. hours make 12.
natural days, each day of 24. hours. In like manner it behooves that another
man should make this course going toward Orient have his day and night shorter
than a natural day by 2. hours, then his day and night should be but of 22.
hours, then if he made this course in like space, to wit, in twelve days and
somewhat more. Thus if John made the course toward occident, and Peter toward
orient, and that Robert abode them at the place whence they departed the one as
soon as the other, and they meet at Robert both together. Peter would say he
had 2 days and 2. nights more than John, and Robert who had rested a day less
than Peter, and a day more than John, howbeit they have made this course in 12.
natural days, or an hundred, or in 10. years all is one. This is a pleasant
consideration among shepherds how John and Peter arive one self day, put case
it were on sunday: John would say it is Saturday, Peter would say monday, and
Robert would say Sunday.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Pomell of the skies, a star named the star of the North,
near the pole Artike called Septentrionall.
AFter the abovesaid things, here will we speak of some stars in particular.
And first of them that shepherds call the pomell of the skies, or star of the
North wherefore we ought to know, that we see sensibly the sky turn from
Orient to Occident, by the diurnall moving, that is, of the first mobile, which
is made on two points opposites, which be the poles of the sky, of the which
one we see, and it is the pole Artike* and the other we see not, which is the
pole Antartike or of midday which is always hid under the earth. By the pole
Artike, which is the star most approached, which shepherds call the pomell of
the sky, the which they say is the highest and most steadfast from us, by the
which they have the knowledge they have of other stars, and parts of the sky.
The stars which be by the said pomell, go never under the earth, of the which
be the stars which make the Chariot and diverse other, but they who be far from
it, go sometime under earth, as the Sun, the Moon, and other planets. Under
this pomell directly, is the angle of the earth, in the place where-against the
sun is at the hour of midnight.

Of Andromeda, a star fixed.
Aries is a sign hot and dry, that governs the head of man and the face, and
the regions, Babylon, Percy and Araby. And signifies small trees, and under
him at the 16. degree, rises a star fixed, named Andromeda, that shepherds
figureth a maid in her hair, upon the brink of the sea, set to be devoured of
the monster of the sea, but Perseus son of Jupiter, fought with his sword
against the said monster, and slew it: and so the said Andromeda was delivered.
They that be born under her constellation, be in danger of prison, or to die in
prison, but if a good planet take regard, they escape both death and prison.
Aries is the exaltation of the Sun at the 20. degree, and Aries is the house of
Mars, with Scorpio where he is most.

Of Perseus, a star fixe^, Lord of the sphere.
Taurus has the trees, plants, and impes and governs of man the neck and the
throat bol, the regions Ethiopy, Egypt, and the country about, and under the
22. degree rises a star fixed of the first magnitude, that shepherds call
Perseus son of Jupiter, that smot off the head of Meduse, who made al them to
die that beheld her, and by no manner they might eschew it. Shepherds say that
when Mars is conjoined with this star, they that be born under the
constellation shall have their heads smitten off, if God shape not remedy, and
sometime they call this star Lord of the sword, and figure him a man naked,
with a sword in one hand and in the other the head of Meduse, and looks on
it. And Taurus is the exaltation of the moon in the third degree.

Of Orison, a star fixed, and his fellows,
Gemini signifies large, good courage, wit, beauty, clergy, and governs of
man the shoulders, arms and hands, and the regions. Iugen, Armony, Carthage,
and has the small trees, and under the 18. degree rises a star fixed, named
Orison, and with it 36. other stars, and is figured a man armed in maile, and a
sword girt about him, and signifies great Captains. They that be born under
the constellation be in danger to be slain by treason, if good fortune be not
with them. Gemini and Virgo be the houses of Mercury, but Virgo is it in which
he ioyeth most, and Gemini in the third degree is the exaltation of the Dragons
head.

Of Alhabor, a star fixed.
Cancer domineth the long and equal Trees, and of the body of man the brain,
the heart, the stomach, the side, the lights, and the lungs. The Regions,
Armony the little, and the Region of Orient. And there rises under it in the
eight degree, a star fixed, which Shepherds call Alhabor, that is to say, the
great dog, and they say they that be born under the constellation, and that be
in the ascending or the midst of the sky, it signifies good fortune, and if
the moon be with it, and the party of fortune, he that in it shall be born
shall not be very rich, and Cancer is the house of the Moon, and is the
exaltation of Jupiter in the 15. degree.

Of a star fixed, named the Lions heart.
Leo has the great trees, that is to say he signioreth over them, and
signifies a hasty man full of anger, and of anguish, and of the body of man it
beholds the heart properly, the back and the sides, and of regions Artitry to
the end of the earth habitable, and under the 34. degree arises a star fixed,
named the Lions heart, and they that be born under the constellation, as
shepherds say, shall be mounted in his signiories, or in great offices, and
afterward shall be deprived or put down, and be in danger of their lives, but if
some good planet behold the said star they may be saved. Leo is the house of
the Sun, and Aries is the exaltation of the Sun, as it is said.

Of the star fixed named Nebuluse, and of another named the Golden Cup.
Virgo governs all that is sown on earth, and signifies a man of good
courage, philosophy, largess, and of all manner of sciences, and keeps of
man the belly and the intrails, and the regions of Algeramita, Assen a region
by ^erusalem, Euphrates and the I Will of Spain. Under the longitude or 5. degree
rises a star fixed named Nebuluse or tail of the Lion, and is in the
septentrionall latitude of the said sign of Virgo under the which sign rises
another fixed star, which Shepherds call the Golden cup, and is in the 1.
degree of the said sign, toward the part merydionall. The which star is of the
nature of Venus and Mercury, and signifies that they which be born under the
said constellation do know things worthy and sacred.

Of the Porkeespike a star fixed.
Under the sign of Libra that domineth the great Trees, and signifies
Justice, and of man it governs the reins and the nether part of the belly,
and regions the Country of Romany and of Greece. Under the 18. degree rises a
star fixed that shepherds call Porke espike. They that been born under the
constellation been well shaped* and been honest, and do things that folk marvel
on and rejoices, and signifies riches by honesty, and precious merchandise,
and be commonly loved of Lords and Ladies: and Libra is one of the houses of
Venus, and Taurus the other, in the which she rejoices most, and is the
exaltation of Saturn, for the weather begins to wax cold in this month of
September, and Saturn is the planet and Lord of cold, that exalts when he
enters into the sign of Libra.

Of the Crown septentrionall, a star fixed,
The Scorpion domineth the trees that be of longitude and largeness, and
signifies falsenesse, and of the body of man governs the privy places and
the regions of Heberget, and the fields of Araby; in the second degree rises a
star that shepherds call the Crown septentrionall, the which when it is in the
ascending in the midst of the sky, gives honor and exaltation to them that
be born under the constellation, and specially when it is well beholden of Sol,
the Scorpion is one of the houses of Mars, in the which he rejoices most, and
Aries is the other and is the sign wherein Mars begins to fall from his
exaltation.

Of the Scorpions heart, a star fixed.
The Sagittary signifies a man full of engine and wise, and governs the
thighs of man, and regions Ethiopy, Maharobem, and Anych. Under his first
degree rises a star fixed of the first magnitude, the which shepherds call
the Scorpions heart, which when it is well beheld of Jupiter or Venus, it
raises them that be born under his constellation to great honors and riches,
but when it is evil beholden of Saturn or of Mars, it puts them that be
born under it to poverty* The Scorpion is the house of Jupiter, in the which he
rejoices most, and Pisces is his other house, and so is the said Sagittary,
the exaltation of the Dragons tail.

Of the flying Eagle a star fixed.
Capricornus signifies a man of good life, wise, irefull, and of great
thought, and governs the knees of man* and the regions, Ethiope, Araby
Gehamen, and to the two seas, and under his 18. degree, rises a star that
Shepherdes call the flying Eagle, that signifies the Sovereign Emperors and
kings. They that be born under his constellation, when they be well beholden of
the Sun and Jupiter, mounteth in great seignories, and be loved of Kings and
Princes. Capricornus and Aquarius be the houses of Saturn, but he rejoices in
Aquary most, and the said Capricornus is the exaltation of Mars.

Of the fish meridionall a star fixed.
Under Aquarius, that keeps the legs of a man to the ancles of the feet, and
the regions of Hazenoch, Atempha, and part of the land of Alphage, and part of
Egypt, in the 21. degree rises a star that shepherds call the fish
Meridionall. They which be born under his constellation be happy in fishing in
the sea at midday, and under the 9. degree of the said sign rises the Dolphin
that signifies Lordship on the sea, ponds, and rivers, and as is said,
Aquarius is the house of Saturn, in the which he rejoices.

Of Pegasus that signifies the horse of honor a star fixed.
Pisces governs of man the feet, and signifies a man subtle, wise, and of
diverse colors, and has regions, Tabrasen, Iurgen, and all the habitable part
that is septentrion, and part of Romany, and under the 15. degree of the said
sign, rises a star that shepherds call Pegasus, that is the horse of honor,
and the figure in form of a fair horse. They that be born under his
constellation, shall be honored among great Captains and Lords. When Venus is
with it, they be loved of great Ladies, if the said star be in the midst of
the sky in the descending, and Pisces is one of the houses of Jupiter, and
Sagittarius the other, in the which he rejoices most, and the said Pisces in
the 27. degree is the exaltation of Venus.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the division of the 12. houses, as well in the earth as in the
heaven.


THe heavens and the earth may be divided in four parts by two circles which
cross directly over the two poles, and crosses four times the Equinoctial
line. Each of the four parts divided into three equally, is in all 12. equal
parts, as well in the sky as in the earth, which shepherds call houses, and be
twelve. Of the which six be always above the earth, and six under it, and
these houses move not, but be always each in their place, and the signs and
planets passes by them always once in four and twenty hours. Three of these
houses be from Orient to midnight going under the earth, the first, second,
and the third, whereof the first under the earth begins at Orient named the
house of life. The second house of substance and riches. The third that
finisheth at midnight is the house of fraternity. The fourth that begins at
midnight coming in Occident, is named the house of patrimony. The fifth
following is the house of sons. The sixth finisheth in Occident under the earth,
is the house of sickness. The seventh begins in Occident on the earth, and
stretches toward midday, and is the house of marriage. The eight is the
house of death. The ix. finishing at midday, is called the house of faith, of
religion, and pilgrimage. The tenth beginning at midday coming toward Orient
is the house of honor and regality. The eleventh after that is the house of
true friends. And the twelfth that finisheth in orient on the earth is named
the house of charity, but this matter is difficile, for shepherds knowledging
the nature and property of every of the said twelve houses, and departs them
lightly, and suffices of that is said with the figure present.

Qualiter puer crescit in ventre matris suae. Primo mense crescit cerebrum;
Secundo crescunt venae; Tertio and quarto habebit omnia membra sua, sed erit
sine anima; Quinto incipit venire and multum gravabit matrem suam; Sexto
circundabitur pelle, and ossa crescent. Septimo ungues crescent; Octavo crescit
cor and omnia viscera praeter jecur; Nono sciet matter si puer poterit been
nasci an non; Decimo crescit jecur in puero, de tunc been comparebit mulieri si
been eveniet and puero, an non, quae in jecore crescat: quod quam cito habuit
jecur tam cito nascetur vel morietur.

In quibus partibus corporis hominis sunt spiritus and intellectus. Intellectus
dicitur essein front; Memoria in cerebro, Ira in fell, Avaricia in jecore,
Timor in cord, halitus in pulmone; cogitatio in venis, quia spleen ridemus,
fell irascimur, cord sapimus, jecore amamus: quibus quatuor elementis
constantibus integrum est animal.

Of the twelve signs, which be good or bad to take journeys by land or water.

ARies is good, Taurus is not so,
Gemini and Cancer will make thee glad;
But beware hardly of Leo and Virgo.
Libra for friendship, full hard is Scorpio.
Sagittary good, Capricorn perilous,
Aquary by water good, Clarks proves so,
For best is Pisces, and most plenteous.
CHAP. XL. How the Planets reign in every hour.
HE that will weet how shepherds know which planet reigns every hour of the
day, and night: which planet is good, and which is bad, ought to know the
planet of the day and seek therefore The first temporal hour of the Sun
rising, that day is for the said planet. The second hour is for the planet
ensuing, and the third for the other as they are here figured by order, and it
behooves to go from Sol to Venus, Mercury and Luna them come again to Saturn,
unto 12. that is the hour before the Suns going down: and incontinent after
the Sun is down, begins the first hour of the night that is for the xiii
planet, and the 2. hour of the night for the 14. and so unto 12. hours for the
night, that is the next hour before the Sun rising and come directly falling
upon the 24. planet, that is next before that of the day following. And thus
the day has 12. hours, and the night 12. also, the which be temporal hours,
different to the hours of the clocks, the which be artificials. Shepherds say,
that Saturn and Mars be evil planets. Jupiter and Venus good, Sol and Luna
half good, and half evil. The party toward a good planet is good, and the
party toward the evil planet is naught. Mercury conjoined with a good planet
is good, and with an evil planet he is naught, and they understand this as to
the influences good or evil, that been of the said planets there following.

The hours of the planets been different to them of clocks, for the hours of
clocks been equal at all times each of lx. minutes, but they of the planets
when the days and the nights be equal that the Sun is in one of the
Equinocts, they be equal, but as soon as the days lengthen or shorten, so do
the natural hours. By this it is convenient always for the day to have 12.
temporal hours, and the night also, and when the days be long, and the hours
long, and when the days be short, and the hours short, in like manner is the
night, and nevertheless an hour of the day, and an hour of the night together
have six score minutes, as many as two hours for artificials, that the one
leaves the other takes. And take we our planets from the Sun rising, not
before, unto the Sun going down, and all the remnant is night.

Example of that which is above.
In December the days have but vii. hours artificials of clocks, and xii
temporals, let the viii. hours artificials be divided in 12. equal parts and
it shall be 12. times, xl. minutes, and every part shall be a temporal hour that
shall be of xl. minutes and no mo. Thus in December the temporal hours of the day
have but xl minutes, but the hours of the night have fourscore for in that time
the nights have xvi. hours artificials, which divided in 12. parts bin
fourscore minutes for every te^porall hour. Thus the hour of the nights in
December. have 80. minutes, and xl. for an hour of the day: there been six sore
minutes in two temporal hours, as many in two hours artificialls that be each
of xl minutes. In June is the contrary, in March, and in September, all hours
been equal as the days been in other months by equal portion. With every
planet here before figured been the signs which be the houses of the said
planets, as it is aforesaid. Capricornus and Aquarius been the houses of
Saturn: Sagittarius and Pisces, of Jupiter: Scorpio and Aries, of Mars: Leo, of
Sol: Taurus and Libra, of Venus: Gemini, of Mercury: Cancer of Luna, with other
significations that would be long to recount.

Hereafter follows the nature of the seven planets, with the dispositions of
the said Planets, after the sayings of expert shepherds.
My son, thou shall understand,
That to avoid all idleness,
This matter often thou take in hand.
To read of shepherds business.
And specially of the Planets seven,
Of Mars, and Saturn that is full high,
Also of Sol the middle heaven.
And under him Venus, Luna and Mercury.
For to know their natures all,
In sooth it is a great cunning,
And show what may befall,
When every planet is reigning;
By their working, often we been moved
To love, lust, and plays of iollity,
And by some of them, as Clerks have proved,
They stir us to theft, murder and utily.
Some be not good, some be bad verily,
Some be not comfortable to man, ne beast,
Some hot, some cold, some moist, some dry.
If three be good, four be worse at least.
Saturn is highest and coldest, being full bad;
And Mars with his bloody sword, ever ready to kill,
Jupiter very good, and Venus makes lovers glad.
Sol and Luna is half good and half ill.
Mercury is good and evil verily:
And hereafter shall thou know,
Which of the seven most worthy be,
And who reigns high, and who low.
Of every planets property,
Which is the best among them all,
That causes wealth, sorrow or sin,
Tarry, and hear soon thou shall.
Speak soft, for now I begin.
Of Saturn.
Saturnus significat hominem nigrum and croceum, ambulando vergentem in terra
qui ponderosus est, incessu adjungens pedes, and macer, recurvus, habens parvos
oculos, siccam cutem, barbam raram, labia spissa, calidus, ingeniosus,
seductor, interfector, hominemque corpore pilosum junctis superciliis.



Here begins of Saturn, the highest of the seven Planets.
Saturn is the highest planet of all the seven, he is mighty of himself he
gives all the great colds and waters, yet he is dry and cold of nature, and he
comes into Cancer, and his chief signs be Aquary and Capricorn, and he
compasses all the other planets: for Saturn is next under the first mobile*
that is, under the sky, which mobile moves marvellously, for some shephards
say that he causes by his moving all other planets to move, and moves the
mobile above.

Saturn is so high that the shepherds cannot well measure it, for so high
reason has power and no further, and therefore it is more then 30. years ere
he may run his course. When he reigns there is much theft used, and little
charity, much ^ying, and much lawing one against another, and great prisonment
much debate and great swearing. And much plenty of corn and Hogs, great travel
on the earth, and old folk shall be very sickly, many diseases shall reign
among the people, especially in the chief hours of Saturn, therefore this
planet is likened to age, as hard, hungry, suspicious, and covetous, that
seldom is content with any thing, for Saturn is enemy to all things that grow
and bear life of nature, for the cold and stormy bitterness of his time.

Of his properties.
HE that is born under Saturn shall be false, envious, and full of debate, and
full of law, he shall be cunning in currying of leather, and a great eater of
bread and flesh, he shall have a stinking breath, and he shall be heavy,
thoughtfull, and malicious, a robber a fighter, and full covetous and yet he
shall keep counsel well, and be wise in councelling, and he shall love to sin
wilfully, he shall be a great speaker of tales, iusts, and Chronicles, he shall
have little eyes, black hair, great lips, broad shouldred, and shall look
downward. He shall not love Sermons, ne go to the Church, and beware of his
s^^nds, and behold the ratel, and above his ears the planet reigns. The
children of Saturn shall be great ^angelers and chiders, black and lean in
the face, thin bearded, evil languaged, they shall be full of Law and vengeance,
and will never forgive til they be revenged of their quarrel, and like as the
planet Saturn is cold, and a great causer of Frosts and Snowes, semblably, and
he that is born under him shall be cold in charity, and not misericordious but
vengable and will never be entreated. Also they shall be great cursers, and bear
malice long in their minds, and not forget it, they look to be obeyed, and to
have great reverence, and commonly will praise themselves, and talk to
himself, and laugh at their own conceit, and all evils shall grow in them, and
above al colors he shall love black best. The planet of Saturn governs of man
the ratle, and above the ears as is aforesaid. This planet is cause of hasty
death, because he is cold and dry of nature, and therefore is likened to
melancholy. And the said Saturn reigns in Aquary, Capricorn and Cancer, but
specially in Aquary and Capricorn.

Jupiter significat hominem habentem album ruborem in facie, habentem oculos
non prorsus nigros nares non equares and breves calvum, in aliquo dentium
habentem nigridinem, pulchre statuere, boni animi, bonis moribus, pulchris
corporis, hominemque habentem magnos oculos, pupillam latam barbam crispam.


NExt after the planet of cold Saturn is the noble planet of Jupiter, which
Jupiter is very pure and clear of nature, and not very hot, but he is all
virtuous: And there is fixed in Jupiter two noble signs of love, the one is
Pisces, and the other is Sagittar, signs of none evil, nor unhappiness* This
planet may do none evil, he is best of all the other seven he keeps the liver
of man, and maintains it ioyously, and ever more this planet does good, and
within twelve years or thereabout he passes all the twelve signs.

Of his properties.
THe man that is born under him shall love cleanliness of body, and will not
use to speak of ribaldry and harlotry, he shall ever love religion, and
virtuous living, he shall be personable of body, he shall be perfect in all
manner of measures, both large and long, he shall be white in the visage mingled
with a little redness, large brows, he shall be a fair speaker, and say well
behind a person, he shall love green color and gray, he shall be happy in
merchandise, and shall have plenty of gold and silver, and he shall love to sing
and to be honestly merry: and of man he governs the stomach and the arms.

Of Mars.
THe planet of Mars is called the God of battle and of war and he is the third
planet, for he reigns next under the gentle planet of Jupiter. This planet
Mars is the worst of all other, for he is hot and dry, and stirs a man to be
very wilful and hasty at once, and to unhappiness, one of his Signs is Aries,
and the other is Scorpio, and most he is in these two signs. He causes all
wars and battles, this planet stirs men to bear weapons, as murderers,
daggers, swords, hilts or bows, or some Mars significat hominem rubeum,
habentem capillos ruffos and faciem ortundam, leviter homines die honestantem,
habentem oculos croceos, horribilis aspectus audacem, habentem in pede signum
velmaculum, hominemque ferocem habentem acutum aspectum superbiam levitatem and
audacem.
other weapon of death, and would ever hear of fighting. Therefore let every
man beware of the days of Mars, and in his chief hours that no man fight,
for without doubt if God help him not, he shall be maimed or slain. Also the
hours of Mars is perilous meeting with thieves for dread of slaying of true
men. And Mars mounteth into the crabbe, and goes about the twelve signs in
two year, and thus runs his course.

Of his properties.
HE that is born under Mars, in all unhappiness is expect, he shall be a
nourisher of great Beasts, he is full of malice, and ever doing wrong, under
Mars is born all thieves and robbers that keeps high ways, and hurts true
men, and night walkers quarrel pickers, mockers, and scoffers, and these men of
Mars cause war, murder, and battle, they will gladly be Smiths or workers of
Iron, light fingers, and liars, and great swearers of oaths in vengeable wise,
and a great surmiser and crafty, he is red and angry, with black hair and
little eyes, he shallbe a great walker, and a maker of swords and knives, and
shedder of man's blood, a letcher, a speaker of ribaldry, red bearded round
visage, and good to be a barber and letter of blood, and to draw teeth, and is
perilous of his hands, and he will be rich of other men's goods. And of the body
of man Mars keeps the gall and the reins.

Of the noble planet Sol.
THe sun is a planet of great renown and king of all the planets, the sun
nourishes every age, and yet he is hot and dry of nature, and the planet
Saturn is to him full contrary, for he is ever cold* and the noble planet of
the sun is hot, and gives all light, for when it is above the earth, it is day
Sol significat hominem habentem colorem inter croceum and nigrum, id est
fuscum, tectum cum rubore, brevis statuere, crispum crinem, pulchri corporis,
capillos, parum rubeos: occulos aliquantulum croceos, and mixtam habet naturam
cum planeta qui cum eo fuerit dum modo digniorem habeat locum ejus insequitur
naturam.
and when the earth does shadow the Sun, it is night, much be we people bound
to laud God for that noble planet, for he comfort both man and beast, fish,
and all fowls that flies in the air, all things is glad of the Sun the red
Rose and fair flowers, after that the Sun goes far into the West they close
themselves.

Of his properties.
AL men and women that be born under the Sun shall be very fair, amiable of
face, and their skin shall be right white, tender, and well colored in the
visage with a little redness, and they shall have a pleasure in their own
beauty, they shall show their lives as they were good and holy but they shall
be secret hypocrites, if they give them to religion they shall be fortunate to
great promotions, they shall be clean and good of faith, and shall be governors of
other people, and if they be never so poor, yet shall they love hawking and
hunting with hounds and hawks, and rejoice to see it, the children that is
born under the Sun shall desire honor and science, and shall sing very
pleasantly and they shall be of good courage and diligent, and shall desire
Lordship above other people, they shall give wise judgments, and their words
shall sound all sweetly, and he bear any office he shall be liberal, and he
shall be subtle in feats of war, and many shall seek to him for counsel, he
shall have profit by women and he shall be in service with Lords, and by them
shall have advantage for his wisdom, his sign shall be in the face, he
shall be of small stature, with crispe hair, and bald on the head, he will
seldom be angry, and of all the members in a man's body, the Sun keeps the
heart, as the most mighty planet above all other.

Venus significat hominem album trahentem ad nigredinem pulchri corporis and
capillorum, habentem parvam maxillam, pulchros oculos and pulchrum faciem,
multos capillos habentem ad album confectum rubore, crassum and benevolentem.


NExt after the Sun reigns the gentle planet Venus, and it is a planet
feminine, and she is lady over all lovers: this planet is moist and cold of
nature, and her two signs is Taurus and Libra, and in them she has all her
joy and pleasance* she causes joy, and specially among young folk, for greatly
she reigns on them, and on all men that be jealous, and on women also, for
jealousy is but love inordinate, as when a man or woman loves more fervently
than they should, for such would never be from the sight of their lovers: for
if they be, they soon suspect them, and fear to be beguiled. There is no man
that loves a woman by carnal affection* but it is by the influence of Venus,
and few men escape out of her danger. This planet Venus runs in twelve
months over the twelve signs.

Of her properties
WHat man or woman that is born under Venus shall be a gay lover, pleasant,
delitious, and most commonly they have black eyes, and little brows, red lips
and cheeks, with a smiling cheer; they shall love the voice of trumpets,
clarions, with other minstralsie: they shall be pleasant singers, with sweet
voice, full of wanton toys, plays, and scoffings: they shall greatly delight
in dancing, in gambols, in leaping and springing, and will use playing at the
chesse, and at the cards, and tables, and desire often to commune of lust and
love, and covet of sweet meats and drinks, as wine, and be often drunken* and often
desire lechery, and the beholding of fair women, and the women of men in like
wise, and use dead fleshly lusts oftentimes* they will desire fair clothes of
gay color, and fine, with rings of vanity, and all vain pleasure of the world,
with fair and rich clothes, and pearls, precious stones, they shall love
flowers with sweet smells, yet shall they be of good faith, and they shall love
other as well as themselves, they shall be liberal to their friends, they shall
have few enemies, if they be brown they shall be well proportioned of body, if
they swear it is true, ye may believe them: and Venus governs the thighs of
man.

Of the fair Planet Mercury.
Mercurius significat hominem non multum album neque nigrum habentem colorem,
frontem elevatum, longam faciem, and nasum longum, barbam in maxillis, oculos
pulchros non ex toto nigros, longosque digitos atque perfectum magistrum.


NExt under Venus is the fair planet Mercury, and it is masculine, next above
the moon, and there is no planet lower than Mercury, saving only the moon. This
Mercury is very full and dry of nature, and his principal signs be these.
Gemini is the first that reigns in the arms and hands of man or woman, and the
other sign is Virgo that governs the navell and stomach of man. This planet
is Lord of speech, in like wise as the Sun is Lord of light. This planet
Mercury passes and circueth the xii. signs in CCCxxxviii days. Hereafter is
showed the disposition of the children that be born under the planet Mercury,
of what condition they shall be, as Doctors of Astronomy do discuss.

Of his properties.
WHo is born under Mercury shall be subtle of wit, and shall be a devout person to
God, and have good conscience, and shall be very crafty in many sciences, he with
his wisdom and labor shall get him many friends and lovers, she hal ever follow
and resort to them that be of good manners, and shall be fortunate on sea in
merchandise, he shall be very gracious, he shall have harm by women, and when he
is married men shall not see so much by him, as before, he will have great love
to ladies and gentlewomen, but yet they shall not be masters over him, he will
be a very good man of the Church, or a religious man, and he shall not love to
go a warfare, he will hate thieves and swearers, and he shall gather great
goods by his wisdom. If he be a man of the world, he shall be perfect in some
handy craft, he shall love well to preach, and to speak fair rhetorike
language, and to talk of philosophy and Geometry, he shall love well writing,
and to read in strange books, and to cast accounts of great numbers, and shall
be a gay maker of balads, songs, meeters and rimes, he shall be perfect in the
art of music and love it, he shall love measuring and meting, and he shall be
some great clothmaker, he shall be servant, to some great Lord, or else a receiver
of his money, he shall have a high forehead, a long visage black eyes, and a
thin beard, he shall be a great pleader in the law, and he will meddle with other
men's deeds if they do not well, and say against it; and Mercury governs the
thighs, the flancks and belly.

Of the Moon.
Luna significat hominem album confectum rubore junctis superciliis, benevolum,
habentem oculos non ex toto nigros, faciem rotundam, pulchram staturam, and in
facie ejus signum in initio quod crescet, significat omne quod faciendum est
and in plenitudine quod distruendum quia decrescit.


IT is to be understood that the lowest planet of the seven is named Luna,
which we call the Moon, and is called feminine or female, and is called among
the shepherds the Lady of the night, for the chief light and clearness that
is by night, is by the presence of the Moon, for the Moon is much nearer
approached unto us than any star, and therefore she gives us much more light
than the stars do: and also the moon is Lady of moisture, and rules the sea
by ebb and flood. The moon takes her light of the Sun 22. times in a year, and
also the moon is cold and moist of nature: and her color is much fairer than
silver, and her chief house is Cancer, and there is none of the other planets
that is so slow and goes so little ci^cuit as does the moon, and she
descends into Scorpio, and she goes about the xii signs in 27. days, and
then changes, and is called new:

Of her Properties.
SVch men and women as be born under the Moon shall be lowly and serviceable,
and very gentle. And if it be a maid child shall be very shamefast and womanly,
and they shall be wel-favored both man and woman, their faces shall be full and
round, and they shall be very patient folks, and will suffer much wrong or
they be revenged, and will be soft of speech, and very courteous, and shall live
honestly with such as God shall send them, and will haunt virtuous company, they
shall be well formed of body, and have merry looks, and love honestly to be
glad, and will live very chastely, and love greatly the virtue of cleanness
both in word and deed, they hate lecherous talkers and speakers of ribaldry,
their color shall be mixed but with a little redness, they shall gladly go
attired in many colored clothes, and they shall sweat in the forehead. Also
they will have a great desire to be masters and mistresses over great streams,
rivers and floods, and devise many proper engines to take fish. Look what they
say, it shall be true and steadfast, and they shall be very honest, and good
goers on foot, and comfort sick persons, they shall love well to talk sometime
of marvells, they shall not keep hatred long in their mind, they shall appease
the people under color with their communications, as well as other should do
with silver. Honest women will they love, they will hate harlots and brothels,
and shall nourish their children up in virtue and good manners. And the lights
and the brains of man is under the governace of Luna.

Thus ends the seven Planets with their properties.
Of the Physnomy of Shepherds.
PHysnomy of the which been spoken a fore, is a science that shepherds have to
know the natural inclination of man and woman, good or evil, by diverse signs
on them in beholding them only. The which inclination we ought to follow if it
be good, but if it be evil by virtue and strength of understanding we ought
to eschew and avoid it, and to withstand the said evil inclinations.
Shepherds use this science none otherwise. The prudent, virtuous and wise man,
may be of all other as touching their manners, otherwise than their signs show
in their reign. Thus the things demonstred, as to vice is not in a wise man,
though the sign be so, as an ale stake, or a sign is sometime hanged before a
house* in the which often times is no Ale. Howbeit that a man by his wisdom and
understanding follow not the evil influences of the celestial bodies that be
upon him, and yet he corrupts not the signs and demonstrations of the said
influences, but those signs naturally have seignory on them in which they be,
for to have naturally that which they signify, whether a man have them or not,
wherefore shepherds say that the most part of men and women follow their
natural inclinations to vice or virtue, for that the most part of them be not
wise and prudent as they ought to be, and they use no virtue of their own
minds, but ensue their sensuality, and by this the celestial influence of the
which is showed by signs exteriors, and of such signs is the said science of
Phisnomy. For the which it behooves first to know that the time is divided into
four parts, as it has been before said, that is to wit, Prime time, Summer,
Harvest, and Winter, that be compared to the four Elements, Prime time to the
air, Summer to the fire, Harvest to the earth, and Winter to the water. Of the
which four Elements every man and woman is formed and made, and without the
which none may live. The fire is hot and dry. The air is hot and moist. The
water is moist and cold. The earth is cold and dry. Also some say, the person
on whom the fire domineth, is choleric of complexion, which is to say hot and
dry. He on whom the air domineth, is sanguine of complexion, which is hot and
moist. He on whom the water domineth, is Phlegmatic of complexion, which is
moist and cold. He on whom the earth domineth, is melancholy of complexion,
which is cold and dry. The which complexions they know and discern the one from
the other by signs which are said here-after.

CHAP. XLI. Of the four complexions.


The Choleric has Nature of fire hot and dry, and naturally is lean and
slender, covetous, irefull, hasty, brainlesse, foolish, malicious, deceitful
and subtle, where he applies his wit. He has wine of the Lion, that is to
say, when he is drunken he chideth, fights, and commonly he loves to be clad
in black, russet and gray.

The sanguine has nature of air, hot and moist, he is large, plenteous,
attempered, amiable, abundant in nature, merry, singing, laughing, liking,
ruddy, and gracious. He has his wine of the ape, the more he drinks the
merrier he is, and draws to women, and naturally loves high-colored cloth.

The phlegmatic has nature of water, cold and moist, he is heavy, slow,
sleepy, ingenious, commonly he spitteth when he is moved, and has his wine of
the sheep, for when he is drunk he accounts himself wisest, and he loves
most green color.

The mellancholy has nature of earth, cold and dry, he is heavy, covetous, a
backbitter, malicious and slow. His wine is of the hog, for when he is drunken
he desires sleep, and he loves cloth of black color.

CHAP XLII. The judgment of man's body.
TO come to our purpose of speaking visible signs, we will begin to speak at
the signs of the head. First we advertise that one ought to beware of all
persons that has default of members naturally, as of foot, hand, eye* or other
member, and though he be but a criple, and specially of a man that has no
beard, for such be inclined to diverse vices and evils, and one ought to eschew
his company as his mortal enemy. Also shepherds say, that much and plain hair
signifies a person piteous and debonair. They that have red hair be commonly
irefull and lack wit, and been of little truth. Black hair, good visage, and
good color, signifies very love of Justice. Hard hair signifies that the
person loves peace and concord, and is of good and subtle wit. A man that
has black hair and a red beard, signifies to be letcherous, disloyal, a
vanter, and one ought not to trust in him. The yellow hair and crisp signifies
a man laughing, mercy, letcherous and deceitful. Black hair and crisp
signifies melancholy, letchery, evil thought, and very large hanging hair,
signifies wit with malice. Great plenty of hair in a woman signifies
boisterousnesse and covetise. A person with great eyes is slothful,
unshamefull, inobedient, and weeneth to know more than he does: but when the
eyes be mean, ne too big ne too small, and that they be not too black nor too
green, such a man is of good understanding, courteous, faithful, and trusty. A
person that is blear-eyed, gogled and squint, signifies malice, vengeance,
cantell, and treason. They which have great wide eyes and has long hair on
their brows and eyelids, signifies foolishness, hard of understanding, and
robust wit, and be evil by nature. The persons that have their eyes moving
fast from one side unto another, and have their sight sharp and quick,
signifies fraud and theft, and is of little trust. The eyes that been black,
clear and shining, been the best and the most certain, and signifies wit and
discretion, and such a person is worthy to be beloved, for he is full of truth,
and of good conditions. The eyes that been ardent and sparkling, signifies
strong heat, force and puisance. The eyes that been whitish and fleshly,
signifies a person inclined to vice letchery, and full of fraud. Shepherds
say, that when a person beholds often as abashed, shamfast, and fearful, and
that in beholding it seems that he sigheth and he has small drops appearing
in his ties, then it is for certain that such persons loves, and desires the
wealth of them that they behold. But when any looks in casting his eyes
aside, as by wantonness, such persons be deceitful, and purchases to grieve
him and such persons will dishonor women, and they ought to be taken heed of,
for such looks be false, letcherous and deceivable. They that have small
greyish eyes and sharp, signifies a person melancholous, hardy, an evil
speaker and cruel. And if a little vein appear between the eyes and the nose
of a wench, they say it signifies virginity, and in a man subtilty of
understanding, and if it appear great and black, it signifies corruption, heat
and melancholy in women, and in man rudeness and default of wit, but that vein
appears not always. But the eyes been yellow, and have no hair on the brows,
signifies meselry and evil disposition of body. Great hairs and long,
signifies rudeness, hard engine, and letchery. The beetled brows signifies
malice, cruelty, letchery, and envy. And when the brows been thin, it
signifies subtle, engine, wit* and faithfulness. Hollow eyes and hanging
brows, signifies a person full of evil saying, of evil thought, a great
drinker, and commonly applies his mind to malice. A little short visage and a
small neck, a little slender nose, signifies a person of great heart, hasty
and irefull A long nose and high by nature signifies prowess and hardesse. A
short raised nose signifies hastiness letchery hardiness, and an undertaker;
a hooked nose that boweth to the upper lip, signifies malice, deceit, untruth,
and letchery. A great nose and high in the midst, signifies a wise man and
well spoken A great nose with wide nostrils, signifies gluttony and ire. A red
face and short, signifies a person full of riot, debate and disloyal. A
visage, neither too short nor too long, and that is not overfat, with good
color, betokens a man veritable amiable, wise, witty, serviceable, debonair,
and well ordered in all his works. A fat visage and full of red flesh
signifies gluttony, negligence, rudeness of wit, and understanding. A slender
face and somewhat long, signifies a person well advised in all his works by
good measure. A little short visage of yellow color signifies a person
deceiving, untrue, malicious, and full of harm. A visage long and fair,
signifies a man hot, disloyal, spiteful, and full of ire and cruelty, They
that have their mouth great and wide, signifies ire and hardness. A little
mouth, signifies melancholy, heaviness, hard wit, and evil thought. He that
has great lips, has a token of rudeness and default of wit. Thin Lips,
signifies liquerousnesse and leasing. Teeth even set and thin, betokens a
true lover, letcherous, and of good complexion. Long teeth and great,
signifying hastiness and ire, Long ears signifies folly, but it is a sign of
good memory. Little ears signifies letchery and theft A person that has a
good voice, well sounding; is hardy, wise and well spoken. A mean voice that is
not small ne too great signifies wit, purveiance, truth, and right wittiness.
A man that speaks hastily is of value. A great voice in a woman is an evil
sign. A soft voice signifies a person full of envy, of suspicion and
leasings. An over-small voice, signifies great heart and folly. Great voice
signifies hastynesse and ire. A man that stirs always when he speaks, and
changes voice, is envious, nice, drunk, lewd, and evil conditioned. A person
that speaks temperatly without moving, is of perfect understanding, of good
condition, and of good counsel. A man with a round visage, running eyes, and
yellow teeth, is of little truth, a traitor, and has a stinking breath. A
person with a long slender neck, is cruel, without pity, hasty, and
brainlesse. A person with a short neck, is full of fraud, barate of deception,
of malice, and none ought to trust in him. A person that has a long thick
neck, signifies gluttony, force, and great letchery. A manly woman that is
great and truly membred, is by nature melancholyous, valiant and letcherous.
One that has a great long belly, signifies small wit, pride, and letchery. A
little belly and large feet, signifies good understanding, good counsel, and
true. A person having large feet, high and curbed shoulders, signifies
prowess, hardiness, hastiness, truth and wit. Shoulders sharp and long,
betokens letchery, untruth, barate and unnatural. When the arms been so
long that they may stretch to the joint of the knee, it is a token of prowes,
largess, truth, honor, good wit, and understanding: when the arms be short,
it is a sign of ignorance, of evil nature, and a person that loves debate.
Long hands and slender fingers signifies subtilty, and a person that has
desire to know many things. Small hands and short thick fingers betokens
folly and lightness of courage. Thick and large hands, and big, signifies
force, hastiness, hardiness, and wit. Clear and shining nails of good color
signifies wit, and increase of honor. Nails full of white spots and riveled*
signifies a person avaricious, letcherous, proud, and of great heart, full of
wit and malice. The foot thick and full of flesh, signifies a person
outrageous, vigorous, and of little wit. Small feet and light, signifies
hardness of understanding, and little truth. Feet flat and short, signifies
an anguishous person, of small wisdom and uncurtesie. A person that goes a
great pace is great of heart, and despitefull. A person that makes small
steps and thick, is suspicious, full of envy, and evil will. A person that
has a small flat foot, and casts as a child, signifies hardiness and wit,
but the said person has diverse thoughts. A person that has soft flesh, too
cold ne too hot, signifies a well disposed person, of good understanding and
subtle wit, full of truth, and increasing of honor. A person that laugheth
gladly, and has green eyes, is debonair of good wit, true, wise, and
letcherous. The person that laugheth faintly, is slothful, mellancholious,
suspicious, malicious and subtle.

Shepherds say, for that there are diverse signs in a man and woman, and that
they be sometime contrary one to the other, one ought to judge for the most
part after the signs in the visage. First of the eyes, for they be truest,
they say also God formed no creature to inhabit the world wiser then man, for
there is no condition in a beast but is comprehended in man. Naturally a man is
hardy as the Lion, true and worthy as the Ox, large and liberal as the Cock,
avaricious as the Dog, and aspre as the Heart, debonair and true as the Turtle,
malicious as the Leopard, prevy and tame as the Dove, dolorous and guilefull as
the Fox, simple and debonaire as the Lamb, shrewd as the Ape, light as the
Horse, soft and pitiful as the Bear, dear and precious as the Eliphant, good
and wholesome as the Unicorn, vile and slothful as the Ass, fair and proud as
the Peacock, gluttenous as the Wolf, envious as the Bitch, inobedient as the
Nightingale, humble as the Pigeon, fell and foolish as the Ostrich, profitable
as the Pismire, dissolute and vagabond as the Goat, spiteful as the Fesant,
soft and meek as the Chicken, moveable and varying as the Fish, letcherous as
the Bore, strong and puissant as the Camel, traitor as the Mule, advised as
the Mouse, reasonable as an Angel: and therefore he is called the little world,
for he participateth of all, or he is called all creatures: for as it is said,
he participateth and has condition of all creatures.

CHAP. XLIII Shepherds practice that quadrant of the night, as ye may see by
this figure.
BY this figure one may know the hours by night as follows, let the Star be
known we call the pomel of the sky, right under is the summer, at the hour of
midnight, and the place on the earth against the star that we call the Angel
of the earth. When we will see it at eye we behold our Pomel, and I behold under
this cord and the nether end of my cord is the angle of the earth, and the Sun
is right under it. The long line that traverseth the star of the figure, that
is the pomel of the skies, serves for two hours, and the small lines for one
hour. But yet serve lines as the changing of the star that signifies
midnight, and consequently the other hours for the long hours serve to a
month, and the small to fifteen days. Let the cord be stretched, that it be
seen over the pomel, note some star under the cord, that may be always known,
and that shall be it that always shall show us the hours of the night. After
imagine a circle about the pomel, and distance of the star marked, in which
circle be imagined the lines or semblable distances, as in the figure. As many
distances as the marked star shall be before the cord, so many hours shall
there be before midnight, and as many as shall be behind the cord, so many hours
be after midnight. It must be known that the star marked changed the place in
xv. days, by the distinction of an hour, in a month of two. Wherefore it
behooves to take midnight in xv* days further by the distance of an hour, and
in a month of two, and in two months of four, and in three months of six, so as
in six months the star marked that was right under the pomell shall be right
over, and in other six months it will come to the point where as it was first
marked, and this said marked star one ought not to change, but ought to choose
it among many for the most knowledgable, and for the most to be found among
other.

By this present figure, shepherds know by night in the fields all seasons,
what time and hour it is, be it before midnight or after.
The xxiv. letters without the figure, be for the xxiv. hours of a natural
day, and the xii. within been for the xii. months. The star in the midst is
the pomel of the skies, with the which it behooves to know one that is next it,
which shall be a marked star, and it by the which one may know the hour in the
manner as before is said, in taking midnight in fifteen days, further more by
the distance of an hour.

FOr to know by night the place against midday as of midnight, the high
Orient, and the high Occident, the low Orient, and the low Occident, and the
place in the sky, over against which every sign rises. Shepherds uses this
practice. They hang a cord that is made steadfast above and beneath* then
another with a plomb, that descends till it be time for to stay it that they
may be a little distance one from another, so that one may see the star of the
pomel right under the two cords at once, then they stay the cord with the
plomb above, or beneath. Now who that will see midday directly be it night or
day, go on the other side the cords, and thou shall see the place against
midday. Then come on the first side, and thou shall see the place against
midnight though it be day. For the highest point of the Zodiak in the longest
day of Summer let the Sun be seen under the two cords at the hour of midday,
and that he be so near that he touch the cords, and mark in the cord toward
the Sun, the height that he has seen it, then by night mark some stars that
one may always know on, in the same place is the passage of the solstice of
Summer. And when the days be at the shortest, the star which we see at midnight
in the said point of midday, been directly they that be next to the solstice
of Summer, that which has the sign next toward orient is Cancer, and the sign
next toward Occident is Gemini. And it is said from the height of the solstice
of Summer, one may practice the low solstice of Winter, the which we see on the
midday, when the day is at the shortest over the place against midnight, and
his next sign toward Orient is Capricorn, and that toward Occident is
Sagittarius. One may mark the high Orient or the low, but it behooves that it
be when the days be at the longest or shortest and the distance between the two
Orients divided into six equal parts, by each rises two signs, by the
nearest part of the high Orient, rises Gemini and Cancer, by the second Taurus
and Leo, by the third Aries and Virgo, by the fourth Pisces and Libra, by the
fifth Aquarius and Scorpio, by the sixth more near the Occident Capricornus and
Sagittarius, and diverse other things which may be practiced on the sky.

CHAP. XLIV. Of diverse impressions that Shepherds see in the night in the air.
Shepherds that lies by night in the fields, sees many and diverse
impressions in the air, and on the earth, which they which lies in their beds
see not. Sometime they have seen in the air a manner of Commet, in form and
fashion of a Dragon, casting fire by the throat. Another time they have seen
fire leaping in manner of Goats, that leapeth without long during. And other
times a white impression, the which appears always by night and at all hours,
which they call the highway to St. James in Calice.

The flying Dragon, Goats of the fire leaping, the highway to St. James in
Calice.


Other impressions there be, as flames of fire that mounteth. Other as flaming
of fire that goes side-way. Other as still fire that bideth long. Other there
is that makes great flames and bideth not long. Others also as candles,
sometime great and sometime little, and this they see in the air and on the
earth. Another Comet they see falling as an ardent spear.

Burning candle, Spear ardent, fire mounting, burning sparkles, firebrarnds,
wild fire.


Moreover Shepherds see comets in other manners, that is to weet, in manner of
a pillar flaming, and dureth long. Another in manner of a flying star that
passes lightly. But the third is a covered star that dureth longest of all.
They see other five stars erraticks that goes not as the other, and been they
which they call planets, but they have form of the planets, and been Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and they see stars of the which one is
called the bearded star, and the other the haired star, and the other atayled
star.

Stars erraticks, Comet tailed, flying star, Pillar ardent, star tayled, Star
haired, Star bearded.


Quatuor his casibus sine dubio cadit adulter,
Aut hic pauper erit, aut subito morietur,
Aut cadit in causam qua debet judice vinci.
Aut aliquod membrum casu, vel crimine perdet.
Of a thunderstone that fell in the Duchy of Austrich.
Howbeit that the impressions before seem things mavelous to people that have
not seen them, they say that it is in part impossible, Know they and other,
that in the year of our Lord Mxcii. the vii. day of November, a wonder happened
in the Earldom of Ferrare in the Duchy of Austrich, near a town named
Euszheim, where that day was great thunder and orage. In the plain fields nigh
the said town fell a stone of thunder, which weighed two hundred and fifty pound
and more. Which stone to this prsent time is kept in the said town, and every
man and woman may see it that will. Of which stone follows an Epitaph.

Here follows the Epitaph of the Thunder-stone.
VIr legate antiquis miracula facta sub annis,
Qui volet, and nostros comparet inde dies,
Visa licet fuerint portenta, horrendaque monstra,
Lucere coelo, flamma, corona, trabes,
Aster diurna, faces, temo, and telluris hiatus,
Et bolides, typhon, sanguineusque polus,
Circulus, and lumen nocturno tempore visum,
Ardentes clipei, and nubigenaeque ferae
Montibus and visi quondam concurrere montes,
Armorum and crepitus, and tuba terribillis,
Lac pluere coelo visum est, frugesque calybsque
Ferrum etiam, and lateres, and caro, lana, cruor,
Et sexcenta aliis ostensa a scripta libellis,
Prodigiis ausim vix simulare novis,
Visio dira quidem Frederici tempore primi,
Et tremor in terris, lunaque, solque triplex,
Hinc cruce signatus Frederico rege secundo,
Exidit in scriptis grammate ab imbre lapis,
Austria quem genuit senior Fredericus, in agros
Tertius hunc proprios, and cadere arva videt,
Nempe quadragintos proh mill peregerat annos,
Sol noviesque december signiferatque duos,

Septem praeterea dat idus metuenda Novembris,
Ad medium cursum tenderat illa dies,
Cum tonat horridum crepuitque per era fulmen
Multisonum, hic ingens concidit atque lapis
Cui species delight est aciesque triangula, obustus
Est color and terrae forma metalligerae,
Missus ab obliquo fertur, visusque sub auris
Saturni qualem mittere sydus habet.
Senserat hunc Enszheim sunt gaudia sensit in agros
Illic insiluit depopulatus humum,
Qui licet in parts fuerat distractus ubique,
Pondus adhuc tamen hoc continet ecce vides,
Qui mirum est potuisse hyemis cecidisse diebus,
Aut fieri in tanto frigore congeries,
Et nisi anaragore referant monimenta, molarem
Casurum lapidem credere and ista negem,
Hic tamen auditus fragor undique littore Rheni
Audiit hunc uti proximus alpicola.
CHAP. XLV. How the year goes about by xii. months, and how a man waxes in
xii. ages of his life.
WE should believe that it is certain true, that the xii months and seasons
changes xii. times the man, even as the xii. months changes them in the year
twelve times, as every one after other by the course of nature, and so man's
life changes every six year, and so after that forth to twelve ages, and every
age lasts six year, and so twelve times six makes lxxii. and so long every
man may preserve his body without sickness, if they keep themselves well in
youth, by good diet and good governance, for ye know well that many men slay
themselves, and die long ere they should do, as by surfets, over salt meats,
over-cold meats, or too hot in operation, contrary to their complexion, or by
taking great heat, and after great cold, or by evil aires, or by taking of
thought, or by great wet, going in the rain, or going wet-shod, or overmuch
using the company of women, or by fighting in his youth and losing some of his
blood, or by great anger, or by falls or burdens, or by too great study
overreaching his mind. These with many other, men may alter their complexion,
and shorten their lives, and all for lack of good governing in their youth. And
they that live till lxxii. is by their good living and diet. Then may they live
in decrepit till lxxx. or an hundred years, but few passes that. All is Gods
ordinance, to lengthen and shorten their days at his pleasure.


CHAP. XLVI. Of the commodities of the twelve months in the year, with the
twelve ages of man.
January.
The first month is January, the child is without might until he be six years
old, he cannot help himself.

February.
The first year that is the first time of the springing of all flowers, and so
the child til xii. year grows in knowledge and learning, and to do as he is
taught.

March.
March is the budding time, and in that six years of March the child waxes
big and apt to do service, and learn science from twelve to sixteen, such as is
showed him.

April.
April is the springing time of flowers, and in that six years he grows to
man's state in hight and breadth, and waxes wise and bold, but then beware of
sensuality, for he is xxiv.

May.
May is the season that flowers been spread, and be then in their virtue, with
sweet odors. In these six years he is in his most strength, but then let him
gather good manners betime, for if he tarry past that age, it is hap if ever he
take them, for then he is xxx. years.

June.
In June he begins to close his mind, then waxes he ripe, for then he is
xxxvi. years.

July.
In July he is xlii. and begins a little to decline, and feels him not so
prosperous as he was.

August.
In August he is xlviii. and then he goes not so lustily as he did, but
studies how to gather to find him in his old age, to live more easily.

September.
In September he is live. year, he then purveyeth against winter, to cherish
himself withal, and keep near together the goods he got in his youth.

October.
Then is a man lx. years full, if he has ought, he gladdeth, and if he has
naught, he weepeth.

November.
Then is man lxvi. he stoopeth and goes softly, and loses all his beauty and
fairness.

December.
In December is man lxxii. years, then had he rather have a warm fire than a
fair Lady, and after this age he grows decrepit to wax a child again, and
cannot weld himself, and then young folk be weary of his company, but if they
have much goods, they been full evil taken heed of.

CHAP. XLVII. Of an assault against a Snaile.
The woman speaks with an hardy courage.
GO out of this place thou ugly beast,
Which of the Vines the burgenings does eat,
And buds of trees both more and least,
In dewy mornings against the weat.
Out of this place, least I thee sore beat
With my distaffe between thy horns twain,
That it shall sound into the realm of Spain.
The men of arms with their fierce countenance.
Horrible Snaile, lightly thy horns down lay,
And from this place, out fast look that thou rin,
Or with sharp weapons we will thee fray.
And take the castle that thou lie in.
We shall flay thee out of thy foul skin
And in a dish with Onions and Pepper,
We will thee dress, and with strong Vinegar.
There was never yet any Lumbard,
That did thee eat in such manner of wise,
And break we shall thy house strong and hard,
Wherefore get thee hence by our advice.
Out of this place of this rich edifice,
We thee require if it be thy will,
And let us have this tower that we come till.
The Snaile speaks.
I am a beast of right great marvel,
Upon my back, my house raised I bear,
I am neither flesh ne bone to avail,
As well as an Ox two horns I wear.
If that these armed men approach me near
I shall them soon vanquish every chone,
But they dare not, for fear of me alone.

CHAP. XLVIII. Here follows the meditations of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that Shepheardes and simple people ought to have in hearing the divine
service.
IT behooves for to think before the beginning of Matins on the words that Jesus
said in the garden, the night before that he took his blessed passion, Father if
it be possible transport from me this chalyce. How be it my will be not don,
but thine, and that in so saying, he suffered so great pain, that he sweat
drops of blood, in such abundance, that it ran down to the ground.

And at Matins time it behooves to think how as the traitor Judas approached
him to our Lord, and kissing him said, Ave rabbi. I salute thee Master. And
that the meek and benign Jesus withdrew not his visage from the traitor, and
how he suffered himself to be taken and bounden as a thief, and cast to the
earth, reviled, spitten on, and left of his disciples and servants. At Lands,
it behooves to think and consider, Jesus being in the house of Annas, and after
in the house of Caiphas dispyteously beaten, blasphemed, stretched, and
bespitten in his most precious visage, his eyes bounden, and after trodden under
foot inhumanely.

At Prime it behooves to think how as Jesus was led from the house of Caiphas
to Pilate, and the beatings that he had. And how Pilate examined him of that
they had wrongfully accused him of, and how he was cruelly beaten at a pillar
before a great multitude of people, and crowned with thorns.

At Tierce it behooves to think how Jesus was presented before the people with
a crown of thorns, clothed with a mantle of purple, and the cursed people
cried Crucifige, Crucifige eum. And how Pilate condemned him to the most
bitterfull death, and how he bare the heavy cross upon his sacred shoulders.

At noon it behooves to think how Jesus was lead to the mount of Calvary,
shedding his precious blood, and how he fell diverse times under his Cross. And
how he was nailed with great blunt nails, and the dolor that he suffered when
it was let fall into the morteis. And think also of the dolours of his
sorrowful mother.

At high noon it behooves to think what dolor he was in when he said, my God,
my God, wherefore have thou left me. And when he said, I thirst, they gave him
vinegar and gall mingled, and how he abode the death, after sighs made, he
gave up the ghost to God his father. And how his mother had great sorrow also.

At Evensong it behooves to think how Jesus had his side opened with a spear,
and how he hung dead on the Cross full of wounds from the top of his head to
the soles of his feet, and he taken down, and how his mother laid him on her
lap weeping.

At Complyne think how Jesus was wounded and laid in sepulture, and kept of
the Jews to the end that he should not rise.

Clerks and lay people ought to think on these, or they go to Matins.

CHAP. XLIX. The saying of a dead man.

Man look and see,
Take heed of me,
How thou shall be
When thou art dead,
Dry as a tree,
Worms shall eat thee,
Thy great beauty
Shall be like lead.
The time has been,
In my youth green,
That I was clean
Of body as ye are,
But for mine eyne
Now two holes been,
Of me is seen
But bones all bare.
Now intend,
For to amend.
O Mortal creatures, sailing in the waves of mysery,
Avail the sail of your conscience unpure,
Flee from the perils of this unstedfast wherry.
Drive to the haven of charity most sure,
And cast the anchor of true confession,
Fastened with the great cable of contrition clean,
Wind up the merchandise of whole satisfaction.
Which of true customers shall be over seen,
And brought to the warehouse of perfection,
As perfect merchants, of God by election.
CHAP. L. How every man and woman ought to cease of their sins at the sounding
of a dreadful horn.

HO, ho, you blind folk darkened in the cloud
Of ignorant fumes, thick and mystical,
Take heed of my horn, toting all aloud.
With boystrous sounds, and blastes Boreal,
Giving you warning of the judgment final,
The which daily is ready, to give sentence
On perverse people, replete with negligence.
Ho, ho betime, or that it be too late,
Cease while ye have space, and portunate.
Leave your follies, or death make you chekmate.
Cease your ignorant incredulity,
Cleanse your thoughts of immundicity.
Cease of your pecuniall pensement,
The which defieth your entendement.
Ho, ho people, infect with negligence,
Cease your sins, that manyfold cruelties.
Dread God your maker, and rightwise sentence.
Cease your blindness, of worldly vanities,
Lest he you smite with endless infirmities,
Cease your covetise, gluttony, and pride,
And cease your superfluous garments wide.
Cease of your oaths, cease of your great swearing,
Cease of your pomp, cease of your vain glory.
Cease of your hate, cease of your blaspheming,
Cease of your malice, cease of envy,
Cease of your wrath, cease of your letchery.
Cease of your fraud, cease of your deception,
Cease of your tongues, making detraction.
Flee faint falsehood, fickle, fuol and fell,
Flee fatal flatterers, full of fairness,
Flee fair feigning fables of favell.
Flee folks fellowship frequenting falsenesse.
Flee frantic facers, fulfilled of frowardness,
Flee fools fallacies, flee fond fantasies,
Flee from fresh fables, feigning flatteries.

Thus ends the horner.
CHAP. LI. To know the fortunes and destinies of man born under the xii.
signs, after Ptolomeus prince of Astronomy.
Prince of Astronomy Ptolomeus.


TO know under what planet a man or a woman is born, it is needful to wit that
there is seven planets on the sky, that is to say, Sol Venus, Mars* Mercurius,
Jupiter, Luna, and Saturnus. Of the seven planets, is named the seven days of
the week, for every day has his name of the planet reigning in the beginning
of it. The ancient Philosophers says that Sol domineth the Sunday, the cause
is (they say for the Sun among other planets is most worthy, wherefore it
takes the worthyest day, that is Sunday. Luna domineth the first hour of
Monday. Mars the first hour of Tuesday. Mercurius of Wensday. Jupiter for
Thursday. Venus for Friday, and Saturnus for Saturday. The day natural has
xxiv. hours, and every hour reigns a planet.

It is to be noted, that when a man will begin to reckon at Sunday, he must
reckon thus, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, Luna, Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars.

And when the number is failed, he must begin at the hour that he would know
what planet reigns. The Monday he ought to begin at Luna, the Tuesday at
Mars, the Wensday at Mercury, the Thursday at Jupiter, the Friday at Venus, the
Saturday at Saturnus. And ever when the numbers of the planets is failed, he
must begin by order as it is aforesaid.

Also it is to be noted, that the Greeks begins their day in the morning.
The Jews at noon. And the Christian-men at midnight, and there we ought to
begin to reckon. For at one of the clock on Sunday in the morning reigns Sol,
at two reigns Venus, at three reigns Mercurius, at four reigns Luna, at
five Saturnus, at six Jupiter, at seven Mars, at eight begin again at Sol, at
nine, at Venus, at ten Mercury, and consequently of the other by order in order
in every hour.

When a child is born, it is to be known at what hour, and if it be in the
beginning of the hour, in the midst, at the end. If it be in the beginning, he
shall hold of the same planet and of the other before. If it be in the midst,
it shall hold of that only. If it be born in the end, it shall hold of the
same, and of that that comes next after, but nevertheless the planet that it
is born under, ne shall not domineth other, and that of the day shall be above
it, which is the cause that a child holds of diverse planets, and has diverse
conditions. He that is born under Sol shall be prudent and wise, a great speaker,
and that which he praises he holds virtuous in himself. Who that is born
under Venus is loved of every man, good to Godward and regular. Who that is
born under Mercury is well bearded, subtle, mild, veritable, and is not most
prudent. Who that is born under Luna, has an high forehead, ruddy, merry
visage, shamefast, and religious. Who that is born under Saturn is hardy,
courteous of living, and is not avaricious. Who that is born under Jupiter is
hardy, fair visage and ruddy, chaste and vagabond.

Who that is born under Mars is a great speaker, a liar, a thief, a deceiver,
big, and ofred color.

They that will know of this more evidently, let them turn to the properties of
the seven Planets before rehearsed.

CHAP. LII. A prologue of the Author upon the twelve signs.


I Considering the course of the Celestial bodies and the puissance of the
high God Omnipotent, the which has made the Sun to shine upon the good and
evil that governs all things contained in the firmament, and on the earth,
have taken on me to indite this little treatise, for to instruct and endoctrin
the people not lettered. First, to know God their maker. Secondly to govern
their bodies, and eschew infirmities. And thirdly, to know the course of the
firmament, and of the celestial bodies contained in it, with the disposition
of the vii. Planets But who that will know his properties, ought first to know
the Month that he was born in, and the sign that the Sun was in the same day, I
will not say that such things shall be, but that the signs have such properties,
and is the will of God. After Poets and Astronomers Aries is the first sign,
that shows the fortunes of men and women, as says Ptolomeus.

The first sign of Aries.
I Find that he which is born in the sign of Aries, from mid March to mid
April, shall be of good wit, and shall neither be rich ne poor, he shall have
dama^^ by his neighbors, he shall have power over dea^ ^^lkes goods, he shall
be soon angry, and soon appeased, he shall have diverse fortunes and discords,
he will desire doctrine, and haunt eloquent people, and shall be expert in many
degrees, he shall be a liar, and unstedfast of courage, and will take the
vengeance on his enemies, and he shall be better disposed in youth in all things,
than in age, unto xxxiii. year he shall be a fornicatour, and shall be wedded at
xxv. year, and if he be not, he shall not be chaste* he shall be a mediator
for some of his friends, and will gladly be busy in the needs of other, he
shall be awaited to be damaged, he shall have a sign in the shoulder, in his
head, and in his body, yet he shall be rich by the deaths of other: his first
son shall not live long, he shall be in danger of four footed beasts, he shall
have great sickness at xxiii. year, and if he escape, he shall live lxxxv.
year after Nature.

The woman that is born in this time shall be irefull, and suffer great wrongs
from day to day, she will gladly make leasings, and shall leese her husband and
recover a better, she shall be sick at five year of age, and at xxv. she
shall be in great danger of death, and if she escape she shall be in doubt till
xliii. year, and shall suffer great pain of the head. The days of Sol and Mars
to them shall be right good, and the days of ^upiter shall be contrary to them, and
as well the men as the women shall be semblable to the Sheep, that every year
leeseth his fleece of wool, and within short space recovereth it again.

Of the sign of Taurus.
HE that is born in the Sign of Taurus, from mid April till mid May, shall be
strong, hardy, and full of strife, delicious, and shall possess goods given to
him by other men: that he would have done shall be incontinent, and will enforce
to himself to finish it. In his youth he will despise every person, shall be
irefull, he shall go pilgrimages and will leave his friends and live among
strangers, he shall be put in offices, and shall exercise them well, and shall
be rich by women, he shall be thanklesse, and come to good estate, he will take
vengeance on his enemies, he shall be bitten of a dog, and shall experiment
many pains by women, and shall be in peril at xxxiii. year, he shall be in
peril of water, and shall be greeved by sickness, and venym at xxiii. year, and
at xxx. year he shall be abundant in riches, and shall rise ^o great dignity, and
shall live lxxxv. year, and three months after nature, and shall see his
fortune sorrowful. The woman that is born in this time shall be effectual,
laboring, and a great liar, and shall suffer much shame, she shall re^oyce in
the goods of her friends, that which she co^^^^veth in her mind shall come to
effect, and shall have the best party* she shall ^^ve many husbands and many
children, she shall be in her best estate a^ xvi. years, and she shall have a
sign in the midst of her body, she shall be sickely, and if she escape she
shall live lxxvi. years after nature. She ought to bear rings and precious
stones upon her. The days of Jupiter and of Luna been right good for them, and
the days of Mars contrary. As well the man as the woman, may be likened to the
bull that laboreth the land, and when the seed is sown, he has but the straw
for his part. They shall keep well their own, and it shall not profit to them
ne to other, and shall be reputed unkind.

Of the sign of Gemini.
THE man that is born in the sign of Gemini from mid May to mid June, shall
have many wounds, and he shall be fain and merciful, he shall lead an open and
a reasonable life, he shall receive much money, he will go in unknown places,
and do many pilgrimages, he will praise himself, and will not bide in the place
of his nativitie, he shall be wise and negligent in his works, he shall come
to riches unto xxvi. year, his first wife shall not live long, but he shall
marry strange women, he shall be late married, he shall be bitten of a dog, and
shall have a mark of Iron or of fire, he shall be tormented in water, and shall
pass the sea, and shall live an hundred year, and x. months after nature. The
woman then born shall come to honor, and set forward with the goods of other,
and she shall be agrieved of a false crime, she ought to be wedded at xiv. year
if she shall be chaste and eshewe all peril, and shall live lxx. year after
nature, and shall honor God. The days of Mercury and Sol to them been right
good, the days of Luna and Venus been to them contrary, and as well the man as
the woman shall augment and assemble the goods of their successors, but skantly
shall they use their own goods, they shall be so avaricious.

Of the sign of Cancer.
NExt after, he that is born under the sign of Cancer, from mid June to mid
July, shall be very avaricious, and of equal stature, he will love women, he
shall be merry, humble, good, wise, and well renowned, he shall have damage by
envy, he shall have the money of other in his guiding, he shall be a conductor
of other folks things, he shall have strife and discord among his neighbors,
and will avenge him on his enemy, by his arrogance man shall mock him, he shall
have often great fear on the water, he will keep his courage secretly in
himself, and shall suffer dolor of the womb, he shall find hidden money, and
labor sore for his wife, he shall see his peril in a certain year, the which
shall be known of God, his favor shall decrease, at xxxiii. year he shall pass
the sea, and shall live lxx. year after nature, and fortune shall be agreeable
to him.

The woman that shall be born in this time shall be furious, incontinent, angry and
soon appeased, she is nimble, serviceable, wise, joyous, and shall suffer many
perilles; if any person do her any service, she will recompense them well, she
shall be laboring and take great pain unto xxx. year, and then she shall have
rest, she shall have many sons, she must be wedded at xiv. year: honors and
gifts shall follow her, she shall have wounds and be whole thereof, and shall
have peril of waters, and shall be hurt in a secret place, she shall be bitten
of a dog, and shall live lxx. year after nature. The days of Jupiter, Venus and
Luna, to them been right good, and the days of Mars right evil, and as well the
man as the woman shall have good fortunes and victory over their enemies.

Of the sign of Leo.
AS we read he that is born under the sign of Leo, from mid July to mid
August, shall be fain and hardy, he shall speak openly and shall be merciful,
he shall weep with the weepers, and shall be arrogant in words, he shall have a
peril in certain time, and at xxx. year he shall be awaited to be damaged, but
he shall eschew that perril, his benefits shall be in great, he shall be
honored of good folk, and obtain his enterprise, he shall have goods by
temporal services, he shall be ingrate to thieves, and shall be great and
puissant, he shall have charge of the commonalty, and as much as he leeseth he
shall win, he shall come to dignity and shall ^e amiable, he shall take
fortune of three wives, he will go often on pilgrimages and suffer pain o^
the sight, he shall fall from high, and be fearful of water, he shall find hid
money, at viii. year of age he shall be sick, also he shall be in peril and
doubt of some great Lord, and at xxxvi. year he shall be bitten of a dog, and be
whole with great pain, and shall live lxxxiv. year after nature.

The woman that shall be born in this time shall be a great liar, fair, well
spoken, merciful, pleasant, and may not suffer, ne see men weep, she shall be
meek, her first husband shall not live long, she shall have pain in her stomach
she shall be awaited of her neighbors, at xvii. year, and live to great riches,
she shall have children of three men, she shall be amiable, and have the
blouddy flixe, and shall be bitten of a dog, she shall fall from high, and
live lxxvii. year after nature. The days of Mercury, Sol, and Mars, to them be
right good, the days of Saturn been contrary, and as well the man as the woman
shall be hardy, great quarrellers, and merciful.

Of the sign of Virgo.
OF the sign of Virgo, I find that he which is born from mid August to mid
September shall, gladly commend his wife, he shall be a great house-houlder,
ingenious: he shall be solycitous to his work he shall be shamefaced and of great
courage, and all that he sees he shall covet, in his understanding, he will be
soon angry, and surmount his enemies. Scarcely shall he be a while with his
first wife, he shall be fortunate at xxxi. year, he will not hide that that he
has, and shall be in peril of water, he shall have a wound with iron, and shall
live lxx. year after nature.

The woman then born shall be shamefaced, ingenious, and will take pain, and
ought to be wed at xxii. year, she shall not be long with her first husband.
Her second husband shall be of long life, and shall have much good by another
woman, she shall fall from high, her life shall be in peril and shall die
shortly, she shall suffer dolor at x. year, if she escape those dolours, she
shall live lxx. year after nature, she shall bring forth virtuous fruit, and
every thing shall favor her, she shall rejoice in diverse fortunes. The days
of Mercury and of Sol, shall be right good for them, and the days of Mars shall
be contrary. And as well the man as woman shall suffer many temptations, so
that with great pain they many resist them, they shall delight to live in
chastity, but they shall suffer much, wheresoever it be.

Of the sign of Libra.
AMong planets Libra ought to be remembered, for he that is born from mid
September to mid October, shall be right mightily praised and honored in the
service of Captains, he shall g^e in unknown places, and shall get in strange
lands* he shall keep well his own, if he make not relevation by drink, he will
not keep his promise, he shall be envied by silver and other goods, he shall be
married, and go from his wife, he shall speak quickly and shall have no damage
among his neighbors, he shall have under his might the goods of dead folk, and
shall have some sign in his members. Oxen, horse, and other beasts shall be
given to him, he shall have damage and injury, he shall be enriched by women,
and experyment evil fortunes, many shall ask counsel of him. He shall live
lxx. year after nature.

The woman that is born in this time shall be amyable and of great courage, she
will anounce the death of her enemies, and shall go in places unknown, she
shall be debonair and merry, rejoice by her husband, if she be not wedded at
xiii. years he shall not be chaste, and shall have no sons by her first husband,
she shall go many pilgrimages, after xxx year she shall prosper better and
have great honor and praise, then after she shall be greevously sick, and
shall be brent in the feet about xii. year of age, and shall live lx. year
after nature. The days of Venus and of Luna for them been right good, and the
days of Mercury contrary. And as well the man as the woman shall be in doubt unto
the death, and there is doubt in the end.

Of the sign of Scorpio.
We read that he which is born in the sign of Scorpius from mid October to mid
November shall have good fortune, he shall be a great fornicatour, the first
wife that he shall have in marriage shall become too religious, he will serve
gladly to Images* he shall suffer pain in his privy members at the age of xv.
year, he shall be hardy as a Lion, and amiable of form, many faculties shall
be given to him, he shall be a great goer in visiting diverse countries, for to
know the customs and statutes of many Cities, and shall have victory over all
his enemies, they may not hinder him in no manner of wise, he shall have money
by his wife, and shall suffer diverse dolours of the stomach, he shall be merry
and love the company of merry folk. In his right shoulder shall be a sign by
sweet words and adulations, he shall be deceived, he will often say one thing
and do another, he shall have a wound with iron, he shall be bitten of a dog
or of some other beast, he shall be in doubt and have diverse enemies at the age
of xxxiii. year, and if he escape he shall live lxxxiv. year after nature.

The woman that shall be born in this time shall be amiable and fair, and shall
not be long with her first husband, and after she shall enjoy another by her
good and true service, and she shall have honor and victory of her enemies,
she shall suffer pain in the stomach, she shall be wise, and have wounds in
her shoulder, she ought to fear her later days, which shall be doubtful by
venim, and she shall live lxx. year after nature. The days of Mars and of
Saturn to them been right greeable, and the days of Jupiter to them been
contrary, they shall be sweet of word and pricking with their tail, and will
murmr, detracting other, and say otherwise then they would be said by.

Of the sign of Sagittarius.
YE ought to know that he which is born under Sagittarius, from mid November to
mid December, shall have good effect, and shall have mercy of every man the
which he sees, he shall obtain and have by revelation, he shall go far to
desert places unknown and dangerous, and shall return with gains, he shall see
his fortune increase from day to day, he will not hide that that he has, he
shall have some signs in his hands or feet, he shall be fearful, at xxii.
year he shall have some peril, he shall pass the sea to his lucre, and shall
live lxxxii. year and viii. months after nature.

The woman that is born in this time shall love to labor, she shall have
diverse thoughts for strange strifes, and may not see one weep, she shall have
victory over her enemies, she shall spend much silver by evil company, she
shall be called mother of sons, and shall suffer many evils, she shall take
great pain, to the end that she may have goods of her kinsemen. She ought to be
married at xiii. year, and she shall have pain in her eyes at xiv. year, and
shall have great joy at xviii* year she shall suffer dolor by envy, and shall
be separate from joy, and shall live lxxii. year after nature. The days of
Venus and Luna been right good, the days of Mars and Saturn been evil, and as
well the man as the woman, shall be inconstant and unstable in deeds, they
shall be of good conscience and merciful, better to strangers then to
themselves, and they will love God.

Of the sign of Capricornus.
HE the which is born under Capricornus, from mid December to mid January,
shall be ^racundious, a fornicatour, a liar, and shall be always laboring, and
shall be nourished with strange things, he shall have many crimes and noyses,
he shall be a governor of beasts with four feet, he shall not be long with
his wife, he shall suffer much sorrow and heaviness in his youth, he shall
leave many goods and riches, he shall have a great peril at xvi. year, shall
be of a great courage, he shall haunt honest people, and shall be rich by
women, and shall be conductour of maidens, his brethren will make diverse
espyings upon him, and he shall live lxx. year and four months after nature.

The woman that is born in this time shall be honest and fearful, she shall
surmount her enemies, and have children of three men, she will go many
pilgrimages in her youth, and after have great wit, she shall have great goods,
she shall have pain in her eyes, and shall be in her best estate at xxx. year,
and shall live lxx. year and four months after nature. The days of Saturn and
of Mars to them been good, the days of Sol been contrary. And both man and
woman shall be reasonable and envious.

Of the sign Aquarius.
THe man that is born under the sign of Aquarius, from mid January unto mid
February, shall be lovely and irefull, he will not believe in vain, he shall
have silver, at xxiv year he shall be in estate, he shall win where he goes,
or he shall be sore sick and shall be hurt with iron, he shall have fear on the
water and afterward shall have good fortune, and shall go into diverse strange
countries. The woman that is born in this time shall be delicious, and have many
noises for her children, she shall be in great peril, at the age of xxiv year*
she shall be in felicity, she shall have damage by beasts with four feet, she
shall live lxxvii* year after nature. The days of Venus and of Luna be right
good for them, the days of Mars and Saturn been contrary: and both the man and
the woman shall be reasonable, and they shall not be over rich.

Of the sign of Pisces.
HE that is born under the sign of Pisces, from mid February to mid March,
shall be a great goer, a fornicatour, and mocker, and shall be covetous, he
will say one thing and do another, he shall find money, he will trust in his
sapience, and shall have good fortune, he shall be a defender of Orphelius, and
widows, he shall be fearful on water, he shall pass soon all his
adversities, and shall live lxxiii. year and v. months after nature.

The woman that is born in this time shall be delicious, familier in jests,
pleasant of carriage, fervent, and shall have sickness in her eyes, and shall
be sorrowful by shame. Her husband will leave her, and she shall have much
pain with strangers, she shall not have her own, she shall have pain in her
stomach, and she shall live lxxvii. year after nature. The days of Mars and of
Saturn to them been contrary, and both the man and the woman shall live
faithfully.

Thus ends the Nativities of men and women after the twelve signs.
CHAP. LIVE. Here after follows the ten Christian Nations.
I Pretend in this little treatise to speak of diverse Christian nations, the
which be divided in x. of the which I will declare as I have found written in
the latin tongue, and will redige it to our English maternal, as Shepherds
speaks in the fields, after the capacity of mine understanding. And if in so
doing I have erred, I require all other Shepherds for to excuse my youth, and
to amend where as I have made default. And where as I have failed, I submit me
unto amendment: for against amends no man may be.

The first Nation is of Latins.
IN the Nation of Latins, for the superiors is the Emperor, and many Kings.
That is to wit, the most Christian and redoubted King of England and of France,
with many noble Dukes, Earls, Viscountes, Barons and Knights, and is the
nation most resplendishing of all other in honor, force and chivalry. In the
nation of Spain been the Kings of Castile, of Aragon, of Portingale of Navarre,
and other Lords. In the Nation of Italy is the King of Cicile, and the King of
Naples, and many other Lords, as of Venice, Florence, and Gaone. In Almayne
beside the Emperor is diverse Kings, as of Scotland, Hungary, Boheme, Poloney,
Asia, Fryse, Ruisse, Hornegy, Almacie and Croacy, and many other Lordshipps
that been under the obedience of the Catholic Church.

The second nation is of Greeks.
HOrace complains speaking of this nation of Greece, for the vexation that it
has had in times past. The Greeks have the Patriark of Constantinople,
Archbishops and Abbots to the spiritualty, and to the temporalty, Emperors,
Dukes, and Earls. They be now but of small number, for Agariens and Turks have
taken the greatest part of Greece, the which part obeys not the catholic
Church for their error. They been condemned by the Church for that they say.
Spiritus Sanctus non procedit a filio

The third Nation is of Armenians.
WE read that the Nation of Armenians is nigh Antioch, they use all one
language in the divine service and in holy scripture, as who should sing
English in the Church, and both the men and women understand all. They have
their Primate, which they call Catholic, to whom they obey as to the king in
great devotion and reverence. They fast the Lent and eat no fish, and they
drink no wine, and eat flesh on the Saturday.

The fourth Nation is of Georgians.
THis Nation is called Georgians of St. George, of whom they bear the Image in
battle, and he is their Patron. They been in the parts Oriential and been
strong and delicious, half Persians and half Assyrians, and they speak foul and
foolish language, and make their sacraments as the Greeks. The priests have
their crowns round raised on their heads, and the clerks have them square.
When they go to the holy Sepulcher they pay no tribute to the Sarazins, they
enter into Jerusalem, their standards displaid, for the Sarazins fears them,
the women use armors as the men. When they write to the Sultan, incontinent
that which they demand is granted them.

The fifth Nation is of Assuriens.
I Find also by writing, that the Nation of Suriens has taken the name of a
city named Sur, the which is the most eminent, and most upholden among all
other cities and towns of the country of Surrey. These people for their
vulgar and common speech speaks the language Sarazionis, their holy
scriptures, divinities, and offices of the service in the Greek. They have the
Bishops, and keep constitutions of the Greeks and obey them in all things. They
sacrifice with raised bread, and have opinions of the Greeks as the Latins.
There be some Christian men in the holy land that ensues them, and been called
Samaritans, which were converted in the time of the Apostles, but they be not
perfect Christian men.

The sixth Nation is of Mororabins.
SOmetime were wont to be a Nation of people in the country of Afric and
Spain called Mororabiens, but now they been but few. They be called
Mororabiens, for that in many things they held the use in Christian men being
in Araby, they use the language of Latin in the divine offices and sacred
things, and obey to the Church and to the Prelates of the Latins. They
confess them in the language Azymonien or in Latin. They bin different to the
Latins, for that in their divine offices they have the hours to long. And for
the day, is divided in xxiv, hours of night and day, so many offices, hours,
Psalms, and all other Orizons have they along, the which they say not after
the custom of the Latins, for that that the Latins say in the beginning, they
say in the end, or in the middst. Some divides the holy sacraments in vii.
parts and other in x. This is a right devout nation, they conioyn no persons by
marriage, but if they be born in their own country and land, the strangers be
not received in marriage. And when a man leeseth his wife by death, he will
never be wedded again but live in chastity. The cause of so great diversity
among Christian men, was for that in time past the Christians were let and not
constrained to celebrate council general. For this cause there arose diverse
heretics in many parts. For there was none that might remedy it.

The seventh Nation is of Prester John's land in Indie.
THen is the land of Indie whereof Prester John is. For his might is so great
that it exceeds all christendom. This Prester John has under him lxx. kings,
the which do to him obeisance and homage, and when he rides about his country
he makes to be borne before him a Cross of wood. And when he will go to
battle he makes two to be borne before him, one of gold, and the other of
precious stones, and in that land is the body of St. Thomas the Apostle buried
in a Tomb of stone, and one of his hands is out of the Tomb, and that hand
every body may see that goes thither.

The eight Nation is of Jacobites.
FOllowing after the Nation of Iacobits, the which been named St. James the
disciple of Alexander the Patriarck. These Iacobites have taken and occupied a
great part of Asia, in the parts Occidentall, and the land of Mambre that is in
Egypt, and the Land of Ethiopians unto Indie, with more then xx. Realms. The
children of that Country be circumcised and baptized with an hot iron, for
they have printed the Character of the Cross on their foreheads, and on other
parts of the body, as on the arms and the breast* they shrive them only to
God, and not to the priests. In this Province the Indians, and Agarenoriens say
that Jesus Christ has only but the nature divine. Some among them speaks the
language of Calde and Araby, and diverse other that speaks other languages,
after the diversities of nations, They were condemned at the council of
Calcedony.

The ninth Nation is of Nescoriens.
OF Nescorianus that was of Constantinople, has bin made this name Nescoriens.
These Nescorians puts in Jesus Christ two persons, one divine, and another
humain, and they deny our Lady to be the mother of God, but they say well,
Jesus to be man, they speak the language of Caldee, and sacrifice the body of
Jesus Christ with raised bread. They inhabit in Tartary and in great Inde, they
be in great number, their country contains almost as much as Almaigne and
Italy.

The tenth Nation of Moroniens.
RObust is the Nation of Moronyens, called of an heretic of Morone. They put
in Jesus Christ (one understanding and one will) they inhabit in Libia in the
province of Venice, and be a great number, they use specially bows and arrows,
and they have bells, Their Bishopes have rings, Miters, and Crosses as the
Lattines: they use the letter of Caldee in their divine scriptures, and in
their vulgar speech they use the letter of Araby. They have been under the
obedience and lordship of the most holy and sacred Church Romain; their
Patriark was at the general council of saint John de Latran, celebrate at Rome
under Pope Innocent the third, but since then they be returned. They were first
condemned at the council of Constantinople, and since been returned to the
obedience of the Romain Church, and yet returned again to their false and
evil opinions wherein they persevere.

CHAP. LV. Here begins a few proverbs.
THese proverbs be good to mark,
The which follows in this book:
Be thou never so great a clark,
Disdain not on them to look.
The first is, man be content,
As God has set thee in degree:
Each man may not have land and rent,
It were not convenient so to be.
If thou have not worldly goods at will,
Therefore care nothing, by the read of me:

Do well, and Gods commandment fulfill*
For every man may not a goldsmith be.
He that has a penny in his purse,
If he the right way of Gods law hold,
He shall come to heaven as soon I wusse
As a King* that wears on a crown of gold.
Also there is of men, full many a score,
And each of then does keep well his wife:
Which never had a noble in store.
And yet they live a full merry life.
And also another, forget it not,
Keep your own home as does a mouse:
For I tell you, the devil is a wily cat,
He will spy you in another man's house.
And in especial God to please,
Desire thou never none other man's thing:
Remember that many fingers is well at ease,
That never ware on no gay gold ring.
And this I tell you, for good and all,
Remember it you that be wise:
That man or woman has a great fall,
The which slide down and do never rise.
And one also forget not behind,
That man or woman is likely good to be,
That banisheth malice out of their mind,
And sleeps every night in charity.
I read you work by good counsel,
For that man is worthy to have care,
That has twice fallen into a well,
And yet the third time cannot beware.
Say that a friar told you this,
He is wise that does forsake sin:
Then may we come to heavens bliss,
God give us grace, that place to win.

O Ye Clerks famous and eloquent,
Cunning is caught by reading and exercise,
Of noble matters full exc^llent
And remembers what Solomon says the wise,
That praises business, and idleness does despise*
And says, he that many books does read and see,
It is full likely wisdom have shall he.
Remember Clearks daily does their diligence,
Into our corrupt speech matters to translate,
Yet between French and English is great difference,
Their langing in reading is douse and delicate,
In their mother tongue, they be so fortunate.
They have the Bible and the Apocalipse of divinity,
With other noble books that now in English be.
And remember readers, where ever ye go,
That Honey is sweet, but cunning is sweeter,
Caton the great Cleark, sometimes said so,
How gold is good, and learning much better,
Yet many full good be, that never knew letter.
And yet virtuous, none can be of living,
But first of Priests and Clerks, they must have learning.
Wherefore with patience* I you all desire,
Beware of the rising of false heresy:
Let every perfect faith set your hearts afire,
And the chafe from the corn clean out to try.
They that believes amiss, be worthy to die.
And he is the greatest fool in this world iwis:
That thinks no man's wit so good as his.
Thus ends the Shepherds Calendar
Drawn into English to Gods reverence.
And for profit and pleasure shall Clerks to cheer,
Plainly showed to their intelligence,
Ours is done, now readers do your diligence.
And remember that the Printer says to you this,
He that lives well may not die amiss.

FINIS.

