THE HEROICAL LOVER OR ANTHEON and FIDELTA A POEM Written by THOMAS BANCROFT

(...).
Byon Smyrnaeus. May Love the Ladies skilled in song
Invite, and they bring Love along.
LONDON Printed, by WILLIAM GODBID, 1658.

TO The Right HONORABLE The Lord ROSSE.
My Lord,
THis Poem, though composed in a Peak-like country, has yet no cause to be
proud of its high birth, unless more worthy it were of your Lordships perusal,
more suitable to the gallantry of your flourishing condition. Yet as the
ancient Muses delighted to climb Mountains, Parnassus Helicon, and others; so
has mine been moved with a pleasing ambition to ascend to the eminency of your
presence. It was your servant and my Kinsman, Mr. Henry Wright, that
occasionally raised her to this boldness, whilst he highly commended your most
hopeful endowments, and mentioned (with much honor) your singular love to
learning. It is (I confess) a superfluous service to present to your Lordship a
phansied pattern, you being really conformed to your truly-noble Father, as he
to more ancient Worthies of your Family, that heightened their Honors by
heaping benefits on their country, and made their houses seem palaces by their
royal hospitality. I am therefore in good hope that you will be pleased to
entertain this Heroical Lover; and that as the rising Sun (that celestial
Archer) seemed to shoot life into Memnons statue: so your affulgent favor will
quicken this dull composure, and discloud withal the Authors forehead, that he
may more clearly exhibit himself.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Tho. Bancroft.

To his learned Friend Mr. THOMAS BANCROFT, ON HIS POEM Entitled THE Heroical
Lover.
FRom your retired abode in Bradley town,
Welcome, my friend, abroad to fair renown.
No^^ Atlantis and Eutopia you
Again expose unto the public view
By your heroic Piece; unknown before
TO all mankind save to B^con and to More.
To the tripartite world Col^mbus erst
The western India did discover first,
Yet (after that his perfecter survey)
Vesputius much on's glory took away,
By giving it his name: so though those two
Most learned Lords did first those countries show,
Yet by your Antheon (and his fair Delight)
Farre-sought Fidelta, does your skill unite
Eutopia and Atlantis: what these two
Owed singly to their pen, they both owe you.
Nor Belgium, Italy, nor France, nor Spain,
Nor Graecia, nor Sicilia, could constrain
(With their most tempting objects) your brave Knight
To yield submission to a false delight.
Although Sir Antheon did refrain to run
The monstrous courses of the Knight of the Sun,
(Whose Fablers so strange tales of him rehearse,
That such untruths never appeared in verse)
Those countries Beauties he despised and pelf;
Some others do overcome, but he himself:
And of all victories it is the best,
To keep our own wild appetites represt:
Hereby his prowess he did most discover,
And hence you t^rme him the Heroic Lover.
Your fair Fidelta did not range about
Eutopian cities to find Suitors out:
A free well-ordered house she kept; and there
Sir Antheon found her out, and married her.
Joy or long life I need not wish them either;
They in your lines shall happy live for ever:
And you for penning their high Epick song
(With Laurel crowned) shall live in the Poets throng.
Aston Cokaine Bart.

Upon Mr. Bancrofts POEM, THE HEROICAL LOVER.
VVHo're bound to the true Atlantis, cannot fail,
If by your Kinsmans and your Charts they sail:
It Is by these means we really descry
What Is in Sir Francis but Sciograpy.
Your neighbor hills in joyful echoes tell
It Is Haddon where those happy Parents dwell
That nursed Sir Antheon; and time will discover
The illustrious Rose (Sir) your Heroic Lover.
There, there live sweetly wedded Great and Good,
The brave Supporters of illustrious blood,
Whose waiters show you by their courteous eye
The King and Queen of hospitality.
From this brave Pair Sir Antheon took his Arms
Proof against Aselgia's and Sordezza's charms;
Whose generous temper, extract with his birth,
Shall scorn and discipline those sons of earth,
Whose brutish valor wine and sloth would rust,
But for caprichioes, rapine, pride, and lust;
Whilst injured virtue, honor, longing stand
To see their triumph purchased by his hand.
Your Lovers (might I venture at your skill)
Are that, Melentus; this, a Claracil:
Or if I miss in one, I have descried
At least the Propheticke of the real Bride.
For our Atlantis truly does afford
A race of young Fidelta's, but one Lord,
The brave Sir Antheon, whose illustrious fame
Eutopia shall translate b'y another name
To stately Belvoir, where his gallant story
Shall out-doe all that Fame has yet of glory.
Me thinks I see approach a glorious dawn,
When all the ferall birds and beasts withdrawn
To the dark cavernes of eternal night,
From this blessed region forced to take their flight,
Shall give admission to the Prince of day
In a triumphant chariot drawn this way,
Welcomed with thousand Graces, waited on
To fair Fidelta and Sir Antheon.
Our floting Delos fixed, then men shall say
Haddon's Atlantis, Belvoir Eutopia;
And then your Muse, crowned with deserved Bays,
Shall sing of Epithl'mes and Halcyon days.
Anth. Harwood.

THE HEROICAL LOVER,
CANTO I.
The Argument.
Of honored parents Antheon bred,
And in green years well seasoned,
Is loath his lineage to belie,
But aims at true nobility.
GReat Fate, that a kingdom here did throw
The chance of war, afflicts us still with woe;
Yet some impulsion stirs me up to sing:
Daigne me, ye Muses, from your purest spring.
A flow of bounty, that my tongue may be
Sweetly embath'd, and sound true harmony.
In new Atlantis, Charidem, and fair
Olympia lately dwelt a noble pair,
Warmed with a love as equal as the heat
That Chemists use the Elixar to beget.
The bright Celestials slide not from the skies
More calmely, to perform their embassies,
Than these went through all passages of life*
At no time troubled with domestic strife,
Wealth flowed upon them like a high Springtide,
Yet neither by intemperance nor pride
(Vices that on great forrunes most attend)
Against well-known morals did they much offend.
They often reflected on this humble sphere,
Whence their ^rail morral parts desumed were;
Yet minding that their souls to heavenly fires
Were near allied, they scorned all base desires.
A Son they had (the tender fruit of love)
Whom since propitious Planets, Sol and love,
Welcomed into the world; some Artists, well
Taught by clear* Heaven dark matters to fore-tel;
(As formerly the Delphick God had from
His golden Tripod uttered things to come)
Were asked what fortunes should the child betide
In course of years: whereto it was replied,
" That as he was illustrious by descent,
" So for his acts he should be eminent,
" Should seek as treasure fair Fidelta's love,
" And richly blessed i^its fruition prove.
Now, as when Philip saw his son bestride
Bucephalus, he was so highly joy'd,
That his dilated spirits down his face
Made tears to run, as each did other chase:
So were the Parents of young Antheon (so
Their son they called) most joyful to foreknow
That bravely he to Honor should aspire,
And crown with rich content his high desire.
'Twas their first care to have his body strong
And solid, able to endure each wrong
Of wind and weather. But when time (that mends
As well as marrs, and by concoction spends
The drowsy humors in an Infants brain)
His wits had wakened, and laid things more plain
Before his sight, that well he might discern
Proposed objects, and their nature learn;
They with sweet easy precepts well did fit
His tender age, and then the same commit
To learned Worthies, men that did as well
In virtues, as in sciences, excel,
These much admired his forward industry.
And as when in the years minority
Young goodly Plants with smiling blossoms shine,
We of their fruitfulness may well divine:
So did these sons of wisdom boldly guess
He would grow famous by his forwardness,
And that such sparks of excellence would fly
Up to a pitch of rare sublimity.
Of these he learned exotic languages,
Such as conduced to nobler knowledges
Of liberal arts, religion, manners, and
The laws and customs of each famous land.
As his wit was to admiration prompt,
So was his language elegant and count
Beyond compare; and well he could bestick
His sentences with flowers of Rhetoric.
Nile, that with sev'n mouths runs into the Main,
Seems not more fluent than his happy strain
Of elocution was; his hands and eyes
Being ordered with his voice to harmonize:
Nor can strong Neptune with his trident raise
His waters sooner, or their wrath appease,
Than he could by his Oratory sway
Men's hearts, and turn them this or the other way.
But when to nobler verse he did erect
His spirits, O what curious and select
Phrases came melting from his sugared pen,
Able to soften marble-breasted men,
Or harder-hearred women! nere could he
Endure to blast his leaves with ribauldry,
Or stoop to baseness; but still high and clear
(As Phoebus some beseem'd) his phansies were:
T'^onour and virtue did he still direct
His aims, and on such sacred things reflect,
As Orpheus thought on in his ravished state,
When he with hymns the Gods did celebrate.
What ere's comprised in Natures history,
Was the discourse of his Philosophy;
Who was not ignorant what spirit blows
The worlds main Organ, most harmonious;
What principles do constitute the same;
Nor what proportion in the wondrous frame
One to another holds; nor yet how great
War they maintain, where concord keeps her seat.
Of what the gazing multitude admired
He learned the causes, and thereof desired
So clear a knowledge, that he did despise
The trifling term of obscure qualities.
All sorts of Meteors, whether high or low,
With their imperfect mixtures, did he know.
He found that subterranean winds do make
(For false imprisonment) the earth to quake.
He well could tell what strength of cold converts
Water to Hail; and that the frothier sorts
Of vapors, from the aires cold middle-roome
Do in thin flakes of Snow (thick-scatter'd) come,
Whose dissolution mirthful plenty brings;
And these the feathers are of Boreas wings.
He knew what smoky exhalations rolled
Up into air, and there begert with cold,
And chaf't into a flame, do roar and crack,
As Heaven had broke the Giant Atlas back.
He knew what those that kept the Heavens highway
By contemplation* did of Comets say;
What copious fumes, when many mon'ths they hung
Ore a sad kingdom, fewell'd them so long;
After what Planets course they most did bend
Their motions, and what fates they did portend.
He knew the Globe celestial, Parallels,
Colures, Meridians, and all circles else*
Could into several coasts the Heavens divide,
Had learned what circuits the fair stars do ride,
With all that to their influence belongs,
As he had heard divine Iopas songs.
But more familiarly this Globe below,
With all its Zones and Climates, did he know;
How broad a liquid girdle (here and there
Embost with Islands) girts the solid sphere;
And how the shore's indented more or less
With Promontories, Creeks, and Isthmuses.
He knew all watery wonders, and could tell
How humorous Luna makes the Ocean swel;
And how it sinkes again; as persons high
And proud, are apt to fall from dignity.
No Mariner that dwells upon the Flood,
The use of Chart or compass understood
More perfectly than he, nor dared profess
More knowledge of all famous voyages.
Well vers't he was (affecting to be wise
At others charge) in best of histories,
And as an Indian upon Ganges shore
Amongst common pibbles pickes up golden ore,
So amongst obvious passages what he
Worth observation found, he faithfully
Entreasur'd in his mind, and so indear'd
That to his use which he of others heard.
But when he met with actions brave and great,
Such as enforced pro^d fame on them to wait,
O then he seemed to feel a secret fire
Boiling his blood, and raising a desire
To match th'atchievements were they nere so high,
And pass the low marks of mortality!
He had more skill to hit than mind to hurt,
And used his sword but in a way of sport,
Yet durst the stoutest Combatants oppose,
And could make downright payment with his blows;
But in the dusty field of Mars he chose
Rather to chafe his blood, and could dispose
An army (as his best advantage lay)
In all the several forms of battel-ray,
And quickly change them, as from circular
To Oval, Cuneate, or Quadrangular.
He knew when to go on, and when retreat;
How a besieged town to win, and beat
An enemy out of his fortress; he
Could use all Engines made for battery;
Could work a Mine under a Castle-wall,
And make it with more noise than thunder fall;
Could fortify a Hold, make sure defense
With all sorts of securing Muniments,
As knowing what to Palisadoes, strong
Ensconcing, and entrenchments did belong.
One would have judged him of the Thessalian breed
By's horsemanship; who, on his generous Steed
Mounted, and raising dust with motion proud,
Looked like a Centaure phansied in a cloud.
He could his courage raise, his force command,
Cause him in full career to make a stand,
To Obey his least directions, every way
To turn, curvet, and lusty gambols play.
But as a weak child roming here and there
In a large garden, plucks some flowers near
In trifling sort, but balketh more, that are
Perhaps more sweet, more beautiful and rare
So on his meaner ornaments I yet
Lay hold, but things more laudable omit;
As that (which is of knowledges the best)
He knew great Natures Parent (who impressed
His image upon man,) and likewise knew
What tribute's to his Sovereign goodness due.
should relate how well acquainted he
With his own essence was, how far could see
Into his frame, his temperament, and all
His bloods impulsions, which we Passions call:
How far he dived into the abstrusity
Of The Soul, and after how much industry
He found her seat imperial, her extent
Of power, and won^rous form of government.
He took delight with judgment to reflect
Upon his own far-piercing Intellect,
To reg^late its acts, and teach his Will
To yield obedience to its dictates still.
Hence famous for his wisdom he became;
And justly, since enlightened by the same
All virtues are, which in his gentle breast
Meeting, with much content their center blessed.
Such was his valor, that he knew not how
To fear invasive danger, nor to bow
Under afflictions weight, but upright stood
With heart unconquered and unchilled blood.
In the foul gulfs of luxury he nere
Emplunged himself, but a fair course did s^eere
In Seas of plenty: and what ere he took
In hand, did fixtly at fair justice look;
Nor (so much as his Poniards breadth) would pass
Beyond the way that right and level was.
His courteous sweetness humbly seemed to show
That from high Ancestry his blood did flow:
His bounty (free as heavenly influence)
Made good the style of brave magnificence:
And all his virtues were wrought up so high,
So full of luster, strength, and dignity,
That nothing could be added save the sound
Of mighty Fame to make them more renowned.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO 2.
The Argument.
The young Knight of Fidelta hears,
And thinks her praises tune the spheres;
Seeks her through Italy in vain,
But finds Aselgia with her train.
WHen at the beam of youth this matchless Knight
Now weighed himself, and sound his spirits light,
And felt more fervent blood, he thought to prove
The sweet endearements of desertful love,
And called to mind what Beauty he had seen
Fit to be took for his affections Queen,
As minded some brave Heroine to wed,
Or never else to warm a Genial bed.
Mean while comes Fame (than thinnest sum more light,
Or wings of insects shining in their flight)
And tells him in a busy panting have
Of a renowned Lady, richly grac'^
With all endowments Nature can bestow,
By name Fidelta; who her self would snow
Most worthy of his love, although it were
A treasure of affection nere so dear;
But was so wondrous modest, so retired,
So sweetly humble, that she much desired
Her beauties, though as sparks of heaven beheld,
Might yet encloud their beams, and be concealed;
So much her precious virtue feared to be
Allaid by the mixture of much company:
And for this reason (as some birds do flit
From coast to coast) she did so often quit
The place she honored, from resort to go,
That where to find her very few did know.
" As sure now, said Sir Antheon, as I draw
" A trusty sword, I such a Lady saw
" In my last dream; who having at me cast
" Some smiling glances, vanished at the last,
" And left my heart on fire; it is surely she
" That must be mine by Destinies decree.
" This to confirm, I now remember well
" What often to me my chary Nurse did tell,
" To wit, that great Astrologers once said,
" That I a Lady of this name should wed.
" I Will travel through this Globe to seek her out
" Where'ere she hidden lies, and should not doubt
" But to discloud her, though her beauty bright
" Were maskt in shadows of Cimmerian night.
" The Stygian Prince that Proserpine did steal,
" Should not this Lady from my sight conceal
" In's inmost cell, though it with clouds were hung,
" And 'bout her bed redoubled darkness flung;
" But with a deep device I would orethrow
" His shady palace, and her beauties show
" To the upper world, that would admiring stand,
" And offer service what she should command.
This said, he called for gentle Eubulus,
A man mature, discreet, and virtuous,
And thus bespake him: Friend, I now must try
" The strength and temper of your amity
" So long professed: by all fair promises
" Of friendly aid, all vows of services
" He^ted with zeal (and yet I know your heart's
" So firm, that needless are persuasive arts)
" I must entreat you readily to go
" With me, and help my skilless youth to woo;
" For I must travel (who can tell how far?)
" To seek a bright, though sublunary, star;
" A Lady whom all beauty does embeam,
" Though never by me seen save in a dream:
" But so we do adore the Powers on high,
" Though not exposed to view of mortal eye;
" And we admire the Phoenix, though there be
" Few that did ere that winged wonder see
" The place of her retirement I no more
" Know, then I do the Oceans utmost shore;
" Yet shall I find her to my wished content
" (My Genius tells me so) if you will assent
" To my desires, and cause my pains to be
" More short through your long-lov'd society.
" To make a question, Eubul^s replied,
" Of service, is to make our friendship void,
" As cancelled were its bond: command me t'go
" On bare feet through the Hyperb^rean snow,
" Or through dry parched Deserts seek my way
" Amongst poisonous Serpents; and without delay
" I Will run those hazards: the sweet style of Friend
" Is charm enough to cause me to attend
" Your motions through the world, and to despise
" The frowns of Fortune, strokes of Destinies.
These words made music in St. Anth^ons ear,
Who for the affection he professed to bear,
Returned him thanks, and further did devise
How to atchive his amorous enterprise.
But as a Seaman ready to launch out
Of The Harbor, when the winds do shift about
From point to point, well knows not how to set
His hoised sails that he may forward get:
So did this noble Lover doubtful stand
Whither he should direct his course, what land
He should ^ill with his fame, what region see,
To make therein blind loves discovery.
But having heard how Italy was graced
Sometime with Ladies of renown, as chaste
Lucretia, Arria, and Paulina dear
To Seneca, he now resolved to s^eere
A straight course thither, hoping there to find
Fidelta, the honor of all woman-kinde;
And to observe with some delight what breed
Of beauties now those Ladies did succeed.
So, like the Trojan Knight, attended by
Faithful Achates full of hope and joy,
Went he with Eubulus by land and Sea,
Ju^iled with ro^ky dangers in his way,
And at a hard rate did experience buy,
Yet came at last in ken of Italy.
And saw the smoke of Rhegium, where it is said
That famous land was sometime severed
From Sicily, the force of waves and wind
Driving asunder what had been joined.
Having arrived where Harbor did invite,
And cheered his worthy friend, his dear delight,
Of that fair coast a greedy view he took,
More pleased therewith than Jason was to look
On Colchis strand: the one for a golden ^leece
Sailed far, this other a fa^re richer piece
Of beauty sought. Like Mercury he moved,
And truth of history by trial proved,
Apt to take notice and to give account
Of every wood and river, Plain and Mount
In the whole region. One day as he came
Near to Vesuvius, when it belcht a flame
Out of its horrid mo^th, and sent a smoke
Therewith that threatened half the world to choke,
" O Hell, said he, thy happiness is great,
" That have no feeling of that fervent heat
" Within thy bowels, nor art rapt along
" By force thereof, but restest on a strong
" And fixed Base; whereas in my sick heart
" (That seems at every sigh to lose some part
" Of its vitality) a heat I feel
" Able to melt a very breast of Steel,
" By whose impulsion am I moved to go
" From coast to coast in hope to lose my woe,
" And now could wish I here might rest my head,
" And sleep my last in learned Plinies bed.
Thus let he forth a Lovers discontent,
Yet with affections more inflamed went
To gallant Naples, and to Millaine great,
Fair Florence, and high Rome (an Empires seat,)
Rich Venice, and to many Cities more,
More populous now, more famous heretofore:
And wheresoere he came, he still inquired
For that hid star whose sight he most desired;
Yet nothing heard in answer, save that she
(Affecting sights of famed Antiquity)
Came once to Rome, b^t thence ere long withdrew
Her honored presence, whither no man knew.
This news that like a bitter-sweet did taste,
Caused him to double his industrious have
In his research: when passing on the way
Through the fresh fields of rich Campania,
Whose pleasures once their sinews all unstrung,
That marched with warlike Hannibal along
To Capua; some Rusticks (fit to sort
With sheep, and with rude Sylvanes to disport)
Bluntly informed him that a Lady gay,
Who in that region bare a Queen-like sway,
And courted was by braver men than swains,
Did add much sweetness to their slowery Plains:
On the green Margin of a crystal lake
Stood her more shining house, built high to take
Far-distant eyes; about it Myrtle-groves
And bowers did emblemize more pleasant loves;
In mystique beds (all fair and odorous
As Flora's bosom) glowed the Paphian Rose
Amongst flaming Heliotropes, whilst violets blew
And star-like Lillies heavens fair figure drew.
There planted was rich store of bounteous vines,
That swelled her Cellars with Nectarean wines;
There fields seemed Seas of plenty, and did wave
With come, as much as greedy Hinds could crave;
There goodliest cattle grazed; and all things else
Were such as few could find their Parallels.
Thither the Knight (with hope of sweet content
Drawn easily on) his course directly bent;
And when he now approaching was espied,
The Lady all her magnetismes emploid
More to attract him; rich perfumes were made;
On loud-sweet Instruments her Vassalls played,
Wherewith the heightened water in its fall
Kept time, with purlings rarely musical;
Thereto encaged birds sang many a Lay,
And all those soft aires Echo home did play;
So that as winds the water did advance
In waves, the Lake seemed all the while to dance,
Charmed by those raptures, softly rode the Knight
By the Lakes side, remotely opposite
To that fair tower; when now the Lady said
Her beauties forth, her braveries displaid
At a large window, beckoned him, and sent
Glances and smiles, and signs of kindness meant*
He bowing with much courtesy, kept on
His way, intending (when he had anon
Past by that watery obstacle) to make
Some courtship to that Lady of the Lake.
But not much farther had he forward gone,
Than valiant Hector could that flint have thrown
That hit strong Ajax; when he chanced to see
A grave man under a green leavy tree,
With book in hand, and eyes thereon so set,
As all his wealth lay in that Cabinet:
Yet seemed his garb and garments to proclaim
That of some honored family he came;
And in his countenance there something shin'd^,
That showed the precious habits in his mind.
The jolly Knight, desiring much to know
Whether the Lake was fordable or no,
Went and required of him; who thus replied:
" Sir, be assured this is the safer side;
" And if you will calmely hear, (because I see
" In you some sparks of nobler gallantry)
" I Will tell you why: At the house (whereto I guess
" You mean to go) lives that grand Sorceres,
" Wicked Aselgia; who on Roses treads,
" Paints her alluring parts, perfumes her beds,
" And feasts blind Lovers, that they likewise may
" Feed her wild ^^its, and so themselves betray
" To ruin. Some of them (as Apes their young)
" She with embracing kills; and then they are flung
" Into this fatal water which you see,
" Being therefore called The Lake of Luxury:
" Others she clothes inpide and ragged coats.
" And some transformes to Satyrs, Monkies, Goats,
" Or viler beasts: who ere endears her vice,
" A Serpent finds in stead of Paradise.
" Her damned witcheries are fed at once
" With blood of men, and marrow of their bones,
" Their entrails, and the humors of their eyes,
" Besides the spoil of mental faculties:
" And if she draw not Luna to the ground
" Medea-like; yet still is Venus found
" In her unhollowed rooms, as only there
" She meant to dwell, and leave her giddy sphere.
" Her musicke's magical, and poisons fly
" In the hot stream of her perfumes, whereby
" She draws delightfully soft-natur'd men
" TO her Mansion; whence, as from the Lions den,
" None are trac't back; at least, if any be,
" It Is not without some marks of misery.
" Braz'd Impudence sits staring at her gates,
" And rude Procacity upon her waits:
" Intemp'rance ushers her, and in her house
" All lewd disorders keep their rendevouz.
" Avoid her, gentle Sir, as you would fly
" From a dire Basiliske with death in's eye,
" Or plague more deadly; and hereafter say
" You met with wholesome counsel in your way.
The Knight expressed much thankefulness, and would
(Had need required) have g^erdon'd him with gold
For better-worth intelligence; whereby
(Being angry at his own credulity)
He was induced his purpose and his way
To alter, and new fortunes to assay.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO III.
The Argument.
The Knight, that in Italian ground
No footsteps of Fidelta found,
Travells int' France, with Robbers fights,
And Alazonia's profers slights.
BY this time had our noble Traveller
(Fitted no less for Mars than Cupids war)
Marched through famed Italy, and as that Hun,
Stout Attyla, who did that land ore-run,
In every town and city sought for prey:
So had this Worthy (if compare I may
Virtue with vice) in every place inquired
For that fair Prize which chiefly he desi'rd.
But being not found, (as who can set the time
Wherein he shall to high contentment climb?)
He elsewhere laid the Scene of his design,
To wit, in France; whose people are (like wine)
So brisk and pleasant, that great Caesar might
In their harmonious tempers well delight;
And happily for that cause he longer staid
Amongst them, and their country more surveid.
Over the huge high-shoulder'd Alps there be
Three passages 'twixt France and Italy;
One of them Hannibal is said to have wrought
With fire and vinegar, what time he brought
The Fates against Rome: that way Sir Antheon chose;
And as with Eubulus he climbing goes,
Bespeaks him thus: Sweet Partner of my care,
" Whose spirits with no dangers daunted are,
" Nor any pains decline, I hope we shall
" Much sooner pass these hills than Hannibal;
" The way's well smoothed, and fire my bosom bears
" That melts my brain into a lake of tears,
" As piercing as the liquor that he poured
" Upon the rocks; though yet the Heavens nere lowr'd
" Upon our t^avells, but anon they cleared
" Their looks, and full of smiling light appeared.
" He, full of falsehood, cruelty, despite,
" And all the Furies that enrage a fight,
" Could scarcely promise to himself success
" Like my fair hopes, who Love and Nobleness
" Strive to advance, and nothing seek but what
" Fore-pointing Fates have taught me to level at.
Five times had Phoebus with his golden light
The world immantled, and as often the Night
The same had disarraid, before those vast
And rocky hills the Knight had over-past:
But lastly coming where the country lay
More plain, he took much pleasure to survey
The fruitful land, and bent his industry
To compass't round, though in the form it lie
Of a Quadrangle; as he meant to make
(What greatest Artists scarce dare undertake)
A Circle and a Quadrat to agree
In the nice point of just equality.
Blithe Tityrus, that well could pipe and sing,
Made not the fields of Amaryllis ring
More fully, than this worthy Lover spread
Fidelta's fame whe^es'ere he traveled:
Nor did pale Ceres with more industry
Her daughter seek in fields of Sicily;
Nor Cadmus, at his fathers first Command,
Make a more busy search by Sea and land
For raped Europa, than this Gallant did
Wher'ere he deemed his Treasure might lie hid;
Which could he by good fortune find, he would
Not envy Plutus for his heaps of gold.
About the country he not only drew
A journal-line, but did his quest pursue
Through all its provinces, wheres'ere they lay:
And being not far from Poictiers on his way,
Found an occasion not ably to show
What fiery fortitude in's breast did glow.
It thus befell: Two Gallants that had bin
Gaming all night, and paid so dear for sin,
That they had lost their Pictures at their play,
Nor left a Cross to keep the Fiend away,
Next morning (though over night dejected low)
Well mounted, to their highway trade did go,
To try what fortunes they could steal upon,
And so patch uptheir poor condition.
But as a sharpe-set Haggard that did fail
To find a Patridge, or a daintier Quail.
Flies at less Game, a Linnet or a Wren:
So these, not meeting with well-monyed men,
Fell foul an two fair Milk-maids (as they ^at
Sweetning their pains with songs and pleasant chat)
Seized on their little hardly-earned store
Of coin, and made them desperately poor;
Causing the wretches in a wild affright
To cry for succor to the approaching Knight,
Whom through some shadowy bushes they espied
Full of clear-metal'd gallantry to ride:
Forthwith he came like Perseus, when he saw
Andromeda enchain'd, in rage did draw
Upon the Robbers; who again made head,
Saluted him with sounding blows instead
Of a Good Morrow; fiercely fought, yet straight
Feeling upon their crests the unwonted weight
Of his stiff blade, their own on ground they threw,
Yielded themselves, and did for Quarter sue.
" Quarter? said he, you hateful Plunderers
" Of purses! Terrors of faint Travelers!
" Can you expect kind Quarter, that should be
" Tortured and quartered for your villainy?
" Can you (the wandering fires of wickedness,
" Your countries running Plague-sores) that profess
" Nothing but riots, rapines, cruel acts,
" Have ought in mind save Gallowses and Racks?
" You in rich Scarlet like to Princes go,
" Yet base as tattered Rog^es your selves do show
" By your debauchments, and extinguish quite
" All sparks of worth that shines in others bright.
" Come, Milk-sops, that, as you could slash and slay
" Whole troops, would seem, yet straight the Pultrons play,
" Cast now those splendid Sloughs, that ill become
" Such Snakes: for as you took their monyes from
" These Maids, their garments shall you have, put on
" Their Aprons and their wastcoates: they shall d'on
" Your cloakes, and say they never were so brave,
" Nor the like gallant day shall ever have.
" Take their pailes too, and carry them to the Town
" Meekely and maidenly; nor to you frown,
" Much less refuse, lest that my sword to a goade
" I turn, and shrewdly prick you on the Rode:
" I never drove such Bullocks; nor will I
" Sell them, unless the Hangman come to buy.
This said, he set them marching on the way
(Not as in battle, but) in strange array.
The Varlets sowrely looked, and ready were
To turn to curds the milk that they did bear:
But the Maids were lighthearted, talked aloud, proud
Smiled at their robes and thought they seemed too
When now they came to Poictieres, nere did Fowls
So flock at midday about flying Owls,
As people swarming came in such amaze,
Upon those walking wonderments to gaze:
And all that viewed them did so break out
Into loud laughter, clap their hands, and shout,
That never could a more confused noise
Be raised at Bacchus wild solemnities.
Scarce could Sir Antheon and his friend make way
With ^lourisht weapons, that they might convey
Their theevish Charge to an aweful Magistrate,
Who to their vile offense might adequate
Some punishment: yet, cleaving still the Throng,
To a strict Jus^icer they came ere long,
Who thought the Offenders not unfit to feel
(Since cladlike women) what belonged to the wheel,
That as to break good fortunes they were bent,
They suffer might a breaking punishment:
Mean while he sent them where expect they might
After a (...)-day a long-lasting night.
Fame with a fuller blast did never strain
Her cheeks, when Theseus had Procrustes slain,
Than now pro^laim'd Sir Antheons worth, most high
In honor, courted, feasted rovally.
Yet' cause Fidelta's image ever shined
In's phansy, small content he there could find.
But (hearing least of her he most did love)
Resolved forthwith some other aires to prove;
And first to visit Europes thorough-fare.
Full-peopled Paris, did himself prepare.
When he did nearer to that City come
Than Tullies Tusculanum is to Rome,
Just in that season when with eager pace
Flame-breathing Sirius did the Lion chase,
Under a tree whose umbrage did invite
His stay, he from his Palfrey did alight,
Intending there the suns exalted power
To Avoid, and rest until the Evening hour:
The fervor of the day beg^n t'abate
By slow degrees, when in great pomp and state
A Court-bred Lady that way chanced to come,
Drawn by six Horses (whiter than their ^ome)
In a rich chariot, such as might compare
With Cytharea's, which through yielding air
Soft Swannes convey. The Lady seemed of light
And air made up, her presence was so bright:
Yet some dark spots she on her face did wear,
That happily she like Cinthia might appear.
Her head with Chrysolithes adorned round,
Seemed with a radiant starry cincture crowned:
Her Carcanet and bracelets would have made
A richer chain than ever Vulcan laid
Upon his Anvil: of pure Tyrian die
Her vesture was, which fine embroydery
Had decked with Peacocks, wondrous (to behold)
For lively workmanship, and all of gold,
Save that round Saphires, colored like the skies,
Did shine instead of Argus watchful eyes.
Sir Antheon seeing her so stately brave,
Upon her fixed his eyes; who gladly gave
Him a full view as leisurely she past
Along, her pleasure not requiring have;
For only t'view the country, and to show
Her pompous greatness, she abroad did go.
Somewhat behind the Train that with her came,
On a misshapen Jade, both lean and lame,
Rode as forelorn a person all along,
Grumbling and rolling his distempe^'d ^ongu^
His clothes had been like flowers, but now were grown
Poor withered weeds; and looking often thereon,
Sorely he sighed, and his brows did knit,
As one both weak in fortune and in wit:
Of him the Knight inquired what Lady 'twas
That in illustrious state that way did pass,
Like some great Princess. Sir, said he (to tell
" The truth) this Lady do I know too well;
" Her name is Alazonia, high at Court
" Has she been bred, but who fares better for it?
" I Have served her almost as old Poets say
" Hard-taskt Aloides did Queen Omphale;
" A fair thread have I spun, spent many pounds,
" Consumed my patrimony, sold whole towns
" To buy her love; who mounts of gold to me
" Promised, though not a Mole-hil do I see
" Of kind performance. Yet as one bewitched*
" Or for true service sure to be enricht
" I still wait on her; though I may as soon
" Vault from this Center to the silver Moon,
" And bring down treasure, as her love regain,
" Who now beholds her servant with disdain;
" Much less recover what I erst have lost
" Through fond profusion, and excessive cost.
" For though I now attend in mean array,
" Yet have I served her when I shone like Day,
" Was the Top-gallant of the Town, and gave
" Laws (as it were) to all that would be brave.
" Such must they be that on this Lady wait,
" Who studies most quaint fashions to create,
" And boasts more in an ^our, than in an age
" She will make good, howere she does engage.
More had he uttered in that eager vein,
But that the Lady bad drive back again:
For she descrying, as she passed by,
In the young Knight some sparks of gallantry,
Felt her affection (kindled thence) to glow
With such an ardour, that she needs must go
Back to the attractive object of her love,
And with these melting words his metal prove:
" Sir, if enfeebling ^eat, or tedious length
" Of travel, chancet* have tired out your strength,
" Rest in your servants chariot here; lo I
" Dispread mine armest' embrace your company,
" And shall (as with a bowl of Nectar deep)
" Waken your spirits, lay your cares asleep.
" In those bright eyes I something read above
" The ascent and region of a common love;
" And that I might with fuller view discern
" What warmed my heart, I made this quick return.
" Where ever you intend your worth to show,
" Your pleasure I Will attend, and with you go:
" And if at Court (a Stage for you most fit)
" You will keep up your fashion and your wit,
" I Will see your way to lofty honor cleared,
" Nor leave you till in happiness inspher'd:
" There like the radiant Day-God shall you shine,
" And wear the value of a precious Mine
" Upon your back: nor shall you need to fear
" Harsh envies storms; I like a Halcyon there
" Shall keep all calm: then dear Sir come aboard;
" More love to you no Lady shall afford.
" Madam, said he, as fire makes fuel flame,
" So love the like affections force may claim
" In the beloved; but yours runs so high,
" It quite orewhelms my grateful quality,
" And brings me under: yet get up I must,
" And gallop in contempt of heat and dust;
" My business rapts me hence, nor can I stay
" A formal leave to take, but must away.
Forthwith he mounts, and rides as if in fear
Of The Gorgons head, or the uglier Fiend he were;
With greedy have the way (as't were) devoures,
And soon beholds the proud Parisian towers;
Coming whereto, he much admires to see
Such numerous troops, and quaint variety
Of fashions there; but could not fashion well
Himself to stay, where fatal pride did dwell.
Strait tries he other Q^arters; but does find
To the same Falling-evill all inclined:
Whence he concludes his Lady, that was sound
In mind and manners, was not there to be found.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO IV.
The Argument*
Sir Antheon at his next remove
Goes into Spain to seek his Love;
Contemnes the wealth Sor'dezza shows,
And stickles 'twixt engaged foes.
NO force of envious Fortune can divert
From his fair aim a worthy Lovers heart,
Resolved in's course all crosses to abide
With patience, working against both wind and tide,
Such a true undertaker was our Knight;
So firm in's purpose, that he did unite
All his endeavors to the point of love,
And toward that sweet cen^re still did move.
The Sea-mans Needle varies and declines;
But it is not so with brave heroic minds,
Touched by pure love; these steadily direct
Their motions to their marks, and nere defect.
A due respect to faith and honor (dear
To Worthies) cau'sd this noble Cavalier
Still to indulge his amors, to devise
How to atchive his ardent enterprise,
And think where next he should the name resound
Of his Fidelta, nere enough renowned.
At last he did resolve to see what Spain
Of worth and excellency did contain;
Whether the women of that western coast
Have orient beauties, as some men do boast;
And whether their endowments be as rare
And precious, as they rich in treasure are.
Betwixt the potent realms of Spain and France
The Pyrenean hills are bold to advance
Their heads; so hoary, as they took much care
To keep the treasures safe that hoorded are
In their deep entralls. Over these (they say)
The Gauls, too populous, did once make way,
And by Iberus side new seats did find;
And over these Sir Antheon now designed
To pass into Iberia. 'Twas not long
Before they did ascend those high and strong
Rock-ribbed mountains; when to's friend he said:
" Some-where (I now remember) I have read
" That once these hills took fire, whose mighty heat
" Dissolved their minerals, and poured great
" Currents of treasure down; though now through snow,
" And a sharp penetrative air we go:
" But a true Lovers breast, that much does hold
" O'th torrid Zone, defies all force of cold;
" Will fight with it at sharp, and whatsoere
" To his designs shall opposite appear.
Great Spain, whose strength is now in monarchy
United, was divided anciently
Into twelve kingdoms; through all which the Knight
(Whom nothing can dismay, much less affright)
Intends with speed to travel, and to try
The fortunes of a fresh discovery.
When he had passed those haughty mountains, more
Did heat insest him than the cold before:
But his surmounting courage did despise
Both Earths and Aires more threatening injuries;
And like a River went, that without stay,
Though with some windings, seeks the wealthy sea:
Still was he sounding sweet Fidelt^'s name,
And did her worth in every place proclaim;
Making in wealthy Corduba more stay,
To he^r what people could of Lucan say,
And the Seneca's. As there he walked along,
And saw a house all mo^s't, but mainely strong,
More like a Prison than a Palace; there
Fixing his view, and drawing somewhat near,
Forth comes a woman well in years, but ill
In fashion, seeming as some Hellish skill
She did p^ofess, so fiend-like her aspect,
Mixing with carefulness a rude neglect.
A temp^st in her eyes she seemed to bear,
Whence ro^gh and wavy did her brow appear;
Her Elfine hair was gray, but had been red;
Her cheeks a nasty morphew over-spred;
And like a rusty Gnomon was her nose,
Thin as the bone that winter-weather shows;
Her teeth were Or, but Argent were her lips;
Her neck was speckled as with fairy-nips;
Toward her bodies sordid Center hung
Her breasts like Rennet-bags, all knobb'd and clung;
And turned were her tanned hands to paws,
So bent to rapine, and so armed with claws.
She with a false eye (like a Kite that spies)
A chick, and cunningly to catch it flies)
Having descried some jewels rich and fair,
Which (from his country brought) the Knight did wear,
Did long to finger them; and therefore came
To him; and having set her looks in frame,
Thus said: Fair Sir, if from this public street
" You will withdraw, and please to set your feet
" Within my ga^es, I shall to you impart
" What happily Nectar-like will warm your heart,
" And win your liking; come along, and see
" What golden hope's in offe^'d amity.
He smiling went with her (brave Jason so
With magical Medea on^e did go,)
Went with her int' a gallery that led
TO a round built room, whose door she opened,
Showed him a world of treasure shining there,
And bade him enter while the coast was clear.
But when, refusing, he a stand did make,
She thus again his modesty bespake:
" You see, blind Fortune has not been my foe,
" That has vouchsaf't upon me to bes^ow
" Such heaps of treasure; yet some foes I have,
" Wild Prodigals. that strut about in brave
" Attire, when scarce they have wherewith to buy
" A cord, to mind them of their destiny:
" By day they are lordly, yet with night conspire
" To feed a base and ravenous desire:
" Such youngsters often invade my treasury,
" As the Elders did Susanna's chastity.
" Now, as you seem a gallant man at arms,
" If you will secure me from such frightful harms,
" And be my champion, you shall share a part
" Of all my wealth, but wholly have my heart:
" Midas shall be an Ass to you; that King
" Croesus, scarce named, not worth your envying:
" My precious treasures with reflexive shine
" Shall gild your brows, and make your looks divine.
" Those jewels that you wear are dim and poor,
" Compared to many that I keep in store:
" I Will give you richer in exchange, that may
" My love, together with their-light, display.
With that, she wrung his finger, with intent
To have plucked thence its golden ornament,
Wherein an Opall shined: but he, his blade
Halfe-drawing, told her, if such pranks she played,
He would hacke of her talons, send her head
T'her feet, and show it in g^imme Gorgons stead.
Then such a thundering stamp he gave, that all
The gold and silver chinkt, and the Hagge did crawl
Back (like a Crab) in much affright, whilst he,
Full of brave scorn and sparkling gallantry,
Left her to Mammons mercy, laughing went,
As furnished for a whole mon'ths merriment.
Soon after, meeting with a Matron grave,
Who by her even carriage seemed to have
A well-pois'd temper, he enquired who
That Beldam was that so much wealth did show,
That with fair proffers veiled her foul intents,
And meant to cheat amidst her blandishments.
" You mean, said she, Sordezza (as I guess,)
" That Harpy-like, Hell-raking Sorceress,
" Who gapes for gain as Dogs for cooling air,
" And earth-ward bends, affixing worldly care,
" To ^he worlds Center. If you have been in
" Her house, that Hold of mischief, Shop of sin,
" You owe much to your fortune, that you have
" So safe returned, and not remained her Slave.
" For she not seldom lays her golden baits
" For whom she likes; and when those gay deceits
" The Gulls have taken, she enchaunts them so,
" That they her service never will forgo,
" But gladly as her vas^ais will remain,
" And what she pleases to impose, sustain.
" Yet a hard-hearted Mistress does she prove,
" And great's her tyranny (pretending love)
" To those that serve her, over rocks and hills
" And dales she hurries them, while sweat distills;
" Sends them to back the wild-bounding Sea,
" And pass through perils to rich India;
" With troubles, as with torrents, over-bears
" Their strength, and with sharp cares their bowels tears;
" Feeds them with scraps and refuse; makes them go
" Thinly araid through piercing winters snow;
" Loosens their limbs with flesh-quakes, and does make
" Whilst others soundly sleep, the wretches wake.
" This is no fabulous story which I tell,
" But true and real. Therefore weighing well
" Your late escaped dangers, with much joy
" Reflect upon your precious liberty,
" And shun as Serpents (if so wise you be)
The air and track of ill society.
Contented with this answer, thence he went,
But not without a grateful complement
For her intelligen^e, well seasoned
With grave advice. His resolution led
Him forward still or rather urged him on:
And as a Current being stopped, anon
Flows with more force: so if by chance he staid
Long where he liked, the greater have he made
In's following jo^rneys. When he came in sight
Of fair Toledo (once the Moors delight)
Which in the Center of that kingdom stands
On Tagus, famous for its golden sands;
Beyond a thicket bordering on his way,
He saw two gallants in a mortal fray
Engaged, striking, thrusting, bending all
Their forces to procure each others fall.
Forthwith dismounting, toward them he goes,
And (though in danger of their desperate blows)
Betwixt them steps, and bids them hold, or he
Would send them where they better should agree;
Asks them the occasion whence their discord rose,
And what might urge them to those angry blows.
Says one of them: This fellow that you see,
" That looks like milk, and quakes for fear of me,
" Was not ashamed to tell me that he saw
" My father (who his Pedigree does draw
" From Princes) on a ^ounder'd Hackney ride
" Sometime, and wear no weapon by his side;
" Whereas (his foes well knew't) he wore a sword
" Daily, as good as Bilbo co^ld afford,
" And used a trampling Gennet to bestride;
" The King of Spain does on no better ride.
The Other with indignation said; This Boy,
Whose tongue the Hangmans noose can only tie,
" Says that my sister loves him, and does wear
" A bracelet (as he brags) made of her hair;
" When I dare swear she holds him in disdain,
" As courted by the bravest Don in Spain;
" And's of that birth, and wealth, and beauty rare,
" As well may drive mean Suitors to despair.
" For this I challenged him; and if you had
" Not intervened (whereof he may be glad,)
" I had by this time broch't him on my blade
" Like a swollen Toad, and fatal work had made.
" You both are valiant, said the Knight, no doubt;
" And pity it is great spi^its should abo^t
" Small matters tempt their fates: p^t ^p for shame
" Those angry tools; and if you would purchase fame,
" Draw them against your countries public foes
" In a just urgent quarrel; do like those
" Ancient Heroes, Th^seus, and the rest,
" Resist ambitious wrongs, relieve the oppressed,
" Release the enthralled, and such monsters tame
" As live like Harpyes, flying at all Game.
" These are high ways to honor; but for toys
" To brawl is infamous, more fit for boys
" Than well-bred men, who wrongs should rightly weigh,
" Nor in the balance heavy hatred lay.
" Whole kingdoms suffer for wild fervency
" Of blood, and blindly-bold temerity:
" And often the Flowers of families (that might
" Have done their country much obliging right)
" By trifling quarrels have I known to fall,
" And damp our hopes with sudden funeral.
" Come, let me link your hands, as is most fit,
" And in like manner let your hearts be knit;
" And as your metal is now found to be
" Solid and firm, so prove your amity.
This speech did work no less than Mercuries
Pastoral music, charmed their enmities,
And caused them (in stead of angty blows)
To strike a league, and hate the name of foes.
So home they went: but him that made their peace,
Nor Love nor Destiny would yet release
From painful taskes of travel. Thence he hyes
To famous Sevil, where Columbus lies;
And coming there his Epitaph to view,
Blows off the dust with sighs, and much does rue
That a brave Ttraveller who bare a mind
As ample as the world, should be confined
T'a narrow vault; and he that had surveid
New unknown stars, should be in darkness laid.
Through many cities makes he then his way,
But his chief Scene of business does he lay
In fair Madrid; which (as sometimes a clown
May rise to honor) from a v^lgar town
Is grown a royal seat. But neither there
Nor elsewhere can he of Fidelta hear,
Nor of such noble qualities as might
Thither a Lady of much worth invite.
Wherefore at present making there a stand,
He means to visit some more hopeful land.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO 5.
The Argument.
To Greece the unwearied Lover hyes,
All obvious dangers does despise;
A huge impetuous Serpent slayes,
And on the ground a Braggart lays.
THE Knight now having against his passions strove,
And made them all subservient to his Love,
(That, like a Torrent, all things in its way
Ore-bare) some other aires would yet assay,
And either find his Lady, or dispread
Her fame, and make her worth more honored*
His mind was bent on Greece, that once brought forth
Wits, beauties, courages, of highest worth:
Was Learnings fruitful mother, sending thence
All arts, as from a happy confluence;
And in such noble qualities excelled,
As scarcely have on earth been paralleled.
Toward that land with hoised sails he went;
And though he heard that Pirates do frequent
Those Eastern Seas, yet forwards did he steer
With dauntless heart, scarce knowing what to fear.
On the wild Deep not many days he spent
(Though often beset with dangers incident
To Sailours) ere he to Morea came,
That had from Pelops a more ancient name.
There traveling with much desire to see
Things of most fame in faithful history,
He most intensively that Isthmus viewed
(Reaching about six miles in latitude)
Which to have dug through* Caligula,
Nero, and other Princes, did assay;
That so two Seas which Nature had disjoined
Might as it were in marriage be combined,
But Heaven forbad the Match; strange prodigies
Of blood that issued forth, of frightful cries,
And fights of vengeful Furies, sent away
The Pionieres with terror and dismay;
The Powers celestial seeming thus to threat
Mortals for acts of insolence so great.
With like desire transported was the Knight
With clear-stream'd Alpheus to compare his sight;
Upon whose flow^y margin when he stood,
Viewing the motions of the sportive Flood,
He said; Fair River, that thy Are^huse
" Do sollow under Seas to Syracuse,
" But there do thy beloved Nymph enjoy,
" I envy much thy great felicity;
" But hope withal that I, who likewise go
" Through sundry coasts for love, shall not bestow
" My pains in vain, but finally possess
" My dear delight, my high-priz'd happiness;
" So other Lovers at that bliss of mine
" Will look with languishment, as I at thine.
After some days int' Attica he came;
And for Minerva's City of much fame
Did look; but nothing did like Athens see,
That sometimes was the fruitfull'st nursery
Of a^ts and arms; brave worthy warriors bred,
Such as elsewhere have scarce been equalled;
And through the world such streams of learning sent,
As have supplied all wits with nourishmen^:
The Genius of the place (as did appear)
Making the phansy quick, the ^udgment clear.
Now in regard that A^tick faith was known
To Have been so firm, that 'twas proverbial grown,
Sir Antheon with fair hope did feed his mind,
That there he should his faithful Lady find.
But as an Alchymist that long has swet,
Pufft, and projected, the rare Stone to get,
But naught save ashes finds, does sigh and mourn,
For that his furnace seems the fatal urne
Wherein his wealth lies buried: so the Knight,
Not finding his chief jewel and delight,
Felt discontents arising in his breast
Like vap'rous storms disturbing much his rest.
But with Philosophies instilled Balm
He cured the wound of grief, and did becalme
His spirits so, that cheerfully he went
Forwards, arriving, ere much time was spent,
At those Fame-widn'd Streights, Thermopylae;
Where Xerxes host, which (as Historians say)
Had soakt up floods as it along did pass,
Was by brave Lion-like Leonidas
With some few Spartan troops dismembered sore,
Full thirty thousand weltring in their gore:
Such fire strikes fortitude, when thoroughly steeled
With resolution, that disdaines to yield.
Having well viewed that place, his way he took
Into the parts of Phocis, there to look
For Pytho, famoused by mighty Jove;
Who by a rare experiment to prove
Where this enflowred Globes firm navel stands,
Sent forth out of his thunder-swaying hands
Two Eagles, one of them, fro'th' shining East
Directed, the other from the cloudy West;
These, flying, met with weary wings about
That town, and by the encounter cleared the doubt.
From thence the Traveller with high desire
Marched to Parnassus, whose two tops aspire
To pass the clouds, and Embleme-wise express
Of God and Nature the clear knowledges.
At foot ^hereof the pure Castalian spring
(That often had moved the Muses sons to sing)
He tasted; and beheld the adjoining Cave,
Whence sometime wise Apollo answers gave.
Then, as that liquor had with fluency
Inspired him, thus he said: How happy be
" Those wits, whom time and Fortune do allow
" To walk at leisure on the lofty brow
" Of this fair Mount; as in the Court of Jove,
" Embeam'd with starry lights, Celestials move!
" They with no small delight the trackes may see
" Where the ancient Muses danced, so orderly,
" As the hosts of Heaven do march; and rest in those
" Sweet Laurel-a^bours, where they did compose
" Songs of choice s^bjects, and fresh garlands made
" For happy brows, whose fancies would not fade.
" But my condition's like the restless stone
" Of Sis^phus; and hence I must be gone,
" To seek a cure for my love-strucken heart;
" Which only sweet Fidelta can impart.
This having uttered with some discontent
Signed in his cloudy b^ow, forthwith he went
Toward Helicon, a mountain high in site
And fame, wherein the Muses did delight.
Coming in view thereof, the careful Swains
That fed their cattle on the fertile plains,
Told him how sore their country was distressed
By a huge Serpent, which did so infest
And rob their folds, that few or none could keep
Their flocks in safety, nor securely sleep.
Near to the place where famous Hesiod said
That he his frisking Lambkins pastured,
Within a hollow rock this Monster lay,
At the hills foot; not stirring thence by day;
But soon as Night did from her iron carre
Fling rusty darkness, would he forage far
With great celerity, and take their prey
From Wolves or Lions, were they in his way.
And as the Enchantress Circe long ago
Did into Scylla's bay infection throw:
So into the Muses springs he did inject
Foul poisons, and their purities infect.
His close-wrought skales were like the Crocodiles,
Scarce penetrable: nor could all the wiles
And stratagems that Rusticks could devise,
Prevail this Cattel-killer to surprise;
But he not seldom did their arts elude,
Not seldom had their greatest force subdued.
The hardy Knight now felt his heart on fire
At this report, so much he did desire
To benefit the country, and so much
A kind compassion did his bowels touch.
So, having purchased firm artillery,
Such as the great Bow-bearer used, when he
Against Python went; and having with him took
A Guide or two that durst on danger look,
He climbed the Mount a pretty space above
The Monsters den, and would not thence remove
Till Night with shades the Hemisphere did hide,
And forth for prey the horrid Snake did glide:
Hearing ere long his rustling skales below,
And thence presuming that he forth did go,
From the hills side he boldly did descend
To the holes mouth, that passage to defend;
And setting some dry Laurels there on fire,
Did mean to see the direful beast retire.
About such time as the Day-Roses spring,
Back from his haunts and spoilful forraging
The Serpent sweeping comes; his bulk was vast,
And when extended, like a trailed Mast
Or oaken Beam it seemed; his chappes besmeared
With blood and poison, terrible appeared;
His teeth like iron pikes, his eyes like fire;
And with the black fumes which he did expire,
The air was tainted, blasted was the grass,
And leaves of trees, where he along did pass.
When ^e drew near to his den, and saw the fire,
He forthwith kindled a more rageful ire,
Quickn'd his deadly forces, bigger yet
Did swell, and seemed his forked tongue to whet;
Hissing so loud, as if a thunder-stone,
Enwrapt in flames, had from a cloud been thrown
Into the deep: then on with widened jaws
He comes; when straight his bow Sir Antheon draws,
And sends a shaft (that would have pierced a coat
Of double Mail) into his gulfy throat;
Then with another quenched his flaming eye,
Ripping his heads smooth seams so fatally,
That, mad with anguish, up and down he flung;
Now wreathed round, then stretched himself along;
Sometimes shot forwards, wheeled sometimes aside;
Then with his sharp tail lasht the ground, and died.
When hasty Fame had published what was done,
From all parts thither did the people run,
Straining their throats with Paeans, Eulogies,
And all expressions of triumphal joys:
The Swains (ambitious then to show their skills)
Made jolly Music with their reeds and quills;
And to their humble houses did invite
The highly-praised, ever-honour'd Knight,
Offering him homely kindnesses, who took
All in good part, and at good will did look.
But when he nothing could amongst them find
To feed his hopes, or ease his lovesick mind,
His leave he took, and traveled on to see
Some farther coasts in his discovery.
Within that countries bounds he shortly came,
Where warlike Castriot won unbounded fame;
And taking a survey of Actium (nigh
To which Augustus quelled Mark Anthony;
As the Venetians did long after foil
The Turks, and took inestimable spoil)
He found that Fame his acts had thither blown,
And that the Serpents slaughter was well known
To the people there, who gave him therefore great
Respect, and with much kindness did him treat.
But as a Canker creeps amongst the best
Of Plants; so Envy amongst these civilest
Of people did appear, and did reflect
With all the scorneful signs of disrespect
Upon the Knight. A youngster of some note,
A lusty big-limb'd bragging Epirot,
Full of disdain, came stalking to him near,
Star'd in his face, and thus began to jeer:
" Sir Knight (if such you prove) it seems to me
" A matter of no small indignity,
" That to your self such honor you will take
" For crushing a poor worm, a silly Snake;
" Surely your hungry stomach barks for praise
" As well as food, that strive such fame to raise.
" If Hercules a Lions skin that wore,
" Had with your impudence been skin door,
" He had at honor cast his club in vain,
" And had been looked upon with much disdain.
" I Will have your metal more acutely tried,
" And mean to prove how well you can abide
" The clashing of a sword: then (if you dare)
" Ride forth with me into the open air,
" And show me how your doughty blade will bite;
" For Knighthood shall you shame, or with me fight.
The challenge was accepted, and anon
The Knight was mounted; but he scarce had gone
Five hundred paces, ere a stand he made,
And bade the Challenger unsheath his blade,
And metal show: he turned, and somewhat spoke
In have; but the other with a nimbler stroke
Cut off his speech, and some part of his cheek
Together, which he on the ground might seek.
And now that his hot humor 'gan to flow,
He felt his courage cool, nor did he know
Whether to venture for another wound;
When straight the bold Knight felled him to the ground,
And then dismounting, graspt him by the throat,
Whilst he for Quarter cried with piteous note.
" Caitiffe, said he, thy life I do disdain
" To take, or put thee to deserved pain;
" It is enough to have proved to thy face,
" And signed with thy blood, that thou art base.
" Rise lubber that thou art with heart so cold,
" Do me some service here, my stirrup hold
" Whilst I remount; and likewise mindful be
" Thy tongue to hold in strangers company.
He readily obeyed, and quickly showed
By's homage, that to him his life he owed;
Of fame regardless, so that thence he might
Traile back his limbs, and not be slaughtered quite,
The Knight then called his friend (who stood aloof
To see this fighting-match, this martial proof
Of metal;) and with him advancing on,
Came s^ortly into the coasts of Macedon;
There notice took of Pella, famoused
For that it had the mightiest Monarch bred;
And of Siderocaspae, where the ground
With precious minerals does so abound,
As metals grew there, or in a royal sort
Plutus, the God of wealth, there kept his court.
But hearing nothing of that jewel there,
Which he above all treasures did indeare,
He journeyed thence to Thessaly in have,
A country with all Natures favors graced;
Where he Olympus viewed, so wondrous high,
It plainly seemd to shoulder up the sky,
As lofty Fame the clouds; where likewise tall
Othrys (that witnessed the rude Centaures fall)
He did survey; and with no small delight
On Ossa there and Pelion fixed this sight.
When he arrived at Tempe, and saw there
The face of Nature smiling all the year,
A bounteous soil, adorned with various flowe'rs,
Clear shining riv^lets, and shady bowers,
Wherein the lively birds did hop and play,
And taught the wild woods many a pleasant lay;
He stood, as struck into a deep amuse,
" And said: O, if I worthy were to choose
" My place of residence; and with me here
" This ages ornament, Fidelta were;
" Here would we gul old Time in pleasant sort,
" Inventing ('among the Sylvanes) quaint disport;
" Under green leavy Laurels, interwove,
" We would repose, and dream of naught but love;
" With soft sweet flowers would we strew our way,
" And make thereof fresh chaplets every day;
" Our loves so full of crosses, would we carve
" In knotty Oaks that might the work preserve;
" And birds should learn our oft-repeated songs,
" Of what to true affections force belongs.
" But ah! I must be gone, the Fates ordain
" Some other meeting place then on this Plain;
" More painful travels must I undertake,
" That may more pleasant my fruition make.
This speech being uttered, and with sighs pursued,
He march ere long where he Larissa viewed,
A City honored for Achilles sake,
That Grecian chief, who there his birth did take.
Thence passing on with some severe delight,
He on Pharsalos looked, neat which in fight
Caesar and Pompey joined, resolved to stand
All shockes and hazards for the worlds command.
He purposed to have seen hard-metall'd Thrace
Oft-frozen Hebrus, and the adjoining place
Where the wild Manades did piecemeal tear
Renowning Orpheus, throwing here and there
His bleeding limbs, who the Sirens had out-sung,
And seen their instruments of music flung
Into the Ocean. But he changed his mind,
When (to his greatest comfort) he did find,
That as a pleasant field, neglected, grows
Squalid, and fair fertility does lose:
So there for want of discipline and arts,
The people were from all praiseworthy parts
Greatly estranged, were now grown barbarous,
Rechless, debaucht, and pusillanimous;
As loath they were the Lordly Turks should be
Taught how to reach to honors high degree;
Or else those Tyrants had for some offense
Beaten out all their sparks of excellence.
No signature of lovely virtue saw
He there that might a worthy Lady draw
Those coasts to visit, or there make her home,
If she by accident should thither come:
Which things well pondered, caused him to make
A stop, and think what next to undertake.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO VI.
The Argument.
The Gallant now his Scene does lay
In Sicily, and on the Sea
Rescues a Knight from wrackful waves;
On land a Ladies honor saves.
AS those that of clear Phoebus did enquire
About obscure events, of their desire
Did sometimes fail, and doubtful went away*
So though the Knight consulted night and day
With wise experienced Eubulus, yet he
Could find but little ground of certainty
To fix his thoughts upon, nor well did know
Where next he should his wonted pains bestow.
At last, resolved he was to range the fields
Of Sicily, and try what worth that yields;
An Isle that in the mid-land Sea does lie,
As virtue stands in mediocrity.
For loves and wars it sometimes famous was,
And still its fellow-Islands does surpass
In things of note: the men ingenious are;
The women, like to wood-Nymphs, sweet and fair:
And 't was presumed, because the people spend
Much pains in fields (which Poets did intend,
Who feigned that Saturn hid bis sickle there)
The currents of their lives did run more clear
From vicious taints, than others idly spent;
And worthy persons did the coast frequent.
Besides, whereas long since, to plant that Isle,
People (invited by its wealthy soil)
From Corinth, Sparta, Athens, flocking came,
And other Cities of high worth and fame;
'Twas credible their virtues would not be
Extinct, but shine yet in their progeny.
These things well weighed, Sir Antheon and his friend,
Who to make proof thereof did now intend,
In a fair ship lancht forth; that (as ore-joy'd
To be by persons of prime worth emploi'd,)
While the winds whistled, on the waters danced,
An^ forwards with auspicious course advanced,
Passing by sundry Islands famous made
By Poets, that therein their Scenes had laid.
But when of Sicily they came in sight,
The air grew turbid, and the winds did fight,
Whirling about with such a threatful sound,
As they forthwith the vessel would have drowned;
As the like mischief they had lately done
To a tossed Bark that on a rock did run.
It was a Ship wherein a youthful Knight
Of Malta sailed; that in this others sight
Was dashed upon the hard and craggy side
Of Scylla (which wise Seamen most avoid,)
And with the allision split and shattered sore,
As all her barking Dogs the Bark had tore.
So have I known a globe of snow to roll
Down from a hill-top, all compact and whole,
Till some hard obstacle it met, but fly
In pieces then, and wildly scattered lie.
All perished in the shipwreck save the Knight,
Who full of caution and of motion light,
Into the ship-boat leapt, enforced to obey
False winds, that turning straight another way,
Drove him to deep despair; who now did flote
Near to Charybdis, whose vast gulfy throat
Had quickly swallowed him, but that our brave
Heroic Lover, vent' (...) to save
The wretched Passenger (that seemed to be
A person of some eminent degree)
Drew him into his vessel, interposed,
And him from straits of horrid danger los'd,
Banished his baleful woes, and lively joys
Recalled into his death-expecting eyes:
Soon as the bellowing surges of the Maine
Grew tamely silent, and the Heavens serene,
So that they well could into Harbor get,
Our Knight on shore his now-call'd brother set,
With wine refresht him, waftage did provide,
And all things for his voyage fit beside;
Giving him cause in Malta to proclaim
His noble favors, and divulge his fame.
Thither he went; but not before he showed
What services for a saved life he owed;
Debts which he would with speaking heart agnize,
And gage for payment all his faculties.
Of all strange things that Travelers admire
In Sicily, there is none like Aetna's fire,
That (unextinct) has burned from age to age,
And sometimes with such high impetuous rage,
That, belching out flames, cinders, ashes, smoke,
It threatened wholly to ore-whelme and choke
That Island, striking all the rest with fear
Lest the worlds conflagration now were near.
The hill was less incensed at this time,
Giving the sprightfull Gallant leave to climb
Its steep and rocky sides, and to survey
Some chinkes and clefts thorough which the wind makes way
Into its bowlls, and like bellows blows
The fire therein, that without ceasing glowes,
As being with stuff combustible supplied,
Which Nature there does plenteously provide.
Then came he to the place where some did say
Empedocles his iron slippers lay,
Thrown out 'oth' furnace, after he had cast
Himself into the flame, and breathed his last;
Thus stealing out of the world, to seem to be
Deathless, and honored as some Deity.
This moved the Knights inseparable friend
To fall int' a discourse of the fatal end
Of blindly-bold ambition, and to tell
With how great danger it does upward swell;
How (like to smoke) it does obliquely rise,
But falls directly from high dignities;
How Giant-like it against the Gods does go,
And under proud feet lays Religion low;
Sticks not to violate with impious hands
Of blood or amity the strictest bands;
Subverts well-founded governments, with Fate
(As 't were) conspiring all to ruinate.
When now 'bout objects much to be admired,
They rather had their limbs, than senses, tired,
Down went they from the Mountain to the Plain,
Whose bounteous soil glads Italy and Spain,
Malta and Barbary, with rich supplies
Of grain, the welcom'st of commodities.
Led on by sweet Affects, the way they found
To Syracuse, a City much renowned
By Maro's Muse, who thither did re^ort,
Preferring it sometimes to Caesar's court,
It was against great Romes ambitious wrong
By God-like Archimed defended long;
Who seemed at threatening ships to hurl at once
Fierce lightning-flames and fulminary stones,
So that the astonished Victor gave command
That none should against that Artist heave his hand;
Who yet in the tumult amongst his figures found,
Was soon disfigured by a deadly wound.
This caused Sir Antheon his sepulchral stone
With teare-shot eyes to view, and look thereon
For the Cylinder and the Sphere he made;
Desiring often ere Natures debt he paid,
To have them figured on his tomb, to show
What to his industry the world did owe.
The Knight now having seen what worthy was
Of observation there, did forwards pass,
Minded to see the place where Poets say
The Stygian Monarch plucked Proserpina
Into his iron coach and hurrying fast,
A veil of shades about her beauties cast:
Seized near to Enna was this gallant prize,
Where the fair Islands very navell lies;
A meadow stored with flowers so odorous,
That snuffing Hounds do in its bosom lose
The sents of beasts pursued; about it round,
Tufted with neat trees is the rising ground,
And nourisht with cool waters, gathered nigh,
As 't were to admire a gaping vastity
In rocks adjoining; into which (they say)
Pluto in triumph rode, yet lost the day;
Black night advancing from her drowsy seat
To welcome him, and on his Queen to wait.
Not far beyond these wonderments, that might
Retard his motion, traveled had the Knight;
But that (as if lusts wild-fires fatally
Raged in that coast) a wronged Ladies Cry
Sent from the Concave of a valley near,
Did with amazement strike his listening ear.
She being fresh as May, of lineage high,
And wealth beyond the most in Sicily,
Had often been seen, attended by her Maid
Alone, to walk there in the pleasing shade;
And (as it were) the Wood-Nymphs steps to trace
Into a mossy Cave, a pretty space
From her high-seated Mansion: That had moved
A brutish Don, that wealth and woman loved
B'ove fame or honesty, in wait to lie
To win her by surprise, and forcibly
Take her to wife, that so enjoy he might
A beauty rare, a fortune infinite.
That this rude wickedness might then be wrought,
Three Ruffians (wild as Boreas sons) he brought
With him; and now they had the trembling Prey
Amongst them, and were forcing her away.
But brave Sir Antheon having got a view
('Among shady bushes) of that salvage crew,
Cast where to assail them with his b^andisht blade,
And that so closely, as they did invade
The noble Lady; whom he either would
Rescue out of their hands, or spend his blood.
And Eubulus, although more fit to give
Grave counsels and instruction how to live,
Than deadly tools to wield, did yet advance
Bravely with sword in hand, and forward prance.
These suddenly, as from an ambush, met
Those worst of Thieves, where ere they well could set
The Lady down, their champion to the ground
Was brought, engoared with a ghastly wound;
The Knights keen weapon soon asunder shred
The sinews of his neck, and laid his head
Upon his shoulder, there a sleep to take
Than night more heavy, never more to wake.
The like did Eubulus, his sword ore-took
Another, as he turned his head to look
At's gasping Mate; the steel stook in his jaw,
And being forced thence, did rudely draw
His sh^tter'd teeth; so fell he likewise down
From his chaf't Steed, and das^t his hairy crown
Against the hard earth. Those other two that saw
Such deadly slashing, quickly did withdraw,
And fled Sir Autheons force, who them a while
Pursued, but thought it fitter to recoil
To a fair Lady, than foul varlets chase,
Whose brutish courses mankind did disgrace.
He found her almost where he left her, so
Empalsied with affrights, she scarce could go;
Her blood being like to Niobe's when grown
Stone-cold she was, and scarce from marble known.
But his warm hand (who was all love, all fire,)
Gently embalming hers, did soon inspire
Her veins with hea^, and made her spirits from
Their sad Retreat with lively motion come.
His softer language too her inward pain
Much eased, and rosy tinctures fetched again
Into her cheeks; as when dim clouds away
Are blown, clear Heaven more beauties does display^
Thus comforted, he ushered her along
Unto her home, and ^et her safe among
Her dearest friends who hearing, what was done.
Shed tears for joy (like rain by the shining Sun
Fairly embrighten'd) striving to express
To her all love, to him all thankfulness.
And as Aetolian Ach^lous flowed
With bounty toward some that had bestowed
Their pains to chase the Calydonian Beast,
Perithous, Lelex, Theseus, at the least:
So strove thi^ noble Ladies worthy f^iends
To make the Knight and Eubulus amends
With royal entertainment, for their high
Merit, and most obliging courtesy.
The bounty of the house was full and free,
Yet could not work upon the constancy
Of brave Sir Antheon, there to fix his mind;
For that another Lady (though disjoined
In place) was linkt to him with lines of love,
Which, howsoere extended, firm would prove.
To seek that sweetning Object of desire
(Which find he would, or finally expire.)
Thence hasts he to Palermo, that a thin
Phoenician Colonie had sometime bin;
But by additions grew so stately great
And populous, that it is a princely seat;
A City of such eminence and fame,
As may some sovereignty over others claim:
Fair streets, brave structures, rich magnificence
Of Temples, give the place preeminence;
Which yet had worthier been its head to rear
With honor, if Fidelta had been there.
But none there knew her, no^ had winged Fame
Wasted the pleasing sweetness of her name
Into those parts* which caused the pensive Knight
To look on Beauties there with small delight,
But ^ull to travel on, in mind to try
The close of a true Lovers destiny.
The next place where he did some days reside,
Messina was; whose gates stood open wide,
As in derision of the Turks proud threats,
Who often for prizes near that Haven waits.
There such pure noble liquour did he taste,
As caused Augustus to forget his past
Sorrows; and with the Knight wrought so a while:
But shortly did his discontents recoile,
And sadly did he fold his arms, when there
No news he could of rare Fidelta hear.
Other fair Cities made he with his love
Acquainted, but like Fortune still did prove,
Finding the peoples greater part to be
Light, vain, and void of solid constancy;
So that it seemed impertinent to spend
Much time in such an Isle for such an end
As he designed; yet howsoere he staid
A while, as disappointed, not dismayed.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO VII.
The Argument.
To Belgium goes the gallant Knight,
Avoids Ebbrezza's lewd delight:
And rings (to anger highly stirred)
Two Hogs of Epicurus Heard.
Our famous Travellours transendent loves
Like to a forest-kindled flame, that moves
With hot contention, seeming to look red
For anger, that it can no further spread.
He knew a brave heroic fortitude
(And such was his) should never seem subdued
Nor wearied out; but should as much disdain^
A faint submission unto grief or pain,
As in a quarrel once engaged, to yield
After slight hurts, and basely quit the field.
The Spaniards, that of large Dominions boast,
And run Division so from coast to coast,
Had told him that their Belgic provinces
Bred famous Worthies, such as did profess
All arts, and had such pregnant fantasies,
That they the na^tick compass did devise,
Swift-hurrying Chariots, Clockes, Typography,
Quaint music, lively Limning, Tapestry,
With many other rarities of wit,
For pleasure some, but more for benefit.
They told him also that the women there
Are stars of beauty, of complexion clear,
And quick in motion, thinking it scarce fit
To yield to men precedence in wit,
Or to any Europaean Dames more fame
For noble virtue than themselves may claim*
These speeches blew the Knights internal fire,
And kindled in his breast a great desire
That coast to visit, and thereof to take
A full survey for fair Fidelta's sake.
Provided therefore of good shipping straight,
That near danced under a more hopeful freight,
He plows his passage through the foaming Sea,
By good direction finding out the way
To that low-seated region; where he lands,
And in no little admiration stands,
Viewing its bulwarks, made with mighty pain
And cost, the raging billows to restrain,
That threat to drive down all, and once did drown
Many fair fields, and many a goodly town;
Whose towers and steeples, when the season's clear
And water low, like marine rocks appear.
" Friend Eubulus, said he, these works are rare;
" And they that thus secure their borders, are
" More to be famed than Hercules. For he
" Found work enough to win the victory
" Of Achelous, that one river strained
" His nerves, before the conquest he obtained.
" But long (I hear) these Patriots have withstood
" The furious charges of the brinish Flood,
" Though thousand rivers to their Neptunes aid
" Bring their fresh forces, readily conveid,
" And often great Aeolus in puffing have
" Sends his bold slaves to lay the country wast.
The painful Dutch may teach us industry,
" And fill our hearts with pleasing hopes to enjoy
" After a small time what we much desire,
" And what we travel for at length acquire;
" Though yet we find that Fortune seldom goes
" Our way, nor friendly favors often bestows.
Thus spoke he; thus from every thing he saw,
Some useful observation did he draw.
Then warm with wonted fire, he foreward went,
Still wondering at the pains that had been spent
In cutting trenches, dreining marshes,
Casting up banks, and many works like these;
Whereof some tend to profit, others aim
At pleasure, all true industry proclaim.
No Statist, on some great embassage sent
'Twixt Prince and Prince, can be more diligent
About the weighing of those nice affairs
That are the subject of his pressing cares,
Than was the Knight industrious to enquire
For the dear object of his deep desire.
Yet balkt he Amsterdam (though rich and fair
That City be) for that he heard there are
So many lost Religions there to be found,
Like to Medusa's Snakes together wound,
Yet hissing at each other; such a crowd
Of sects and heresies, and all allowed
Their dotages, that he despaired to see
Fidelta in such faithless company.
But with no small content he viewed the town
That bred Erasmus, Belgium's chief renown,
Who with pure flowing style far off to drive
The Augean filth of Barbarism did strive;
Rendered the Muses walks more sweet and clean,
And made their troubled spring run clear again.
To Zutphen when he came, and heard some tell
That there that star of honor, Sidney, fell,
A cloud of sorrow over-cast his face,
And thence a showr'e of tears distilled apace,
Whilst freshly he remembered that the fame
Of that brave Hero^ to Atlantis came,
Long ere his amourous task he undertook;
And that his worthy Father bad him look
Upon such noble Patterns, and aspire
With main contention of a high desire
To reach their excellencies, and to be
(If possible) their equal in degree.
Thence goes he on, nor slacks a Lovers pace,
Proclaiming his design in every place;
And lets no object over-slip him, which
With any knowledge might his mind enrich.
The Sun (with fervent labor looking red)
Declined apace toward his western bed,
When by the forest of Ardenna's side,
An house of large receipt the Knight espi'de,
Such as wherein he thought that strangers might
Refresh themselves by day, repose at night.
At his approach, so wild a noise therein
He heard, as if the Thyades had bin
There with their Timbrels: howsoere, being tired
With travel, there to rest he much desired.
Straight then he entered; and so might he well,
Since open stood the gate like that of Hell,
Those there assembled being void of ^ear,
For that by valiant Bacchus armed they were.
The house was full of Ramblers, some whereof
Did break unsavory jests, and visely scoff;
Others sang Catches; some leapt over stools;
Others grown qualmish, cursed the unquiet* fools;
Some crossed in love deplored their bad success;
Others with laughter mocked their heaviness;
Some like the Lapithes and Centaures brawl'd;
But all drank deep, and for more liquor called
With thirsty throats, save those that had before
(Like mellow fruits) dropped down, and strewn the ^^oor.
Thus as hot sultry weather sundry wise
Works upon things of different qualities,
Hardens some substances, makes others f^ow;
Withe^s some Plants, and makes their fellows grow:
So did the ^ervid liquor of the grape
The humors of that drunken Rabble shape
Int' several sollies, causing them to express
Their tempers by intemperate rudenesses.
Amidst them sat Ebbrezza (so she hight,
Whose courtship was their solace and delight)
Deep-drencht in wine, yet such an Ocean more
Desiring, as no bottom had nor shore.
Like a great Puff the blown-up Fatling was,
Filling a large chair with her fleshy mass:
Her face was fully bladder'd, in whose sphere
Her eyes like flamy meteors did appear;
And in her fiery nose (that toward her chin
Inclined) the quintessence o'th quassing sin
Seemed bottled up: Her bagging cheeks so low,
And trebble chinne did hang, that little show
Her neck did make, although no little charge
Maintained a thorow-fare, a gulf so large:
Her palsied arms and hands could scarcely own
Themselves by shape, they were so overgrown:
Like a foul ruffled pillow either breast
Appeared, whereon Silenus well might rest
His seldome-sober head: Her belly soft
Was like a mossy mount, with laughter often
(As with an earthquake) shook: And in such sort
Those Limbs that should her weighty bulk support,
Were swollen with Dropsy, that they did appear
Not legs, but logs, such monstrous props they were;
Not could she easily move them, when to bed
She willing was to go, and must be led.
On one side of her stood a Cask repleat
With lusty wine; on the other side a great
Nicotian box, which duly she did ply,
Smoking and quaffing still alternately;
That so being moist and dry by turns, she might
Taste her Delights with greater appetite.
Sir Antheon smiled when such a Rout he saw,
And knew not whether he should straight withdraw
Out from that mad-brain'd Company, or stay
To see the Humorists some tricks to play.
At length the guzzling Gossip he bespake
Thus: may we not be bold awhile to make
" Our randevouz amongst you, and to be
" Merry with this light-hearted Company?
" At least be furnished with things requisite
" For Travelers, who with the morning-light
" Arose, and since have journyed without stay,
" Though our vexed stomachs chid the tedious way?
" For we upon an urgent business go
" Of love, like arrows sent from Cupids how,
" And on the sweets of hope may seem to feed,
" Yet yield perforce we must to Natures need;
" And (that our worse parts may do service to
" Our better) eat and drink, as others do.
" Sir, if you come to drink, said she, sit down,
" Here Is liquor soon will take you by the Crown,
" Will make those sober looks of yours to stare
" Like to a Comet, conjure down your care,
" Make all your fears to vanish like my smoke,
" And arm you against encountering dangers stroke.
" You shall not need to wear here by your side
" A threatening sword, to show your valors pride:
" My Caske's a Magazine, and you may hence
" Be strongly furnished for secure defense:
" Then lay that dandling weapon by, since fools
" (And only such) will so expose their tools*
" And take you rather what our house presents,
" Full pots and pipes, the chief of implements.
Then ^aught, then belcht she, and then took a cup,
And drank to him; but slowly heaved it up,
That, taking a long d^aught, she might thereby
Morefully, what she dearly loved, enjoy.
Mean while slept forth two Roarers, fierce and bold
As fire-drakes, who the Knight too plainly told
That he must singe a merry Catch or two,
And what their Mistress had enjoined him, do,
Or the^e ^e should not quench his thirst not be
Honored to mix with that Society.
He, thus provokt to show his metal (more
Than Meleager, when the sylvane Boar
(...) him) (...) his hand upon his blade,
And ^^ming with high indignation, said:
" Feed still, ye nasty Hoggs, each at his trough;
" I scorn what you deny, and have enough
" To see you swill and guzzle at this ra^e;
" Who only staid to view (the more to have)
" Your Bucchanalian freakes, and all those vile
" Impurities, that your loathed lives defile.
" As much do I disdain to quaffe, and sing
" Those ribauld rhimes wherewith your rooms do ring,
" As from fair humane dignity to throw
" My self, and like a grovelling beast to go.
Then with a threatening look, as straight he would
Have mixed delicious wine with Drunkards blood,
And dampt their frantic mirth, he left the den
Of those wild beastly Revellers. But then
Did the plumpe Da^e begin her voice to strain,
And called to him to stay, and called again,
Inviting him with promises, that might
Work on a green and frolic appetite.
When she perceived her words were like a gale
To drive him on, and naught they could prevail,
She after him those jolly Champions sent,
That lately gave him so much discontent,
And bade them melt their language in to fair
In treaties, that he would with them repair
Back to her house. They hasted, reeled, and fell,
Yet to him came, and did their message tell,
Courting him fairly at their first assay:
But when they saw he still would keep his way,
They called him Lout and Beast, and (to have staid
His Errantry) bold hands upon him laid.
He quickly shook them off, and trained them on,
Till out of the view of others they were gone;
Then, as the King of beasts, that (hunted) burns
With wrath, at last on his Pursuers turns:
So did he face about to fall on those
That followed him, and 'twixt them dealt his blows.
Then, having with stiff gagges distended wide
Their chaps, and their rude hands behind them tide,
The next part that most workeman-like he played,
Was that a small arch in the bridge he made
Of eithers nose, and both together wy^'d;
Saying, Now you that busily conspired
" Against me, may with heads together laid
" Plot your Release, but hardly call for aid.
" Stand billing there like Doves, and spend your blood
" With comfort; it is for your dear countries good*
" Rather like Swine for Mast or other fruit
" Stand gaping, but forbear awhile to root:
" Be taught, ye Sots, to drink more sparingly,
" And Strangers treat with more civility.
This having spoke, he left them to bespue
Each others breast, and their ill manners rue.
Never did Be on top of Hybla high,
Or fair Hymettus, with more industry
Search the sweet cells of every vernant flower,
From the Days entrance to the Evening hour,
Then he with care performed the great inquest
Of Love, that carelesty disturbed his rest.
When he had viewed each City, every Port,
And almost every place of great resort,
Yet was unsatisfied in his desire,
It was his purpose to have marc'ht up higher,
TO have seen the neighboring nation, over whose heads
His shady ^wings the Austrian Eagle spreads:
But when being certify'd by sundry Posts
And Legates (sent into those lower coasts
To take up news) that sure there could not be
Any such Lady found in Germany
As he enquired for, since Fame no where
Is busier with her hundred tongues than there,
And quickly would such excellence discloud,
Although wrapped up in a Cimmerian shroud;
He paused a while, and like a Student fared,
Who reading sentences obscure and hard,
Is shrewly puzzled, yet will truth pursue
Through misty walks, and seek a clearer view.
He could not but give way to discontent,
Yet scorned neretheless to slack the bent
Of his Resolve, or any sign to show
That his high courage did dejected grow.
THE HEROICAL LOVER.
CANTO VIII.
The Argument.
Our worthy Lover tak^s his way
Toward farre-fam'd Eutopia,
Finds there Fidelta, claims his prize,
And triumphs in connubial joys.
IN all assayes the courage of our Knight
Showed (like his sword) a temper exquisite,
Bearing so true an edge, as hardest fate
That ere encountr'd it could nere rebate.
This raised his thoughts, adapted him for high
Achievements, formed him for great dignity;
Quickn'd his hopes, and wrought upon his mind
Further to seek what most he wished to find.
But as a Sapling on a mountain pight,
When the rude winds tumultuously do fight,
Bends several ways, as surly blasts impell:
So tossed with passions was the Knight, nor well
What course in's business might be taken, knew,
Nor in what (...) he should his quest^renew.
Some thoughts he had great Britain to have seen,
An Isle on^e famous for a Fairy Queen;
But hearing then (as who now does not hear?
That Rapine, Fraud, and Treachery were there,
Acting their Hellish plots in peace and war,
As common as high ways, but deeper far;
He could not hope Fidelta there to find,
Where people were to falsehood most inclined.
Nor could he think it safe for him to tread
Where Trappes and Snares so covertly were laid.
Some other nations meant he to assay;
But Fame unwilling seemed to give him way,
Reproching them with manners so impure,
As no fair noble Lady could endure.
Amidst the Puzzle of designs, his friend
(Who on him cheerfully did still attend)
Thus spoke: Small reason have we to complain
" That our great labors have been spent in vain*
" For we have seen what made Ulysses wise,
" Manners and Cities differing in their guise,
" And government. But happily, had we showed
" At first less rashness, and more time bestowed
" In consultations, we had better sped,
" And our desire long since accomplished
" There is (discovered by an English Knight,
" Much-honour'd More) a land, Eutopia hight,
" Not far from our Atlantis, though in wrath
" Beyond it far; a land that brings forth
" (As Fame reports) a brave and noble race
" Of people, that account all vices, base,
" Maintain fair rights, and love to peace profess,
" Alike detesting war and wickedness.
" Now lately have some thoughts possessed my mind
" That there we shall your long sought Lady find,
" That land being less with vicious customs stained
" Than those whereof we have the knowledge gained:
" If then you please that proof hereof be made,
" We will retire (like Planets retrograde)
" Toward our native coast, and so, no doubt,
" Shall find ere long that famous country out.
Hereat Sir Antheon smiled, and said (in jest;)
Perhaps, if Apollonius, who professed
" Strange sounds t'interpret, had but chanced to hear
" How Huntsmen in these parts their Hounds do cheer,
" He would have told us that their Ho^^es did say
" At every blast, Euto, Eutopia.
" But if this fair and happy region be
" Not far from our Atlantis, certainly
" It Is such a ^loting Island, as it is said
" That Delos was, till fixed and stablished.
" For sometime (if my judgment do not fail)
" It bordered upon Plato's Commonweal,
" Famous in Greece, so far from us, that well
" How great the distance is I cannot tell.
" However your desire imports to me
" A just command, besides an a^gury
" Of good success; and I your counsel weigh
" As much as what a Senate House can say:
" Nor (having found you credible in all
" Reports) can I your words in question call:
" Your riper age, that has the world explored
" Much more than mine, more knowledge does afford.
" Then let us cheerfully our selves address
" (As at the first) to the earnest business
" Of ardent love, to seek that happy land,
" And her that greater service may command.
These speeches ended, to a Port they went,
And for their own Atlantic vessel sent;
A Ship that often had wrastled with the Seas,
And born up bravely in long voyages.
When they had trimmed it up in every joint,
Had seen it firm, complete in every point,
And furnished with provisions plenteous store,
They boldly put off from the lazy shore
Into the working Flood, that smiled with ^ome,
And proudly swelled to see the vessel come.
Through wildest vastities and torrid'st Climes
They past, sometimes bestorm'd, becalmed sometimes;
Sometimes with unseen rocks (that seemed to bear
A secret spite to them) they threatened were;
Sometimes with swallowing gulfs, sometimes with sands
Up-cast, and often with Rovers from strange lands.
Yet, as great Caesar's fortune they along
Had with them took, they safely past among
All dangers, safely to the largest Plain
In Neptunes Empire came, the Southern Main.
It was not long before they racked the sand
Of their Atlantis with their Keele; yet land
They would not there, lest they too long should stay
Ere they arrived at fair Eutopia.
Having at last procured anabler Guide,
And sailed by his direction, they descried
Somewhat that looked as if a cloud had lain
Upon the Sea; but soon appeared more plain
To be an Isle, the same that they had sought,
And with hard pains a sight thereof had bought.
The country seemed of figure spherical,
Embost with hills more beautiful than tall,
Whose brows fresh woods engirt; the shadowed vales
Were here and there with brooks (like silver Trails)
Enbrightned; the rich soiles well-cultur'd state
Rendered it chief of Islands Fortunate,
They, safely landing, greatly joy'd to see
A people formed to fair civility,
That showed themselves in mind and body sound,
And had much knowledge with more virtue crowned,
Hating the names of injury and strife,
As bitter enemies to the sweetest life;
So that good laws amongst them did indeed
Scarce seem from evil manners to proceed,
Bu^ rather from a wise forecast. They were
(Like those of famous Sparta) so severe,
That such as dared to offend, were never spared,
Nor was Desert ere cheated of reward.
Hence lived they in such quietness, that they
Might well be neighbors to the Pacificke-Sea;
And happy were in such a high degree,
That next to Heaven was their felicity.
The Knight, whose sparkling courage cleared his way,
Went on with his design without delay;
And as those motions which from Nature flow,
Do toward their cessation swifter grow:
So he now drawing nearer to his Love,
With more alacrity did forward move.
Under a hill, with Olive-arbours green,
Amongst whose sprases was store of Turtles seen,
Did stand an ancient Edifice, not gay,
Nor vast, but strong and useful every way;
Such as whose very structure wrought the effect
In all beholders, of a fair respect:
Humility had raised it, and there ^ate
Full-handed Bounty smiling at the gate,
Whilst fair Civility in every room,
Took care of what might dignity become.
It had for Prospect an extended Plain
Toward the East, where Flora seemed to reign
In richest state: through this, Sir Antheon drew
Up toward the Fabric which he had in view:
When meeting with a Passenger by the way,
An aged Sire, all (Pilgrime-like) in gray,
He gently wished him (if he could) to tell
What person at that pleasant Seat did dwell.
" Truly, said he, there shines in yonder place
" A starlike Beauty, the great joy and grace
" Of this whole coast; Fidelta is (...),
" Whose worth would weary many-tongued Fame
" Fully to sound it: her poor B^ad-man I
" Profess my self, and will do till I dye.
The Knight (now rapt with joy, and grown as light
As Nisus felt himself, when first in flight
He stretched his wings) no more to hear would stay,
But thither hasted where his Treasure lay.
Arrived and entered there, he fed his sight
A while with objects of no mean delight;
Servants all clad in livery; a free
Full house, yet void of fulsome luxury.
A fire amidst the hall (most apt to show
Pure charity) that did like Vesta's glow;
All things in the old worlds fashion, plain but neat,
So regular, substantial, and complete,
That (sure) he thought that happy Household could
Not look with envy upon the age of gold.
Coming at last to the presen^e of that rare
Lady, whose beauty cleared the circling air,
Whose eye-light, breath, and virgin-blush, did show
How stars do shine, Balm smells, and Roses glow;
As wonder-struck he stood, and scarce could use
His vocal faculty: so stands my Muse,
And words does want sufficiently to praise
A beauty that transcends Hyperbole's;
Which so attempt to reach with lofty strains,
Her lowly mind forbids, and saves my pains.
He found her with fine needle curiously
Working Susanna's famous history
In silk and gold; whose vernal beauty clear,
And the hoary Elders wintry faces, were
So artfully enlyv'd, that well they might
Lead into error a Beholders sight.
But he a livelier and a lovelier Piece
Admiring (more than Troy that Dame of Greece)
His courtship thus began: Fair Governess
" Of all the powers your Servant does possess!
" Lady Angellical! most fit to move
" And rule the Orb and influen^e of love!
" I that to find your home have traveled
" Farther than all that searched for Nilus head,
" From hardest exigents on Sea and Land,
" Come now to kiss your soft Ambrosial hand,
" And to demand as (hardly earned Hire)
" Your true affections treasure, love entire.
" The Magnetisme that in your virtues lies,
" Drew me to this laborious enterprise,
" Fame having far divulged your courtesy,
" Noble beneficence, rare modesty,
" Meekness, veracity, and many more
" High notes of excellence, which I adore,
" And with your person must the same possess,
" Or fall full far short of longed-for happiness.
" Fair Sir, said she, if of my virtues you
" Be so desirous, that you them pursue,
" Then (if you can) those dear endowments take
" As yours, but use them nobly for my sake;
" Take those quaint jewels for your wondrous pains,
" But leave the cabinet that them contains:
" I shall not be disfurnisht, for we so
" Fetched flames from fire, which ner'theless will glow.
" Perchance I make it my ambitious strife
" To imitate Diana's single life;
" Will you perst then to solicit me,
" And like Orion, tempt my chastity?
" What if my heart, drawn forth by such a charm
" As your soft speech, another breast does warm,
" To whom I promised love? then without fruit
" You labor spend, and frustrate is your suit.
" For sooner shall some harsh collision crack
" The whirling Spheres, and to a general wrack:
" Hurry the world, than any force of Fate
" Shall cause me my vowed faith to violate:
" Fortune may smile, and frown, and often estrange
" Her looks, but must not look my mind to change.
" Madam, said he, your temper's not so hard,
" That into it all entrance is debarred;
" For as you spoke, from my dilated heart
" I did perceive some spirits to depart,
" And fly int' yours; whence now they back retire,
" To work in us an unitive desire.
" My breast's inflamed; yet my desire do I
" Disdain to follow with the common cry
" To pull for love, or come with poor intent
" To beg a smile, or show my languishment;
" But to your beauties as bold claim to lay,
" As Venus to the Doves that draw her, may,
" Since to unite our hearts the stars combined,
" And to our Match the Destinies consigned:
" I saw you in a dream too; whence drew
" Fair hopes that sometime I should sleep with you.
" You little dream, said she, what envy I
" Should draw upon you, should I not deny
" What you desire; For many Knights whom arts
" And arms ennobled, have from foreign parts
" Repaired and su'd to me, as Pilgrims go
" On holier visits, and devotion show.
" But I have either fled them, as they say
" Daphne did Phoebus, or else sent away
" Them with their suits, and caused them to depart
" Sorely oppressed with heaviness of heart;
" Or into a passion chaf't, as floods are more
" Enraged, when meeting with a rocky shore.
" But now that you more loveliness present,
" I feel my rigid temper to relent;
" And since indeed you urge the will and law
" Of mighty Fate, you needs must overawe
" My power, and I must of my modesty
" Crave leave to say I love you fervently:
" Not think it levity in me to say
" So much, for I have learned my words to weigh.
" Plain truth to tell, loud Fame has blown your worth
" So far, and trumpeted your merits forth,
" That you in your Atlantis to have seen
" I purposed; as that Amazonian Queen,
" Thalestris (though with more impure intent
" Than mine) to the Macedonian Monarch went.
" Love, These^s-like, a noted part did play,
" Did through a Labyrinth it self convey,
" Found passage through mine ear; though in at the eye
" (More slippery far) it slides most frequently.
" However to the center of my breast
" With happy speed it went, and there shall rest:
" Time that will break strong-hearted Oak, shall nere
Crack that affection which to you I bear.
After this sweet accord, this harmony
Of voice and vote, they further did agree
By Hymen's hallowed lights all doubts to clear,
And make their loves more sensible appear.
Haste was required; nor many days did pass
Before what they desired accomplished was
With fairest auspice, every rite and dress
That aptly symboliz'd their happiness.
And as when Peleus was to take his dear
Thetis to wife, the Gods invited were
To the marriage feast: so persons eminent,
Whom Fame had Heavenward in high praises sent
For loyalty in love, must only be
The welcome Guests to this solemnity.
Yet such true hearts these Islanders did bear,
That faithful Lovers, like to culvers there
In ^locks did meet; who as their cups did flow,
Turned Prophets, and full fortunes did fore-show
To the married Pair; while the air with music rung,
And nuptial hymns inspired Poets sung.
Thus now these worthy Lovers reached the joys
That long had hovered in their fantasies;
Joined their loves forces, that (as gummes in fire
With spices mixed) more sweetly did conspire;
And blessed their fates, that on them had bestowed
Such ample favors, as to few were showed.
High was their happiness, and scarce to be
Reached with the lines of loftiest poetry.
The End.

