THE Storming and total Routing of Tithes, wherein is showed the
unlawfullnesse of claiming them by the now pretended Tribe of Levy, and both
takers and payers therein, denying Christ to be come in the flesh.

Or the humble representation, declaration and protestation of Edward Barber,
in behalf of himself and many thousands of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of
England, humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Lord General Crumwell,
Lieutenant General Fleetwood. Colonel Pride, with the rest of those worthies of
the Nations Liberties,

Proving paying Tithes under the Gospel to be against the Law of God, the Law
of the Land, the Protestation, Covenant and Engagement of the Army; And that if
we should still continue the practice thereof after so many Engagements, so
much light breaking forth, we might Judge our selves guilty of perjury in the
high Court of Heaven, and so stand guilty at the bar of Gods Justice.

1 Samuel 2. 36.And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house, shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of
bread, and shall say, put me (I pray thee) into one of the Priests offices,
that I may eat a piece of bread. Ezekiel 34. 2, 3, 4.Son of man, prophecy
against the shepherds of Israel, prophecy, and say unto them, thus says the
Lord God unto the shepherds, woe be unto the shepherds of Israel, that do feed
themselves. Should not the shepherds feed the flocks, ye eat the fat and ye
cloth you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not the flock,
the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost;
but with force and with cruelty have ye culled them. Micha 3, 5.Thus says the
Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people err, that bite with their
teeth, and cry; peace: and he that puts not into their mouths they even
prepare war against them. Matthew. 10. 16.Behold I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves etc. By Edward Barber freeman of England, Citizen and
Merchant-Taylor of London.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom 1651.

TO The Right Honorable Lord General Crumwel, Lieutenant General Fleetwood,
Colonel Pride, with the rest of those worthies of the nations Liberties.
RIght Honorable and worthy Patriots, we having enjoyed much good and
quietness by Gods goodness, through the care valor and prudence, God having
by you brought us in some measure out of that thraldom and bondage we were in
under the late Prelates that we may not be carried back again to more then
Egyptian thraldom or Reheboams Reformation, and that you may not be a Moses
only, to go unto mount Nebo and there see the good land; But as our Josuah to
carry us into the good Land of a thorough Reformation, the which to do that God
would give you self-denying spirits, and to be a means to the Parliament to
choose out according to Jethrows advice, and provide out of all the people able
men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over
them etc. Exodus 18. 21. Such as would make it their work as Moses did from
morning till night, verse. 13. That so poor people might not be totally ruined
in Courts of Injustice or Committees, espetially for that Popish claim of
Tithes etc. And to this end that none without a special occasion might have
plurality of places of profit, in Church or Commonwealth as too many have,
whereby the work is left undone They like Locusts going over the breadth of the
Earth Exodus 10. 14. Revel. 9. 3. Or false Teachers that seek the fleece not the
fleck, the love of money being the root of all evil; But that he that has an
Office might weight on his Office (not Offices) one place being sufficient to
take up the whole man of the ablest self-denying honest man in the nation, and
that a sufficient known salary may be allowed to each party for their service,
and not to live upon bribes called fees, or one to have several places and 500,
600, 1000, 1500. per annum, for that which others that have been as faithful
and are as able as themselves for that service, would perform for 100. per
annum, against whom there can be no just exception, whereby it has been
proffered to some in Authority by 100. men's service to save the nation 100000
per annum, which might be employed toward the relief of the poor or the
payment of the Soldiers and not some that had mean estates at the beginning of
these troubles, yet now glut themselves with ungodly gains and the ruins of the
nation, when others are ready to starve, as too many have done, for want of
means by honest employment; all which is practiced by reason of some
time-servers that sow pillowe under their Arm-holes, as Isa. 38. 12. and
Ezekiel 13. 18. That by enjoying their great Benefices dare not with the
Prophets say thou art the man, or with the watchman of the Lord tell the house
of Israel their sins and transgresgressions, yet they seek me daily etc. says
the Lord, Isa. 58. 1. Have not they discovered themselves to be as Baals
Prophets, 1 Kings 18. and 20. that seduced Ahab, or those unclean spirits like
froggs that came out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, being the spirits of devils,
working Miracles which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty, etc.
Revel. 16. 13, 14. That therefore in performance of your Protestations Vows and
Covenants, ye, would be instruments of easing this bleeding nation of this
Popish burdensome practice of Tithes, who as the rakers thereof, have been the
cause of 12. years war, bloodshed and ruin already, so had rather have an utter
desolation then loose their ungodly gains: that by your doing this, the loins
of the poor may bless God for you, and your Representer with other free people
of the nation may enjoy this one thing, as a part of the first ripe Grapes of
our Canaan, which will be as acceptable as the Olive Branch was in the mouth of
Noah's Dove, and is the desire of your humble supplicant

EDWARD BARBER.

THE Storming or Total Routing OF TITHES, Or the humble Representation,
Declartion and Protestation of EDWARD BARBER, in behalf of himself and many
thousands of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of England.
Shows that whereas at the beginning of the Parliament, upon the
consideration of the abuse done by the Prelates and their adherents to this
Nation, both concerning the souls and bodies of the people, the Parliament was
pleased to put forth a Protestation, wherein themselves and the Kingdom amongst
other things did protest to defend and maintain with life, power and estate the
true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations contrary to the said
Doctrine, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subjects (or rather the
freemen of England) and (note this) every person that makes this Protestation
in whatsoever he shall do, in the lawful persuance of the same, and to their
power, and as far as lawfully they may, oppose, and by all good ways and means
endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as shall either, by force,
practice, Counsels, Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the
contrary of any thing in this present Protestation contained, etc.

Also in the Explanation thereof, it is said that whereas some doubts have been
raised by several persons out of this House, concerning the meaning of these
words contained in the Protestation, lately made by the Members of this House,
viz. The true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm
contrary to the same Doctrine, this House does declare that by these words, was
and is meant only the public Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as
it is opposite to Popery and Popish Innovations [and that the said words are
not to be extened to the maintaining of any form or Worship, Discipline or
Governdment, nor of any Rites or Ceremonies of the said Church of England]
Resolved that what person soever shall not take the Protestation, is unfit to
bear Office in the Church or Commonwealth again.

2. Again by the Vow and Covenant, we are enjoined for the defense of the true
Protestant Religion and Liberties of the Subjects, and this is made in the
presence of Almighty God, etc.

3. We are engaged in the Reformation of the Churches of England and Ireland,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, to have it according to the
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches.

4. That we shall without respect of persons, to wit, from the Prelate to the
Sexton, in like manner endeavor the exterpation of Popery, and Prelacie, that
is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancelours Commissaries,
Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers
depending upon that Hirarchy (which these Priests extent do) Superstition,
Heresee, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be sound to be contrary
to sound Doctrine [and the power of godlinesse] least we partake in other men's
sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their Plagues. Revel. 18. 4.

The performance of which Protestation and Covenant concerning the said
Minestery and Popish Tithes, so cruel and burdensome to all enlightened
conscientious men has been often desired, as by the Declaration of the Army,
and Petitions of diverse Countries to the House may appear, etc.

Now forasmuch as the Lord says Eccles. 5. 4. 5. When thou vowest a vow unto
God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools: pay therefore that
which thou have vowed; better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou
should vow and not pay. And Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; for the Lord thy God will surely
require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. Compared with verse. 22. 23.
And Psalm. 76. 11. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God This David performs Psalm.
66. 13. 14. I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings, I will pay thee my
vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble.

For the not performing whereof, I believe with Jeremiah the Land now mourns,
Jer. 23. 10. And Jer. 6. 14. They have also healed the hurt of the daughter of
my people slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace. Compared with
Isa. 9. 15, 16. The Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail; for the leaders
of this people cause them to err: And they that are led by them are destroyed.

1. They Preaching for hire, and divining for money; and yet will lean upon the
Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come upon us, Micha.
3. 11. Pulling down poor Wooden and stone Crosses, and yet leaving that cruel
Popish burdensome Cross of their Priests and Tithes remaining.

2. Observe that whosoever shall submit to and receive any Ministry, ordained
by virtue of a foreign power from Rome, is a Traitor by the known declared
Laws of this Land: Now whether men receiving their Ordination beyond the Seas
or here; it being done by one and the same power, springing from one and the
same root, for as the root is, so is the branches, Romans 11. 16. Ye shall know
them by their fruits, do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistle? And
have not the Ministry of England their ordination from Rome? As by their Book
of ordination appears, as also confessed by many of them; yea, all that are true
to their own principles, and therefore to be protested against, by all that
have taken the Protestation or Covenant etc.

3. Christ says, John 10. 1. to the 19. He that enters not in by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a robber,
etc.

And are not these Tyth-takers guilty of the same Judgment, as Psalm 50. 16.
to the 19. To wit, these that enters not in by the door Christ Jesus, that is,
by his way, Laws and Ordinances? and are not the Ministers of England such,
Ergo, are they not such as are there spoken of, Judge ye Noble Bere^ns.

Has all our Fasts and professing Liberty, taking of Oaths and Engagements,
with the free-will-offrings of the Nation, blood and taxations produced this,
to wit, Ordinances for Tithes, with treble damages for those who much like
Eliahs sons 1 Samuel 2. 13. to the 17. who came with a flesh-hook of three teeth
in his hand, while the flesh was in seething, and he struck it into the Pan or
Kettel or Cauldron or Pot; all that the flesh-hook brought up the Priest took
for himself; also before they burnt the fat the Priests servant came, and said
to the man that sacrificed, give flesh to roast, for the Priest, for he will not
have sodden flesh but raw, and thou shall give it me now, and if not, I will
take it by force, (note this.) The like is these men's practice whereby they rob
Christ of his Honor and Priesthood, poor people of their goods, and without
repentance, of their souls, as Isa. 9. 16. Revel. 14. 9. 10. But would these
consider Deuteronomy. 18. 1, 2, 3. The Priests, the Levites, were to have no part nor
inheritance with Israel; but were to eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire:
and his inheritance, therefore shall they have no inheritance amongst their
brethren; the Lord is their inheritance, as he has said unto them. But if
these Priests will be circumcised and do the work, slay the Beasts etc. As
Levit. 14. 13. Then shall they have the wages Deuteronomy. 18. 1. 2, 3. the shoulder,
the two Cheeks and Maw also, the Tyth of the increase Deuteronomy. 14. 22. But out of
that must be relieved the Levite; because he has no inheritance; and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, verse. 29. which these men perform
not in the least, neither were they to take Tithes of any but of their brethren
the Jews, not of us Gentiles, Heb. 7. 5.

4. Christ's Ministers, Ambassadors, or the servants of the Churches must be
content with their Masters wages, and not to trouble the Civil Magestrate, to
have Statute-Laws or Ordinances of Parliament to strain on men's goods, or have
them committed to Prison without Bayl or Mainprize, until they pay treble
damages besides costs and charges, the which has been inflicted on diverse to
the utmost; whereas for the duest debts men are so tortured in Law, that many
choose rather to loose their debts, then to endure the torture of the Laws as
they are now administered, wherein this Clergy makes good that Scripture Revel.
9. 10. In making the Civil Magistrate the Tail of the Beast; for their strength
is in their Tails, and with them do they hurt, to wit, force and strain men's
consciences and goods; and therefore if these men and the Synod would have
given themselves to have truly Translated the Bible, knowing there be many
gross Errors, they would have much discovered the mystery of iniquity and
their own deceits, done the best service they could to this State, brought much
glory to God as Balaam did in acknowledging the Truth, dealing plainly with
King Balack, who told his servants that if he would give him his house full of
silver and gold, he could not go beyond the word of the Lord to do less or
more, desiring to die the death of the righteous, and that his last end might
be like theirs, Numb. 22. 18. 38. and 27. 8. 10. which if these had done, thus
they would have brought much glory to God and peace to this bleeding nation.

As by experience with us is manifested, as formerly causing the Civil
Magistrate to oppress the Conscience and take away the life of many, as in
Queen Mary's, Queen Elisabeths and King Charles his days, whose blood I fear
lies fall on this nation, as Barrows, Greenwoods and Penries etc. Also who
stirred up the King against the Scots and against the Parliament; but those
unclean spirits like froggs, Revel. 16. 13. 14. being the spirits of Devils
working Miracles, that go out unto the Kings of the Earth, etc.? Consider again
their practice at Zion College, and their morning Lectures, Courts of Justice,
yea, at the Parliament and Committees where they like Locusts swarm; And
therefore note that as Judgment is to be powered forth upon the nations in
general that have given their power to the setting up or upholding that State
of Antichrist, without submitting and turning to Christ by Repentance; so upon
them in especial, they having been the Instruments whereby they with the
Nations their Kings and Rulers have been made drunck and committed fornication,
with the Whore, and therefore shall the Jndgements of God be powered fourth upon
them, as Revel. 17. 12. to the 14. and 18. 9, 23, 24. Compared with Isa. 60.
12. For that Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea
those Nations shall be utterly wasted, etc.

Again Christ says, Mat. 10. 38 to his Ministers as ye go preach, saying, The
Kingdom of heavenis at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead,
and cast out Devils, freely ye have received, freely give, compared with 1 Cor.
4. 9. to the 12. Acts 20. 33. 34. where the Apostle says, I have coveted no
man's silver nor gold, nor Apparel; yea, you your selves know that these hands
have ministered to my necessities, and to those that were with me, I have showed
you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to
remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said it is more blessed to give
then to receive, etc. compared with 1 These. 2. 9. and 2 These. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 12.
14. 15. or as Fox in his Acts and Monuments says, The maintenance of the
Ministers is the pure Alms of the Church; but have not they, as Christ says to
the Jews, Mat. 15. 6. 9. made the word of God of no effect by their traditions?

Now consider the vast difference between the Commission and Commands of Christ
to his Ministers and Servants, Mat. 28. 18. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15. 16.

And the several Cannons, Statute-Laws, and Ordinances of Parliament to their
Ministers: as also the administration thereof; and know that their Servants you
are, to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, whether the Church and
State of Rome, or the Prelates and Parliament of England, etc.

5. It being against or beyond the Law of the Land, every free man of Englands
Birthright, to be so by them tyranized over for Tithes, it being first given
for the maintenance of Prelates, Priests, Abbots, Moncks, and Friars, as in the
council of Lateren. But now God having discovered them to be Antichristian and
Popish; so also must be their maintenance, there being not one word of God for
it, but was taken by force and violence, or given for superstitious Tithes of
the same nature, Popish and Antichristian, and more burdensome and oppressive
then Nebuchadnezars golden Image was to the Jews, which he set up in the plain
of Dura; for although he required worship from them to his Idol, yet not
maintenance for the Idol-Priests.

6. That these men, as their Fathers have usually been, still are the cause and
fomenters of the troubles, and ruin of all or most Nations where they come or
have any power, as by experience with us is manifested.

7. Diverse faithful Subjects, and good Common-wealthsmen, have been forced
through (their) tyranny to leave the^r houses and Kingdom, choosing rather to
expose themselves to a desert Wilderness, then to endure that misery at home,
by them forced upon their bodies and minds, others shut up in prison ti^l they
have paid treble damages; besides Prison Fees and Charges, yea some lost their
lives, others having their Cattle strained on, and for legal replying them
committed to prison; yea, the Bailiffs and Atourney fined for their prosecuting
the same according to Law, who paid 61. per piece by force to escape
imprisonment: this was done by the means of the good Lord Say, and the house of
Lords in Browns of Hanworths business.

So that from what has been said it does clearly appear, that although we are
freed from Prelacy, Book of Common Prayer, with diverse other Ordinances, yet do
their Sons succeed in cruelty, they being as like their Fathers as ever they
can look, or Rheoboam-like, exceeding in cruelty: their little finger (as his)
being thicker then their Fathers loins, 1 Kings 12. 10.

And although Henry 8, Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth took away part of the said
Orders; yet as then the maintenance thereunto belonging was continued and
enforced from the people: even so now this burden of tithes, still continues
and cleaves close unto us; and that not only on our temporals and estates, but
upon our Consciences; for if this Popish Ordinance be continued, for we can
judge it no other, being instituted, as before showed, for the maintenance of
Prelates, Priests, Monks and Friars, etc.

If this we say be continued to Presbyters, who received Orders from them, as
to the said Orders before, then are we forced still to Popery, and Popish
Innovations, no less sinful then the others.

And whether this be not a breach of our Protestation, Oaths, and Covenant,
which we have made with hands lift up to the most high God, we refer to all
judicious men to judge: And whether these are not such as the Prophet speaks
of, Ezekiel. 33. 31. 32. 33. And they come unto thee as the people comes, and
they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not
do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness, etc.

Again, we desire to declare as believers, Christians and free men of England,
that the Lord Jesus Christ as he has ordained another Ministry, then that
under the Law: so also has he appointed another maintenance for the
Gospel Ministry then Tithes; there being not one word in the Gospel for it,
they being to live upon their own hand-labor, as before shown, or the peoples
free gift, Mat 10. 8. And to eat such things as they have by their labor, or is
set before them, Luke 10. 7. 8. For the Workman is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10.
9.

Also the first days collection, 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. As God has prospered every
man; who loves a cheerful giver, and for the orderly dispensation of the same,
he has ordained an Office in the Church, to wit, the Deacons, who is to
dispose of the said free gift, as every one needs, Minister or other poor
Saint, without respect of persons: now compare Christ's Commission, and the
Apostles practice with the Ordinance of Parliament, and these men's practice in
these times, and you shall find a wide difference between them. And upon
examination, you shall find that to set up or allow another humane invention
for Ministers maintenance, then the Lords own, who is the only Lawgiver to his
Church, is to frustrate the Deacons Office, and so make the word of God of no
effect by men's traditions, as the Jews did, Mat. 15. 6. 9. and so deny Christ
to be come in the flesh, etc.

Again, it becomes not a true reformation, to borrow of a false Church,
especially such as Rome, so main a Pillar, as Ministers or maintenance: Inas
much as Jeremiah says, Jer. 51. 25. 26 The Lord is against Babylon, that
destroying Mountain, that destroyest the earth, etc. And they shall not take of
thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for a foundation; but thou shall be
utterly destroyed for ever, according to the Covenant, root and branch,
compared with 2 Cor. 6. 14 to 18.

The said practice of taking Tithes, also introduces Prelatical pride, and
time-serving with great men in Authority, as Ezekiel. 13. 1. all the Ministers by
that means being lifted up so far above their poor Brethren, which causes
unaptness to teach, their care being set upon the things of this life (as how
to get, so also to keep the things of this World; whereby he becomes a brawler,
a man of contention, as too sad experience shows, Courts of Justice,
Committee for Plundered Ministers, Sessions, Justices of Peace, by their
trouble and daily vexations, and Suits, through their covetousness can witness,
which causes great covetousness and contention; for the contending of which,
as the Apostle says, is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. for instead of
being given to hospitality, these rob the poor that are forced to beg, taking
that by force which others get by great labor and toil. All which is clear
against what the Ministers of Christ ought to be, yea, and must be, if they
perform their duty, as 1 Timothy 3. 2. 3. where the Apostle says. A Bishop then
must be blameless, the Husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good
beheaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not a brawler, much less a
plunderer for Tithes, not covetous, etc. And therefore if you will pretend your
selves Ministers of Christ, prove your ordination by the word, and be content
with your wages.

This is clear, Acts 6. 2. where the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ, would not leave the word to serve Tables, to wit, to supply the want of
the poor Saints, but gave direction for Deacons to be chosen for that service;
much less would they look after Tithes, as these do by compulsion and cruelty.

A Husbandman one day declared at the Parliament door, that he rented 300.
Acres of Land, and that he proffered the Priest 100 thereof gratis, so as that
he would manure it; but he would not accept thereof, now judge ye what a case
we are fallen into.

Again, consider how dishonorable it is, that such as pretend that they are
put in trust with the unsearchable treasure of the Gospel, should so dishonor
their pretended Master, and hinder the receiving thereof by their forcing
maintenance from people, which themselves confess, have not received the Gospel
from them, nor have they begotten them to the faith; so that they are neither
Fathers, Planters, Teachers, Bishops, etc. unto them.

And yet will they force maintenance from them, contrary to 2 Cor. ^2. 14. 15.
Behold the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be burdensome
to you; for I seek not yours but you; for the Children ought not to lay up for
the Parents, but the Parents for the Children. And I will very gladly spend and
be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.

But instead of this I have seen that cruelty exercised by the Magistrate,
through these men's means already, that I never saw in four years waiting at the
high Commission Court; But why have we not as well a Doctor of Physic, and a
Lawyer forced on every Parish as these, would it be any more but the like
Monopoly? but that we should be forced to pay these men Tithes, not owning them
nor their work, they having been the Priests of the Nation, and chief cause of
all the bloodshed, yet now oppressing cruelly such as have adventured life and
estate for the preservation of the same, yet this to be called Primo Libertatis
Angliae, when instead of take him Jailer at the high Commission Court, it is
said now take him into Custody; where is demanded 10. times greater charge, Oh
Rehoboams Reformation, was such proceedings cruel then, and against Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right? and is it not much more in the first year of
Englands Jubilee, Englands Liberty?

Again, consider the great burden to the Commonwealth, for the free Commones
of England do hereby in some places loose the profit of one half of their Land
by the year, as may be made appear, if it be duly considered; to wit, to the
Landlord and the Priest or Parson, they only being Gentlemen, the rest being
slaves, and it were well if they were board through the ears, that they might
know themselves to be so, they being under service and oppression, worse then
the Israelites, in Egypt who labor with much sweat and pains, hunger and cold,
wet and dry: for that which the other like drones or Caterpillars, consume on
their backs and bellies, etc.

Therefore our denying the paying of Tithes, is not in the least in any
contempt against Civil Authority who are Gods Ministers not only to take
vengeance on them that do evil, and should cause them to work and eat their own
bread; but for the praise of them that do well, and should see such not to eat
that will not work; but in obedience to God and the rule of the Gospel given
forth by his spirit to all Nations that believe and obey him as before is
showed.

2. It is not in contempt to the persons of these men, who pretend they are
Ministers of Christ; But rather desire they might be employed in some lawful
way or calling to get their own bread, that so he that has stolen (to wit,
Minister (or in English Servant) as well as Member) might steal no more; but
labor with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs, etc. according to the Apostles words Ephesians. 4. 28. But our
denying the payment of Tithes, is first in obedience to God: all that do pay
them, therein denying Christ to be come in the flesh, by their upholding those
Jewish Rites and Ceremonies which ended in Christ; which these self-seeking and
time-serving men, still seek to uphold so far as they will make for their own
ends, robbing Christ of his Priesthood; poor men and women of their goods, and
without the great mercy of God of their souls, for might they not as well have
their Linen Ephod, or Surplus Altars, Sacrifices of all sorts, right shoulder
and the Maw, Tempel at Jerusalem, none Inheritance for the Priests, yea
Circumcision and killing of Beasts etc. is Tithes, that so they that take the
wages might do the work enjoined for the wages, as to feed the Levit, the
stranger, fatherless and widow Deuteronomy. 14. 29? But if through pride or Lazines
they will not do the work, which they refuse to do, then let them not wrong the
people and Nation so grievous as to take the wages: for to him that works is
the wages reckoned of debt, not of grace; But not to him that works not, it
must be of grace, to wit, of free gift.

2. Their ordination being false and not according to the rule of the Gospel;
But against the Rule, Government and Authority of Christ the Son of God, his
Crown and dignity, who is therein the only King and Lawgiver, whom they say
is their Master, yet do they as the Heathen Tyrants of old, who clothed men in
Beasts skins, that so they might be the more eagerly devoured: so these make
the true worshippers of God in Christ as odious as they can by slanders and
revilings under the name of Heretics and Schismatics etc. Never showing
wherein, much less proving the thing true, that so they may make the
Magistrates and common people, as those deluded by the Friars and Priests in
Germany against the Hugnotes as they called them, cry out against them before
they see them, Judging them to be strange Monsters; unhumane Creatures, and so
do these, before they know them, etc.

3. It being against the known declared Laws of the Land, as Statute decimo
rertio Elisabeth, they not upon every induction into any place publicly
Reading the Book of Articles and subscribing it, which by the Protestation and
Covenant these cannot do except perjured, are to enjoy no more benefit then if
they were naturally dead.

4. It being against the Protestation, Covenatn, Declarations of Parliament and
Army, that the Kingdom have Generally taken and entered into, to wit, to uphold
and maintain the true Protestant Religion in opposition to Popery and Popish
Innovations, and as aforesaid they also receiving their Power and Ordination
from Rome, yet not performing that they were enjoined, and for what Tithes was
given neither in the time of the Law nor by the Counsel of Lateran as before
showed.

5. It being against the Engagement and Covenant, not only of the Parliament;
but also the Kingdom in general, with their hands lift up to the most high God,
the searcher of all hearts, to Root out Popery Root and Branch, and the
Government by Lord Archbishop, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers
depending on that Hierarchy as these do, etc. And each one to go before another
in a real (not a fained) reformation, it being better not to vow, then to vow
and not perform, etc.

6. The Gospel-weapons being not carnal, but spiritual, mighty through God,
etc. 2 Cor. 10. 4. and 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. 26. The Apostle says, The Servant of
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, patient
in meekness, instructing the contrary minds, proving if God at any time will
give them repentance. Compared with Mat. 8. 10. 11. 12. and Titus 3. 2. Romans
14. 11. where the Apostle shows, we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, where every one shall give an account for himself to God, etc.

And surely the way that Christ has appointed for his Ministers of the Gospel
to walk by in all Gospel-Administrations, is the sword of the spirit, the word
of God, and not the Authority of the civil Magistrate, or sword of steel, by
which Antichrist has so enlarged his Dominions, as Revel. 13. 3. 7. 16. 17.
And therefore to escape his punishment, verse 10. Let all the people of God
shun this practice, compared with Revel. 18. 4. where it is said, Come out of
her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues.

It being very considerable, whether the civil Magistrate giving their power as
to raise so to the upholding of that state of Antichrist, ruling over the
bodies and consciences of the people in Ecclesiastical things, by intrenching
upon the prerogative Royal of King Jesus, whereas (he) would not intermeddle
with that which was their due, Luke 12. 14. whether that I say be not the cause
why the Lord lets the sword remain so long amongst us and other parts, even to
the depopulating of the Nations of the earth, being now even drunk with the
blood of the slain amongst us, for many years past, according to Revel. 16. 6.
They have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou last given them blood
to drink; for they are worthy: And as was once said by Jehu to Joram, 2 Kings
9. 22. being asked, Is it peace? what peace answered he, so long as the
whoredoms of thy Mother Jesabel and her Witch-crafts are so many? so what hope
of peace have we so long as the Whordoms, Witch crafts and Sorceries of that
Jesabel of Rome, England and Scotland, that great City Babylon, though divided
into 3 parts, Rev. 16. 19. remain with that spirit of persecution, hatred,
malice, evil contention, and division, against the Statute Laws of King Jesus,
it being contrary to Vows and Covenants, etc. in those that profess themselves
Ministers of the Gospel of King Jesus, who is that Prince of peace; seeing the
Lord has said, Isaiah 6. 1^. The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve him
shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted, which I cannot but
judge to be one cause of the distractions, Wars, shedding of blood in the
Nations (of Christians as they pretend) to wit, the civil Magistrate
intrenching upon the prerogative Royal of King Jesus, and not permitting him to
rule and reign by his own Laws in his Kingdom, to wit, over the Saints in the
Churches, as before is showed.

These things considered, we could not but in obedience to God, love to the
truth, and ease of our own Conscience, discharge our duty herein to reminde
you of the Protestation, Covenant, Declarations, etc. desiring to be eased of
these burdens of popish Tithes, etc. That so the Land mourn not because of
Oaths, and no longer to enforce the same for Ministers maintenance, they
therein denying Christ to be come in the flesh: As also wherein the civil
Magistrate gives his power unto the Beast, in upholding that popish practice
and innovation by their Clergy, etc. And let the Ministers or Servants of the
Gospel, live upon the Gospel, even upon their own hand-labor, or the free and
voluntary gift of the people, which the Gospel allows them, wherewith they will
and ought to be content, being better to be without a livelihood, then rob and
steal, and sin against God, in getting it by unlawful ways and means. But I
doubt not but all true Ministers will be content with their true wages allotted
for them by Christ's appointment, which we are confident will sufficiently
satisfy all such godly ones as desire and seek not the fleece, but the flock;
and with Paul seek them, not theirs; such as take the word of God for their
Guide and Rule, they having a word for their warrant, not traditions of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing gain is godliness, or
their own covetous hearts, and men's precepts: it being a means to hinder the
free progress, and embracing of the Gospel-Administrations: so shall we the
Freemen of England be free from that burden that does so much inslave us,
making our very lives uncomfortable to us, they eating up Caterpiller-like, the
best fruits of the Land, and a great part of the Peoples Labors.

But if these Scriptures and Reasons cannot take place, and cease upon (...)
your spirits to grant us relief, in freeing us from this more then Egyptian
bondage; yet we having declared the truth, we have discharged our duties and
shall have peace of Conscience in warning you of it, according to Ezekiel 3. 17.
to the 21. and 33. 2. to the 7. and shall with heart go on in the strength of
the Lord, in opposing that state of Antichrist, head and tail, root and branch,
Ministry and maintenance, by Tithes or otherwise, if we perish, we perish: and
so in all other their practices, that are contrary, or without the word of God,
not daring to presume above what is written, submitting our persons with Daniel
and those worthies, the three Children, Apostles and Primitive Christians, as
in that Catalogue Heb. 11. Passively to the will and command of the Civil
Magistrate, as to the Fathers of our flesh; but, unto God who in Christ is the
father of our spirits Actively that so we may live, although in sufferings
here, yet in Glory hereafter. For such as suffer with him or for him now, shall
one day reign Glorified with him, and whosoever shall be ashamed of him and of
his sayings, to wit, his Ordinances in this adulterous and sinful generation
of Tyth-taking Priests, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when he
comes in the Glory of his Father with his holy Angels, to execute Judgment
without respect of persons; and whether these Tyth-takers be not as truly by
the Gospel Thieves, as such as Rob by the Highway side, or break Houses, and
the upholders by pay or otherwise guilty of as great evils as they that uphold
or countenance the other; I leave to every enlightened man to Judge; and
although it be not so well known, by reason they have deluded and bewitched the
Nations, yet now God having enlightened the Earth, he requires an answerable
obedience thereunto: for where much is given, much will be required. Luke 12.
48.

Thus have we declared our resolutions to go on in the Lord and the Power of
his might, in whom is our strength, and no more to bow the knee to Baal or
those Amalakites or Hamans of the times, to whom as Mordecai, so we resolve not
to bow, Hester 5. 9. to the 12. Although it cost us our goods by Plundering; as
they have done, or our Liberties; for if we perish, we will perish with them
and those worthies, Dan. 3.

The Lord being now at work, intending to Level the Mountains, Psalm. 113. 7. 8.
He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill, that he may set him with Princes, etc.

Yea, that great destroying mountain of Babble that destroys all the Earth,
Jer. 51. 24. 25, 26. saying, Behold I am against thee oh destroying mountain,
says the Lord, which destroys all the Earth; and I will stretch out my hand
upon thee and roll thee down from the Rocks* to wit, the shelter of Magistrates
and I will make thee a burnt mountain, and they shall not take of thee a stone
for a Corner nor a stone for Foundations; but thou shall be desolate for ever
says the Lord.

This shall be done by the Lord Christ, he being mounted on the white Horse,
Riding on Conquering and to Conquer* Revellations 6. 2. by the Sword that
proceeds out of his mouth, Isa. 30. 15. not by Carnal weapons, 2 Cor. 9. 10.
4. Zach. 4. 6. Not by might, [or Army or Arm of flesh,] but by my spirit, says
the Lord, this being published for the conviction of the Priests, and direction
of all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, resting your servant in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel of King Jesus,

EDWARD BARBER.

Postscript.
ANd although the subject Matter of this discourse be principally against
Tyth-takers and Tyth-payers, yet not excluding others of the like nature, but
that the same condemnation lies against pretended high Lights, above
Ordinances, spiritualized, above Christ, above Scripture, and what is Written,
contrary to Paul's advice 1 Cor. 4. 6. (to wit) not to presume above what is
Written, thereby winking at iniquity that will not do it themselves, but
appoint and suffer others to do it, as sprinkling of Infants, take Tithes or
contract for Preaching, etc. Neither will they discover the evil thereof, and
show (...) Judgment that lies upon the Nation for permitting thereof by those
in author^ty, contenting ^^^selves with a half-Reformation (to wit) so far as
will stand with their Honor and profit, not showing such repentance as Simon
Magus Acts 8. 13. nor those Conjurers Acts 19. 18 19. Who believing confessed
and showed their deeds* and those of them which used curious arts brought their
Books together and burned them before all men, and they counted the price of
them and found it fifty thousand pieces of Silver, so mightily grew the word of
the Lord and prevailed, (...) Demetrius like, verse 24. to the 29. Who made
Silver shrines for Diana, wh^ called the Craftsmen together with the Workmen of
like occupation, saying sirs ye know that by this Craft we have our Wealth;
Moreover ye see and hear that not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all
Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much people, saying, that they
be no Gods that be made with hands, so that not only this our Craft is in
danger to be set at naught; But also, that the Temple of the great goddess
Diana should be despi^ed, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all
Asia and the World worshippeth, and when they heard these sayings, they were
full of wrath, and cried out, saying, great is Diana of the Ephesians, and the
whole City was filled with confusion etc. compare with John 11. 48. Where the
Jews said concerning Christ, if we let him thus alone, all men will believe on
him etc. And if any desire farther Information concerning the unlawfulness of
paying or taking Tithes, let them Read, John Turner on Tithes, Tyth-gatherers
no Gospel-Teachers, Gentil-Congregations no Tyth-payers, or the Ordinances of
Tithes dismounted, and if all this will not serve those greedy Cormorants the
Priests of these times, to take them off from their ungodly gains, let them
then expect no quarter according to Zach. 13. 2. 3. Where it is said it shall
come to pass in that day, says the Lord of Hosts, that I will cut off the
n^mes of the Idols out of the Land, and they shall no more be remembered; And I
will cause the Prophets and the unclean spirits to pass out of the Land, and it
shall come to pass that when any shall yet Prophecy, then his father and his
mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he Prophesies, and it
shall come to pass in that day that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one of
his Vision when he Prophesies, neither shall they wear a Rough or Inckie
garment to deceive, or lie, compare with 1 Kings 18. 21 to the 24. And Elijah
came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opiniors? If
the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him: and the people
answered him not a word etc. compared with the 2 Kings 23. 4. 5. 6. Hosea 10.
5. Acts 6. 8. to the 13. And Stephen full of faith, and power, did great
wonders and miracles among the people.

Then there arose certain of the Synagogue, which is called the Synagogue of
the Libertines and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and of
Asia, disputing with Stephen.

And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.

Then they suborned men which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words
against Moses and against God.

Romans 2. 6. Who will render to every man according to his deeds, etc.

Revel. 14. 9. and 10. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud
voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand.

The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shallbe tormented with
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb. Compared with Revel. 18. 23. 24. And the light of a candle shall
shine no more at all in thee: and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride
shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of
the earth: for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.

And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, an of all that were
slain upon the earth.

FINIS.

