Cyrus the Great: OR, THE Tragedy of Love.

As it is Acted at the THEATER IN Little-Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, BY His Majesty's
Servants.

Written by JOHN BANKS.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bentley at the Post Office in Russel Street,
Covent Garden. 1696.

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS, THE Princess ANNE OF DENMARK.
Madam,
I Confess I am so transported at the Honor You have done this poor Play, that
I know not in what Terms to pay my Devotion to Your Highness; I am not
insensible too of my own Unworthiness, and that it is a Presumption even in the
best of this Kind, to think to gain Admittance into the Closet of so Great a
Princess; But when I consider that no Present, of what Value soever, can be
made suitable to One of Your Illustrious Character, It gives me Encouragement
to hope this Trifle may not be less Acceptable to Your Royal Goodness, than a
Pitcher of Water was to the Great Monarch of the World, from the Hands of a
Mean Soldier. 'Twere Profaneness in me any longer to divert with my rude Pen
Your Divine Thoughts and Precious Moments, that are still employed Above, in
imploring Blessings for the Nation, and more profane to sully the Crystal
Mirror of so many Incomparable Virtues with the coarse Breath of Mortal Praise.

I most humbly ask Leave then to withdraw from a Subject so much above my
Capacity and Merit; (a Task fit only for the Angels You converse with,) and
pray my Muse may have the Happiness to conclude, who groans to be delivered of
her Duty, in these Homely, but Hearty Thanks.

Accept, Great Princess, this small Offering,
This humble Mite I to your Treasure bring,
The poor mean Present of a bended Muse,
Amidst the Heaps of all the Wealthier Jews,
A banished Play that tedious Years had mourned,
Blessed with your favor, by your Smiles returned,
Writ and designed for this Immortal Grace,
E're my then happier Earl of Essex.
Favorite took place;
But though the Younger first the Blessing had,
This brings no less Devotion that has stayed:
The grateful Peasant thus before he is stored,
Gives his first Fruits of Plenty to his Lord.
Since this had never lived but for your sake,
It Is just I give you what your self did make:
For the Great Cyrus being but a Child,
And in his Cradle destined to be killed,
Your Highness his Divine Panthea now,
Has raised him both to Empire and to You.
The God of Love, who in the Scene departs,
Bequeaths to You his Quiver and his Darts,
And, what is more, his Title to all Hearts.
Whilst at your Feet, the mighty Monarch lays
His conquered Crowns, as humbly I the Bays.
Happy was He that Presence to engage,
That cheered the World, and brought to Life the Stage,
Where the sad Muses, since they lost their Queen,
Never till that Day did tune their Songs again.
The ravished Crowds adored You as You rode,
Like Spring in April coming first abroad.
My humble Muse, then, that did grovelling lie,
Soared like an Eagle through the Vaulted Sky,
Forgot the Disappointments that she had,
Raved with fierce Joy, and ran with Pleasure mad:
Two Labors of her Brain, Queen of Scots.
this Play the third,
Through Spite and Envy were the Stage debarred, Lady Jane Gray.

Cast and never Tried, Condemned and never Heard.
Thus drooped your Poet, saw his Laurels stained,
Or robbed by Others who more favor gained;
But time he hopes, and Pity in your Breast,
Will bring'em both to Life, as this is blessed.
Your Royal Highness's most humble, most devoted, and most obedient Servant, J.
Banks.

PROLOGUE TO HER Royal Highness.
WHen all that we thought great and good was gone,
And the whole World did in that Deluge drown,
When mourning Cupids flagg'd their tender Wings,
And the sad Muses broke their warbling Strings;
When she was fled that shined with Pity here,
What could revive the drooping Theater! --
But from the Phoenix Ashes in their Spice,
Lo, I behold another Goddess rise*
All Blessings that with her* great Princess, flew,
Can never be restored us, but in You.
The Dove in the glad (...) was not so kind,
Who brought the Olive, and revived Mankind.
The Laurels fading now behind our Scene,
Like Virgil's Grotto, shall be ever green.
Let conquering William send abroad his Darts,
Secure for him you rule his Peoples Hearts.
And his soft Pledge only her self withdrew,
Whilst all her Miracles succeed in You:
Then let us to Heaven in loudest Anthems sing
That such bright Hopes we have, and such a King.
Dramatis Personae.
Cyrus the Great. Mr. Betterton. Cyaxares, King of Media. Mr. Smith. Hystaspes,
Kinsman to Cyrus. Mr. Kynaston. Craesus, King of Lydia. Mr. Bowman. Abradatas,
King of Susa. Mr. Hudson. Artabasus, Friend to Cyaxares. Mr. Thurmond.
Thomyris, Queen of Scythia. Mrs. Bowtell: Panthea, her Daughter. Mrs. Barry.
Lausaria, Daughter to Craesus. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Officers, Guards, Women, and
Attendance.
Scene the Camp near Babylon. Cyrus the Great.
Actus Primus. Scaena Prima.
The Scene a wide spacious Land, ruinous and almost covered with dead Bodies,
supposed to be after a great Battle, wherein Cyrus had Overthrown Croesus.
Enter Cyaxares, Artabasus, Officers and Attendants. ^yax. STAND.

Arta. Stand -- It Is the King's Pleasure each Commander
Draw up his Men, and close upon this Heath.

Cyax. How far have we to Cyr^'s Camp from hence?
And how far distant do the Assyrians lie?
Where stands this great and mighty Babylon,
The Mistress of the World, the glorious City?
Whose proud, ambitious Arms have still enclosed
The greatest Emperors that ever were?
So Proud, so Vain, and Awful was she once,
She almost reached the Heavens with her Towers.

Art. Just from the ascent of that small rising Hill,
And but a few Miles distant, you may see
The three great Miracles of all the Earth;
Nearest in view your Faithful Valiant Medians,
With all the rest of your Confed'rates lie,
Composed of fierce Hyrcanian Horse,
Armenian Foot, and brave Cadusian Archers.
The Troop of Cyrus own Immortal Guards,
The Persian Homotyms, each nobly Born,
Valiant and Wise enough to be a General --
These are ordained to hold the World in Chains,
With Cyrus, God-like Cyrus at their Head.

Cyax. Cyrus! Thou speak as if thou never had knewn
Astyages, or were thy self no Mede --
Answer me not, but as you did, go on.

Arta. Distant from Cyrus's Camp, some twenty Furlongs,
And just as many from the Imperial Town,
Lies the great Army of the Assyrian King,
Filled up with such a multitude of Nations,
You Would think that all the Living of the World
Were there assembled to defy the Gods,
Not fight with Cyrus --
Betwixt these Armies, as the Prize of all,
Stands the bright Virgin Queen, rich Babylon,
Encouraging the Soldiers on each side,
As if she said, that she and all the World,
Were, till this great decision, set at Stake,
To come in Triumph to the Victor's Arms.

Offic. Her Sp^res and Temples so with Beauty shine,
Did not the Smoke which from both Armies rise,
Eclipse the Light, you might with wonder see
She than the Sun would make a brighter Day.

Cyax. A brave Reward, more worth than is the danger!
But I unmanly come to share the Spoil,
Without the hazarding of one poor Battle;
All Is done already, no more Crowns to win,
Those that have escaped, are all for shelter run
Under the Wings of this huge Armies Body --
This is the Field whose sad remains can tell
Of Craesus's late and dreadful Overthrow --
Behold the Triumph of unstable Fortune!
Are these the Men that made such mighty noise!
How they lie low, cut off like withered Corn,
Where proudly once they flourished, and grew up.
Craesus the Rich, the Happy, and the Wise,
His Scale of Fortune now that lies so low,
Gives Cyrus leave to mount and touch the Sky.

Arta. A fatal Glory fires ambitious Man,
That is for ever with destruction gotten,
Bright Ruin is the gilding of his Doys,
And humbl'd Nations with his height must fall.
Our Eyes no other Objects can behold,
But near and distant Plains all harras'd over,
And great and beauteous Palaces unveiled.

Cyax. No Corn does here enrich the bloody Field,
Nor Grass adorn the Meads with wanton Green;
The Trees, the Earth's tall Sons, are all cut off,
All Places mourn where Cyrus Horse has trod.

Offic. The poor and plundered Peasants peep abroad
With piteous Eyes and Hands lift up to Heaven,
To see their Labor turned to dismal Spoil,

Arta. So Shipwrack'd Passengers cast on the Shore,
That but a few past moments saw themselves
Rich in a Calm, watching the Tides decrease,
Pick up small pieces of their scattered Wealth,
Which the relenting Waves left on the Sands --
The utmost Corners of the World have heard him,
And frighted at the Trumpet of his Fame,
Have straight obeyed. -- All Mortal Eyes look up,
Nay, God's themselves with Envy now look down
Upon the growth of this prodigious Man,
Wondering as they behold such monstrous Greatness,
How they so lavishly decreed.

Cyax. No more, get thee to Cyrus back,
Do, and forget what late thou were, when first
I molded thee from humble Earth, and placed
Thee over the Heads of twenty thousand Great Ones;
And thou for this, e're Cyrus dawn, declined
Thy Royal Master, left me in a time,
When he, with all his Train of early Hopes
Could scarcely comprehend the meane^^ Star,
Dropped from the Sphere where all my (...) are written.

Arta. O pardon, Royal Sir, my Love to Cyrus
Is but what you out of excess may spare;
It runs to him in narrow, shallow Streams,
But never ceases to overflow the Fountain.

Cyax. Ah! Artabasus, were not thou to blame,
To counsel me to give the Reins to Cyrus,
Pleased me with Hopes, and fed my longing Ears
With cunning Tales, of this ambitious Boy,
And when my self would fain have lead my Armies,
Made me lie down in Sloth, yielding to him
These Hands, these Feet, my Legions, and my Strength,
And left me then a weak and limbless Body,
Drenched in Delights, and drowned in studied Pleasures.
Bane to my Bliss, and my Renown for ever!
How can thou answer this? --

Arta. If you will hear --

Cyax. Why Father, great Astyages, did not
Thy Martial Ghost affright me in this Slumber?
Call to my Mind the Deeds that thou have done,
When Young, and scarcely risen from my Cradle,
Thou leadst me round the Frontiers of the Globe,
And brought me to a Nation blessed by Heaven,
Elysium sure it was, a Land of Wonders,
Whose Leaves and Trees still blossomed like the Spring,
And Fields were clad with everlasting Green;
Its Streams ran Crystal, and its Sands were Gold.
This Orient Miracle shone like a Gemm
Sat in the golden Circle of the World,
So swarmed on by the fairest of the Living;
As if it had been indeed that happy Place
Where Souls are blessed with an Eternal Being:
For there no Want was found, but all Increase
Sprung from the great and unknown Deity.
Through this Immortal Land we pierced our Arms,
Climbing the lofty Hills that reared the City,
And from their Temple built of shining Gold,
Bore all the holy Vessels of their God,
And took Five hundred thousand Slaves away.
Thunder and Lightning, Darkness seems to cover the Field. Hark, hark -- A
horrid Thunder sounds at distance.

Arta. Now here it answers with a Force as dreadful --
A sudden Darkness seems to spread the Field --
There you may see that cloudy Curtain drawn,
Whilst Lightning rushes from the parting Heavens,
And to my wondering Eyes discovers Swarms
Of hellish Insects flying in the Air.

Cyax. The Gods are sportive sure, and seem to mock
At what bold Cyrus has performed below.

Arta. The Scene of Horror yet discloses further --
My Sight deceives me if I do not see
Spirits descend into their Humane Forms
Again, and the dead Bodies slain by Cyrus
Begin to move.

Cyax. Something does tread the Ground --
Look, Artabasus, see, what monstrous things
Betwixt a Mortal and a Devil's Shape,
Are those?

Arta. I see distinctly now, and I Will
Release you from your Wonder -- These are Witches,
Or Wizards else, that all this Land is famed for --
What Nation is there but has often been told
Strange Tales of the Chaldean Sorcerers.
When they would know the Event of things on Earth,
Like ravenous Vultures haunting bloody Battles,
They still attend the Fortune of the Field,
When they may exercise their loathsome Charms
And hateful Practices upon the Dead.
With sulfurous Herbs, and devilish Incantations.
They wrack their quiet Spirits in the Shades,
Driving their Souls back to their Flesh again,
And force 'em to reveal what is writ below,
What Heaven had bound up in the Book of Fate.
The Infernal Gods are mastered by their Po^er,
Or else persuaded by some Piety
That pleases them; deny these Wretches nothing.

[Dance of Wizards. Witches SONG. 1 Witch. Sisters, Whilst I thus wave my Wand,
Charming the Ground on which we stand;
Invoke the Spirit of this Slain,
Its Body to inform again:
Some of Deucalion's Seeds I Have found,
That raised Mankind when all was drowned.

2 Witch. Mummy with Cats Blood did I boil,
I Will chafe his Temples with the Oil.

3 Witch. To fume his Nostrils, lo, I bring
A Feather from the Phoenix Wing.

4 Witch. I Will wash his Ioints with Liquor brought
From Aeson's Bath, which Wonders wrought.

CHORUS. He stirs, he stirs; Rise and foretell
This listening Monarch's Fate from Hell.

Cyax. Behold -- Look yonder -- Is not that a Man,
That rises from amongst the Heaps of slain,
And with an awful March comes steady toward us?

A dead Carcass of one of the slain rises, and comes to them upon the Stage.
Arta. Fear't not, my Lord -- See, it would speak.

Dead Cark. From the dark Region of Eternal Night,
Where numerous Souls in mingled Tortures live,
And fry like Atoms in the Sunbeams Heat;
Alternately from Flames and then to Frost;
First dipped into a liquid Fire, and thence
Whole Shoals are plunged into a Deep of Ice:
Whilst Pluto's great Divan in Council sit,
T'invent new Plagues to practice on the Damned.
From thence, as I stood gazing on the Lake,
Waiting my Passage to that place of Horror,
A Summons from the Fiery King was sent
By Charon brought, wherein I was commanded
By Power on Earth, which that in Hell controlled,
That I should straight glide back into the World,
Quick as pent Light disclosed, it self disperses,
And re-assumes this Corpse yet uninterr'd,
Till Cyaxares Ears had reached my Charge,
What of thy Fates decreed, which I shall speak,
And Pluto dictate -- This the Oracle.
In vain's thy vast Ambition and thy Envy,
A Genius yet more great shall conquer thine,
And when thy Rashnes^ leads thee next to fight,
To Cyrus Glories thou shall add thy Life,
And leave thy Empires, and thy Darling Crowns,
To be possessed by him whom Fate adores,
Whom, for a time, Heaven, Hell, and all the World
Obey -- I am recalled, -- my Task is done,
And subtle Fiends come thronging to the Light
To drive me into Torments back again.

[Falls down again. Cyax. Ha! Art thou fallen! Stay, speak, who sent thee,
Soldier?
What greater Devil lurking here on Earth
Made the black God obey his threatening Summons,
And charmed the Powers of Hell to my Destruction?

Arta. A mere cold Clod, a bloody mangled Coarse.

Cyax. Here, take this hellish Carcass,
And throw it to wild Beasts to be devoured --
What, have thou Hell invoked too on thy side!
Can Cyrus trust his helping Gods no more!
So little do I fear thee now, false Persian,
That, stoodst thou guarded like the King of Furies,
Ten thousand glaring Spirits round about thee,
With burning Tridents, and hot Scourges armed,
To hurry me from Earth like Mortal damned,
I Would through 'em all to meet thee, daring Boy.

Arta. Recall your Temper, Sir, and blame not Cyrus,
Who, bating his Ambition, still is Virtuous.
His Soul, pure as the first created Mortals,
Who in the Worlds prime Innocence began,
'Ere Lust and Power defaced the tender Image,
And crept into the Frailties of Mankind --
This was performed by some Magician's Art,
At the Command of the Assyrian Monarch,
Who, since his late Defeat, basely and cowardly,
Is forced to have recourse to Hellish Tricks,
And in his sinking State catches at Air,
Grasps any thing to save him from o'erwhelming.
The Gods will guard you through an Host of Devils,
Then as Hell's Malice only this esteem.

[Noises of singing within. Cyax. Whence comes this Sound of Music, and of
Voices?
[ Captain goes off. Am I awake! Is It real Artabasus
That we have seen, or that we now do hear?

[Captain reenters. Capt. The brave Hystaspes, Sir, is just arrived,
With Presents from his Royal Master Cyrus
To Cyaxares his Imperial Uncle.

Enter to them Hystaspes, with Panthea, Women, and Attendants. SONG.1.
Hark how the Trumpet and the Drums,
With dismal Voice proclaim she comes,
Whilst we that Victory despise,
Where Valor blushes at the Prize.
2.
The Royal Captive now appears,
A Beauty sinking under Showers of Tears.
Love's Queen in Chains, fettered are all her Charms,
And useless lie her little Heroes Arms.
3.
And yet the Conqueror shall yield,
And give up all the Trophies of the Field;
Shall kiss that Scepter, which the World does sway,
And at his Captive's Feet his Laurels lay.
How pleasing is the Pain a Lover feels,
Glad to ^e chained to Beauty's Chariot Wheels.
CHORUS.
Such is the Force of Love! the Great, the Brave,
All must submit, sometime put on the Slave.
Cyax. Blessed Sight! and happy Cyrus much more blessed,
That in thy boundless Prodigality,
Can throw away so rich, Immense Delights,
And scatter Pleasures as the Gods do Blessings.

[ Panthea and her Maids weep. [Hystaspes kneels. Hyst. The Great, the Valiant,
and the faithful Cyrus,
The Light of Empires, and the World's great Soul,
To whom all Nations bend, bids me to kneel
To his dear Uncle, Father, Master Cyaxares,
And as an earnest of succeeding Glories,
Lay here the Queen of Beauty at your Feet.
Not Crowns nor Kingdoms does he send by me,
Those he reserves with all Religious Duty
To plant himself about your Royal Temples,
And with his own Victorious Hands to give you
More Laurels, and more heaps of Monarchs Riches,
Then e're adorned the Shrines of Deities;
And her whose so much celebrated Charms
Made all the World, and Cyrus Ears in Love,
Yet would not your brave Nephew trust his Eyes
With the least sight of what they so much longed for,
Lest they should Rivals prove to Cyaxares.

Cyax. Are these, O Love, Rewards of Victory!
Or the blessed Consorts of the Gods themselves,
By some more awed Divinity brought thence,
Leaving the Immortals mourning Widowers --
But what is she that shines above the rest,
As Cynthia does amongst her Starry Train,
Shedding more precious Essence from her Eyes
Then Phoebus wantonly each Morning draws
From Beds of Violets, or the Dew of Roses --
Speak thou more fair than finest thought can form,
Or but thy self, the Sun did ever see.

Hyst. God's! Was Hystaspes born to be your hatred!
Is it her Griefs, or what, that makes this change
Within my Bosom? I would no call it Love --
O Cyrus, had thou viewed these dangerous Beauties,
Thou had not marked thy Friend out to be wretched.

Cyax. What, not a Word t'inrich thy humble Creature?
There is no Goddess that can speak like thee --
Thy Griefs keep concord with thy Virgins Songs,
Who, to thy Sorrows, set their warbling Notes,
Whilst thou add'st Tea^s to every Syllable,
And with thy Sighs, gives the sad Tunes the Time;
Or was not this the Music of the Spheres,
Never before made known to mortal sense,
And thou the Goddess of that happy Place.

Hyst. Sir, she is Panthea.
The famed fair Daughter of the Scythian Queen.

Panth. O! yes, tell all my Woes too if thou can,
And tell' em with a Grace, that I may sooth
My many Sorrows to a little rest.
For I shall never say 'em in an Age.
I have a thousand swelling in my Soul,
Struggling at once, and rushing to get foremost,
So I can speak of neither, but at last
Call to my Aid my Sex's feeble temper,
And draw the (...) Vapor into Tears.

Cyax. Divine Panthea --

Panth. Call me what I am,
Tell me not what I was -- I was Panthea,
Panthea rich in Friends, blessed as their Hopes,
Praised and beloved, or I was grossly flattered,
Who, from the fondness of my Parent's Arms,
(Hanging still round my Childish Infancy)
Found no false Change, no waining of my Joys,
But every day increased my Happiness;
And the same Stars that smiled upon my Birth
Seemed still to tempt, and draw all Eyes to me;
All Knees, all Hearts did bend where ever I came,
And blessed me as their Goddess, or the Spring;
And till this day, of all my Age accursed,
I never knew what a worse Moment was.

Hyst. O thou art lost, undone Hystaspes quite,
The Glory of the Battle owes to thee,
But this bright Victim makes the Victor blush --
Yet to revenge me on my self, and Crime,
If Cyrus will not grant her Liberty,
I Will do it my self, with forfeit of my Life.

Cyax. Go on, go on, thou charming Creature, do,
Each Word leaves Bliss and Wonder in my Soul.

Panth. But oh! now to repeat the Sum of all,
That which methinks should strike the Hearers dead.
When my full Joys had ripened for Enjoyment,
And I wrapped up in harmless Ecstasy,
To such a height I saw no ground below,
And thought the Glass of that blessed Hour would never
Be run, I mean (Gods, give me leave to say it)
As my dear Mother in the Temple gave me
A happy Bride, in show to Abradatus,
The Brave, and most Heroic King of Susa --
Scarce had the Priests the Holy Rites performed,
When straight the Trumpets called, and Battle joined,
Cyrus approaching with a fatal Charge
On Craesus, and the Forces of our Army;
Then was my Love snatched from my Virgin Arms
To his Command, and I ran breathless on the Walls
To see my Abradatus Fight, and Conquer;
But soon, methought, I saw him round enclosed
With Enemies, which sight to snatched my Senses,
That on a sudden followed by my Women,
I found me in our Camp, not knowing how
I went, nor waking from that wretched Slumber,
Till I was brought a Prisoner to Hystaspes.

Cyax. Ah sweet Panthea! if thy Sorrows move so,
What can thou do, dispersing Smiles around thee?
But oh the thoughts! I Will tear 'em from my Breast,
Pull out the Seeds just rooting in my Heart,
And die rather than live with the disgrace --
Down, down, thou fair infectious Charm of Beauty,
Down to thy first Abyss from whence thou came,
Where Light lay hid, when all things were a Chaos,
Thou cheat of Sense, and blinder of all Eyes --
Cyrus is boasting now of his design,
That laid these Nets of Beauty in my march,
To stop my fair and quick return to Glory --
Away thou sweet destroyer of my Fame --
Hystaspes, haste with thy fair Charmer hence;
Go tell thy Master all that thou have seen
Of Cyaxares; tell him that Panthe^
Should be esteemed as Heaven and Heavenly Joys,
Not to be tasted by a Man, and live,
Therefore I give her to the Stars, from whence
She came -- Bid Cyrus do the like -- Begone,
Quickly, least I should wish to look again.

Pan. Ten thousand Glories crown your Head for this.
May this brave Action make your Name and Bliss
Renowned on Earth, as is the God of War,
And when in Heaven, a bright shining Star.

Hyst. I am amazed -- Can this be real, Sir?
I dare not tell the King of your refusal.

Cyax. Do it, I charge thee, and inform him too,
That Cyaxares comes to meet him straight,
With Courage awful as Astyages,
When Cyrus, but a prattling Boy, admired him,
Looked from the Ground, adored his Majesty,
And feared him like a God -- Go from my Eyes --
Remove those gay bright Sirens that forerun
A Storm.

Hyst. Come Madam.

Panth. To kind Death, I hope --
Brave Cyaxares.

Cyax. O speak no more -- Thou conquering Beauty go --
There lies your Path -- We must take several ways;
If you look back, my lingering (...) stays.

[Exeunt severally. Exeunt Omnes. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus, Scaena Prima.
Cyrus discovered upon his Throne in Triumph amongst his Captains and Soldiers.
Craesus bound ready for Execution. Cyr. ENough -- These splendid Vanities I
loath,
[Sounds of Triumphs. The boast of Fools, and Pageanty of Cowards;
It sits too heavy on your Cyrus Arms --
O let me rise, and let 'em loose, my Soldiers,
To throw about your Necks, and thus embrace
My Valiant Friends, and all my brave Confed'rates,
By whose sole Aid (Gods be my Witnesses)
I own it with a Pride, I have restored
The World to its dear ancient Liberty,
Freed Captived Nations from their Tyrant's Yoaks,
And placed 'em on the Necks of barbarous Kings,
Trod down the Walls of famed Semiramis,
That founded first this Asian Monarchy;
Made my Commands in one quick Moment spread
Like Thunder terrible through all the City.
But let us no more afflict this Monarch's Spirit,
But grant him that which every gallant Soul
In vast distress requires -- a speedy Death --
Away with him, and having placed him on
The Fuel, let it blaze, a just Reward
For him that has so long set all the World
In Flames -- Quick, take him hence --

[As they are carrying off Craesus to Execution, Cyrus calls him back. Craes. O
Solon! Solon! Solon!

Cyr. Stay, bring him back, say, What does Craesus mean?
I did expect thou should have asked thy Life,
And thou in scorn of me call'st loud for Solon --
Can Solon save thee from the Wrath of Cyrus?

Craes. No, it is too late, but that which made me call
On Solon was, to my remembrance came
The Sentence of that Wise and Learned Teacher,
Which I till now contemned, 'Twas in the midst
Of all my Glories, Children, Friends, and Riches,
Thinking my self, no God could be more happy,
I sent for Solon to resolve this Question --
Tell me, said I, who is the happiest Man
On Earth: but Solon answered, there was none,
None could be truly happy whilst he lived.
I asked him then, who 'twas he thought was happiest,
Expecting that he should have said, 'twas Craesus;
But he replied, the happiest Man he thought
Was Tellus, once a Citizen of Athens,
A Man that had no mean nor mighty Fortune;
His Wife not fair, nor homely, but beloved,
And virtuous, and his Children all obedient,
Who, like the first Man, lived in Paradise,
And never pressed the Strangers luscious Fruits,
Nor drank but what his own full Vines did yield;
Fed on the Flesh of his own teeming Flocks,
And wore no Clothes but what their Backs afforded;
In his own Pale grew all his Sustenance,
And in his Bosom all the World's content.

Cyr. How brook you then your fallen and lost Estate?
Methinks with brave Contempt you bear your Chains,
And Craesus looks as if he spurned his Fate.

Craes. So much my Mind does soar above my Fortune,
That I behold with greater scorn these Bonds,
Than thou born up with the World's flattering Wings
Look down on me that am thy Slave -- Yet in
Despite of all thou can, I Am Craesus still.

Cyr. It Is bravely said, and spoken like a King --
I have been told, that in thy spring of Glory
Thou did consult the Delphick Oracle,
And kneeled before the God days numberless,
Made rich Apollo's Shrines with such vast Presents,
As did excel what the Earth's Bowels hold,
Might make a Ransom would restore the World,
Were It threatened to be ruined by the Gods.

Craes. All this, nay more, the God did heap upon me,
My Children, Friends, and Kingdoms so increased,
That Europe could not bound my spreading Empire,
Nor Asian Cities number out my Wealth.

Cyr. The God was grateful to thee for a while:
But by what wonderful neglect of thine
Have thou since lost the Merit of his Bounty?

Craes. I Will tell thee all with a prodigious Patience --
Having at length tired out the relenting God
With my unwear'd steps, never ceasing Prayers,
This Answer I received from the bright Altar --
Craesus no more -- Let Craesus know himself,
And he to his Life's end, shall happy be. --
These Words so much exalted my frail Mind,
That then, methought, I reigned not amongst Men,
But ruled the Sky, and saw the Stars below me;
My Wealth, my Friends were numberless as Sands,
Still no Storm grew upon my smiling Days;
No Cross, nor Rub lay in my smooth State's way,
No Vision was so calm as was my Life;
Elisium envied my strange Bliss, and wondered.

Cyr. Now by the Gods, thy Blessings were so rare,
So very sensible thy Losses move,
That my stout Heart begins to pity thee.

Craes. Look to thy self, thy Fortunes reach their highest,
Mine touch the Ground, and can no lower be;
I from this Hour begin to know my self,
And from that Knowledge I renew my Joys --
But as I told thee, so my Life continued
In its still smiling Form and Flattery,
Till thou, swift Harbinger of Death and Ruin,
Have let the Ocean in on Craesus Glories,
And left him poor, bereft of all, but what thou see.

Cyr. Despair not, Craesus, thou art still the same;
What Solon and the Gods have said is true,
And Cyrus, as a Servant of the Oracle,
Obeys thy Fortune, and absolves thy Doom --
Unbind him straight, unbind those sacred Hands,
Set fire with speed to the vast Funeral Pile
That was designed to burn the pious King,
And Sacrifice thereon a hundred Heads
Of Oxen, dedicated to the Gods;
Augment the Flames with rich Arabian Gumms,
With Pearls, and Spice sent from the Kings of India --
My Laurels, Standards, and my Crowns shall burn,
TO atone the Gods, rather than one dear Hair
Of Virtue perish -- Come, then to my Arms,
And show me how to be a King indeed,
Solon taught thee, and thou shall teach thy Cyrus.

Craes. O mighty Prince! Thou much more God than Man!
My emulating Soul flaggs at thy Sight,
The Genius of the World must bow to thine;
And all the Virtues of Mankind together
Make but dimm Light before thy beauteous Presence.

Cyr. Your Children, and your Wives receive again,
With all those Kindoms you by Right were born to.
Sardis, wherein lies heaped, both yours, and most
Of A^ia's Wealth, I Will save from Death, and Plunder;
Only for Ransom some few Sums extract,
To reward my Soldiers, and divert their Hopes
From Expectations of so great a Ruin;
Then Craesus dwell for ever in my Breast.

Craes. My Thanks are too too great to be expressed,
I can no more then h^ard 'em in my Thoughts,
And pay you Blessings as I would Apollo.
May Craesus meet the Death that was prepared,
When he for Love of Empire, Wife or Children,
Forsakes his Prince, and leaves to follow Cyrus.

Enter Lausaria attended. Laus. Where Is this Divine, this Miracle of Virtue;
This Rival to the Merciful above?
Show me the Face of this exalted Man,
Who stood betwixt the Vengeance of the Gods,
And from the dreadful Pile of flaming Ruin,
Has snatched a King, and saved my Father's Life;
Let me ado^e the Ground his Steps have blessed,
And kiss the Feet of the Immortal Cyrus.

Craes. Great Prince, my Daughter, and your meanest Handmaid,

Cyr. How, Craesus! Now by the sacred Sun she is fair --
Rise, or I blush at this unseemly Posture.

Laus. Here let me fix -- You should be thus adored,
Thou Blessing of all Eyes, thou Heavenly Wonder --
Indeed I never did see a God till now --
Where have I lived? -- The Mountain, Cottage Girl,
That in her homely Life never saw a Man
Above the Keeper of the neighboring Herds,
Could not approach you with such Joy and Terror,
As I do now; so much you do excel
The little World that I have still been bred in.

Cyr. Thou pretty'st Innocence as ever talked,
Look back upon thy self, disperse these Clouds,
These sorrowful Looks that hide from thine own Eyes
Their Brightness, and thy near-approaching Joy.
To morrow is the Day, no longer then to morrow
Gives all thy Wishes and Revenge a Crown.
When Balthazar's last Stake, and hated Life
I Will sacrifice t'ppease the fairest injured,
And thy dumb Brother's Ghost shall from Elisium
Rise in a Form Divine, and bless thy Beauties.

[ Enter Officer. Offic. Hystaspes is returned, and brings with him
The News of Cyaxares his approach.

Laus. Go on; whilst I retire to pray,
Lausaria's Guardian-Deity you are;
But turn: Oh turn that awful Look away,
My Eyes cannot endure the pointed Ray;
Spare it to conquer Balthazar in Fight,
For Beauty trembles at the strange Delight;
And if a Virgins Wish can prosper thee,
That hateful Tyrant shall thy Victim be:
If not, and there is a God greater than Jove,
Save, save, (that God) his precious Life and Love.
[Ex. Laus. attended.
Cyr. Craesus, let nothing be refused that may
Increase her Welcome as becomes thy Daughter,
And the Fair Guest of Cyrus.
Now all prepare to meet my Royal Uncle.
Enter to them Hystaspes, Panthea, and Women. When comes the Royal Cyaxares?

Hyst. To his worst of Rage abandoned,
And in proud Envy of your growing Conquests,
He bad me, in Contempt of your rich Kindness,
Return the mighty Present with my self;
Said he, I will be with the haughty Cyrus
'Ere thou can bring my Message to the Boy.

Cyr. What, did he scorn the Proffer of my Duty,
Return the Presents which I sent him, say thou?
O Gods! it cannot be; thou do abuse my Uncle.

Hyst. Sir, all that I have said --

Cyr. No more, Hystaspes.
By my immortal Fame, and sacred Crowns,
None but thy self had told me so, and lived --
Ha! what do I behold! More Wonders still! --
What Lady's that? What weeping Lady's that?

Hyst. Panthea, Sir.

Cyr. Panthea, Sir -- What, what, Panthea?

Hyst. Thomyris Daughter, the brave Scythian Queen,
And the fair Captive whom you did command
Me to present to Cyaxares, yet
I fear to tell he did refuse her too.

Cyr. Refuse her, say thou! Gods, did he refuse her!
Was I so lavish, say? What Right had I
To give the Wealth of all the World away?
Nay, what would bankrupt all the Gods in Heaven.
The Sun, the Moon, and Stars may be eclipsed,
But her bright Beauty is enough alone,
Without their feeble Aid to light the Globe,
And make eternal Day --

Hyst. Sir --

Cyr. Thus Prodigal like,
Not thinking of the Vastness of the Gift,
I threw away at once my whole Estate,
And never repented till too late I see
The mighty Sum spread large before my Eyes --
Thou should have played the faithful Steward, and,
Restrained thy Master's wild destroying Bounty.

Hyst. O pardon, mighty Sir, who could but hear
Your dread Commands, and not obey you straight.

Cyr. What shall I say? Tell me, Hystaspes, do
All you that know the secret Paths to Love,
The way to win a Woman's Smile direct me --
In Fights you often have took me from amidst
My Enemies unhors'd, and bore me from the Danger,
Breathless upon the Arms of Victory,
But now you have left me to my worst of Foes,
So awful, so divinely formidable,
That your proud Cyrus Heart (mark that, my Soldiers)
Which never stooped to fear what Man could do,
Nay, what the Gods through Miracles have wrought,
Lies panting now, and gasping at the Danger.

Hyst. Madam --

Cyr. Hold off thy sacrilegious Hands,
Shrines and their Deities may be approached
More near -- Goddess, Divinity -- Bright Ven^s.
Is there a Name in Heaven thou art worshipped by,
O tell me that, and teach my Tongue to say it,
That I may call thee what the Gods have named thee.

Panth. O Cyrus! you forget your self, and me;
I Am no such thing, no Creature to be praised,
A Wretch forsaken of the World, and Heaven,
Your Prisoner, you should pity, not admire me.

Cyr. O say not so -- Forsaken say thou! No,
Rather the World and Heaven are left by thee --
Is there a Mar. that dares not call thee Queen?
What would thou have, or be, more than thou art?
Say but the Word, and thy Commands shall fly
Quick as the Lightning from thy killing Eyes,
And Cyrus is thy Slave to execute.

Panth. I have no Power, no Charms but Grief about me,
That may move Pity, but can never cause Love.
All this wild Passion but disturbs your self,
And cannot make a wretched Creature happy.
You sent me late a Slave to be abused:
But this is worse than when I was refused.

Cyr. Pardon, thou Saint, a Man in Love untaught,
I have been used in Battles from my Youth,
Bred from my Birth like Lions in their Fierceness,
Free as the Light, and uncontrolled as Air,
And never met a charming F^e like Thee,
Yet at thy Sight I can forget my Fury,
Molded like Wax, made soft before the Sun,
And all my Passion, like a Storm quite spent,
Lies hushed, and silent as an Evenings Breeze.

Panth. Hold, mighty Cyrus, spare my tortured Bosom.
Play not the Tyrant with so great Misfortunes,
And talk to me of Murde^s, Massacres,
Wracks, and Eternal Death -- Talk any thing
But tell me not of that which kills my Soul,
Calls to my Mind to view the mighty space
'Twixt me and Joy: For nothing yet can prove
So great a Misery to me as Love.

Cyr. O let me catch that Sigh before it goes --
It Is gone, it is gone, and each officious Wind
Strove who should first convey the rich Perfume,
And hoard it with the Treasure of the Spring,
Thence to disperse, and brood over tender Blossoms,
And add new Scents to every fragrant Flower --
O give me leave to kiss this beauteous Hand --
Here has Arabia all its Sweets confined,
Rich as from thence, we Southern Breezes find,
When Trees of Spice had gently fanned the Wind.

Hyst. Awake Hystaspes from this horrid Slumber --
Shall I see ravished from me all my Right,
And dare not speak -- By Heaven I Will climb the danger,
Though he stood armed at my next daring Word,
To throw me from the Precipice, I Will do it --
May Heaven give fettered Globes to Cyrus Wish,
Crown you with Love, as you are crowned with Conquest.
May all bright Beauties else adore your Charms,
And stoop to him that gives the World a Law,
But this fair Prisoner, give me leave to ask
Her who by Conquest is your Soldier's Prize.
Hystaspes begs the sharer of your Blood;
If that is too great a Fame for him to Challenge,
Thus I implore it as your humblest Vassal.

Cyr. O Gods! He Is Jealous, Jealous on my Life --
O thou most mighty Jove, had thou at once
Shot Thunder in my Ears, and Lightened in
My Eyes, I had not seen and heard more Horror --
Dear Craesus, -- Craesus, give me Patience --
Am I thus soon so mean a thing become!
That he that is my Slave durst here presume
Before my Face to own so proud a Guilt,
And mix his haughty Love with mine -- Traitor --

Craes. Hold gallant Cyrus, Craesus bids thee hold.

Cyr. O Craesus say, Could Solon suffer this?
Is there a Rule in all Philosophy
To teach me Patience now? -- O tell it me --

Pant. Cyr^s no more.
In vain are all this Rage and Jealousies --
Farewell* I Will shut this Captive from your Eyes,
Prison and Absence will be both your Cures:
I am no more his Prisoner now but yours:

Cyr. A Prisoner: ha! Conduct her to my Tent.
Let what was Cyrus's (...) Court:
Adorned with Asia's Jewels, let her shine,
Served like the Parthian Queen, adored and kneeled to
By all her moving En^pire about her.
And on the Globe where now my Eagle stands,
Let Love be placed, and with its awful Banners
Spread her Commands through all the shining Camp,
And let an hundred thousand Hero's Hearts
Be Sacrificed each Morning to her rising --

Panth. Hold Cyrus: Cease this unwelcome strife.
What though you have in your Power my Death or Life,
Know I am bound in faster Bonds, a Wi^e,
Could I but Cyrus Fame have loved before,
When I had seen him, should have loved him more
Yet there are greater Chains than all beside,
I am both by Virtue and by Passion tied.
When I on Cyrus look I must admire;
But for my Lord I barn with nobler Fire:
And Two I must confess are Gods to me,
Which are my Abradator first, and thee.
[Exit Panthea attended. [Drums and Trumpets within. Enter to them an Officer.
The News?

Offic. Great Cyaxares is arrived.

Cyr. It Is well -- Have you enclosed the way he comes,
With Persian Homotyms, and Median Horse?

Offic. Most migh^y Cyrus it is already done.

Cyr. His Drums and Trumpets answer you more loud,
And as he passes through your noble Ranks,
With welcome Shouts receive my loving Uncle --
[Exeunt Cyrus, Craesus, Hystaspes. Manment the Guards. The Scene opens, and
discovers a way ranked with Soldiers, and after a Warlike sound, and Shouts,
Cyrus and Cyaxares meet. Cyrus offers to embrace Cyaxares, but he refuses --
They come forward on the Stage. My honored Uncle, Royal Cyaxares! -- ha!
How long have you been absent from these Arms! --
Ha! What is this I ^ee! when I expect
A kind return of my true Hearts salute;
You bend your Head, and look another way,
And sigh as if my Eyes were Bassalisks,
Or Breath shot Venom -- Ha! what means my Uncle!

Cyax. The meaning is too plain, it is Shame, and Coward --
Do you not see 'em written in my Forehead?
What means this Pomp, these Shouts, these heaps of Trophies,
These crowds of Conquered Kings, and mighty Slain,
And I but a poor idle gazer on?
It Is that, it is that has swallowed up my Fame,
Branded the Son of great Astyages,
Made me the talk of all the World;
A senceless Block for Cyrus Foot to tread on,
And mount the Throne of all the Universe --
Ungrateful Cyrus!

Cyr. Hold -- O cease dear Uncle --
Let not o^r Passions here be made a sport
To common Eyes -- we pray you would withdraw --
It Is Cyaxares Pleasure we should be
Alone -- so Uncle, let us sit down together,
And I will hear with Patience if I can.
[Exeunt, Praeter, Cyrus and Cyax. Speak, and I Will glue my Ears to every Word
Your voice shall utter.

Cyax. God's that I were Dumb!
That ever I should speak, when what I say
Recounts my loss, and my eternal Shame,
With Cyrus false Ingratitude.

Cyr. Still, still
You touch the same harsh String -- Tell't out, --
What is it that hangs upon your troubled Brow?

Cyax. O this it is
The Man that I have nourished in my Bosom,
Safe guarded from an Host of private Foes,
That sought his Life with great Astyages.
Led by the dictates of Prophetic Dreams,
Which now to Cyaxares proves most true;
That thou, I say, should like a subtle Serpent,
Wind thy self round my guardless Breast,
Then watch thy time, and Poison thy Preserver.

Cyr. Go on, go on -- I hear you patiently.

Cyax. Nay, give me leave to put it to thy Conscience,
And answer me as thou believ'st it true.

Cyr. I will.

Cyax. Did I not save thee in thy Cradle?
No sooner had Mandana brought thee to
The World (who then I think was innocent)
But by Astyages Command thou were
Delivered to be slain by Harpagus --
Have you not heard this often for truth?

Cyr. I have.

Cyax. Have you not heard too how I ventured 'twixt
My Father's Wrath and Pity, to preserve
Thy Life by awing Harpagus, who caused thee
At my request, in private to be Nursed,
Telling the King that thou were surely dead.

Cyr. This I have often been told too.

Cya^. Did I not,
When thou had passed the Years of Infancy,
Often put into my Fathers ^ruel Mind
The sense of his most foul unnat'ral Crime
In killing thee so long that he (...),
And wished a thousand times the^ were alive
Again -- This opportunity I took
To tell the King of the deceit, and begged
The Life of Harpagus -- Then ^treight were thou
Sent for to Court, and this thou well rememberst.

Cyr. I do.

Cyax. This did I, though 'twas Prophesied
That thou should quite subvert the Median Empire,
And fill the Throne of great Astyages* --
Then did I not, after my Father's Death,
And when I reigned alone, keep thee still by me,
Taught thee the use of Arms, to chase the Boar,
To hurl thy little Dart, and wound the Panther;
And when the fiery Beast would turn upon thee,
I then would interpose a violent stroke,
And taught thee how to give a mortal Blow,
Leaving the Savage gasping at thy Feet;
And this thou art well witness of thy self.

Cyr. All this, and more you bring to my remembrance.

Cyax. Is It possible, thou have not then forgot!
Is this a kind return for all my Love!
Who first began the War with Balthazar?
Was It not my self twice beat him in set Battles
Until thou were of Years, when for thy Fame
I sent thee with the flower of all my Strength
To prosecute my Victories, and thou
Whole tedious Years have kept the War on foot,
Using my Subjects till they have forgot
Their Countries Gods, their Fashions, and their King,
And worship nothing but the Sun and thee --
Pity me Gods; for sure I am become
But the poor Shadow of the thing I was.

Cyr. O Uncle, hold: For I can hear no more.
What wicked Man has poisoned thus your Ear?
Your words, though they are most unjust, and I
Am guiltless, yet they are Daggers to my Soul
When spoken with unkindness -- ah why droops
My Royal Uncle, hanging down your Head,
Throbbing that noble Heart, as if the weight
Of all the Miseries on Earth depressed it?
Snatch me ye Gods this Moment into Nothing,
If I your Cyrus am the least to blame
In what you have accused me.

Cyax. Well, I Have done.

Cyr. Have I worn out my Youth, at home, your Subject,
In War your General; denied my self
The soft Retirements of the Court, in which
Your meanest Para^ite enjoys more Pleasure --
H^re not my Courriers found you in the Height
O^ Banquet^ing, informed you of the Dangers
That I had passed in every dreadful Fight,
Which only the Relation of 'em made
Your trembling Courtiers spill their brimming Bowls,
And with the Palsy life 'em to their Mouths.

Cyax. No more, my Cyrus.

Cyr. And have I not augmented all the Kingdoms
Of great Astyages, with Hazard of
My own -- What Crown, what Treasure have I gained
Of which I did not make you first a Proffer?
Do I a Secret keep, or hide from you?
Or hoard that Wealth of which you shall not share?
Is it for this I have so ill deserved
My Unkle's Envy, and unjust Suspicion!

Cyax. Enough, my Cyrus.

Cyr. Will you then embrace me?

Cyax. I will.

Cyr. And let me kiss your Cheek?

Cyax. Thou shall --
O Cyrus! Thou have conquered me, my Cyrus --
I can no longer hold but must forgive thee.
See, see, these Tears that sprung from Tides of Crief,
Are now augmented to a Sea of Joy.
Hide 'em for shame, Oh, hide 'em in thy Bosom!
Come, I will chide no more -- may I be thought
[They both rise up. A Coward, led in Triumph by my Foes,
And put t'an ignominious Death when I
Again reflect unkindly on my Cyrus.
Thou art my Son, this Moment I adopt thee,
And I will die the sooner to make Room
For thee.

Cyr. O my dear Father, say not so --
To morrow brings the Empire of the World,
I see it plain, and dazzling Victory
Flies like an Eagle circling round your Head,
To show our Way over Hills of slain Assyrians,
And under falling Clouds of Scythian Darts,
Which from ou^ Shields we'll throw like scattered Hail,
Whilst with one Voice, around the conquered Field,
The Dying praise us, and the Living yield.

[Exeunt Omnes. Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertius. Scaena Prima.
Enter Cyrus with Guards; Cyaxares, with Hystaspes meeting him. Cyax. I HAVE a
Request to beg of you, my Cyrus.

Cyr. What, is it my Royal Uncle? speak, yet not,
It Is granted 'ere it is named.

Cyax. It Is that you would forgive the brave Hystaspes,
And here restore him to your wonted Favors.

Cyr. O it is the thing that I with Joy intended,
And now he is doubly fixed -- Rise, my Hystaspes,
My Soldier, rise, my Kinsman, my Right Arm;
For that was never so near me in the Fight,
Nor pushed it on so fiercely -- O my Friend!
Do think I have forgot my valiant Leader?
But above all at the Surprise of Sardis,
When thou were followed by the Homotyms,
Led by thy brave Example, all dismounted
Your fiery Coursers, and with Scaling-Ladders
Climbed up the Walls, and shouted on the Top,
In spite of Showers of Flints, and Clouds of Arrows;
The^ leaped into the Street, and there you fought,
Till you had opened the Gates amidst the Guards,
And cleared my Way through Clusters to the Town --
This, this with Joy I do remember still.

Hyst. Your Royal Grace extends too far above
The Merits of Hystaspes -- O I grieve
When I look back on my Offense to you,
The bravest Master, and the best of Kings --

Cyr. No more, Hystaspes, welcome to thy Prince,
More dear to him than penitent Children are
To Parents, or than Martyrs to the Gods,
And like them too I will reward thee --

Hyst. O I know you are liberal,
Can disperse Crowns and Sceptres as you please,
And make a Monarch of the Man you favor;
But Pardon's the rich, only thing I beg,
And is from Cyrlls more than I can merit.

Cyr. Enough, Hystaspes; thou shall see I love thee,
When I bestow upon thee such a Treasure.
That all Mankind shall wish to be thy Rivals --
Craesus, thy Ear -- send for thy Daughter straight --
I promised thee that I would choose a Husband
For her, and I will do it -- Such a Husband,
That thou shall bless the happy Moment when
Thy Wife brought such a Daughter to the World
To be so well bestowed -- Go fetch her, Craesus.

Craes. O happy Girl, Lausaria! he does
Intend sure to bestow himself upon her.
[ Exit Craesus.
Hyst. O Gods! I dream -- Can there be such a Thought!
Has he resolved to give Panthea to me!

Cyr. Prepare, Hystaspes, now to meet such Joys,
Which if thy Senses are not all Immortal,
Thou art not able to sustain -- Behold --
Re-Enter Craesus leading Lausaria attended. Behold the brightest Star that
gilds the World,
And makes that Bosom Heaven where ever she shines.

Hyst. Is this the Prize of all my flattering Hopes!
Now I perceive the Gulf that lies before me,
Yet I run on, and cannot stop my self;
This Mortal Disobedience stabs me quite.

Laus. Now all you gentle Powers that pity Love,
And thou, Diana, from the Stars look down,
Behold the bashful Virgin of thy Train --
I see my Life or Death writ in those Eyes,
There is no Mean betwixt my Heaven or Hell,
I Am to be raised this Moment to the Skies,
Or flung into the bottom of Despair.

Cyr. Assist me, Jove; and all you that disperse
Rich Blessings from the Skies -- Lend me your Aid;
Extend my liberal Hands; for I Am to make
Two Mortals now so infinitely happy,
As will amaze your Godheads all to see,
And make you wish to be translated here --
Give me thy Hand, thou soft, thou lovely Virgin --
Ha! why, what makes thou tremble, start, and blush!
And now look pale? This Combat of thy Beauty's
Adorns thy Cheeks with double Victories,
Whilst both in Competition strive to paint
A Color there to set at Enmity
The Lilly and the Ro^e -- Draw near, Hystaspes --

Laus. O Gods, your Help! what does he mean to do!

Cyr, Give me your Hand -- what now? what means the Man?
Give me your Hand, I say -- I did expect
You should have flewn like Lightning to my Arms,
And snatched her from me, so unmannerly
Thy Raptures should have been -- (...) --
Why holds Lausaria back? -- You both draw back.

Hyst. Your Pardon, Royal Sir, if my Offense
Be not too great to challenge any Mercy.
I do confess the Wonder of the Bliss ha; stunned me;
The Joy's too great, too mighty for my Sense,
And therefore to approach it as I ought,
O give me time to study how to bear it.

Cyr. Away; I Have heard too much -- I Will talk with you
Anon -- What means La^saria? Ri^e, my Charge.

Laus. Ah, why do you kill with such a Look of Anger?
Now your strange Beauties are so awful grown,
That they are above all Mortals to behold
Without a Dread -- O stay the Lightning in
Your Eyes -- What will become of brave Hystaspes,
If you let loose to Action all your Frowns,
And execute the Terror of your Looks!
Pour 'em on me, 'twas I the Grace denied:
For lo, I think so meanly of my self,
That I can live to be refused by him.

Cyr. Rise, or you press my yielding Heart to Death --
This hurls me on the more to thy Revenge --
Guards, seize that Traitor, drive him from my Presence;
To Exile let him go, and not be seen
So near as Asia does her spreading Empire bound.

Laus. O let me beg you would recall your Doom.

Cyax. Nephew.

Craes. O Cyrus!
Mighty Prince, but hear us.

Cyr. Keep off, and give me Breath, you stifle me --
Why, Uncle, Craesus, King of Lydia, I Have decreed it,
And none amongst the Stars shall 'ere revoke --
Away with him -- A thousand Basilisks
Are in his Eyes.

Hyst. With haste I will obey you.
Thus on my Knees I take your gentle Doom; I go
To Banishment, and if my wandering Steps
Direct me where to do you some poor Service,
I Will do it with hazard of this hated Life --
Ten thousand Victories, nay more,
Immortal Crowns, and Eve^lasting Laurels
Adorn the Head of the most God like Cyrus.
[ Exit Hystaspes.
Craes. He Is gone, and see the King looks discontent,

Cyax. Why, Nephew, Cyrus, you are moved.

Laus. O Cyrus!

Cyr. What says the bright the wronged Lausaria?

Laus. Why have you banished from your sight Hystaspes?
I Will tell you then, how rashly you have done.
The Sun and Moon might in our Heaven appear,
And both at once disperse their Rival Lights,
E're our two Loves could join; and should Hystaspes hope,
Yet you your self forbid the scornful Hymen.
Since it must out, I Will tell it, if my Sighs,
Mixed with Ten Thousand Blushes, give me leave --
I love (Heavens!) This poor Daughter to a Captive Prince,
Owns it with Pride that she does love the Man,
Of all the World, the greatest, bravest Soul
As ever the Gods put in a mortal Body.

Cyr. Alas! What Is this I hear!

Laus. Now judge by what I Have said, if I could ever
Descend to love another -- I have done --
O look not on me, I am all on Fire,
Burnt up with Blushes which these Tears inrage.
This mortal Secret you have wracked from me
Will kill Lausaria:

Craes. Unhappy Girl.

Laus. Give me a Vail: And now the World farewell.

Cyr. What means the bright, the wronged Lausaria?
Why do thou hide thy Charming Face from Cyrus?

Laus. It Is just, after a Confidence so new,
It should for ever thus be shut from you.
My Blushes to all Eyes may be unknown,
But oh! I never can shroud 'em from my own.
Olympus is too low. I want beside
The Sun to be Eclipsed, my Shame to hide.
Cold Cydnus, make thy Icy Stream my Urn,
To drown my Flames, and quench me now I b^rn.
[ Exit Laus.
Cyax. What, does not this start Pity from your Eyes
And Heart?

Cyr. Tell me, instruct me what to do --
O Cyaxares, lend me thy dear Breast,
TO unload my Griefs, and learn thy precious Council --
Run for Hystaspes quick, if not too late,
Tell him his Prince repeals his Banishment,
Will take him to his gentle Arms again --
Excuse, dear Uncle, these unruly Passions,
[Exit Officer. And oh, my Friends, forgive your Cyrus Frailties.
[Sound of a Trumpet. Enter to them Artabasus. What means this Trumpet's formal
sound? -- The News?

Arta. It is a Herald from the Assyrian Camp,
That says, the Scythian Queen, the brave Thomyris,
With Abradatas, the young Susan King,
Attend to ask a moments Parley with you.

Cyr. Then we shall ^ee this wonder of her S^x --
Craesus, thou know her -- Is she then so Brave,
So Great, and Valiant as the World (...) her?

Craes. She is indeed a Woman of such Spirit
As you have heard of Juno, of such Honor,
Such haughty Valor, and (...) Masculine,
That she is well called, the Miracle of Women;
But then, like bold (...)
With every Vice of the (...),
And monstrous of her Sex; Yet A^radatas
Is truly Valiant, Brave, and Virtuous --
But hark, she comes, -- this Trumpet speaks her Entrance.

Enter to them Thomyris, Abradatus, Women and Attendance, in State, (...)
Guards. Cyr. She is indeed of admirable Presence.

Thom. There cannot be a Wonder on the Earth
So Great as Cyrus is: If thou art he,
Or is it some God, or Mars himself I see;
For sure these Eyes were never blessed before
With such a sight -- What Is Balthazar, and all
The Princes of the Globe compared to him ^
Now, I no more admire his mighty Fortune,
That Godlike Mein and Presence is enough
TO enslave great Kings, and awe the barbarous World --
I need not ask who is the famous Cyrus?
Something which makes great Souls so near allied,
Tells me you are that excellent brave Man.

Cyr. I am that most unworthy Cyrus --
What would the Great, the most famous in the World
The Scythian Queen?

Thom. Hea^ me, Divinest King --
Curse me, you Powers, and languish all my Fame,
Now I behold the gallant Cyrus Person,
If ever injustly I become your Foe.
Nay, I Will forget the Murder of my Son,
And say his Death was my misfortune only --
You have a Virgin that is Panthea called,
The Mourning, longing Wife of this young Prince,
Whom (e're the Priest had said his binding Prayer)
The Gods, to show the most uncertain State
Of human things, snatched from his Nuptial Arms,
And bore her from him by a Storm of Fate,
Even in a time when they did think to join
Fast as their Wishes -- She your Prisoner is.
All Places save, and privilege the Fair;
Beauty is even held in War most sacred,
And Cyrus cannot stoop to do a thing
That is not brave.

Cyr. Go on, bright Queen.

Thomy. Long hearing of thy vast and proud Success;
Over all Mankind. In pity of the World,
I drew a force of Forty Thousand Men,
From my own yet unconquered Land to aid
Thy ^ Enemies this Army we'll withdraw;
And with brave Cyrus make immortal League,
If he will restore the sad Panthea to us.

Cyr. Now blessed be all those Deities that saw
The solemn Rites performing against their Wills,
And would not let the Hymeneal Torch
Be light -- Ask you me, whom piteous Heaven
Sent by a Miracle to my Protection!
Demand my Crowns, my everlasting Fame,
My shining Trophies, and my Victories:
For they are not so dear, nor half so sacred,
Nor look so bright in all the World's esteem.

Abra. O I am ruined -- Hell is in my Bosom --
Panthea's lost, undone, inconstant, ha!
She loves him too perhaps -- O thought-like Death!
Curse on this feeble Arm that could nor guard her,
Nor had the Courage to assault my Breast.

Cyax. It is apparent that the Gods were all
Displeased, and meant those Nuptials should not be,
When at the very Altar, like a Dove
From the fierce Vultures Claws they rescued her.

Abra. O King of an Immortal Fame!
Dread Cyrus, thou art Great, above the World:
There is no thought a Woman here can fix
Thy Soul, that soars and ranges like the Sun,
Behold me from thy Power, like awful Jove,
And O! restore me to my Heaven of Love,
Pity my Youth, and give Panthe^ to me;
O give her to my Soul, and I will add
To the bright Queens, Ten Thousand Valiant Archers,
And vow my self thy true Confederate --
Think not it is Fear that makes me stoop so low
To beg of Thee, but mighty Love that must
Be still obeyed; else I could meet thee daring
At^th' Head of all thy Army, shouting loud
To animate the Courage of their Leader:
And O Panthea! were Panthea but
The Victor's Prize, the blessed Hopes should aid me
To kill this great Disturber of the World.

Thom. Spoke like thy self, my (...),
Thou have a Scythian's Courage in thy Breast --
Entreat no more; for Cyrus dare not hold her.
The Gods and Thomyris have decreed*
To fetch Panthea back in Triumph from him --
To morrow I will meet thee in the Front
Of Battle, where it shall be then recorded
To thy eternal Shame and Infamy,
A Woman conquered thee.

Cyr. Proud Queen, retreat least we profane the Truce,
The nicest Law of Arms can never endure
Such daring Provocations.

Enter Panthea attended. Panth. My Abradatas.
Soul of my Love, and Lord of my Desires,
Am I so blessed to see thee once again!
To embrace thee once before I die,
Save me from Fears, from Prison, and from Harms,
And lock me safe within these tender Arms.

Abra. O my Panthea! Let me hold thee fast,
Hoard all my numberless and breathless Kisses,
On thy soft Cheeks at once: For something tells me,
This Pleasure is too great and rich to last --
O stir not from me.

Panth. No, we'll never part --
Our Loves shall here incorp'rate us like Air;
Not Swords, nor Death, shall any way divide us.
Now it is beyond the Power of Jealousy,
Or Jove himself this Gordion to untie.
Nay, Cyrus is too Brave, too Good to see
Such faithful Lovers languish any longer.

Cyr. O I am struck! -- A thousand Stings dart all
At once their pointed Venom in my Eyes,
And now I feel 'em in my Breast -- ^ell me,
What is it besides the mortal stroke of Love
That pains your Cyr^s thus? See how they grasp --
It Is that, it is that -- assist me (...) --
Say quickly, Friends, what shall be done to part 'em --
Speak, will you see me racked? -- My Soul's between
Each close Embrace,
And will not, cannot, bear it any longer --
Prince, from this fatal Ecstasy retire,
This sight will mortal be to one of us.

Abra. Thou shall not stir -- I will not move without her,
But leave Ten thousand Limbs, if I Would so many,
Hacked off and hewed from this unhappy Body,
But I will bear her hence -- O my Panthea! --
Oh Mother! let me lose this hated Life:
(...) let me dye before I part with her.

Panth. Think not of Death, my Abradatas, lo,
The Gallant Monarch melts, and says it too;
Our Lives shall be immortal as our Loves.

Thom. Cyrus has reached the utmost brink of Greatness --
The Gods no longer will dispute thy Fate,
Since they have punished thee with lawless Love;
A cursed Charm that slumbers all thy Virtues,
That thou shall never more awake to Glory --
Retire, my Son, from Beauty run to day,
And, by the Gods, Panthea shall be thine
To morrow, when we only shall encounter
With the starved Genius, weary Fame of Cyrus.
My Women shall be foremost in the Fight,
And, with their naked Breasts and Arms displayed,
Shall lead this once brave Man a Captive-Slave,
This empty Form of his departed Greatness.

Panth. O Royal Mother!
Why do you mistake? You wrong the God-like Cyrus.
O give him gentle Words, mild as the Sound
Of Prayers and Sighs in Sacrifices used;
Speak t'him, approach him as indeed you ought,
As Conqu'rour of the World, and you shall see
No God can be so lavish, nor so kind.

Abra. My dear Panthea, why do you thus proceed?
Unless you wish to make me worse than Woman --
Hold, while I Have Resolution in my Breast,
And all thy Heaven of Charms will let me go;
By those, thy self I swear, the greatest Oath
That I can take, to morrow I will bring
Thy Abradatas to thee, live or dead.

Panth. No, say not so -- Thus kneel with thy Panthea,
My Hand close locked in thine, my Abradatas,
And send our Tears and our Requests together --
Look, Mighty Conqu'rour, cast your Eyes beneath,
[Both kneel. And may your Arms, and Fame increase in Wars,
As you to Love, are pityful and kind.

Abra. Now, God-like Cyrus, from thy Rage look down,
By all those Virtues that have made thee shine,
And gained the Name of the Immortal Cyrus.
Oh, stoop to see what mighty Love can do,
That humbles thus thy generous Enemy,
And makes a Suppliant of thy mortall'st Foe --
Since you have felt the Rage of Jealous Love,
The Fire that burns unruly in your Breast,
Pity me then, and give Panthea to me:
O give her to these Arms!

Panth. Mighty Cyrus,
Give Abradatas to my thousand Wishes,
And Oh, restore his loved Panthea to him!

Cyr. They kneel -- She kneels --
See, see, my valiant Friends,
Do not my Eyes shed Blood? -- They should, they should,
For all the Torments that I feel within.
This is the sharpest Stroke that ever touched
My Virtue here -- Rise, Goddess -- In this Posture
Thou art more cruel to thy Cyrus far
Than he can be to thee.

Panth. Here we will grow,
Thus ever fixed, thus rooted as you see us,
Till from the noblest Breath of all the World,
We hear the Sentence of our Death or Life.

Cyr. Oh Friends! I feel a War within my Breast.
The horrid Sound of Fights, and parting Ghosts
Are all but Music to my tortured Sense --
Yet fain I Would get the Victory over my self;
But Oh, I cannot! and find I am too weak --
By all the Gods it is beyond a Mortal --
Ha! Part 'em, or the Sight will kill
Your General -- And Oh, my Fellow Soldiers!
Stay whilst this dreadful Moment I retire,
And having raised Panthea from the Ground,
Send my triumphant Rival back; for this
Is more than all the Wounds ever had in Fight,
And I can fly from nothing but this Sight.
[ Exit Cyrus.
Abra. Now, now I curse my Tameness, and these Knees,
That made me stoop so low to beg even thee --
Away, Panthea, wish me not to stay;
Go to thy Jailer back, and load his Head
With Curses, whilst thy Abradatas shall
Prepare to fight, and pour 'em all upon him.

Thom. Go, we must leave thee in thy Prison again,
But in the Morning thou shall rise from thence,
Bright as the Sun that revels in his Chariot,
And see thy self as free -- Go, whilst we stay,
Revenge grows tame, and we forget thy Wrongs.

Panth. Then must we part! Yet I Am to blame -- Begone,
Go, whilst my Woman's Soul can give thee leave,
And all the Blessings of a Love that is chaste,
A faithful, tender Wife's kind Thoughts attend thee.

Abra. O my Panthea!

Panth. And to inspire thee more, call to thy Mind
Our Infant Loves, the soft, and precious Vows
That we have often ex^hang'd Nights without Number,
As were the Stars our Witnesses, till all
Those petty, lesser Knots were quite unravelled,
And made one Nuptial Bond -- I Have done -- Farewell --
But Oh, regard -- Regard that precious Life,
By which both live, and all the Gods protect thee,

Abra. The Thoughts of thee shall still enrich my Mind
With all the Pleasures that are yet to come,
And those that are like Visions slid away;
How often we have tired the Watchings of the Moon,
Till the pale Empress of the Night grew weary,
And sat to rest behind a silken Cloud.

Thom. Have done, or I must act the Part of Cyrus,
And tear you from each others Arms.

Abra. This Kiss, and then we part -- Farewell -- It comes,
Methinks already the fierce Storm begins,
And bears thee from me over a thousand Billows.

Panth. Thee, like a Rock, I fain would hold but cannot.
But Oh! rough Horror like a desperate Sea,
Throws me from off Love's Fortress and from thee.

Abra. Weep not, my Soul -- Who knows but that 'ere long,
Our wearied Barks may meet, the Storm o'er-blown.
Trust till to morrow what the Gods can do.

[Exeunt Thomyris, Abradatas, and their Attendants, at one Door; and Panthea
weeping with her Maids, at another. Manent Cyaxares, Craesus, Artabasus, and
Guards. Cyax. Let a strong Guard attend the Scythian Queen,
Till she is safe arrived within her Camp.

Re-Enter Cyrus. Cyr. Tell me, kind Uncle, tell thy Cyrus quickly,
How bore the sad Panthea her Departure?

Cyax. As silent as the Day gives way to Night,
And patient as the Spirit of a Saint
Dying, and leaving all the World behind him.

Cyr. Run, Artabasus, run, and kneel before her,
Tell her, what Kingdom in the World can buy
One Smile, or Tear on Abradatas thrown,
And't shall be hers -- The Sea's, nor Craesus Hoard,
Holds not the Wealth that I will bid for either;
My Life, nay say Ten thousand Lives are her; --
Tell what thou can invent -- Tell her what not --
Say more than if thou were in Love, thou then
Could say -- Yet hold, I will not trust thy self alone --
Come all with me -- You, Uncle, are a Father,
Speak as you would do to your only Daughter;
Drop all the Sweetness of a Parent's Tongue --
Craesus is wise, and has been taught to speak,
Thy Eloquence has cleared the Delphick Riddles,
O charm my Goddess as thou charm'st the God --

Craes. Else may I fall a Sacrifice to Cyrus --

Cyax. Rejoice, my Cyrus, doubt not thy Success;
That needs must move, which tortures all our Pity.

Cyr. It Is she must pity, you forgive my Passion --
Lend me a Dagger one of you, or kill me;
Come, who is Noble level here thy Dart,
And reach this wanton Cupid in my Heart:
Death from my meanest Vassal I will stand,
Or fall by any but a Woman's Hand;
For Love still plays the Tyrant with the Great,
Lets Fools and Cowards prosper in their State,
And only makes the Brave Unfortunate.

[Exeunt Omnes. Finis Actus Tertii.
Actus Quartus, Scaena Prima.
Scene draws, and discovers Cyrus, and Cyaxares; They come forwards. Cyr. YET
more! Have I not said enough, dear Uncle?
And have you not already seen and heard
With blushing, too much of your Cyrus Frailties?

Cyax. Tell me, my Cyrus, when you have disclosed
The heavy Load that lies upon your Soul,
I Will pour a Balm into it shall give you Ease --
These Strugglings of the Nobler Passions show
The most Heroic Mind that ever was.

Cyr. O Cyaxares! I Am all Guilt, all Stain,
Even I that rid the foremost in the World,
And knew how Dear, how Great, and how Esteemed
A Thing my hard-got Honor was -- yet that,
And all are drowned within a Sea of Love,^
My Empires, Crowns quite ruined by the Fair,
That gilded over the deep deluding Danger,
Then tempted me to split -- O all my fame,
My matchless Glories with my self are sunk,
In the false footing of a Woman's smile.

Cyax. You are Impartial to a fault, my Cyrus.
Whose Love is guided by the Rays of Virtue --
The Crime is not so great to be in Love;
The Gods themselves have often felt its Power,
Witness the many scapes of Jupiter.
And the Wise Men have all confessed, that once
In his whole Life the bravest, greatest Man
May stoop to Love --
Nay, Solon has confessed,
That he himself was once a Slave to Love.

Cyr. Solon! had Solon that to lose as I have?
Had he the business of the World to fill
His thoughts, and chase away all soft Idea's?
Books might have fashioned his tame Soul to Love,
But mine should have been hardened wrought by War;
Proof as the Anvil against the Cyclop's Hammers;
And Glory in my Breast should have Eclipsed
The Rays of Beauty -- How I hate my self!
Achilles, when a Boy, did never handle
And ply the Distaff with such Female Skill.

Cyax. Still you run on, are too severe a Judge
Even to your self, your Honor is too nice,
And Dictates to you with a ridged Breath,
This noble caution over your looser Passions,
Shows yet a greater Conquest over your Mind,
Than if you never had felt what Love had bin;
It Is Mortal-like to be the Aim of Vice,
But it is God-like to resist its Fury.

Cyr. Teach me, dear Uncle, teach me how to do so:
I feel my Virtue now begins to tire,
And Love Plays all the Tyrant in my Soul,
When I begin to wish the Pain away,
O then I wish the pleasant grief to keep.

Enter to them Hystaspes. Hyst. Thus low Hystaspes falls beneath your Feet,
And comes to know his Monarch's joyful Doom.

Cyr. Welcome, Hystaspes, once more to my Arms,
And from this time for ever to my Breast;
No Love, nor Jealousy shall henceforth throw
Suspicions 'twixt my Friend and me.

Hyst. Then it is
Above the Malice of Fiends in Hell,
To Shock me from the state I now remain in
Blessed be the Gods that have again Installed me
In the Immortal Throne of Cyrus's Favor --
But oh! forgive, forgive your Soldier's Crimes,
Led by his Frailties.

Cyr. Thou art good Hystaspes;
It Is thou have cause to blame thy Cyrus's Temper,
When like a Man infected, mad in Love,
I threw at random; hurt my dearest Friends;
So raged I with the wild Promethean Fire;
But I will quench it, quench it every Spark,
And the bright Venus then, that glittered in
My Eyes, I will behold hurtless as shadows,
Or as Jove's Bird the Eagle does the Sun.

Hyst. O my loved Lord, pursue your gallant Hopes,
She shall be yours by all the Powers above;
My self shall hold your Hymen's Torch -- O Sir
She Is too Divine for all the World but you.

Cyr. No more, Hystaspes -- There is something in
Thy Face that shows thou art not yet well pleased --
Tell me -- why look thou still upon us with
A troubled Brow?

Hyst. I came from such a sight
Would strike Compassion from obdurate Rocks,
And make soft Pity flow from Hearts of Steel,
The Courage of your Soldiers flags to tell it.

Cyr. Out with it, though, let it be never so dreadful.

Hyst. The Fair, the unhappy, Innocent Lausaria
Is grown distracted by a violent Grief;
Her Wits, her Precious Senses quite are gone;
The Ornaments of so much Beauty fled!
Fled to the Gods that gave them, and, no doubt,
E're long will draw the lovely Body after.

Cyax. Ha! what say thou?

Cyr. Can this be true, Hystaspes?

Cyax. The Cause?

Hyst. Do you not guess it, since she owned
A Passion for the Great, and Famous Cyrus?
The sad occasion was, alas! that she
Too lightly had revealed her Love to you:
For from your Presence, she no sooner was
Conveyed to her Appartment, but her Anger,
Which first adorned her Face with blushing Red,
Straight snatched the Roses from her Cheeks, and left
A Pale, and Trembling Color in their stead --
Mountains and Hills come cover me she said;^
No, no, Eternal Darkness shroud my Head,
From Cyrus's sight -- O! Cyrus follows me;
He mocks me -- Hide me from his scornful Eyes.

Cyr. Hold, hold, Hystaspes give me strength to hear thee;
Thou pour'st ill News too fast upon my Soul --
So -- But go on.

Hyst. This for some Minutes held her,
Till from the Fatal Ecstasy, she rose,
And struggling to recall her wandering Senses,
Looked round about her, Wild and Beautiful.
But oh! (thou rash Minerva to permit it)
She let her Words at random so disperse,
That we too soon the Fatal Meaning knew,
Through all their dark and ridled Sense.

Cyr. Pry'thee, what said she? -- Say, did she not Curse me?

Hyst. Thus she would talk --
Where Is Cyrus, where? Has he not heard I love him --
Cursed be the Wretch that first disclosed my flame,
See where she is hurld, and has no rest below,
A Thousand Souls of Chaste and Modest Virgins
Arm at her sight, and drive me from the Shades;
Then must I back into the World again!
O there is Cyrus, and Panthea too,
He Loves her, and she Loves him not again!
Ha! There the art punished false deluding Man,
Thou art -- Revenge me, O Panthea, on him --
But see, my Cyrus weeps, O pity him --
Cruel Panthea! cruellest of thy Sex!
What merciless Panther gave thy Mother Suck,
That bred in thee such Monstrous Savage Nature,
As not to adore so excellent a Man?

Enter to them Craesus weeping. Crae. O Cyrus, I perceive the Gods ordain
Thy Friends and Foes to fall alike by thee,
By all their Ruins to adorn thy Triumph
Pity the Man whose breath thou did restore,
Pity my Daughter on whose future state
That Life depends -- Go in, and see what Wrack,
What wild destruction thy still Conquering Genius,
In Love as well as War, has made amongst
Lausariar's Beauties.

Cyr. When, when ye Gods will all these mischiefs cease,
Or grow to such a Bulk will sink me quite! --
Chide me not, Craesus, chide not the unhappy,
Convey me to her straight, and strive
With me to Charm the cruel Deities,
And save the greatest miracle of Love.

[ Exeunt Cyrus and Craesus. Cyax. Why, why ye Gods, has Cyrus so deserved!
That almost at the Race's end of Glory,
Worse than Pandora's Plagues is sent amongst us?
Beauty thou subtle spoyler of the World,
Man were a Godhead were it not for thee,
And there was never Hero yet below
That raised the Jealous Envy of the Gods,
But this, this never failing Curse was sent
To ruin all his Fame, and blast his Glories --
Hystaspes, when does Balthazar intend
To give us Battle?

Hyst. Early this next Morning;
I understood it by a Slave of mine,
That fled at my Command some few days since,
And dewlt a Spy within the Enemies Camp.
He Is now returned, and tells me both the number,
Order, and strength of this so potent Army,
He likewise says, that next their multitudes
They put their chiefest Hopes and Confidence
In brave Thomyris, and her Scythian Bowmen.
Relying thus on his unweildy Forces,
And fed with lies of Soothsayers, he remains
Close in his Tent, Carrouses, Feasts, and Revels,
Scorning the Gods, the Fates, and thinks them poor,
And all besides his boasted Power but mean.

Cyax. Would it were now, Hystaspes, would the Fight
Were now beginning, and the Trumpets call
Did Rouse fond Cyrus from these Painted Dreams,
The danger would be less to find him so
Enclosed, than in his Tents besieged with Love,
His Breast laid open to the poisonous Darts
Of Cruel Beauty.

Hyst. O the Happy time!
Thy Rage soft Tyranous Love shall then have End,
When Cyrus kindles once again the Heat
That first inspired his Noble Breast with Glory.

Cyax. I hear sudden noise of Clashing Swords --
[Noise of Fighting within. Look out, Hystaspes, go and see the matter.

[As Histaspes is going off, enter in haste Artabasus with his Sword Drawn.
Arta. Where Is Cyrus? where is the King? -- Great Cyaxares,
Pity the bravest Valor in the World --
Haste, Sir, and save the Gallant Abradatas,
With great and most unequal odds oppressed --
Haste for the sakes of all your bravest Men:
^or at so dear a Rate he sells his Life,
That with his own Hand already he has slain
Strange Numbers of the stoutest Ranks, whose Valor
Pusht 'em first on to meet his daring Blows.

Cyax. What madness forced him thus to his Destruction!

Arta. His desperate Love led him so boldly on;
For with a Troop, composed of all his best
And stoutest Men, he straight broke through our Camp,
Who stood more Wondering at their madness, than
Afraid -- And though of all his Valiant Followers
Scarce ten remain alive besides himself,
Yet still he ventures on, and calls for Cyrus --
But hark, they this way come --

Cyax. Follow Hystaspes --
[As Cyaxares, and the rest are going off, Enters Abradatas fighting against a
great many, Cyaxares and the rest join against him and his followers. Brave
Abradatas yield, whilst you are safe.

Abra. Yield! By the Gods that hated Breath I scorn --
The Spirits of my murdered Friends around me
Still guard me from the Thoughts of such a Baseness --
Do think I undertook so brave a Deed
With the least thought of Living, or of Yielding!
No, Fight I will till every Sinew fail me:
And when my Arms can lift a Sword no longer,
I Will stretch 'em forth to all your Cymeters;
Now to be parted from my Bleeding Body,
Before I Will suffer 'em to be tamely bound --
Come all -- Quick, make an End of me -- Ye Gods!
Would I had Cyrus now but in thy Place;
Thus would I do, thus use my hated Rival.

Hyst. Kill, kill the raging Prince, if he will be still
Thus Obstinate.

Cyax. I charge you every Man
To save him, and with speed take him alive.

[They Fight, Cyaxares in the Skirmish is mortally Wounded, Abradatas is taken
Prisoner, and Disarmed. Abra. Base Villains! Choked I am with Multitudes --
O that I want the Fierceness of a Lion
To chase this Herd of Slaves and Cowards from me.

Hyst. What ail you, Sir? O Cursed sight, you Bleed!

Cyax. I fear I Have bin too rash --
And feel I Am wounded in my Mortal'st part.

Re-enter to them Cyrus in haste. Hyst. The Gods forbid -- O Sir, retir^^ and
view not
This sad Mischance.

Cyr. Ha!

Craes. Hystaspes, how came this to pass?

Cyr. Blast me, you Vicious Planets of my Birth;
Fall on me all the wrath of Heaven at once,
Can this be true what here my Eyes behold --
My Uncle wounded! It Is not much, I hope?

Cyax. Yes, it is to Death, and by my fleeting Soul
I am not sorry for it -- But why grieve you?
I now shall tug the Reins of Rule no more,
And you shall drive the Chariot of the World
Alone -- My life that stood so long in the way
Dividing all the while Ambition with thee,
Shall share with thee, and of thy Hopes no more.

Cyr. Fetch my Physicians -- Run for Artists straight,
A Kingdom shall be his that Cures his Hurt.

Cyax. Stir not, I charge you -- It Is beyond all Art
To save my Life -- I Have but a Moment's Breath
To speak, yet whilst that lasts, it is thine, my Cyrus;
And likewise all that is mine I give to thee;
Commit my only Daughter to thy Care,
She Is young, and may in time grow up thy Wife.

Cyr. Cursed Abradatas -- Curst-be all the Fates
That led thee thus to Triumph still upon me,
First in my Love, and now in Cyaxares;
But by the Gods -- By my wronged Self I Swear
I will be tame no longer, but will sweep thee,
Like a fierce Whirlwind from the Face of Cyrus,
Were thou the Mynion of the spiteful Stars;
Yes, though ten Thousand Cupids on their Knees,
And Venus weeping Eyes should beg to save thee.

Abra. I killed him bravely, by the Gods I did,
Killed him as I would thee, had thou bin there.

Cyr. Away with him to speedy Death, I charge you.

Cyax. Hold, Cyrus, hold, the Gallant Prince says true;
Let me not be the cause of his hard Fate,
It was my Fortune, and the Chance of War.

Cyr. Torture me not with the Request; I vow
It is the only thing I cannot grant you.

Cyax. You must -- O my Dear Cyrus; I have bin
To blame, my Envy of thy gallant Deeds
Brought me to meet the Death I have deserved;
Had I but pleased my self to hear thee prosper,
And Treasured thy Exploits within my Breast,
As a kind Uncle should have done to Cyrus,
O then I had bin happier.
Persia, and Media now shall be but one;
Far greater than Astyages thou art,
The first sole Monarch of the Medes and Persians --
Cyrus farewell -- Kiss me, and then I go.

[dyes. Cyr. He Is fled, the kindest, dearest, bravest Man
That ever blessed the World, is gone -- Dry up
Your Tears, and hide your Sorrows in your Breasts.
It Is poor and mean to spend our griefs like Women;
Ten Thousand Deaths are all too little for thee,
[ To Abrad. No, thou shall live, and grow in studied Torments;
I Will carry thee where-e're I go, to be
The sport of my Revenge, and every Day
Thou shall be brought in the midst of all thy Pains
To hear thee houl before me -- Go with him
To Tortures, Chains, Imprisonment -- Away.

Enter to them Running, and Weeping, Panthea attended, as Abradatas is carrying
off. Panth. Hold, whither is my Abradatas going? --
Brave Cyrus stay, real your dread Commands --
Ah! where do you hurry my dear Prince so fast?
[To the Guards. Still Abradatas will you be thus rash?
Adventuring through a Thousand threatening Deaths,
To come to this accursed Place to meet
Your certain Ruin; Cruel as you are,
More Cruel to your self and me than Cyrus far.

Cyr. Still does she come to brave my little Power,
And chain my weak Resolves -- She knows her strength,
By all the Gods she does, and dares me to it --
Keep 'em asunder, part 'em whilst I Am in
The mind -- Perhaps anon I may forget
I bid you -- Do, and part 'em now for ever.

Abra. You urge in vain, the Tyrant must b'obey'd --
Farewell, our Loves shall shine amongst the Stars,
And make Immortal Lights that never shall
Be quenched -- There we will Rule, and guide the Planets,
Causing 'em every one to shed their worst,
And mortal'st Venom on his Cursed Head.

Panth. Ah no, you wrong the brave and God-like Cyrus,
He is more mild than tender Mothers are;
The Spring is not so sweet that flows from Winter,
As are the Passions of that Brave rough Man --
Look thou Immortal; great on Earth as Jove
[Kneels. Can you behold me kneel, and hear me beg,.
In vain, who once you said was Beautiful, and loved?

Cyr. Panthea rise, I cannot see you bend --
There Is something in those Eyes would cheat me still,
Although I know their kindness is not meant
To me -- No, no, these Prayers and T^ars are all
My Rivals still -- Behold there is one cou'd^speak
If it had Life, but that is slain by thee --
[Shews the body of Cy^x. See, see, the silent everlasting Cause
Of Abradatas Fate.

Panth. Ah me, the sight
Is dreadful, but you must forget it --
He killed him fairly in his Life's defense,
And you may add a little too for Love --
The gallant Cyrus would have done as much,
Had he bin urged, or had the like Occasion.

Cyr. Away Panthea, hence, thou plead'st against
Thy self, and have recalled each wandering Spark
That strayed without my Breast, and fanned 'em to
A Flame, that if thou talk, will never be quenched --
Away with him, I say -- Death to you all
That disobey a Moment --

Abrad. I Court that Death, and cannot wish to live
A life so mean that is in thy power to give;
But ah, Panthea!

Panth. Stay, for we must live
Or dye together Cyrus, take thy Choice --
Give me thy Hand, my Love -- Thus we will grow,
[ Panthea runs and takes Abrad. by the hand. Joining our selves together thus
-- Thus fixed,
By great Diana's Soul, immovable --
So mingle not our Souls, nor beams of sight so twist
As are these Hands united -- Why do you stay? --
Come bear him to his Fate -- By Constancy,
I vow this Hand shall go along with him,
Not all your Torments, Pincers, nor Devices
Shall wrench these Knots asunder; no, unless
You cut this off, so you may part our Bodies,
But then my Spirits shall retire that moment,
Flying to the part that is nearest to my Love,
And my lost Hand shall hold him still thus fast,
And Perish with him as the Body would.

Craes. Behold, do not the Gods look down, and wonder?

Cyr. What shall I do? Craesus advise me straight.

Craes. I am beyond all Sense, the Miracle
Has almost struck me dumb -- Yet you had best
Begone -- Retire, Sir, from this melting Object;
O never interrupt such Happiness,
But send these rare and faithful Lovers home,
To be the Wonder of all Worlds to come.

Cyr. O how shall I begin! Craesus, I Will do it,
I am resolved, yet cannot though I would;
When I have gained the highest Victory over
My mind, then straight I feel my climbing Love
Ascends by stealth, and reaching to the top,
Pulls all my slippery Resolutions down --
Assist me Gods, and guide my sickly Virtue.

Enter to them Lausaria Distracted, dressed like a Cupid, with a Bow and Quiver,
followed by her Women. Laus. Ye daring Mortals, would ye hinder me? --
Let me alone, I say -- Prepare my Chariot;
Go fetch me Boreas straight, and bid him bring me
A gentle Wind to spread my fiery Wings,
Then I Will ride faster than the Fleeting Air,
Or Raceing Clouds -- The Stars shall be my Guides,
And in a Moment I will reach the Gods.

Craes. O Dismal sight!

Laus. -- My Father weeps: If tears could quench thee!

I. SONG.
O Take him gently from the Pile,
And lay him here to rest,
And I will ^corch for him the while;
If he must burn, then burn him in my Breast,
For there is Fire, there is shame
Enough to set the World on flame.
Craes. Hear me Lausaria, thou had once a Brother
Doomed by the Gods to want the gift of Speech,
And yet his Dumbness could not so afflict me,
As these wild words torment thy Father's Soul.

Laus. This Bow and Quiver were a wanton Cupid's;
I watched the Boy, as he lay down to sleep,
And stole his Ammunition from his side;
And now I Have got 'em, I will be revenged
On all mankind, on all the Sex at once,
And shoot Love's Plague into their Breasts -- Stand fair.

II. SONG.
I Am armed, and delare
For a Vigerous War;
By my Bow and my Quiver I swear
Not a Rebel ^0 Love will I spare,
This Shaft I will draw to the Head,
And shoot the great Persian, shoot him dead.
The Tyrani shall die, there is one will deny him,
Let him Court her with Crowns she shall fly him,
This Shaft I will draw to the Head,
And shoot the great Archer dead.
Cyr. Her Sense is out of Tune, her Wits not well,
But yet, alas! her Tongue is Charming still.

Laus. Here is a Dart by Limping Vulcan made,
Tip'd with the Clippings of a red hot Star;
The same that Venus, when she robbed her Son,
Chose from the rest to shoot Adonis with;
I Will burn you every one, till you endure
Worse Pains than I -- Ha! Cyrus there -- Have at thee --
I think I Have struck thee, Cruel Flint, I have.

[She shoots and hits Cyrus. Cyr. Thou have indeed, and touched me to the quick;
I thank the Gods there wanted but this sight
To rouse my slumbering Virtue -- Sweet Lausaria,
Thou Have pierced my rocky Heart, and see it melts.

[Cyrus Weeps. Laus. Ha! have I hurt him! Cursed was I to do so --
Look how the Blood runs trickling down his Face --
Help, help Panthea, Abradatas help --
Can you behold that Bleeding brave good Man,
And not bestow one Sigh, or Tear between you,
Indeed you are to blame -- I could shed Rivers,
And with my sighs disturb the endless Ocean.

[Weeps. Craes. Poor Girl! She tires her self with her Wild Thoughts --
When will her roving Fancy get some rest?

Laus. Go, go; you are a pair of Constant Fools,
[To Panthea, etc. You are not fit to dwell amongst Mankind --
Get you to Wilds, to Fountains, and the Woods,
There graft your Follies on the Barks of Trees,
And write sad Songs upon th'unconstant Sands,
Which are as false as are the Hearts of Men:
Or get you to the Echo, Owl, and Magpye;
They say, they once were Mortals like your selves --
Dye like a pair of faithful silly Lovers,
Dye, dye, and get you to Elysium,
There be the things you dream of; there be such
As are your selves -- Go, get you to Elysium;
And I will follow you so soon as e're
I can -- Hey hoe! -- I have a mind to sleen --

Craes. Come, lead her gently to her Bed.

Laus. Well let me make my Will, since Love must dye,
And leave to every one a Legacy:
This Dart I give --
To those that are Ambitious of a Name,
And fall in Love with such a Jilt as Fame;
This tipped with Gold to Sages on the Bench
Who have --
One Eye for Bribery, the other for a Wench.
This Wicked one that at the Pulpit Drives
To Priests, who Love good Livings, hate good Lives,
And send you all to Heaven by your Wives;
This Matrimonial Dart, that shames the Giver,
To Married Folks, the worst of all my Quiver,
My Wealth to Poets, thrift to Eldest Sons,
My Truth to Courtiers, Chastity to Nuns.
My Wantonness I do bequeath in Plenty,
To all the Women in the World of Twenty,
My Eyes to Alchymists, my Brains to Schools,
Scorn to the Brave, and all my Love to Fools.
[Exit.
Craes. What say you now? How feel you now your self?

Cyr. Just like a Man fast tied upon the Rack,
When, feeling the fierce pain too great to bear,
Starts up and stretching every Nerve about him,
Expands his Joints, and loosens all his Bands,
As threads of Flax are driven before the Flame --
Now mighty Love, I will despise the Nets,
And like the hunted Deer, rush through the Thicket
That once I feared, and hung by every Bough --

Craes. -- Bravely resolved and like the Godlike Cyrus.

Cyr. -- Hence, hence my Torment -- All fond thoughts of Love
Away, and vanish into slender Air,
And from this time, let Pity and Revenge
Fill up my tortured Bosom in its stead --
Release the Prince -- Panthea, take the Man
You Love -- Quick, not one word of thanks, for I
Deserve none -- But be sure you Charm him, hold him
Till he is Immortal made in your Embraces --
Haste, Abradatas -- Thou shall dearly pay
For all the Pleasures of this longed for Night --
To Morrow I will Summon thee like Fate
Soft slumbering in Panthea's Arms.
Abra. And I,
Armed with the Thoughts, will meet thee like a God,
Fired with each Kisses heat, that thou shall blush
To see what Beauties happiest Man can do.

Cyr. Ye Gods! To Morrow! Did I say to Morrow?
To day, this hour, a Moment is too long --
He goes just now to ravish all those Beauties,
To ransack so much Joys, compared to which
Heavens store is all but nigardly composed --
Away, away -- I Will overtake thee else,
Swift as the Winds that drive behind thy Back.

Re-enter to them Craesus. Craes. O Cyrus, your sad Craesus Daughter's Dead.

Cyr. Dead is she then. Poor Innocent Lausaria!
But hold, I have more griefs to spend for thee
Hereafter --

Panth. These sad Disasters make me move but flow,
And stir unwillingly to meet my Joys --
I go, but still to pray for Cyrus Life --
Thou generous, great, unhappy Man, farewell.

Cyr. Farewell -- And sinee the Gods have so decreed,
May this Divorce so happy be to prove
The last of meetings, and the End of Love.

[Exe^nt severally. Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus, SCENA Prima.
Enter Thomyris, Women, Guards, and Soldiers. Thom COme, my brave Friends, I
see you are resolved
To follow me, and share your Queens worst Fate.
Remember first who it is you go to fight with,
Cyrus, a braver Man indeed not lives;
But likewise call to mind your selves, a Nation
That all mankind has looked upon with wonder,
Envying your State that never yet was Conquered;
But oh my Son! We drop the Precious Minutes --
My Spargepyses did last night appear
With the cursed Dagger, sticking in his Breast,
(In the same manner as your Eyes beheld him,
When Cyrus sent the Royal Body home,)
Let Balthazar still drown in Luxury,
Devoured by Cycophants, undone by Harlots,
Whilst with your Aid I act such mighty things,
As never Woman yet performed, nor Man
Could do.

Enter to them Abradatas, and Panthea, Hystaspes, and Guards. Panth. O Sacred
joy! -- Could I have thought once more
To kneel before you, and have in these Arms
The kindest Mother, and the best of Queens?

Abrad. O blessed Panthea's Mother, Godlike Thomyris!

Thomy. Rise, dear Children,
Bend only to the Gods, and not to me,
To that Ambitious, happy God, who wrested
This gallant Action from my feeble Arm,
And only would ingross the glorious Deed.

Panth. That God was Cyrus; who, alas! Tormented
With Jealousy, the worst of all Loves Tortures,
Besides the dismal sight of Cyaxares,
Dying before his Eyes, slain by the Hand
Of Abradatas, whom of all mankind
It was expected, he the least should pardon;
Yet notwithstanding all those fierce assaults
On his brave mind, to his eternal Fame,
He has restored Panthea to her wishes,
And a loved Rival to his Mistress Arms.

Abrad. But we forget how soon the assault begins,
Spite, and ambitious Rage have lent him Wings,
With which we are to expect him at our Backs,
Rushing to overtake us with more speed,
Than falling Torrents, or the swiftest Tide.

Hyst. With Balthazar he now intends to fight --
Love that so long misled his Warlike Genius,
And turned him from the Path of his ripe Glory,
Having at length overcome this worst of Foes,
This Moment he intends to end the War,
And with quick Marches rouse up the Assyrians --
I hear him coming: For on this large Plain
Betwixt both Camps, he forms his mighty Battle.

[ Cyr. Trumpets within. Thomy. Now, now methinks I feel the noble Fire
That first inspired our Amazonian Chief,
When like a Star, shot from our Northern Sphere,
Her Courage every where like light displayed,
And gave the World a wonder to all Ages --
Does not this news inspire you Country Men?
Kindle a Flame through all your Frozen Sinews,
Which the Sun Beams could never do to Scythia --
Go, Abradatas, mount thy dreadful Chariot,
Armed like the God of Thunder, Jove himself,
Send from the Rage his Lightning, and his Bolts:
Let the wild Steeds the winged Winds out-fly,
And the sharp hooks like Death ^ow all before thee,
Whilst their carved Limbs, and mangled Bodies drop,
Like Fields of Corn before the Reapers Hand.

Hyst. I have Commands to wait you to the Camp,
Thence to return with all the faithfulst speed,
And meet my Master in Bellonias Arms.

Abrad. Away, let us rouse the sleepy Balt^az^r,
Fierce as a Lion, waking to revenge.

Panth. Come, Abradatas, see what Love has for thee,
Which take as Presents from Panthea's hand;
Trophies far Richer then Ulysses strove for,
And when I Have seen my Mars in his Throned Chariot,
Return I will, and in my Closet kneel,
And never rise till thou Victorious be,
Thinking of nothing but the Gods, and thee.

Abrad. Prepare my Soldiers -- Hear you what he says?
Panthea calls, Panthea is the Word.

[Exeunt. As they are going off, enter on the other side, Cyrus, Craesus,
Artabasus, Soldiers, Guards, Sound of a March. Cyr. Something, my fellow
Soldiers, I would say --
The Gods have often proved by your success
That in your Breasts Divinities are stamped
With all their Heavenly Courages inspired;
The Sword is not so used to cut and slaughter,
When guided by some sure, and mighty Arm,
As you to fight and overcome -- I will
Not boast, nor talk what I have done;
But let me tell you, I am Cyrus still,
Cyrus, that will not prize this worthless Life,
Nor yet refuse to put it in the Scale,
Weighed with the danger of the meanest Soldier,
But follow you as well as lead you on,
There is but this one Battle
That parts us from the Empire of the World --
Who would not venture his last drop of Blood,
When this sole Action makes us All, or Nothing;
This over, we'll to Babylon retire,
Whence as the Hill of all the World, you may
Behold your several stately Provinces,
And I the only Man that ever looked down
Upon so many gallant Heroes at
One time, and blessed an Army made of Kings.

Craes. Haste, for I long to face this Cursed Tyrant,
'Till he has let out from the Heart of Craesus
The Father's Blood, and stabbed the Daughter's Image
Here in my heart -- She calls on me to go
And end my Miseries where they first had being.

Cyr. O Craesus wound her not again, she is here,
The weight hangs heavier on me than thou see --
Father -- For henceforth thou shall ever be so,
Let Us have no thought to Day but of Revenge,
Deaf to the Charms of Grief, and more remorseless
Than Winds, or hideous Storms, or groaning Earthquakes,
Hide the least Species of our swelling Griefs,
As Streams are Coated in a Frosty Night --
But after Conquest, like a sudden Thaw,
We'll melt into a Deluge, and the World
Shall drown in tears -- The Gods shall wonder at our Sorrows --
And for thy Daughter Babylon shall Mourn,
And nod its Spiring Pinacles to the ground.
No more shall gaudy Worship fill the Town,
The Temples with their awful Shrines and Gods
Shall cast their Crowns and Golden Habits off,
And in exchange wear Rags and Ashes on
Their Heads -- Then she shall have a Monument
Shall stop the Sun to cast his wondering Eye,
Astonished at the height, the vastness, and
The Richness of it -- My Treasure, nay the Worlds
Huge Mass shall all be melted to an Urn,
And the proud Greatness of Massolus Tomb,
With those vast Pyramids by Hebrew Slaves
Built to the Sky, shall all be Dwarfs beneath it --
This shall the Gods and I bequeath to thy Lausaria.

Craes. On then, thou Glorious Conqueror --
Fate like a Cloud hangs over the Assyrians heads,
The God whom all the World with dread admires,
The Hebrews Worship, and the Egyptians fear,
Has called thee by a Miracle to be
The King of this Great Empire, and the World.

Cyr. If the wise God show ought of me, declare it.

Craes. Last Night the Drunken Ba^thazar Carous'd
With all his vicious Concubines about him,
And Beardless Minions, far more lewd than Women;
Then in a Pride he took the Holy Treasure
Brought from the wondrous Fane of Solomon,
And in the Sacred Cups made impure Healths
Go round, and drank to the Immortality
Of their proud King, who had in spite of Heaven,
And its scorned Power committed such a Rape
Upon the Richest Shrine of all the World.

Cyr. What but the wrath of Heaven, and dreadful Ruin
Could follow such a Sacrilege!

Craes. This horrid Deed drew awful Thunder from
The impatient hand of the wronged Deity,
Whilst straight a dreadful Clap was heard, and Lightning
With a fierce Rage struck through their guilty Eyes,
And on a sudden snatched away the Flames
That gave the Tapers light, then in thick Darkness
The horrid sounds of dying groans ascended,
And dismal Voices pierced the trembling Earth,
Whilst straight a yet more strange and dreadful Scene disclos'd^
A Bloody Hand appeared upon the Wall,
With a bright Bracelet set with flaming Stars,
Dazeling the Eyes of all the astonished Crowd,
Then with a Finger which distilled warm Gore,
The God wrote Words in Characters of Hebrew,
Which by a Wise Religious Captive of
That Nation, was Interpreted of Cyrus,
That you should be the Assertor of his God,
Who gave Assyria to the Medes and Persians.

Cyr. O my dark Soul! Is there a Mighty God!
(As sure there must) in whose admired Belief
My Mother's Breasts never Nursed my Infancy,
Whose Being was before all Beings else,
Who is the Source, Beginning, and the End
Of all, yet has no Source, Original,
Nor Ending, but art that of which is all
Composed, and yet art still the same, and not
The less, nor greater -- If then such thou art,
O help me, guide me by thy Sacred Power
To be the Man this Miracle has meant.

Enter to them Hystaspes, and Guards. Hystasp. Make ready, Sir, the Assyrians
are approaching,
Pusht on at length by your indulgent Fate,
To a desparing Courage -- Fierce Thomyris
And Balthazar are joined -- And Abradatas
Sits in his Chariots, midst a thousand Deaths;
He, with five hundred of those hooked Wagons
Protects the Right Wing of the Tyrant's Army,
And Thomyris with all her of Strength the Left --
But Oh! Had you then seen Panthea's Courage,
You could not blame the Fates to be divided,
How to bestow this mighty Victory;
Whether to her, as Challenged by such Virtue,
Or Crown your Brave, and still Triumphant Brow.

Cyr. What say -- My Soul stands listening at my Ears,
And fain I would hear something of Panthea.

Hyst. Fierce Abradatas she her self saw mounted,
Clad in an Armor far more Rich and Noble,
Than that which Vulcan made the God of War,
Which the Skilled Workman hammered from pure Gold,
And every joint with Diamond Stars had nailed.
'Twere long to tell you how much breath she sighed,
The thousand Tears she shed for grief, and joy;
'Till the shril Trumpets called him swift away,
O Then she raised he^ tender voice more Charming,
And more provoking than the Wars loud Music;
Clasped her soft Hands about the gilded Spokes,
And kissed the Chariot Wheels;
The fiery Steeds, as if then slashed with Lightning,
Upon a sudden started from her hold,
Swift as an Arrow from a Scythian Bow,
And left her senseless, clinging to the ground.

Cyr. Enough, thou have said too much -- Sound, Sound a Charge,
I Will shut my loitering Soul close in her Home,
That she shall never have the power to send
[Charge sounds. One Truant Thought abroad, not the least glance,
Or secret with after forbidden Love.

Craes. Lead us to Victory that the Gods have shown thee.

Cyr. Yes Craesus, yes -- We come, dear slaughtered Uncle,
To give an Army to thy Funeral Pomp --
See, see, thy Daughter's Spirit, like Jove's Eagle,
Sails over our heads with Laurels in her Beak --
Now, now is the Sign to draw your Conquering Swords,
Cy'axares, and Lausaria are the Words.

[Exeunt O^nes. Scene draws, and discovers a great Battle between both Armies:
Cyrus, Balthazar, and Thomyris seen Fighting at their Heads. Battle over, a
Retreat is sounded, Scene shuts, and then Enter Cyrus, Craesus, and Guards.
Cyr. Now, Craesus, the Assyrian War is over
And Ba^th^zar is Slain -- Thou see him drop,
Whilst his Blasphemous Soul burst by my side, --
His Spirit groaned, and gave a horrid fi^ght --
This was the bloodiest Battle to our Foes,
That ever my Sword yet won.

Re-enter Artabasus. Arta. Greatest of Kings,
Immortal may thou live, and ever Reign --
More than two hundred thousand of your Foes
Lie breathless in the Field -- None but a few
With the bold Scythians make a quick Retreat.

Re-enter and Hystaspes. Craes. Kings, Senates, and the World obey thee, Cyrus;
For lo the Gods did never at a time
Heap so much Greatness on one Man before.

Cyr. What is become of Valiant Abradatas?

Hyst. Something to his misfortune we must owe:
For with a Drove of hooked Chariots which
He led, he first began a dreadful Slaughter,
'Till the fierce Steeds, stung with the pointed Darts,
Started, recoiled, and overthrew their Guiders,
Then, like a Whirlwind, broke through their own Ranks,
And where 'twas thickest, mowed a dismal passage,
That the sad spaces midst their numbers looked
Like empty Ridings through a Forest cut,
So Abradatas is by all Men thought
From his fierce Chariot to be hurled and torn.

Craes. But the Brave Scythian Queen retreating fights^
And whilst the Homotyms are eager in
Pursuit, as a Stout Lion that is hunted,
Turns eager on the nearest of his Foes,
And tears 'em piece meal, then retreats again;
So in their flight, the Scythians send huge showers
Of Mortal Arrows on the Conquerours Faces.

Cyr. My self will haste with the Cadusian Archers,
And gaul their backs with much more dreadful Flights.

Craes. Mingle not Sir, in the unruly Chase --
We beg you would retire into the Camp,
Your Wounds, and Labor ask some quick relief.

Cyr. Fly then, Hystaspes, to the Homotyms,
Bid 'em their vain and eager Chase give over;
In the mean time, you valiant Craesus may
Wheel round about 'em with your Lydian Horse,
And beat 'em in their Front.

Craes. It shall be done --
Expect my Death, or the brave Queen a Prisoner.

Cyr. Attend me but at Distance for a Moment.
[ Exeunt Cr^sus and Hystaspes. What is it to rule the World,
To hold the wealth, and sumpter of the Earth,
And find it all but Dreams of Happiness,
As I do?
[Going off, Lausaria's Ghost rises to ^im. What object does my flattering Eyes
present!
The Lydian Princess, ha, it is! it is she,
Or else some Star, the darling of the Sky,
Dropped from the Gods, and Pattern'd in her Likeness! --
But ha! if this shoud prove a Dream,
Thou look quite through me, speak, if thou art Lausaria!

Ghost. O Cyrus, I am come from far to blame thee,
To chide my Love, and stand 'twixt him and Ruin.

Cyr. Thou art alive then! ha! and thou can talk too --
O sacred joy! -- Who told me thou were dead?
-- Thou look thin, pale and wan,
Give me thy cold fair hand in mine, and let me lead thee
From the cold Mansion of the Grave;
To a warm ^oom in Cyrus Breast for ever.
Where is thy hand? -- Ha! Thou art fled, and hid
As in a (...) thou dazelest every Sense,
And mak's^ ^hy Cyrus giddy to behold thee.

Ghost* Ah! Cyrus,
Thou may as well grasp Water, or fleet Air,
As think of touching my Immortal Shadow --
I am the wandering Spirit of Lausaria,
That still dotes on thee in her Solitude;
So well, that when thou think but of Panthea,
By secret Charms thou call'st me from my quiet,
And give my Soul no rest below, nor Peace above.

Cyr. A cold and sudden damp sits on me round,
Thy Eyes run pointed with thy wrongs, and shoot
Quite through my Heart, as thy keen Spirit with horror
Pierces the ground, and glances through the Air --
Thou strikest a terror trembling in my Blood,
And I with torture find thou art a thing
Immortal --
Speak, awful Shade, what brings thee from thy Rest?

Ghost. When I had passed the Lake that leads to Bliss,
(Bliss so unjustly termed by Mortals here,)
To those dull Shades, Elysium fondly called,
Where the sad Scene gives mournful Lovers Souls
A Melancholy Prospect of Delight;
I heard the Powers of Hell
Call for the Fates to cut thy thread before 'em --
What shall be done, said they, with this Great Man,
This Barbarous Hunter of the World, and Love?
Let us ordain that by a Woman's Hand
His blood be in a fatal moment spilt,
So to Revenge the Sex's wrongs at once --
Haste from the Field -- Beware the enraged Thomyris --
Come, follow me, I Will show thee such a Sight
Shall Cure thy Breast of all Love's Wounds for ever.
Hold, stay, and take my Ghost along with thee.

Ghost. O Live, I charge you --
Live happy as a God on Earth, live ever;
Each drop of Blood you drain from that brave Breast,
You double all the Pangs upon my Soul --
O think that on your Joys depend my Bliss,
Your Torment is my Hell, your Happiness
My blessed Elisium -- Follow me, I Charm you,
By all the pity once you paid my Love,
By all the Love you owe my Memory.

Cyr. Lead then the way, thou brightest Angel Guide,
Conduct me quickly to thy blessed Abode.

Ghost. The Minute's come -- This way, thou gallant Cyrus.

Cyr. I follow thee, and if my Body proves too heavy,
I Will throw it off, and mount all Soul to reach thee.

Scene Draws, and discovers Panthea with her Women weeping over the mangled
Body of Abradatas, whose Limbs she had seemingly fixed to his Body, a Dagger in
her hand. Panth. I charge you live -- Live to excuse my Fault,
And sooth the sorrows of the sad Thomyris;
The Story of our Deaths told from your Mouths,
May from her tender Eyes draw floods of Tears,
But the sad Object would have killed her quite --
Likewise relate the dismal Scene to Cyrus;
Tell it with all the pity that in grief
Can be expressed -- Be sure t'adorn our Ends
As sumptuously with Sorrow as you can --
But oh! you need not -- Tell 'em as they were,
And your sad tuned Description will surpass
All Fiction, Painting, or dumb show of Horror
That ever Ears yet heard, or Eyes beheld --

Wom. O cast that Weapon from you --

Panth. Vex me not --
What, cannot I be obeyed in Death -- Now, now,
My dearest Partner of my Soul, I come:
Look back as thou art in the Milky Road to Bliss,
And take thy loved Panthea with thee.

Wom. Still you advance that dreadful Weapon.

Panth. No more -- These Hands and Feet which the sharp Scythes
Mowed from thy lovely Body, I have tried
A thousand times to join 'em with my Kisses,
But it is in vain -- O you Immortal Powers!
Cannot these Lips so Deify'd, restore
One hour of Life -- See what Idolaters
You are, false Men! -- You Lying Prophets say
A Kiss, a Sigh, a Tear from those you Love,
Can fetch you from the Grave to Life again,
And make a God of the least Doting Swain.
But I have groaned ten thousand Sighs and Wishes,
And bathed his Body all, all over in Tears,
Yet find 'em all too little; one small drop
Of Rain is worth an Ocean of these Pearls;
That gives the sweets that from the Roses flow,
And makes the Violets and the Lillies grow.
Yet I cannot restore one Finger back
To Life, unless my heart's warm blood can do it.

Panthea Stabs her self, and just as she gave the Wound Cyrus Enters, led in by
the Ghost, the Ghost vanishes. Cyr. Ah! cruel, spiteful -- yet thou lovely
Spirit
Coud'st thou not bring me one half moment sooner?
Give me this Dagger, and I Will plunge it in my Breast,
Wipe off the stain of thy most precious Blood,
And reak it in my own; revenge thy wrongs,
And please Lausaria's Ghost, whose shadow haunts me --

Panth. This Weapon I Will not part with --
This Glorious Relic here that sets me free;
Thus I will hold it, brandished up on high,
And die with the loved Passport in my Hand --
Live, happy, Cyrus, may these ills forewarn thee
To shun the fatal Deed of crossing Love,
Love that will never be stopped, but have its Course,
Or overflow to drowning with the least resistance.

Cyr. O forgive me, blessed Panthea;
And the same time thou leave thy lovely Body,
Forgive my passion too, and carry with thee
My Pardon to be Sealed by all the Gods,
And by the Soul of thy departed Love,
And tell him how I took his hand in mine,
Washed with thy Tears, and bathed in my Repentance,
And put it to my eager Lips, and asked
His pardon thus -- Ha! Horror! Worse than Horror.

[ Cyrus taking Abradata's hand, offering to put it to his mouth, it comes from
the Body; Panthea places it again.] Panth. What have you done? Why touch you
him so rudely?
Give me this Hand back to my Lips again --
These mavelous Limbs with industry I sought
Amidst an hundred heaps of mangled Bodies,
And picked and culled 'em, as is sifted Gold
Parted from loads of common Dross;
And placed each torn-off Member in its proper state,
Just as you see -- Forbear again to touch him,
For they are every one alike dismembered,
Mowed by the Hooks of his own dreadful Chariot,
Fierce as the Horses wildest rage could g^iude 'em --
I feel Death's giddy vapor in my Eyes,
And covers all my Senses on a sudden --
Lay me -- O lay me gently by my Lord.

[Dies. Cyr. Die all that is good -- die Sacred Love and Friendship.
Let none presume to say that Virtue lives,
That Beauty gilds the World, now she is dead.

Enter to Cyrus, Thomyris, Women and Soldiers, as persu'd. Thom. There, there is
the dreadful sum of all our Woes;
Look there, my Friends -- What, Cyrus Mourning over 'em!
Run, run, with speed, and snatch his hated Life --
Quick, e're your Foes that have you in the Chase,
Prevent you -- Hold -- And shall 'a dye by Slaves! --
There is some Pity to his Virtue due.

Cyr. Ha! Am I then surpised -- I was to blame --
Though I abhor to live, yet loath I am
To dye by Treachery, and Cowards Hands.

Thom. Look, Cyrus, look, I am thy Mortallest Foe --
Thou dwell'st over the sad Ruins t^ere, which I
Look on with Horror, at so great a distance --
Do, glut thy self -- Call likewise to thy Mind,
My Spargepyses Blood, and think the Fates
Are gentle still -- Bend, bend your Bows,
Draw every one a Dart up to the Head,
And send a thousand winged Deaths to seize him --
Yet hold -- My self the glorious deed will do.

Cyr. Thou dare not, sure! -- Naught but thy VVomans Spleen
Could be Seducer to such base Revenge.

Thom. Talkest thou! -- Now to thy Heart this pointed Justice.
[As she is ready to shoot at him, Lausaria's Ghost rises up betwixt them, and
stands before Cyrus, and Faces Thomyris. Hah! sure there is something there
controls my Hand?
Or I am lost in a wild Maze of Fancy --
What shining Form is that so fills my Eye!
Cyrus, thy Guardian Genius it is protects thee,
That with her tender Wings Roosts over thy Head,
And with a Look shoots awful Brightness through me,
And Fetters every thing that is brave within me --
My Sinews slack, and Nature at this Sight
Shrinks back to her first feeble Infancy.

Sold. You stand amazed -- Let Us kill him whilst we may.

Thom. Hold, Villains -- What, through her Immortal Body!
Your Darts would all turn Heads against your selves;
You might as soon touch the bright shining Sun,
Or fix your Arrows in the Marble Sky --
Loose, loose your Strings, and let fall all your Bows,
And to appease that Goddess, Worship him,
That all the World is destined to Obey.

Re-enter Craesus, Hystaspes, Gobrias, and Artabasus, shouting, Ghost vanishes.
Craes. He lives, is safe; thanks to the Immortal Powers.

Cyr. I charge you on your Lives, none touch the Queen,
And hurt no man but such as shall resist.

Thom. 'Twas never known, that any Scythian yet
Did yield his Person, or his Weapon up.
Then, Cyrus, since great Baltbazar is slain,
And all our Lives too mean to adorn thy Triumph:
O give, without denial, to these Tears,
Panthea's and her Ahradata's Bodies:
Then undisturbed, let us forsake this place,
Of all the World the fatallest to Thomyris.

Cyr. It Is granted, and you may with safety go --
Cyrus can do no less to such a Queen,
Whose brave and generous Pity saved his Life --
But begs that you would make the Town your way;
My Crowns, my happiness, and Life to me
Is not so dear as what you carry with you --
There you shall see what mourning Babylon
Can do; the Fires, the Temples, and the Urns
That shall adorn these Lovers Funerals;
Cyprus, instead of Laurel, Wreaths shall bind
The Conquerours Brows, and Groans instead of Shouts
shall fill the Streets, the Houses Lamentations;
All the vast City shall indead appear,
But one wide spacious Room filled full of Sorrow.

Thomy. No, no, cover the Bodies from their Eyes,
Then in a Mourning Chariot place the Bridgroom,
And his pale Bride so leaning on his Cheek --
Cyrus, farewell -- And may thou live to be
Unconquered still, and great as Creetan Jove --
Beat a dead March -- Let Trumpets hoarsest sound
Fright Birds of softer Music from the Air,
And naught be heard but Horror and despair.

[Exeunt Thomyris, and all her Party, bearing away the Bodies of Panthea, and
Abradatas. Dead March Sounds. Hyst. Live happy as a God, and over past miseries
Rejoice -- Fate is your slave, and puts and End
To all your toyls this day -- The conquered Globe
Has not that Monster now that from its Chains
Durst stir to interrupt your sacred Bliss --
Go, for new Pleasures Court you every where,
And having spread your Laws over all the Earth,
And settled first the Business of the World,
Think then to make your Median Kingdoms happy,
And there in Person wed the fair Mandana,
Whose Youth and Beauty shall like buds increase,
Still grow upon you, and with fresher Charms
Supply your Soul, and make your joys Immortal.

Cyr. Come, Fellow Soldiers, let us to Babylon,
Empress of Nations, and great Queen of Cities --
Make haste, my Friends, and share the World with me,
All shall have some -- Amongst the meanest here
I Will throw Rewards they shall not live to spend,
And scatter Provinces as thick as Drams --
First with Lausaria's Funerals we'll begin;
Three Days with strictest Mourning shall be kept,
And all things else forgotten for that time;
These Hands her fragrant Funeral Pile shall burn,
And Princes shall Officiate at her Urn --
I Invite you all to come and weep with me,
Over this rare Miracle of Constancy;
Let the loud War to gentler Griefs remove,
And mourn with us the Tragedy of Love.

[Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE, Spoken by the Boy and Girl, by way of Dialogue.
Curtain falls. Girl. HOLD, hold, is the Play done?

Boy. Ay, pretty Rogue.

Girl. What a New PLAY without an Epilogue?

Boy. Lausaria's dead, Panthea too is slain,
And would you have dead Bodies rise again?
That were indeed a very pretty Fact,
You had enough of that in the First Act.

Girl. Why, what d' you make of Mr. Betterton?

Boy. The Curtain's dropped, and he is glad he is gone;
The Poet too, has loaded him so sore,
He scare has breath enough for one word more.
Since most of the Old Actors then are killed,
And the Great Hero has forsook the Field;
What if we did; to cover such a Blot,
Address our selves toth' Audience?

Girl. That Is well thought,
And since we must say something, pray begin,
You to the Ladies, I the Gentlemen.

Boy. Ladies, if you will to our PLAY be kind,
May every one, their dear last Wishes find;
May Virgins those enjoy they value best,
And Wives their Husbands kindness to the last.
At Bassert may your Good Luck so continue,
And win the Gamester's Heart, as well as Guiney.

Girl. And Gentlemen, if you will like our PLAY,
May this good Fate attend you every day.
Let no rude Boreas, from his Boisterous Cell,
Profane the Curl that on your Wigg sits well.
Nor^brush the Sacred Powder from the Clothes
Of two such Sights of dainty dapl'd Beaux.
May nothing bring you out of humor hither,
Nor Hackney-Coach be wanting in wet weather.

Boy. Ladies, we are almost sure of your good Natures,
'Twere Cruel to deny such Little Creatures.

Girl. And if the Men mislike, or make a puther,

Boy. Evads we'll fit 'em for it one way or other.
It Is a wise Child that knows its Father, Sirs
For ought we know, we may be some of yours,
We Will come and lay our selves before your Doors.

FINIS.

