THE BANNERS Of GRACE and LOVE DISPLAYED In the farther Conversion of the
Indians In NEW ENGLAND: Held forth in sundry Letters from diverse Ministers to
the Corporation established by Parliament, for Promoting the Gospel amongst the
Heathen in New England; and farther attested by Edm. Callamy Simon Ash Will.
Spurstow Lazarus Seaman George Griffith Phil. Nigh William Bridge Henry
VVhitfield Joseph Carryll Ralph Venning


LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Edw. Farnham, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Popeshead-Alley, M.DC.LVII.

TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THIS NATION, The Parliament of the Commonwealth
of ENGLAND.
THat the Fathers joy at the returning of a Spend-thrift Son, ought to have
an influence upon the whole Family of Heaven and Earth, that is called after
his name, to work their suitable affections, and conformity to himself,
cannot be questioned by any true child thereof. Behold then, Right Honorable,
a call thereunto, Poor Prodigalls, who have not only with our selves lost that
rich Treasure of grace and holiness, wherewith in our Common root and
Fountain we were entrusted, but also in a course of Rebellion for many
Generations wasted the remainder of Natures Riches to the utmost degeneracy
that an Immortal rational being is obnoxious unto, not returning a far off,
but rejoicing in the embraces of their Father, and enterteined with his flesh
and blood, who was slain and sacrificed for them.

The aim of our walking with God here is to come up to some conformity to
them, who behold his face and do his Will in Heaven: amongst them there is joy
at the Repentance of one Sinner, and shall not we find sweetness in the
first fruits of a barren Wilderness in the shining of a beam of light into
the darkness of another World, giving hope of a plentiful harvest, and a
glorious day to ensue. Let men take heed, lest by despising the day, and
opposing the Work of the Lord toward those poor Sons of Adam,
notwithstanding all their zealous profession, they proclaim themselves to
pursue a Carnal Interest; by which they declare the enlargement of the
Dominion of Jesus Christ is of no Concernment unto them.

We are by many Pledges assured better things of you Right Honorable, and
such as accompany zeal for the House of our God, and therefore the ensuing
Testimonialls of the progress of the Work of the Gospel being sent unto us,
we make bold humbly to present them to you; partly that we may invite you as
the friends of Jesus Christ, to rejoice with him that some sheep of his, who
were lost, are found; and partly to lay before you, some such fruits of the
putting forth of your Authority for the carrying on this most glorious
undertaking, as may encourage you to go on through him who does enable you
unto future real expressions of your love and zeal thereunto. We shall not
need to draw forth any particulars from the ensuing Narrative, to give you a
taste of that Spirit whereinto these poor Creatures are sweetly baptized; We
hope your delight in the Work of God will enforce a leisure, to view the
whole, this in General we may say, that in the Wilderness are waters broken
out, and streams in the Desert, the parched ground is become a Poole, and the
thirsty Land-springs of water in the Habitation of Dragons, where each lay,
there is grass with Reeds and Rushes, the Lord has powered water upon him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; He has powered his Spirit on the
seeds of the Heathen, and his blessing on their Offspring, they spring up as
among the grass, as willowes by the watercourse: One says I am the Lords,
and another calls himself by the name of Jacob, and another subscribes with
his hand unto the Lord, and sirnames himself by the name of Israel. The Lord
has done a new thing, and we know it, he has made a way in the Wilderness,
and Rivers in the Desert, the beast of the field does honor him, the Dragons,
and the Owls because he gives waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the
Desert, to give drink to his People his chosen, so that upon the Report here
read unto us, we cannot but glorify God with those Primitive believers of
old, and say, then has God also to the poor naked Indians granted Repentance
unto life. Their outward wants and streights have often been presented unto
you; we shall not need to repeat them, blessed be the Lord, and blessed be
you of the Lord that your hearts have been stirred up to give encouragement
unto this Work, and to open a Door for the relief of those Eminent
Instruments in the hand of the Lord who carry it on, who though they
communicate to them Spiritualls, yet are so far from receiving of their
Temporalls, that they impart unto them a Portion of their own daily bread, and
provision necessary from their own subsistence.

The good Lord lay the weight and concernment of this Work upon your spirits,
and we no way doubt that you will in any way be wanting to the Public
improvement of this blessed opportunity, for the enlargement of the Kingdom
of him whom our Souls do love: There is a vexation of spirit, which through
their formalitie and unbelief, has encompassed many Professors, that whereas
they have with much seeming earnestnes cried out for mercies; when they have
been bestowed, they have thought scorn of them: so did the Jews in the
business of their Messiah, and many at this day amongst our selves in the great
works of the Provinces of God: It is so with some to this breaking forth of
light amongst the Indians, desiring it before it began, despising it in its
very beginnings, the Lord lay it not unto their charge, and keep all our
spirits in an holy admiration and reverence of the powerful efficacy of his
eternal and unchangeable purposes, which through so many sinful Generations
(falling in their Rebellion) have preserved a seed to himself, whereof he will
take care that one grain fall not to the Ground.

Your Honors humble Servants; John Owen. Joseph Caryl. Will: Greenhill. William
Bridge. William Carter. George Griffith. Tho: Goodwin. Sidrach Simpson. Phillip
Nigh. William Strong. Henry Whitfeld. Ralph Venning.


To the READER.
Christian Reader;
THese ensuing Letters do represent unto thee, and to the Churches, the
outgoings of Christ, as a Light to the Gentiles, that the grace which brings
Salvation has appeared unto them also in the furthest parts of the Earth, for
the accomplishment of that ancient and glorious Promise; I will give thee for a
Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth, ( Isa. 49.6.) The People of God have been greatly affected with the
appearances of Christ, when he has rode forth upon a red Horse to the
destruction of his Enemies; for he is glorious in his Apparel, even when his
garments are dipped in blood, but much more when he rides forth upon a white
Horse, for the Conversion of Souls, and goes on Conquering and to Conquer.

We have therefore thought fit to commend this great work of Christ unto the
view of all the Saints, under these following Considerations.

First, Hereby the Kingdom of Christ is enlarged, and the promise made unto
him in the Covenant between him and his Father accomplished, Arma diaboli
Gentes erant; fide cutem Gentium vulnera^^ tus, caput quod habebat, amisit.
Amb. in Psalm. 118.
his Domimon shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the flood unto the Worlds end,
therefore his design is upon all the Kingdoms of the Earth, that he may take
possession of them for himself, they shall all become the Kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ, Revel. 11.15. And the Kingdom and Dominion under the
whole Heaven, being so possessed by Christ, shall be given to the Saints of the
most High, Dan. 7.18. Our prayer is, Thy Kingdom come, to see the promise made
unto Christ fullfilled, and the Prayers of the Saints answered, should be
matter of great rejoicing unto us, and of high Praises unto God.

Secondly, The glorious Gospel of Christ is hereby Propagated, which is the
Scepter of his Kingdom, the Rod of his Power, which we pray may run and be
glorified. And when we consider, by how many (even amongst us) the Gospel is
rejected, for men reject the Council of God against themselves: by how many it
is resisted, for there are many adversaries, (...). 1 Cor. 16.9. (...). 2 Timothy
2.25. (...). Nazian.
and by how many the Gospel is perverted, being made another Gospel, by strange
Interpretations; one of the great acts of Sacrilege of our times, stealing the
sense of the Scripture from the words of the Scripture. Now to see the Gospel
lifted up as an Ensign to the Nations, and they to flow unto it, should be
matter of great rejoicing to the souls of those who love the Gospel in
sincerity.

Thirdly, Hereby the souls of men are rescued out of the snare of the Devil,
in which they were before held captive at his will; The Lord has manifested
that there is a seed according to the Election of grace, even amongst these
also as well as other Gentiles, that the Lord has visited them to take out of
them a people for his Name, yea that even they who in a more immediate manner
among them worshipped the Devil, their Witches called in their language
Pawwawes, that even these should be delivered, Satan falling from Heaven like
lightning before the Gospel, should greatly exalt free grace in our hearts; the
great Love of God, is Love to Souls, and our tenderest compassion should be
manifested in pitying of Souls, neither know we any other ordinary way that
the Lord has appointed but the preaching of the Gospel for the winning of
Souls to himself: That being the Power of God to salvation.

Fourthly, Hereby the fullnes of the Gentiles draws near to be accomplished,
that the calling of the Jews may be hastened: the Scripture speaks of a double
conversion of the Gentiles, the first before the conversion of the Jews, they
being Branches wild by nature grafted into the True Olive Tree in stead of the
natural Branches which are broken off. This fulness of the Gentiles shall
come in before the conversion of the Jews, Brightman in Cant. 8.8. Mede in
Apoc. cap. 7. p. 56.
and till then blindness has happened unto Israel, Romans 11.25. The Second,
after the conversion of the Jews, as appears Acts 15* 16, 17. After this I
will return and will build again the Tabernacle of David which is fallen
down, and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up; that
the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my
Name is called says the Lord. Hence it appears that there are some Gentiles,
upon whom the Lords Name is called that are a people to him, even whilst the
Tabernacle of David lies in its ruins; and when he has built again this
Tabernacle of David, that there are a residue of men, the remainder of the
Gentiles that shall enquire after the Lord and worship him, together with those
Gentiles that were formerly converted, and upon whom his Name was called. The
first conversion of the Gentiles in its fulness makes way for the coming in
of the Jews, the King of the East, therefore to see this work go on, should
cause the people of God to lift up their heads, and expect that the Time of the
fullfilling that Promise is near.

Fifthly, That the Lord has blessed the labors of our Brethren, who were
driven out from among us: A gracious heart as he prays for, so he cannot but
rejoice in the success of other men's labors as well as his own, so the work
which is Gods may prosper, who ever be the Instrument; it is enough to him. When
Peter gave an account to the Apostles and Brethren of the Conversion of
Cornelius and his family, who were, as it were the first fruits of the
Gentiles, they all glorified God, saying; Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted Repentance unto life, Act. 11.18. And if they could rejoice in the
Conversion of the Gentiles which they knew would be with the rejection of the
Jews, how much more should we rejoice in this great work, who may grow
together upon the same good Olive Tree! That when other Nations who have
planted in those furthest parts of the Earth, have only sought their own
advantage to possess their Land, Transport their gold, and that with so much
covetousness and cruelty, that they have made the name of Christianity and of
Christ an abomination, that the Lord should be pleased to make use of our
Brethren that went forth from us to make manifest the savor of Christ among
the people, and to win their souls to him; How should we rejoice that the
Lord has so far prosper'd such an undertaking. It was a holy ambition in
Paul to preach the Gospel where Christ was not named, that he might not glory
in another man's line: It is certainly a great honor to be Isntrumental to
bring souls to Christ, who before never heard of his Name.

Sixthly, This we hope may be but the first fruits of those great Nations unto
Christ, the Lord does not usually cause to bring forth and then shut the womb,
Isa. 66.9. Let no man despise the day of small things, the Lord has opened a
great door, which we hope Satan shall never be able any more to shut.

Such Considerations as these, have filled and affected our hearts, in the
reading and meditation of this great work of the Lord, and we hope being
communicated, may be a good means to awaken the godly and faithful of this
Nation, to observe the Presence and appearances of God amongst his people
there, that we also may say; What shall we do for our Sister in the day that
she shall be spoken for? Shall we not be abundant in Prayer, that the Lord
would yet further bless their holy endeavors? Shall we not labor to
strengthen their hands by ministering to them of our abundance? that they may
not be discouraged in so eminent a service, one of the greatest works that
has been upon the wheel in this latter age, for to Contribute to the offering
up of Souls to Christ, must needs be a Sacrifice of a very sweet smelling
savor unto God. This we humbly offer unto all those that love the Lord Jesus
in sincerity, and remain

Thine in the furtherance of the Gospel, W. Gouge. Edm: Calamy. Simon Ash.
Will: Spurstowe. Jer: Whitaker. Lazarus Seaman. George Griffith. Phillip Nigh.
William Bridge. Henry Whitfeld. Sidrach Simpson. William Strong. Joseph Caryl.
Ralph Venning.


To the Christian Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER;
AS ever work of God tending to the rescuing of deluded Souls out of the
snares of the Devil, so even this Glorious work of Gods grace has met with
many discouragements by various kinds of objections cast abroad by diverse sorts
of people, and even by some that come from New England it self, who having
lived remote from the work done, and either not affecting the instruments
therein employed, or not going to the places of their Exercise, that they might
see and hear the gracious operations of the Spirit of God amongst them, may
easily misreport the proceedings of Gods goodness therein. Yet nevertheless
God having called us to be exercised in a work of this Nature, wherein his
Glory and the Salvation of so many of the lost sons of Adam are concerned;
we have taken up a Resolution by his gracious Assistance to improve the power
and trust by Authority of Parliament committed to us to the utmost, least it
be laid to our Account amongst others the obstructors of it in the great day of
the Lord.

But as we meet with discouragements, so, through mercy, we are not without
encouragements of many sorts. Viz.

1. This work of Gods grace grows in New England, not only in the places
where the Gospel was formerly preached to the Indians; But God has stirred up
two Eminent Ministers in two other parts of the Country, to labor in the
work, not without success answerable; as Mr William Leveridge near Sandwich
in the Government of New Plymouth, sixty miles from the place where Mr Eliot
teaches, and Mr Richard Blindman at Pecoat, a place formerly subdued by the
English, and is a place about the same distance from Sandwich another way, an
account whereof you will have in the following Treatise.

2 Where the Act of Parliament for the Collection meets with Gospel-spirited
Ministers and people, there we find a good account of it comparatively; God
having stirred up the hearts of some Eminent Christians to contribute in a
considerable manner; Some by charging their Lands with a yearly Revenue to the
Corporation for that end for ever: and others by sending in good sums of
money, subscribing to pay yearly so much whilst they live. And one Gentleman
(leaving two sons of tender age) having appointed by his will, in case they
dye without issue that an estate of two hundred pound per annum, should be
settled upon the Corporation for ever, and the rest of his estate for the like
uses in the four Northern Counties of England.

3. That God has wrought a resolution in us of the Corporation (wherein we
trust he will enable us to persist (viz.) to contribute our labor and pains
freely to this work, without the least diminution of the Stock. And if any
desire to be satisfied what our receipts, disbursements, or manner of
proceedings are, our Books are open at Coopers Hall, London, between the
hours of Ten and Twelve every Saturday, where they may without offense see
what is given, and by whom, when brought in, and how employed or improved.

It Is very strange to see what a multitude of objections are darted against
this pure piece of Christianity, yea by some, whom otherwise we have
charitable thoughts of, and how exceedingly the work is impeded thereby, and
however through mercy we are able to answer every one of them sufficiently,
yet we forbear to particularize them, least we should reflect too much on
some, our Consciences telling us, that as the work is of God, and really such
as is held forth, so he only can satisfy the spirits of Men, and will do it
in due season, and in the mean time bless his own work being able to carry
it on, who delights oft-times in small means, that his gracious operations
may the more be seen.

This is the fifth Treatise has been published to the world in this kind (but
the first by the Corporation) every one of them exceeding each other, wherein a
most apparent growth and progress does appear amongst the poor Natives.

That we have now to offer to the public view is a farther account of that
living, growing, spreading power of Godliness amongst them. And first we shall
begin with some remarkable passages of divine providence in a Letter received
from Mr John Eliot (who was the first Minister the Lord stirred up to promote
this work) bearing date the 28th of February 1651. to one of our selves.

Much Honored and Beloved in CHRIST.
THe Providence of God giving this unexpected opportunity of sending, I thought
it my duty not to omit it, that so the Saints and people of God with you,
especially your self, with the rest of the Worshipful Corporation, might
understand the progress and present state of this work of the Lord among the
Indians, for we meet with changes of providence and trials in this our day
of small things. It has pleased the Lord to try them, so soon as they have
but tasted of his holy ways. For our natures cannot live without Physic, nor
grace without affliction, more or less, sooner or later. The winter before
this last past it pleased God to work wonderfully for the Indians, who call
upon God in preserving them from the Pox, when their profane Neighbors were
cut off by it. This winter it has pleased God to make less difference, for
some of ours were also visited with that disease, yet this the Lord has done
for them, that fewer of them have dyed thereof, then of others who call not
upon the Lord. Only three dyed of it, (but five more young and old) of other
diseases: Now (through the Lords mercy) they are well, though not without
ordinary infirmities, which befall Mankind. In matters of Religion they go
on, nor only in attendance on such means as they have, not only in
knowledge, which begins to have some clearenesse in the Fundamental points
of Salvation; but also in the practice and power of Grace, both in constant
care in attendance on the worship of God on Sabbath days and Lecture days,
especially profitting in the gift of prayer, and also in the exercise of love
to such as be in affliction, either by sickness or poverty. I have seen
lively Actings of Charity out of Reverence to the Command of the Lord, when
such as had not that principle were far from such works of mercy, it pleased
God to try them in the time of the Pox, for some of them did hazard their own
lives (for to them it is very mortal) in obedience to the Command of the Lord,
to show mercy to them that were sick, and some were infected thereby, and fell
sick and lay with much chearefullnesse and patience under Gods hand, and
through the Lords mercy are well again; others who did show mercy in that case
escaped the sickness to the praise of God. Likewise God is pleased to try
their Charity by an old Paraliticke or Palsy sicke-man, whose own Children
being profane and tired with the burden of him (his retentive power of
houlding excrements being loosened) and having a looseness, sometimes he is
very noisome and burdensome) they forsook him, and he had perished, but that
the Lord stirred up (by the word of his grace) their hearts to show mercy to
him, for he was while he was sick at six shilling a week charge, for we
offered twelve-pence a night to any to tend him, and for mere hyre none would
abide it, but out of mercy and Charity some of the Families did take care of
him, and gave freely some weeks, and others were paid out of their public
money, namely, such as has been taken off, such as have been Transgressors by
Fine or Mulct: and still he is at four shillings a week charge being better
in health, in so much that all their public money is spent, and much more,
and we have Collections among them for the same use. The old man who has been
and still is wise, does wisely testify that their love is sincere, and that
they truly pray to God, and I hope so does he, and shall be saved. I could
with a word speaking in our Churches have this poor man relieved, but I do
not, because I think the Lord has done it, for the trial of their grace* and
exercise of their love, and to train them up in works of Charity, and in the
way of Christ to make Collections for the poor. I see how the Lord provideth
to further the progress of the Gospel, by these trials and afflictions, yea
there be more passages of this winters work, wherein the Lord has taught us
by the Cross. For one of our first and principal men is dead, which though it
be a great blow and damping to our work in some Respects, yet the Lord has
not left the rest to discouragement thereby, nay the work is greatly
furthered, for he made so gracious an end of his life, and embraced death with
such holy submission to the Lord, and was so little terrified at it, as that it
has greatly strengthened the Faith of the living to be constant, and not to
fear death, greatly commending of the death of Wamporas, for that was his
name, I think he did more good by his death, then he could have done by his
life: one of his sayings was, That God gives us three mercies in this world;
the first is health and strength; the second is food and clothes; the third is
sickness and death; and when we have had our share in the two first, why
should we not be willing to take our part in the third? for his part he was: I
heard him speak thus, and at other times also, and at his last he so spoke,
and it so took with them, that I observe it in their prayers, that they so
reckon up Gods dispensations to them, his last words which he spoke in this
world were these; Jehova Aninnumah Jesus Christ, (that is) Oh, Lord, give me
Jesus Christ; and when he could speak no more, he continued to lift up his
hands to Heaven, according as his strength lasted, unto his last breath; so
that they say of him he dyed praying; when I visited him the last time that I
saw him in this world (not doubting but I shall see him again with Christ in
Glory) one of his sayings was this: Four years and a Quarter since, I came to
your house, and brought some of our Children to dwell with the English, now I
dye, I strongly entreat you (for that is their phrase) that you would strongly
entreat Elder Heath (with whom his Son lives) and the rest, which have our
Children, that they may be taught to know God, so as that they may teach their
Countrymen, because such an example would do great good among them, his heart
was much upon our intended work, to gather a Church among them, I told him I
greatly desired that he might live (if it were Gods will) to be one in that
work, but if he should now dye he should go to a better Church, where Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob, and Moses, and all the dead Saints were with Jesus
Christ in the presence of God in all happiness and Glory; he said he feared
not death, he was vvilling to dye, and turning to the Company which were
present, he spoke unto them thus; I now shall dye, but Jesus Christ calls you
that live to go to Naticke, that there the Lord might rule over you, that you
might make a Church, and have the Ordinance of God among you, believe in his
Word, and do as he commands you: With many such words exhorting them,
which they could not hear without weeping. A little before his death he
spoke many gracious words unto them, wherein one passage was this; Some
delight to hear and speak idle and foolish words, but I desire to hear and
speak only the words of God, exhorting them so to do likewise: his gracious
words were acceptable and affecting, that whereas they used to fly and avoid
with terror such as lie dying, now on the contrary they flocked together to
hear his dying words, whose death and burial they beheld with many tears;
nor am I able to write his Story without weeping.

Another affliction and damping to our work was this, that it has pleased
God to take away that Indian who was most active in Carpentrey, and who had
framed me an house with a little direction of some English, whom I sometime
procured to go with me to guide him, and to set out his work: he dyed of
the Pox this winter, so that our house lies, not yet raised, which makes my
aboade amongst them more difficult, and my tarriance shorter then else I
would, but the Lord helps me to remember that he has said, Endure thou
hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. These are some of the gracious
trials and Corrections the Lord has exercised us withal, yet he has mingled
them with much love and favor in other respects; for it has pleased God this
winter much to enlarge the ability of him whose help I use in translating the
Scriptures, which I account a great furtherance of that which I most desire,
namely, to communicate unto them as much of the Scriptures in their own
language as I am able. Besides, it has pleased God to stir up the hearts of
many of them this winter to learn to read and write, wherein they do very
much profit with a very little help, especially some of them, for they are
very ingenuous. And whereas I had thoughts that we must have an Englishman to
be their Schoolmasters, I now hope that the Lord will raise up some of
themselves, and enable them unto that work, with my care to teach them well in
the reason of the sounds of Letters and spelling, I trust in the Lord that we
shall have sundry of them able to read and write, who shall write every man
for himself so much of the Bible as the Lord shall please to enable me to
translate. Besides those works which concern Religion and Learning, we are
also a doing (according to the measure of our day of small things) in the
civil part of this work we have set out some part of the Town in several
Streets, measuring out and dividing of Lots, which I set them to do and teach
them how to do it: many have planted Apple Trees, and they have begun diverse
Orchards, its now planting-time, and they be full of business, yet we are
doing some public works; the last week I appointed our Lecture to be at a
Water which is a common passage, and where the Fish we call Alewives come,
there we built a bridge, and made a wyre to catch Fish, and being many of
them, some we appointed to one work, and some to another, through the
blessing of God we brought both these works to perfection: we also have
begun a Pallizadoe Fort, in the midst whereof we intend a meeting house and
Schoole-house, but we are in great want of Tools, and many necessaries, and
when we cannot go we must be content to creep; this present week I am
going to Pawtucket, the great Fishing place upon Merimek, where I hear sundry
do expect my coming, with a purpose to submit themselves unto the Lords hand.
Sir, I do earnestly beg your prayers both for me and for this work of the
Lord which he has set me about,

John Eliott.
Roxbury the 28th: of the 2d: 1651.
The former Letter of Mr Elliots came to hand about six Months before the
latter, and that's the reason you have another of his follows next after his
former, whereby the Reader may see and observe the constant goodness of God in
carrying on his own work, notwithstanding all the opposition of Men. Every
day bringing forth as it were additionall improvements, to the praise of God,
who delights so much in this his day of small things.

Worshipful and much honored in the LORD.
IT is through the grace of Christ, who has called you into the fellowship of
his Kingdom, that you are willing to take such care and pains for the
advancement and furtherance of his Kingdom, and the Lord fill your hearts with
the Consolations of his holy Spirit, whose spirit he has set to seek his
glory in promoting the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and because the fruit of our
Labors coming in with a blessing, is a great means to quicken the heart to be
constant in that work which the Lord delights to prosper and bless. It is
my duty to let you understand how it pleases the Lord to prosper and proceed
in this work of his among the Indians; for the promoting whereof you travail
with care and pains, that so you may go on with the more Comfort, and the
better know how to direct your prayers unto the Lord in that behalf. I will
not trouble you with rehearsal of such things as I have already this year
written about unto our honored Friend Mr Winslowe, so far as I can call to
mind what I wrote, hoping in the Lord that the Ships are safely arrived, and
my Letters come unto his hands. I know not whether I have yet mentioned our
School, which through the Lords mercy we have begun, though we cannot yet
be constant in it, we have two men in some measure able to teach the youth
with my guidance, and inspection. And thus we order the School: The Master
daily prays among his Scholars, and instructs them in Catechism, for
which purpose I have compiled a short Catechism, and vvrote it in the Masters
book, which he can read, and teach them; and also all the Copies he sets
his Scholars when he teaches them to write, are the Questions and Answers of
the Catechism, that so the Children may be the more prompt and ready therein:
we aspire to no higher learning yet, but to spell, read, and write, that so
they may be able to write for themselves such Scriptures as I have already, or
hereafter may (by the blessing of God) translate for them; for I have no hope
to see the Bible translated, much less printed in my days. Therefore my
chief care is to Communicate as much of the Scriptures as I can by vvriting:
and further, my scope so to train up both men and youths, that when they be in
some measure instructed themselves, they may be sent forth to other parts of
the Country, to train up and instruct others, even as they themselves have
been trained up and instructed. This consideration does make me very careful
to put on the School, and attend it with what diligence I can, although I
cannot as yet do in it, what I desire. There be several providence of God
appearing to work, which make me think that the most effectual and general
way of spreading the Gospel will be by themselves, when so instructed as I have
abovementioned; (...) for my preaching, though such whose hearts God has bowed
to attend, can pick up some knowledge by my broken expressions, yet I see that
it is not so taking, and effectual to strangers, as their own expressions be,
who naturally speak unto them in their own tongue. To the end therefore that
they may be the better able to teach others, I do train them up, and exercise
them therein: when I am among them on the Lords days, appointing two, each
Sabbath to exercise, and when they have done, then I proceed, and assuredly I
find a good measure of ability in them, not only in prayer (wherein they
exceed my expectation) but in memory to rehearse such Scriptures as I have read
unto them and expounded; to expound them also as they have heard me do, and
apply them. And now also the Schoolmasters taking the care of catechizing the
Children, I leaving that to him do catechize the men, examining and trying
their knowledge, which yet I am wary in doing, least I should dampe and
discourage the weak. These things I attend with the more intention, because it
seems to me God will employ these first instructed to instruct others, of
which I have had sundry experiences, some I shall instance; it pleased Mr
Winthrop (son unto our late Honored Governor now at rest) to advise me to
send two discreet men to the greatest and most potent Sachem among the
Naragansets, to answer such Questions as they might propound, and to stir
them up to call on God. I did accordingly, and sent him a Present by them; but
the proud Sachem did little less then despise the offer, though he took the
Present; So they thought they should have returned without success; but when
they came among the people, especially such as were a little more remote from
the great and proud ones, they received them with great gladness; one Company
taking one of ours among them, others taking the other of our men amongst them;
they asked them many Questions, expressed their readiness to call upon God, if
they had any to teach them: expressing likewise that they did not expect their
Sachems would pray to God, because they were so proud: by which I do perceive
that the Lord is preparing a plentiful harvest, and not only by this, but by
many other Evidences. There is a great Country lying between Conectacott and
the Massachusetts, called Nipnet, where there be many Indians dispersed, many of
which have sent to our Indians, desiring that some may be sent unto them to
teach them to pray unto God. And sometimes some of our best men do go to
several places for a little while, and return again, and not without
success. These things being so, the work which we now have in hand will be
as a pattern and Copy before them, to imitate in all the Country, both in
civilizing them in their order, government, Law, and in their Church
proceedings and administrations; and hence great care lies upon me to set
them right at first, to lay a sure foundation for such a building, as I foresee
will be built upon it, and in this matter I greatly need pray: The order of
proceeding with them, is first to gather them together from their scattered
course of life, to cohabitation and civil order and Government, and then to
form them (the Lord having fitted them) into visible Church State, for the
guidance whereof, I have instructed them, that they should look only into the
Scriptures, and out of the word of God fetch all their Wisdom, Laws, and
Government, and so shall they be the Lords people, and the Lord above shall
Reign over them, and govern them in all things by the word of his mouth.
Sundry of these which pray unto God have formerly subjected themselves unto the
English; So that in this Government among themselves they do reserve
themselves in that point to own them as their superiors, to make appeals
unto them as need may require, and experience for these many years show, that
though they have so subjected themselves, yet the only benefit they have is
protection: as for hearing and determining their causes, the difference of
language, and paucitie of Interpreters prohibits, and if their causes come,
they be so longsome, and yet of small importance, that it is of necessity,
that either they must have no government, as hitherto it has been, or else
they must have it among themselves. Besides, all or many of their differences
and causes they usually brought to me, which was not convenient, and I was
willing to avoyde: themselves also found great need that some should be over
them, to judge their causes, and end differences, and much desired it.
Therefore upon the sixth day of the sixth Month of this present year (their
Pallizadoe Fort being finished) they had a great meeting, and many came
together from diverse parts, though sundry were hindered and came not at that
time, where, with prayer to God I read and expounded to them the 18th of
Exodus, (which I had done several times before) and finally they did solemnly
choose two Rulers among themselves, they first chose a Ruler of an Hundred,
then they chose two Rulers of Fifties, then they chose Ten or Tithing Men (so I
call them in English) for so they were called (as is reported) in England,
when England did flourish happily under that kind of Government. And lastly,
for that days work every man chose who should be his Ruler of ten, the Rulers
standing in order, and every man going to the man he chose, and it seemed unto
me as if I had seen scattered bones go, bone unto his bone, and so lived a
civil political life, and the Lord was pleased to minister no small comfort
unto my spirit, when I saw it. After this work was ended, they did enter into
Covenant with God, and each other, to be the Lords people, and to be governed
by the word of the Lord in all things. The words of which Covenant are these in
English. We do give our selves and our Children unto God to be his people,
He shall rule us in all our affairs, not only in our Religion, and affairs
of the Church (these we desire as soon as we can, if God will) but also in
all our works and affairs in this world, God shall rule over us. Isa. 33.22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, He
will save us; the Wisdom which God has taught us in his Book, that shall
guide us and direct us in the way. Oh Jehovah, teach us wisdom to find out
thy wisdom in thy Scriptures, let the grace of Christ help us, because
Christ is the wisdom of God, send thy Spirit into our hearts, and let it
teach us, Lord take us to be thy people, and let us take thee to be our God.

This Act of forming themselves into the Government of God, and entering into
this Government is the first public Record among the Indians, and for ought I
know the first that ever was among them: and now our next work is to prepare
them for Church Estate, to which end I do instruct them, that the Visible
Church of Christ is builded upon a lively confession of Christ, and Covenanting
to walk in all the Administrations of the public worship of God, under the
Government and Discipline of Jesus Christ. I do therefore exhort them to try
their hearts by the word of God to find out what change the Lord has wrought
in their hearts, and this is the present work we have in hand.

Give me leave (much honored Friends) to go a little back in my relation,
that I might be more particular, because these Letters I prepared in the sixth
Month after they had chosen their Officers, as I was propounding and teaching
them the above-written Covenant, for that I did often before we did solemnly
accomplish it, that so they might do it as an Act of knowledge and faith. Now
let me relate the order of our proceeding: Having again and again read this
Covenant to them, and instructed them in the meaning of it, it pleased God to
wrack Mr Webbers Ship at Conahasset, though the Lord dealt favorably; most
goods were saved, though much spoiled: this was on the first day of the 7th
Month, wherefore at a Lecture at Natik on the 10th of the same Month, I
informed them of the plentiful supply which the Lord had made your selves his
instruments to send unto them for the furtherance of this our work, and also
how the Lord had frowned upon it, and undoubtedly it was a fruit of sin, and
therefore the Lord called them to repentance, and make peace with God: besides
we were beginning a great work of civil Cohabitation and Government, and
they wanted wisdom to carry on such a work, and the Lord had promised, if any
want wisdom ask it of God, who gives liberally, citing that of James which I
had formerly preached on. Moreover, we were in preparation for a Church State,
and that was a great matter to seek the Lord in; and lastly, they having
chosen Rulers, and intending to enter into a Covenant, to promise unto God to
be his people, and to be ruled in all things by his Word. Gods appointment is
that such a Covenant should be entered into, in a solemn day of fasting and
prayer, and all these causes concurred, to put us on unto that work. Now
though we never yet had kept such a day unto the Lord, yet I had instructed
them therein, for in the Spring we had a general day of humiliation in all
the Churches; and thereupon they moved this question; Why the English often
fasted and prayed, and I never yet taught them so to do: to which I did
answer, by that of Christ unto the Disciples, but told them, that when we set
upon the great works of God to be his people, governed by his Word, and to
gather a Church, then they should be called of God unto it, etc. and now it
came to pass, my motion they deliberated on with some conference (as their
manner is) and finally did consent unto it, then I told them, it was needful
they should pray and teach that day; sundry of them and we agreed, that all
such as were called to be Rulers should exercise that day, or so many as we
had time for their exercise. Before that day came, even then when it was
appointed Cutshamoquin, the chief Sachem, and therefore chosen the chief (for
he is constant in his profession, though doubtful in respect of the
throughnesse of his heart) was in the Country near Narraganset, about
appeasing some strife among some Sachems. In which Journey some of those bad
Indians and Cutshamoquin with them did buy much strong Water at Gortons
Plantation, and had a great drinking, from which the wiser sort did withdraw
themselves, but Cutshamoquin was in it, though not unto drunkenness, yet his
Act was scandalous. Before we solemnly appeared before God, and made the
above-written Covenant, I advised with Mr Cotton about it, and his Counsel
was to add these words in the beginning: We are the sons of Adam, we and
our forefathers have a long time been lost in our sins, but now the mercy of
the Lord begins to find us out again; therefore the grace of Christ
helping us, we do give our selves and our Children, etc.

When the day came, this Act of Cutshamoquin being broken out, we suffered not
him to teach; only he began the day with confession of his sin, and made a
short prayer, wherein he confessed, Satan acted in his heart, begged pardon,
and that the Spirit of God might dwell in him, and act in him for time to come,
and so ended.

Then another of them began with prayer, and for his Text took that in the 7th
of Luke 36. to the end, (though they do not know the Book, Chapter, or Verse,
but distinguish my Lectures by the first material word in it) Christ being
invited by Simon the Pharisee, the Woman washed his feet with her tears, etc.
At which Simon stumbling, Christ spoke the parable of the two Debtors, both
freely forgiven, with the application, all which he repeated pretty well, and
after his teaching he prayed again and ended. The second took for his Text
the Lords Prayer because it is, said he, a day of prayer. The third took for
his Text the 7th of Matthew 19. to the end, Every tree that brings not forth
good fruit is cut down, etc. And upon that parable of the two Builders, on the
rock the first, the other on the sand, etc. By this time the day was well up,
then I taught out of the 9th of Ezra 3. and 9. where I described a day of
fasting, and the right carriage of it; yet by the parable of a Nut, I showed
that outward acts are as the shell, which is necessary, but a broken and
believing heart is the kernel, and so ended the forepart of the day. After a
little respite (in which time a Question came to me, if it were lawful to
take a pipe of Tobacco?) we met again, the first took his Text, Joh. 3.16.22.
and his Preface was, I read or rehearse this, and let every one read it in
his own heart. The second took his Text, Matthew. 13.24. to 31. from the parable
of him that sowed good seed, and the enemy came and while they slept sowed
tares, etc. The third took his Text, Luke 3d. 4, 5, 6. ver. Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his paths straight, etc. By this time night drew on, then I
took for my Text, Deuteronomy. 29. and the 1. to 16. where Israel entered into Covenant
with the Lord: and finally our Covenant in the forerecited words I expressed,
and they jointly consented unto; first the Rulers, then all the people, then
was the Collections for the poor, and by dark night we finished our work.
Thus have I briefly described that blessed day wherein these poor souls
solemnly became the people of the Lord: this was on the 24th day of the 7th
Month, 1651.

Upon the 8th of the Oct. Month, which was our next Lecture (for it is in that
place but once in a fortnight, I houlding a Lecture each other week still at
any other place) it pleased our Governor with many others attending him, to
visit our poor works and day of small things, where they viewed our house,
our Fort, our Bridge, advised about a place for a Mill, etc.) At the season
they came unto our Lecture, and observed the carriage and behavior of things
and men: among other things one of our Indians did (as we are wont) exercise,
which they took so much notice of, and were so far affected with, as that it
pleased the Governor to advice me to write the substance of that which he
spoke, which is as follows; his Text was Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46* Again, the
Kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field, the which when a man
has found, he hides and for joy thereof goes and sells all that he has,
and buyeth the field: 45. Again, the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a
Marchant-man seeking goodly pearls: 46. Who when he had found one pearl of
great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it. The substance of
these words he did twice rehearse, then for instruction he first propounded
what is this treasure which is hid in a field? he answered it is Repentance for
sin, faith in Christ, and pardon of sin and all grace, as also praying to
God, the worship of God, and his appointments, which are the means of Grace,
on which he dilated, showing what excellent pearls these are, exhorting all to
account so of them, and on this point he did much insist: secondly, he asked
what is the Field where these pearls are to be found? he answered the Church
of Christ, which they did desire to constitute in this place, and to that end
come thither to dwell: Thirdly, he asked what is it to sell all that a man has
to buy this Field? He answered, to part with all their sins, and to part with
all their old Customs, and to part with their friends and lands, or any thing
which hinders them from coming to that place, where they may gather a Church,
and enjoy all these pearls; and here he insisted much to stir them up, that
nothing should hinder them from Gathering together into this place where they
might enjoy such a mercy.

Then he proceeded to the second parable, and his first Question was, Who is
the Merchant man, that seeks goodly pearls? he answered, it is all you
Indians which pray to God, and repent of sin, and come to hear the word of
God, you come to seek for excellent pearls; and here also he insisted: his
second Question was, What is this pearl of great price? now in answer to this
Question he did not pitch it on Christ alone, and show the worth and price of
Christ: but he did pitch it on faith in Jesus Christ, and repentance for sin,
and stood upon the excellency and necessity thereof. And this was the greatest
defect I observed in his Exercise, which seeing I undertake to relate that
which none but my self understood, I dare not but truly relate, because the
Lord heard all, and I must give an account of this relation before him: His
next question was, What is meant by all the Riches he had? he answered; his
sins, his evil Customs, his evil manners, in which he formerly took much
pleasure; And here he dilated also: Lastly he asked how did he sell them all,
and buy the pearl? he answered, by casting away and forsaking all his sins,
mourning and repenting of them, praying to God, and believing in Jesus Christ.
And here he fervently dilated, and so ended; and this according to the best of
my memory and observation, is the substance of what he delivered. Whereby you
may observe the manner of my teaching them, for they imitate me, as for our
method of preaching to the English by way of Doctrine, reason, and use, neither
have I liberty of speech, for that way of teaching being very unskilful in
their Language, nor have they sufficient ability of understanding to profit by
it, so well as by this way, whereof you have herein a little Taste.

Jo: Eliot.


The next Letter good Reader (for we place them according to their several
dates) is one that came from Mr John Wilson that reverend holy man, who is
Pastor of the Church of Christ at Boston in New England, who accompanying the
Governor, together with Mr Eliot and sundry others to their new Town built by
the Converted Indians, where they purpose by Gods permission to cohabite
together, that so they may enjoy all those Ordinances the Lord Jesus has left
unto his Church. Now what Mr Wilson there saw, heard, and observed, that he
has written over to us, and we have published for thy information and
consolation.

Honored and ever dear Sir.
TOuching the work of God among the Indians, for ought I hear or see from
them that are most conversant therein, as Mr Eliot, Mr Mahew, and Mr Leverich,
with whom I have made diligent enquiry; It does prosperously succeed to their
great encouragement, and ours in the Lord. There was here some few weeks
since, the prime Indian at Marthas Vineyard with Mr Mahewe (Humanequinn) a
grave and solemn Man, with whom I had serious discourse, Mr Mahewe being
present as Interpreter between us, who is a great proficient both in knowledge
and utterance, and love, and practice of the things of Christ, and of Religion,
much honored and reverenced, and attended by the rest of the Indians there,
who are solemnly Covenanted together, I know not how many, but between thirty
or forty at the least, and receive none into their Fraternity, or
Combination, but those which give good proof of their upright desires, to
their Conscience, in their professions and Conversations, who when Mr Mahewe
cannot be with them (as at many set times he is) does in the week time
instruct himself from Mr Mahews mouth, and prepare for their instruction on
the Lords day, which they conscionably observe, and have their constant solemn
meetings together: This man where he was, had communion on the Lords day with
Mr Eliots Indians near Dorchester Mill, unto whom he preached or declared what
he had learned himself from the Scripture, some two hours together, with
solemn prayer before and after, and then ended with a Psalm, such as at home
is wont to be sung among his usual hearers. The Lords day after he was in our
Assembly, the Boat then being ready to carry him home by the next
opportunity, and truly my reverence to him was such, as there being no room
I prayed our brethren to receive that good Indian into one of their pewes,
which they did forenoone and afternoon, and at meal, I perceived by him that
he had understanding of what he heard. Mr Leverich being lately here and at my
house, (who also preached at our new Church) I conferred with him about the
beginnings and progress of the Lords work, among his neighboring Indians at
Sandwich, and did hear from him, what did my heart good. And therefore when he
took his leave of me I requested him that he would do me the favor at his
return home, to send me a brief story of that good hand of God which was
there upon them, ab origin, which I thank him he did soon after, and I
thought not amiss to enclose it, as it came to me, being written with his own
hand, not doubting but it would add unto your rejoicing in the Lord. About a
fortnight since, there was a Lecture to be of Mr Eliot, at Naticke, the new
Indian Town, where he uses frequently to preach to them, besides what he does
near home (on either side) and many times does keep the Lords day with them,
whereof having some notice, and that the Governor Mr Endicot intended then to
be there, my Cousin Rawson and I with some other, did prepare to ride thither,
the Governor and his Sergeants lying at Dedham, which is within seven or
eight miles of the Town, and we at Mr Jacksons near Watertowne Mill) in like
distance in the next morning after we had been some hours there where we found
Mr Eliot, and by that time we bad viewed all things, the Governor came with
about twenty horsemen from Dedham, and made a like view, after which the
Lecture or Sermon began in the Fort, which the Indians have made of whole trees
very hansome and firm, which is near a fair house which the Indians have
built after the English manner high and large (no English-mans hand in it, save
that one day or two they had an English Carpenter with them to direct about the
time of rearing, with chimneys in it: In which Mr Eliot and those which
accompany him use to lie, and the Indian Schoolmasters was there teaching the
Children who does read and spell very well himself, and teaches them to do
the like (besides writing) and as there is a large Room below, so there is a
like chamber above, in a Corner whereof Mr Eliot has a little Room enclosed,
and a bed and bed-sted therein, and in the same Chamber the Indians do as in a
Wardrope hang up their skins, and things of price, as counting them there to
be very safe, as well when the doors be open, as when they be locked; they have
laid out three long fair streets there, two on this side the River, and one on
that, and have several house-lots apportioned severally to every one, which
do or be to inhabit there, and in many of them there are fruit trees already
planted, and they are building English houses for themselves, mean while
living in Wigwams, whereof there is good store near the hill side, at present
there being a goodly plain from the Town toward Dedham) over the River (that
is, Charles River) they have made a firm high foote-bridge arch-wise to walk
to and fro, having heaped on the bottom tymbers huge stones, the more to
fortify it, and it was a great encouragement to them, that the last year,
(when a like bridge made by the English in the new Dedham Village called
Medefield, some four or five miles from them) was thrown down by the force
of the floods or Ice, yet theirs did stand firm and upright. But to return to
the Fort, and to the business of the day, that is Round and Capacious, and they
have prepared there a large Canopie of Matts upon poles for Mr Eliot and the
chief of his Company to sit under, and other sorts for themselves and other
hearers. The Saneps or men by themselves and the Squaes or women by themselves,
besides the English then present, (which were about thirty) there were I
think not fewer then a hundred men women and young ones; among the Indians
there be some greater proficients in knowledge, and of better utterance by
far then their fellows, Grave and serious men, whom Mr Eliot has trained up
(or the Lord rather by his instructions and directions) to instruct and exhort
the rest of the Indians in their Lords day and other meetings, when he cannot
come to them himself. There be some five of these, one of them was prepared
before we came, and appointed to begin this Exercise; the further relation of
the manner of this Indians behavior in preaching, together with the substance
of that Sermon being before set down by Mr Eliot may be never omitted: other
particulars in order to the exact description of the Indian Fort and buildings
in Mr Eliots Letter is defective are here supplied. This man being of middle
age, and clad all in English apparel (as most if not all others of them are)
sitting in the midst, on a stool, under the shelter, did begin with prayer
very solemnly, standing up for some half quarter of an hour, then sitting
down spoke unto them of the two Parables, concerning the Field wherein the
treasure hid, and the wise Merchant selling all for the pearl; we understood
him not (save Mr Eliot) excepting now and then a word or two, he discoursed to
them some three quarters of an hour at the least, with great devotion,
gravitie, decency, readiness and affection, and gestures very becoming, and
sundry mentions he made of Jesus Christ, specially in the beginning, and
toward the ending, as if he were the scope of all, and the rest of the
Indians; diverse old men and women, and the younger did join and attend with
much Reverence, as if much affected therewith; then he ended with prayer as he
began. Then Mr Eliot prayed and preached in the Indian Language for some
hour more, about coming to Christ, and bearing his yoke. This Text was
translated by him from the Scripture into English, speaking with much
authority, and after his latter prayer the Indian Schoolmasters read out of
his Book one of the Psalms in meeter, line by line, translated by Mr Eliot
into Indian, all the men and women, etc. singing the same together in one of
our ordinary English tunes melodiously. I should have said that after Mr Eliots
Sermon there were two or three grave Indians that propounded to Mr Eliot, each
of them a Question, very pertinent to the matter he handled about the yoke of
Christ, and coming to Christ, which he answered, interpreting unto us both
their Questions, and the sum of his own Answers. After this the Lord did
stir up my heart to make an Exhortation to the Indians, which Mr Eliot
expounded to them, and also the Governors Speech, which God did stir him up
too unto the same purpose, declaring our joy to see such beginnings, and
warning them of the great danger if they should decline from what they had
already come unto, either in their knowledge, affection, or Christian practice,
encouraging them against what might dampe or deter.

Then all of us taking us to our horses left Mr Eliot and them together, the
Governor and his Company to lie at Dedham, and the rest of us when we had rid
two or three miles with them did return into our own way toward our former
lodging, having been every one of us much refreshed in our spirits in what we
saw, and were informed of, viz. of God amongst them. Not long before this,
traveling with Mr Eliots brother I conferred in the way seriously with him
about these Indians, for he uses to accompany his brother, and is a right
godly and diligent man, desiring to know what solidity he found by experience
in them. Who did acquaint me that there was difference between them as between
the English, some being lose serious then others, and less spiritual; but
that there was a considerable Company of solid ones that were constant and
forward in good duties, as well on the week days as on the Lords. And that he
had purposely sometimes in the dark walked the Round, as it were alone, and
found them in their several Families as devout in prayer, etc. as if there had
been any present to observe: and that carried it very modestly, utterly
refusing to receive any relief from Mr Eliots Table, choosing rather to live
on the provisions at home, which came in by their own labor; and when once Mr
Eliots own provisions failed (he being detained among them sundry days
beyond his intent) they soon took notice, and of their own accord did bring
unto him variety of the best which they had themselves, and he professed unto
me that upon all his best observation, there was a very hopeful beginning
amongst them of the Grace and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus. The Lord vouchsafe to
be the Omega among them as well as the Alpha of this blessed change.

Your most loving Friend, and Brother in Christ, John Wilson.
Boston: 27: 8ber 51.

As Mr Wilson was stirred up in himself to send us the Relation of his own
observations upon his journey with Mr Eliot, so he having received some
precious lines from an able Minister of the Gospel, viz. Mr Leverich of
Sandwich in the Government of New Plymouth, whom the Lord had stirred up to
labor also in the conversion of the Indians: the cares seeming as it were
white unto harvest, and the laborers but very few, he adventures to put in his
sickle, not without hopeful success, as will appear in his following lines.
And for the discouragements mentioned in his Letter, know that diverse of his
people having cast off all the Ordinances of God in his Church, at last came to
be seduced by every idle spirit that came amongst them, to be led into such
fancies as we are ashamed to mention. And so this good man upon this occasion
turned to the Indians, where he meets with an abundant blessing upon his
endeavors.

Reverend Sir.
I Salute you in the Lord, I shall trouble you only with two things, first,
the mooving causes inducing me to set upon this work: Secondly, with what
success I have hitherto been entertained, by the blessing of God upon my weak
endeavors. For the first of these, I suppose its not unknown to your self,
amongst many others, what singular exercise I have had in these parts, and what
singular Conflicts I have met withal in my travails amongst our own
Countrymen, diverse of them transported with their (though not singular)
Fancies, to the rejecting of all Churches and Ordinances by a new cunning, and
I persuade my self one of the last but most pernicious plot of the Devil to
undermine all Religion, and introduce all Atheism and profaneness, if it were
possible, together with which, I have observed a spirit of Pharisaisme and
formalitie too, too evidently creeping upon and strongly possessing others
generally, besides other discouragements I shall forbear to mention, which
considered diverse of our brethren, together with my self, upon consultation
had together, were resolved to moove together else whether, where we might
hope for more and better encouragement, as touching our Communion, if God so
pleased: but were dissuaded by diverse our honored Friends, both by their
Letters and more private Counsels, unto whom we gave way, at least for the
present: not long after having an hopeful Indian in my house, he propounds to
me a motion of teaching the Indians near us. And sometime after Mr Eliot
invites me to the same work by his Letters: then I thought with my self I
must stay, and began to taste the motion with more affection, resolving, that it
God would please to fit up the rooms of others with the access of such for
lorne Creatures, and bring in such as wandered in the high ways, lanes, and
hedges; and Call in the lame, and halt, and blind, in stead of those
Contemners, it would be a mercy; and by no other respects in this world was my
breast inclined unto this work, and to attend God in it. As touching the
second, for matter of success and encouragement, I cannot but reckon this one,
and that not the least, that though the Indian tongue be very difficult,
irregular, and anomalous, and wherein I cannot meet with a Verb Substantive
as yet, nor any such Particles, as Conjunctions, etc. which are essential to
the several sorts of axioms, and consequently to all rational and perfect
discourses, and that though their words are generally very long, even
sesquipedalia verba, yet I find God helping, not only my self to learn and
attain more of it in a short time, then I think I could or did of Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew, in the like space of time, when my memory was stronger, and
when all known rules of Art are helpful to fasten such notions in the mind of
the learner; but also the Indians to understand me fully (as they acknowledge)
so far as I have gone. I am constrained by many ambages and circumlocutions
to supply the former defect, to express my self to them as I may. The next
encouragement I may not without ground omit to mention is this, that it
pleases God to help some of these poor Creatures to look over and beyond
the Examples of some of our looser sort of English, which I look upon as a
great stumbling block to many. It Is to be lamented that the name of God so
generally professed by those looser sort of English, should be so generally
polluted by them, and blasphemed by Heathens, through the occasion of their
loosenes and denial of the power of godliness, yet God gives some of theirs a
spirit of discerning between precious and vile, and a spirit of Conviction, to
acknowledge (oh that ours would lay it to heart) there is no difference between
the worst Indians, and such English, saying, they are all one Indians, yea and
further, to put a like difference between such Indians amongst themselves here
and elsewhere, as appear to be more serious in their Inquiries after God, and
conscientious according to their light, and such others that are more slight,
and mere pretenders to Religions. Thirdly, for more particular observations.
1. God has brought some of them to a sense of their sins, and a fear of his
justice. Here I shall insert an example or two, one of them being to repeat
such Principles I had begun to train them in, in a Catechisticall way (for my
penury confines me to this method at present, and I hope it may be never the
worse for them) was a good while before he could speak, having his countenance
sad before (and as I have understood since a week together after our former
exercise) and in speaking the tears all the while trickling down his Cheeks:
After being demanded by me what was the matter of his sadness, he answers
me, he did now understand that God was a just God, and for himself he had
been very wicked, even from a child. And another, whom I used as my
Interpreter now and then in teaching them, falls suddenly and publicly into a
bitter passion, crying out, and wringing his hands, out of the like
apprehension of his Condition, as he told me afterward, and I find no one of
them (daring men) to speak of their good hearts, but some more some less
sensible of the Contrary. Secondly, God has brought some of them to some
Evangelicall Conviction, one acknowledging that though he and others leave
their former evils, and should keep Gods Commandments, yet without Christ
they must go to hell. Thirdly, Two or three of them have complained of the
hardness of their hearts, and are questioning of Remedies. Fourthly, Speaking
to them of the mercy of God in Christ, one of them tells publicly it did him
more good to hear of Christ, then to hear of all earthly good things, I would
feign hope for seeds of Faith in such. Fifthly, Two of them I deal withal,
particularly for personal evils, by name for the sin of Fornication, which
they were carried away into, which my Indian acquainting my self with after
our exercise I spoke unto, showing them the evils of this sin, and
aggravating of it by the knowledge they now had of God, etc. and exhorting them
to Repentance, and to seek mercy in Christ; whereupon one of them fell into
bitter weeping, presently the other though his heart was shut up at present,
yet not long after, and with longer continuance said, I have observed in others
a sense of temptations, spiritual bondage, which they expressed naturally
thus; one says that he and the Devil were all one Soldiers, and this in
sadness of spirit and speech: another laying his hands upon his knees and
hammes, complains he was as a man tied in Cords, and prays to God to be
unloosed, and in general they are observed diverse of them to pray with much
affection, mourning; in so much that they are in this respect a wonderment to
their Companions, who enquired what is the matter, why they do so, etc.

A fourth encouragement to me is this, I find the Devil bestirring himself,
and betaking of himself to his wonted practice of stirring up oppositions
against this work by his Instruments, as fearing the ruin of his Kingdom,
their Countrymen manifesting their hatred, threatening they shall not plant,
hunt, etc. as before; yea the Controversy or enmity rather arises between
Parents and Children, etc. Lastly, and not long before I was last with you in
the Bay upon a second day in the morning before they went away, there came to
me to the number of twenty of them, voluntarily professing one by one their
desire to fear God, promising that they would leave their sins (some
intermixing acknowledgements of their sins and ignorance: and one that English
and Indians knew she had been very wicked) hereunto calling Jehovah to witness;
and this to do all their days, as long as they live: some bringing their
Children, and causing them to make the like profession; whereupon I was the
more stirred toward them in my spirit (though I acknowledge I was loath to
make an absolute engagement) to promise them I would endeavor to be as helpful
to them as I could in teaching them: which when I had done, they gave me
thanks publicly; and since this, they living some seven miles from us, have
built a Wigwam of purpose near our Town to receive them when they come on the
Lords days; and truly Sir, they are so attentive in hearing, that it grieves
me I cannot speak to them as I desire, they seeming to be hungry, and I
wanting bread for them. And thus Sir, you have a naked Narration of our
proceedings, with the events fallen out by Gods providence within not many
months. It is I believe a day of small things, and so looked at by our English
many of them, who surely would have perished in their darkness, if all others
should have contemned them as they these, I pray God they perish not in the
light, however I am resolved to babble to them as I may, considering that out of
the mouths of babes God ordaines praise, and found strength to still the
enemy, etc. the beginnings of Gods great works are often in great obscurity,
where he appoints the end to be glorious. Also I remember one sowes and another
reaps, which where ever they be, such as are faithful shall rejoice together.
I doubt not Sir, of your fervent prayers (which I do further beg of you and
others that know how to pity lost ones) for my self and poor Indians, that
the Lord will prosper our endeavors this way, and water them with his abundant
blessings in Jesus Christ, that the dayspring from on high may visit such
poor souls as are in darkness, and the shadow of death, and bring them to
life in Jesus Christ.

William Leverich.
Sandwich this 22th of the 7th. 1651.

The next Letter is a testimonial from a private hand of what Mr Leverich
mentions in his to Mr Wilson, where we may see some fruits of his labors
testified by a neighbor of his at Sandwich, which is fifty miles from that
place, where Mr Eliot has taught other Indians for diverse years: but we do
not a little rejoice to hear that Mr Leverich is engaged in this work,
because he is a grave learned knowing and a prudent Christian, one indeed from
whom by Gods blessing we may expect much good.

COncerning the Indians I have seen and heard more this Summer then ever I did
before, I have seen some Indians crave a blessing before meat, and return
thanks after meat, pray morning and evening, some of them do frequent our
meetings, they come constantly eight or ten miles every Saturday, and the
Monday they return home again, while our Exercise does last, they do attend
diligently, but understand but little, but when that is done Mr Leverich and
they do put questions one to another, and Mr Leverich has an Indian, that
speaks good English, and he is Interpreter. There is a man that lives near
us, that comes from an Island that is called Martins Vineyard, where is a
Minister that speaks good Indian, he does preach to them every week, he has
told me that that Minister told him, that there are some of them Indians, that
are able to give a better reason of their Faith, then some of the Members of
their Church; some of them will preach, and they have private meeting, and
keep very good orders.

Anthoney Bessey.
Sandwich 21th September. 1651.

The next Letter we present thee withal good Reader, is one from Mr Mayhew,
whom God has honored with abundant success in making his labors the
isntrumental means to turn many of the Heathen from their evil ways to the
Lord our God. This he not only wrote to Mr John Whitfield, who is a Minister
in Winchester, but also to a Member of our Corporation, being the same
Narrative word for word for ought we discern, wherein appears a mighty
progress in godliness since our last Treatise published by Mr Henry Whitfield
upon his coming hither from New England. God not only daily adding to their
number such as in Charity we conceive appertain to his Election: but stirred
them up (being near two hundred persons) to enter into a more close way of the
Gospel, declaring themselves to be the worshippers of the everliving God. With
many other things ministering much consolation to every Christian heart, to see
these very Powwawes fall off from the worship of Devils, and embrace the glad
tidings of Salvation.

Reverend and dearly beloved in Christ Jesus.
SIR,
WHat you have done in the Indian business, and concerning my self in
particular, do give good testimony of your holy desires to further the work
of the Lord amongst them. The good providence of God in bringing you unto us,
and the free engaging of your self in this work of the Lord, and that upon
the best ground, did fully persuade my heart of your faithfulness therein,
and of an inward blessing from God upon us thereby; although I should never
have seen a return in outward supplies, as now through mercy I have, as an
acceptable and very helpful fruit of Christian goodness and bounty, received
from your self and Christian Friends, that the Lord has stirred up both to
pray earnestly, and contribute freely for the promoting of the work of the
Lord in my hand amongst the poor Indians. Sir, assure your self, and let all
our beloved Friends know, that what is done by you together in this behalf,
does not only strengthen my hands, and give me advantage to be more helpful to
the Indians, but also is a further encouragement unto my heart from the Lord to
do to the utmost of my power in this service he has called me unto, and
wherein he has afforded me his gracious presence unto this day; and not only
in supporting me therein, but also in some remarkable passages of his power
and mercy amongst the Indians, those miserable Captives, something whereof your
self have been an eye witness unto; and have already heard, yet now being
further advantaged through the grace of God appearing with us, and knowing it
will be acceptable to your self, and our dearly beloved Christian Friends,
that long for and rejoice in the gracious appearance of Jesus Christ in his
Kingly Soveraigntie and power, where he has not formerly been known, I shall
by the help of God certify you how the Lord has carried on his own work
with us since your departure from us.

It pleased the Lord who had drawn the Indians from the Pawwaws to worship
himself, whereat the Pawwaws were much discontented, yet now to persuade two
of themselves to run after those that followed hard after God, desiring that
they might go with them in the ways of that God whose name is Jehovah; and
they came much convinced of their sins that they had lived in, and especially
of their Pawwawing, saying, I throw it from me with hatred of it, being sorry
that ever I meddled with it. And now I have heard of Jehovah, by his help I put
it under my feet, and hope to trample it down in the dust with the Devil and
Pawwawnomas (or imps) I throw it into the fire, and burn it. Thus they fully
made known unto all both by word and gesture, and by more such like
expressions they then used, not only their indignation against it, but that
they would never make use of it more. One of them did then discover the bottom
of his witchcraft, confessing that at first he came to be a Pawwaw by
Diabolical Dreams, wherein he saw the Devil in the likeness of four living
Creatures; one was like a man which he saw in the Air, and this told him that
he did know all things upon the Island, and what was to be done; and this he
said had its residence over his whole body. Another was like a Crow, and did
look out sharply to discover mischiefs coming toward him, and had its
residence in his head. The third was like to a Pidgeon, and had its place in
his breast, and was very cunning about any business. The fourth was like a
Serpent, very subtle to do mischief, and also to do great cures, and these
he said were mere Devils, and such as he had trusted to for safety, and did
labor to raise up for the accomplishment of any thing in his diabolical
craft, but now he says, that he did desire that the Lord would free him from
them, and that he did repent in his heart, because of his sin.

The other said his Conscience was much troubled for his sin, and they both
desired the Lord would teach them his ways, have mercy upon them, and pardon
their sins, for Jesus Christ his sake: and truly it did give to us who were
present a great occasion of praising the Lord, to see those poor naked sons
of Adam, and slaves to the Devil from their birth to come toward the Lord as
they did, with their joints shaking, and their bowels trembling, their spirits
troubled, and their voices with much fervency, uttering words of sore
displeasure against sin and Satan, which they had embraced from their Childhood
with so much delight, accounting it also now their sin, that they had not the
knowledge of God.

Secondly, that they had served the Devil, the Enemy both of God and Man.

Thirdly, that they were so hurtful in their lives, and were also thankful
that now through the blessing of God they had an opportunity to be delivered
out of that dangerous Condition. The Indians did all much rejoice to see the
Pawwaws turn from their wicked ways to serve the Lord. Not long after the
Pawwaws had forsaken their old way, on a Lecture day after Exercise diverse
Indians desired to become the servants of the Lord, amongst whom was a Pawwaw,
called Tequanonim, who was of great esteem and very notorious; for he as they
said, and in their ignorance conceived, never did hurt to any, but always
good, endeavoring the good and preservation of the Indians; whereunto also he
was accounted by them to be strongly provided. And as himself said he had been
possessed from the Crown of the head to the soal of the foot with
Pawwawnomas, not only in the shape of living Creatures, as Fowls, Fishes, and
creeping things, but Brass, Iron, and Stone. It was therefore the more to be
acknowledged the work of God, that he should forsake this way, his friends,
his gain, to follow the Lord, whose ways are so despiseable in the eyes of
devilish minded men. This Pawwaw declaring by what means the Lord took him
off this devilish Trade, said that he had heard some things from my Father,
who took occasion to discourse with him about the way of true happiness, that
he should never forget, blessed be God, his Counsel had so good an effect, as
I hope it has on many others: It pleased the Lord who will have all the gods
of the earth to be terrible unto him; For he meeting Mumanequem in the wood by
accident, told him that he was glad he had an opportunity to speak his mind
unto him, for he had many searchings of heart about his Pawwawing, and did
think it was not a good way, and that God was angry with him for it; for said
he my wife has been a long time sick, and the more I Pawwaw for her, the
sicker she is; And this does agree with an observation of the Indians of this
Island, viz. that since the Word of God has been taught unto them in this
place, the Pawwaws have been much foiled in their devilish taskes, and that
instead of curing have rather killed many; but in a word the fruit of this and
all other means was a public manifestation of hatred to his former ways,
wondering he was yet alive who was so sinful, and that he desired to be
better, and to believe in Christ, for whose sake only, he did believe his
sins could be pardoned, and that he did desire to hear the word of God. This
man hereby has made those of his own house to be his Enemies; his wife, his
children, and most of his friends and kindred, who remain obstinate still,
whereby he meets with many troubles and temptations: one of his brethren being
very sick did earnestly desire that he would Pawwaw for him, which he refused,
his brother told him that he might keep it private, but he still refused,
telling him that notwithstanding that, if he should answer his desire, he
should break his Covenant, and sin against God; and therefore would not.

There came pressing in at the same time about fifty Indians, desiring to
join with the worshippers of God in his service. It would be too long for me
to set down what every one said before they entered into Covenant, only this I
may not omit, that all of them came confessing their sins, some in special
the naughtiness of their hearts, others in particular, actual sins they had
lived in: and also they all desired to be made better, and to attend unto the
Word of God, to that end looking only to Christ Jesus for salvation. I
observed also that they generally came in by Families, bringing also their
Children with them, saying, I have brought my Children too, I would have my
Children serve God with us, I desire that this son and this daughter may
worship Jehovah, and it they could but speak, their parents would have them
say something, to show their willingness to serve God: And when the
Commandments were repeated, they all acknowledged them to be good, and made
choice of Jehovah to be their God, promising by his help to walk according to
his Counsels: And when they were received by them that were before in this
general Covenant, it was by lowed voices giving thanks to God that they were
met together in the ways of Jehovah: this is all before the end of the year
1650.

And now through the mercy of God there are an hundred ninetie-nine men, women,
and children, that have professed themselves to be worshippers of the great and
everliving God. There are now two meetings kept every Lords day, the one three
miles, the other about Eight miles off my house: Hi^comes teaches twice a day
at the nearest, and Mumanequem accordingly at the farthest, the last day of the
week they come unto me to be informed touching the subject they are to handle:
And the Lord does much assist them, blessed be the name of the Lord. I have
also undertaken to keep by the help of God two Lectures amongst them, which
will be at each once a fortnight: And I hope it will be by the blessing of God
very profitable unto them. This winter I intend, if the Lord will, to set up a
School to teach the Indians to read, viz. the Children, and also any young
men that are willing to learn, whereof they are very glad. I am also
endeavoring their Cohabitations with all convenient speed, that so they may be
more helpful one to another; and also the better advantaged to carry on that
work they have set upon to Gods glory, and their own comfort. And what I
have written concerning the Pawwawes, and the fifty Indians, that were
admitted to those that worshipped God in one day: There were diverse English
both eye and ear witnesses thereof, as well as my self, and we could not but
acknowledge much of the Lords power and goodness to be visible amongst them,
who without being driven by power, or allured by gifts, were so strongly
carried against those ways they so much loved, to love the way that nature
hates. Let us therefore magnify the Lord, who alone does this, and seek unto
him to do more and more still, that so one generation may praise his works to
another, and that so both we and them may abundantly utter the memory of his
great goodness and power, In that new song, Revelations 5.9. until that we
all meet together in Heaven, and sing glorious praises unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever end ever. In whom I heartily
recommend you unto God, desiring to be recommended by you, and in him to rest.

Yours to be commended in and for the Lord Jesus. Thomas Mayhew.
From the Vineyard this 16th of October. 1651.

The next Letter you meet withal came from the present Governor of the
Massachusetts, directed to the President of our Corporation; and another of the
Members thereof, which we thought good to publish, that every Christian Reader
may partake in the same consolation, wherewith he and we are comforted; and
join with us in prayer to the Lord of the Harvest, that he would provide more
laborers to enter upon this soule-saving work, and enlarge the hearts of all
his people in this Nation toward the same.

Much Honored and beloved in the Lord Jesus.
IEsteeme it not the least of Gods mercies that has stirred up the hearts of
any of the people of God to be isntrumental in the enlarging of the kingdom
of his dear Son here amongst the Heathen Indians, which was one end of our
coming hither, and it is not frustrated. It was prophesied of old, and now
begins to be accomplished, Psalm. 2.8. Neither can I but acknowledge the
unspeakeable goodness of God that gives us favor in the sight of our
Countrymen to help on with so large a hand of bounty, so glorious a work,
provoked thereunto by your worthy selves, the chief Actors of so good a
design, let me (with leave) say confidently, you will never have cause to
recent it; For the work is Gods, and he does own it, the labor there has
been yours, and your Master will reward it. It think Religion and Conscience
bind me to seek unto God for you, and to praise him with you, for what is
already begun. The Foundation is laid, and such a one that I verily believe
the gates of Hell shall never prevail against. I doubt not but the building
will go on apace, which I hope will make glad the hearts of Thousands. Truly
Gentlemen, had you been ear and eyewitnesses of what I heard and saw on a
Lecture-day amongst them about three weeks since, you could not but be
affected therewith as I was. To speak truly I could hardly refrain tears
for very joy to see their diligent attention to the word first taught by one of
the Indians, who before his Exercise prayed for the manner devoutly and
reverently (the matter I did not so well understand) but it was with such
reverence, zeal, good affection, and distinct utterance, that I could not but
admire it; his prayer was about a quarter of an hour or more, as we judged
it; then he took his Text, and Mr Eliot their Teacher told us that were
English, the place, (there were some Ministers and diverse other godly men
there that attended me thither) his Text was in Matthew 13.44, 45, 46. He
continued in his Exercise full half an hour or more as I judged it, his
gravitie and utterance was indeed very commendable, which being done Mr Eliot
taught in the Indian tongue about three quarters of an hour as near as I
could guess; the Indians, which were in number men and women near about one
hundred, seemed the most of them so to attend him (the men especially) as if
they would loose nothing of what was taught them, which reflected much upon
some of our English hearers. After all there was a Psaime sung in the Indian
tongue, and Indian meeter, but to an English tune, read by one of themselves,
that the rest might follow, and he read it very distinctly without missing a
word as we could judge, and the rest sang chearefully, and pretty tuneablie. I
rid on purpose thither being distant from my dwelling about thirty-eight or
forty miles, and truly I account it one of the best Journeys I made these
many years. Some few days after I desired Mr Eliot briefly to write me the
substance of the Indians Exercise, which when he went thither again, namely,
to Naticke, where the Indians dwell, and where the Indian taught, he read what
he remembered of it first to their Schoolmasters, who is an Indian and teaches
them and their Children to write, and I saw him write also in English, who does
it true and very legible, and asked him if it were right and he said yea, also
he read it unto others, and to the man himself, who also owned it. To tell you
of their industry and ingenuitie in building o^ ^n house after the English
manner, the hewing and squaring of their timber, the sawing of the boards
themselves, and making of a Chimney in it, making of their groundsells and
wall-plates, and mortising, and letting in the studds into them artificially,
there being but one Englishman a Carpenter to show them, being but two days
with them, is remarkable. They have also built a Fort there with half trees
cleft about eight or ten Inches over, about ten or twelve foot high, besides
what is intrencht in the ground, which is above a quarter of an acre of ground,
as I judge. They have also built a foot bridge over Charles River, with
Groundsells and Spurs to uphold it against the strength of the Flood and Ice
in the Winter, it stood firm last Winter, and I think it will stand many
Winters. They have made Drums of their own with heads and brases very neatly
and artificially, all which shows they are industrious and ingenuous. And they
intend to build a Water-Mill the next Summer, as I was told when I was with
them. Some of them have learnt to mow Grass very well. I shall no further
trouble you with any more relation at this time concerning them. But a word or
two further with your patience concerning other Indians. The works of God
amongst the Indians at Martins Vineyard, is very hopeful and prosperous also.
I mist of Mr Mayhew their Teacher, who was lately at Boston, and therefore
cannot give you a particular account thereof at this present time; yet I cannot
but acquaint you what other motions there are touching other Indians. There
came to us upon the 20th of this instant Month, at the general Court one
Pummakummin Sachem of Lunnubbagge, dwelling amongst or near to the
Narragansets, who offered himself and his Men to worship God, and desired that
some English may be sent from the Massachusetts Government to plant his River,
that thereby he may be partaker of Government, and may be instructed by the
English to know God. We shall I hope take some care and course about it, and I
hope we shall have more help to carry on that work also; For there are some
Scholars amongst us who addict themselves to the study of the Indian Tongue.
The Lord in mercy recommence it into your Bosoms, All that labor of love
vouchsafed to the poor Indians, which are the hearty prayers and earnest
desire of; much honored.

Your loving Friend in all service of Christ, John Endecott.
Boston the 27th of the Eight. 1651.

The next thing we present the reader withal is a private passage from one in
New England to his godly Friend here, who was so much affected therewith, as he
found out our Treasurer of the Corporation, by name Mr Richard Floyd at the
Meremaide in Cheapside, and desired it might be published to the world amongst
other things, when we should publish and print what we received of like nature.
And how ever it is but brief in it self, yet full of sweetness and plainnes
of spirit which we offer to thy view.

THe best News I can write you from New England is, the Lord is indeed
converting the Indians, and for the refreshing of your heart, and the hearts of
all the Godly with you. I have sent you the Relation of one Indian of two
years profession, that I took from his own mouth, by an Interpreter, because
he cannot speak or understand one word of English.

The first Question was;

Q. How did you come first to any sight of sin?

A. His answer was, before the Lord did ever him any English to us, my
conscience was exceedingly troubled for sin, but after Mr Mahew came to
preach, and had been here some time, one chief Sagamore did embrace the
Gospel, and I hearing of him, I went to him, and prayed him to speak something
to me concerning God, and the more I did see of God, the more I did see my
sin, and I went away rejoicing, that I knew any thing of God, and also that I
saw my sin.

Q. I pray what hurt do you see in sin?

A. Sin, says he, is a continual sickness in my heart.

Q. What further evil do you see in sin?

A. I see it to be a breach of all Gods Commandments.

Q. Do you see any punishment due to man for sin?

A. Yea, says he, I see a righteous punishment from God due to man for sin,
which shall be by the Devils in a place like unto fire (not that I speak of
material fire, (says he) where man shall be for ever dying and never dye.

Q. Have you any hope to escape this punishment?

A. While I went on in the way of Indianisme I had no hope, but did verily
believe I should go to that place, but now I have a little hope, and hope I
shall have more.

Q. By what means do you look for any hope?

A. Says he, by the satisfaction of Christ.

I prayed the Interpreter, to tell him from me that I would have him think
much of the satisfaction of Christ, (and so he told him) I prayed him to
return me his Answer.

A. I thank him kindly for his good Counsel, it does my heart good, said he,
to hear any man speak of Christ.

Q. What would you think if the Lord should save you from misery?

A. If the Lord, said he, would save me from all the sin that is in my heart,
and from that misery, I should exceedingly love God, and says be, I should
love a man that should do me any good, much more the Lord, if he should do
this for me.

Q. Do you think that God will do you any good for any good that is in you?

A. Though I beleave that God loves man that leaves his sin, yet I believe it
is for Christ's sake.

Q. Do you see that at any time God does answer your prayers?

A. Yea, says he, I take every thing is an Answer of prayer.

Q. But what special answer, have you taken notice of?

A. Once my wise being three days and three nights in labor, I was resolved
never to leave praying, till she had deliverance, and at last God did it, and
gave her a son, and I called his name Returning, because all the while I went
on in Indianisme I was going from God, but now the Lord has brought me to him
back again.

By this time Captain Gooking came to us, and he asked him this Question:

Q. What he would think if he should find more affliction and trouble in Gods
ways, then he did in the way of Indianisme.

A. His answer was, when the Lord did first turn me to himself and his
ways, he stripped me as bare as my skin, and if the Lord should strip me
as bare as my skin again, and so big Saggamore should come to me, and say,
I will give you so big Wampom, so big Beaver, and leave this way, and turn to
us again: I would say, take your riches to your self, I would never for sake
God and his ways again.

This is a Relation taken by my self, William French.


The last Letter we offer to the Readers view, is a Letter directed to one of
our selves from Mr Thomas Allen, who came lately from New England, and is now
settled in the Ministry at Norwitch in Norfolk, wherein he bears witness to
the reallitie and truth of this work of the Lord in New England begun upon the
Indians, against all such that raise up false reports against the same, or such
as labor to weaken the same, by lessening the number of such as are wrought
upon by the power of the Gospel preached to them.

Honored Sir;
IT seems that some of late have been so impudently bold (which I cannot
sufficiently wonder at) as to report and publicly affirm, that there was no
such thing as the preaching and dispersing of the Gospel amongst the Natives in
New England: verily Sir, I do believe that the Devil himself (who is the
Father of Lies) would not, yea durst not have uttered such a notorious untruth
as that was. Now although I confess I have not been present at the places
where the Indians are wont to meet, to hear such as do preach unto them, by
reason of my bodily weakness, and indisposition to travel so far into the
Wilderness, yet thus much I can testify (if my Testimony may be of any use)
being lately come over from New England; that there are diverse persons in
several places, who do take pains, and labor in that Work there, viz. not
only Mr Eliot of Roxbury, who has preached among them for many years up and
down in the Jurisdiction of the Massachusetts; and Mr Mahew, who for a good
while has taken pains amongst the Indians at an Island called Martins
Vineyard; but of late also Mr Leveridge in the Jurisdiction of Plymouth, and Mr
Blynman, who lives now in a new Plantation in the Pequotts Country. As for the
success of the preaching of the Gospel unto the Natives, I have heard Mr Eliot
affirm, that he is so well persuaded of the Work of grace in some of them, as
that he could comfortably join in Church Fellowship with them: Mr Mahew also
(who came to see me a little before my coming from thence) told me that after
Mr Whitfeilds coming thence (for he had been upon that Island, as he came to
the Bay, and was present also with Mr Mahew amongst the Indians) there were
near upon one hundred (I think he said Ninety and odd) persons of them more who
came in to hear him preach unto them, and some Pawaws also, and one of some
Eminency amongst them, who did acknowledge his Evil in such doings, and made a
Declaration ration of the manner how he came at the first to be a Pawaw, the
which also Mr Mahew did relate unto me. Sir, that there is such a work in hand
in New England as the preaching of the Gospel unto the Natives there, all the
Magistrates and Ministers and people in that place (who know any thing) will be
ready to attest, and therefore such as dare affirm the contrary, may as well
say, that the Sun does not shine at Noone day, when the sky is clear, and
do indeed deserve a Public Witness to be borne against them, for such a
Public, and so notorious an untruth; The good Lord humble them deeply for it,
if it be his good will, and pardon it to them through his grace in Christ.

Thus Sir, not having further at this present to be troublesome unto you,
desiring an Interest in your earnest prayers for me, beseeching the Lord to
let his presence and blessing be with you, and upon your great and weighty
businesses, I take leave, resting

Your humble Servant in the Lord, Thomas Allen.
Norwich 8d. 11m. 1651.

The Corporation to the Reader.
THus having presented thee Christian Reader with a view of those things that
God has brought to our hands, which we of the Corporation conceive our selves
bound in duty to publish to the world, looking upon it as one means to advance
the work in the hearts of Gods people, and to stir them up thereby to
contribute more freely toward the carrying on the same: The reason wherefore
we have published so many testimonialls, and shall insert more, is because too
many that come from thence labor to blast the work, by reporting here that
there is no such work afoote in the Country: or if it be it is but for the
loaves, and if any be truly converted, it is not above five or seven at most?
These things as they are very grievous to us to hear, so we take God to
witness, that as we are in sincerity exercised in a great deal of care and
travel to carry on the work: so we publish to the world no more then what we
have received, and believe to be really true. And if these testimonies related
in the foregoing discourse, be not sufficient to satisfy any still doubting
spirit, there are some eminent Gentlemen come from thence, who are ready to
resolve them in the truth hereof, as Mr Edward Hopkins, late Governor of
Conectacutt, Mr Francis Willowby, (and others) a late Magistrate of the
Massachusetts. Besides if any shall repair to Coopers Hall, we shall be willing
to show them the original Copies we have received, which we have transcribed
for the Press: the time for any to repair thither is Saturday every week
between the hours of ten and twelve in the Morning, where our Corporation sit,
and where we shall gladly take pains to satisfy the doubts of any: and think
nothing too much wherein we may be serviceable to the Lord Jesus in a work
having so much tendency to his glory in the propagation of his Kingdom.

Signed in the name and by the appointment of the said Corporation by William
Steel Esquire, President.

FINIS.

