SURGERY According to the Modern Practice Written by PAUL BARBETTE DOCTOR
of Physic and Practitioner at AMSTERDAM.

Printed for Henry Rhodes.



THESAVRVS CHIRVRGIAE: THE CHIRURGICAL and ANATOMICAL WORKS OF PAVL BARBETTE,
M. D. Practitioner at Amsterdam. Composed according to the Doctrine of the
Circulation of the Blood, and other new Inventions of the Moderns.

Together with a Treatise of the PLAGUE, Illustrated with Observations.

Translated out of Low Dutch into English,

THE FOURTH EDITION.

To which is added the Surgeon's Chest, Furnished both with Instruments and
Medicines, all useful: Illustrated with several Copper Plates: And to make it
more complete, is adjoined a Treatise of Diseases that for the most part attend
Camps and Fleets.

Written in High Dutch by Raymundus Minderius.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next door to the Swan-Tavern, near
Bride-Lane, in Fleet Street, 1687.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
WHat should be the scope of putting forth this my not sufficient Polished
Treatise, after so many Excellent and Learned Writings of Physicians, the Title
before will declare unto thee, viz. That my Design was both out of the Ancient
and Modern, to extract the very Marrow, and plainly to show the best way of
Curing Diseases belonging to Surgery: Therefore I have purposed not to
obtrude upon thee this or that Man's Fancy, or Conceit, for Modern Practice:
For who ever was so mad as to Embrace the Opinion of any one Region, City, or
Man? Who ever, though most ingenious and judicious, equally excelled in all the
Parts of his Profession? Seeing it has not pleased the Giver of all Arts to
grant this perfectness to Men: But I resolve to set down that Practice which
Reason and Experience, after a diligent Reading of the best Authors, and an
exact observation of several Operations, have Taught me to be the safest,
convenientest and easiest, for prolixity I have purposely avoided, and used not
more words than only to express the thing it self. Nevertheless I have studied
to conprehend the Foundation of the Art in few Chapters. Read over all
diligently, and let not what I purposely omitted trouble thee: Great Volumns
easily affright the Reader, as those that are too little betrays him: I have
carefully endeavored, what is hardly found, a mean; and therefore, I have
rather in few words inserted my Observations, in the very descriptions of the
Diseases, then to waste thy time with a prolix discourse: To this end, that I
might not repeat in particular Diseases, what I had once set down in generals.

Tumors, Wounds, and Ulcers, which neither in Cause nor Cure differ, I have
reduced under one Head, contrary to what most Writers use to do, who only from
the difference of the Part and Member affected, difference the Diseases, which
aftewards giving them new names, they without any benefit multiply, and so they
render that Art which is difficult enough of it self, much more difficult. The
most diligent of Students can scarce distinguish them, who unprofitably spend
much labor and time, in the Controversies of the Ancients concerning the Name,
whose Opinions they suppose they ought to follow to a Tittle, if they will
arrive at the degree of Doctor. We are the Ministers of Nature, not the Slaves
of those Men that describe it: We account neither them Prophets, nor their
Writings sacred, neither unlawful to add, or diminish to them without the name
Heretic.

I have set down both few, and many Medicaments; for those that I have
produced, although few in number, yet of great virtue, which by vast pains, and
no less charges I have found out, and which daily Practice has confirmed to
me, as the safest of all. Other Medicines seek for amongst others.

Farewell kind Reader, and whilst I am employed about other, and better (if I
can possible) Writings, receive these with a grateful mind; and as I study to
be profitable to thee, so also do thou endeavor always by these to help
others..

The Index of Chapters to Barbetty's Surgery.
The First Part.
Chap. 1. OF Manual Operations in general, Page 1. 2. Of Unition or
Conjunction, 2 3. Of the Nature, Difference, Signs, Prognostics, and Cure of
Fractures in general, Ibid. 4. Of particular Fractures of Bones, 10 5. Of the
Nature, Differences, Signs, Causes, Prognostics and Cure of Dislocations in
general, 17 6. Of particular Dislocations. 20 7. Of Ruptures, 26 8. Of the
Falling down of the Matrix, 34 9. Of the Falling down of the Anus. 35 10. Of
the second Operation called Diaeresis, or the separation of what was united
together, 36 11. Of opening a Vein, 37 12. Of the opening of Abscesses or
Imposthumes, 42 13. Of the separation of parts unnaturally joined, 46 14. Of
the Paracentesis, 48 15. Of the opening of the Breast, 54 16. Of removing a
Cataract of the Eye, 60 17. Of Leeches, 63 18. Of cuting in the hard parts, 65
19. Of Ustion or Burning, 69 20. Of Issues, 70 21. Of the Seton, 71 22. Of the
drawing forth of Bullets, 73 23. Of the Extraction of a dead Child, and the
Secundine, 74 24. Of the extirpating of a mortified part, 78 25. Of the fleshy
Rupture, 80 26. Of the Extraction of the Stone out of the Bladder, 82 27. Of a
Hare Lip. 87
An Index to the Second Part.
Chap. 1. OF Tumors in general, 88 2. Of Inflammation, 90 3. Erysipelas, 95 4.
Of Oedema, 98 5. Of Scirrhus, 101 6. De Tumore Aquoso, or Watery Tumor 103 7. Of
the Flatuous, or Windy Tumor, 107 8. De Herpete, 109 9. De Atheroma, Steatoma
and Meliceris, 111 10. Of Scrophula, Struma, or King's Evil, 113 11. Of a Bubo,
116 12. Of the Carbuncle, 121 13. Of a Cancer, 122 14. Of a Gangrene and
Sphacelus, 126 15. Of Paronychia, 133 16. Of an Aneurism, 135 17. Of Opthalmia,
136 18. Of a Quinsie 141
The Index of Chapters to the the second Book. Of the second Part.
Chap. 1. OF the Nature, Difference, Causes and Signs of Wounds, page 147 2. Of
the Cure of Wounds in general, 152 3. Of the preservation of the strength and
native heat in the wounded parts. Ibid 4. Of the Symptoms of Wounds, 153 5. Of
the drawing forth of extraneous Bodies out of Wounds, 157 6. Of the manner of
joining the Lips of Wounds together, 159 7. Of Medicines necessary for the
curing of Wounds, 161 8. Of Wounds of the Nerves, 166 9. Of Wounds by Gunshot
168 10. Of poisoned Wounds, 170 11. Of particular Wounds. 172
The Index of Chapters to the third Book of the second Part.
Chap. 1. OF the Nature, Differences, Causes, and Signs of Ulcers, 177 2. Of
the Cure of Ulcers, 178 3. Of an Ulcer with foul Bones, 182 4. De Ulcere
depascente. 184 5. Of Fistula's, 186 6. Of Burns, 190 7. Of particular Ulcers.
193
The Index of the third Part of Surgery.
Chap. 1. OF the Practical Anatomy, 201 2. Of the parts in general, 205 3. Of
Bones, 207 4. Of Cartilages, 215 5. Of Ligaments, 217 6. Of Membranes, 219 7.
Of Fibers. 220 8. Of Veins, 221 9. Of Arteries, 228 10. Of Nerves, 233 11. Of
the Flesh, 237 12. Of the Skin, 243 13. Of the Fat, Nails and Hair, 247 14. Of
the generation of the Blood, and its Circulation, 250 15. The division of the
Parts of the Body. 266
The second Book, of the Head.
1. OF the outward parts of the Head, 268 2. Of the inward parts of the Head,
292 3. Of the Neck. 296
The Third Book: Of the Breast.
1. OF the External parts of the Breast, 300 2. Of the Internal parts of the
Breast. 305
The Fourth Book: Of the lower Belly.
1. OF the outward parts of this Belly, 311 2. Of the Internal parts of the
Abdomen, 314
The Fifth Book: Of the Joints.
1. OF the Hands, 332 2. Of the Feet. 337
An Index to the Treatise of the Plague.
A Description of the Plague, Page 1 It Is Cause, 3 It Is Diagnostick, 5
Prognostic, 6 It Is Cure, 9 Whether Bleeding and Purging is convenient, 9, 10
The use of Sudorificks, 11 Medicaments against the Plague, 12 Symptoms of the
Plague, are, 18 Fever, Ibid. Drowsiness, 20 Continual watchings, 21 Great pain
of the Head, Ibid. Vomiting and the Hicough, 22 A Looseness, 23 Spots, 25 Bubo,
Ibid.
Preservatives against the Plague, 32 Practical Observation. 36
BARBETTY'S SURGERY. The First Part.
CHAP. I. Of Manual Operations in general.
ALthough the word Surgery signifies all Manual Operations in general; yet,
by reason of its pre-eminence above all the rest, it is now only given to that
Art, which endeavors to remove the Diseases of the Body, by the assistance of
the Hands.

It Is true, that External Accidents require not only the help of the Hands, but
also Internal Means; therefore it is no wonder for a Part of Physic to require
the whole: Surgery being a Part, which depends upon the Body of Physic: But
these internal Medicines we impart to you, not as Surgeons, but as
Physicians.

The General Operations of this Art, to which all the particular ones may be
reduced, are of four sorts:

1. Synthesis, which teaches how to unite parts disjointed.

2. Diaeresis, To separate parts unnaturally joined.

3. Exaeresis, To remove what is superfluous.

4. Anaplerosis, To supply those that are wanting.

CHAP. II. Of Synthesis or Unition.
UNition is of two sorts; one regards the Hard and Boney; the other the Soft
and Fleshy parts of the Body.

The Unition of Bones is again twofold; the one, setting Bones broken; the
other, reducing Bones wrenched or disjointed. We will begin with Fractures.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature, Difference, Signs, Prognostics and Cure of
Fractures in general.
A Fracture is a Solution of Continuity in the hard parts of the Body, caused
by an hard Instrument externally forced upon the part.

The Differences are taken, 1. From the Manner; there being some transverse,
which are properly called Fractures; others that are made according to the
length of the Bone, called Fissures: and others are Comminutions, when the Bone
is broken into many small parts. 2. From the Part, it being some times in the
Head, sometimes in the Shoulders, Ribs, Arms, Legs, etc. 3. From the Accidents;
there being sometimes a Wound accompanying it; at other times, a Dislocation,
Inflammation, Gangrene, etc.

Cause] is, Whatever is able to break, bruise, or cut: Sometimes also a Bone
corrupted by the Pox, Gout, or otherwise, has been broken without any external
force.

Signs.] A Bone being transversly or obliquely broke, by handling it, you
perceive an inequality; the Patient is scarce able to move the Part affected,
and sometimes that Part is shorter than the other; the Thigh, Leg or Foot being
broken, the Patient cannot stand at all; but he may somewhat, though with pain,
in a Dislocation: And this is the surest difference between a Fracture and a
Dislocation. A Fissure is discerned by the thickness, pain and unevenness of
the Part, and requires the judgment of a skilful Surgeon. A Comminution is
easy to be perceived, the Bone being very unequal, and here and there yielding
to the Fingers.

Prognosticks] A Transverse Fracture is more easy to cure than an Oblique; or
when accompanied with apparent Inequalities; that, where but one Bone is
broken, than where two are, or where the Bones are much shattered; that, which
^s made in the midst of the Bone, than what happens to be near the Head; and a
single one, than a compound. If the Patient remain undressed beyond the seventh
day, the Member is in danger of mortifying, especially if that the Part be too
^ard bound.

The Cure.] A broken Bone requires these four Operations; Extention,
Conjoining, Ligature, Well-placing; and withal, the application of outward and
inward Remedies.

Extention can hardly be performed without pain; which yet will be much less,
if the Member be so extended, that the Muscles do not labor; that is to say,
The Part must be so laid, that when in health, they could hold out longest
without tiring. Sometimes the extension must be greater, sometimes lesser;
which will be performed aright, if regard be had to the time of the Fracture,
to the Age of the Patient, and to the greatness of the Bone. A recent Fracture,
a tender Patient, a small Bone, require a gentler Extention: on the contrary,
an old Fracture, a strong Patient, and a big Bone, a greater. The manner of
extending I describe not, because it is better learnt by the frequent view of
Practice, than by Reading.

After Extention, you are to join the Bones together; in the doing of which,
the Muscles must not be wrested, but retain their natural position and figure.

Then the Part must be bound with a double Rowler; the first is to be rolled
thrice about the Fracture, and then upwards. The (second (which must be twice
as long) is to be once wound about the Fracture, proceeding downwards, and then
upwards again, a little higher than the first Rowler; to which you will give
more firmness, if you bind some convenient Splints (of Wood, or rather of
Past-board) round about the Member.

The Ligature ought not to be too strait, lest it cause pain, and rob the Part
of its nourishment; nor too loose, lest the Bones slip out of their place. And
unless great pain, or other symptoms require, it must not be opened before the
third day; and at the second dressing, it must be bound somewhat closer; and
afterward changed but once every four, five or six days.

Lastly, The Part ought to be well placed, that is, softly, evenly, and a
little raised. If you lay it too low, the Bone will bend outward; if too high,
it will bend inwards: Wherefore you must observe a mean.

Now, whether these four Operations have been duly performed, may be known by
the ensuing Signs.

The Extention is well done, if the part be strait, and as long as its fellow;
if it appear to outward view every where even, and a little hollow about the
Fracture.

The joining together is duly made, if the Bone be any thing firm, and all
about the Fracture be found equal.

The Ligature is as it ought to be, if the Patient, as soon as he is dressed,
find the pain abated; if the pain do somewhat increase the first and second
night, and there be perceived the third day, without the place of binding, a
little swelling yielding to your hands.

The Bone is well placed, if in the second dressing you find all even.

Before you roll the Ligature about the Member, bathe the part with Spirit of
Wine or Red Wine; or, with Oil, Wine and Vinegar mixed together; Or, take the
White of an Egg, with some Bolus, Frankincense, Dragons-Blood, etc. Or anoint
it with Oil of Roses, Mirtles, Violets, etc. or lay Plasters on it. In Winter,
the Oxycroceum will do well: At all times that which follows;

Take Mastick, Frankincense, of each two drams, Aloes, Gum Tragacanth,
Dragons-Blood, Bole-Armonick, of each a one dram; Lapis Haematitis, Burnt
Talch, of each one dram; Whites of Eggs, and Oil of Roses, as much as is
sufficient. Make it into a Plaster.

If a Wound accompany the Fracture, then ought you to extend the Part first
(yet somewhat gentler than in a simple Fracture) then you are to join the Bones
together; next, to observe the Wound, to bring the Lips thereof together with
Plasters, rather than with a Needle, and to guard it with a Defensive: And
lastly, roll the Part, and lay it conveniently.

If there be a Cominution, or great shattering of the Bones joined with the
Wound, then endeavor with Forceps to remove the small loose Bones, leaving
those to Nature that are yet any way fixed; for she will, though somewhat
later, of her self throw them out; and sometimes she will unite them again to
the whole. Yet, to forward her, you may assist Nature with the following
Medicaments.

Take Ashes of Earthworms, three drams; Virgins-Honey, an ounce and half, mix
them, and make an Ointment.

Or,

Take Aloes, Myrrh, of each half a dram; Roots of Comfrey the great,
Round-Birthwort, of each three drams, Euphorbium, two drams; Turpentine and
Wax, as much as is sufficient, with a little Oil of Lillies, to make it into an
Ointment.

If the Bone be bare, cover it with its own skin and Nuscles, and defend it
from the Air as much as is possible.

If it be bare and also started out, endeavor to reduce it again into its
place; but if it be got out too far, take away the pieces thus started out,
with Saw or Nippers.

Now these Manual Operations being well performed, the Patient must observe a
good Diet; open a Vein upon occasion, and afterward purge the Blood. In the
Fractures of the lower parts, purging is not convenient; but if the Patients
Belly be bound, he must take a Suppository.

In the Fractures of the upper parts, Purging or administering Clysters, is
oftener necessary, and may be done by the ensuing compounded or simple
Medicines, which may also serve you in all other Accidents that we may describe
in this whole Treatise.

Medicines purging Choler.
Rhubarb, Cassia fistula, yellow Myrobalans,

Tamarinds, Manna, Scammony, Syrup of Sicchory, with Rhubarb, Elect.
Catholicum, Hiera picra, Lenitivum, Diaprunum solutivum, and Succus Rosarum,
Pil. de Aloe Rosata, Aureae, Aloephanginae, Ruffi.

Take Electuary Lenitive, two drams; Elect. of the Juice of Roses, one dram;
Cassia fresh extracted, two drams; Cream of Tartar, two scruples;
Succory-water, as much as is sufficient; Spirit of Vitriol, a little. Make it
into a Potion.

Or,

Take Rhubarb, Senna, of each two drams; Cream of Tartar, one dram; Aniseeds,
half a dram: Infuse them two hours in a sufficient quantity of Sorrel-Water,
let it boil a little, and to three ounces of the strained Liquor,

Add of the

Elect. of Diaprun. Sol. one dram, or a dram and half, and drink it.

Or,

Take of Pilulae Aureae, Extract. Catholicum, Rhubarb, of each half a scruple.
Make them into seven Pills.

Or.

Take Cream of Tartar, Sal Prunella, of each xij grains; vitriolated Tartar,
Diagredium, of each vj. grains. Make it into a Powder.

Medicines that purge Phlegm.
The Roots of Asarum, Mechoacan white and black, Hellebore, Colocinth,
Myrabolani, Belliric, Emblici, Chebuli, Agarick, Turbith, Syrup of
Diacarthanum, Electuaries of Hierae with Agarick, Diaphoenicon, Diacarthamum,
Confection of Hamech, Powder of Diaturbith, Pills of Cechiae, Foetidae the
greater, Aggregativae, Lucis the greater, Assajeret of Avicen, Troches of
Agaric, Alhandal.

Take Roots of Grass, two drams; Flower-de-luce, Trochiscatum, Agarick,
Turbith, of each one dram; Aniseeds, Fenel seeds, of each one scruple: Let them
infuse for three hours in a sufficient quantity of Parssy water; boil it, and
strain it; and to three ounces of it,

Add of

Electuary of Diaphenicon, one dram and half. Make it into a Potion.

Or,

Take Electuary of Diacarthamum, Confection of Hamech, of each two drams;
powder of Jalop; eight grains; Cream of Tartar, two scruples, Fennel water, as
much as suffices. Make a Potion.

Or,

Take of Pill Aureae, six grains; of Pill Cochiae, Pill Faetidae the greater,
of each twenty grains. Make them into seven Pills, and gild them.

Or,

Take Extract of Catholicum, xiij grains; of the Troches of Alhandal, one
grain. Make three Pills, and gild them.

Medicines purging Melancholy.
Roots of black Helebore, Polipody, Senna, Lapis Lazuli, Syrup of Roses
solutive with Senna, Electuaries of Diacatholicon lenitive, Confection of
Hamech. The Powder of Dia Senna, Pills of Lucis minoris, Troches of Alhandal,
Myrobalans of India.

Take Bark of Tamarisk, three drams; Roots of Polypody, two drams; Staechas
Flowers, half a pugil; Senna, one dram and half; Aniseeds, half a dram;
Mirobolans of India, one dram: Infuse them two hours in a sufficient quantity
of Borage-water; boil it, and strain it; and to four ounces of the strained
Liquor,

Add,

An ounce of Syrup of Roses with Senna, Spirit of Salt, as much as will give it
a little acidity; and make it into a Potion.

Or,

Take Electuary of Diacatholicon, one dram; the Electuary of Diaphoenicon,
Confection of Hamech, of each a dram and half; Cream of Tartar, two scruples;
Powder of Jalop, six grains; Whey, a sufficient quantity. Make a Potion.

Or,

Take of Pill Indiae, of Aggregativae the greater, of each fifteen grains:
Diagridium, three grains; Troches of Alhandal, one grain. Make seven Pills, and
gild them.

Note, All these Receipts are set down for full-grown Bodies, their quantities
being to be lessened according to the younger age, and strength of the Patient.

CHAP IV. Of particular Fractures of Bones.
THe Fractures of the Skull are divided into six several kinds; A Fissure,
Contusion, Fracture, Incision, Puncture and Contra fissure.

A Fissure is made by a hard and blunt Instrument, and passes sometimes
through both Tables, sometimes through one only.

A Contusion is made, when by a hard and blunt Instrument the Skull is so hurt,
that it appears whole from without, but yet is severed from the whole within:
Which yet in little Children may be done without a Fracture.

A Fracture is made, when a part of the Skull is separated from the whole.

An Incision is made by a cutting Instrument; where sometimes one part of the
Bone is raised up and separated, as it were, but is yet fast to the rest of the
Bone; sometimes a part is quite taken away; sometimes there remains a mark in
the Bone according to the Figure of the Instrument.

A Puncture is made by a pungent or thrusting Instrument, and seldom passes
through both Tables.

A Contra-fissure is made, when the part struck remaining whole, the opposite
part is cleft.

The Signs are, Swimming of the Head, dimness of the Eyes, Vomiting, Bleeding
at the Mouth, Nose and Ears. The Patient grows dumb, and suddenly falls to the
ground: whereupon follows Raving, a Fever, Convulsions, Palsy. Any hard
thing, as a piece of Wood, a Spoon, etc. being put into his Mouth, he is not at
all, or hardly able to bite upon it. Here it must also be carefully enquired,
in what manner, and with what Instrument he has been hurt? Whether he be young
or old, tender or strong, healthy or unhealthy? Presently after the Fall or
Stroke, before the Part swells, you may sometimes feel the hurt with your
Fingers; and if there be a Wound with it, you may either see it, or find it out
with a Probe.

Prognostics.] The Fractures of the Skull, how fair soever they may look, is
never without danger, but more dangerous, when both the Tables are hurt or
broken; and more dangerous yet, if the Dura Matter, and most dangerous, if the
Pia Matter be also hurt. The more Symptoms there are, the less hope of a good
event. If the Bone grow black in the beginning, that is a mortal Sign.

Cure.] If the Skin be yet whole, or the wound not large enough, make a cross
incision, and divide the Pericranium. If under it you find a fissure, put some
Ink into it, and bind up the wound. The second day, or as soon as the bleeding
is ceased, scrape the Skull at once, or at several times, until the Ink with
the Fissure is altogether gone, and the Bone grow somewhat bloody, then throw
the ensuing Powder upon it.

Take Dragons Blood, burnt Hartshorn, of each one dram and half; Myrrh half a
dram; Frankincense, and Orrise roots, of each a dram; Make it into a very fine
Powder.

If the Fissure pass through both Tables, then are you to make use of
Trepanning; as likewise in the Contra-fissure, Fracture and Contusion of the
Skull, or else you will quickly lose your Patient.

The Incision is healed like the Fissure.

In the Puncture you must put the Trepan just in the middle, and not on the
sides of the place hurt.

If you find a Fracture with a Cominution, then take out all the small loose
Bones, committing to Nature those that are yet fast to the Pericranium, or
cannot be taken away without force. And then if the Fracture be so large, that
you can free the Brains from the coagulated or corrupted Blood, or from the
pricking Bones, Trepanning will be needless; but if it should happen otherwise,
you must, with great care, apply the Trepan, unless the Patient be strong, and
the matter very little. The manner of Trepanning will be taught in another
place.

2. In a Fracture of the Nose, what is raised, is to be pressed down; and what
is pressed inward, to be raised with a Spatule, or other Instrument: afterward
a Pipe or Quill is to be put up, and continually kept there, till the Cure be
done, and a Fracture-Plaister is to be laid on without. If the Bone be not
corrupted, it will be healed in ten or twelve days.

3. A broken Jaw Bone is restored by ones fingers used both within and without
the Mouth; and if those be too weak, then one is to draw the Head backward, and
the Surgeon forward, and so to put it in. It is cured in twenty days.

4. The Clavicle being broken, there must be one to draw the Arm backward, and
another to draw the Neck or Shoulder forward; the Surgeon himself, in the
mean time, drawing upwards what was fallen down, and downwards what was raised
too high. If a Ball be put into the Arm-pit, and the Elbow be pressed against
the Ribs, the Operation will prove more easy. It is cured in twenty four days.

5. If the Shoulder Blade be broken about the place where it is united to the
Arm, then is the hurt for the most part incurable. If it break in the Acromion
(which may be easily felt) then let the Arm or Shoulder be pulled down, either
with Hands or Ligatures, and in the mean time set it in. If it be broken into
several pieces, make an Incision, and take them out, unless they be yet fast to
the Peri-estium; in which case, you must leave Nature to her self, which will
either make them unite again, or throw them out. It is healed in forty days.

6. The Sternum, or Breast Bone happens either to be broken, and then you will
find an unevenness, which being touched, will yield to the Fingers, and cause
some cracking; or to be pressed in, and then you will feel a bending inwards,
which will cause pain, a short breath, coughing and spitting blood. To restore
the same, lay the Patient on his Back upon a great stone, pressing both his
Shoulders downwards; then press the Ribs backward and forward, until the Bone
be reduced again in its right place. This is cured in twenty days.

7. A simple Fracture of the Ribs, which is without any great Contusion, or
Inflammation of the neighboring parts, may be healed in twenty days, applying
the Fracture-Plaister. If the Ribs stand out, they must with ones Hand be
pressed in. If they bend inward, let the Patient keep in his Breath, and so
press the Rib outward; in the mean time, assisting him with your hand. If that
succeed not, then lay a sticking Plaster upon it, and pull the same off so
often, until the Rib return into its place. Cupping-Glasses here are of no use.

8. A simple Fracture of the Joints of the Backbone is easily set again with
ones finger, and is made whole in twenty days. But if the Marrow of the
Backbone be so hurt or pressed in, that the Arms or Legs of the Patient become
lame or senseless, that he cannot retain his Urine, or his Excrement, then he
seldom escapes death. Yet you are to do your utmost; and if one or more small
Bones be altogether loose from the Periostium, then make Incision, and take
them out.

9. The same is to be understood of the Fracture of the Os sacrum, which alone
has this peculiar, that you may put your fingers into the Anus, and restore it
to its right place.

10. The Hip-bone being broken, is to be set as soon as possible may be, and
then it will heal in twenty four days; otherwise you may expect various
accidents. But if it be fractured into many pieces, then you are forthwith, in
the first dressing, to make an Incision; take out the small Splinters, and
re-place those that have yet any hold-fast. Yet, by reason of the multitude of
the Tendons, Muscles, Veins, Arteries and Nerves, that are spread over the
whole part, such an Incision cannot be made without great danger.

11. If the upper-Bone of the Arm be broken, first bend the Elbow toward the
Breast, then take the lower part of that Bone close to the Elbow, pulling it
straight down toward the ground, and so restore it; well observing here, that
the Arm, during the whole time of Cure, must remain in that posture in which it
was extended; otherwise the Fracture will, upon the least change of its
posture, slip out again. Where yet it is to be understood, that the Surgeon
after the second or third dressing, as often as after that he dresseth the
Patient, must stretch out his Arm strait, to the end that the Tendons which run
from the Arm, and are inserted below the Elbow, shrinking by the long lying
still, may not cause a troublesome stiffness. However, this shrinking of
Tendons (which are by pretenders to Surgery, ridiculously called Nerves) may
yet conveniently be cured in two or three months, if you make the Patient to
carry every day some weight, and endeavor to relax and mollify the Tendons
with Fomentations and Embrocations, abstaining from the use of any Brandy, or
any other corroborating and astringent Medicines. I have always found
successful the following Unguent.

Take Man's and Duck's Grease, of each one ounce; Ointment of Marshmallows,
half an ounce; Oil of Earthworms, white Lilly, and Camomile, of each two
drams. Make an Ointment.

This broken Bone is cured in forty days. The restoring of the broken
Thigh Bone, has nothing different from this.

12. The Elbow has two Bones; of which, the greater is called Radius, the
lesser Ulna; both Fociles: The small Focile being broken, it is easy to restore
it. The Cure is harder, when the great one is broken; and yet harder, when both
are broken: In which case, the extention is to be made the stronger. When they
be well set, and bound up, then must the hand be placed a little higher upon
the Chest than the Elbow; and afterward, every second or third day (without
pain or violence) the Arm is gently to be stretched out, to the end that the
Humors flowing thither, and there staying too long, may not cause a concretion
in the Bones, and a stiffness in the Arm, as not extensible any more. It is
cured in thirty days.

13. The Leg has also two Bones, the greater called Tibia, and the lesser
Fibula. Their Cure had nothing different from the next foregoing.

14. If the Patella, or Knee-pan, break crossways, the Patient commonly remains
lame. If it break long-ways, then by the Muscles that draw upwards, without any
great help of the hands, it is almost of it self restored, and cured in twenty
days.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature, Difference, Signs, Causes, Prognostics, and Cure of
Dislocations in general.
A Dislocation is a forcing of the Bone out of its cavity and natural place
into another, hindering voluntary motion.

The Differences are taken, 1. From the manner; for sometimes the Bone is
altogether forced out of its place, and that is properly called Luxation or
Dislocation: Sometimes it is got out but a little or half, which is called
Sub-laxation, or Elongation. 2. From the Cause; for sometimes it is from an
external accident, as by wrestlings, Falls, or Blows, etc. Sometimes from
internal Causes, by the afflux of Humors.

The Causes are of two sorts; 1. External, Such as are Falling, Beating,
Running, Wrestling, and vehement extention, as it often happens to Women in
Labor, through the unskilfulness of Midwives; yea, by a violent stroke or
fall, even the Bones of the Infant in the Womb, may be dislocated. 2. Internal,
By the afflux of Humors, which falling into the Joints, relax and resolve the
Ligaments, and so causes the Bones to slip out of their places.

The Signs, especially in a lean Body, are manifest enough. The Bone causes in
the place to which it is forced, a tumor or rising; and in that whence it is
forced, a cavity. If there be a perfect Dislocation, the Member will be drawn
up, and shorter (unless the luxation happen by the laxity of the Ligaments,
than it becomes longer) the part is painful, chiefly upon motion. In a
Subluxation, these Accidents are lesser, and seldom all together.

Prognostics.] In Children and other tender Bodies, the Bones may be reduced
more easily; but are kept in with more difficulty; the contrary happens in
strong and full grown persons: The Dislocation of the Head is mortal, that of
the Vertebra's dangerous; and that which is inveterate is hard to be cured.
That which proceeds from an inward Cause, is of a slower Cure, and does easily
return.

Cure.] The Bone forced out, must be reduced to its place, either by the Hands,
Ligatures, or Instruments; but by which of these three it shall be performed,
the Nature of the affected part will declare. It Is certain, that these four
Manual Operations ( Extention, Setting, Binding and Well-placing) must here be
used as well as in Fractures of Bones.

Extention must be made so great, that there may be a cavity between the Bone
that remains well, and that which has been forced away, to the end that in the
setting, the one may not rub against the other; whence afterward are wont to
rise very grievious, and sometimes incurable Accidents.

In the Setting, care must be had not to wrest the Bones nor the Muscles, but
to keep their natural figure. Before you proceed to binding up the Member,
endeavor to preserve the part from inflammation and flux of Humors, and
strengthen it with the following Medicines.

A strengthening Plaster.
Take Frankincense, Mastick, Bole-armonick, Dragons-Blood, of each half an
ounce; fine-Flower, an ounce; Roots of great Comfrey, two drams; Weather-Sewet,
three ounces; white-Wax, as much as suffices to make a Plaster.

Another.

Take Litharge, Wax, Rosin, of each three ounces; being melted over the fire,
add to them, of great Comfrey, Bean-Meal, Bole-armonick steeped in Vinegar, and
dried, of each three ounces; Tragacanth, two ounces. Make it into a Plaster.

If the pain, or other symptoms do not necessarily require it, you ought not to
loosen the Bandage before the fifth, sixth, or seventh day, and then do it with
as little motion as is possible. Lastly, lay the Part even, and in such a
posture, in which, when found, it can longest remain without trouble.

If you find the Dislocation accompanied by an Inflammation, beware of
extending the part, or doing ought to it before that be removed; which you are
to do, first with emollient, and afterward with discutient, Medicines.

An Emollient Unguent.
Take the compound Ointment of Marshmallows, two drams; Hog's Grease, half an
ounce; Oil of white-Lillies, Roses and Mirtles, as much as is sufficient to
make it into a Linament.

A Discutient Plaster.
Take Colophony, Frankincense, Mastick, Pitch of each an Ounce; Cummin-seeds,
Fennel-seeds, of each six drams; Wax and Oil of Dill, as much as suffices. Mix
them, and make it into a Plaster.

CHAP. VI. Of particular Dislocations.
1. THe Jaw Bone, except it be in young Children, can hardly be dislocated
otherwise than forwards. Sometimes it is only dislocated in one side, and is
easily restored; sometimes in both, in which case it is difficult to set, and
very dangerous, and often mortal.

It is very seldom luxated from a debility of the Muscles; sometimes from the
laxity of the Ligaments; for the most part, from a too wide opening of the
Mouth. If it be dislocated but on one side, it stands a-skew, and is turned
toward the side hurt; some thing is prominent, the Teeth stand not directly
under one another, nor can they be brought together, so that the Mouth remains
open. You must draw it toward the opposite side, and reduce it to its place,
which is not hard to do; yea, by a stiff box on the Ear it has often been
restored.

If it be dislocated on both sides, then does it fall forwards, the Mouth
stands open, both the Apophyses are prominent, the lower Teeth stand further
than the upper, and the temporal Muscles are distended. In this case, let yout
Servant hold the Patient's Head firm, or hold it against a Wall; draw the
Jaw Bone first downward, putting both your Thumbs in the Mouth, then backward,
and lastly upward.

2. The Collar-bone rarely happens to be luxated, and is seldom set, but it
stands somewhat out; whereby it often comes to pass, that the Patient cannot
lift up his hand to his mouth, much less to his head. For restoring it, you are
to lay the Patient on his back, and a stone under his shoulder; then you must
draw his Arm forward and backward, as the Dislocation requires; then press the
Clavicle, so raised, down into its place.

3. The Great Bone of the Arm (Adjutorium) is never dislocated backward; seldom
upwards and forwards, but for the most part downward: a certain sign of it is,
if you find it roundish hardness under the Armpits, and on the top of the
Shoulder a hollowness, and the Arm be longer, and the Patient cannot bring his
hand to his Mouth. It may be reduced several ways; but these are the most
convenient, and the most sure. 1. Let a strong man hold the Patient fast about
the hurt Shoulder, and let another draw the Arm downwards; then lift the upper
part of the Arm into its Cavity, and the Bone will be soon restored into its
place. 2. Take a strong Ladder, at the foot thereof put a ^tool for the Patient
to stand upon; on the uppermost step, bind something round that may just fit
the Armpits; put the Patients Arm upon it, and draw it downward, moving the
Shoulder Bone to and fro; let your Servant, mean while, draw the sound Arm
downward, and withal, thrust away the Stool from under the Patient, that whilst
he is thus pendulous, the Shoulder Bone may be restored. 3. Lay the Armpits of
the Patient upon the Shoulder of a strong and taller man than himself; draw the
dislocated Arm downward, so that he lifting up his own Shoulder, the Patient
may remain in a pendulous posture: In the mean time, press his Shoulder
downward, working the Arm to and fro, until it be restored to its due place. 4.
The Glossoc^mium described by Hyppocrates, and approved by Paraeus, is the most
convenient of all; to be seen in the Authors themselves.

4. If the Vertebrae of the Neck be out of joint, the Patient is to be set upon
a little low Stool, and his Shoulders pressed downward. After this, his Head is
to be lifted up with both hands, turning it to and fro (yet with as little
force as may be) and thus they are to be reduced. Whereupon the Patient will
presently find himself at ease, and turn his head whithe^ he pleases.

5. If the Vertebrae of the Back be forced outward, the Patient is to be laid
upon his Belly and by two Men and two Ligatures, one tied under the Armpits,
the other about the Hip he must be strongly stretched out, and the Ve^tebroe's
be thrust in again. If they be forced i^wards, it is mortal.

6. If the Os sacrum be out of joint, put you^ fingers into the Anus, and press
it from within as well as from without, into its place.

7. A Rib dislocated, must not remain long out of its place, lest more grievous
Accidents follow. If it be removed out of its Vertebra upwards, then hang the
Patient by his Arms over a Door, and so press it in. If it be out of joint
downward, the Patient must bend himself, laying his hands upon his Knees, and
the Surgeon in the mean time, must move to and again the displaced Rib till
it be restored to its right place. If it be dislocated inward, lay a sticking
Plaster on it, and often pull it away with violence; and thus sometimes it may
be restored; if not, it often proves mortal, not being capable to be reduced
by the Hands.

8. The Cubitus may be dislocated forward or backward, inward or outward. And
sometimes the Radius is likewise dislocated with it, sometimes it remains in
its place; which by handling the part, is easily perceived. If the Cubitus be
out forwards, the Arm thereby becomes shorter, and cannot be bent; the Bone
stands out forwards, and behind there is a preternatural hallowness. The
forcedout Bone must, as well in this, as in all other kinds of dislocation of
the Elbow, be speedily restored; otherwise there will follow grievous Pain,
Inflammation, Fever, Vomiting of Choler, and sometimes Death it self. Let the
Arm be extended obliquely, and so far, that one Bone may not hurt the other in
the setting. If the Hands be not strong enough, then bend the dislocated Arm
about a Pillar or a Bed-post, and by the help of a Bandage extend it, pressing
the Bone backward, until it be replaced. If it be dislocated back-ward, the Arm
will then also be shorter, and cannot be bent, the Bone will stand out behind;
and before there is a preternatural cavity. If it be inward or outward, there
are the like signs; only the Tumor will be in the place, to which the Bone has
been forced; whereas the hollowness is there, whence it has been forced. All
these three dislocations may be easily cured by a convenient Extention, if they
be not inveterate. The same is to be understood of the Radius, when forced out
of its place.

9. The Hip may be put out of joint four manner of ways chiefly; inward,
outward and forward, but seldom backward. If inward, the Leg is longer, and
moves with difficulty; the Knee is turned outward, and the head of the
Thigh Bone by the hands may be perceived in the Groin. As it is difficult to
put in, so easily does it slip out again, whereby the Part affected is wasted,
and the Patient lamed. To reduce it to its place, lay the Patient upon the
midst of a Bench or Table; between his Legs put a strong stick, wound about
with Linen, and upon it let him stiffly stretch out his Leg, and the Surgeon
in the mean time with his hands set it. If outwardly dislocated, the Leg grows
shorter, and the Foot is turned inwards. The Patient can then indeed bend his
Leg, but hardly bring it to the ground. Though it be not set aright, yet the
pain vanishes of it self, and the Patient in time is able to go without
Crutches. Lay him on a Bench or Table as above; let the Leg be strongly
extended, either with hands or Bandage, and mean while reduce it into its
place. If the Hip be forced out forward, the Groin is swollen, and the Buttocks
fallen, the Leg is neither longer nor shorter, nor cannot be bent but with
trouble; and the Urine is suppressed. Though it be not set aright, yet the
Patient in time will be able to go well enough upon it; though sometimes it
falls out, that he must somewhat trail his Leg after him. To restore it, let
the Patient lie on his sound side, and strongly stretch out his Leg, press it
into its former place; and in case the hand be too weak, thrust it in with your
Knee. If it be dislocated backward, the Patient can neither stretch out, nor
bend his Leg, nor is he able to bring his Heel to the ground, and if he should
force himself to do so, he would fall backward; the Leg is shorter, there is a
hollowless in the Groins, and if the Buttocks be pressed upwards, you shall
find an unusual swelling. Though it be not put in, yet the pain will in time
vanish, and then the Leg may be bent again, but it remains shorter and
straight, nor is the Foot turned inward nor outward. Lay the Patient on his
Belly, and strongly extend his Leg; mean time apprehend the Thigh bone above
the Knee; stretch it outward from off the sound Leg; press the Head into its
Cavity, in which yet it will not stay, if thenceforth the Patient do not keep
himself very quiet.

10. The Dislocations of the Tibia and Fibula, are cured after the same manner
as those of the Cubitus and Radius.

11. If the Knee pan be out of its place, let the Patient stand upright, and
press it in again; lay on the side whence it has been forced away, a hollow
Splint, answerable to the shape of the said Pan, and below in the cavity of the
Leg, put one or more compressing Splints, binding the whole Leg so stiff, that
the Knee may not bend.

CHAP. VII. Of Ruptures.
HAving thus roughly handled the boney and hard parts of the Body, it now
follows, that I treat the soft and fleshie more gently, and describe their
Synthesis or re-unition again. Therefore I begin with the broken Peritonaeum,
which sometimes gives way to the Intestines, at other times to the Cawl, and
not seldom to both, to get out of their natural place into the Groins or
Scrotum, there causing a Rupture called Entorocele, or Hernia Intestinalis, if
the Guts come out; an Epiplocele, or Hernia Omentalis, if the Omentum or Cawl
be out.

The Peritonaeum is made up of two strong, but soft Membranes, which do so
contain whatsoever is included in the Belly or lowest Cavity, that when sound,
nothing can fall out. In Women, the Os Pubis is its utmost Limit. In Men, its
outermost Membrane reaches farther; and constitutes the first proper Coat of
the Testicles. In the Groins, it comprehends the Seminal Vessels as in a
Sheath, called Processus, or Productio Peritonaei. This being stretched, or
enlarged, or coming to burst, is the proximate cause to the lately mentioned
Ruptures. The Groins therefore are the usual places of Ruptures: But do not
imagine, that the Peritonoeum cannot be distended or burst in other places, and
there to cause a Rupture. It happens sometimes above the Navel, yet seldom:
Beneath, and on the side of the Navel, far above the Groins, I have not only
seen it often, with many others, but seen it ordered and dressed just like an
Abscess; the Surgeon giving no other reason for his mistake, than that it
was not the place of Ruptures; which those that love the Art and their own
Honor, may take notice of.

Most times the Ileon falls down, yet sometimes the other Guts come out with
it, and fall into the Scrotum; which cannot come to pass by a simple distention
of the abovesaid process, but that necessarily in all such great Ruptures it
must be broken.

The Causes which make the Peritonaeum to burst or to dilate, are Falling,
Leaping, Blows, bearing of heavy Burdens, strong Vomiting or Coughing,
difficult going to Stool, Winds retained, and all vehement Motions of the Body.

Signs.] The Tumor is sometimes bigger, sometimes lesser, sometimes altogether
vanished, but with the least Motion returning. Though the Caul or Intestines
should be fallen down never so much, they may easily, without any pain, be
thrust in again, unless Wind or Excrement hinder it, in which case the Rupture
is very painful.

If the Intestines be full of Wind, the whole belly is tense; you may hear a
noise, and the Patient breaks Wind upwards and downwards. If the Excrements be
grown hard, the Patient goes with difficulty to Stool, and the swelling, weight
and hardness, little by little increases. If the Peritonaeum be only relaxed
and widened, then the Tumor from little becomes bigger by degrees; but if it be
broken, it suddenly descends.

Prognostics.] In little Children, Ruptures are easily cured; in aged people,
slowly or not at all, especially if the Peritonaeum be burst. If the Intestines
be filled with Wind or Excrements, there follows pain; and if that be not
suddenly removed, an Inflammation, Gangrene, and at last Death it self.

Cure.] Lay the Patient on his Back with his Legs on high, and a little
asunder, by which it often comes to pass, that the Caul or the Intestines
return of themselves into their former place; but that not happening, press
them in gently with your fingers. And if you cannot effect this, by reason of
Wind or hardened Excrements, then use the following Medicines.

Where the Excrements are indurated,
Take Roots of Marshmallows, two ounces: of white Lillies, one ounce; Leaves
of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory of the Wall, of each half a handful; Flowers of
Camomile and Melilot, of each two pugils; Bran, half a handful: Boil them in
Water, and to the Liquor,

Add of

Barley and Bean-meal, of each three ounces; Lin-seed and Fenugreek, of each two
drams; Oil of Roses and white Lillies, Ducks-Fat, and Hens Fat, of each an
ounce. Make it into Cataplasm.

In case this Cataplasm be not sufficient, or seems not to be so, then bathe
the Patient two or three hours in Oil, sweet Milk, or Water, wherein Emollients
have been boiled; not forgetting in the mean time Clysters and Purges.

Against Wind.
Take Oil of Camomile, Rue, of each one ounce; Oil of Nard and Dill, of each
three drams; Spirit of Wine, two drams; a little Wax: Make it into an Ointment.

Another,

Take Oil of Wormwood, one ounce; Oil of Nard and Nutmeg expressed, of each half
an ounce: Oil of Mace and Carraways distilled, of each one dram; Malmsey, an
ounce and half: Boil it a little, then add to it as much Wax as is sufficient
to make it into an Ointment.

Inwardly use the seeds of Anise, Fenel, Carraways, and others Medicines
dispelling Wind; which also are to be mixed in the peculiar Clysters requisite
to this purpose.

Also the Cumin Plaster used by some, may here do good service.

Or,

Take the Styptick Plaster of Crollius, Gum-Caranna, Tacamahac, of each half a
dram; Ol. Philosophorum, and Carraways distilled, of each an ounce: Make it
into a Plaster.

These impediments being thus removed, and the Caul or Intestines reduced to
their place; you must then with convenient Bands or Trusses so long keep them
in, until the burst Peritonaeum be so firmly grown, either together again, or
to the Muscles of the Belly, that nothing can fall out of it any more. And this
you will the sooner obtain, if you outwardly lay on it the following Plaster,
and inwardly assist Nature with appropriated Medicines. But here remember, that
in old Ruptures, and aged People, the edges of the burst Peritonaeum are
sometimes callous, that how fitly soever they are brought together, yet they
can never grow together; and in that case Bands must do the best; but in young
Children they easily grow together; and here Trusses are better than the best
Bands: Those that are not acquainted with them, must confult those that are.

A Plaster for a Rupture.
Take Roots of the great Comfrey, Bistort, of each an ounce and half; Round
Birthwort, two drams; Galls, Cypress-Nuts, Pomegranate-Rinds, of each one dram
and half; Flowers of Balaustians, Red-Roses, Oak-Leaves, of each half a dram;
Aloes, Dragons-Blood, Acacia, Earthworms dried, Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh,
Sarcocols, Mummy, of each one dram; Pitch, Colophony, Burnt-Talch, of each one
dram; Lytharge, Bole-Armonick, Lap. Hematitis, prepared Steel, of each one
scruple; Venice-Turpentine, as much as is sufficient to make a Plaster.

An Apozem, that the Patient may take five ounces two or three time a day.
Take Osmund-Royal, Rupture wort, of each one handful; Roots of the great
Comfrey, Bistort of each one ounce and half; St. John's Wort Flowers, one
handful; Aniseeds, two drams; Boil them in Red-Wine, and to a pint and half of
the strained Liquor,

Add,

Of the Syrup of Comfrey of Fernelius, two ounces: Make it an Apozem.

Pills that the Patient may take five or six of, mornings and evenings.
Take Mummy, one dram; Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, two drams; Myrrh,
Filings of Steel, dried Hares-Dung, of each half a dram; Powder of Earthworms,
two scruples: Make them into Pills about the bigness of a great Pease.

If by a Wound, the Caul or Intestines come out, you are to endeavor to put
them in again, before they lose their natural warmth or color by the Air,
otherwise there will remain but small hopes of recovery.

If the Intestines be wounded, then with a waxed Thread stitch the Lips
together, and with a gentle hand return it into the Body; as also the Omentum
slipped out, unless it should have lost its natural color and warmth; in which
case, you must tie it in the place where it is sound, cutting off the part that
is putrid, and reduce it into the Belly, leaving the Thread hanging out of the
Wound, that after Suppuration, it may be conveniently fetched out.

And then you must stitch together the Wound of the Belly and the Peritonaeum,
which is to be done after this manner; Take a Needle, thread it with a Waxen
Thread, thrust it from without through the Skin and Muscles unto the very
Peritonaeum; leaving it on this side untoucht, but lay hold on it on the other
side; pierce it through, and the Muscles and the Skin also, drawing the Lips
together; then passing over the space of an inch, thrust in the Needle on the
same side again, on which you drew it out last, through the Skin and Muscles,
leaving again the Peritonaeum on the same side untoucht, but holding it on the
other side, thrust it through together with the Skin and Muscles, and so on:
Then seeing that by reason of the continual motion of the Belly, your stitches
may be easily undone, the rather, because the haste, sometimes here to be used,
will not permit to make them with Exactness, it is always necessary to apply to
the Wound a sticking-Plaister.

Among these Ruptures is to be reckoned the Navel-Rupture (called Exomphalos,
or Hernia Umbilicalis) which proceeds from the same cause, and is cured by the
same means: Only you are here to observe, That upon the Plaster, you must put
Bolsters of Leather, or other hard things, and this according to the bigness of
the Rupture; that by this means it may be sufficiently and perfectly kept in.

It is worthy nothing that the Peritonaeum seldom bursts in this part. I have
diverse times found and showed in dissected Bodies, that the Navil, together
with the Intestine following, stood out bigger than a man's Head, insomuch that
the right Muscles of the Belly were pressed to the side, and severed from one
another; and yet was the Peritonaeum but stretched, and no where broken.

These are the simple and compounded Ruptures that are commonly described; but
Practice shows us many others, not mentioned by Writers. For, Experience has
taught me, that the Peritonaeum may burst in the back-part, and there cause a
Rupture. We also find, that the Processus Peritonaei near to the Groins, may
come so to be lacerated, that the Guts press not into the Scrotum, but between
the Skin and Muscles falls down toward the Thigh. Besides, we have more than
once found, that the Vas deferens was fallen twisted into the Scrotum, and had
there made a Rupture; which happening, it may with the Hands be easily reduced,
yet, goes in of it self by lying backward, without any further inconvenience.

The manner of cure had nothing peculiar in it self, but that you contrive such
Bands, that may reduce the parts fallen out into their right place, without
prejudicing the sound ones.

Among these Ruptures, are commonly reckoned diverse Swellings, that belong to
other Chapters; where also we intend to describe them. But to comply with young
Students, I shall here enumerate those that in the modern Practice do occur;
Namely, 1. Entero-cele, Hernia Intestinalis, or the falling down of the Guts
into the Groin. 2. Epiplo-cele, Hernia Omentalis, or the falling down of the
Caul. 3. Omphalo-cele, Hernia Umbilicalis, or the Rupture of the Navel. 4.
Pneumato-cele, Hernia Ventosa, or the Wind-Rupture. 5. Hydro-cele, Hernia
Aquosa, Water-Rupture. 6. Bubono-cele, Swelling of the Glandules in the Groin.
7. Cirso-cele, a swelling of the Seminal Vessels in the Scrotum. 8.
Hernia-Veneris, an hardening of the Testicles by an impure Concuoitus. 9.
Hernia-Humoralis, a Repletion of the Testicles with unnatural Humors. 10.
Hernia Carnosa, a fleshy Rupture. 11. Broncho-cele, Hernia Gutturis, a swelling
in the Throat. 12. Spermato-cele, figuratively so called by me, when the Vas
deferens falls twisted into the Scrotum.


CHAP. VIII. Of the falling down of the Matrix.
THe Matrix does not easily fall down by Relaxation, much less by Laceration of
her broad Ligaments, as most Writers imagine; from hard Labor, or by an
indiscreet drawing away of the Secundine. Others with me have seen, that the
bottom of the Matrix has been plainly inverted in pudendis, so that the inward
part showed it self as the outward. We have also found (especially in those
that were subject to Costiveness or Belly-ach) that the membranes of the
Pudenda were so far stretched out, that the unskilful have taken it for the
Matrix it self, and do so still. For though many Authors have dared to write,
that the Womb may be cut out without danger of life, seems altogether
impossible to a skilful Anatomist.

To cure this Disease, lay the Patient on her back, with her Knees on high, and
Legs asunder; then take a Wax-Candle of a competent thickness, mix therewith
some Castoreum or Assa Foetida, and with it gently press the Womb inward, and
having sastened the Candle with a Bandage, apply outwardly to the Belly the
Emplastrum Barbarum, or the following:

Take the Roots of Cyprus, Bistort, of each a dram; Galls, Acacia, of each half
a dram: Cypress-Nuts, Date-stones, Myrtle-Berries, of each one dram; Pitch and
Colophony, as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

Then presently enjoin the Patient to lie still, with the Legs cross, and to
beware of speaking aloud, of scolding, and of whatever may occasion coughing or
sneezing.

Here great care is to be had, that your Wax-Candle be not too thick, to the
end that by its continual friction it may not cause Fluorem Album, whereby the
strength of the Body would certainly come to decay. Yet because even by the
greatest care and circumspection, this inconvenience will hardly be altogether
or always prevented; therefore those do very well and discreetly, that longways
perforat the Candle, and thereby give a convenient passage for the humors
flowing that way.

CHAP. IX. Of the falling down of the Fundament.
IF the Gut be sunk down, anoint it with Oil of Rose and Myrtle, mixing a
little Powder of Galls amongst it, and with your Fingers and a small
Linnen-Rag, put it in. If an Inflammation hinder the reducing it, then bathe the
Anus with these Medicines,

Take Flowers of Elder, Camomile, and St. John's-wort, of each a handful; Red
Roses, rwo Pugils; the tops of Wormwood and Melilot, of each half a handful:
Boil therein Milk and Red Wine, and bathe the part.

Here especially care is to be had, that no external cold may come to the
fallen-out Anus; for then you may sooner than you are aware of, be surprised
with a Gangreen. Wherefore do your utmost to put it in again with speed; and in
the mean time, endeavor with the above prescribed Bathing and warm Linen Rags,
to preserve its natural heat.

There is yet another, though in appearance ridiculous, yet in reality a good
way of reducing the Gut. With a strong hand strike five or six times the
Patient's Buttocks, and thereby the Muscles, called Any levatores, will
presently draw the Anus into its right place again. But before the Patient be
thus chastized, take care that the Gut may first be anointed with Oil of Roses,
or of Myrtle.

CHAP X. Of the second Operation called Diaeresis, or the separation of what
was united together.
HItherto we have joined together again what had been disjoined; now it
follows, that we separate what is united, and treat of the second Manual
Operation, called Diaeresis, which teaches us the manner of Cutting and
Burning, and that both in the hard and soft parts of the Body.

In the soft, the Cutting is called Incision. In the hard, it is performed four
manner of ways: By Terebration or Perforation; by Rasion or Scraping; by
Limation, or Filing; by Serration, or Sawing. Burning is done either by an Iron
(which is the Actual Cautery) or by Medicaments (called the Potential Cautery)
as shall be declared particularly hereafter.

CHAP. XI. Of opening a Vein.
BLeeding (one of the greatest Remedies in the Art of Physic) is sometimes
highly necessary, but sometimes so dangerous, that it ought not to be used
without very urgent Causes. Here therefore I think it will be better somewhat
to digress for fuller information, than to leave the unskilful in their error.

The Blood is the darling of Nature, by whose assistance she performs all her
Operations, and which can hardly be drawn from her without damage; yet does
Art require, that those who meddle with it, being neither venturous nor
timorous, but discreet and courageous, and making out of necessity a virtue, do
sometimes proceed to the opening a Vein; yet for no other than these four
following causes.

1. In a Plethora, or super-abundance of blood, that by this means Nature may
be eased of her too heavy burden, and the innate heat preserved from
suffocation.

2. For Revulsion-sake, when the blood and the (therein) mingled humors, by
flowing too plentifully to this or that part, hinder the Cure: Here you are
always to choose a Vein of the opposite side, and that sometimes the farthest
distant, sometimes the nearest.

3. For the Derivation or conveyance of the Blood (which is already got into
the part, but is not yet altogether settled there, nor extravasated) into
another place; in which case a Vein is to be opened the nearest to the Part.

4. For Refrigeration, when the heat of the Blood is so excessive, that it
cannot be allayed by cooling Medicines, or not time enough.

These limits are too narrow for some, who will needs take into those a fifth
cause, which they make the Corruption of the Blood, held by them to be as great
an inducement for bleeding as any of the four by us recited; to the end, say
they, that Nature being rid of part of what is corrupt, may be the better able
to correct what remains.

But I much wish, 1. That they could make this discharge without the loss of
that strength which is so highly necessary. 2. That they would be present when
their Patient is to bleed, and precisely tell to what degree of corruption his
blood is come, that so the Surgeon may know how much of it he is to take,
and how often; forasmuch as they will not allow, that Bleeding is good in all
sorts of the Blood's corruption, but in that only which is not gone
considerably far. 3. That they would declare, why they will have cured the
greater corruption by Purging, and the lesser by Bleeding, since that they give
to the one as well as to the other (and that duly) the name of Cacho-Chimia.
Let them show, that things differing only secundum Majus and Minus, do differ
in specie, and so require specifically different Remedies.

Others proceed yet further, and shed innocent Blood in all sorts of Fevers,
without any consideration of spots of the Plague, or of Poison it self; thus
freeing themselves from a great deal of labor and trouble, otherwise caused to
the Physician from the variety of Fevers. But because the nature of all Poison
and Malignant Humors is continually to assault the Heart, and suddenly to
prostrate the strength of the strongest Persons; and since Bleeding does
likewise both, not only diminishing strength, but also drawing the malignity
toward the Heart, and driving in again, for the oppression of Nature, what she
had thrown out for her relief: I do entreat and warn all the Practisers of our
Art, That as they love the quiet of their Mind, and the good of their Patients,
they would beware of bleeding in Pestilential and other Malignant Fevers; as
also in all cases that may befall People by Poison, either inward or outward.

The French, Italians, Spaniards and Portugueses (great Blood-letters) will, I
expect, tell me; That Nature, when by bleeding she has vent, and is somewhat
discharged, shall be better able to throw out the remaining Evil. And this
seems to be true, for the blood indeed receives Air, that the Spirits may the
better fly away, and is robbed of that strength which it so necessarily wants;
whereupon Nature exchangeth the Life of the Patient for death, and extorts
tears from the Bystanders.

Without alleging other Reasons, they ground themselves upon Experience. And
it were to be wished they had that ground indeed; for we find such Patients of
theirs, who in the morning were in no danger, even after but the taking away of
five or six ounces of Blood, to be cold and stiff at night. Whence it may
easily be collected, what it is they call Experience, viz. If the Patient by
chance escape death, then Bleeding must have the honor of it; but if he die, as
for the most part, then the malignity of the Disease was the cause of it.
Wherefore I allege Experience against Experience, and praise God Almighty,
that he has vouchsafed to furnish all those, who without envy, passion, or
slavish dependence upon others, will duly consider Diseases with surer means.

The more moderate sort of them would have Bleeding only administered in the
beginning of the Disease, and before the Malignity appears outwardly. This I
shall willingly allow them; 1. In very hot Countries. 2. In a Plethorick Body.
3. If the humors flying to the head, cause any grievous symptoms there; in
which case, bleeding in the Hand or Foot may be, I think, very beneficial.
Otherwise those that use it in all bodies, and without distinction in these
cold and moist parts, will find the ill effects of it, and be puzzled withal to
give a reason for their Practice, allowable by Art; the rather because, by
their own confession, they dare not use this their Darling of Bleeding at
certain times, but find themselves best in the use of Sudorificks and cooling
Drinks. But enough of this.

Now how many Ounces of Blood ought to be taken at once; the degree of the
Disease, and the Patients more or less strength, will indicate. And it is better
too little than too much. I have never taken more from the strongest and most
plethoric Person under my Cure, than twelve ounces at once, choosing rather, in
case of need, to let out twenty ounces at two times, than fifteen at once; of
which method I have found good success.

As to the season of the year, and the hour of the day, little regard needs to
be had in those Diseases, wherein bleeding cannot be deferred without danger,
as in Plurisies, Squinancies, etc. Otherwise, the Spring and Autumn, and the
Morning are best.

The veins that are wont commonly to be opened, are these: In the Forehead, the
Vena frontis; in the Temples, the Vena Temporalis; in the Mouth, the Vena
sublingualis, or Ranularis; in the Neck, the Jugularis externa; in the Arm, the
Basilica, under which lies an Artery; the Mediana, under which lies a Nerve,
and under both of them a Tendon; and the Cephalica, which has under, or near
it, neither Artery, Nerve, nor Tendon, and therefore may safely be opened: This
last has but one small Branch that runs outward to the head, whence it has
got the name of the Head Vein. Without this consideration, it little matters
which of these three be opened, in regard that about the Armpits they all
acknowledge no more but one Branch. In the Hand, between the little finger and
its neighbor, the Salvatella; in the Foot, the Saphena and Ischiatica.

The manner of Bleeding is so well known, that I think it needless here to
describe it; only I could wish, that some of those that let blood, would take
care somewhat better to guess of the number of Ounces of Blood they take from
their Patients, that so we might not find 12, 16, 18, yea, 22 ounces drawn away
instead of 6 or 8, that were prescribed. To prevent so intolerable a mistake, I
would advise, that small Porringers of Tin or Copper were made, in which the
number of ounces were marked; though expert Masters do not at all need them, as
knowing that Blood is really weightier, than it outwardly seems.

CHAP. XII. Of the opening of Abscesses, or Imposthumes.
THe Humors here and there gathered, do often cause a Swelling, which nature is
not always able to dissipate, unless Art do succor her by fit means; which if
fruitless, you must use Suppuration, and then stay till she of her self make an
opening, except there be a necessity to hasten one, or even not to stay for a
perfect Suppuration: As, 1. When the matter being very sharp or malign, upon
which happens a Corrosion of the neighboring parts, and a corruption of the
Bones, Tendons or Nerves. 2. When it may affect a nobler part. 3. When it lies
in the Joints. 4. When it is cast out by a Crisis.

Before you proceed to the opening, you are to consider, whether the matter be
contained in its own proper Tunicle, or whether it be without any Tunicle. If
without any, then make your apertion with a right Line, observing the Fibers of
the Muscles. For Example; In the head, according to the position of the Hair,
long-ways; in the Eyelids, transverse; in the Temples, the Nose, Neck, Breast,
Back, Arms, Feet, Joints, long-ways; in the midst of the Abdomen, let it be
long-ways; in the sides of it somewhat oblique; in the Groins, transverse; but
not very deep, by season of the subjacent seminary Vessels. Always beware of
touching any great Vein, Artery or Nerve, though the Fibers be cut across,
lest from a lesser evil there should arise a greater.

The properest place for the opening, is the most raised and softest part of
the Abscess, if possible in the depending, that the purulent matter may the
more conveniently be discharged: To which end also you are with a Tent so long
to keep open the wound, until the part, being altogether cleansed of its
preternatural Humors, may return to its former Functions.

In the opening, thrust not in the Launcet too deep, nor further into the
Cavity than to the matter; and as soon as you perceive that, draw it a little
back, and turn the point upward; making your opening through the Skin so big as
may afford the contained matter a free vent.

If the Abscess be included in a Tunicle, if small, make the Incision long
ways; if big, then make a double incision, that is, cross-ways; and beware of
touching the Vesicle, otherwise you must expect a foetide and almost incurable
Ulceration. This being well done, press out with your Fingers the Vesicle,
which seldom or never sticks to the Skin, and easily follows; cut off the
little Artery by which it is fed; and have a care, that not the least Particle
of the Bag may remain on it, lest it gather again.

Forasmuch as in this Operation I find, that Surgeons differ in the
Instrument they ought to use, some choosing the Launcet, others the Potential
Cautery, and extol it far above the former: I think my self obliged to declare
here what I judge of this matter.

The Potential Cautery has this Advantage, that it does not terrify timorous
Patients, nor is painful to the tender; especially joining with it the present
and known good Remedies: For unquenched Lime, mixed with Holland Soap, works
deep enough into the flesh, yet much gentlier than the Corrosive of Ambr.
Paraeus. But it has these Inconveniences:

1. That according to the tenderness or strength of the Skin or Bodies,
sometimes it eats in deeper than needs; for we have found by experience, that
in some it has eaten through the Skin and Muscles, to the very cavity of the
Belly; in others irrecoverably wounded the processes of the Peritonaeum,
together with the seminal vessels therein.

2. Commonly it spreads it self in length and breadth somewhat further than you
would have it, especially if it be to be applied under the Armpits, in the
Groin, or in the Joints; for it no sooner grows warm, but it melts, and so
spreads abroad, notwithstanding the Plaster with which the Surgeon designed to
bound it.

3. There are necessarily required some hours (in some Bodies more, in others
less) before it can perform its Operation; and this the Humor will not always
bear, especially if it be malign.

4. And the Scar falls not presently off; and if you would give a present vent
to the Humors, you will be obliged still to make use of a Launcet. Be as
circumspect as you can, I am sure, you will hardly avoid these Inconveniences.

On the other hand, the Launcet has this trouble, that many people are
affrighted at it, and that it is painful: But the fear may be prevented by
silence, and the pain is little considerable; mean time you have these
Advantages:

1. That with the Launcet, the Apertion may be made as long and as deep as the
Surgeon desires.

2. The matter is suddenly discharged, and the Patient has present relief.

3. The unconcocted remainder may be the sooner concocted, by assisting Nature
with convenient Remedies, both inwardly and outwardly.

4. You will not be troubled with a long gleet, which if it happens, the fault
is assuredly in the Surgeon. For almost all Tumors that appear behind the
Ears, in the Neck, under the Armpits, or in the Groin, spring from indurated
Glandules, replete with a preternatural humor; these Glandules are all included
in their own Membranes, which being touched, either with a Launcet, or with
Corrosive Medicines, there must needs follow a gleet (for it is impossible that
the Glandule should be able to preserve it self, or the contained Humor, its
Tunicle being divided) which will continue until the whole Glandule and Tunicle
are both consumed.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Separation of Parts unnaturally joined.
WIthin the Ear is a thin, but strong Membrane called the Drum. This being
overgrown with another preternatural Membrane, or a Caruncle, the Patient
loses his hearing; which is not at all to be cured by any Manual Art, and
difficultly by Medicines. But if the Cavity of the Ear come to be closed up
with a Membrane, and thereby the hearing lost, then is it to be opened with a
fit Instrument, and as soon as may be, cicatriz'd.

That many have been born with the Anus imperforated, and the Intestine covered
with a Membrane, has been often observed; which if the Membrane be tender and
thin, is to be opened with the Fingers; if thick, with a Launcet, long-ways;
and afterward kept open with a small leaden Pipe, and drying Medicines.

The Pudenda Virginum are sometimes also closed with a preternatural Membrane,
which causes most grievous Accidents, when they are grown marriageable.
Sometimes the part is altogether grown together; sometimes upon an ill-treated
Ulcer, coalescunt Labia and Membrum illud ineptum reddunt congressui virili.
Sometimes a preternatural Caruncle shuts the Os Vulvae. The two first are to be
opened long ways with a sharp Instrument, in part wound about with linen Rags,
and then cured according to Art. To the last, which causes most difficulty,
you will need in the Operation a Speculum Matricis, and in the latter end of the
Cure, a small Pipe, perforated throughout in length, to promote the Cicatrizing.

Here we shall take leave to speak something of the Tongue, not of a long and
sharp one, for which I have found either none, or at least, no better remedy
than contempts, patience and commiseration; but of those, that being short and
tied, deprive Children, first, of Sucking, afterward of Speaking: Which is
easily remedied, by loosening the string of the Tongue, by cutting it
transverse with a pair of Scissars, and anointing it afterward with Honey of
Roses three or four times a day. In the cutting, the neighboring parts and
veins must be carefully shunned; and sometimes the Nerve of the sixth pair of
its Branches run so near the String, that by a deep incision they may be easily
hurt, and the Patient fall into sad Accidents. Here let the Surgeon know,
that of an hundred Children, scarce one needs this Manual Operation; and that
those Midwives are as rash as ignorant, who in all newborn Babes, do forthwith
dilacerate this String, whereby the found parts being hurt, they are often
deprived of their necessary Sucking, and, by subsequent symptoms, of their Life.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Paracenthesis.
ALthough the word Paracenthesis, signifies all Punctures, yet custom has
appropriated it solely to the opening of the Belly in a Dropsy, and to that of
the Breast in Empyema, though more to that than to this.

This Manual Operation is ancient, and full of danger; yet sometimes preserves
the life of the Patient. Nature and Success have emboldened us now and then to
make use of it; but Experience has taught us, that the greatest difficulty
consists herein: 1. That the parts debilitated, and deserted of their natural
heat, do easily, after opening, mortify. 2. That together with the Water,
issues out likewise the Spirits. 3. That the pressing water can hardly be so
kept in, but it will run out in despite of the Surgeon; and if, the better
to close the Wound, you do forcibly press in the Pipe, a Gangrene soon and
easily ensues.

Who therefore expects a good issue of this Operation, must use it only upon a
Body that is not emaciated or wasted; in a Dropsy that is recent (or at least,
when the Tumor in a short time has risen to a great bulk) and which, upon the
use of proper Remedies, would not presently be removed; in such Patients that
are not molested with a Fever, or with difficulty of breathing, and where the
noble parts are yet sound and uncorrupted; and in persons of a middle age,
since in Children and in old people it succeeds not so prosperously.

As to the Place; if the Navel stands out, seek for no other, but make your
opening therein: But if that be much drawn in (as it commonly happens to be in
Hydropical Persons) it is not proper for it: In which case you must take for
your place three inches beneath the Navel, not in the white-Line, which, to my
wonder, I find proposed by some; but, on the side of the right Muscle, in the
Muscle called Oblique Descendens: Mark it first with Ink, and then make a small
Apertion through the Skin, Muscles, and Peritonaeum, taking great care that the
Omentum, or Guts, be not wounded; which also, by reason of the interposing
Water, cannot easily be hurt. He that will be very careful of the opening, must
make it according to the Ductus of the Fibers, a little obliquely downwards
(according to this \) in the left side; and (according to this, /) in the right
side.

As soon as you perceive Water to come forth, take a Golden, Silver, or Leaden
small Pipe, that is, 1. Smooth. 2. Furnished at the Head with a Button or Wing.
3. Perforated on the sides with three or four holes. 4. No longer than the
thickness of the dissected part, that is, an inch broad. 5. Somewhat crooked at
the end. 6. Exactly fitting the size of the Orifice. Put this into the
Apertion, lay over it a sticking-Plaister (others take a Sponge, or a four
double linen Rag) bind up the Patient, and let him rest two or three hours;
then open the Bandage again, and take away one, two, three, seldom or never
more pints of Water, and so repeating it once or twice a day, till the water be
almost all discharged. You must not take away all at first, for the chilness of
the parts, following so great an Evacuation, very often causes death. The Pipe
is not to be taken out, but must remain all the time of the cure in the Wound,
which you must at length heal up according to Art.

For the opening of an Hydropical Belly, this is the safest as hitherto
practiced way, that is left us by the Ancients; but the industry of their
Posterity has invented for us a much convenienter Instrument, whereby we not
only do avoid many of the abovementioned difficulties, but also with less
trouble preserve the lives otherwise incurable Patients, freeing them from
stretching, pain and trouble, according to our pleasure, or the degree of their
strength.

This never enough commended Instrument was first of all brought out of Italy;
by the experienced Surgeon of this City, Mr. Jacob Block, and by him put
into practice, to the great benefit of many Patients.

Commonly he chooses the place lately pointed out by us, viz. about three
inches below the Navel, and perforates the Skin, Muscles and Peritonaeum, unto
the very Water, taking away no more at once than a quart.

That done, he draws out his Instrument again, puts nothing upon the made hole
but dry Lint and a sticking-Plaister, whereby he sufficiently hinders the
running out, against your Will, of even a drop of Water; for, upon the
withdrawing of the Instrument, the opened Skin, Muscles and Peritonaeum are
easily by their natural motion so far drawn asunder, that the holes cannot any
more exactly close upon one another.

This being once performed, we regulate ourselves according to the strength of
the Patient, staying two, three or more days, before we repeat this Operation;
then either the first Orifice is to be opened, or again a new one to be made,
especially if the Surgeon finds, that the Water may be more conveniently
drawn away in another place.

In an Hydrocele (when the water is fallen into the Scrotum) the said
Surgeon does by this Instrument so dexterously discharge the Water out of
the Scrotum, that the next day you shall not, or hardly be able to find where
the Hole was.

The Perforation seems to me a little inconvenient, wherefore I have caused
this Instrument so far to be altered, as that I make the end not to be wrought
round, but sharp on both sides, Launcetwise, by which means it may be sooner
thrust through the Muscles. But then, his may be made of Silver, mine must be
of Steel.

To the end that you may the better comprehend what we say, we shall represent
to your view the Instrument, and the Operation it self, in the ensuing Figures.



Expligation of the Figure. FIG. I.
^^e Silver Pipe of Mr. Jacob Block, with a and point end.

^^e little hole, through which the Water pas^ out of the Belly into the Pipe.

^^e Stillet or small Wire, to cleanse the Pipe ^, after the operation.

FIG. II.
^^e Steel Pipe of the Author, with an end ^ a Launcet.

The little Hole, as before.

^^e Iron-Wire, as before,

FIG. III.
^^e Bed on which the Patient sits.

^^e Hydropical Person.

^ Pipe thrust into the Cavity of the Belly

^^^^ugh the right Muscle, where the above^mended Surgeon affirms, that the
made ^ is sooner healed up.

^^e Basin to receive the Water running out.

^^e Surgeons or Assistants hand.

CHAP. XV. Of the Opening of the Breast.
THere is sometimes collected in the Cavity of the Breast a water or purulent
matter.

The Water gathers either by some Lymphatick Vessels burst, or from an
unconcocted watriness of the Blood. The purulent Matter follows upon
Inflammations of the Throat, or Lungs, or a Pleurisy, etc.

If it be Matter that is collected, it is called Empyema; if Water, Hydrops
pectoris vel pulmonis, the Dropsy of the Breast or Lungs.

The Marks of the Water are, a dry Cough, a painful heaviness, a difficulty of
breathing, even to Suffocation, great Thirst, little Appetite, a pale Look and
sometimes a swelling of the Legs, now and then accompanied with a Fever; and
when the Patient turns himself, you may perceive a rumbling noise.

The collected Sanies may be known by the following Signs; When the Inflammation
of the Lungs or Pleura, will not, upon Bleeding, or other convenient means, be
sufficiently removed, then may you apprehend a collection of such matter to
come within a fortnight. Between the thirtieth and fortieth day the Tumor
commonly breaks. The Patient shall find a great heaviness in his Chest without
considerable pain; and in case it is accompanied with pain, then you are to
Expect a new Flux, which you must divert by Bleeding. The Patient has a
difficulty in breathing; in motion, he hears a rumbling, at least he is
sensible that the matter changes place, and the side affected is to the touch,
hotter than the other. He casts up, with violent coughing, a purulent matter,
having a continual Fever; he finds an anxiety at his heart, and has little
stomach to his meat.

If we cannot expel these Humors by Expectorating, nor by Diuretics, nor
Diaphoreticks, nor by purging Medicines, then are we forced to come to Manual
Operation.

This cannot be done without danger, and is not to be attempted in case the
Patient be weak, and the inward parts already corrupted. However, this
Operation has less danger than the next foregoing, and people oftener recover
upon it; yea, Learned Writers assure us, that by this Operation, and the use of
Injection, they have cured many of Ulcers of the Lungs.

Concerning the Place of Opening, Authors are not agreed in it; the reason
whereof is obvious: For, the Diaphragma runs higher in some persons than in
others; whence it comes to pass, that the collected Humors in some Patients,
lie higher than in others. Secondly, the Chest is raised in some, flat in
others; which here much alters the case. Besides, the Lungs do often grow so
fast to the Pleura, that the sanious matter cannot easily be carried into the
Cavity of the Breast: In which case it would be ill done, to chose the place of
Opening lowest, in respect of the Diaphragma. And in regard that in this, as in
other swellings, the most eminent place is, esteemed the most convenient for
opening, it cannot be otherwise but that one Surgeon has made choice of
this place, and another uses that place as the best. Upon which account,
Hyppocrates Guido, Amatus Lusitanus, etc. do make the apertion between the
third and fourth Rib, counting from beneath upwards: Fienus, Riverius, and many
others, between the fourth and fifth; Paulus Aegineta, Vidus Vidius, Fabritius
ab Aquapendente, Sennertus, etc. between the fifth and sixth; which place, in
my opinion, is the safest; for, if higher, the Pericardium, if lower, the
Diaphragma may be wounded, of which there have been many sad Examples. But in
this difference of dissenting Writers, what has been said, will direct you to
pass into the safest Haven.

All things therefore well considered, choose the place where to make your
Apertion; not the forepart (for, before, the Sternum or Breast Bone will hinder
your operation here; nor in the back-part, for the Ribs are so close to one
another, that without hurting some Vessels, you cannot make any Apertion there)
but on the side, four or five inches from the Sternum: Neither ought the
Incision to be so near to the upper Ribs, as to the lower, because the
intercostal Vessels, viz. the Vein, Artery and Nerve, lie in the lower part of
each Rib, where Nature has assigned them a place, branching themselves into
the middle of the intercostal Muscles; which dissemination nevertheless hinders
not, but that the Incision may be made in the middle between the two Ribs.

After you have marked the place with Ink, charge the Patient to breath forth
as long as possibly he can, without taking it in, and in the mean time make an
oblique, but small Orifice, and put into it a Silver or Leaden Pipe, and take
forth four or five ounces of Matter to run out in a day. In case the Matter
does not come forth well, place your Patient on the wounded side, and make him
to cough; if by reason of its toughness it will not yet come forth, then inject
into the cavity some abstersive, exsiccating and healing Medicines; As,

Take Goats whey, eighteen ounces; Honey of Roses, four ounces; the Juice of
Celandine and Smallage, of each six drams: Mingle it.

Or,

Take the Roots of Comfrey the greater, an ounce; of Sanicle, half an ounce;
the Leaves of Betony, Agrimony, Periwincle, Burnet, of each half a handful; the
Cordial Flowers, two pugils; the Seed of St. John'swort, Holy-Thistle,
Roman-Nettle, of each half a dram: Boil them in Water and Honey to a pint and
half; strain it, and keep it for your use.

Of this Injection, the Patient may also drink a little twice or thrice a day.

It is yet further to be observed, that the collected Matter is often contained
in a Membrane of its own, and by its rising, manifests it self from without;
and then the Latins call it Vomica Pulmonis: In which case, you must not stay
till the Membrane breaks of its self; for by delay, the Matter flowing up and
down is more difficulty to be got out of the Breast; but open it presently,
taking no other place, but the most raised part of the swelling.

Now, since an Empyema for the most part follows upon a Pleurisy, and it is
daily found, that ignorant Surgeons take all kind of pain in the Sides,
Belly and Breast, although caused from Winds only, for a Pleurisy; thereupon
immediately opening a Vein; I thought therefore necessary to write in this
place of the Pleurisy, as much as is necessary for a Surgeon to know, for
the preventing such mistakes.

The Pleurisy then is an inflammation of the Pleura, and commonly of the Lungs
themselves, caused from afflux of Blood, accompanied with Pain Cough, spitting
of Blood, shortness of Breath, continual Fever, strong and quick Pulse.

The Cause is the Blood, sometimes alone (when a true Pleurisy) sometimes mixed
with other Humors then it occasions a Bastard one.

The Signs, as may be seen in the Description, are so evident, that those who
know not how to distinguish it from a Cholick, are not worthy of any excuse.

The Prognostics.] The sooner the matter is concocted, and the whiter and
easier it is ejected, the quicker and safer is the Issue. If the Cough, and
difficulty of breathing lessen not by a copious Expectoration, it is an ill
sign. If the Patient come not to spit the third or fourth day, then will he
scarce see the seventh. If upon Bleeding, and other fit means, the pain cease
not, the Patient must either die, or the Pleurisy will turn to a Consumption,
or an Empyema.

The Cure.] In this case, Bleeding is one of the most necessary and safest
means of Cure; and if used in time, the Patient, in the very Operation, and
before the Vein be closed, will find relief, and sometimes be altogether freed
of the pain. Nor do I know any Disease, in which there may, to the Patient's
benefit, be so much Blood taken away at once, as in this.

There are different Opinions concerning what side the Patient is to bleed on:
But those have had little Experience of this sickness, who have not found, that
Patients (at least in these Countries) are relieved much more and sooner, when
they are bled in the Arm of the same side where the Pain is, than when it is
done in the opposite side.

The Pain not ceasing in four and twenty hours, we are necessitated to bleed
twice or thrice, most commonly in the same Arm; but here you must well observe
the Patient's strength.

After letting Blood, sometimes Purging, Swearing and Expectorating Remedies,
are very necessary. One only Medicine I cannot conceal from you, because of its
Excellency. The Industrious Physician Dr. Hadden in his Cure of the Pleurisy,
has much commended it, and I have, after once Bleeding, always in the
beginning used it with great success, viz.

Take the Juice of Dandelion, an ounce and half; the Water of Plantane, two
ounces; of Holy-Thistle and Scabious, Syrup of Poppies Erratick, of each an
ounce; Crab's-eyes, a scruple and half: Mix it.

Let the Patient every half hour take down a spoonful or two of it, until the
Flux be stopped: After which you are to use other Remedies.

CHAP. XVI. Of Removing a Cataract of the Eye.
A Cataract (by the Greeks called Hypochyma by the Latins, Suffusio; in the
German and Belgic Tongue, De Staer) is a concretion of superfluous Humors, by
little and little generating a preternatural Membrane betwixt the Cornea and
the Crystalline Humor, covering either totally, or in part, the Pupil of the
Eye, and so depriving the Patient, of his sight, or hindering it.

Difference.] It is either Imperfect, when the Humor is thin, or the Apple of
the Eye not totally covered; or Perfect, when it is changed into a Membrane, or
the Pupil is quite covered. Sometimes it is white, gray, yellow, green,
sometimes of a leaden color, etc. according as the green, yellow or black
Choler is mingled amongst it.

The Seat of it is between the Cornea and the Crystalline humor, being
sometimes nearer to this, sometimes to that.

The Cause is a Phlegmatic Humor, either collected there by the weakness of
the Eyes, or by the Brain transmitted thither by reason of its abundance.

Signs.] In the beginning, the Patient sees every thing double, and of many
colors; the Air seems to him full of Flies, Nets and Clouds, and cannot endure
a great light. Thereupon his sight lessens, and all things appear as Spots, and
at length there follows blindness. If it be just in the Center of the Pupil,
yet covers not the whole Pupil; but leaves round about the sight some place
free, and then all the Patient sees, seems perforated. If the Pupil spreads it
self, when you rub the Eye with your Fingers, then is it yet imperfect; if it
remains unmoved, there is no doubt of its being perfect.

The Prognostics.] The imperfect Cataract may easily be cured in the
beginning, by convenient External and Internal Medicines, in sound Bodies, and
in Patients of a middle Age. The less the Pupil is dilated, the less hope of
Cure. The nearer the Suffusion is to the Crystalline Humor, the more dangerous.
If the Eye be turned to the Sun, and the Patient then sees no glimmering of
Light, there is no benefit to be expected from the Manual Operation. If the
Humors of the Eye be commixt by the Needle, though the Membrane be removed,
then blindness will certainly remain. If in the Operation you happen to touch
the Membrane of the Eye, called the Retina, the Patient will after that always
see the Air, as if full of small Hair and Flies. A Cataract commonly remains so
soft unto the third year, that it will not follow the Needle; after the third
or fourth year, it is so firm and hard, that it can by no Art be loosned. The
Blood spilt by the use of the Needle, causes no danger, and soon cease of it
self. Though the Cataract be not altogether suppressed, but divided into
several pieces, the sight does often perfectly return within six or eight
weeks, though before that time the whole Operation should seem to be fruitless;
which I speak from manifold Experience.

The Cure.] The Imperfect Cataract requires solely the Aid of the Physician,
who by Medicines and strengthening the Stomach and Head, have done much; to
which purpose the conserve of Marjoram, Rosemary, Beteny, Pulv. Diambre, etc.
are very good. And outwardly use the following means.

Take Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Eyebright water, two drams; Burnt Allom, one
scruple: Make a Collyrium.

Or,

Take Celandine water, an ounce and half; White wine, half an ounce; Spirit of
Wine, two drams; White Vitriol, six grains; Prepared Tutty, a scruple; Glass of
Antimony, five grains; Sugar Candy, two drams and an half; Camphire, six
grains: Mix it, and make a Collyrium.

Or,

Take Juice of Fennel, of Celandine, of each two ounces; Leaves of Rue and
Marjoram, of each a Pugil; Eyebright, one handful; of the Gall of an Ox, four
ounces; the Gall of Hens; an ounce; Red-Myrrhe, Aloes, of each a dram and half;
Sarcocols, half an ounce; Camphire, two scruples: Mingle them, and let them be
dilled in B. M.

If the Cataract be confirmed, then let the Manual Operation be your only
refuge; but beware of attempting the Operation, if the Patient have long before
complained, and still complains of Head ach or pain of his Eyes; if the Body
has not been cleansed in general, nor the Head in particular; and if the
Patient be yet molested with a Fever, Sneezing, Coughing or Vomiting.

Having chosen a convenient season of the year, some morning in the decrease of
the Moon, and a clear and serene Air, set the Patient in a Chair, and against
him let the Operator sit in one somewhat higher than his, bind up his sound
Eye, and make him clap his hand about your waste, without stirring them at all
as long as you are busy in the Operation. Let some body hold his Head fast
behind, and hold you asunder his Eyelids, charging him to turn the Eye toward
his Nose, which when he does, quickly thrust your Needle into the Cornea, half
a straws breadth from the Iris, and bring it unto the hollow of the Eye; when
the Needle has touched the Cataract, endeavor therewith to press it gently,
and so long from above downwards until it remains there; if it be stubborn, in
springing up again and again, divide it into several parts, and keep these
particles, or the whole Cataract a little while under, that it may not return
again before the Pupil of the Eye; then draw out the Needle, and bind up as
well the sound as the unsound Eye, with Linnen-cloths moistened in some Rose
water, the White of an Egg, and a little Allom mixed together. Beware in the
Operation, of hurting the Crystalline Humor, and the sound Tunicles.

CHAP. XVII. Of Leeches.
LEeches more advantageous than Scarification, and safer than Bleeding, may
with benefit be applied, as well in strong as in weak Bodies, they only draw
Blood from the Cutaneous Vessels, by which they cure light Diseases, if only
applied to the Skin; but if applied to some greater Vessel, they draw also
Blood from the Internal Parts, and so remove internal and more desperate
Diseases.

There is great care required in the choice of Leeches, for those with great
Heads, and that are green and shining, with hair or blew stripes on their
Backs, are not without Poison; as also those that live in standing or putrid
Waters: But those are to be chosen that are slender and long, with little
heads, and red Bellies, and such as are nourished in clear running Water: They
are never to be applied to the Part new taken, but after they have been taken a
day or more in fair Water, and fed with a little Blood, that they may be
cleansed of all their impurities; the place where they are to be applied, is to
be rubbed till it be red; and if they fasten not, it is to be moistened with
Cream, or with Blood fresh taken from a Pigeon, or the part it self to be
pricked with a Needle till it bleed; if they draw sluggishly, cut their tails
off with a pair of Scissars. After they have sucked a sufficient quantity of
Blood, and they fall not off themselves, put upon their Heads a little Ashes or
Salt, and they will suddenly desist from their work: they are not to be pulled
off by force, lest they leave their heads behind them, from whence incurable
wounds, and oftentimes Death succeeds. It Is to be noted, that they rather draw
Arterial Blood than Venal, therefore they ought to suck the less.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cutting in the Hard Parts.
THe Section which is used in the Hard and Bony Parts, is of four kinds, viz.
Scraping, Filing, Sawing and Perforating, that is, Trepanning.

Scraping is used in a Fissure and foul Bone, in the Teeth also, when they are
crusted over with a Tartarous black substance; the Bones are to be scraped till
you come to the sound part, which is white and solid, and a little blood cast
forth; and to the Bone thus scraped, some drying Powder is to be applied; the
Pericranium and Periostium must first be separated from the Bone, before you go
about this Operation; for by no means are they to be touched with the
Instrumenr, neither likewise the lips of the Wound.

Filing is used in the Teeth; for when they unnaturally stand forth, and either
in Eating or Speaking, are any hinderance to a man; then that which thus sticks
forth, is with a File to be taken off, which must be done carefully, without
any injury to the neighouring parts, and by degrees, neither with two great a
Violence, lest it loosen the Tooth.

The use of the Saw is in a mortified part, when the Bone is to be cut a
sunder; concerning which Operation I shall suddenly speak.

Perforating or Trepanning is of great use, when the Bones are extremely soul,
but it is of greatest use in those effects, which the Fissure or a Fracture of
the Skull, or a Contusion may produce: Seeing therefore this Operation is so
full of danger, it is diligently to be enquired in what Cases it is necessary,
and in what it is not; for a Fissure as a Fissure, as likewise a Fracture as a
Fracture, requires not the Trepan as an operation without which they cannot be
cured: In like manner a slight Contusion does not always occasion such
dangerous symptoms, that the Trepan may not cause worse; for oftentimes a small
quantity of extravasated Blood, in Robust People, is often discussed by the
work of Nature her self; except the innate heat be weakened by external Cold,
which in the use of the Trepan, let what care possibly be had, cannot be
totally avoided; besides this, the Blood is more often extravasated between the
two Membranes, the Dura-Mater and the Pia Matter, there the Trepan can seem to
promise but little good; but in this case I would not much matter to divide the
Dura Matter; Experience having taught us, that by the help of Art and Nature,
has an Incision, nay, Gangrene of the Part it self been cured: Therefore for
the most part but in three cases is the Trepan required.

1. Where the loose pieces of the Bones prick and wound the Meninges; which is
to be known by the continual pricking pain presently from the very hurting
perceived, granted the Patient be sensible; but if not, he is always feeling
the Part affected wirh his hands: There happens likewise Contusions of the
Eyes, and Convulsions of the Limbs: Besides, the quality of the Instrument
which the Fracture has made, will more plainly demonstrate it.

2. Where the first Table is only depressed, but the second broke; there being
no way to give passage to the pieces, how well soever by Art or Nature
separated. The Signs of this, are, a Dimness, a Giddiness, a Fever, Vomiting,
and sometimes an Apoplexy; a feeble small Pulse, and especially about the
Temples, the depressed Bone in some manner obstructing the Circulation of the
Blood in the Brain.

3. Extravasation of Blood, upon which follows Putrefaction, and if not
remedied, Death it self: The Signs which declare this Putrefaction, is a
continued Fever, a great Heat in the Head, unquiet Sleep, Watchings,
Inflammation of the Eyes, and light Delirium; and moreover, the Temperaments of
Bodies are diligently to be considered; for in Plethorick People, to those
abovenamed Symptoms are joined, a Laughing, Talking idly, and Redness of ^he
whole Face. In the Choleric appears a yellowness of the Face and Eyes, great
Heat, and Madness. In the Phlegmatic, all the Symptoms are less; but sometimes
it is accompanied with a Palsy, sometimes with an Apoplexy. In Melancholy men,
a dread impertinent Talk, and Laughing is usual.

Where the Trepan is necessary, apply it as soon as possible, lest the
putrefying Blood causes greater evils, that is, on the third, fourth, or fifth
day.

The manner of Trepanning is thus, The Hair being shaved, Let the Skin be
divided with a double Incision, inform of a Cross to the Pericranium, avoiding
with the greatest diligence always the temperal Muscles, and the Sutures of the
Head; this done, bind up the Wound, except the Hemorage be small (which very
often is so violent, that it hinders the Surgeon for some days from any
further Operation) if it will then give leave, to divide likewise the
Pericranium from the Skull: After some few hours (the Skull already barred of
its Pericranium) the Patient well placed, his Head must by some Person be
firmly held, his Ears being stopped with Cotton; then set on the Trepan with a
Pin, which must neither be upon the Fracture, nor upon the Sutures (although
there are some that venture to apply it upon the very Sutures themselves) the
Surgeon holding in his left hand the Instrument, and with his right, let him
gently turn about the Trepan until it has taken good hold round; then take out
the Pin, and set the Trepan on again without it, moving it still about, and if
you see any small Filings of the Skull, take off the Trepan and wipe them away;
and the Trepan it self is sometimes to be dipped in the Oil, that it may the
easier be turned about; and sometimes in Water, that it grows not hot. If any
Blood appears, you may be certain that the Trepan had past the first Table,
then are you to have a greater care, lest the Trepan should unawares slip in,
and wound the Meninges, from whence oftentimes follows sudden Death: For the
Dura Matter invests the inside of the Scull, in the same manner as the
Pericranium does the outside, but yet not so strongly joined to it, but that
by a fall or blow, it may be easily separated from the Skull.

When the piece of Bone, separated by the Trepan, begins to be loose, you must
with a little Instrument put in, between the Skull and the Trepan'd part, and
free it from the whole, and so gently take it out with a pair of Forceps.

If there remain any inequality from Trepanning, in the inside of the inward
Table, that may cause injury to the Meninx, it is to be taken away with an
Instrument called Lenticula.

And that there may be a discharge given to the coagulated Blood and Matter,
the Dura Matter is to be compressed with an Instrument called a Decussorium. To
effect the same, it is commended that the Patient (if sensible) his Mouth and
Nose being shut, hold his Breath, so that the Brain being raised upward, the
concreted and corrupted Matter may be thrown forth; but very seldom is the
Matter discharged by this only remedy; for the Surgeon has need enough of
the Decussorium, Spunges, Lint, and the like Instruments; the description and
delineation of the which, you may find in Joh. Andr. a Cruce, Paraeus, and
others. Read the 4 th. Chapter of this Surgery, where Fractures of the Skull
is described.

CHAP. XIX. Of Vstion, or Burning.
ENough has been said of Cutting, now a little of Burning; when neither
Medicine nor Knife bring relief, we must then come to the Fire, as well in the
soft as hard parts: In all Burning, great care is to be taken that the
neighboring parts be not hurt; therefore it is very necessary to defend them
against it with Lint: That burning is certainest, which is made by an actual
Cautery, viz. a red hot Iron, than that which is performed a Potential, that
is, by Corrosive Medicines; yet for the most part, the Patients fearfulness
makes choice of this; whichsoever you use, beware of applying Oil alone, or
Butter, to remove the Escar, for it has been observed not once only to to have
occasioned a Gangrene, Diapalma Plaster, or Lint, wet in Wine, will be
sufficient.

CHAP. XX. Of Issues.
ISsues are little Ulcers made by Art in a sound part of the Body by a red-hot
Iron, Launcet, Scissars, or corrosive Medicine, to evacuate superfluous humors,
and so either to cure or prevent Diseases.

These troublesome Guests are rarely courted, and are chiefly prescribed when
we see gentler Medicines to profit nothing, and after the Body has been well
purged.

In what part soever they are made, it is always to be observed they never
ought to be inserted in the beginning, middle or end of a Muscle, but always in
the space between two Muscles, which requires the knowledge of Anatomy, except
according to the example of Quacks, whose custom has taught them to find out a
place even blindfold. In the Head, the place is the middle of the Coronal
Suture, made oftener by other Nations than is a practice amongst us. In the Neck
they are not so often made, how necessary soever they may appear. The Italians
use to make them between the Shoulders with success. In other places they are
either very troublesome or inconvenient.

The Manner of making Issues is diverse: If you make use of the Potential
Cautery, apply a Plaster to the part, having a hole in the middle about the
bigness of a Pea, in which lay a little Costick, and over that a Bolster and
another Plaster; and after three or four hours, take off the Plasters, and
laying on the Escar a Plaster of Diapalma; dress it twice a day, that it may
the sooner separate.

Those which desire it rather by Incision, the Skin being taken up either by
the Forceps, or by the Hand, divide it with a pair of Scissars or Launcet. If
Burning be preferred before the other ways, burn the Skin, but not the
subjacent Muscles; for indeed the Skin it self is not to be wholly penetrated,
oftentimes the touching only the Superficies of it is enough.

When the Scar falls off, take little hard Dossels made of Lint, spread upon
them some Detersive Medicine, and press them into the Ulcer, until they have
made a sufficient Impression; then afterward keep in this Cavity a Ball of Wax,
Wood, or Silver, or a Pea, which is to be often taken out, and another put in,
and so is to be continued till the Disease be cured, or Weakness hinder.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Seton
ALthough the application of a Seton be with greater trouble than an Issue, yet
it brings much greater advantage to the sick Patient; for what two Issues
cannot remove, oftentimes is performed by one Seton.

It may be made in the Arms and Legs, and many other parts of the Body; but in
the Nape of the Neck, between the first and second Vertebra, or second and
third; yea, between the third and fourth, is only in use amongst us, but I
could wish it was more frequent.

There are three Instruments necessary to perform this Operation; A pair of
Forceps, a Needle, and String. The Forceps which are to hold up the Skin, must
be perforated of each side; the Needle must be three-pointed, and answer to the
hole of the Forceps, which it must pass through. The String is to be of Silk,
not exceeding the thickness of the Needle: Let the Surgeon take up the Skin
with the Forceps and gripe it hard, which being somewhat stupefied, the Patient
will feel the less pain; then let him pass the Needle red-hot through both the
holes of the Forceps, Skin and all; after which, with another Needle let him
bring through the thread: The first day, to ease pain, apply to the Part Lint
dipped in Whites of Eggs and Rosewater mixed together: Afterward let Digestion be
procured by the use of convenient Medicines; when digested, let the String be
drawn every day, sometimes to this side, sometimes to that, so that the mattery
part may hang out of the Wound. Thus the Operation being perfected, the Ulcer
may be kept open as long as occasion requires, or the Patient pleases.

After this manner many Authors, both Ancient and Modern, order the making the
Seton; but this Oparation is much easier performed, if in the right place the
Surgeon take up the Skin with one hand, and his Servant with another, and so
pass it through with a sharp-pointed Needle, but not made hot; the String being
of Thread, not Silk, of convenient Thickness, and rubbed with Wax.

CHAP. XXII. Of the drawing forth of Bullets.
NOw we are come to the Third Part of Surgery called Exeresis, which removes
things superfluous: They are of a twofold Nature, either they are generated in
the Body it self, or else brought thither by Accident.

We treat of the last first, to wit, The Extraction of Bullets out of the Body;
which is not difficult, if it appears whether it be nearer to the part where it
made its entrance, or to the opposite to which it has penetrated.

If it be observed to be near the Orifice; let it be drawn forth with a
convenient Instrument; if nearer to the opposite part, let the Incision be made
upon it, and there taken forth: But if the Bullet cannot be found out by a
Probe, the Member is to be so placed, that the Bullet by its own weight may
come forth; which if it happens not to do, the Wound is to be cured; and let
the Surgeon expect until the Bullet shows it self near the Skin, which very
often requires a long time.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Extraction of a Dead Child and the Secundine.
THat the Birth may be Natural, it is necessary, That the Infant the whole time
of its continuance in its Mothers-womb, lies in such a posture, that the Arms
and Feet being contracted, the Head downwards, having the Face toward the
Mothers Back; the whole Foetus lying transverse in the bottom of the Womb;
until requiring greater room, which happens in the seventh, sometimes in the
eighth or tenth, for the most part in the ninth Month, the head of the Infant
descends toward the mouth of the womb; the Limbs which were before contracted,
being extended, it breaks through the Membranes wherein it was included, by
which the water that is contained in them, flows forth, which serve to make the
parts slippery, and so is convenient to facilitate the Birth.

If any one of these be wanting, then one of these four things necessarily
happens; either, 1. Both the Mother and the Child, although they may live, yet
there follows no Exclusion. 2. Or the Mother lives, and the Child dies. 3. Or
the Child lives, and the Mother dies. 4. Or both the Mother and Infant dies.

Causes hindering Labour] are, 1. When the Pains of the Birth are none, or not
sufficient. 2. The great weakness of the Mother. 3. The greatness and strength
of the Child; and on the contrary, the slender and tender Constitution of the
Mother, or when the passages are so straight that the Infant cannot come
through them. 4. The number of Children, especially if they endeavor to come
forth at the same time. 5. The transverse, or any other preternatural posture
of the Child. 6. If the Child in the Birth it self be fallen down with its Head
upon the fore-port of the Ossa-Pubis: which case Authors of the greatest
account, whom I know, and our Midwives have not at all observed; so by how much
the greater the Pains of the Birth are, there is so much the less hope of
coming out, except the Head be first a little raised, and the Foetus be turned
toward the back, and so into its true passage by the hand of the Midwife. 7.
The Weakness of the Child it self, which makes it not able to add any thing
toward its Exclusion. 8. The Death of the Child. 9. The not sufficient
recesses of the Hip-bones toward the Back; for the Ossa-Pubis, except in the
very hardest Labors, and then but very seldom do divide.

The Signs of a Dead Child are as follows.
The Mother feels no more the Motion of the Infant, although strengthening
Cordials be exhibit'd; but in this case when the Infant is as it were tired,
stirs it self a little, you have a much more certain Sign. Take a piece of the
Crum of Bread, and dip it in Canary Wine, and apply it to the Navel of the
Mother, then open a Vein in the Foot, and if by the use of these things, there
follows not a motion of the Infant, it is a very ill Sign.

When the Mother turns her self from one side to the other, and perceives the
Child to fall on the side laid upon, like a stone or a great weight; the Face,
and chiefly the Lips grow pale, the extreme parts cold, as likewise the lower
Belly, the Paps begin to grow lank, the Breath becomes fetid, great pains of
the Head, Faintings and Fevers, Water and stinking Gleet flows out of the Womb;
If the Afterbirth be excluded before the Child, it is impossible the Child can
live long; but the surest sign of all is, if the Membrane of the Head of the
Child be not observed to be any longer tense; for as long as it is tense, the
Infant lives.

Prognostic.] Except the dead Child be suddenly drawn forth, it puts the
Mother in great hazard of Life. The Fever not being great, other Symptoms,
though great and fearful, yet take not away the hope of recovery.

The Cure.] If Medicines, with the aid of Mother and Midwife, profit little,
then must the business be committed wholly to the Surgeon, except the Woman
be too weak, or the Child having been dead for many days, which he ought to
consider, lest he lose both his Credit and Labor.

But first, it is diligently to be enquired into, which of the Causes it is
that hinders the Birth: If the Child be greater and the passage straighter than
usually, they ought to be dilated; this some Midwives do with convenient
Instruments, and so draw forth the Child alive; but where they are wanting, the
Midwife must clutch her hand very close, and thrust through the Internal
Orifice into the Womb it self; then putting her Fingers one after another
through the Orifice into the inner part of the Womb, to discover the situation
of the Child; and if she finds the Arms or Feet to come inconveniently, let her
gently raise it up, bringing the Head downwards, which if she finds to be next
the Orifice, if possible, let her put in her other hand through the Pudenda
into the Womb, and so with both her hands laying hold of it, draw it forth.

But if this Operation cannot be performed, then with a hook firmly fixed (lest
it injure the inside of the Womb) in the Mouth, Eye or Ear of the Child, and so
gently draw it forth; and if the Faetus will not follow, then with another
Hook, blunt on the outside, and sharp within, let him cut in pieces the Belly,
Breast, or Head of the Child; and if the Arms or Legs cannot be brought forth,
let him cut them off; so at length, being deprived of its Limbs, the remainder
may be drawn forth.

But if by this way the Woman can neither be delivered, with a sharp and strong
Knife, the Limbs one after another are to be cut out, and so the Child be drawn
forth by piecemeal: It is necessary that this be performed by none but a good
Anatomist.

The Secundine will presently follow the Birth, for it is of no use, that being
excluded; for the Mouth of the Womb, suddenly after delivery, is so closly
shut, that not without great pain it can admit the Hand of the Midwife;
therefore the Midwife, as soon as may be, is to draw it forth, and with her
fingers, if it sticks very close to the Womb, gently to separate it, but not
pluck it a way forcibly, which is mortal; and although many Writers and
Midwives of inferior Rank, little regard the retention of the Afterbirth for
some time after delivery; yet I think I have good reason to pronounce it, one
of the greatest Symptoms of Women's Labor.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Extirpating of a Mortified Part.
WHen a Dead Part altogether becomes useless, that it may not do any injury to
the neighboring Parts, it is to be taken away: But in what place? Most
convenient is the Joint; but the cure by such Extirpation is rendered more
difficult, and the use of the Part altogether lost; therefore the Extirpation
is better to be made two, or three, or more fingers breadth below the Joint,
except the Mortification has extended it self to the uppermost part of the
Arms or Thighs; for then we are forced to take the Joint it self: But again in
what Part: whether in the whole or Mortified? The Amputation is more safe in
the sound Part, although accompanied with greater Pain.

The common way both of the Ancient and Modern.
The Patient having received convenient nourishment, is to be placed upon a
Form; then let the Skin and fubjacent Muscles be drawn up as much as possible,
by a strong Man, and there kept; and an inch above the place where the Member
is designed to be taken off, with a narrow Ligature is the Part to be very hard
bound; this done, with a dismembring Knife, the Skin with the Flesh is speedily
to be cut all round to the Part, and the Periostium, by scraping, is to be
separated from the Bone; and if it be where there is a double Bone, as in the
Leg, and below the Elbow, the Flesh and Ligaments between them is to be
divided; which being performed, let the Bone be separated with a very sharp
Saw. If the Flux of Blood be not great, to apply only those Medicines that stop
Blood, will be sufficient; but if great, an actual Cautery is to be used, which
is only to be applied upon the great Vessels; then let the Ligature be taken
off, and the Part be fitly bound up.

If either the Patient or Surgeon be averse to the use of a Cautery, then as
soon as the Member is taken off, let the Skin together with the Flesh, in four
distinct places opposite one to the other, be taken up with a Needle and waxed
Thread, and the Ligature being loosened above, or drawn down, that, if
possible, they may meet: So by this way is the Hemorage staid, the Bone
preserved from all danger, and the Wound sooner cured. But this way is painful
and troublesome, therefore ought it the seldomer to be used.

Aquapendens his way.
When the principal design of Art in this Operation, is to put a stop to
Putrefaction, to cause as little pain as may be, and to stay the Flux of Blood,
all which the above-quoted Author thinks may be done, if the Member be
amputated in the dead Part, but near to the sound; then the Bone being divided
with burning-hot Irons, let the remainder of the dead Part be cauterized, till
the Patient perceive the heat of the Fire: So he writes, that by this course a
Flux of Blood is not to be feared, less pain is caused, and within the space of
two or three days, will appear a separation of the Mortified Part from the
Sound; but in my opinion, we ought to consider well of the Cause. For in a
Spacelus, sprung from an Internal Cause, in a Body otherwise sound, this way is
the best; but in a Spacelus caused from a defect of innate Heat, the former is
more profitable.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Fleshy Rupture.
SArcocele, which is a Fleshy Rupture, is a Tumor besides Nature, produced from
impure Blood, flowing in too great quantity itno the Testicles, and there
degenerated into Flesh.

In this Definition, received by the best Physicians and Surgeons, I note
two things: 1. The cause of this Tumor, not to be impure Blood, seeing the
best, may produce it; not simply abounding in quantity, because it also happens
in wasted Bodies, though it is not so soon generated, nor arrives to such a
greatness in these, as in those Bodies; but the true cause is the Erosion,
Rupture or Dilatation of the Membranes which close the Mouths of the Capillary
Vessels, that the nutritious Blood may not flow too suddenly into the Part;
from whence, more Blood flows into the Part than what is required for its
nourishment; and Nature changes that Blood which otherwise would purify into
a fleshy Substance. 2. This flesh sometimes grows to the second of the common
Tunicles of the Scrotum, and not to the Testicles, in which case it may be
taken aways, without either hurting, or cutting of them out.

Signs are, the hardness, and slow increase of the Tumor, which is rather more
troublesome than painful, except accompanied with sharp Humors; no appearance
of any Tumor in the Groin.

Prognostics.] A Sarcocele is hardly cured by the help of Medicines, and
seldom by manual Operation, without taking off the Testicle, if it extends it
self into the Groins, for the most part incurable.

Cure.] In the beginning, when the Membranes of the Vessels being eroded, broke
or dilated, do give leave for too much leave to issue forth, Bleeding, and the
use of Repelling and Restringent Medicines profit much; but when it has begun
to augment, then we may use these following means: Let there be made a little
Orifice into the Scrotum, rather in its Superior then Inferior Part, through
which, by the help of Plegets let Suppurating Medicines be applied, so that if
possible, to waste the Flesh, every dressing diligently wiping away the Matter,
but not at all, that the remaining Flesh may be the better consumed.

If these things succeed not, draw forth the Testicle, and by Incision take off
as much Flesh as may be done without injury to it; then restore it again into
its place, and the remainder of the Flesh endeavor to consume by Suppuration.

But if there be no hope of curing this Rupture by the recited means, draw
forth the Hernious Testicle as far as you may, then pass once or twice a Silken
Thread above the Tumor by the Process of the Peritonaeum; then pass both ends of
the Silk through the Orifice it self, so that which was on the right side, may
be on the left, and that of the left, on the right; and having ordered that the
process of the Peritonaeum may be tied with a knot, then cut off the Testicle,
letting both the ends of the Silk hang out of the Scrotum, and so cure it as
another Wound.

I cannot here but friendly advise, 1. The Surgeon ought to consider well of
the Cause, before he comes to the Operation it self; for sometimes the
Parastates are so swelled, especially the Testicles being Scirrhous, that they
may easily deceive a very curious Examiner. 2. The Ligature ought to be made as
near to the Tumor as possible, for by how much the higher part of the Process
of the Peritonaeum be perforated, it is observed to be so much the thicker,
which thing will retard the Suppuration and the falling of the Thread; in the
mean time Convulsions coming on, denounce death. 3. The Spermatick Vessels
detained in the Scrotum, oftentimes by Natures variety, exceed the Testicles
themselves in greatness, which causes no other inconvenience but only Fear,
which I have observed to be true, in more than one.

CHAP. XXVI. The Extraction of the Stone out of the Bladder.
THe Stone is a hard Body concreted from Slimy, Salt or Earthy Matter, by a
peculiar Lapidifying quality, causing Pain, Obstruction; and other Symptoms in
the place where it is detained.



The Cause is a Pituitous, Salt or Earthy Matter, which neither by heat nor
cold, by a peculiar lapidifying quality is changed into a Stone.

Signs.] The Urine is white, slimy, crude and troubled, suddenly adhering to
the Urinal; sometimes it is bloody, sometimes sandy or gravelly; sometimes full
of little Threads, and not seldom suppressed; a great thirst, a frequent making
of Urine, but with pain and by drops: The Patients place themselves with their
Thighs across, always holding their Privy-Parts in their hands, pressing the
bottom of their Belly; the Privy-Part is always erected, very painful to go or
walk, in the Region of the Belly a weight perceived, the Patient seldom making
Water without going to Stool, the Intestine commonly falls out, especially in
young People.

Although all these Signs seem plain, yet they may sometimes deceive a
Phisician; it was formerly the Custom with a Catheter passed through the Ureter
into the Bladder, then thrusting in one or two fingers into the Anus, not only
to search for the Stone, but also understand its greatness. But this searching
was so very painful, that it was difficult, through fear of pain, to have it
permitted a second time; and this thing gave occasion to have ready at the
second time of searching, all Instruments necessary for cutting out the Stone;
but the Omnipotent and great Prince of Physicians has now granted to those
miserable Patients, those Surgeons, who not only without Catheter, but also
without pain, both in old People and Children, which can most certainly find
out the Stone; and for this Reason they Excel the so much Esteemed Frenchmen.
I wish other places may may enjoy the same Artists.

Prognostic.] A crumbling Stone seldom, a hard Stone can never be wasted by
Medicines, whatsoever boasting persons may say; sometimes it is so soft, that
by the very Catheter it self it may be broke to pieces in the neck of the
Bladder, and be brought forth; sometimes through its smalness it comes forth
whole; sometimes it sticks in the Urethra, out of which, without danger and
great pain it cannot be removed; if it sticks in the Tunicles of the Bladder,
or grows to the Superficies of the Interior Coat, it cannot be taken away by
Section, without the death of the Patient: By how much the greater the Stone
is, the Operation is the more dangerous and painful. Stones are often drawn
forth out of Women's Bladders about the bigness of an Olive, or a Walnut,
without Incision: but this way by Dilatation, of Extracting the Stone, is so
dangerous, that it ought not to be performed but by experienced Surgeons.

Cure.] Stones generated in the Kidneys, Bladder, or other parts of the Body
(for, they may in any) in general, require the assistance of the Physician; but
we in this place treat only of the manner of drawing them forth out of the
Bladder by Incision. There are several ways by various Authors proposed; but
that which follows, is the most common, and most sure.

Let the Surgeon place his Patient on a soft Pillow in a strong man's Lap,
after he has three or four times jumpt from a high place, then let him tie both
his hands to the soles of his Feet, and let two standers by hold each Knee,
extending them as far as may be one from the other; then let him take the first
Finger of his Left Hand, or if necessity requires, the two first, anointed with
Oil of Lillies, Roses, or fresh Almonds, and thrust them up the Fundament, with
his right hand gently compressing above the Os Pubis, so that the Stone may
slip down under the Os Pubis, into the Perinaeum, which when brought thither by
the foresaid Fingers, let him make Incision with a sharp Knife in the left side
between the Testicles and the Anus, near to the Suture of the Perinaeum,
cutting to the very Stone it self; and if it comes not out of the Wound it
self, nor by the thrusting forth of the Fingers which are in the Intestinum
rectum, let him draw it forth with a pair of Forceps, or which is better, with
the Lapidillum or Spoon. The Stone being taken out, and all the Ligatures
loosed, let the Wound be bound up according to Art, applying Medicines,
stopping Blood, viz. of Meal and Bole, etc. with the greatest care to
consolidate it as soon as possible, lest the Patient labor with a dropping of
his Urine through the wounded part: And this is the manner of drawing forth the
Stone, which Surgeons use to call Apparatus Minor, which chiefly is used in
Children, although there are those which proceed thus in People of full growth:
But in our Country always this Incision is made by them whose Fingers are
fitted for this Operation,

But in People of full Age it is sometimes very difficult to reach the Stone by
the Fingers put up into the Fundament, and after the same manner to bring it
down into the Perinoeum, if not altogether impossible, as many think it;
therefore there is another way found out, which they call Apparatus Major; the
Patient is put on a Table, and bound, and held as above, the Surgeon through
the Uretra passes a Director into the Bladder to the Stone, then Incision
being made as obove, in the hollow of the Director, puts in the Conductor,
taking the Director out of the Uretra, he passes into the Wound the Forceps,
the Lapidillum, or other Instrument convenient for drawing out the Stone, by
which he may both lay hold of it, and draw it forth, not making use of his
Fingers in the Anus, except great necessity compel him to it. Where the Stone
is bigger than the Orifice, and cannot come forth, the Wound is to be enlarged,
or the Stone to be broken into pieces by the Forceps, and so drawn forth in
parts: This done, the Binding and Consolidating the Wound, ought to be the same
as in Children, giving it a stitch if it be too great, putting in a Silver-Pipe
for two or three days, that may give passage to the Concreted Blood, Slime and
Sandy Urine.

The manner is the same in Women, but only the Fingers are not put into the
Anus, but into the Privy-Parts, and the Catheter must not be crooked, but
straight, and much shorter than the other.

There is likewise another manner of drawing forth the Stone; the Surgeon
thrusting his Finger into the Anus, presses the Stone upwards to the Belly;
then through the Wound made in the right Muscle above the Os Pubis, according
to the ductus of its Fibers, by the assistance of the Lapidillum or Forceps
draw forth the Stone; by this way is never observed any coming forth of the
Urine, and the place supposed convenient to draw forth the Stone: But this
Operation in it self is dangerous and troublesome, and if the Lips of the Wound
made in the Bladder unite not to the Muscles of the Abdomen, there follows an
Ulcer of the Bladder, more painful, but less cureable than the Stone it self;
which inconveniences have caused it not to be reckoned among other Operations
by true Practisers.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Hare-Lip.
THe fourth and last Part of Surgery called Anaplerosis, which restores what
is deficient, is chiefly used when any part of the Nose, Lip, or Ear is
wanting, whether it be from the Birth, or from an External Cause,

As to the Lip, in a little defect, let it be first separated from the Gums,
then let the edges be scarified and joined together with a Needle, laying over
it an aglutinating Plaster, and so in a short time the Cure will be performed.

In a greater Defect, let the Lip be separated from the Gums, then put a Linen
Cloth between, and let the Extremities be brought together by Bandage, after
some few days, convenient Scarification being made, by the help of a Stitch,
and Plasters, let the ends be united.

The Nose and Ears being deprived of any part, after what manner they are
cured, Taliacotius in a particular Treatise has largely set down; to the which
I refer the Reader.

The End of the first Part.
BARBETTY'S SURGERY. The Second Part.
Which treats of Tumors, Wounds and Ulcers: In three Books.
The First Book of the Second Part of Surgery. Of Tumors.
CHAP. I. Of Tumors in general.
A Tumor besides Nature, is a Disease in which the Parts of the Body are
indecently inlarlarged and extended, so that they are rendered unfit to perform
its Actions.

The Differences of Tumors are taken, 1. From the Part affected; as an
Inflammation of the Eyes, Jaws, etc. 2. From the Causes.

The Causes are, 1. The Parts of the Body removed out of their Natural place.
2. The Four Humors, as well Natural as Preternatural, viz, Blood* Choler,
Phlegm, Melancholy, to which likewise we add Serum and Wind.

Tumors for the most part are generated from the Humors, and that either by
Congestion, or Fluxion.

They come by Congestion, when the Natural heat of the Part being diminished,
the good Humors are ill concocted, or the vicious are not sufficiently
evacuated.

By Fluxion, from a twofold Cause, External, viz. a Fall, Blow, External Heat,
too great Motion, etc. Internal, viz. Pain, Superabundancy, Thinness, Acrimony
of Humors, etc.

The Signs of Tumors are, an Extention of the Part, Pain, Redness, Heat,
Hardness, etc. But these are better explained in particular Tumors, than in
general.

The times of Tumors (for all curable Tumors have four) are as follows,
Beginning, when the Part begins to swell; Increase, the swelling, pain, and
other Symptoms are augmented; State, the Symptoms stand at a stay, and grow not
worser; Declination, when the Symptoms are diminished.

Prognostic.] Tumors produced from Phlegm or Melancholy, are hard of Cure.
Those are dangerous, which are generated from corrupt Blood or Choler, which
seizes the Internal Parts, which show themselves about the greater Vessels,
Joints, Nerves, and the Membranous or Noble Parts: Those that are of great
bigness, and that happen in Cacochymick Bodies.

They are Terminated four ways; 1. By Dissipation, which the lessening of the
Symptoms do declare. 2. By Suppuration, wherein the Pain and Pulsation is
increased together with a Fever. 3. By Induration, which the too often and
immoderate use of Repelling and Dissipating Medicines has caused. 4.
Degenerating into a Gangrene, from the defect of Natural Heat.

The Cure is performed two ways: 1. By hindering any further Flux to the Part.
2. In removing that which is already gathered in the Part.

We stay the Flux of Humors, 1. By Intercepting. 2. By Repelling. 3. By
Revelling. 4. By Derivation. 5. By Corroborating the Part it self.

The Matter already gathered, is taken away, 1. By Astringing and Repelling
Medicines, to wit, when it is thin, and sticks not too firm to the Parts. 2. By
Resolvents, when it is thick, and adheres more firmly to the Part. 3. By
Suppuratives, when the other are too weak. 4. By Fire and Cutting, when other
means effect nothing.

CHAP. II. Of Inflammation.
A Phlegmon or Inflammation is a Tumor besides Nature, from Blood thrown forth
into the Skin or Subjacent Muscles, causing Heat, Redness, Pain, Pulsation and
Tension.

Difference.] It Is Perfect, when from Blood alone: Imperfect, when Choler
Phlegm, or Melancholy is mixed with the Blood, and then it is called Phlegmone,
Erysipelatodes, Oedematodes, Schirrhodes.

The Cause is sometimes Blood alone, sometimes mixed with other Humors.

Signs, are Heat, Redness, Pain, Pulsation, Shining, Tension, Hardness,
Renitency.

Prognostics.] An Inflammation of the External Parts frees the Internal from
many Diseases; always wholesome, except from its too great Extention it
produces a Gangrene; dangerous and of hard cure is that which seizes on the
Eyes, Jaws, Penis, Pudendum Muliebre and Joints. In a young Person, and in
Summer soon cured; longer of Cure, in a fat, than a lean Body.

The Cure has four Indications. The first of these respects a good Diet; let
him choose a clear Air, his Meat and Drink little, and that cooling; all hot,
sweet and fat things, as Pepper and Ginger, are hurtful; as also the motion of
the Body, especially of the Part affected; Sleep is very convenient: All
Costivenefs, Anger and Venery are noxious,

Second, that stops the further Flux of the Humor, which may be performed by
Revulsion, Derivation, Repelling and Interception; therefore let a Vein be
opened as soon as possible, it being most necessary: Revulsion is made in the
Opposite and most Remote part, Derivation in the nearest: If you may not open a
Vein, you must use Leeches and Scarifications. Whilst these things are done,
seeing the Body is seldom clean, but that always there are ill Humors mixed with
the Blood, by Purging rightly used, and often repeated, as also Bleeding, we
effect much.

In the mean time, the Part affected requires Repelling Medicines, from which
we must abstain, Where, 1. The Noble Parts send the Humors to convenient
places, and to the Glandules. 2. Where the Humors are Malignant. 3. When
Critical. 4. When the Body is very impure. 5. When the part affected is very
weak or painful. 6. Where the Inflammation is about some Noble Part.

Repelling Medicines.
The Roots of Bistort, Tormentil; the Leaves of Cyprus, Mirtles, Plantain and
Oak; the Flowers of Balaustians and Roses, Quince-seeds, Red Sanders, Galls,
Acacia, Dragons Blood, Whites of Eggs, Vinegar, Red Wine, Alum, Bole, Oil of
Roses, Myrtles, Empl. de Spermate Ranarum.

Take Rose-Vinegar two ounces, Whites of Eggs beat together No. 2.
Bole-Armenick, three drams; Lap. Hematitis, a dram; Mix them.

Take the Juice of Housleek, Purslane, and Plantane, of each an ounce;
Rose-Vinegar, sour Red Wine, of each an ounce and half; Oil of Myrtles, an
ounce: Stir them together in a Leaden Mortar, adding to them of the Powder of
Pomegranate Rinds and Bistort, of each a dram: Make it into a Linament.

3. Indication requires the taking away the Humor already in the Part. Here
Resolvents are first to be used; but they not effectual, then Suppuratives.

Resolvents or Discussives.
Roots of Galangal, Orrise, Dill, Southernwood, Rue, Savin, Flowers of Camomil,
Melilot, Elder, 2 Aniseeds, Carraways and Cummin* Ammoniacum, Bdellium,
Sagapenum, Tacamahac, Oil of Dill, Nard, Rue, Bays; Ointment of Agrippa
Martiatum; Emplaisters of Betony, Oxicroceum, Diachilon, Leaven, the Dung of
Beasts, Spirit and Lees of Wine.

Take Roots of Orrise, Marshmallows, of each an ounce and half; the tops of
Wormwood, Flowers of Camomile, Melilot, of each one Pugil; Herbs, of Pellitory
of the Wall, Mullein of each one handful; Meal of Barley, and Fenugreek, as
much as is sufficient; Boil them in White Wine, then being beaten together, add
of Oil of Orrise and Camomile, of each an ounce: Make it into a Cataplasm.

Or,

Take Cows-dung, three ounces; Juice of Hemlock, one ounce; Oil of Camomile
half an ounce; Castor, two drams, Bole-Armonick half a dram; Red Myrrh, two
drams; Saffron, one dram; Meal of Lupines, as much as suffices to make it into
a Poultice.

Suppuratives.
Marsh-Mallow Roots, Mallows, Camomile-Flowers, Figs, Galbanum, Bdellium,
Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, Fat of Hogs, Geese, Ducks, Hens, Oil of White-Lillies;
Ointment of Marshmallows both Simple and Compound, Basilicon, the Plasters of
Diachylon, of Mussilages and Melilot.

Take Onions roasted in Embers, three ounces; Figs, No. x. beat them together,
adding of Ointment of Basilicon, six drams; Ducks-Grease, an ounce;
Virgins-Honey, and the Meal of Linseed, of each as much as is sufficient to
make it into a Cataplasm. Or,

Take the Roots of White-Lillies, Marshmallows, of each an ounce ane half;
Leaves of Mallows, Cows-Parsnips, of each an handful; Figs No. viij, Raisins,
six drams; Meal of Marsh-Mallow-Roots, or of Wheat, two ounces; Venice-Sope,
three drams; being boiled and strained, add to them of Hog's Grease on ounce,
Oil of Camomil two ounces: Mix them according to Art, and make a Cataplasm.

4. Indication respects the Symptoms, which, if not removed, hinder the Cure;
the chief of which are,

1. A Fever; The chief of which concerns a Physician, except it be removed by
Bleeding.

2. Hardness, whose Cure look for in the Chapter of Schirrhus.

3. A Gangrene; Which is treated of in a particular Chapter.

4. Pain; Which we do remove by the following Medicines.

Anodines.
Marshmallows, Dill, Mallows, Camomil, Henbane, Tobacco, Lin-seed, Seed of
Poppy, Fenugreek, Sperma Ceti, Cream, White of Eggs, Oil of White-Lillies,
Linseed, Ointment of Populeon, fat of Hogs, Hens, and Man's Opium.

The great Virtues of the following Poultice I have not seldom experimented.

Take Flowers of Dill, Camomil, of each a handful; Elder, a handful and half;
Linseed-Meal, four ounces; Oil of Dill, White-Lillies, of each half an ounce;
Boil them in Milk to the consistence of a Poultice.

CHAP. III. Erysipelas.
ERysipelas is a Tumor besides Nature, from Choler, thrown forth for the most
part only into the Skin it self, sometimes on the subjacent Muscles, causing
Pain, Heat and other Symptoms.

Difference.] It Is perfect, when sprung from Choler alone; as it is imperfect,
when Blood, Phlegm or Melancholy is mixed with it; from whose Appellation it
likewise takes its name, and is called Erysipelas, Phlegmonodes, Oedematodes,
Scirrhodes; sometimes an Ulcer is joined with it, which sometimes consumes only
the Skin, other times the Flesh it self.

Cause is Choler, seldom alone, sometimes mixed with Phlegm and Melancholy, but
oftentimes with Blood or Serum; whence, those Medicines that are proper for a
Phlegmon, oftentimes do good in an Erysipelas.

Signs.] Great heat, sharp pain, Redness mixed with Yellowness, easily giving
way to the touch, but as suddenly returning; the Swelling and Extention of the
part little, and the Pulsation lesser: which last gave occasion to Authors, of
questioning whether an Erysipelas ought to be reckoned amongst Tumors. It is
accompanied always with a Fever, except from an External Cause.

Prognostics.] An Erysipelas is seldom dangerous, except the Matter be
repelled from the External parts to the Internal; yet more dangerous, when it
seizes on the Noble Parts and Jaws; and when a Wound; Fracture, Dislocation or
Putrefaction are joined with it.

Cure.] What concerns Diet here, is first and chiefly to be considered; Air,
Meat and Drink must be cooling; all sharp, hot, fat and sweet things hurt; as
likewise do too great Motion of the Body, Watchings, Costiveness, Venery and
Anger.

Purging is very necessary, therefore those Medicines described in the third
Chapter of the first Part, are here convenient.

A perfect Erysipelas admits not of Bleeding; for the fatness of the Blood
bridles the sharpness of the Choler: But if the Fever be vehement, the Flux
great, and any Blood (which for the most part happens) be mingled with the
Choler, it is convenient to bleed, especially in Plethorick Bodies: In delicate
and weak Bodies, Cupping-Glasses, with Scarification or Leeches, if things
should require, will serve,

These being thus done, to provoke Sweat, is the best of all other Remedies.

Outwardly to the affected part, ought not to be applied, 1. Oil, or any fat
thing; as those things which yield matter to the Choler, easily increase
Putrefaction: But if yet it is your pleasure to use them, they must be tempered
by mixing them with other Medicines. 2. Repellents, except the Erysipelas be
very little, the Part affected remote from the Noble Part, and the Humors be
yet flowing, and then they ought not to be used without Resolvents mixed with
them.

The Cataplasms described in the foregoing Chapter, may for the most part be
applied here with success.

The Plaster of Diapalma dissolved in Vinegar, is in daily use; the leaves of
Tobacco, Colewort, and Henbane applied to the part affected, strongly draw
forth the heat. There are those which use Sheeps dung boiled in Wine-Vinegar;
as also the Flowers of Camomil, Mellilot, and Elders, boiled in new Milk.

Chalk powdered, put upon the Part, laying Cappaper over it, quickly and safely
Cures.

The following Fomentations I have experienced to be of great Virtue.

Take Red Myrrh powdered, two drams; Saccarum Saturni one dram; Camphire a
Scruple, Opium 25 grains, White Wind six ounces: Let Linen Clothes be dipped in
it, and applied warm to the Part, often renewing them, when dried, or cold.

Another,

Take the white Troches of Rhasis one dram, Camphire one Scruple, Spirit of
Wine an ounce, Elder-water six ounces: Mingle and apply it as before.

Fumes of Mastick, and Frankincense may likewise be used five or six times a
day, especially if the Erysipelas be in the Face.

When an Ulcer accompanies it.
Take the white Troches of Rhasis, two drams; Red Mirrhe, Litharge of Gold, of
each a dram; Flower of Brimstone half a dram; Sarcocol, two Scruples; whites of
Eggs, as much as is sufficient to make it into a Linament.

CHAP. IV. Of Oedema.
OEdema, is a Tumor beside Nature, arising from Pituitous Matter, white, soft,
without pain, oftener caused by Congestion, than by Fluxion.

Difference.] It is perfect, when it proceeds only from Phlegm: Imperfect, when
mixed with other Humors; Thus Oedema, Phegmonodes, Erysipelatodes, Schirrhodes.

Cause is Phlegm, sometimes alone, sometimes confused with other Humors; for
the most part it is produced from the ill disposition of the Limphaeducts.

Signs are Whiteness, Softness, yielding to the Fingers; little Pain, and less
Pulsation.

Prognostics.] If an Oedema degenerate into a Scirrhus, or Abscess, it is hard
of Cure. It is dangerous if a Consumption, or Dropsy accompany it: it oftener
happens in old People, Phlegmatic bodies in the Winter time, and in all those
who with immoderate eating and drinking continually, debilitate the natural
heat.

Cure.] This, as the precedent Tumors, requires a good Diet Meat and Drink, as
also the Air must be moderately hot and dry: Roasted Meat is better than Boiled;
Fruit, Cheese, and Fish hurt; as also too great a quantity of Meat and Drink:
Wine, either of it self,, or altered with hot Herbs is good; moderate Exercises
of the body before Meals, is as profitable, as much Sleep, especially diurnal
is prejudicial; Costiveness, Rest, and Sadness are Noxious.

Bleeding is altogether here unprofitable, and very seldom used; but Sweating
and Purging very necessary, sometimes Vomiting: Always regard must be had to
the Stomach.

To the Tumor it self. In the beginning we apply Repelling Medicines mixed with
Discussives, but so, that the Discussives exceed; afterward we use only
Discussives, though sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker, according to the
condition of the Disease.

Take Aloes three drams; Bole-armenick half an ounce; Acacia, Dragons blood,
Cyprus Roots powdered, of each two drams; Saffron half a dram, Rose-Vinegar an
ounce and half; Oil of Myrtle and Earthworms, of each an ounce; Wax, as much
as is sufficient to make it into a Linament.

Another stronger.

Take Crude Brimstone, Ashes of Vine Branches, Sal-Gemme, of each two drams;
Beanmeal two ounces, Vinegar an ounce, Oil of Nuts a dram, Turpentine, and Wax,
as much as suffices either to make it into the Consistence of an Ointment, or
Cerat.

Another yet stronger.

Take Laudanum, an ounce and half; Frankincense an ounce; Styrax-Camitis half
an ounce; Brimstone six drams; Alom, Saltpeter, Ashes, of each two drams;
Cows-dung half an ounce; Oil of Rue an ounce; Turpentine, and Pitch, as much as
suffices to make a Plaster.

An Excellent Cataplasm.
Take Roots of Marshmallows, three ounces; Bryony, Dwarf-Elder, of each 2
ounces; Leaves of Sage and Rue, of each a handful; Savin, half a handful: Boil
them in equal parts of Wine and Water; in the end, adding of Vinegar three
ounces: then being well beat together, add Bean-meal two ounces and a half;
Ashes, half an ounce; Cows-dung one ounce; Salt half an ounce; Leaven an ounce
and half; Oil of Camomil four ounces; Hoggs-grease, two ounces: Make it into a
Cataplasm.

If it comes to an Abscess, which rarely happens, this Poultice is Excellent,
especially if the Vinegar be omitted, and in its room, Onions, and a quantity
of Unguentum Basilicon be added.

If an Oedema proceed from a Consumption, Dropsy, or ill habit of Body, till
those Diseases be cured that cannot.

I have used often to Cure an Oedema with this Wine or Purging Conserve, and
exactly rolling the Arms or Legs with Rowlers of 12 or 15 yards long, beginning
from below, upwards, and so allowing no liberty for the Humor to descend: By
this way the Noble Parts are Corroborated; the Preternatural Humors Evacuated,
and the External Members in a few days space restored to their former Condition.

Take Roots of Orrise Floren. an ounce; Seaholly and Parsley, of each half an
ounce: Rhubarb, Agarick, Trochis. of each three drams, Senna, six drams;
Cinnamon two drams, Cloves half a dram. Sem. Siler. Mont. two drams: tie them in
a Cloth, and let them infuse in two pints of old White Wind, then take every
Morning four or five ounces for a Dose.

Or,

Take of Electuary of Juice of Roses an ounce; Jalap, a dram; Spirit of Salt, a
scruple: Mix it in an Electuary.

Let the Patient take the quantity of a Bean, or Hazel-Nut every third or
fourth day.

CHAP. V. Of Scirrhus.
SCirrhus is a Tumor besides Nature, sometimes generated of Tough, Viscous
Phlegm; sometimes of Melancholy, hard, not yielding to the touch, nor painful.

Differences; It is perfect when sprung from Melancholy, or Phlegm alone:
Imperfect, when other Humors are unnaturally mixed with it.

Cause, is Melancholy, or tough Phlegm.

Signs, great hardness void of pain, of a white color, if from Phlegm; if from
Melancholy, Livid.

Prognostic.] A Scirrhus, where there is no pain, and upon which the hair
grows, is altogether incurable, and if Livid, it is very dangerous, and often
degenerates into a Cancer: An imperfect, small, and painful one, by means
sometimes (although very rare) may be cured.

Cure.] If the Scirrhus be produced from Phlegm, the same manner of Diet is to
be observed as in an Oedema; but if from Melancholy, you must choose a clear
Air, moderately hot, and moist; the Meat of the saxe quality, and of easy
Digestion; all sharp things, and those that are hot in the third or fourth
degree, hurt: Let the Drink be neither thick nor strong, but warming* Sadness,
Anger, Cares, Venery, much Sleep, hurtful; but moderate Exercises very
necessary.

Bleeding is scarce ever administered with any success, but Sweating, and
Purging with great.

Amongst the External Remedies are Discussives and Emollients; but yet the
whole course of the Cure must be mixed, now increasing the quantity of the one,
then of the other.

The use of Suppuratives in the Cure of Schirrhus, has seldom any good event.

There are those which try cutting out, and burning which must be attributed to
their rash ignorance, except contained in a proper Tunicle, and then the name
of Schirrhus is ill attributed to that Tumor.

Emollient Medicines.
Butter, the fat of Hens, Geese, Ducks, Hogs, Foxes, Bears, Man's; Mallows,
Marshmallows, Orrach, Gums, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Bdellium, Styrax, Liquida;
Ointment of Marshmallows; Plasters of Diachilon, of Mussilages, and Mellilot.

Resolvents are set down in the Chapter of a Phlegmon.

Take Gum, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Oppoponax of each an ounce; Flower of
Brimstone, Red Myrrh, of each half an ounce: Camphire, a dram; Oil of
White-Lillies, Ducks-grease, of each six drams; Wax, as much as is sufficient
to make it into a Plaster.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, three ounces; Orrise, an ounce; Leaves of
Colworts, Pellitory of the Wall, Mallows, Flowers of Camomile and Mellilot, of
each a handful; Linseed two ounces, boil them in Water; and being well beat
together, add to them Horse-dung two ounces; Hoggs-Grease, Oil of Camomil, of
each an Ounce; boiled Onions half an Ounce: Make a Cataplasm.

CHAP. VI. De Tumore Aquoso, or Watery Tumor.
TUmor Aquosus is a Collection of a Watery Humor in the whole body, or in some
one part; soft, and without pain, yielding to the Fingers, but suddenly
returning.

Difference. Sometimes the whole body is swelled with water; which Tumor is
called Anasarca, sometimes the lower Belly only, or with the Legs, and then it
is called Ascites; if Wind, mixing with the water, extends the Belly like to a
Drum, it is called Tympanites: These are three kinds of Dropsies, whose Cure
rather appertains to the Physician than Surgeon; Water collected in the
Head, is called Hydrocephalos; in the Breast, a Dropsy of the Lungs; in the
Navel, a Hydromphalos; in the Cods, Hydrocele.

Cause is Serum, to wit Salt Water, produced from the lost heat of the parts
that served to Sanguification, and Chylification.

Signs; This Tumor is softer then Oedema, and more yielding to the Fingers,
without pain, with some itching, and if you look on it by Candlelight, very
shining.

Prognostics.] Watery Tumors are not dangerous, if the principle parts that
feed it, are not too much debilitated, yet all are of difficult Cure,
especially those in and about the Joints.

Cure. Diet is here the same as in Oedema: All Salt things indurated with
Smoke, and too great a quantity of Drink, are very hurtful; as also Spirit of
Wine and Pepper; otherwise hot and dry Aliments are best.

Purging is very necessary, provided it be not too great, lest the parts
already weak, are more weakened: provoking Sweat and Urine, here are very
profitable.

Bleeding, by experience I know it to be hurtful to all Hydropick People.

Medicines, Purging Water.
Roots of Asarum, Dwarf-Elder, Jalap, white Mechoacans, Leaves and Bark of
Elder, Euphorbium, Turbith, Gum Gutta, Syrup, and Species of Diacarthamum,
Cream of Tartar.

Take Syrup of Roses solutive, with Senna, Diacarthamum, of each an ounce;
Jalap, eight grains, Cream of Tartar, two scruples, Parsley-water, as much as
is sufficient to make it into a Potion.

A Purging Wine, which cures the Dropsy it self.
Take Roots of Orrise, Gentian, Succhory, Fennel, Masterwort, of each an Ounce;
the middle Bark of Elder, an Ounce and half; Leaves of Ground Pine, a handful;
Rosemary, two Pugils; Flowers of Centaury the less, one Pugil; Seeds of
Smallage, Coriander, Carraway, Roman-Nettle, Fennel, of each a Dram, Senna two
ounces; Agarick three Drams; Jalap half an ounce; Turbith, a Dram and half: Let
them be cut, and infused in six Pints of Rhenish-wine: Dose four ounces.

Medicines consuming Water, outwardly used.
Roots of Orrise, Bryony, Birthwort, Flowers of Elder, Camomil, leaves of
Celandine, Centaury, Calamint, Rue, Dill, wild Majoram, Sulphur vivum, Salt,
Alum, Bay Berries, Ammoniacum, Bdellium.

Take Cows-dung, half an ounce; Pigeons dung two drams; Sulphur vivum half an
ounce; Nitre two drams; Honey, Vinegar, of each an ounce and half; Bean meal
two ounces; Bay Berries, Cummin-seeds, of each half an ounce; Oil of Dill,
Nard, of each an ounce; White Wind, as much as is sufficient to make it into a
Poultice.

Or,

Take Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, of each half an ounce; Camphire, half a
Dram; Goats-dung, an ounce and half; Brimstone, Salt, Cummin-seeds, of each
three drams; Turpentine and Wax, as much as suffices: According to Art, make
it into a Plaster.

Hydrocephalus is always of difficult Cure: Water contained in the Ventricles
of the Brain, or between the Brain and Meninges, is very dangerous; but less
dangerous, when collected between the Dura, and Pia Matter, or between the Dura
Matter, and the Skull: For the Dura Matter may be divided into a Lancet, if you
can come at it; but least danger of all, when detained without the Skull.

Purging Sudorificks and Diuretics, seldom do any good here; but Cauteries,
Blisters, Issues, Setons are more profitable; but sometimes we are forced to
come to Incision or Ustion, which Remedies, although dangerous, have cured
several.

Some Chyrurgeons use with an actual Cautery to burn the Skin of the Head in
five, six, or more places, but not together and at once, but at several times,
lest the Patients strength should be too much spent, continually choosing that
place, which the watery Humor makes, to appear most convenient.

Some with a Lancet open the Skin near to the Sagital Suture.

Which of these Remedies are best, cannot absolutely be declared. I must esteem
an Actual Cautery, when the Water is between the Skin and the Skull; but if
under the Skull, between the Meninges, I do not see how this operation can be
performed without a Lancet.

But which of them soever you choose, have a care of discharging all the Water
at once, for in the very Operation it self the Patient dies, or at least is
very much debilitated; for till the end of the Cure, all the Water is not to be
taken away, lest the debilitated Parts be deprived of that heat which the Water
possessed, do corrupt: but rather what remains must be consumed by Internal and
External Discussives; and this is to be observed in all Watery Tumors that are
Cured by a Paracenthesis.

In the same manner the Watery Tumor in the Navel and Cod ought to be handled,
after other Medicines have been applied in vain.

Dropsy of the Breast belongs not to Surgery, except where a Paracenthesis
is convenient; concerning which, Read the 15 th. Chapter of the first Part.

CHAP. VII. Of the Flatuous, or Windy Tumor.
THe Flatuous Tumor is a Disease produced of Wind, not yielding without
resistance to the Fingers.

Difference. Some are without pain, others with it; in the one, the wind is in
motion, in the other, quiet.

Causes of Wind, are Phlegm, especially when mingled with Choler, which, as
Ferment does froth, so it proceeds wind; it always happens upon a debility of
the Parts, by reason of which, although endeavoring to concoct the Humors, yet
are notable.

Signs are Inflation, with a resistance yielding to the Fingers, a rumbling
noise, especially if shaken.

Prognostics.] It seldom comes is fleshy parts; in other parts it brings many
inconveniences, in weak and Cacochymick bodies, it is of difficult and tedious
Cure.

Cure.] The same Diet in here to be observed as in an Oedema: Pease, Beans,
Turnips, Chestnuts, and all Crude Fruit do extremely hurt; On the contrary,
Wine, and other things moderately warming, profit; as also Spices, and those
things which disperse Wind, as Nutmegs, Mace, Anise, Carraways, Lovage.

The Stomach, and the whole Body require purging and corroborating Medicines,
always mixing with them those that disperse Wind, and sometimes also where
Corroboratives are used, Anodines, Laudanum; Opiatum cautiously used (that is,
half a grain, or a grain for a Dose) is here excellent: For besides that it
cease pain, it also by its Diaphoretick quality removes the Cause of the
Disease: To cause Sweat, is as necessary as Bleeding is unnecessary.

Outward Medicines discussing Wind.
Roots of Galangale, Lovage, Herbs, Dill, Mint, Marjoram, Peniroyal, Rosemary,
Rue, Chervil; Flowers of Elder, Mellilot, Camomil; Seeds, Anise, Carraways,
Cummin, Fennel; Nutmegs, Cardamum, Castor; Oil of Rue, Nard, Spike, Dill,
Carraway distilled; Mace, Nucista expressed and distilled, Mellilot-plaister.

Take Oil of Wormwood, Rue, of each two Drams; Oil of Nucistae expressed, one
Dram; of Mace distilled, half a Dram; Castor, dissolved in Aqua vitae, two
Scruples: Make it into a Linament.

Or,

Take the Leaves of Rue, Calamint, of each half an handful; Bean-meal, two
Ounces; Seeds of Cummin and Anise, of each half an Ounce; Bayberries, Salt, of
each three Drams; Nitre, Brimstone, of each a Dram; Goats dung, six Ounces;
White Wind, as much as is sufficient: Mix them, and boil them into the
Consistence of a Cataplasm.

Or,

Take the Roots of Pelitory of Spain, half a Dram; Venice-Sope, three Drams;
Castor dissolved in Aqua vitae, one dram; Seeds of Cummin, Carraways, of each
two drams; Ashes of Earthworms, half a dram; Oil of Spike, half an ounce;
Mastick, three drams, Wax and Turpentine, as much as suffices: Make it into a
Plaster according to Art.

CHAP. VIII. De Herpete.
HErpes is a Tumor besides Nature, sprung from yellow Choler, disfiguring the
Skin with corroding and spreading Pustules.

Difference.] Where Choler solely predominates, it produces Herpes exedens,
but where Phlegm is mixed with Choler, a Herpes Miliaris.

Cause is sometimes Choler alone, sometimes mixed with Phlegm; and I see not why
the serum of the Blood may not often be here taken as a Cause: For the
Lymphaeducts being out of order, do produce Mutations in man's body, heretofore
unknown.

Signs.] Are little Pustules, like to Millet-seed; a heat, itching; and after
rubbing, a moistness, and little Ulcers.

Prognostics.] Herpes is of difficult Cure, but of little danger, unless so
rendered by the immoderate use of Repellents.

Cure.] The same Diet is here required, as in an Erysipelas. Moreover, Purging
is here very necessary; Bleeding not to be allowed of; the use of Baths is
excellent, and their Waters taken at fit times, safely Cure this Disease: The
Decoctions of China, Salsa, etc. also benefit much.

Outwardly.] Fasting-Spittle oftentimes does good, because if it should be
repelled to the Internal parts, it causes a Fever, and other ill Symptoms.

With great success many times, have I seen applied the Powder of Lapis
Scisilis, mixed with Vinegar; some used Mustard boiled in Butter; to which they
add some Gunpowder. Lie also, and Urine have helped many; Unguent, Fuscum, of
Felix Wurtz is excellent here; as also the following Plaster.

Take Sarcocols, Crude Brimstone, of each two drrms; Mastick, Frankincense,
Lapis Calaminaris, of each half an ounce; white Troches of Rhasis, Litharge of
Gold, Myrrh, of each three drams; Goats Suit, half an ounce; Wax and
Turpentine, so much as is sufficient to make it into a Plaster, according to
Art.

Take the Powder of Chalk mixed with Cream, and anoint the part, fomenting it
before with the hot Lees of White Wind.

In a Rebellious Herpes.
Take the brown Ointment of Felix Wurtz, three drams; white Ointment with
Camphire, one dram and half; Cerase, Brimstone, Myrrh, of each a dram;
Litharge a dram and half; Mercurius dulcis, Verdigrease, of each a scruple and
half; Oil of Roses, as much as suffices: Make it into an Ointment.

Or,

Take Lapis Prunella, one dram; Flower of Brimstone, half an ounce; Salt of
Saturn, a dram and half; old Oil of Rape, as much as suffices to make it into
a Linament.

CHAP. IX. Of Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris.
A Theroma is a Tumor besides Nature, contained in a proper Cist, caused from a
Humor like to the Pap of a sodden Barley, without pain, of the color of the
skin, not yiedling to the singers, nor when they are removed, suddenly swelling
out again.

Steatoma is a Tumor besides Nature, contained in its own proper Tunicle,
caused from a Matter like to Suet, and of the same color, soft, from a small
beginning, by degrees increasing, difficulty yielding to to the Fingers, but
they being removed, returning again to its former greatness.

Meliceris is a Tumor besides Nature, included in its proper Tunicle,
engendered from a Humor, like to Honey, without pain, round, easily yiedling to
the Fingers, which being removed, returns again to its first Figure.

Differences.] This Matter like to Honey, Suet, or Pap, if gathered about the
Joints, is called a Ganglion; if about the Glandules of the Neck, a Glandula,
Scrophula, or Struma; if in the Arms, Legs, or Head, Turberculum; if from the
Pox, Tophus.

Cause of these Tumors is Phlegm, in the one more, in the other less, receding
from its Natural Constitution; and sometimes, but very seldom, mixed with
Melancholy.

Signs are declared in their Definition.

Prognostics.] They are scarce ever cured, but by Manual Operation: If the
Vesicle be broken, or not all taken out, there remains a Fistula, or a foul
Ulcer: The Cure of which will be both difficult and tedious.

Cure.] They are sometimes, but very rare, removed by strong Resolvents: I have
Cured some with Balsom of Peru; some use Oxicroceum Plaster, or the following:

Take Laudanum an ounce; Red Myrrh, three drams; Camphire a dram: Mix them;
and make it into a Plaster according to Art.

Another,

Take Gum Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, of each half an ounce; Roots of Pellitory,
Euphorbium, of each a scruple and half; Brimstone three drams; Oil of Amber a
dram: Make it into a Plaster.

If it break, and the Matter discharge out of the Tunicle, then must you use
Corrosives, for other Medicines are too weak.

Corrosives, and Cathereticks.
Roots of the black Hellebore, burnt Galls, burnt Date-stones, Verdigrease,
burnt Alum, Quick Lime, Vitriol, Mercury Sublimate, and Precipitate; Spirit and
Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt; the Liquor of Tartar; Ointments of Aegyptiacum
Fuscum of Felix Wurtz; Ashes of Oak, and Vine branches.

Some use Arsnick, and Orpment; but they are not used but with the greatest
danger in those places known by Anatomy, under which the Nerves lie; to the
Skin, and Carnous Excrescencies, they may be applied with the less danger.

The following Ointment will suffice.
Take Vitriol well sweetened, a dram; Verdigrease, a scruple, Ointment of
Aegyptiacum, half an ounce: Make it into an Ointment.

If they tend to Suppuration, which is very seldom, let the Surgeon assist
Nature with Maturatives; but the safest Method of taking away these Tumors, we
have shown in the twelfth Chapter of the first Part.

CHAP. X. Of Scrophula, Struma, or King's Evil.
STruma or Scrophula are Tumors besides Nature, contained in a proper Tunicle
of their own, from a Melancholic or Pituitous Humor; showing themselves in
manner of Tubercles in the Neck and adjoining Parts.

Difference.] They are sometimes noveable, sometimes fixed; sometimes but one,
sometimes many.

Cause, is Melancholy or Phlegm, or both mixed together.

Signs.] Are Hardness, Inequality, and seldom painful.

Prognostics.] These Tumors are of long and difficult Cure; especially if
many, or fixed; they are dangerous when they grow painful, and threaten to
become cancerous; or if fixed to any great Nerve or Vein, sometimes they are
Hereditary, and sometimes peculiar to a Region or City; when cured, they for
the most part leave behind them great Skars; where the recurrent Nerve is
divided, the Speech is lost, and oftentimes Life it self.

Cure.] Diet must be here the same, as in a Oedema or Scirrhus.

Purging is necessary, but not Bleeding: provoking Sweat, by the same way and
means as in the French Pox, effects much; yea, it alone cures the King's Evil.

Sometimes they are consumed by Internal Remedies, that have appropriated
Qualities of curing Scrophulas.

Such are these:

Roots of round Birthwort, Briony, Sow-Bread, Dropwort, Devil's-bit, Orrise,
Pimpernel, Pellitory of Spain, Squills, Vervain, Figwort, Leaves of Cypress,
Bawm, Rue, Savory, Flowers of Broom, burnt Crabs, burnt Egg-shells, Sal Gemmae,
Spunges.

New Spunges are much commended, if boiled in Ale; drinking thereof three or
four times a day; or calcined, and taking half a dram of the Powder Morning and
Evening. The following Powder is likewise very much praised:

Take the Ashes of Sea-Spunges, Os Sepiae, Long Pepper, Cinnamon, Sal Gemmae,
Pellitory of Spain, Cypress-Nuts, Galls, Red-Rose Leaves, of each half an
ounce: Make a Powder. Dose, two Scruples or a Dram.

Or,

Take of Spunge-stone, three drams; Sal Gemmae, two drams; Salt of Tartar, a
dram: Make a Powder. Dose, two scruples, or a dram.

Outwardly Resolving and Emollient Medicines are applied; which if they effect
it not, then use Suppuratives; when it is suppurated, it is to be cured as a
malignant Ulcer.

But if the abovenamed Medicines signify nothing, then we come to corrosive
Medicines, and to the Incision-Knife.

An excellent Resolving Emollient Plaster.
Take Gum, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, of each half an ounce; Bay Berries,
Stavesacre, Pellitory of Spain, Cummin, of each six drams; Pigeon's dung, a
dram; Goat's-dung, three drams; Hog's-grease, an Ounce and half; Oil of
Camomile, an ounce; Wax and Pitch, as much as is sufficient to make it into a
Plaster.

A Liniment that stops the Flux of Humors, and oftentimes wholly cures the
King's Evil.
Take Oil of Myrtles and Bays, of each half an ounce; Ointment of Martiaton,
an ounce; Quicksilver extinct with Flower of Brimstone, six drams: Make it into
an Ointment.

Let the Scrophula be anointed with it twice a day; and if they are not
consumed, at least they will be diminished: but the Surgeon must look into
the Patient's Mouth each day, lest upon the continual use of Mercury, there
follows a Flux, which causes a swelling of the Tongue and Jaws: The Plaster of
Frogs, with Mercury, is likewise good here.

Or,

Take Gum-Caranna, an ounce; crude Mercury extinct in Turpentine, three drams:
Make a Plaster.

If the Tumor he painful, there may be added to this Plaster a dram of Opium,
which has the virtue of resolving and easing pain, and is not cold, but hot.

Suppurating Medicines are set down in the second Chapter, and Corrosive in the
foregoing Chapter.

In Suppurated and open Scrophulaes, this Ligament is much esteemed:

Take Oil of Bays, Ceruse powdered and allayed with Aqua-vitae, of each an
ounce; Roch-Allom, half an ounce; Salt, two drams: Make it into an Ointment.

CHAP. XI. Of a Bubo.
BUbo is a Tumor besides Nature, of the Glandules, from impure Blood, Red,
Painful and hard.

Difference.] Where little, and not painful, and easily brought to Suppuration,
it is called Phyma; but where there is more of Choler in it Phygeton; in the
Armpits, Panus; behind the Ears, Parotis: The one Malign or Pestilential, the
other not; sometimes contracted from unchaste Embraces, then it is called a
Venereal Bubo.

Cause is Blood, never alone, but always mixed with some other preternatural
Humor.

Signs, are Redness about the Glandules, pain, heat, tension, hardness,
pulsation, and sometimes a Fever.

The Liver and Spleen, according to the opinion of the Ancients, discharge
themselves into the Groins; the Breast and Heart, at the Armpits; the Brain,
at the Glandules of the Ear; but now far other use is attributed to the
Glandules. Of which there are several Tracts written, and we shall give our
Opinion in another place.

Prognostics.] The Bubo that is not Malign, is not dangerous, except it be
long discussing, or suppurating, and then fear lest it Fistulate: In the
Armpits it is sooner brought to maturity than in the Groins; and here sooner
than behind the Ears: On the contrary, a Malign is for the most part a sign of
sudden Death, although all outward signs may appear well.

The Venereal is not mortal, but of hard Cure, and for the most part precedes
the Pox; chiefly when by Bleeding, or the use of repelling Medicines, the
Matter is returned from the External, into Internal parts.

Cure.] Diet the same as in a Phlegmon: In a Benign, Purging is necessary,
provided it be not with too strong Medicines: Bleeding, except a great Fever,
or a Plethora require, I admit no more of it here, than of Repellent Medicines;
for it is unseemly that Natures Assister should return that into the interior
parts, which Nature her self did eject (which for the most part is Critical.)
Sweating in all Buboes, profits much: Scarification has no place here, except
in Malignant, nor Leeches, but where very much inflamed.

The External Cure is to be managed so, that the Humor may be dissipated with
Resolvents, which by reason of the frigidity of the Glandules, are required the
stronger; adding also Attractives to them; for in all, I suspect lest the
Matter be not perfectly thrown forth: But in a painful Bubo, it is first
necessary to ease the pain, before you come to any other Medicines.

In extreme Pain.
Take Musilages of the Seeds of Flea-wort, an ounce and half; the Yolk of an
Egg, Saffron, a dram; fresh Butter, half an ounce: Make it into a Liniment,

Or,

Take Leaves of Mallows, an handful; Meal of Marsh-Mallow Roots, and
Fenugreek-seeds, of each two ounces; Barley-meal, an ounce; Ducks-grease, Oil
of Dill, of each half an ounce: Boil them in Milk, to the consistence of a
Cataplasm.

Resolvents are above described; Attractives shall be presently set down.

If it yield not to discussion, Suppuration is to be endeavored; which is of
all, the safest Method: Being suppurated, let it forthwith be opened; but
rather by Incision, than Cautery: And so let it be kept opened until the whole
Tumor be dissolved.

In Children, for the most part, we commit it wholly to Nature; only
prescribing a good Diet, and forbidding the often touch of the part affected
with the hands; or we apply the Plaster of Diachilon, or of Musilages: it is
also often cured by the only using of Oil of Olives, Rape, Camomil, or white
Lillies.

In a Pestilential Bubo, neither Bleeding or Purging (whatsoever others say)
must be used: Sudorificks and Refrigeratives are convenient; outwardly
Attractives in the beginning, are necessary.

Attractives.
Roots of Aron, Briony, Birthwort, Pellitory of Spain, Dittany, Cresses,
Virgins-Flower, Leeks, Nettles, Garlic, Onions, Figs, Mustard, Gums, Galbanum,
Ammoniacum, Euphorbium, Succinum, Cantharides, Castor, Ox gall, Pigeons grease,
and Goats-dung; Quicklime, Nitre, Brimstone; Leaven, Black-sope, Plasters of
Diachilon, Oxicroceum, Thereacle, Mithridate.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, an ounce; Onions, two ounces; Elder and
Camomil-Flowers, of each a pugil; Figs, No xij. Fenugreek-meal, two ounces;
Pigeons-dung, two drams; Thereacle, three drams: Make a Cataplasm.

Or,

Take Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, of each two scruples; Salt,
two drams; Treacle, three drams; Gum Ammoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar, as much
as suffices to make a Plaster.

Many take a Hen or Frog divided in the midst, and apply them warm to the
affected Part, often changing them: Some apply to the Part the Breech of a live
Hen or Pigeon, the Feathers being pulled off: Others take away all by Incision,
which is very dangerous, and not to be permitted: But they proceed best, who
forthwith in the very beginning apply a Vesicatory to the Bubo; then the
following Morning or Evening open the Blister, and afterward dressing it with
Attractives: This is of great Use, and of much Esteem.

Take the Plaster of Diachilon with Gums, of Musilages, of each half a pound;
Ointment of Basilicon, four ounces; Mustard Seed, three ounces: Make a
Plaster. More of the Cure of a Bubo, look in our Description of the Plague.

In a Venereal Bubo, you must neither Bleed nor Purge, as long as there remains
any hope of Curing it by External Remedies, lest the Malignant Humors which
Nature threw out, should be returned again into the Body, and so occasion the
Pox: But Suppuration is to be endeavored by all means, and the Suppurated
Tumor forthwith, yea, although the Matter be not perfectly concocted, is to be
opened; if it is tough, as for the most part it is, Attractives are to be
applied, especially Cupping-Glasses; they not being sufficient, when the whole
Mass of Blood is infected, the Cure of the Pox is to be prescribed; often using
this following Decoction.

Take Roots of China, Sarsaparilla, of each three ounces; Polipody, an ounce;
Bark of Guaicum, three ounces; Senna, two ounces; Agarick Trochiscatum, two
drams; Cinnamon, two drams: Infuse in a sufficient quantity of Water over the
Fire for 24 hours, then boil them to three quarts, and to the strained Liquor
add Syrup of Roses, Sol. with Senna, four ounces: Mix them. Dose, six or eight
ounces.

Some make this Decoction with stale Beer or Wine; but in these things the
Surgeon ought to consider the past manner of living of his Patient, his
Temperature and Age: If you desire that it purge you more, you may add a dram
or two of Trochise Alhandal; and if not strong enough, then you may mix it with
five or six grains of white Precipitate, provided strength gives leave.

CHAP. XII. Of the Carbuncle.
A Carbuncle is a Tumor besides Nature, from adust Blood, corrupting the Part
where it is collected.

Difference.] It Is called by the Greeks, Anthrax; by the Latins, Ignis
Persicus; by the Germans, Even Kool: Some endeavor a Difference between an
Anthrax and Carbuncle, but lose their Labor. There is is no other Difference,
but sometimes it is bigger, sometimes lesser, sometimes more Malignant, other
times less.

Cause is adust Blood, assuming the Nature of black Choler, and so apt to
putrify.

Signs are, sometimes but one great Pustule, sometimes many litttle ones; which
being opened, appear black, and all about enflamed: The Crust being removed,
instead of Matter, you find spungy Flesh; the Part affected is very painful, a
Fever present and Watchings.

Prognostics.] Very dangerous, when black, especially in Plague time; when
near to to a principal part, if great, and suddenly vanishing.

Cure.] Strong Purging Medicines I much mistrust; Clisters or loosening
Medicines will suffice; viz. Cassia Fistula, Manna, Tamarinds, Cream of Tartar,
etc. But more suspicious to me is Bleeding to fainting (as Galen writes) and in
its room, Leeches or Cups with Scarification will be sufficient. But I rely
most upon Sudorifick and Refrigerating Medicines; using outwardly the same
Medicines as in the Plague.

This Plaster is much commended to make a separation of the Eskar.

Take old Thereacle, Mithridate, of each half an ounce; Leaven, Turpentine, of
each two ounces; Honey of Roses, an ounce and a half; Fresh Butter, two ounces;
White Vitriol, an ounce; Soot, two ounces and half; Black-sope, three ounces;
Saffron, three drams; Yelks of Eggs, No iij. Mix them, and make a Plaster
according to Art.

The External Medicines ought often to be changed: Here is no need of
Suppuratives; for the Humors are easily corrupted of themselves; in the place
of which, the Eskar being separated, may be used Ung. Fuscum of Felix Wurtz,
Aegyptiacum, and Honey of Roses, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Cancer.
A Cancer is a Tumor besides Nature, sprung from Black Choler, round, hard,
livid, painful, full of turgid Veins, resembling the feet of a Crab.

Difference.] Where not exulcerated, by the Greeks it is named Carcinoma; when
ulcerated, Plagedaena, by the Greeks; and by the Germans, De Wolf.

Signs.] In the beginning difficultly known, scarce equalling a Pea in bigness;
then sometimes increasing suddenly, sometimes slowly; it makes it self, by its
grievous Symptoms, easily enough to be known: The Tumor is hard, painful, hot,
livid, or black, round with some inequality, full of swelled Veins.

Prognostics.] A Cancer is seldom Cured by Medicines, often by Surgery, but
not without danger; sharp Medicines exulcerate it: It is imprudence to attempt
an occult Cancer, or that is detained in any Cavity of the Body, except it be
very little, and may easily be taken away by Incision.

Cure.] Diet the same as in Schirrhus; frequent Purging convenient; be cautious
in Bleeding, as also in Scarification. The Months flowing in Women, and in
Men, the Hemorrhoids, are very beneficial.

Externally, Suppuratives and strong Discutients are hurtful; the following,
good.

Medicines in a Cancer.
Roots of Arum, Dropwort, Gentian, Figwort, Mullein; Leaves of Maidenhair,
Housleek the greater, Agrimony, Tobacco, Plantain, Nightshade, Hounds-tongue,
the Spawn of Frogs, of Whales, Burnt-Crabs, Burnt-Lead, Mans-Dung, Plasters of
Diapompholigos, of Lead, Diafulpharis, of Frogs with Mercury, Sugar of Saturn,
Camphire.

For a Cancer not ulcerated.
Take the Juice of Plantain, Endive, Housleek the greater, Nightshade,
Rose-Vinegar, Oil of Myrtle, of each an ounce; Venice-Turpentine, two drams:
Stir them together in a Leaden Mortar, with a Leaden Pestle; adding of the
Rinds of Pomegranates and Citrons, of each a dram; Bole-armonick, Burnt-lead,
Camphire, of each half a dram: Make it into a Liniment

For an Ulcerated Cancer.
Take Galls, Pomegranate-Rinds, of each half an ounce; Burnt Talk, an ounce;
Bole-armenick, half an ounce; Burnt-Lead, two drams; Ashes of Crab-shells, a
dram; Turpentine and Honey, as much as is sufficient: Make an Ointment.

By the use of these or the like Medicines, Cancers that are not ulcerated,
have been often cured; and ulcerated Cancers have been for many years kept in
the same condition; but for the most part, the business is committed to
Surgery: The Part affected being held by a pair of Forceps, is to be cut off
by the help of a convenient Knife, but so that nothing of the Cancer be left
behind, left it bud afresh; others holding it only with their left hands, or
passing a string quite cross, take it off by Incision.

Many with great Praises extol prepared Arsenick, or Mercury sublimate; but its
Deeds answer not their Words: Its Preparation John Faber in his Myrotheico
Spargirico teaches.

The Quintessence of Arsenick.
Take Cristalline, Arsenick, with the like weight of Saltpeter, and reduce all
into the finest Alchool, and put them into a very strong Glass-Retort; to which
join a Recipient big and large enough; being well luted together, distill them
with Embers, observing the degrees of the Fire, at first gentle, at the end
very strong and violent, until all the Spirits of the Arsenick and Salt Petre
are gone forth: They being come forth, and the Vessels cold, disjoyn the
Recipient from the neck of the Retort, having great care of the Spirits that
are within, which are venomous; suddenly stopping the mouth of the Receiver
with a strong Lute; afterward breaking the Retort, and that which is in the
bottom, must be powdered, and put into a new Retort, and upon the Powder that
is put into the Retort, the Spirits of Arsenick which were in the Receiver, is
to be powered and distilled again, being luted well, as at first: This is to be
done three or four times, till the Arsenick be well calcined with the
Saltpeter; then lay the Arsenick upon a strong Tile, and for a whole day make
a strong fire about it; so that which could not be Calcined by Distillation,
may be Calcined and burnt by an open Fire: This Calx of Arsenick is to be
dissolved in distilled Rainwater, and the Solution so cleansed and depurated,
from its Terrestrial Excrements, and by filtring made clear and limphid, is to
be evaporated and dried, and calcined again with a very strong Fire, until it
remits no Faeces in the Solution, but the whole Calx is dissolved, and the
Water remains most clear and limphid; then the Water being evaporated, it is to
be dried. Then lastly, its above reserved Spirit is to be powered upon it, and
mixed with it; but first it ought to he seven times rectified: You must make
this Conjunction in a Matrace (a Glass-Vessel so called, by reason of its
roundness in the bottom, and long neck) and in a warm Balneum, till the Calx
has imbibed its Spirit; then in a Glass-Alembick, you shall separate by
Balneum whatsoever of waterish Humidity can be separated, and there will remain
in the bottom the Buttery Calx of Arsenick: of great virtue, which must be kept
in a Glass-Vessel well stopped.

Take some of this Powder, mix it with Basilicon, or a Digestive; and thus
mixed, apply to the ulcerated Cancer.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Gangrene and Sphacelus.
A Gangrene, is a beginning Mortification of the the soft Parts of the Body,
most commonly following a great Inflammation, or ill cured.

Sphacelus, Necrosis, Syderatio, is a perfect Mortification, not only of the
soft, but of the hard parts also.

Differences.] In a Sphacelus, the parts are altogether dead; but in a
Gangrene, they begin but to die, and the sense is not perfectly abolished;
there the Skin is first pallid, suddenly livid, then black; here in a manner
red; greater stink in that, than in this.

The Causes of both are six. 1. The External Cold of the Air, or Repelling
Medicines. 2. External Heat, from burning, or use of Corrosive Medicines. 3. A
Defect of Nutriment, as in an Atrophia, either by the compression or
obstruction of the Vessels, by reason of which straightness the Blood cannot
pass to the Part. 4. The stopping of the Pores, or Perspiration hindered; from
whence comes a Suffocation of the Natural Heat. 5. Malign Humor, either
begotten in the Body, or contractee from venomous Beasts, or Medicines. 6. The
Scurvy, which by a peculiar property, causes the Parts sometimes to mortify.

Signs.] A Sphacelus is easily to be known, the Part looks black; Spungy Flesh;
Sense, Heat, and Pulsation abolished.

But the Signs of a Gangrene vary according to the variety of the Causes: If
contracted from Cold, a great pricking Pain is felt in the affected Part:
First, it is red, then pale, at length black: The Natural heat by degrees is
extinguished, and there happens a shaking, not unlike that in a Quartane Ague.

If caused from an External Heat, or stopping of the Pores, the Redness is
changed into White, then into Black; Pulsation and Pain cease; the Senses
lessened; and at last there appear some Pustules, from whence issue a gleety
Humor.

If from defect of Aliment, there is neither Pain, Inflammation or Tumor; the
Body waxes cold, and for the most part seizes upon the Joints.

If from a venomous Creature or Humor, great Pain and Fever always accompany
it; frequent Faintings, and oftentimes Deliriums: Here arises a Pustule, under
which appears a black Spot, which spreads it self over the whole part.

If from the Scurvy, it for the most part begins at the Toes, it shows it self
outwardly with blackish spots and lines, which degenerates into a dry Crust;
upon which follows a Numness of the Part, and at length a Mortification it
self, without any Stink: Sometimes without pain, other times very great,
especially in them that are given to Passion or Sadness.

Prognostics.] Except a Gangrene be suddenly stopped, it degenerates into a
Sphacelus; easilier cured in young, than old People: The Humors continually
flowing to the part affected, bring danger with them, and that very great, if
they are Malignant: In the Cavities of the Body, to wit, in the Mouth, Privy
Parts, and Fundament, etc. a Gangrene is always difficult of Cure, as also that
which happens among the Nerves and Tendons; in Hydropicks always mortal: That
which happens from the Scurvy, may be spun out from many Months, but seldom
cured.

A Sphacelus is not cured but by the Knife and Fire.

Cure.] Diet must be good, the Air, Meat and Drink generally cooling and
drying: But seeing the Causes are various, we leave it to the Physician to
prescribe what is convenient; who also must well distinguish concerning
Bleeding and Purging, when to be used with advantage or disadvantage.
Sudorisicks and Cordials are of great use here; and because that in this, and
other Diseases, they are often used, I thought it convenient to set them down
in this Place.

Diaphoreticks or Sudorisicks.
Roots of Angelica, Scorzonera, Lovage, Contrayerva; Herbs, Holy-Thistle,
Fumitory, Scordium; Hearts Horn, Unicorns-Horn, Bezoar, the Stone of an Indian
Hog, called Pedro Porco; Waters, of Threacle, Alexipharmick; Diascordium,
Threacle, Mithridate; Species Liberantis; Antimony, Diaphoretick; Salts, of
Wormwood, Prunella, Holy-Thistle, Rob. Sambuct.

Take Diascordium Farcastorii, one dram; Alexipharmick-Water, two drams;
Holy-Thistle water, as much as is sufficient; Syrup of Limons, half an ounce:
Make a Potion.

Cordials.
Waters of Roses, Borage, Bugloss; Conserves, of Rosemary-flowers, of Roses,
Violets and Borage; Bezoar, Hearts horn, Unicorns horn; Confections of
Alchermes, Hiacynthus; Rob. of Red Currants, of Barberries; of Scorzonera Roots
Candied, Citron and Orange-peels Candied, Saccharum Perlatum, Salt of Coral.

Take Water of Borage, Bugloss, of each two ounces and an half;
Alexipharmick-water, three Drams; Cinnamon Water, two Drams; Saccharum
Perlatum, half an ounce; Confection of Hyacinth, half a Dram; prepared Crabs
eyes, two Scruples; Spirit of Salt, four Drops: Mix them.

Let the Patient now and then take one or two Spoonfuls.

Externally, Cupping glasses, and Leeches; but chiefly Scarification must be
used; although there are some of our Surgeons, which altogether reject
Scarification; nevertheless happily curing their Patients, by the following
Medicines, which resist Putrefaction.

External Medicaments against a Gangrene.
Roots of Angelica, round Birthwort; Herbs, of Wormwood, Holy-Thistle, Tobacco,
Rue, Colewort, Germander; Flowers of Elder, St. John's Wort, Mellilot, Camomil;
Lie, Brine, Ink, Urine, Spirit of Wine, Treacle, Ung. Aegyptiacum, Fuscum of
Felix Wortz, Horse-dung.

Some mix Hemlock in Plasters or Poultices, and use it with success:

Or,

Take the Tops of Wormwood, Camomil, and Elder flowers, of each half a handful;
Leaves of Germander, a handful and half; Rue, half a handful; Crumbs of brown
Bread, seven ounces; Horse-dung, three ounces: Boil them in Brine, in the end
adding to them, Ink, two ounces; Spirit of Wine, three ounces: Make it into a
Cataplasm.

The sound part ought also to be preserved; partly by keeping the Humors from
flowing, and partly by keeping the Gangrene from spreading: For this purpose
the Red defensive Plaster, or the Cerot of Virgo is good; as also this
following Cataplasm.

Take Bolearmonick, half an ounce; Powder of Galls, Cypress-nuts,
Pomegranate-rinds, of each three Drams; Barley-meal, six Ounces; Oxymel
simplex; as much as is sufficient to make it into a Cataplasm.

Or,

Take Sealed Earth, Bolearmenick, of each half an ounce; prepared Hartshorn, a
dram; Camphire, a Scruple; Rose-vinegar, an Ounce; Oil of Mirtles, three
ounces; white of an Egg: Make it into a Linament.

Cure of a Gangrene, caused from Cold.
The part gangrened, if not grown black; but as yet appears very red with pain;
the Patient is to be placed at the Fire; but not too near; but at a distance,
that the heat by degrees may be again restored to the part; and to that
purpose, strongly rubbing it with Snow, or cold Water; giving also to the
Patient, Treacle, or Mithridate, in warm Wine. If the pain and cold remit, let
the part be embrocated very warm with Oil of Dill, Camomil, bitter Almonds, or
Earthworms, etc. A Decoction of congealed Turnips, is good to foment withal;
then are required both stronger and hotter Medicines, viz. Oil of Earth, of
Tiles, Turpentine, Castor, Treacle-water, Mithridate: Or use the following
Fomentation.

Take Herbs of Scordium, a handful and half; Swallow-wort, a handful; Rue, half
a handful; Seeds of Roman Nettle, Cresses, of each three Drams; boil them in
White Wind, let them be strained; and to a Pint of the Liquor, add Spirit of
Wine, two ounces: Mingle it.

When the part has begun to Mortify, Scarifie; continue the use of the above
prescribed Medicines.

Cure of a Gangrene from external Heat, or hindered by Perspiration.
Let the cause of the Disease be removed, if possible; which if it happens from
external Ligature, Hot, or two Astringent Medicines; let them be forthwith
removed from the part affected; and let it be washed, being first Scarified
with the following Decoction.

Take the Water of Endive, Nightshade, of each six Ounces; of Sorrel-water,
eight Ounces, Vinegar, half a pint; Salt, an Ounce and half; Scordium, a
handful; Lupines, half an Ounce; Mix them, and boil them to the Consumption of
the third part.

Then let the Surgeon use Ung. Aegyptiacum, or any other of the above
prescribed Medicines.

Cure of a Gangrene from the Defect of Nutriment.
Let the Patient use nourishing Aliments; all strong External, or Internal
Dryers hurt; Friction of the part, with moderately hot Medicines, as with Oil
of Sweet Almonds, Olives, Earthworms, Scorpions, Vipers, Man's Fat, Bears, or
Hens, is good. Scarifie, if necessity require. Discussives here are very
injurious.

Cure of a Gangrene from a venomous Humor.
If the malignant Humor be in the Body it self, Sudorifick, cooling, and
Cordial Medicines are best: For Purging and Bleeding, I have seen them oftener
to do hurt than good.

Outwardly, Defensives are useless; but Cupping-glasses, Leeches, and
attractive Medicines are necessary.

But if the Malignant Humor come from an external Cause; the surest remedy is
an actual Cautery, lest the Malignity spread it self, which is to be used the
very first time; and also to put a further stop, apply a Defensive to the sound
part, two fingers breadth distance from the wounded part; so also it will put a
stop to the Flux of Humors, or else all the hope consists in Leeches,
Cupping-glasses, Attractive Medicines, and others set down above.

Cure of a Gangrene sprung from the Scurvy.
Internal Remedies we commit to the Physician; Externally, these are commended.

Take Seeds of Broom, Roman-Nettle, Rue, of each a Dram; Tops of Wormwood, two
Drams; Gum, Galbanum Ammoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar, of each six drams; Oil
of Juniper, three drams; Wax, as much as is sufficient to make it into a
Plaster.

Or,

Take Oil of Earthworms, Bays, Rue, of each two Drams; Castor, a Dram; Spirit
of Wine, three Drams: Make it into a Linament.

Or,

Take the Raspings of Guaiacum, Sassafras, of each an ounce; Root of Angelica,
Celandines the greater, Tamarisk-bark, of each six Drams; Leaves of
Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, of each a handful; Fennel-seeds, an ounce; Spirit
of Wine, a pint and half: Infuse them a Night; then distill them in Balneo
Mariae.

Foment the part affected with this, and scarifie, if there be occasion; and
let the Surgeon proceed according to Art.

Where a Gangrene has degenerated into a Sphacelus, especially in the Joints,
let the Part be amputated; concerning which, look in the First Part.

CHAP. XV. Of a Paronychia.
PAnaritium, or Paronychia, is a Tumor very painful, in the end of the Finger,
from a sharp Malignant Humor, corroding the Tendons, Nerves, Periostium, and
Bone it self.

Cause is a sharp humor, proceeding from Choler or Serum.

Signs are, an intolerable pain about the Nail, tormenting the Patient day and
night; an Inflammation, oftentimes extending over the whole Arm: A Fever for
the most part, and sometimes Delirium.

Prognostic.] By how much the Humor is the more malignant, the greater
Symptoms it raises, corrupting sometimes the Bone, the Finger, the whole Hand,
and sometimes from extreme pain, it occasions the death of the Patient.

Cure.] Foment the Finger a while in this Decoction.

Take Flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, Elder, of each half a handful; Linseed and
Fenugreek, each two drams: Boil them in Milk.

Or, let this Cataplasm be applied.

Take Flowers of Dill, Elder, Leaves of Hen-Bane, of each a handful;
Poppy-seeds and Linseed, of each three drams; Marsh-mallow-powder, an ounce and
half.

Boil them in Milk, to the consistence of a Cataplasm.

Then make Incision upon the Part affected, according to the length of the
Finger; and for the most part there appears one or more red spots, containing a
sharp Matter, but little in quantity, which is the cause of the Disease.

After the Apertion of the Tumor, at the first dressing, apply to the Finger
Treacle dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and a Defensive to the whole Hand; so in a
day or two, the Cure will be perfected.

But if this Part should be gangrened or Sphacelated, either by the neglect of
Patient or Surgeon, let it be taken off: Except you will commit the business
to Nature, which oftentimes separates, and throws out this Bone. A great
Inflammation sometimes here produces a Fleshy Excrescency, occult and
senseless; this is removed by Knife, or exeding Medicines: Then cure according
to Art.

But if being too late called you find a great collection of Humors, let
Discussives or Suppuratives be applied; then the Tumor being either broke, or
opened, take great care, lest the Tendons (which do very easily) putrify, or
incline to putrefaction: Separation is here necessary, whether it be by
Medicines, or a cutting Instrument: Repellents in this case, greatly hurtful.

CHAP. XVI. Of an Aneurism.
ANeurisma is a Tumor besides Nature, from a Rupture of an Artery, continually
beating, easily yielding to the Fingers, and as suddenly returning.

Cause.] All Arteries, except those that are dispersed, through the Brain and
upper parts, consist of a double Tunicle; the inmost of which being either
corroded or broke, the External may be extended so much (without a Rupture of
it, whatsoever others say) as to cause an Aneurism: Nevertheless, where the
Tumor is of the bigness of ones Fist, it cannot be but that the External also
must be either corroded or broke. Anatomy does confirm this Opinion, which the
Studious in the Art of Surgery may enquire into.

This Tumor also may be caused, where an Artery be divided; so that the
External Tunicle united to the Muscles, the Internal, by reason of the
continual pulsation, remains open.

Signs.] A Swelling increasing by degrees, of the same color as the skin; a
continual Pulsation: If the Tumor be little, it easily yields to the Fingers,
so that it altogether disappears, but suddenly returns again; but if great, not
so easily yielding to the touch, not so strong a Pulsation: but there is a
noise observed, as of boiling Water; yet in the Head and Jaw, I have found
after death an Aneurism, which while the man was alive, there could be no Pulse
perceived: In the hard parts is greater Circumspection to be used, than in the
soft and fleshy.

Prognostics.] It is difficultly cured; if great, not at all, except with the
taking off the Member; for the most part it is a long Disease, although I have
seen it kill, without any other accidental Cause, within two years: If Incision
be made, Death suddenly follows.

Cure.] In the beginning there may be some Hopes. Astringents and Repellents,
and convenient Ligatures, by which we do not seldom administer something of
Remedy to the Patient; as also the applying a piece of Lead straightly bound
on, have sometimes cured little Aneurisms.

But where the Tumor is increased, there are some would have the Skin divided,
and the Artery tied both above and below, and cut out the middle with the
Tumor, and loosen not the Ligatures, till the Wound is perfectly cured, and
there is no fear of an Hemorrage; but this Operation is dangerous, painful and
troublesome, and oft-times of little Benefit: But to preserve Life, I would
take off the Member.

CHAP. XVII. Of Opthalmia.
OPthalmia is an Inflammation of the Membranes of the Eye from Blood, with
Redness, Pain, and shedding of Tears.

Difference.] A light Inflammation, and which depends from external Causes, is
called a Bastard- Opthalmia, Taraxis, or Epiphora; but a great Inflammation,
accompanied with pain and tears, a true Opthalmia. And if it be so great, that
the Eyelids are so inflamed, and as it were turned inward, it is called
Chemosis.

Causes are two. 1. Internal, as Blood, oft-times mixed with Serum or Choler;
seldom with Phlegm or Melancholy. 2. External, as Smoke, Dust, etc.

Signs vary according to the variety of Causes: If it proceed from too great a
quantity of Blood, the Face looks red, and the Vessels of the Eyes are
extended: If either from more of Serum or Choler, the Redness of the Face is
less, but the Tears are more sharp, and the pain greater; if from more of
Phlegm, the reddish pain, Heat and Acrimony of Tears are more remiss; and the
Eyelids at night are as it were glewed together: If from any thing of
Melancholy, there are but few Tears, and the Eyelids are not closed together,
the Inflammation is not great, but stubborn.

Prognostics.] An Opthalmia is flower cured in Children, than in old people.
Continual pain menaceth Blindness, by how much greater the Inflammation is, so
much the more dangerous it is.

Cure.] The Diet must be the same as in a Phlegmon; all sharp things are
carefully to be avoided; as Garlic, Radishes, Mustard, etc. little or no
Suppers profit: Purging, the use of Glisters, Bleeding ought to be oft-times
re-iterated; as also Cupping-Glasses, Leeches, Blisters; sometimes also
Seatons, Issues, and Artereotomy it self, which is not to be done by any but an
expert Surgeon; Sneezing is hurtful; Provoking of Sweat is sometimes
necessary, sometimes not; which the Physician must distinguish: Dieureticks are
of great use, provided they are not too hot.

External Remedies vary according to the variety of Causes; if from Smoke or
Fire, let them be extinguished.

If from Dust, or any thing got into the Eyes, it is to be taken forth, which is
often performed by blowing, or by the spurting in of Rose Water.

If from the inversion of the Eyelids; the Hairs are to be cut off, or wholly
to be pulled out.

If the Eyelids are glew'd together, they are to be separated, with Butter,
Beer, or Cream, the Rheum is gently to be wiped; and let the Patient have a
Care, lest by the rubbing of his Eyes, he increases his Disease.

Fat things are here hurtful: Repellent Medicines, except in the very
beginning, are not to be used, or in a very slight Opthalmia.

Medicines good for the Eyes.
Roots of Valerian, Solomons-Seal, Orrise, Vervain, Herbs, Betony, Celandine
the great, Eyebright, Fennel, Fumitory, Plantain: Flowers of Roses, Violets;
Anni-seeds, Quince-seeds, Linseeds: Pippins, boiled or rotten; Camphire;
Mussilage of Lin-seeds, Tragacanth; Fresh Veal; Whites of Eggs; all sorts of
Milk, especially Woman's; Tutty; white and green Vitriol; Saccharum Saturni;
Glass of Antimony; White Troches of Rhasis; fresh Cheese not salted; Ung.
Saturni.

A Water for the Eyes.
Take Waters of Eyebright and Celandine the greater, of each an ounce and half;
White Wind, six drams; Glass of Antimony, eight grains; prepared Tutty, fifteen
grains; White-Vitriol, two grains; Sugar Candy two drams; Camphire, four
grains: Make it into a Collirium.

Another excellent one.

Take Wheat, three handfuls; Bruised Ginger, three drams; Common Salt, a
handful and half; White Wind, Water of Roses, of Fennel, Plantain, of each ten
ounces: Infuse them in a Copper Vessel the space of forty days, strain them,
and reserve the Liquor for your use.

Another very much esteemed.

Take a whole Egg, boil it hard, then the shell and Yolk being taking away, put
into the Cavity, Sugar of Saturn, six grains; Camphire, two grains;
White-Vitriol, three Grains; Honey of Roses, half an ounce; then press it very
hard, and let the pressed out Liquor be dropped into the Eyes twice or thrice a day.

Another, second to none.

Take Waters of Fennel and Eyebright, of each a pint; Common Salt, six drams;
prepared Tutty, white Vitriol, of each half an ounce: Let them boil a little,
and reserve for use.

Let not the great quantity of Vitriol afright any; it causes only a slight
pain, which suddenly vanishes; but it is of so great virtue, that it cannot
sufficiently be extolled; but its use will prove it true.

A Powder for the Eyes.
Take Dulcified Vitriol, half a dram, prepared Tutty, fifteen grains;
Sugar Candy, a scruple: Make it into a fine Powder.

Unctious Medicines seldom are applied to the Eyes, or else this Ointment is
much commended.

Take Verdigrease, twelve grains; Camphire, Lapis Calaminaris, of each half an
ounce; prepared Tutty, half a dram; fresh-Butter washed in Rose Water, two
ounces: Make it into an Ointment.

An Anodine Cataplasm.
Take Camomile and Melilot Flowers, of each a pugil, rotten Apples, two ounces;
Fenugreek-seed, an ounce; Crumbs of Brown Bread, three ounces; two yolks of
Eggs, Saffron, half a dram; Boil them in Cows-milk, to the consistence of a
Poultice.

An Anodine Collirium.
Take the Juice of Housleek, two drams; Whites of Eggs, half an ounce;
Womens-Milk, two ounces; Rose Water, an ounce; white Troches of Rhasis, one
scruple; Opium, three grains: Mix them.

Another, which I have often found excellent in the greatest pain.

Take Gum Tragacanth, two drams; Mussilage of the seeds of Fleawort, three
drams; Rose Water, and Plantain-water, of each as much as suffices: Make it
into a Collyrium of an indifferent Consistence; and let it be instilled by
drops into the Eyes, and Linnen-Cloaths wet in it, outwardly applied.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Quinsie.
A Quinsie is a Tumor of the Jaws, from Blood, hindering Deglutition and
Respiration.

Difference.] It Is divided into three species; the first is called Cynanthe,
when the Muscles of the Larinx are inflamed: the Symptoms here are very
dangerous, although neither internally nor externally appear any Tumor; the
Patient puts forth his Tongue like a tired Dog, to fetch his breath. Second is
Synanche, when the Tumor shows it self within the Jaws; the Symptoms are
likewise here great, but much less than in Cynanthe. Third is, Parasynanche,
when the Tumor appears more Externally than Internally; and in this the
Symptoms are least of all.

Cause is Blood, for the most part mixed with Serum or Choler; seldom with
Phlegm or Melancholy.

Signs of an approaching Quinsie, are, a stiffness of the Neck, swallowing and
breathing somewhat hindered, an unusual heat and pain in the Jaws, especially
when Quinsies are Epidemick.

Signs of a present are, a suffocating Asthma: swallowing hindered, which often
increases to so great a height, that Drink taken in at the Mouth, comes forth
again through the Nostrils, Pain, Redness, Tumor for the most part, also a
continual Fever; the Tongue likewise swelled, and the Voice altered.

Prognostic.] A perfect Quinsie never wants danger, but sometimes suffocates
the Patient the first day, generally before the fourth: If the Matter be not
suddenly concocted and thrown forth, it is desperate; if the Vertebraes be
laxated, death is near at hand; foaming at mouth is a sign of present death; if
the Patient be taken with a pain of the Head, a Delirium, raving and death it
self suddenly follows.

Cure.] Bleeding in this case effects much, both by taking away of the
Inflammation, and by hindering its increase, which is to be performed at first
sight therefore let the Median or Cephalic Vein of the side most affected be
opened, though in Women with Child, then the Vein under the Tongue: Cupping
Glasses with Scarification may also be applied to the Neck about the second
Verrebra, Shoulders and Breast; Leeches, Cauteries, and Blisters do much good,
especially in them that are Subject to Quinsie: In the mean time, if the
Patient can swallow, let some purging Medicines be given him; if not, let a
Clister be cast in, with Bleeding, which must be often reiterated as occasion
requires.

Gargarisms then, and other External Medicines are to be used; which in the
beginning are to be more Repelling, afterward more Discussing; for Experience
and best Authors have taught, 1. Repellents never are to be used alone, except
in the beginning, and in a light Quinsie. 2. That Repellents ought always to be
mixed with Resolvents; for Repellents destroy the heat of the Part; Resolvents
cause Fluxion.

Medicines in a Quinsie.
Roots of Marshmallows, Liquoras; Herbs, Comfrey, Myrtle, Prunella, Dandelion,
Scabious, Plantain, Housleek the greater, Sage, Alehoof, Violets, Flowers of
Balaustians, Red Roses, Saffron; the four cold Seeds, Poppy the Rinds and Juice
of Pomegranates; Figs, Album Graecum, Burnt-Swallows, Burnt-Allom, Swallows
Nests, Syrups of Maidenhair, Violets, Purslane, Jujubies, Scabious, Lungwort,
Honey of Roses, Rob. Diamori.

A Repellent Gargarism.
Take Flowers of Red-Roses, Balaustians, of each two pugils; Pomegranate-Rinds,
half an ounce; Oak-leaves, a handful; Burnt-Allom, half a dram: Boil them in
Smith's Water, and add to a pint of the Liquor, two ounces of Rob. Diamori: Mix
them.

Another very convenient in the beginning of the Disease.

Take leaves of Dandelion, two handfuls; Alehoof, Violets, of each half an
handful; boil them in Barley-water, and to a point of the strained Liquor, add
of common Honey of Roses, and strained, of each an ounce and half; Spirit of
Vitriol, 15 drops: Mix them.

A Repellent, and somewhat Discussive Gargarism.
Take Liquoras, Pomegranate-Rinds, of each two drams; Balaustia Flowers, a
pugil; Jujubies, No. xij. Figs, No. iij. Raisins, six drams; boil them in
Barley-water. To a pint of the Decoction, add of common and strained Honey of
Roses, Syrup of Maidenhair, of each an ounce: Mix them.

A Gargarism greatly Repelling, but strongly Discussing.
Take the Roots of Dwarf Elder, Orrise, of each two drams, Flowers of Camomil,
a pugil; Red-Roses, Hysop, of each two pugils, Dates, No. iij. Figs, No. vj.
Fenugreek-seeds, two drams; Album Graecum, one dram: Boil them in Turnep-Broth.
Add to it Syrup of Maidenhair, and Jujubies, of each an ounce: Mix them.

If the pain be very great, boil them in new Milk, chiefly in Goats.

External Medecines for a Quinsie.
Oil of Nuts, White-Lillies, Almonds, Camomile, Dill, Capons-grease,
Hoggs-grease, Ointment of Marshmallows, Plaster of Musilages, Dogs and
Pigeons-Dung, Swallows-Nests.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, White-Lillies, of each an ounce; one Swallows
Nest, Figs, Dates, of each No. iij. Album Graecum, half an ounce; Boiled
Onions, half an ounce: Boil them in Barley-water, and to a point of the
strained Liquor, add of Wheat-meal and the Powder of Lin-seed, of each an
ounce; Fenugreek and Marshmallows powdered, of each two ounces and a half;
Yolks of two Eggs, Eastern Saffron, two drams; Oil of Camomile, two ounces and
a half: Make it into a Cataplasm.

Take Juice of Onions, two ounces; Oil of white-Lillies, Orise, of each an
ounce and half; boil them a little, adding to them of Swallows-Nest, a dram;
Pitch and Wax, as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

But if the Tumor tends to Suppuration, it is to be forwarded, and then to be
opened either by Medicines or Launcet.

A Suppurating Cataplasm.
Take Roots of Briony, white-Lillies, Orrise, of each three drams; Leaves of
Pellitory of the Wall, a handful; Camomile-Flowers, half a handful; Onions, an
ounce; Figs, No. xij. Boil them and bruise them, adding of the Powder of
Fenugreek-seed and Lin-seed, of each two ounces; Hens grease, an ounce; Oil of
Camomile, two ounces: Mix them.

A Suppurating Gargarism.
Take Roots of white-Lillies, and Liquoras, of each three drams; Onions, half
an ounce; Raisins stoned, an ounce; Figs, No. vj. Lin-seed and Fenugreek, of
each two drams; Leaves of Mallows and Coleworts, of each half a handful; boil
them in Barley-water, and to a pint of the strained Liquor, add of Syrup of
Maidenhair, two ounces: Mix them.

And to make the Abscess break, add to this Gargarism.

Take Mustard Seed, two drams; Roots of Pollitory of Spain powdered, one dram;
Saffron, a scruple; Oximel simple, an ounce: Mix them.

But if it does not forthwith break by these Medicines, it is to be opened by a
Launcet, or some other Instrument; afterward using Emollient Gargarismes, and
somewhat abstersive.

The end of the first Book of the second Part.
BARBETTY'S SURGERY. The Second Book of the Second Part Of SURGERY. Of
Wounds.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature, Differences, Causes, and Signs of Wounds.
A Wound is a Solution of continuity in the soft parts of the Body, from a hard
Instrument, causing an Abolition or Immination of Action.

Differences are taken, 1. From the Form; some are long, others oblique; some
are little, others great, some are deep, others superficial. 2. From the
wounded Part, as, the Head, Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Guts, Nerve,
Tendon, Vein or Muscle; sometimes the Skin is only penetrated, then it is a
simple Wound; sometimes a Part of the Flesh is taken away, and then it is called
a compound or hollow Wound. 3. From the Causes, which shall presently be set
down; sometimes a wound happens to be poisoned, and to have many Symptoms
joined with it.

Causes are five-fold, viz. 1. All things that cut, as a Knife, Sword, Glass,
2. Al things that prick; as Needles, Arrows, Teeth. 3. Which perforate; as hot
Iron, Bullets. 4. Which break; as a Fall, Stroke, or the carrying or lifting of
any great Burdens. 5. All things which contuse; as a Stone, Stick, etc.

Signs.] External Wounds are of themselves manifest enough; but those of the
Internal parts, are not always so easily judged of; these therefore are to be
known by Anatomy; 1. What is the situation of each part. 2. What the use. 3.
The Symptoms are to be considered. 4. The Quality of those things are to be
noted, that Nature ejected through the Wound: The other Signs you shall have in
their proper places.

Prognostics. [To know the Events of Wounds, especially to predict which are
Mortal, which not, is a thing absolutely necessary for a Surgeon: For from this
judgment oft-times depends the Life of unfortunate Man.

A mortal Wound is that, which in the space of few hours or days, of necessity
causes Death, and cannot by any Art be cured.

For those that in themselves are curable, yet by reason of ill Symptoms, or
through the neglect either of the Patient or Surgeon, do occasion Death,
ought not to be accounted mortal Wounds: Incurable Wounds themselves are not to
be called Mortal, if they are not the cause of Death suddenly to the Patient;
but that he not only lives many weeks, but oftentimes many years after.

1. Among the Wounds that are Mortal, are to be accounted the Wounds of the
Brain, but not all of them; for Experience has taught us, that part of the
Brain has been taken forth, and the Life preserved, though the Understanding
lost.

Therefore those Wounds of the Brain that be absolutely mortal, are, 1. When
besides the Brains, a Nerve is also wounded. 2. When Blood, or some other Humor
obstructs the beginning of the Nerves: 3. When after a few days the concrete
and putrified Blood produces a Fever, Delirium, and Death it self.

By concreted Blood, I understand not that which lies between the Dura-Mater
and the Skull; for that is to be taken forth by the Trepan, and the Patient
this way may be preserved; but that which is included between the Dura and
Pia-Mater, or between the Pia and the Brain: Although sometimes, that which is
detained between both Membranes, by the dividing of the Dura, may be taken
forth, and so the Patient preserved.

2. The Wounds of the Spinal Marrow are also mortal, which happens in the Neck,
or nearer to the Head; but those which happen lower, as about the Os Sacrum,
are of lesser danger.

3. The Wounds of the Lungs are mortal, if great and deep, where the great
Vessels, or the Branches of the Aspera Arteria are hurt: Where the Vessels are
divided, there follows a great effusion of Blood; where the Branches of the
Aspera Arteria, the Breath comes forth more through the Wound than the Mouth.

4. Wounds of the heart are always mortal; for though one or two wounded in the
heart, have lived, two, three, or four days, it was never found yet, that ever
any escaped.

5. The Wound of the Windpipe may be cured, if the Membranes only behind, to
which the Cartilaginous Rings are joined, be hurt; but if the Rings themselves
are wounded, there is no cure to be expected; yet sometimes those wounds being a
lingering Death; so that I have seen on so wounded, live Eighteen weeks before
he died.

6. Wounds of the Diaphragma, those that are inflicted in the fleshy Part of
it, are curable; but those that are in the Nervous Part, though these always
occasion not sudden Death, yet it is impossible ever to cure them.

7. Wounds of the Stomach are sometimes cured; those chiefly being mortal, that
happen in the upper Orifice, or in Nerves that are distributed over the Stomach.

8. The Wounds of the Small Guts are seldom cured, but the Wounds of the Great
Guts much oftener, especially if they are not great.

9. Wounds of the Liver and Spleen are mortal, where the Vessels themselves are
wounded; where not, they may be cured.

10. Wounds of the Kidneys are not mortal; if the Wound penetrate into the
Cavity it self, for the most part an Ulcer follows, which consumes the whole
Kidney, yet the Patient may continue many years: If the Parachyma, only be
wounded, sometimes, through difficulty, it may be cured.

11. Wounds of the Bladder are seldom so perfectly cured, but that for the most
part there remains a Fistula; but those that are made at the neck of the
bladder, are daily cured.

12. Wounds of the great Veins and Arteries are often mortal; but every Surgeon
understands not rightly to bind up such Wounds; therefore the cause of death is
not always to be cast upon the guilty.

13. Wounds of the great Nerves are for the most part incurable, and sometimes
mortal.

14. Wounds from poisoned Instruments or Creatures, generally are mortal.

Wounds of Nerves, Veins, Tendons and Membranes, are more difficultly, and
longer of Cure, than those of the fleshy parts.

A Wound from a pricking Instrument, is of less danger, than from a bruising.

A Nerve, Vein or Artery, if wholly divided, are less dangerous, than if they
were but in part.

A great Inflammation coming upon a great Wound, is of no great danger, except
it continue too long; but a great Inflammation falling upon a little Wound, is
an ill sign.

The Inflammation for the most part vanishes by the fifth day; therefore if the
Wound then appear white, livid or black, it is not void of danger.

A Fever, Vomiting and Convulsion, are dangerous; but a Fever and Vomiting of
less danger than a Convulsion.

CHAP. II. Of the Cure of Wounds in general.
HEre are required four Intentions: 1. To preserve the strength and native heat
of the wounded Part. 2. To remove the Symptoms. 3. To endeavor that nothing
remains, or be left behind in the Wound. 4. That the gaping Lips of the Wound
be joined together; and being so joined, be kept*

CHAP. III. Of the preservation of the strength and Native heat in the wounded
Part.
Surgery removes the impediments of Cure, but Nature her self cures the
Disease; which it will scarce effect, where the Native heat is weak, or the
Blood vitiated; or where it flows in too great or too little quantity to the
Wound: in flowing in too great quantity, it produces an Inflammation, Pain,
Putrefaction, and many other Symptoms; where in too little quantity, the Wound
is robbed of its Natural Balsam, necessary to consolidate it.

The natural strength and native heat is preserved by a convenient Diet, fitted
to the temperament of Man's body in general, and in particular, to the Part
affected. Of the Diet of the Sanguine, Choleric, Phlegmatic and Melancholic,
we have treated of before, when we spoke concerning a Phlegmon, Erysipelas,
Oedema, Schirrhus.

Then Care is to be had of the Blood, seeing it affords assistance to the
matter, and serves to unite the Wound. Where it is vitiated, it requires
purging: But if it flow in too great quantity, Intercipients, Repellents,
Revellents and Derivation must be used.

If it flow in too small quantity, Aliments that nourish, are convenient, as
also Medicines that strengthen, and that move Sweat: Outwardly, gentle
Frictions and Embrocations moderately hot.

Then the Cure is to be perfected by External Medicines; which shall be
declared in the following Chapter, when we speak of the removal of the
Symptoms, and the Cure of Wounds themselves.

CHAP. IV. Of the Symptoms of Wounds.
THe chief Symptoms of Wounds are, 1. A Fever whose Cure we commend to the
Physitian' 2. A Flegmon or Inflammation. 3. An Erysipelas. Of the Cure of both
which, look in the second and third Chapter of the first Book. 4. Hemorage,
which not only impedes the Cure, but also deprives of strength and life it
self; therefore great Care is to be taken that it be stopped as soon as
possible, which in the greater Vessels, especially the Arteries, is very hard
to do; therefore those Wounds are for the most part Mortal: For Medicines that
stop Blood are too weak, and hard Ligatures occasion a Gangrene; the surest way
therefore in my opinion, is an actual Cautery; the lesser Vessels may and will
close, Some close the Wound of the Vessels with their Fingers, and so hold them
there while the Blood is coagulated, and the Flux stopped; but this Operation
seldom succeeds; besides the long holding of the Finger in the Wound is hurtful.

Therefore let the Wound together with the Vessels be forthwith closed by the
Fingers, but if you cannot come to do this, outwardly make a compress upon the
Vessel; which done, wipe away the Blood with a Sponge, then sprinkle some
restringent Powder; but not over the whole Wound (which is used to be done by
the ignorant) but only upon the Vessels; then bind up the Wound, continuing the
use of the Medicines stopping Bleeding, while there appears no longer any
Blood; not neglecting in the mean time, Generals, viz. Scarification and
Bleeding, etc.

Medicines that stop a Flux of Blood.
Roots of Bistort, Cinquefoil, Tormentil, Comfrey the greater, Red Saunders,
Lignum Leutisci, Pomegranate-rinds, Mastick, Talk, Acacia, Dragons-Blood,
Amber, Sarcocols, Frankincense; the hairs of a Hare, Os sepiae, burnt-Crabs;
Whites of Eggs, Mummy, Cobwebs, red, Coral Chalk, Bloodstone, Bole-Armenick,
Aloes succotrine, Frogs dried and powdered, crude Vitriol, burnt Vitriol.

Take fine Meal, three ounces; Dragons-Blood, Frankincense, of each an ounce
and half; Bole, Sealed Earth, of each two drams, Talk, six drams; dried Frogs,
an ounce; Hares hair cut very small, a dram and a half; Whites of Eggs dried in
the Sun, and powdered half an ounce; New Spunges torrified, an ounce; white
Vitriol, a dram: Mix them, and make them into a fine Powder.

5. Pain; which must of necessity be eased, because it creates watchings, and
dejects the Spirits, and is cause of the Flux of Humors to the Party affected;
and of Inflammation, Fever and Gangrene; but the Causes are diligently to be
considered: For if either Medicines that are sharp, or too hot, occasion it,
they are presently to be altered: It Is better to confess the Error, than
pertinaciously to persevere in it.

If any foreign Body remains in the Wound, it must be drawn forth.

If pain comes from the choking in of the Matter, you must allow it a free
passage.

If an Inflammation be the cause of it, its Remedies are set down in the second
Chapter of the first Book: You must apply to the Wound those things which ease
pain, and are anodine; as Oil of Roses, Linseed, Camomile, Worms, sweet
Almonds, Poppies, etc.

Take Oil of Roses, of Poppy-seeds, of Camomile, of each an ounce; the White of
an Egg, Saffron, a scruple; Mix them.

But if the pain cease not with these or the like Medicines, it is a sign that
some Nerve is wounded, or affected by consent: The Cure shall be set down in
the following.

6. Convulsion or Spasm; this shows the Malignity of the Humor, or the ill
constitution of the Nerves, neither of them promising any good: Here must be
used both Internal and External Medicines, appropriated to the Disease; the
Internal, by reason of the diversity of causes, we commend to the Physician.

External Medicines for a Convulsion.
Balsam of Peru, the fat of Geese, Castor, Foxes, Rams, Man's: Horse-dung, Oils
of Juniper, Lavender, Ol. Philosophorum, Amber, Turpentine, Rue, Marjoram,
Worms, Castor, Orise, Bays, Petraeleum; Ointments of Agrippa, Martiatum, Ung.
Nervorum, Spirit of Wine.

Take Oil of Snails, Worms, Sesamin, of each an ounce; of the Grease of Rams
and Foxes, of each half an ounce; fresh Butter, six drams; Spirit of Wine,
three ounces: Let them boil till the Spirit be consumed; then add Oil of Spike
distilled, Rosemary, Amber, of each two drams: Mix it into an Ointment.

Against a Convulsion there cannot a better Remedy be invented than distilled
Oil of Lavender, some few drops being given in some convenient Liquor; and
anointing well the convulsed part.

7. Hypersarcosis, or too great increase of flesh; which if it happens from
abundance of Blood, the flesh is solid, and otherwise well conditioned; but if
from the too weak quality of drying Medicines, it is spungy; of the same
nature, as when the Bone underneath is rotten. In the former Case, Bleeding is
convenient, and sometimes fasting, and the use of strong drying Medicines: In
the latter, the Medicines must be very strongly drying that are applied:
Detersive and Corroding Remedies are here good.

Medicines against too great increase of Flesh.
Burnt-Spunges, Burnt-Allom, Galls, Aloes, the Bark of Frankincense, Tutty,
Verdigrease, burnt Vitriol, Praecipitate, Arsenick.

A Green Corrosive Water,
Take crude Allom, Verdigrease of each two drams; boil them in eighteen ounces
of White Wind, to a wasting of the fourth part; strain them, and add Camphire,
a dram: Mix them.

A Powder very drying, and somewhat corroding.
Take Galls, Balaustions, burnt-Allom, Frankincense, Myrrh, of each a dram;
Dragons-Blood, Ceruse, Verdigrease, of each half a dram: Make it into a Powder.

8. A Gangrene and Sphacelus, concerning which, look in the fourteenth Chapter
of the first Book of the second Part of Surgery.

CHAP. V. Of the drawing forth Extraneous Bodies out of the Wound.
NO Wound ought to be joined together, as long as any Extraneous Body remains
in it; for otherwise, after some little time, it will break out into an Ulcer:
The Blood, by which Nature unites the divided Parts, if it flow in great
quantity to the wounded Part, and there coagulates, it is to be removed by
Expression, sucking it out, or by any other way; for so there will be less
Matter generated, and the Symptoms fewer; but where an Haemorage is feared, all
the Blood is not to be cleansed away.

Where Hairs are about the Wound, they are to be removed.

If Sand; or any such like thing remain within the Lips of the Wound, they are
to be washed away with warm Wine.

Broken-Bones, if loose, are to be taken away the first dressing, except an
Haemorage hinder; but if they yet stick to the other Bones, then Natures
endeavors are to be expected, and see whether they will be united again to the
other Bone, or separated from it.

If a piece of Glass, Thorn, Arrow or Bullet, or any like thing remains in the
Wound, it is forthwith to be taken forth; but before the Surgeon goes about
to draw them forth, let him consider well, whether the Patient, that Extraneous
Body being extracted, can live or not; lest the Surgeon be thought to have
occasioned the Patients death.

Of the manner of Extracting Bullets, we have treated before; and Arrows are to
be drawn forth almost after the same manner; but they are not in use at this
day among Christian Soldiers: But if neither with the Hand nor Instruments,
what remains in the wound can be drawn forth, then you must endeavor it with
Medicines indeed with an extractive quality.

Medicines drawing forth Thorns, Bones, Bullets, etc.
Roots of Aron, Birthwort, Bastard Dittany, Masterwort, Polypody, Radishes,
Valerian: Herbs, Southernwood, Pimpernel, Anemone, Red-Beet, Ditany: Gums,
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Succinum, Pitch, the Brains and Grease of
Hares, Crabs, a live Mouse cut in two, Common Flies, Earthworms, Burnt Frogs,
Goose-dung, Lodestone, Leaven, Plaster of Opodeldoch.

Take Roots of round Birthwort, Ditany of Crete, of each a dram and an half;
Rosin of the Pine, Colophony, of each six drams; yellow Amber, three drams; Gum
Ammoniacum, Appoponax, of each an ounce; Pigeons dung, three drams; Oil of
Bays, half an ounce; Turpentine and Pitch, as much as to make it into a
Plaster.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner of joining the Lips of Wounds together.
THe Lips of the Wound are joined together, either by Ligature or Stitching.
Ligature is convenient in Wounds made according to the length of the Member,
and not deep; let the Bandage be neither too hard, nor too loose, and of that
breadth that it may take in the whole Wound. If it be a long Wound, the Rowler
must be three Fingers broad, and laying the midst of it upon the Wound, roll
one part upward, and the other downward; which must neither be too loose, for
then it will not keep the Lips of the Wound together; nor too straight, lest it
cause an Inflammation: In the Winter the Rowlers must be of greater length than
in the Summer: In great Wounds, besides Rowlers, the Surgeon stands in need of
Boulsters.

Stitching is performed either by Needle or sticking Medicines. It is requisite
that the Surgeon never be without a Needle; for by it he frees his Patient
from Pain, the Wound from Inflammation, and himself from many inconveniences;
and the Wound so requiring it, let him take a three-pointed Needle, with a
waxed Thread, which let him pass through the Skin, and sometimes also through
the subjacent Flesh, taking Care that the Tendons be not pricked; and also that
the Stitches be not too few nor too many; but keeping such distance between
each, that the Skin may be drawn together, and the edges themselves joined,
leaving a little part for the putting in of a Tent, that may give passage to
the superfluous Matter: These Tents are not necessary in little Wounds; and in
great, they must neither touch the Nerve or Tendon, nor reach to the bottom of
the Wound.

Where Ligature is not sufficient, and a Stitch with a Needle not convenient,
the sticking Plaster is very necessary; for so firmly does this Plaster
adhere to the Wound, that neither the matter flowing out of the Wound, nor the
Blood, nor any other moisture loosens it. Oftentimes in this case is used, the
Stiptick Plaster of Crollius, or Paracelsus, but this sticks more firmly.

Take Sarcocols, Bole, Mastick, Dragons-blood, Rosin of the Pine, of each a
dram; Gum-Tacamahack, a dram and an half; Naval-pitch, as much as suffices:
Make it into a Plaster.

CHAP. VII. Of Medicines necessary for the Curing of Wounds.
MEdicines necessary for the Cure of Wounds, are of three sorts: 1. Digestives,
or moving matter. 2. Sarcoticks, or generating Flesh. 3. Epuloticks, or
inducing a Cicatrice.

Experience has taught, that a Wound may be cured oftentimes only by Digestive
or Sarcotick Medicines; but this is better, and more certain, when they are
both mixed together: In the Fleshy Parts, Digestives may alone serve; but in
Tendinous, Nervous, Membranous, or other drier Parts, Sarcoticks are
convenient, either alone, or mixed with Digestives.

Digestives.
Common Oil, Oil of Roses, Mastick, fresh Butter and May-Butter, Gum-Elemny,
Turpentine, Frankincense, Mastick; the Flower of Wheat, Barley, Fenugreek,
Yolks of Eggs, Honey.

Take Oil of Olives, two ounces; yellow Wax, half an ounce; Frankincense,
Mastick, of each a dram; the yolk of an Egg, fresh Butter, as much as is
sufficient: Make it into an Ointment.

Sarcoticks.
Roots of Birthwort, Orrise, Sanicle, Comfrey the greater; Herbs, Betony,
Centaury, Comfrey, St. John's-wort, Pimpernel, Plantain, Scabious, Scordium,
Vervain; of Seeds, Beans, Fenugreek, Linseed, Barley; Frankincense, Aloes,
Bole, sealed Earth, Colophony; Gums of Elemny, Pine, Laudanum, Mastick, Myrrh,
Dragons-Blood, Sarcocols, Turpentine, Tragacanth; Wax, Honey, Mummy, Cadmia,
Ceruse, Lapis Calaminaris, Litharge, Burnt-Lead, Phomholix, Lapis Haematitis;
Oils of St. John's wort, Bays, Mastick, Myrrh; Ointment, Aureum, Basilicum,
Fuscum, of Felix Wurtz, Diapompholigos; Plasters, Stipticum of Crollius and
Paracelsus, Oppodeldoch, of Betony, Diasulphuris of Rulandus; Balsoms, of Peru,
of Crollius, of Magatus, Aqua vitae; the fat of Geese, Foxes, Bears, Goats,
Man's.

An Excellent Vulnerary Balsom.
Take Turpentine, half a pound; Gum Galbanum, Elemny, Ivy, Frankincense,
Mastick, Myrrh, of each an ounce; Aloes, Xylo aloes, Galangal, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each half an ounce: Infuse them four and twenty
hours in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine; distill them and preserve the
Oil for your use.

Another,

Take Oil of Violets, eight ounces; of Bays, an ounce; Oil of
Venice-Turpentine, half an ounce; of Spike distilled, of Junipers, Verdigreace,
of each a dram; Rosin of the Pine, Turpentine, Colophony, Mastick, of each half
an ounce; white Calcanthum, a dram and half: Boil them a little, then strain
them for your use.

Another,

Take Flower of Brimstone, three ounces; Myrtle, three drams; Camphire, one
dram; Venice-Turpentine, five ounces; distill them, and preserve the Oil for
your use.

A Vulnerary Plaster.
Take the Roots of round Birthwort, and Comfrey the greater, of each half an
ounce; Mummy, Colophony; Aloes, Mastick, Dragons blood, Litharge of Gold,
Tutia, of each two drams; Gum Elemny, two ounces; Turpentine, as much as
suffices to make it into a Plaster.

Another most excellent both in old and new Wounds.

Take Gum Galbanum, ten drams; Ammoniacum, three ounces and an half; Oppoponax,
an ounce; Bdellium, three ounces: Yellow Wax, twenty ounces; Olibanum, three
ounces; Litharge of Gold, a pound; Myrrh, ten drams; Verdigreace, Mastick,
Roots of long Birthwort, of each an ounce; Loadstone, two ounces; prepared
Tutia, Lapis Calaminaris, of each two drams; old Oil of Olive, a pint and half:
Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and let the rest be powdered; mingle them
according to Art, and boil them into the form of a Plaster.

Epulotick or drying Medicines.
Roots of Comfry, Tormentil; Herbs, St. John's Wort, Plantain, Sanicle,
Fluellin, Betony; Flowers of Balaustians, Red Roses; Saunders, Aloes, Myrrh,
Mastick, Sarcocols, Lapis Calaminaris, Red Lead, Lead, Litharge, Tutty;
Ointments of Diapompholigos, Album Camphoratum; Plasters, Gryseum de plumbo,
Op^deldoch de Minio, Barbarum.

Take Oil of Roses, of unripe Olives, of each three ounces; of Myrtles,
Ointment of Poplars, of each an ounce and half; Leaves of Plantain and
Nightshade, of each an handful; let them steep together eight days: afterward
add to the strained Liquor, Wax, two ounces; mingle them over the fire, adding
Litharge of Gold, three ounces; Ceruse, an ounce; Tutty, a dram; Burnt Lead,
three drams; Burnt Brass, a dram and an half; Camphire, a dram; let them be
rubbed in a Leaden Mortar into the form of an Ointment.

Take Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, round Birth-wort, burnt Egg-shels,
Frankincense, Dragons-blood, of each half an ounce; Lapis Calaminaris, a dram;
Litharge, two drams: Make it into a Powder.

Take Ung. Pompholigos, Diapalmae Grisei, of each an ounce; Gum Elemny, two
drams; Saccharum Saturni, half a dram; Wax, as much as suffices to make it
into a Plaster.

I never knew any better Medicine, if applied in a fitting time, to bring to a
Cicatrice, than an Amalgama of Mercury, of which, this is the description.

Take two ounces of Lead, melt it, then add to it two ounces of Quick silver,
pour it upon Paper dried and powdered; it may be mixed with the Plaster of Lead
or Diapompholigos.

To these External Remedies, we join also Internal Medicines, which have been
observed to profit much at all times in the Cure of Wounds.

Vulneraries.
Wintergreen, Sanicle, Ladies-Mantle, Comfry, Mugwort, Saxifrage, Tormentil,
Agrimony, Milfoil, Horse-tail, Hounds-tongue, Betony, Periwincle, Mouse Ear,
Golden rod, Birthwort, Bistort, Dictany, Centory the less, Gentain.

A Wound Dring.
Take Roots of Comfrey the greater, half an ounce; of Wintergreen, two
handfuls; of Sanicle, two pugils; Straw-berries, Ladies-Mantle, Sage, of each
an handful; boil them in red Wine, and to a pint and half of the strained
Liquor, add of the whitest Sugar, as much as is sufficient; Dose, three ounces.

Another very effectual, even when the Bone is hurt.

Take Roots of round Birthwort, an ounce and half; Sowbread an ounce;
Self-heal, Crane-bill, of each an handful; Savin, three drams; Mummy, two
drams; Crab's-eyes, half an ounce; Galangal, two drams, powdered and cut: boil
them in red-Wine, and to three pints of the strained Liquor, add of the Syrup
of Comfry, of Fernelius, four ounces; mingle them. Dose, two ounces.

If any desires an Ointment, that many boast is able to cure the wound though
the Patient be absent; this is its best description.

A Sympathetick Ointment.

Take Moss, two ounces; Mummy, half an ounce; Man's fat, two ounces; Mans-blood,
half an ounce; Oil of Linseed, two drams; Oil of Roses, Bole, of each an ounce:
Mix it, and make an Ointment.

Some use only Vitriol calcined in the Sun; but whosoever shall use them
without Superstition, shall find many things attributed to Medicines, that are
due to Nature; therefore it is safest to proceed in the beaten way.

CHAP. VIII. Of Wounds of the Nerves.
IN Treating of the Wounds of the Nerves, we also comprehend those of the
Tendons; because there is scarce any difference in the Cure it self.

It Is to be distinguished here, where the Nerve or Tendon be divided, or only
pricked.

This Wound is known, 1. By considering the wounded place, and by Anatomy,
which teaches in what Members the Nerves are inserted; but the Tendons seeing
they terminate near the Joints, the Hands and Feet having many; if a Wound
should be inflicted in these parts, who would not fear them to be so hurt,
especially if it be with a transverse wound. 2. From the great Pain, which
causes Pulsation, Inflammation, Convulsion and Delirium, etc. except the Nerves
be wholly transversly divided, and then the Symptoms are altogether not so
grievous.

Prognostics.] All the wounds of the Nerves are dangerous; a Puncture more
dangerous than an Incision: Wounds of Tendons are less dangerous than Nerves.
Convulsion is an ill sign; Nerves and Tendons wounded, do easily putrify.

Cure.] In all Wounds of Nerves or Tendons, seeing pain greatly molests,
occasioning many Symptoms, care is to be taken that it be alleviated as soon as
possible. Outward cold things do here hugely injure, not only the Air, but
Medicines themselves: For Experience has taught us, that cold, moist and
astringent Medicines do naught but hurt; therefore it is best to use Medicines
moderately hot and drying, but void of any sharpness. The Wound also is to be
kept open, till the Cure be absolutely performed, that the Matter may flow
freely forth; which if kept in, may increase the pain, and cause the
putrefaction of the Nerve; which, if it should happen, the corrupt Part is to
be cut off, or removed by an actual Cautery.

Moreover it is to be observed, whether the Nerve or Tendon lies bare or not;
if bare, warm Medicines are convenient; but if covered, hotter Medicines are
required; in the mean time, Purging and Bleeding are not to be neglected.

External Medicines in Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons.
Old Oil of Olives, of Earthworms, of Dill, Rue, Rosemary, Costmary,
white-Lillies, St. John's wort, Castore, of Turpentine, Wax, Lavender, Balsom
of Peru; Gums, Elemi, Tacamahac, Caranna, Opobalsamum, Capayvae, Spirit of Wine.

Take Venice-Turpentine, Tears of the Fir Tree, of each an ounce; Gum
Tacamahac, half an ounce; of Caranna, two drams; Balsom of Peru, three drams;
Propoleos, six drams; Oil of St. John's wort, an ounce: Make it into an
Ointment.

Oil of Wax, Lime water, and the brown Ointment of Faelix Wurtz, are here
excellent, if rightly used.

CHAP. IX. Of Wounds by Gunshot.
ALthough daily practice teaches us, that Bullets may be poisoned, yet they are
not so of their own nature; for the pain in part, and the other Symptoms arise
from the solution of the continuity and the contusion.

Here first the Bullet, and any thing else that accompanies it, is to be drawn
forth, lest pain and inflammation coming upon it, may hinder; and care is to be
had, that neither of them increase; and the contused Part, by the following
Medicines be brought to suppuration.

Take Oil of white Lillies, of Violets, of each two pints; two Puppies newly
whelp'd; boil them till their Bones be almost dissolved; then add Oil of
Earthworms, a pint; and boil them again; strain them, and add of
Venice-Turpentine, three ounces; Spirit of Wine, an ounce: Make it into a
Liniment.

A Wound-Ointment.
Take Venice-Turpentine, an ounce; Galbanum, two drams; Calfs-marrow, half an
ounce; Powder of Scorzonera and Scordium Roots, of each two scruples; Oil of
St. John's-wort, half an ounce; the Yolk of an Egg, Threacle, a dram: Make it
into an Ointment.

Another more effectual.

Take Roots of Birthwort powdered, a scruple and an half; Mummy, Amber, Mastick,
of each a dram; Turpentine, half an ounce; Euphorbium, a dram; Ung.
Aegyptiacum, half an ounce; yolks of one Egg, Oil of Elders, as much as is
sufficient; Saffron, a scruple: Make it into an Ointment.

Another more excellent than the former, and which likewise resists Putrefaction

Take Tar, Turpentine, Galbanum, of each two ounces; Mastick, Frankincense,
Nitre, Sal Armoniack, of each an ounce; Allom, half a dram; Verdigrease, white
Vitriol, Camphire, Powder of Worms, of each a dram; Oil of Lin seed, Roses, of
each two ounces; Oil of Worms, and Turpentine, of each a dram: Molax them with
a gentle Fire; and make them into an Ointment.

If the Nerve hinder not, in a great putrefaction, there may be added some
Precipitated Mercury.

An Anodine Plaster.
Take Bean-meal, Crumbs of brown-Bread, of each two drams; let them be put in
Milk, adding to them Oil of Roses, Violets, of each an ounce; Yolks of Eggs,
No. iij. Powder of Red Roses, Scordium, of each an ounce and half; Wax, as much
as suffices: Make it into a Plaster.

An Anodine Cataplasm.
Take Roots of Marshmallows, Comfrey the greater, of each an ounce; Flowers of
Camomil, Melilot, St. John's wort, of each half a handful; Tops of Wormwood,
two pugils; boil them in Milk, adding to them of the Meal of Marshmallow-roots
and Beans, of each an ounce and an half: Make it into a Poultice.

If the Wound be quite through, a Tent must be put into both Orifices; for a
Flamula is inconvenient and hurtful. At first, dressing it once a day, is
sufficient; for in Wounds made by Gunshot, there seldom appears any Matter
before the third or fourth day; after this, the quantity or acrimony of the
Matter will guide you best, whether it is to be dressed once, twice or thrice a
day.

CHAP. X. Of Poisoned Wounds.
Poisoned Wounds are made sometimes by Bullets, Arrows, Swords and other
Instruments; sometimes by mad Beasts, as Dogs, Wolves, which hurt more by their
venomous quality, than by wounding.

Signs are, vehement pain, a livid Color suddenly becoming black; Symptoms
more grievous than for the quality of the Wound; a Heat over the whole Body;
Trembling, Delirium, Fainting, etc.

Prognostics.] A poisoned Wound, though little, may bring death, especially if
near to the Heart, or any other Noble Part; or the Surgeon not called soon
enough.

Cure consists chiefly in this, that the Venom be drawn forth by Cupping
glasses, attractive Medicines, Scarifications, or, which is safest, by an
actual Cautery; but then it must not be in a Nervous Part, the Escar to be
forthwith removed, and the Wound to be cured by degrees. Inwardly Sudorificks
and Cordials profit. Bleeding and Purging hurt.

A Plaster that draws forth the Poison out of the Wound, and corroborates the
Part.
Take boiled Onions, three ounces; Treacle, half an ounce; Goats dung, an
ounce; Angelica-Roots in Powder, a dram and half; Oil of Scorpions, an ounce
and half; Honey and Wax, as much as is sufficient to make it into a Plaster.

That corroborates the Part, extracts the Venom, produces Matter, and incarns
the Wound.

Take Gums, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Opoponax, Assa Foetida, Myrtle, Pepper,
Brimstone, of each six drams; Pigeons and Ducks-dung, of each an ounce; Mummy,
half an ounce; the great Comfrey-Roots powdered, three drams; Oil of St.
John's-wort, as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

CHAP. XI. Of particular Wounds.
IN Wounds of the Head, where the Pericranium is hurt, a stitch either by
Needle or Plaster, is not convenient; fat things hurt, but comforting and
drying profit much.

Take Mastick, Myrrh, Aloes, Sarcocols, of each half a dram; Dragons-blood,
two scruples; Bole, a scruple; Venice-Turpentine, two ounces; Honey of Roses, a
little: Make it into a Plaster.

Wounds of the Brain are accompanied with pain of the Meninges, and a great
Flux of Blood; to which succeeds other Symptoms, and for the most part Death it
self. Oil of Roses applied warm, greatly eases pain, and fresh Pigeons-blood
effects the same.

In an Haemorage.
Take Myrrh, Aloes, Mastick, Dragons-blood, Rhubarb, Red Coral prepared, Hares
hair cut small, of each a dram: Make it into a very a fine Powder.

Wounds of the Face are not to be stitcht; but always care is to be taken, that
the Scars may not render it deformed.

In Wounds of the Eyes, you must abstain from all Unctious things. The sound
Eye is to be bound as well as the whole. The Head must be placed upright; if
there be a Flux of Blood, the following things are convenient.

The Blood of Turtles, Pigeons, Hens, Mucilage, of the seeds of Fleawort, of
Quinces, Tragacanth, Bloodstone, Ceruse, Tutty, Frankincense, Aloes; the white
of an Egg, Water of Roses, and Plantain, Decoction of Balaustians, Red Roses,
Galls, etc.

Take white Troches of Rasis, prepared Tutty, Aloes Powdered, of each half a
scruple; Red-wine, an ounce; Red Rose water and Plantain, of each two ounces;
Mucilage, of the seeds of Fleawort, Tragacanth, of each a dram: Make a
Collyrium.

In pain, Womans-milk fresh, is good; or the above described Collyrium, adding
to it half a scruple of Opium, and applying over it this Cataplasm,

Take of rotten Apples, two ounces; Flowers of Linseed, half an ounce;
Mucilage, Seeds of Flea wort, two drams; crude Opium, half a dram; Yolks of
Eggs, as much as is sufficient to make it into a Cataplasm.

A part of the Nose quite cut off, never unites again, although the Wound be
but just made; but if it adheres still to the Body, it is to be stitched to it
with a Needle.

Wounds of the Ears and Lips find greater benefit from the Needle than from
Ligature.

Wounds of the Lungs require comforting and drying Medicines; sharp being here
very hurtful, though used in other Wounds.

Externally.
Take Roots of great Comfrey, Tormentil, Cloves, of each half an ounce; Flowers
of Red Roses, half a handful; Mastick, Myrrh, Aloes, of each a dram; boil them
in Barley-water, and to half a pint of the strained Liquor, add Syrup of
Mirtles, common and strained Honey of Roses, of each two ounces: Make it into a
Liniment.

Internally.
Take Leaves of Fluellin, Strawberries, Sanicle, of each half a handful;
Lung-wort, a handful; Roots of Angelica, two drams; Liquoras, a dram; Jujubies,
No. xv. Raisons, half an ounce; boil them in Barley-water, and add to a pint
and half of the strained Liquor, Syrup of Diacodion, three ounces: Mix them,
let them take four ounces of it three or four times a day.

Half a dram of Sperma Ceti taken every day, is excellent; but it weakens the
Brain.

Wounds of the Heart are always mortal, and those that penetrate into the left
Ventricle, kill suddenly; they seldom live so wounded, above six, twelve, or
twenty hours, although there are examples produced for it. If wounded into the
right Ventricle, it permits the Patient to live longer; but that which
terminates in the substance of the Heart, grants yet longer time.

Wounds of the Stomach for the most part are left to be cured by Nature, which
here does miracles; yet in a Flux of Blood, Bleeding is requisite. In a Wound
penetrating into the Cavity it self, all the Tunicles being divided, the Wound
of the Abdomen ought to be united by a Stitch, a little Orifice being left,
through which a Tent is to be put, which must not enter the Wound of the
Stomach, but only outwardly touch it; let it be armed with this, or the like.

Take Oil of Mastick, of Fir Tree, of each an ounce; Manna, of Frankincense,
two drams; Powder of the Roots of Tormentil, of the greater Comfrey, of each a
dram; Saffron a Scruple; Earthworms, half a dram; White Wind, two ounces; boil
them to the Consumption of the Wine, and make a Liniment.

Take Turpentine, half an ounce; Yolk of an Egg, Oil of St. John's-wort, an
ounce: Mix it, and make a Liniment.

Wounds of the Small-Guts, sometimes, though seldom, may be cured (this I can
prove by a notable Example.) Those of the Great-Guts are more easy. Where the
Small-Guts are hurt, the Chyle, and sometimes the Meat and Drink, comes forth
through the Wound; there is great pain, with a Fever and Nauseousness. Where
the Great-Guts, the Excrements come out at the Wound, or at least the scent;
the Body is bound; the Wound is forthwith to be stitcht together, and the Gut
to be restored into its natural place, well cleansed with warm Water, and this
following Powder sprinkled upon it.

Take Aloes, Mastick, Frankincense, Mummy, Dragons-blood, of each a dram: Make
it into a Powder.

Wounds of the Liver and Spleen require bleeding, and if the Belly be bound,
Clisters are daily to be injected; to the Wound it self are to be applied
Astringent and Drying Medicines.

Wounds of the Kidneys are difficultly and slowly cured: If made into the
Cavity it self, the Blood that comes forth is Serous, otherwise more pure. This
Liniment is of great esteem to be used outwardly.

Take Rosin of the Pine, six ounces; Oil of Bays and Turpentine, of each an
ounce; Gum Elemny, four ounces and an half: Mingle them.

Inwardly are to be given the Troches of Alkakingi, Gordonius, de Carabe, or
Sealed-Earth, Bole, Turpentine and Wound-Drinks.

Wounds of the Bladder are generally cured after the same manner; but it is
very seldom that they leave not behind them a Fistula.

The following Pills are of great use in Wounds and Ulcers in the Kidneys and
Bladder.

Take Man's Bones calcined,, three drams; Chalk, Burnt Talk, of each a dram,
Troches of Winter Cherries, three drams; Venice-Turpentine a little boiled, as
much as is sufficient: Make them into Pills about the bigness of little Pease,
rolling them in the Liquoras-powder; let the Patient take morning and evening
six of these.

The End of the Second Part of the Second Book.
BARBETTY'S SURGERY. The Third Book of the Second Part Of SURGERY. Of
Ulcers.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature, Differences, Causes, and Signs of Ulcers.
AN Ulcer is a Solution of continuity with Diminution of Magnitude in the soft
Parts, from a Corroding Matter.

Differences are taken,.1. From the Form of the Ulcer; so it is great, little;
long, short; broad, narrow; right, transverse; equal, unequal; deep,
superficial. 2. From the Part affected; which sometimes is the Skin and Flesh
only, sometimes the Tendons; Nerves and Vessels that carry the Blood. 3. From
the Causes; which shall be presently spoken of. 4. From the Symptoms; so it is
painful, itching, obstinate, verminous, carious.

Cause is a sharp and corrosive Humor, and that is twofold. 1. Internal, as
Choler, Melancholy, Serum, Salt, Phlegm, and other Malignant Humors. 2.
External, as Burning and Corrosive Medicines: the Sweat of Man infected with
the Itch, Leprosy or Pox.

Signs of Ulcers in general are manifest enough; the particulars you shall have
in their places.

Prognostic.] By how much deeper the Ulcer is, so much the longer it is in
Curing. Ulcers in Parts that are subject to much Humidity, are difficultly
cured. If an Ulcer cannot be cured in a long time, or when Cicatriz'd, breaks
out again, the Cause is, the Bone being foul under it. Ulcers near to the
Nerves, Veins or Tendons are dangerous. In Cacochimick Bodies, their Cure is
tedious. If the Matter which comes from them be good, it gives hope of an easy
Cure. Good Matter is of a middle consistence between thin and thick, white,
light, equal, and not at all stinking. That which is ill, is thin and fluid,
pale, livid, and of ill smell. Old and inveterate Ulcers are not cured without
danger, except the Body be well purged, and a good order of Diet observed,
otherwise some Diseases will ensue.

CHAP. II. Of the Cure of Ulcers.
PUrging and Bleeding are here often necessary, but a good ordered Diet always.
Hot Meats and Drinks hurt, as also all Sweet and Salt things. Outwardly, the
Humor ought to be concocted and turned into Matter; the lost flesh ought to be
repaired, and then to be skinn'd. Remedies necessary to perform these, are
Digestives, Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, which are set down in the seventh
Chapter of the second Book of the second Part. We will add some Compounds.

A Defensive.
Take Guaiacum-Wood, long Birthwort-Roots, of each an ounce; Centaury the less,
Wormwood, Agrimony, of each a handful: Boil them in white Wine, and to two
ounces and an half of the strained Liquor, add of the Meal of Orobus, half an
ounce; Myrrh powdered, two drams; of honey of Roses, two ounces; Spirit of
Wine, an ounce; Venice-Turpentine, as much as is sufficient to make it into a
Liniment.

A Sarcotick.
Take the Brown Ointment of Foelix Wurtz, three drams; Basilicon, half an
ounce; Gum Elemni, two drams; Turpentine, six drams; Colophony, Mirrhe, Aloes,
Mastick, of each half an ounce; Litharge of Gold, three drams; Oil of Roses, as
much as suffices to make it into an Ointment.

An Epulotick.
Take Sacchar. Saturn. Litharge, of each two drams; Lapis Calaminaris, one
dram; Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, round Birthwort, Dragons-Blood, burnt
Egg-shels, of each half an ounce: Make them into a Powder.

Let it be sprinkled upon the Ulcer, or mingled (...) Gall, half an ounce;
Honey, as much as suffices to make it into a Linament.

CHAP. III. Of an Ulcer with foul Bones.
IT falls out sometimes that the Bone which lies underneath the Ulcer to be
foul: Bones are corrupted and contract a rottenness, either from the long Flux
of Humors, or from the Acrimony and Malignity of them, or from an Occult
quality, or from a Contusion, in some manner injuring the bone it self, or from
sharp Medicines.

Signs of Corruptions are many: Where the Bone lies open to the sight, at first
it appears of the color of fat, then yellow, afterward black and unequal; but
where it cannot be seen, Surgeons may judge that there it is a Corruption.
1. If a Fistula preceded, or the Ulcer has been of long continuance. 2. If the
Ulcer being skinn'd break out again. 3. If the flesh above it becomes loose,
spungy, pale or livid. 4. If with the Probe you find no resistance, but an
Inequality. 5. If the Matter be much, thin and stinking.

Prognostic.] If the Caries be near the Nervous parts, or in the Joints, or
about the Tendons, Arteries or Veins, it is not easily cured; but for the most
part the Tendon and Nerve are corrupted with it: No Ulcer can be cured whilst
the Bone remains foul.

Cure.] The corrupted Bone ought to be corrected, either with Medicines, or
with Surgery, or by both. Therefore the flesh must be divided as soon as may
be, that the Carious Bone may be laid open (left some considerable Nerve,
Tendon or Artery be hurt) according to the length of the Part, and the Ductus
of the Fibers, not transverse; then let those Medicines be applied that may
separate the Corrupted Bone from the Sound; and that may preserve the Sound
from Corruption.

Medicines against Corruption of the Bone.
Roots of round Birthwort, Briony, Orrise, Dragons, Hores-strong, Guaiacum,
Bark of the Pine, Aloes, Euphorbium, Mirrhe, Alom, Chalcanthum, Lime,
Chrysocalla, burnt Pumice, the Scales of Brass, Aquafortis, Spirit of
Brimstone, of Vitriol; Salt, Tartar; Oil of Vitriol, Brimstone, Antimony.

Take Mummy, Sarcocols, of each half a dram; Euphorbium, a dram: Mix them, and
make a Powder.

Take Roots of Round Birthwort, Orrise, Hore-strong, of each half an ounce;
Mirhe, Aloes, of each a dram and half; Bark of the Pine, Scales of Brass, of
each a dram; Earthworms, two drams; Honey as much as suffices to make it into
an Ointment.

Take Juice of Celandine the greater, two ounces; Spirit of Wine, an ounce;
Mirrhe, Aloes, of each two drams; White-Vitriol, a scruple: Mingle them for an
Injection.

If the corruption of the Bone be so great, that it cannot be removed by
Medicaments, then we must come to Surgery, and either scrape the foul Bone,
if the corruption be small; or Perforate it, if great; or rather use an actual
Cautery; for without these, you will scarce be able perfectly to cure it.

CHAP. VI. De Vlcere Depascente, etc,
AN Ulcer further and deeper spreading, is called Depascens; and if it be with
putrefaction, is called (...); if without it, Phagaedaena; if only in the Skin,
Herpes; if ill-natured Cacothe.

Cause is, the salt Serum of the Blood, salt Phlegm, burnt Choler, or some
other Malignant Humor.

These Ulcers can scarce be cured, unless the Cause be first removed, and the
whole Blood purified; therefore here must be observed a good Diet, often
Purging, and sometimes Bleeding.

External Medicines for Depascent Ulcers.
Plantain, Nightshade; Flowers of Red-Roses, Balaustians, Cypress-Nuts,
Pomegranate rinds, Frankincense, Mastick, Tutty, Ceruse, Litharge, Red-Lead,
Burnt-Lead, Brimstone, Pepper, Ginger, Mercury, Ung. Aegyptiacum, Fuscum,
Diapompholigos; Emplast. de plumbo, de minio, Gryseum, de ranis cum Mercurio.

Take flowers of Red Roses, Balaustians, of each a handful; Leaves of Plantain,
half a handful; Cypress-nuts, Mirtle-berries, Pomegranate rinds, of each half
an ounce: Boil them in Red Wine.

Wash the Ulcer with it, then use over it this following.

Take prepared Tutty, half an ounce; Burnt-Lead, washed Ceruse, of each an
ounce; Bole-Armenick, half an ounce; Ung. Aegyptiacum, as much as is sufficient
to make it into an Ointment.

Or,

Take Long-Pepper, half a dram; Ginger, a scruple; Flower of Brimstone,
Litharge of Gold, each two drams; Gunpowder, a dram; Ung. Fusci of Felix Wurtz,
three drams; Ung. Album, Camphoratum, as much as suffices: Make it into an
Ointment.

Take Mastick, Frankincense, Mirrhe, of each three drams; Litharge of Gold,
Burnt-Lead, of each half an ounce; Quicksilver extinct in Turpentine, two
drams; Brimstone, half an ounce; Pitch and Wax, as much as is sufficient to
make it into a Plaster.

Concerning the Cure of these Ulcers, it is to be noted, 1. External Medicaments
ought to be changed three or four days; for Nature rejects the best, longer
applied. 2. They ought not to be dressed above once or twice a day, except the
Matter be very sharp, that the Medicine may not be disturbed in its Operation.
3. Repellent and Mercurial Medicines are not to be used, except with continual
Purging you drain the Body of its Impurities. 4. These Ulcers are seldom cured
without the use of purging or drying Decoctions, made of China, Guaiacum,
Sarsa, etc.

CHAP. V. Of Fistula's.
A Fistula is a long, narrow hollowness, or a sinewous Ulcer, narrow and
callous, not easily receiving Cure; for the most part, taking its beginning
from an Abscess.

Difference, are straight, oblique, simple, manifold, that is, having many
hollownesses; some going to the Bone, some to the Veins, Tendons, or Nerves.

Signs.] The edges of this Ulcer are white, hard, without pain, or but little;
sometimes moist, but commonly dry: Outwardly the Cavity may be perceived in one
place or other by pressing the Part; in which also sometimes there is a noise
perceived, and the Matter now in lesser quantity, otherwhiles in greater, is
pressed out through the Orifice of the Fistula: By a Probe we can search the
Cavity of a straight Fistula; but in an oblique, we use a Wax-Candle instead of
a Probe. That is more convenient when the Fistula penetrates to the Bone; this,
when it is in the fleshy and sensible parts: If the Fistula remains only in the
fleshy parts, that which is touched by the Probe, is soft, and the Matter that
comes out, is white, equal, and in great quantity. If it extend to the Nerve,
there is great pain in searching it to the bottom of the hollowness, and the
Matter is fat and oily, but is less in quantity, and the action of that Member
which the Nerve goes to, is rendered very uneasy: If it passes to the Bone,
that which is touched by the Probe, is hard, not yielding, and painful, where
the Periostium is not consumed; The Bone, is foul, is rough, and seems unequal
to the touch, the Matter is black, stinking and very thin: If the Cavity joins
to a Vein, the Matter is like dregs, but reder and thicker, where the Vein is
eroded: If it penetrates the Arteries, that which comes forth, is thin and
shining, and comes forth with a leaping.

Prognostic.] All Fistulas are of hard Cure; some incurable, others that ought
not to be cured; to wit, those by which the superfluous Humors have for long
time been vented.

A recent Fistula, and not deep, in a young body, and otherwise sound is easily
cured; but an old deep Fistula, having many Sinew's in an ancient, emaciated,
cachochimick Body, is very difficult.

Those are also difficultly cured, yea, for the most part incurable, which
touch the Tendons, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Bones, and those that are in the
joints, Vertebra's, Cavity of the Breast, and lower Belly, the Womb, Bladder,
or Guts.

Fistulas are wont to come in those places, where Nature is accustomed to
discharge her self of vitiated Humors, to wit, in the Abdomen, Groins,
Buttocks, Fundament, Cod and Perinaeum.

Where the edges are not very hard, but somewhat soft and mattery, they do
promise speedier Cure.

Cure of Fistulas are twosold, one Real, and the other Palliative; by this the
Fistula is dried within, and skinned without; the hollowness nevertheless
remaining, commonly continuing some little while closed, but easily breaks
forth again, except by a good Diet, often Purging and Bleeding, it be perfectly
cured: The true Cure is performed in this manner; good Diet, Purging, Bleeding
and Wound-Drinks effect here very much; but the Haemorrhoids flowing more.
Natural Baths do oftentimes cure the greatest Fistula's; in defect of them, may
be prepared Artificial, of Brimstone, Alom, Salt and Tartar, boiled in Water;
afterward let the Fistula be dressed according to Art: Externally, the Part is
to be corroborated, the Humor contained in the Sinus to be dried; but
especially the Callosity of the edges is to be taken away; therefore are
Medicines for this purpose to be used; by whose help many Fistulas have been
cured: but these not being sufficient, an actual Cautery is to be applied,
having first divided the edges; for which purpose the Syringotomon of Fabritius
Aquapendents is a most useful Instrument.

Medicines for a Fistula
Roots of Hellebore, Cuckospittle, Gentain, Birthwort, Euphorbium, Juice of
Celandine, Smallage, Dragons, Sponge, Flax, strong Vinegar, Lie, Lime, Alom,
Vitriol, Verdigrease, Orpine, Mercury-precipitate and sublimate; the Phlegm and
Spirit of Vitriol, Ung. Egyptiacum, Fuscum.

A Corroborating and drying Plaster.
Take Mastick, Frankincense, Pomegranat-rinds, of each two drams; Dust of a
rotten oaken Posts finely searc'd, three drams; Red-Roses, Myrtle-berries, of
each a dram; Yellow Wax, Rosin of the Pine, Oil of St. John's-wort, of each an
ounce; Make it into a Plaster.

An Ointment.
Take the Juice of Smallage, two ounces; of Celandine, two drams; of Onions,
one dram; Honey of Roses, three ounces; Turpentine, as much as is sufficient to
make it into an Ointment.

Another,

Take Juice of Flower-de-luce, an ounce; of Celandine, half an ounce; Red-Wine,
six drams; Honey, four ounces: Let them boil a little, then add of Aloes,
Mirrhe, of each half a dram; White-Vitriol, a scruple; Litharge, two drams;
Turpentine, a little: Make it into an Ointment.

Another more Excellent.

Take Powder of Briony-roots, a dram; Frankincense, Mirrhe, of each two drams;
Verdigreace, half a dram; Sal-Armoniac, a scruple; Hog's Grease, Oil of Olives:
of each as much as suffices to make it into an Ointment.

Another of greater Virtue

Take White Vitriol, four ounces; Alom, Verdigreace, of each half an ounce;
Strong Vinegar, six ounces: Calcine them in a luted Vessel, and powder it.

Mixed it with Ung. Aegyptiacum, and arm the Tent with it.

The brown Ointment of Felix Wurtz, is a most excellent Medicine in this case,
if it be reduced by boiling into the form of a Suppository, and so put into the
Fistula: You will do well to prepare it your self; for it is not rightly made by
every one: The following Suppositories are excellent, especially in Fistulas of
the Fundament, and other soft Parts.

Take Agrimony, half a handful; Scordium, a pugil; Flowers of St. John's-wort,
two pugils; French-Barley, an ounce; boil them in White Wind, and strain them,
adding of Virgins-Honey, four ounces: Boil them to a thickness, then add of
Male Frankincense, choice Mastick, of each two drams; Red Myrrh, a dram and
half; Sarcocols, three drams; white Vitriol, a dram: Make them into
Suppositories.

CHAP. VI. Of Burns.
BUrning is a Solution of Continuity, caused by an External burning-Matter
always hurting the Scarf-skin, for the most part the Skin, and sometimes also
the Muscles, Veins, Nerves and Tendons.

Difference.] It admits of three sorts. 1. Sometimes there is a Heat and Pain,
at least in the Part affected, caused from burning; and except Remedies are
presently applied, the Scarf-skin is separated and divided from the Skin, and
Blisters are raised, which contains in them clear Water. 2. Sometimes the Skin
it self is burnt, then presently a Blister is raised, but no Escar made. 3.
Sometimes also the subjacent flesh is burnt, here the Skin is black and void of
sense, and after the Escar falls off, leaves a deep Ulcer.

The Differences spring from the Causes; for Lead, Tin, Iron, Powder,
Lightning, do vehemently burn; Oil, Vernice, Pitch and Wax less; Straw, Water,
Flax, and the like, least of all.

Signs, by what has been spoken, are manifest enough.

Prognostic.] A deep and great Burn, very seldom but leaves ugly Scars behind
it; Burning from Lightning, is for the most part Mortal: That which penetrates
to the great Vessels, generally occasions a Gangrene; if to the Intestines,
incurable; Burns of the Eyes and Groins, very dangerous. If a hairy part be
burnt, it remains bald; never hair grows there again.

Cure.] The chief care must be to draw out the fire, by which in a light
burning you preserve from Blisters and Ulcers; in a great one, you free from
all danger; therefore what Medicine soever is at hand, is presently to be used;
let the hurt Part be held to the Fire, and fomented with warm Water, Ink, Lie;
or let there be applied Soot, or an Onion beaten with Salt, or any the
following.

Medicines in Burning.
Roots of White Lillies, Liquoras; Leaves of Beat, Coleworts, Hemp, Onions,
Garlic, Henbane, Tobacco, Leeks, St. John's-wort; Flowers of Camomile,
Melilot, Elders; Seeds of Quinces, of Line; Camphire, Myrrh, Olibanum, Soot,
Whites of Eggs, Hogs-fat, Pigeons-dung, Sheeps-dung, Hens-dung, Nitre, Ceruse,
Ink, Brine, Lie, Oil of Nuts, Rape, white Ointment with Camphire, Plaster of
Red-Lead.

An Ointment.
Take Juice of Oni^ns, two ounces; Venice-Sope, three ounces; common Salt, two
drams; Hog's Grease, two ounces; Washed Lime, three drams; Oil of Rape, Mussilage
of Quince-seeds, of each an ounce; Turpentine, as much as is sufficient to make
it into a Liniment.

Another, by whose means a poor Soldier became rich.

Take Leaves of new gathered Sage, a handful; of Plantain, two handfuls; Fresh
Butter without Salt, six ounces; New Hens-dung, and the whitest as you can,
three ounces; fry them together for the space of a quarter of an hour, press
them hard out, and reserve the prest-out Liquor for your use.

This Ointment is excellent in Burning of all sorts, even in the greatest; it
being melted, let the hurt Part be often anointed with it in a day; then lay
over it a fresh Leaf of Colewort, Beat, or Plantain.

If any Pustules are raised, and yet the Burnt not great, open them the third
day, and let not the opening be prolonged further, lest there follow a
Corrosion.

If the Skin be wrinkled and dried, all the Pustules are presently to be cut,
then let the precedent Ointment, or this following be applied.

Take Oil of Violets, white Lillies, sweet Almonds, Butter without Salt, of
each an ounce; Mussilage of Fleawort-seed, Meal of Marshmallows, of each an
ounce and half; Saffron, half a Dram; Soot, Ung. Basilicon, of each an ounce:
Make it into an Ointment.

If there be an Escar, let its Separation be endeavored the first or second
day; for which the last above-prescribed Ointment is exceeding good; but if it
separates not, then Incision is to be made into the sound Flesh: When it is
separated, it is to be cured as a common Ulcer.

If there be danger of a Gangrene, or already present, it requires its Cure,
which is already treated of in its place.

Where the Eye brows, Lips, Fingers, or Toes are burnt, a clean Linen Cloth,
or Plate of Lead is to be put between them.

If a tender part be burnt, you must abstain from the use of Onions, Soap,
Salt, and such like sharp Medicines.

That ugly Cicatrices may not be left, you must forbear the use of strong,
drying Medicines.

CHAP. VII. Of particular Ulcers.
IN an Ulcer of the Head, neither Unctious, or Repellent Medicines are
convenient. If the ill quality of the Humor requires the use of Mercury, great
care is to be had, that it be well prepared; for Crude is very dangerous; which
ought not to be applied where the Ulcers are about the Sutures, seeing a
Salivation may be easily raised, which will difficultly afterward be
suppressed.

Ulcers of the Eyes, for the most part, leave Blindness, especially where the
horny Tunicle is wholly corroded, by which the Watery Humor is let out, as also
oftentimes the Christaline. An Inflammation generally is very painful, which is
forthwith to be removed by those Remedies delivered in the seventeenth Chapter
of the First Book. To the Ulcer it self; first, Abstersive, then Cicatrizing
Medicines are to be applied.

An Abstersive Collyrium.
Take white Amber, red Mirrhe, of each half a Scruple; Eastern Saffron six
Grains; white of an Egg, Sugar Candy, a Dram; Eye-bright-water, two ounces and
an half: Mix them.

Another,

Take Aloes, Frankincense, prepared Tutty, of each half a Scruple; Glass of
Antimony, six grains; Gum, Tragacanth, a Scruple; Celandine-water, three
ounces: Mix them.

Or,

Take red Coral prepared, Frankincense, of each half a Dram; white Troches of
Rhasis, prepared Hartshorn, of each a Scruple; burnt Lead, fifteen Grains;
crude Antimony, a Scruple; Honey of Roses, as much as is sufficient to make it
into an Ointment.

A Cicatrizing Collyrium.
Take burnt Lead, white Troches of Rhasis, Sarcocols, Sac. Saturni, of each
half a Scruple; Rose Water, four Ounces: Mix them.

Ulcers of the Nose most commonly yield an ill Scent, whence they are called
Ozaenae. Cause is a sharp, bilious, salt, or malignant Humor, which sometimes
corrupts the Bones themselves; but chiefly the Cartilage; so by a flat Nose
deforms the Face. They are hard of Cure, and therefore respect must be had to
the whole Body; at least the Head, which requires corroborating, and moderate
Drying.

External Applications are to be abstersive, and because of the Humidity of the
Part, somewhat drying. The Juice of Scharley, mixed with Honey of Roses, is
excellent here.

Take one Pomegranate sliced, Litharge of Gold, two drams; red Lead, a dram;
burnt Alom, ae Scruple; Mercurius dulcis, half a dram; whitest Sugar, an ounce;
White Wine, six ounces: Let them boil a little, and preserve the strained
Liquor for use.

Take Burnt Lead, washed Ceruse; prepared Tutty, Litharge, of each two Drams;
Frankincense-bark, one dram; Myrrh, round Birth-wort, Mercurius dulcis, of
each half a dram; Ung. Fuscum of Felix Wurtz, three drams; Ung. Album,
Champhorat as much as suffices to make a Liniment.

Fumes of the following powder, put upon Coals is very good, provided it is
used cautiously, and not above once, or at most, twice a day, lest a Salivation
should be raised; which also will cure the Ulcer: The quantity of a Nutmeg is
sufficient for a Dose.

Take Bensoes, Sandarach, Mastick, Frankincense, Storax, of each a Dram;
artificial Cinabar, half an ounce: Make it into a Powder for Fuming.

Ulcers of the Mouth require often Purgings, sometimes Bleeding; and if there
be Malignity, Antivenereal, Sudorifick Decoctions, which are here of great use.

External Remedies also here, are Abstersives and Driers: I have tried the
following to be of singular Virtue.

Take Oak-leaves, a handful; Flowers of Roses, Balaustians, of each a pugil;
Pomegranate-rinds, two drams; Burnt-Alom, two Scruples; white Vitriol, half a
Scruple; boil them in red Wine; to half a pint of the strained Liquor, add
Honey of Roses, Rob. Diameron, of each an ounce: Make a Gargarism.

Or,

Take common Chalk, burnt Talk, red Lead, burnt Alom, of each a dram;
Bole-Armenick, two drams; Mercurius dulcis, half a dram; Vitriol, a scruple;
boil them in white Wine; and to ten ounces of the Liquor, add Syrup of Comfrey
of Fernelius, two ounces and an half: Mix it for a Mouth-water.

Or,

Take burnt Talk, Flower of Brimstone, Bole-Armenick, Frankincense,
Comfrey-roots, the greater, Pomegranate rinds, of each a dram; burnt Alom, two
Scruples; Verdigreece, half a dram; Honey of Roses, as much as suffices to
make it into a Liniment.

Or,

Take Ung. Fuscum of Felix Wurtz, three drams; Honey of Roses, as much as
suffices to make it into a Liniment.

The Fume for Ulcers of the Nose, is here useful; as also common Ink. If
Medicines effect nothing, an actual Cautery must be used.

An Ulcer of the Bladder is troublesome, and for the most part incurable,
having its beginning from a Wound, the Stone, a sharp Humor, or Diuretic
Medicine, it requires many Internal and External Remedies; which that we may
not exceed our bounds, we leave to be prescribed by the Physician, except some
few, whose virtue has been often experimented by us.

Take Roots of round Birthwort, Comfrey the greater, Osmond-royal, of each half
a dram: Myrrh, Frankincense, Storax, Mastick, Gum Tragaganth, Seeds of white
Poppy, Henbane, of each a scruple; Juice of Liquoras, half a dram;
Venice-Turpentine, as much as to make them into Pills of the bigness of a
little Pea.

Or,

Take Troches of Alkakingi, de Carabe, Burnt-Talk, of each half a dram;
Bole-Armenick, Sealed Earth, Mans-skull, of each a dram; Venice-Turpentine, as
much as to make them into Pills of the bigness of a little Pea.

Let the Patient take six of these Pills, or of the former every day Morning
and Evening.

Take Limewater, three ounces; Plantain, two ounces; white Troches of Rhasis,
a dram; Mix them for an Injection, to be used twice or thrice every day.

Lime water in this place, is nothing else than common-water wherein quick Lime
has been quenched: have a care of making it too strong.

Ulcers of the neck of the Bladder are cured after the same manner, though
indeed more easily; and those of the Penis far more easily; although contracted
from a virulent Gonorrhaea. These are to be known by the pained Part, and by
the coming forth of the Matter, before or after making of the Urine; except
timely you endeavor their Cure, the Disease slides inwardly, and will perforate
either the Bladder or Perinaeum: Sometimes there are here one or more
Caruncles, which, because they cannot always be cured by Medicaments, they may
be taken away by Surgery, by the assistance of an Instrument described by
Pary and others; yet many times have I cured these Excrescensies, by using of
small Suppositories made of the following Ointment, thickened by gentle boiling.

Take Ung. Fuscum of Felix Wurtz, Honey of Roses, of each two drams: Make it
into an Ointment.

In these Caruncles, before they are fixed, we effect much by Vulnerary,
Sudorifick and Anti-venereal Decoctions, outwardly using the following Medicine.

Take Litharge of Gold, Flower of Brimstone, of each three drams; prepared
Tutty, two drams; Red Lead, half a dram; Ung. Aegyptiacum, a dram, Honey of
Roses, as much as is sufficient to make it into an Ointment.

Anoint a Wax-Candle with this Ointment, and put it into the Urinary passage,
renewing it twice or thrice a day, until there is an absolute Mundification.
Its Consolidation is performed with no better Medicines (that I know of) than
by the Amalgama of Mercury, described in the seventh Chapter of the second
Book, if it be mixed with Ung. Diapompholigos, and the Wax Candle anointed with
it, and put into the Urethra, as is already said.

Ulcers of the Neck of the Womb, though slight, they are of difficult Cure, and
if those Ulcers are negligently handled, they produce grievous Symptoms, and
sometimes a Gangrene; after Purging, and the use of Vulnerary, and Venereal
Decoctions, as also Bleeding, the following is good.

Take Roots of Orise powdered, Litharge of Gold, Flower of Brimstone, of each
two drams; Mastick, a dram; Mercurius dulcis, half an ounce; Ung. Fuscum of
Felix Wurtz, two drams; Honey of Roses, as much as suffices to make it into a
Liniment.

A Fume.
Take Gum of Juniper, an ounce; Mastick, Myrrh, Laudanum, of each two drams:
Make it into a Powder.

If they had their Original from the French Pox, add to this Powder a dram of
Cinnabar, and use it twice a day.

Ulcers of the Legs, especially those that are upon the Shins, occasion great
trouble to the Surgeon, because the Humors of the whole Body continually
flow to those parts; for which reason the Medicines are oftentimes used to
little purpose; the Part must be well rolled from the Foot upwards, and the
Body once or twice a week well purged.

A Plate of Lead, or Plaster of Lead, or Diapompholigos, of Mineum, Griseum,
or the following is very good in this case.

Take the Plasters of Lead, Griseum, of each an ounce; Litharge of Gold,
Ceruse, of each three drams; Sac. Saturni, half a dram; Gum Elemny, two drams:
Make it into a Plaster.

Another very good in these, or other Malignant Ulcers.

Take Album-Graecum, Froth of the Sea, of each an ounce; Oil of bitter Almonds,
four ounces; Sheeps-Sewet, six ounces; White Wax, as much as suffices to make
it into a Plaster; to which, if you please, you may add some Diapompholigos.

Factotum Magistri Christiani.
Take Oil of Roses, twelve ounces; Ceruse, Mussilage of the Roots of Comfrey,
of each six ounces; White Wax, four ounces; Litharge of Gold, Red Lead, Lapis
Calaminaris, of each three ounces: Make it into an Ointment according to Art.

Another.

Take Flowers of Red-Roses, one ounce; Balaustians, two drams; Elder-flowers,
an ounce and half; Roots of Tormentil, Round-Birthwort Roots, long Pepper,
Lapis Calaminaris, of each an ounce: Prepared Tutty, two drams; Bole-Armenick,
half an ounce: Litharge of Gold and Silver, of each an ounce and half;
Rose Water, five ounces; White Wine, twelve ounces: Mix them.

The End of the third Book of the second Part.
THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE STUDIOUS READER.
AS Surgery is a of Physic, that ought not to be separated from it; so also
let not any imagine to himself, that he can deserve the name of an Experienced
Surgeon, except he underderstand some part of it, especially Anatomy, the
only Foundation of Surgery. But seeing that the study of some most curious
Anatomists, has found out many excellent things in this happy Age, altogether
unknown to the Ancients (though some foolishly affirm the contrary, with great
pains, ascribing those things to them, which they never so much as dreamed of)
which indeed are not to be accounted of, as ingenious subtleties; but as the
Fundamental Rules and Cynosure to those that Navigate through the vast Ocean of
this Art. It is every ones part to labor in it, that it may be perfected, and
every day more and more illustrated; which may at length be brought to pass, if
with the greater Pains, Industry and Curiosity, we enquire into the unknown
Regions and Tracts of the Microcosm, and not given to sloth, plough our Ground
with other Men's Oxen, only trusting on the Authority of the Ancients, which the
Learned wisely call Asinorum Pontem. As for me, I have ventured to introduce
some new Opinions; because that I deemed them in the nature of things, to
exceed thee and me, and all in Antiquity. If thou inquire into it with the
same labor, perchance thou may embrace the same Opinions: That of the
Circulation of the Blood is now spread over all Europe; yea, the principal
Professors in the Illustrious Universities, do all with one voice approve it;
the Salivous passages and Limphaducts, as also the Lacteal Vessels, both the
greater and lesser, may so plainly be demonstrated, that they may be perceived
as it were with one Eye. My own proper and peculiar Opinions I have confirmed
with Reasons, which I suppose are agreeable to our Art: In the rest, if thou
find any thing new, it is nothing but what can be demonstrated by
Dissection. What others have writ at another time, pleases us also; for I
cannot, nor ought not to change the parts of the Body; nevertheless the
Disposition of my Genius is so pregnant, that I hope it will free thee from
great pains and trouble.

For, first I thought it convenient largely to discourse of the simple Parts,
their Affections and Use, that thou might not be necessitated to repeat in
following the same thing a hundred times.

To this end I have retained the Terms of our Art, used by the Ancient Latin
Writers.

Then I expound the elaborating the Blood, which properly is the Foundation of
all Physic, and which the Wits of the Learned have long and much wrested: O
foelicissimum qui metam proxime attigerit.

Lastly, all the parts of the Head, Breast, Abdomen and Joints, I have so
described, having not at all separated them, that thou might not be forced
to seek one here, and another there.

But that this knowledge might become the more profitable, I have shown the
Uses of it in Surgery, which I hope you will well apply, and endeavor with
me, as much as possible, to perfect this Imperfection.

BARBETTY'S SURGERY. The Third Part of Surgery; OR, The PRACTICAL
ANATOMY: In FIVE BOOKS. 1. Treats of the Parts in general. 2. Of the Head. 3.
Of the Breast. 4. Of the lower Belly. 5. Of the Joints.

CHAP. I. Of the Practical Anatomy. THE PREFACE.
THou which desire to know thy self, come hither and view; the little World
will declare how thou ought to value the great one. The Architecture of thy
Creator, by no Art to be bettered; the Essence of thy Soul, not to be reached
by the greatest strength of thoughts, and the fragility of thy Terrestrial
Mansion will teach thee, to esteem those things more that are above thee, to
use better those things that are within thee, and to carry thy self with a more
compassionate mind toward thy Neighbor, although thou walk here as a
stranger; the consideration of these things will show thee, that thou ought
not to be a stranger in the most necessary knowledge of thy Duty, by which thou
may use it to the greater good of thy self; so of others, if thou
dilligently require, of what parts the Fabric of thy Body consists; to this
end, first we will show the simple parts and their use; then after the division
of the whole Body, the compounded Parts.

The Chirurgical use.
Seeing it is very necessary, even at first sight, that thou should know the
nature and temperaments of Men, because they give the Rules of what is to be
done in the curing of each Disease, we have thought it convenient in the very
beginning of this Treatise, to describe their Signs.

The Sanguine abound with Hair, but lank and yellowish; in process of time
declining into blackish, handsome, red cheek'd, freshy, strong: When young,
addicted to Venery, not enduring ^^^ours, easily sweating, phthisical, affable
in their Conversation and Discourse; not suspicious, equally prone to laughter
and tears; they sleep soundly, their dreams are pleasant; Pulse is great and
strong; Urine yellowish, and in great quantity, soluble; They hate Women, and,
except in their company, seldom think of them.

They bear Bleeding, provided it be at a fitting time, and in a convenient
quantity; otherwise they easily fall into a Dropsy. Strong Purges, to wit,
Euphorbium, Scammony, Colloquintida, and those that are compounded of them,
they cannot bear; though gentle Medicines, easily; as Cream of Tartar, Manna,
Tamarinds, Pruines, Syrup of Roses with Senna, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb,
Pulp of Cassia, Electuaries of Diacatholicum Lenitive, etc. As they easily fall
into a Disease, so they quickly again recover.

The Choleric have black Hair, and for the most part curled; lean but very
strong: Coition profitable; they are judicious, and swift in action, avoiding
idleness; they trust neither the words or gestures of Men; soon subject to
Laughter, if the thing require it, otherwise grave: When irritated, addicted to
strike; more inclined to Drink and Watching, than to Eating and Sleep; their
dreams are of Fire, Thunder, Quarrels, Battles. Pulse strong, quick and great:
Urine high-colored, as also their Excrements.

Choler requires not Bleeding, yet permits it, if there be a quantity of Blood
joined with it; but it must neither be excessive, nor oftener repeated, than
just necessity requires, lest the Choler shows its Malignity; gentle Purges
relieve it, but strong irritate it; it produces vehement and dangerous
Diseases, and for the most part short.

Phlegmatic have long Flaxen Hair, which easily falls off, and as easily grows
again; Pale-faced, cold and weak Body; long ere they desire Marriage, and soon
debilitated by it; sloathful, unfit for Conversation; not sollicitous about
public Affairs; difficulty brought to Laughter or Anger, which then lasts not
long: They eat and drink little, prone to sleep; Dreams are of Fish, of the
Water and Rain; Pulse small and slow; Urine pale, and sometimes thin, but
generally thick and darkish; the Belly soluble: they bear not Bleeding, except
upon necessity; they endure strong Purging; their Diseases are long, but not
dangerous.

The Melancholic are almost destitute of Hair, which is lank and black, of a
grim Countenance, the whole skin livid, lean, slow, and addicted to Venery,
prudent, morose in conversation, readier to give counsel to others, than to
themselves; not subject to Laughter or Anger, but long before appeased; they
eat and sleep much; Urine copious, Excrements little, grievous Dreams, Pulse
small, slow and hard.

Bleeding is hurtful, Purging profitable; the Diseases which it begets, are
stubborn and tedious, and oftentimes more dangerous in the end than in the
beginning.

Let these general Signs suffice in this place. But it is to be observed, that
the Temperaments are mixed, and then the Signs are also. Yea, many Mutations,
Vices and Dissimulations, as also Virtues and Ingenuity may be attributed to
them, which is your part judiciously to distinguish; but we assent not to
Galen, who held that the dispositions of the Mind rely upon the Temperaments.

CHAP. II. Of the Parts in general^
A Part (properly so called) is a firm, limited Body, which is nourished by
other living Parts but does not nourish; having a peculiar use and operation
for the advantage of the whole.

It is distinguished, 1. Into the Principal Parts, or or those not so:
Principal are those that perform some Noble Operation common to the whole Body
as the Heart, Liver, Brain, Testicles: Those not so, are those that serve the
Principal, and whence they are called their Servants, as the Eye, Ear, Hands,
etc.

This distinction pleased some Anatomists many years since, whom I much esteem;
yet not me: For if the Liver and Heart are numbered amongst the Principal Parts
because they elaborate the Blood for the advantage of the whole Body, why is
not the Tongue accounted a Principal Part also? which is not only an Instrument
of Speech, by which we are distinguished from Beasts, but also of Tastes, by
whose assistance we choose those Aliments which are best; which if wanting, how
the Heart and Liver could supply the Body with good Nutriment, I see not. The
Brain governs all, but how I beseech you? If the Intestines did not perform
their Orifice aright, what would it effect? How should we be esteemed, if, like
an Oister, we should want Eyes and Ears? How despised are the Feet and Hands,
yet in how many conditions do they serve? For those not stirring, both
Chilification would be impaired, and the Blood and the Spirits rendered thicker,
and the Brain made unfit for all actions: In how short a time would the Limpha
of our Body be corrupted, if, besides its own motion, it was not also moved
with the whole Body? All things in our Body are joined together as in a Clock,
one cannot be without the other; neither is the most despicable Wheel less
necessary than the Hand of the Clock itself, without which, it cannot be
accounted a Clock.

2. Into similar Parts and dissimilar: A similar, which divided into many
parts, yet, whose single parts be of the same Nature with the whole.

Dissimilar are made up of more or less similars, as the Hand, Fingers, Feet.

There are ten Similars found in the Body; a Bone, Cartilage, Ligament,
Membrane, Fiber, Nerve, Vein, Artery, Flesh, Skin; the eight former are made of
Seed; Flesh, of Blood alone, the Skin of both.

This Division is subject to greater difficulties than the former; but seeing
it is not convenient to reject it, without the greatest confusion in the
practice of Physic, let us consider the thing it self, committing the Disputes
concerning the Name, to the Schools.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. A Principal Part being affected or wounded, renders the whole Cure
dangerous: therefore Prognostics are not to be given here, but with
limitation, lest the sudden alteration be rather ascribed to thee, than to the
Disease.

2. Wounds of the similar Parts are less dangerous than of the dissimilar; yea,
oftentimes they are sooner cured by simple Medicines, than by compound; the
consent of the Parts, by reason of the Vital and Animal Spirits, is so great,
that scarce a Joint of the Finger being hurt, can be cured, without regard had
to the whole Body. In deed by the assistance of the Ligaments, Tendons,
Membranes, etc. the Parts are so straightly knit together, and so abound with
Sanguinary Vessels, that oftentimes upon the slightest hurt, the greatest
Symptoms ensue, if you order not every thing aright.

CHAP. III. Of Bones.
A Bone is a Similar Part, cold and dry, composed of Seed, that it might afford
strength to the Body, and help its motion.

Naturally, 1. It is hard. 2. Covered with a Membrane. 3. White, with some
Redness, 4. Hollow, or Spungy. 5. About the Extremities covered with a
Cartilage. 6. Smooth. 7. Moistened with a fat Humor.

It is nourished by Blood brought from the Arteries (every where so small,
excepting the lower Jaw, that Writers of great esteem have denied them to the
Bones) but especially contained in the Marrow.

The Marrow is invested with a Membrane, it self is altogether insensible; in
the Cavities of great Bones, it is White mixed with Red; in the lesser, White;
in the Spungy Bones, soft and juicy

Its Sense it borrows from the covering Tunicle for the most curious Observer
never saw Nerves.

The Bones are joined together, partly for the greater firmness, partly for the
better Motion.

That Conjunction which is for their firmness, is called Symphysis, and is
six-fold.

1. Suture, as in the Bones of the Skull.

2. Harmony, whigh is by a right or oblique Line, as in the upper Jaw.

3. Gomphosis, as the Teeth in the Jaws.

4. Sinchondrosis, which is by an interposing Cartilage, as in the Os Pubis, or
the Sternum.

5. Syneurosis, which is by the assistance of a Ligament, as the Thigh Bone
with the Hips.

6. Syssarcosis, which is by the accession of flesh, as in the Os Hyodis.

That Conjunction which is for Motion, is called Articulation, and is twofold.

1. Diarthrosis, to wit, a loose Articulation: And 2. Synarthrosis, to wit, a
straighter Articulation.

And both is performed by three manner of ways. 1. Enarthrosis, When the Cavity
receiving the Bone is great, and the process of the Bone to be received also
great, as in the joining of the Thigh Bone with the Hips.

2. Arthrodia. When the Cavity is superficial, and the Process little, as in
the hinder part of the Head, with the first Vertebra of the Neck.

3. Gynglymus, When one Bone takes into its Cavity the process of another, and
contrariwise the other Bone receives into its Cavity the Process of the former;
as the Bone of the Thigh with the Tibia, and the Shoulder Bone, the Ulna.

The number of Bones is greater in Children than in adult People; for by years,
many of them so grow together, as that they cannot be separated any more; also
their number is much lessened, when consideration of the Processes and small
Bones is not had; from hence it is that some reckon 360. some, 304, others, 249,

The use of the Bones, is, 1. To be a stay or support to the Body. 2. Together
with the flesh, to give it its shape. 3. To help motion. 4. To defend several
Parts.

Although the Bones ought to be described in particular by us in their proper
places, yet an Anatomist cannot be perfect, that is ignorant of the Bones;
therefore, before we begin the Examination of other parts, we think it
convenient to exhibit to you the Skeleton in this place.

The Bones of the Head, we divide into the Skull and Jaws.

The Skull consists of eight Bones; which are, 1. The Bone of the Forehead. 2,
and 3. Bones of the fore part of the Head. 4, and 5. Bones of the Temples, 6.
The Bones of the hinder part of the Head. 7. Os Sphoenoides. 8. Os Ethmoide.

The upper Jaw consists of eleven Bones, to wit, five of each side, and one
common; of these,

1, 2. Os Zygomaticum. 3, 4. Os Lachrymale. 5, 6. Os Maxillare, 7, 8. Bones of
the Nose. 9, 10. Bones of the Palate. 11. Vomer.

The under-Jaw has only one Bone, except the Cavity for the Teeth, of which
are numbered 32.

Four Fore-Teeth, two Dogs or Eye Teeth; all the rest are Grinders.

In the Internal parts of the Ear are four Bones, which are called, 1. The
Hammer. 2. The Anvil. 3. The Stirrup. 4. The round Bone.

The Mouth has only one Bone, called Os Hyodis.

The Neck is composed of seven Vertebra's; of these, 1. Is called Atlas. 2.
Epistropheus. 3. Axis; the rest want Names.

The Bones of the Breast, in the upper parts, are,

The two Collar Bones; on the sides, fourteen true Ribs, ten Bastard, in all
24. On the forepart, the Sternum, with the Sword-like Cartilage.

In the upper part of the Back are two Shoulder Blades; in the middle twelve
Vertebra's.

The hinder part of the Abdomen exhihits five Vertebra's of the Loins, to which
are joined the Os Sacrum, and to it is joined the Os Coccygis.

On the side of Os Sacrum there is the Os Innominatum, or Bone of the Hip,
which is divided, 1. Into Os Ilium, which is the greatest. 2. Os Ischium, the
lowest. 3. Os Pubis, in the forepart.

The Arm consists of only one Bone, which is called the Shoulder Bone.

The Cubit of two, the uppermost of which is the Ulna, the lowest, the Radius.

The Metacarpus contains eight Bones, to which as yet there are no Names given;
the Carpus four.

The Fingers 10, each of which consisting of three Joints.

Besides these, about the Joints of the Fingers. are sound the Ossa
Sessamoidea, 10, 12, 15, or 20.

The Thigh has only one Bone.

The Leg consists of two, one of which is the innermost, called Tibia; the
other, which is outermost, the Fibula.

Between these, and the Bone of the Thigh, is placed forward the Knee-Bone.

The Tarsus has seven Bones, which are, 1. Tarsus, or, Astralagus, 2. Calx. or
the Heel-Bone. 3. Os Naviculare, or, Cimbiforme. 4. Os Cuboides, or, Tesserae.
5, 6, 7. Ossa Cunciformia, or Sphoenoidea.

The Metatarsus has five Bones.

The Bones of the Toes are 14; for there is only two in the great Toe.

The Ossa Sessamoidea are found here also, 10, 12, sometimes 15, or 20.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Bones are subject to many Diseases. Fractures and Dislocations are already
discoursed of, as also Putrefaction: But seeing there may be several ways
produced, we will declare those which are chiefly worth our consideration.

Preternatural Humors, by what cause soever, either General or Particular,
penetrating the Bone, sometimes produce an Ulcerous Excrescency with moistness
of the Bone; sometimes a Cancer of the Bone, to wit, Spina Ventosa, effects
necessary to be distinguished; which because no Physician has made it his
business to describe, I will impart that which Reason and Experience has
taught us.

The cause of an Ulcerous Excrescency with the Humidity of the Bone (which
effect is called by the Dutch, even Beensuyger) is preternatural Phlegm,
depriving the Bone of its temper and hardness; the flesh cannot be said from
this soft foundation to keep also its Natural state; but its nourishment
passes into soft spongy flesh, which by degrees increases, and at length
causes an Ulcer; from whence the Tendons Ligaments, and Nerves are corrupted,
and the whole Member subject to danger.

In this case you must not flatter your self, that Medicines can effect any
thing before you come to the bottom, that is, the Bone it self: And the Bone
being made sound, the Ulcer will be cured, and the flesh return unto its
natural Constitution. It is therefore necessary to make Incision, even down to
the Bone it self, and if there be a great excrescency, extirpate it; and if it
be observed to rise again, apply an actual Cautery, always consideration being
had of the Bone.

Remedies proper against Putrefaction of the Bones, are already, both by us and
others, sufficiently described. To take away the Excrescency of the Flesh, Oil
of Vitriol, Oil of Antimony, Spirit of Vitriol, Ung. Aegyptiacum, Fuscum of
Felix Wurtz, are very good; and this Powder is excellent.

Take the Restaurative Powder, an ounce; white Vitriol, a dram; prepared
Arsenick, two drams: Mix them.

Sprinkle it upon the proud Flesh, laying over it a drying Plaster, and it
will make a thick Escar, without great pain, which may be taken off the next
day.

2. The Cause of a Cancer of the Bone (by the Dutch named even Beenvreeter) is a
sharp Humor, first corroding the Bone, then making its way through the
Periostium; then follows an Ulcer of the Flesh and Skin, incurable, before the
Bone be made sound; its Orifice is very little, the edges are pale, the Matter
that flows forth, is thin, the Flesh soft, and somewhat swelled, at least (as
we have spoken in an Ulcerous Excrescency) increases of its own accord.

Here also is Incision necessary, made according to the length of the Part, to
the Bone it self; forthwith must be applied those things that correct
Putrefaction, to wit, Euphorbium, Spirit of Vitriol, mixed with Spirit of Wine,
ande.

I have not only once experienced the Powder of Turpentine, hardened by boiling,
to be of great virtue, mixed with Ung. Fuscum of Felix Wurtz, or Aegyptiacum; an
actual Cautery is very convenient: The Cure also will be accelerated, if
instead of Tents made of Lint, you use Elder-pitch, because this inbibes the
sharp and thin Humors, by which the Action of Nature is promoted.

Seeing that for the most part these Diseases arise from the distemperature of
the whole Mass of Blood, and when one Cancer is almost cured, another appears
in some other place, therefore it is highly necessary to have regard to the
whole Body: For which purpose, the following, or the like Medicines may be
taken.

Take Roots of Comfry the great, Osmund Royal, China, Sarsaparella, of each an
ounce; Guaiacum Bark, two ounces; Rhubarb, six drams; Senna, ten drams;
Agarick, six drams; Cloves a dram; Cinnamon, two drams: Infuse them 24 hours in
a sufficient quantity of Barley water, then boil them with a gentle fire, and
to two quarts of the strained Liquor, add of Syrup of Comfrey of Fernelius,
four ounces: Make it into an Apozeme.

Let the Patient, of a middle age, take three, four, or five ounces; it purges
gently, forwards the Cure, and preserves from further mischiefs.

3. The Bones also are subject to certain Tubercles called Tophs and Nodes.
These for the most part are the Symptoms of the Pox. I shall only set down here
some External Medicines, approved by long Practice.

Take Oil of Venice-Turpentine, of Euphorbium, of Guaiacum destilled, of each
two drams; Crude Opium, half a dram: Make it into a Liniment.

Or,

Take Mastick, Male-Frankincense, of each two drams; Ladanum, half an ounce;
Quicksilver extinct in Turpentine, an ounce: Crude Antimony, three drams;
Crude Opium, a dram; Venice-Turpentine, as much as suffices to make it into a
Plaster.

Or,

Take the Juice of Housleek, Henbane, Celandine the greater, of each a dram;
Mans-fat, three drams; Oil of white Lillies, Camomile, of each two drams; Boil
them to the Consumption of the Juices, afterward add of Mercury sublimate, a
dram and scruple, Venice-Sope, two drams; Crude Antimony, three drams; Mummy,
Opium, of each a dram; Ladanum and Wax, as much as is sufficient to make it a
Plaster according to Art.

4. Moreover it is to be observed, that no Fat, or Oily Medicines are to be
used to the Bone, except they are dxtream drying, or that by Distillation, have
lost all their Unctiousness.

CHAP. IV. Of a Cartilage.
A Cartilage is a similar, spermatick Part, drier and harder than a Ligament,
but moister and softer than a Bone, rendering the Articulation the more pliable,
and defending several parts from external injuries.

Difference.] Some are softer, especially about the Joints; others harder, and
differing not much from the nature of a Bone.

It Is nourished by little Arteries.

It is endowed neither with Nerves, nor Membranes, and by consequence without
sense.

Its use is to facilitate motion, and to defend some Parts from external
injuries, whereupon it is scarce subject to any.

Chirurgical Considerations.
Not seldom are the Cartilages, together with the Bones, both corrupted and
cured; other particular Diseases it scarce has any, besides too great a
hardness or softness: Of both which we will give Examples.

1. The Epiglotis sometimes is so indurated, as that it not only deprives of
Speech, but also hinders the Patient from swallowing, except a great piece; for
Drink and all other liquid things pass into the Windpipe, as not being well
closed by the stiff Epiglotis. This Disease is incurable.

2. Glottis, or Chink of the Larinx, either from Meat, or Drink, or Medicine,
is sometimes so straight closed together, as the Patient cannot make any noise;
this we remedy by the following Medicines; Purging and Bleeding if necessary,
having gone before.

Take Milk, six ounces; Yolk of an Egg; White-Sugar, three drams: Mingle them;
let the Patient take often a spoonful or two.

Or,

Take Frankincense, Mirrhe, of each a scruple, Eastern Saffron, half a scruple;
Juice of Liquoras, a dram and an half; Gum Tragaganth, two drams; Sugar, as
much as suffices to make them into Troches, always holding one of them in the
Mouth, and swallowing them down.

I deem those Anatomists to have committed a great Error, who have ascribed
this Malady to be an Inflammation of the Larinx; although I deny not, but that
the Cartilages may be inflamed, and also corrupted; yet it is certain, that
which they have set down, is not of the Cartilages, but of the neighboring
Glandules, and of the fleshy parts of the Jaws; for it would not be so
frequently cured, because an Inflammation and Corruption of the Larinx I always
esteemed a mortal Disease.

2. The Sword-like Cartilage of the Breast is oftener than Practitioners take
notice of, unnaturally bent inward, from Humors flowing in too great quantity;
and so inclining with the point inward, presses the Stomach, from whence comes
a diminution of the Appetite, a Vomiting of what is taken in, with a continual
pain of the Stomach, and a wasting of the whole Body; it is easy for an
Anatomist, by the touch to apprehend this Malady, and in the space of few hours
to cure it; for otherwise men are miserably troubled for many years.

It Is corrected by a large-mouth'd Cupping-glass, outwardly applied upon the
depressed Cartilage, and being there fixed, let it remain, till breathing is
hindered; then suddenly remove, and the Cartilage oftentimes at the first time,
returning again into its natural place; which if it appears not to do, the
Surgeon must repeat this Operation once or twice; then having embrocated the
Part with Oil of Roses, and Myrtles, apply this Plaster to the Part, which
must remain there several days.

Take Bistort-Roots, Cypress-Nuts, of each a dram; Mastick, Frankincense, of
each half a dram; Balaustians, a scruple; Oil of Nutmegs Expressed, one dram and
an half; Naval-Pitch, and Turpentine, of each enough to make it into a Plaster.

CHAP. V. Of Ligaments.
A Ligament is a Similar, Spermatick, dry part, adhering firmly to the Bones,
tying the parts of the Body mutually together.

Difference.] Some are Broad and Membranous, some Round and Nervous. It Is here
to be observed, that the Names Membranous and Nervous, are much used both by
Writers and Practitioners, and has deceived many of them; for it is requisite
to know that here it has regard only to their external form, not their
internal essence; for the Ligaments, both the Membranous and the Nervous are
void of Sense, which they would not be, if they were composed of their true
substance of Nerve or Membrane.

There is no Ligament hollow, if you except the slender Ligaments of the Womb;
and are all destitute likewise of Sense of Motion, as from themselves.

Use is to connect the parts of the Body, especially the Bones, and preserves
them from continual Luxation.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. Ligaments hurt, by reason of their want of sense; seldom draw other parts
into consent, and by the use of drying Medicines, are easily cured. I cannot
but again in this place (taught by Experience) commend the Restaurative Powder,
of which this is the Description.

Take Roots of Comfrey the greater, Aloes Succotrine, Calcis vivae, of each two
ounces; Mastick, Mirrhe, Mummy, of each two drams; Precipitate, two ounces:
Make it into a Powder.

Here diligently at the first time is the weak heat of the Ligaments to be
considered, seeing it may give occasion to a copious collection of Humors, and
other grievous Symptoms.

2. The Ligaments also are not seldom Relaxt: Yea, although the Ignorant do
contradict, sometimes they are so much extended that they may give way to a
Luxation, which the Sciatick pain has more than once given us example of; in
such a case, external Bleeding and Purging profit much; outwardly the
Application of corroborating and discussing Topics: The following Plaster is
excellent.

Take Stiptick Plaster of Crollius, an ounce; Oil of Earth, of Tiles, of each
a dram: Make it into a Plaster to be spread upon Leather.

CHAP. VI. Of Membranes.
A Membrane is a Similar, Spermatick Part, broad, soft, dilatable, white,
investing the Parts, and carrying sense to them.

Difference.] Some are very thin, others thick; some fleshy, but for the most
part not.

The Parts which invest, are properly called Membranes; those which contain the
Humors, Tunicles; and those which cover the Brain, Meninges.

It is endued with sense from itself, for all Membranes are sensible; yea, the
Nerves themselves owe their sense to the Membranous substance of them.

Membranes therefore only are the true Organs of feeling, they serving the
Animal Spirits to this purpose.

Use is, 1. To invest the Parts of the Body 2. To defend it from Injuries. 3.
To keep them united. 4. To strengthen them. 5. To give them sense. 6. To close
the Mouth of the Vessels, that the Nutritious Blood be not carried too suddenly
into the Part, or out of it, into the Vein it self 7. To separate the Parts.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Membranes being so very sensible, they cannot bear sharp Medicines; they
are not endowed with great quantity of Blood, whence when they suffer a
solution of continuity, they are not easily united again. But I have observed
often entimes that by the Muscles, and the assistance of the Quittour, they are
joined together, as in the Bladder it self, whose Wounds and Ulcers otherwise
are esteemed incurable.

CHAP. VII. Of Fibers.
A Fiber is a Similar, Spermatick Part, dispersed through the Skin, Flesh and
Membranes, to make them the stronger, and being naturally distended, to
contract again into the same manner.

Differences are, right, oblique and transverse, and some round; the right
attract, the oblique thrust forth, transverse retain, round constrain; but this
they do not so by their own singular virtue, as by the common virtue of the
Member which they serve, and from whom they have their sense and nourishment,
for of themselves they are senseless.

Use, is, to strengthen the Membranes, Skin, and Muscles, and when dilated, to
reduce them into their natural state.

Whether the Blood it self has Fibers, as many have delivered, and as it seems
very probable to us, shall be explained in another place.

Chirurgical Consideration.
These offer nothing worthy consideration, except that, when they are wounded,
the consolidation of the Flesh and Skin is the longer, and there is a greater
stiffness of the Muscles about the place, and makes them difficulter to
contract and extend. The Ductus of the Fibers is diligently to be observed by
them which are to make any curious Incision.

CHAP. VIII. Of Veins.
A Vein is a Similar, Spermatick, Membranous, long, hollow Part, every where
joined by Anastomoses to the Arteries, receiving the Blood, wanting further
Concoction from them, and carrying it to the Heart and Liver.

Difference.] Veins of a fourfold condition are found in the Body.

1. Vena Cava. 2. Vena Porta. 3. Vena Pulmonalis. 4. Vena Lacteae.

Of the last of which, a more convenient occasion will be offered to treat of
in the following.

The Venae Cava and Porta take their beginning from the Liver. There are those
which would have them come from the heart, from a weak Argument taken from
unborn Embrio's. But where I find many Branches inserted in the Liver, few or
none in the Heart; yea, I have observed, that it has not entered into the Heart
it self, but only to be joined to its right Auricle: I rather embrace the old
Opinion, willingly granting those honors to the Liver that I think belongs to
it.

That the Roots of the Vena Cava and Porta were united by mutual Inosculations,
the old Anatomists persuaded themselves; but the curious Inquisition of the
Moderns has both found out and clearly demonstrated, that they mutually touch
one another, but not so united, that the Blood can pass out of one into the
other; for the extremities of the foresaid Vessels, by means of the Parenchyma
of the Liver, do so mutually consent, that Milk or any liquid thing cast into
the Vena Porta with a Syringe, finds an easy passage into the Vena Cava,
without either an injury of the Veins or the Parenchyma. Concerning which, read
Glisson. Anatom. of the Liver, page 272.

Veins have only one Tunicle with many Valves within, especially in the
external Joints.

They are nourished with Blood from the little Arteries, not that contained
within themselves.

They are endowed with feeling, both from themselves, and sometimes from the
Nerves.

Use is, to receive the Blood not sufficiently elaborated from the Arteries,
and return it to the Heart and Liver, there to be more perfectly concocted.

For the better Methods sake in the following, we must be forced to describe
all Veins here particularly, and divide them into their Branches.

Vena Cava taking its beginning in the Liver, as is before said, is separated
into the ascending Trunk, and descending.

The Ascending, which is the greater, perforates the Diaphragm, and is divided
into four Branches, of these,

1. Phrenica, which disperseth it self through the Diaphragma and Pericardium.

2. Coronaria, appropriated to the Basis of the Heart, proceeds from the Trunk
it self, after it has penetrated the Pericardium, and inwardly united it self
by a large fleshy Orifice to the right Auricle of the Heart.

3. Azygos, or sine pari, coming from the right side of the same Trunk, when
ascending, it has passed the upper part of the Pericardium, affording chief
Branches to the eight lower Ribs, then about the fleshy appendices of the
Diaphragm, it enters the Cavity of the lower Belly, where, on the left side
it is inserted into the Emulgent Vein, on the right into the Trunk of the Cava.

4. Subclavia, from whom comes forth several Branches which go both upward and
downward:

The Superiors are,

1. Muscula Superior.

2. Jugularis, externa and interna; that on both sides (sometimes single,
sometimes double) goes to the Neck, Head and Face; this to the thick Meninx of
the Brain, to whose third Sinus its greater Branch is united.

The Inferiors are,

1. Intercostalis, serving the four upper Ribs, and their Intercostal Muscles.

2. Mammaria, which is carried to the Breasts.

3. Mediastina, which goes to the Mediastine and Thyme.

4. Cervicalis, which goes to the Neck.

5. Muscula inferior, which goes to the Muscles of the Neck.

6, 7. Thoracica, inferior, and superior, which goes to the Muscles of the
Breast.

The Subclavials being come out of the Breast, are called Axillares, then go to
the Arms, where they are divided into 3 great branches, which are,

1. Cephalica, in the hand between the little Finger and its next; it is named
Salvatella: Its Branches are variously mixed with the Branches of the Median.

2. Basilica, or Liver-Vein.

3. Mediana, which proceeds with other branches from the Basilica.

The descending Trunk, which is the lesser, and is undivided till it comes to
the fourth Vertebra of the Loins, then it communicates,

1. Adipsosa, to the Membranes of the Kidneys.

2. Emulgens, to the Kidneys themselves.

3. Spermatica, to the Testicles.

4. Lumbares, two, three or four, to the Loins, and to their Vertebra's.

Nearer to the Os Sacrum, it is separated into two Branches called Illiaci.
Before they go to the Feet; the Trunk it self presents,

1. Muscula Superior, which goes to the Muscles of the Loins and Peritonaeum.

2. Sacra, sometimes single, sometimes double to the Os sacrum.

3. Muscula Media, to the Buttocks.

4. Hypogastria, to the Bladder and its Neck; to the Sphincter Any, to the
Penis, and to the neck of the Womb.

5. Epigastrica, to the Muscles of the Abdomen, and to the Peritonaeum.

6. Pudenda, to the privy Parts.

7. Muscula Inferior, to the joint of the Hips.

The Iliack Branches, as soon as they have left the Cavity of the Belly, are
called Crurales.

From these proceed,

1. Ischiatica minor, which goes to the Skin, and Muscles of the Hip.

2. Ischiatica major, to the Hip, then to all the Toes.

3. Proplitea, to the Ham.

4. Suralis, to the Muscles of the Calf of the Leg.

5. Saphena, To the Knee, Ankle, and to the upper part of the Foot, and to the
great Toe.

The Vena Cava, where it comes out of the Heart, receives three Valves, called
Tricuspidales, looking internally, for this purpose, that the Blood may freely
enter into the Heart, but to hinder its return.

The Use of the Vena Cava is, to receive the cruder Blood from the Arteries,
and remit it to the Heart.

Vena Porta, much lesser and looser than the Vena Cava, arises from the
Umbilical Vein, and with many Roots is inserted into the Liver; without the
Liver, it is divided into Trunk and Branches, all which are distributed into
several Parts contained in the lower Belly.

From the Trunk proceeds,

1. Gastroepiplois, which goes to the Caul and Stomach.

2. Intestinalis, to the intestine Duodenum.

3. Cysticae Gemellae, to the Gall.

4. Gastrica minor, to the left side of the Stomach.

Then this Trunk is divided into two great branches, the Splenick and
Mesenterick.

Ramus Splenicus, sometimes joining to the Sweetbread, sometimes passing
through it, divides into four little Branches, as soon as it has left it;
which are these,

1. Vena Gastrica major, which goes to the Spleen, communicating from thence
three or four small Veins to the Stomach: These being blown up in living and
dead Bodies, manifestly declare, nothing at all can enter into the Cavity of
the Stomach, and so by consequence no Humor coming from the Spleen, as long
since Learned Men have imagined, taught and writ, seeing they terminate in the
Coats of the Stomach, and open not into the Cavity it self.

2. Epiploica dextra. 3. Coronaria stomachi. 4. Epiploica sinistra.

Mesenterious ramus is also divided into four others; of these, the

1. Retains its old name, and is distributed with fourteen or more Branches
through the Mesentery.

2. Vena Haemorrhoidalis, and goes to the Spleen, the Womb, and the right
Intestine.

3. Vena Coecalis, to the blind Intestine.

4. Ramus Mesocolicus, and goes to the Intestine called Colon.

The Use of the Vena Porta is, to take the Blood not sufficiently elaborated,
from the Arteries, and carry it to the Liver, for the perfecter concoction, and
for the separation of the Choler.

Venis pulmonalis (which the Ancients corruptly called Arteria venosa, seeing
that it has but only one Tunicle, beats not of it self, nor returns the Blood)
coming out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, with a wide Orifice goes to the
Lungs, to receive the more imperfect Blood from the Pulmoniack Artery, and
carries it to the Heart.

About its egress from the Heart* it has two Miter-like Valves, hindering the
regress of the Blood to the Lungs.

Its Use is, to carry the Blood received from the Pulmoniack Artery, into the
left Ventricle of the Heart.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. We have in another place treated of the Wounds of Veins; we shall only add,
that if the Bandage, by which you stay the bleednig, be bound too hard, it will
easily induce a Gangrene.

2. We have admitted only four general Indications of Bleeding; to wit, for the
Refrigeration, Imminution, Revulsion, and Derivation of the Blood; but special
Diseases requiring one Vein to be chosen before the other, which are these
following; in a Delirium and great pain of the Head, the Vein of the Forehead
or Praeparata, or Vena puppis, may be cut; sometimes the Temporal or Saphena.

In an Inflammation of the Eyes, the Cephalica, and if you desire to evacuate
from the whole Body, the Basilica or Mediana.

In a Quinsie, the Ranina, which must be but with a little Incision, seeing we
cannot scarce by any means stop the Flux of Blood, and sometimes also the
External Jugular.

In a Pleurisy, the Basilica of the affected, not opposite side; here is
requisite the greatest Circumspection; for under it lies the Tendons of the
Muscle Biceps, and near it the Artery.

In anger, fear, or any Casualty, etc. the Mediana or Basilica.

In Chronick Diseases, and quartane Fevers, the Salvatella, especially in the
Full and New Moon.

In Women that lie in, and in suppression of the Menses, the Saphena; In the
Sciatica, the Ischiatica.

CHAP. IX. Of Arteries.
AN Artery is a Similar, Spermatick, Membranous, round, cavous Part, joined
every where to the Veins, by the assistance of its Oscultations, containing the
Nutritious Blood with the Vital Spirit, carrying it to all the Parts of the
Body.

Difference is twofold, the great Artery or Aorta, and Pulmoniack.

The great Artery comes from the left Ventricle of the Heart; which except in
the Brain and other softer parts, every where else consists of a double Coat;
the outermost of which is of the thickness of the Veins; but the inmost is five
times thicker, lest by continual pulsation about the hard and solid Parts, it
might incur an incurable Rupture.

It receives three Valves, called Sigmoides, looking outwardly.

Coming out of the Ventricle of the Heart, with a great Orifice before it,
perforates the Pericardium, it affords to the Heart it self the Coronary
Artery; when past the Pericardium, it is divided into the Ascending and
Descending Trunk.

The Ascending Trunk, which is the lesser, resting upon the Windpipe, is
separated into the two Subclavials, from which, being yet within the Breast,
proceeds,

1. Intercostalis superior, proper to the four upper Ribs.

2. Mammaria, to the Breasts.

3. Cervicalis, to the Muscles of the Neck.

4. Carotis, externa and interna, proper to the Larinx, Tongue, Neck, Head and
Brain.

When they have left the Thorax, they are called Axillares, and carry
Nourishment to the outward part of the Breast.

1, 2. By the Thoracica superior and inferior. 3. By the Scapularis. 4. By the
Humeraria.

Then they approach the Arm, where they accompany the Branches of Vena Cava,
and are called by the same name as they are.

The Descending Trunk, which is the greater, being yet within the Breast, sends,

1. The Intercostalis superior, to the eight lower Ribs.

2. The Phrenica, to the Diaphragm and Pericardium.

Then having perforated the Diaphragm, it communicates.

1. The Coeliaca, to the Stomach, from which proceeds the Splenica and Gastro
Epiploica dextra.

2, 3. Mesenterica superior and inferior, to the Mesentery.

4. Emulgens, to the Kidneys.

5. Spermatica, to the Testicles.

6. Lumbaris, to the Loins.

7. Muscula superior, to the Muscles of the Abdomen.

Then at length it is divided into the two Iliac Branches: About this Division
exhibiting,

1. Muscula superior. 2. Epigastrica. 3. Hypogastrica. 4. Umbilicalis. 5.
Pudenda.

Out of the Abdomen they change their names, and are called Crurales; and so
they descend into the Feet, and all along accompanied with the Veins, from whom
they borrow their Names.

Use is, to carry the nutritious Blood with the Vital Spirit into all parts.

Arteria Pulmonalis, (which the Ancients did falsely call Vena Arteriosa, seeing
it has Pulsation, is made up of a double Coat, and contains the Nutrious
Blood) issuing out of the left Ventriticle of the Heart, with a double Branch
enters the Lungs, and is distributed through them by many little Branches,
carrying to them the Nutritious Blood: And then what in the Blood is not
sufficiently concocted into the Pulmoniack Vein, by whose means it is returned
into the left Ventricle of the Heart.

It has three Valves called Sigmoides, which look outward, lest the Blood that
having entered it, should slide back again into the Ventricle of the Heart.

Its Use is, to convey the Blood out of the right Ventricle of the Heart, into
the Lungs, by which they are nourished, and what remains above, then serves for
their Nutriment, is brought back again by the Pulmoniack Vein, into the left
Ventricle of the Heart.

Here it pleases the curious Observers of Anatomy, to take notice of (besides
the eleven Valves which we have declared to be disposed in the four already
named Vessels) that many others are found in the Heart, which as yet want any
certain name.

Chirurgical Consideration.
In an Haemorrage of the Nose, the Blood flows from the Arteries, not Veins,
which not only the color of the Blood witnesses, but also the great weakness
which always follows such a Flux: I use to stay it after this manner;

First, let a Vein be opened, then let there be applied in Men, to the
Testicles, in Women, to the Hypogastrium, a Linen Cloth, four double, wet in
cold water; or let the Face of the Patient be suddenly sprinkled with cold
Water: Internally, let there be exhibited now and then a spoonful of the
following Mixture.

Take Plantain-water, two ounces and an half; Alexipharmick-water, half an
ounce; Cinamon-water, three drams; Confection of Hyacinth, half a dram; Dragons
Blood, Lapis Haematitis, of each fifteen grains; Julep of Roses, an ounce;
Laudanum Opiat, two grains; Spirit of Vitriol, six drops: Mix them.

The following Water is also commended.

Take Lapis Prunella, half an ounce; Plantain-water, six ounces; let it be
divided into three Doses.

The manner of opening Arte^ies, delivered by the Ancients, is so dangerous and
frightful, as that there is none of the Moderns but what dislike it; yea,
Arteriotomy has been wholly rejected, had not the Diligence of their Posterity
found out other ways: That which I (with others) have found always to be the
best of them, I will here set down.

Surgeons were wont to tie a Bandage about the Neck; but seeing when it is
hard bound, it is very troublesome; it is better that the Ligature be made
under the Armpits, which must be so straight, that the Jugular Veins, and
Carotide Artery may appear both by swelling and touch; then let the Arteries be
compressed by the Thumb, a little below, where you intend to make the Incision;
and being opened, (which must be done by a steady and strong hand) take forth
as much Blood as is sufficient; which done, strew Astringent Powder upon the
Wound; then put over it a double Linen Cloth, with a Plate of Lead; then bind
it up with a convenient Bandage, and within five or six days space, it will be
perfectly well.

In the Headache, Madness, Epilepsie, great Inflammations of the Eyes or Ears,
the Arteries of the Forehead, Temples, or those behind the Ears, are opened; as
also the Arteria puppis, all of them being branches of the external Carotide.

In the Inflammations of the Liver and Diaphragm, the Artery between the Thumb
and forefinger is opened; in palpitations of the Heart, either that, or the
Saphena is to be opened.

Other Arteries are not to be opened, except a Bone lies under them, for fear
of an Aneurism.

CHAP. X. Of Nerves.
A Nerve is a Similar, Spermatick, Membranous, round, white, hollow part,
serving for the carriage of the Animal Spirits to the Parts for Sense and
Motion.

The Nerves take their Original from the Brain, and are divided within the
Skull into eight Parts, without the Skull, to wit, those that come out of the
Spinal Marrow, into thirty Pares; seven of which proceed from the Vertebra's of
the Back, five from the Vertebra's of the Loins, six from the Os Sacrum.

The eight Pare within the Skull, proceeding from the Brain, are,

1. Smelling pare, which adheres to the Mammillary Processes.

2. Optic pare, which is the greatest, and united in the middle.

3. The pare that moves the Eyes.

4. The Tasting pare.

5. The second tasting pare.

6. The hearing Pare.

7. Par vagum, which is vested with strong Membranes; it descends through the
Orifices of the Bone of the hinder part of the Head to the Throat, afterward
sending Branches to the Neck of the Larinx, to the Muscles of the Tongue, and
Os Hyodis; then is divided of each side into the external and internal Branch.

The right External Branch, having sent some Branches to the Muscles of the
Breast, makes the right recurrent Nerve; this contributes to the Voice, as also
to the feeling in the Pleura, the Coat of the Lungs, the Pericardium, and to
the upper Orifice of the Stomach, seeing all those Parts obtain Branches from
it.

The left external Branch constitutes the left recurrent Nerve, which goes to
the same Parts, as we have declared the right does; being brought to the said
Orifice of the Stomach, it is joined to the right recurrent, and so goes to the
lower Orifice of the Stomach, and to the lower part of the Liver.

The right internal Branch sends Branches to each intercostal Muscle; then
having perforated the Diaphragm, furnishes all the parts of the lower Belly
with a Nerve, ending about the Os Sacrum.

Of the left Internal Branch is the same Distribution.

8. The Part moving the Tongue.

The Nerves have a Cavity, but so little, not to be distinguished by the sight,
except in the Optic Nerves, and those of the Pudendum.

Use is, to carry the Animal Spirits for sense and motion of the whole body.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Cure of wounded Nerves and Tendons is so like, as it has been more than
once the occasion of Confusion among the best Authors; therefore for the better
distinction sake,

1. The frequent contusion of the Nerves by a Fall or Blow: the Skin having
suffered a solution of continuity, there happens an Ulcer, and many other
Symptoms, from the afflux of Humors. It requires the same Cure we have proposed
in another place, of Wounds of the Nerves.

But if the contused Nerve be not bare, which may be discerned from the greater
and more connual pain than is usual, in a simple contusion of the Flesh, the
greatest care is, that the coagulated Blood be as soon as possible resolved;
for if it should suppurate, the Nerve easily would putrify; therefore let
there be applied a Cloth dipped in one or other of the following Oils, warm to
the affected Part.

Oil of Castor, Worms, Dill, Rue, Camomile, Rosemary.

Or, let this Fomentation be applied very hot with Spunges.

Take our Orise Roots, two ounces; Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Horse-Mint, of
each half a handful: Boil them in white Wine for a Fomentation.

Or let the following Plaster be laid on:

Take Sow-bread Roots in Powder, two drams; Species Diambrae, one dram; Oil of
Castor, three drams; Turpentine, a dram; Plaster of Betony, on ounce;
Virgins-Honey, as much as to make it according to Art into a Plaster.

Oil of Lavender is excellent in this Case, if taken to the quantity of two
drops, especially where Convulsions happen.

2. The Nerves are not seldom obstructed with a pituitous and tough Humor, from
whence a stuppor of the Part, and sometimes also a stiffness; these Symptoms I
used to remove after the following manner; the whole Body, if occasion, being
first purged.

Take Gum Caranna, half an ounce; Galbanum; an ounce; Oil of Euphorbium, a dram
and an half: Make it into a Plaster.

Or,

Take Mans-fat, Goose-Fat, of each an ounce* Oil of Earth, three drams: Make it
into a Liniment.

Let the Part affected be anointed with it Morning and Evening, then lay on the
Stiptick Plaster of Crollius, or of Ladanum or Diachilon with Gums.

You will hasten the Cure, if you use Internal Corroboratives, which do
wonderfully alter the Nerves, although these things properly belong to the
Physician, yet I think it convenient to prescribe this Decoction of great
efficacy, of which, let the Patient take three or four ounces twice a day.

Take Roots of Piony, Sea-holly, of each half an ounce; Orrise, three drams;
Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary, of each an handful; Flowers of the Lime tree,
Lavender, and Lilly of the Valley, of each a pugil; the lesser Cardomomes,
three drams; Nutmegs, a dram: Infuse them six hours in a sufficient quantity of
White Wind, afterward boil them, and to a quart of the strained Liquor, add
three ounces of Syrup of Stoechas: Mix them.

There often happens through a Chronick Disease, or from a Luxation or
Fracture, a Contraction of the Member, which is not to be ascribed to the
Nerves, but Tendons. This is easily remedied by the use of Oils and Ointments
that have the property of mollifying the indurated Tendons, especially if there
is to be used a daily extention, either by the Hands, Weights or Instruments.

Take Oil of Camomile, Olives, Foxes, of each half an ounce; compounded
Ointment of Marshmallows, an ounce; Capons-grease, an ounce and an half. Make
it into a Liniment.

CHAP. XI. Of the Flesh.
THE Flesh is a similar, Bloody, Soft, Thick part, together with the Bones, to
yield a strengthening to the Body, and to cover the spermatick Parts.

Difference.] Flesh is three fold.

1. Musculous. 2. Glandulous. 3. Viscerous.

Musculous is soft, red, and is properly called flesh, and for these many ages
has come under the name of Muscles.

But yet a Muscle is not a Similar Part, but compounded of many others, to wit,
Fibers, Tendons, Nerves, a Membrane, Veins, Arteries, that it might be a fitter
instrument of voluntary motion, to which the Fibers, Tendons and Nerves do
chiefly contribute.

It has a Tendon in its beginning and end, sometimes round, sometimes broad,
sometimes but one, sometimes double.

Its end is in that place where the Tendons are greater and more.

Its Head, or beginning, where the Nerve is inserted, the middle, where the
flesh swells out.

Use is, to promote voluntary motion, which is performed after a threefold
manner.

1. When the Contraction of the Muscle is so, that the end comes to the
beginning, and then its Antagonist is quiet.

2. When the Motion is Tonick, so that being contracted, it remains for some
time in the same condition.

3. When it relaxeth, so that it is restored into its former seat and quiet, by
its Antagonist.

The Glandulous flesh is white, thick and spungy, formed of seed (from whence
it cannot properly be called flesh) to this purpose ordained, 1. To prop up the
Vessels. 2. To receive the superfluous Humidities; whence they are called the
Emu^ctories of the noble Parts.

Some Anatomists make strange diversities of them, but it will appear to any
one that diligently enquires into all the Glandules, that they differ not so
much in substance, as in their Use and Humor.

The Viscerous flesh, or the Parenchemick is red, hard, convenient to prop the
Vessels, and to serve for many particular and various operations; this is the
flesh of the Lungs, Heart, Liver, Spleen, which shall be treated of in their
places.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Muscles are subject to many Diseases, very many of which are of so little
consequence, that they shall not be numbered here; some we have declared in
another place: the following require consideration, oftentimes wonderfully
exercising the patience and diligence of the Surgeon.

1. An Atrophy of the whole Body oftentimes comes from an Internal Cause: But
if of the Finger, Hand, Arm, Foot, for the most part from an External Cause.
Thus a Fracture, Luxation, Contusion, Tumor, too hard Ligature, and the like,
so vehemently compressing the Veins and Arteries, that it hinders the free
passage of the Blood to the Parts, upon which happens an Emacitation; for where
the Vessels are wholly divided or stopped, so that the least quantity of Blood
cannot be carried to the Parts, there follows not a Wasting of the Part, but a
Mortification; in this Case the External Causes must be removed: And care is to
be taken that the Blood may again be carried to the Part: Here chafing the
Part, and the use of Nettles (as many will) is good; the Chemists commend much
Alumen Plumosum; all hot Oils likewise are here good; and this Ointment is of
excellent virtue.

Take fresh tops of Savin, Juniper, Lovage, of each two handfuls; Camomile
Flowers, Juniper Berries, of each two handfuls; Oil of Bays, White-Lillies, of
each twelve ounces; Hog's Grease, three ounces; Dogs-grease, an ounce and half;
Aqua vitae, two ounces; Boil them to the consumption of the moisture; then add
to the expressed Liquor, Oil of Spike, three drams; Juniper, a dram;
Mustard Seed in Powder, half a an ounce; Roots of Pellitory of Spain,
Long-Pepper powdered, of each two draws; Yellow wax as much as is sufficient to
make it into an Ointment.

Or,

Take Pulvis Amianti, three drams; Roots of Pellitory of Spain, a dram and
half; Castor, Euphorbium, Oil of Earth, of each two drams; Gum Ammoniacum, an
ounce and half; Laudanum and Wax, as much as suffices to make it into a
Plaster.

2. The true reason of the generation of Wens, in my opinion, is this; the
mouths of the Arteries appointed to carry nourishment to the Muscles, sometimes
are more opened than they ought to be, whether it be by Fall or Blow, or from
an internal Cause, especially in Plethorick People, and in Parts disorderly
moved, the native heat converts the extravasated Blood into Flesh: But seeing
the Member requires not so great a quantity of nourishment, it increases into
a preternatural Swelling; and if this Blood be impure, Choler produces Pain,
Phlegm, Viscousness, Melancholy, a Cartilaginous hardness; and it is to be
attributed to these Humors, that this preternatural flesh is more yellow, white
or livid.

It Is seldom included in a proper Tunicle, except where Phlegm is its greatest
Cause, and then those Tumors are generally in the Neck: The Veins grow big,
according to the increase of the Tumor, so that under the Skin they appear as
thick as ones Thumb.

It Is not in it self malignant, yet by ill applications may be easily made so:
Air is very hurtful, if the Tumor be exposed to it.

For the most part the best Remedies are here used to little purpose; on the
contrary, the Tumor more and more increasing. You cannot promise any Cure,
except you take it away by a Thread, Knife, or both.

In the beginning, the Medicines that are to be applied, ought to be very
astringent and repelling, the Part is gently to be rouled, having applied to
it, either a Plate of Lead, or a Diachalcitheos Plaster, or of Frogs with
Mercury, or the following:

Take Pomegranate-rinds, Bistort-roots, of each one dram; Scales of Iron,
Quicksilver, Burnt-Lead, of each two drams; Bole-armenick, Lapis Haematitis,
of each a dram and half; Turpentine, Wax, as much as is sufficient to make it
into a Plaster according to Art.

In the mean time, Purging, Bleeding, Scarification, and the Application of
Leeches are not to be neglected. Sweating, also Watchings and Abstinence,
profit very much.

But if the Tumor yields not to these Remedies, but daily increases,
Suppuratives are to be applied; but if these within few days effect nothing,
and the Tumor continuing in the same state, an actual Cautery may be used;
which, let not the contrary Opinions either of Surgeons or standers-by
hinder; for by its use, the increase of the Tumor will be stayed for a long
time; yea, sometimes the Disease will be wholly eradicated.

But if the Flesh begins to repullulate again beyond expectation, the Surgeon
ought not to defer to endeavor either by a Thread or Knife its extirpation; the
Thread being small and strong, must be twice wound about the neck of the Tumor,
and tied with a double knot, which must be straightned the same day, and so
every day until the Tumor be deprived of its color, sense and life, which is
within seven or eight days; then it is to be taken off with a crooked Knife,
which is very easy to perform, seeing neither any great pain or flux of Blood
is to be feared: If the Thread be wet in Mercurial or Arsenick-water, it hastens
the mortification of this Tumor: But in this Operation, a Phlegmatic Body is
required; for in other Bodies pain and inflammation do so much afflict the
Patient, that it is seldom that the Thread in a short time should take them off;
yet the Surgeon may to lessen the Symptoms, and to cool, anoint with a
Feather the part which the Thread touches, with white camphorated Ointment, of
Roses, or the like, continually putting the Patients in mind how that others
bear it more quietly.

But if you design to use a Knife only, the whole Tumor must be endeavored to
be taken away, except you will consume the remaining by Medicines, which is
very rarely effected; besides the Surgeon must have a Care that he divides
not the greater Vessels, lest there follows a Flux of Blood not to be stopped.

3. The Viscerous Flesh belongs rather to the Physicians care, than the
Surgeons.

4. Of the Glandulous Flesh we have treated particularly in several places. In
general it is to be noted, 1. That the Glandules are of a cold temperament,
therefore require hot Medicines, but very ill suffers cold. 2. The Tunicle
investing them, being eroded or divided, the Skin cannot be consolidated,
before the whole Glandule, together with its Tunicle, be consumed with the
Ulcer. 3. If Corrosive Medicines cure not the Ulcers of the Glandules, within
the space of few weeks, no hope remains of a sound Cure, because of the
continual Flux of Humors: And this is the reason why we are for the most part
compelled to take them away by Incision.

CHAP. XII. Of the Skin.
THe Skin is a similar, spermatick part, having some Blood mixed with it,
reddish, white, loose, investing the Body, and serving for feeling.

It Is covered by a Scarf-skin, for the greater defense, every where perforated
with Pores, to give vent to the useless Fumes and Vapors; endued likewise with
manifest Perforations, as are the Mouth, Nostrils, Ears, etc. whose use is
sufficiently known.

It has Cutaneous Veins and Arteries, as also Nerves.

Its Use is, to cover the Body, as moreover it is the Instrument of feeling.

Chirurgical Consideration.
1. The Skin being discolored by the Jaundies, Freckles and other Spots, this
Water renders again smooth and fair.

Cosmetick Water of Minsicht.
Take white Frankincense, Sugar Candy, of each two ounces; white Hermodactils,
Florence-Orrise, Venice-Borax, of each an ounce; Salt of Tartar, Burnt Ivory,
Camphire, of each half an ounce; Flowers of white Lillies, of the white
Water Lillies, of the white Garden-Mallows, of each three handfuls;
Virgin-Honey, three ounces; Goats-Milk, two quarts; Bean-flower-water, and
white Rose Water, of each a pint and half; white Lilly-water, and Solomon's
Seal-water, of each a pint; being mixed, let them be distilled in Balneo Mariae.

2. Scars remaining after the Small Pox, Wounds or Burns, we take away by the
following Medicines if deep and great, first, having used Exedents, then
Sarcoticks.

Take Venice-Borax, three drams; Camphire, a scruple; Oxes-Gall, a dram; Oil of
Mirrhe, two drams; Capons-grease, half an ounce: Make it into a Liniment.

Or.

Take Powder of the Roots of Snake-weed, of Orrise, of each three dams; Seeds
of Melon blanched, of Raddishes, of each a dram; Burnt Eggshels, half a dram;
Common white Chalk, a dram and half; Frankincense, a dram; Sugar Candy, three
drams; Gum Tragaganth dissolved in Rose Water, an ounce; Goose-grease, as much
as suffices to make it into a Liniment.

3. Scabs blemishing the Skin, are sometimes moist, dry, spreading, eating,
crusty, malignant; this difference is of so small consideration, that generals
being well known, it is not difficult to one that well weighs every thing, to
proceed aright in particulars.

Seeing the Cause of this Disease is a sharp, choleric, serous, salt Humor,
mixed sometimes with Phlegm, the often use of Purging, Sweating and Vomiting, of
Bleeding, Scarification, Leeches, Natural and Artificial Baths, as also of
cooling, drying Medicines, and those that temper the acrimony of the Blood,
Lotions and Unctions are here very profitable; an Example of each I here give.

A Purging Decoction.
Take Roots of Asparagus, Grass, Polypody, of each six drams; Liquoras, three
drams; Leaves of Fumitory, Succory, of each an handful; Senna, an ounce and
half; Rhubarb, half an ounce* Tamarinds, an ounce; Anifeeds, two drams: Cream
of Tartar, three drams: let them infuse 24 hours in a sufficient quantity of
Whey; then boil them, and to a pint and half of the strained Liquor, add Syrup
of Dianicum, three ounces: Make it into an Apozem. Dose, three ounces.

A Vomit.
Take Oxysaccharum Vomitivum, Syrup of Roses solutive with Senna, of each an
ounce; Fumitory-water, as much as is sufficient: Make it a draught.

A Sudorifick.
Take Flower of Brimstone, Antimony Diaphoretick, Salt of Holy-Thistle, Sal
Prunellae, of each a dram: Make it into a Powder, to be divided into six equal
Doses.

A Bath.
Take Roots of red Docks, Briony, of each six ounces; Leaves of Fumitory, six
handfuls; Camomile Flowers, three handfuls; Bran, a pound; Brimstone, two
ounces; Nitre, an ounce; Alom, an ounce and half; common Salt, two ounces; Mix
them.

In a grievous and rebellious Scab, the Powder of Snakes is excellent; this is
the Preparation of it: Take a Snake (in March, if possible, before it has laid
its Eggs) the Head and tail being cut off, and the Skin stripped off, all the
inward Bowels (except Tongue, Heart and Liver) thrown away, let it dry in an
Oven moderately warm, to a Powder: The Dose from four grains to fifteen.

Vipers dried after the same manner, excel Snakes, and are commended in the
Leprosy it self.

A Fomentation.
Take Burnt-Talk, an ounce and half; Quicklime, two ounces; Litharge of Gold,
half an ounce; Bole-armenick, an ounce; dry Tabacco-Leaves, three ounces;
White Wind, a pint; clear Water, a quart: Let them boil a little, and keep the
strained Liquor for use.

A Liniment.
Take Crude Brimstone, two drams; Venice-Sope, a dram and half; prepared Nitre,
half a dram; Litharge of Gold, two drams; Mercurius dulcis, a dram and an half;
White Camphorated Ointment, an ounce; Oil of Rhodium, eight drops: Make it into
an Ointment.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fat, Nails and Hair.
IT has been long disputed, whether the Fat, Hair and Nails ought to be
accounted Parts of the Body, or Excrements. I neither think them Excrements,
nor Parts properly so called.

Not Excrements, for they are Bodies, enjoying with the rest Life and
Nourishment, but not nourishing others, and are of singular use for the public
good.

They are not Parts properly so called, being destitute of any certain bounds,
and have no particular operation: Fat nourishes in Famine; the Hair and Nails,
without injury to the whole, may be cut off.

Adeps, or Fat, is a similar, soft, white, insensible part, made to preserve
the Natural Heat, to help Chylification, to facilitate Motion, to moisten the
Parts, and to nourish the Body in Famine.

Hair is a similar Part, produced by the worst part of the Blood, covering some
Parts, and in some manner adorning them.

It Is outwardly apiece, inwardly hollow; the variety of Color it owes to
the Temperament and Age of Men, to the Constitution of the Air or Country.

The Nail is a similar part, sprung also from the impurest part of the Blood,
flexible, hard, defending the Fingers from external injuries, as also adorning
them. Its Root is joined to a Ligament, and is very sensible by reason of the
neighboring Tendons.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. Blood wholly, or in part destitute of Fat, is not much to be commended; for
its abundance constitutes fleshy, its unctiousness, fat Bodies, as where but
little fat, lean; this fatness of the Blood dispersed into the parts of the
Body, changes into natural Fat more copiously in the cold parts, to wit, in
the lower Belly, Breast, etc. than in the hot. These Signs may confirm our
Opinion, as often as they are required from the Blood, after the opening of a
Vein; for the upper part of the Blood, which is erroneously taken by many, to
be the Phlegm of the Body, and so the vicious part, oftentimes is the very best
of it: This may be distinguished by the Fire; for if it be fat, it will flame;
if Phlegm, it uses to crackle; hence it comes to pass, that the Fat, when it
is any obstruction in the Cure of an external Disease, may be cut off without
any pain, or other inconvenience.

2. The Nails are oftentimes subject to clefts, to be rough, and of ill color;
the Cause is a vicious Humor, or some External Accident; these may be cured by
the often paring of the superfluities, and the applying the following Plaster.

Take Rosin, half an ounce; Turpentine, Frankincense, Mastick, of each two
drams: Goats-Suet, Green-Wax, of each five drams: Make it into a Plaster
acco^ding to Art.

Blood sometimes remains coagulated under the Nails, which may be discussed by
this Plaster.

Take Roots of Crow-foot, of Solomon's Seal, red Mirrhe, of each a dram; Gum
Sagapenum, an ounce; Oil of Nuts, a dram: Make it into a Plaster.

For the falling off of the Nails, a Finger-stall may be prepared of Green Wax,
Laudanum and Amoniacum, etc.

3. The shedding of the Hair is a frequent evil; the causes of it, are Burning
Fevers, old Headaches, the Leprosy, and the French Pox; and there is not to
be expected any new in its room, before the Cause for some time has been taken
away; which being done, the following external Applications may be made use of.

Take Southern-wood, Maidenhair, Mallows, Marjoram, of each one handful;
Cummin, roots of Parsley, of Radishes, Storax Calamit, and liquid, red Mirrhe,
of each five drams; Euphorbium, Cantharides, of each a dram; Gum Laudanum,
three ounces; Oil of white-Lillies, an ounce; Roman Nettle-seeds, half an
ounce: Infuse them 36 hours in three quarts of fair Water, then distill them in
Balneo Mariae.

Or,

Take Aloes, a dram; Agarick, Coloquintida, of each two drams; Rocket-seeds,
half an ounce; Salt of Camomile, two scruples; infuse them twenty four Hours in
fifteen ounces of White Wind, and keep the strained Liquor for your use.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Generation of the Blood, and its Circulation.
WE have hitherto treated of the Similar Parts, properly and improperly so
called; from whom are the Dissimilars compounded. The Blood serves to their
Conservation, as does the Spirits to the Actions from thence proceeding; but
how the Blood is generated in our Body, and how many Spirits are there found,
is not as yet sufficiently understood by us. In this thing Writers differ among
themselves, so that the very Truth seems to lie hid in the profoundest
darkness; yet the love and desire of searching out the Truth exactly, gives me
freedom to declare my Opinion, yet still giving place to a better.

Sanguification I conceive to be performed after this manner: The harder Meat
received in by the Mouth, chawed by the Teeth, and by the Spittle moistened, is
in some manner prepared to be made Chyle.

This Spittle, from whence it has its beginning, no man as I know of, has
rightly demonstrated: Those that derived it from the Veins and Arteries, it is
upon this reason, because they communicate several Branches to the Maxillerary
Glandules, through which the late invented Ductus Salivales pass; and moreover,
a Salivation raised by Art, seems to confirm this Opinion.

But how the Arteries and Nerves can separate so great a quantity of Spittle,
as we have often known to have been thrown forth in so short a time, seems not
possible to me, I do rather derive it from the Stomach and Limphaducts, which I
suppose to adhere to the Salivals, upon the following Reasons.

1. As often as voluntary swallowing is designed, we observe the Spittle to
ascend as it were from the Stomach into the Mouth it self, especially if the
Meat be moistened by Drink.

2. The Tongue, Mouth and the whole Stomach have inwardly a common Tunicle.

3. The Meat in the Mouth, as in like manner in the Ventricle, ought to be mixed
with Spittle.

4. It would be very troublesome continually to drink in eating; for it is very
easy for some time to keep the devoured Liquor in the Stomach, and then
sensibly to communicate some part of it to the Mouth.

5. The Limphaducts are dispersed through the whole Body, and they go both unto
the Stomach and Tongue.

6. I judge no Humor to be thrown out of our Body, except by peculiar passages;
and so for several reasons, I think the Tears also to be shed though particular
Channels, which a more accurate hand (whether mine or others) may sometimes
find out: Yea, the most Noble Lewis Bills, the great Anatomist, attests to have
already discovered them and promises to demonstrate them in the Body, and in
Figures to the Favorers of Truth.

If you enquire of me of what nature Spittle is, I answer, that it is Salt; yet
it is not always necessary that this saltness be perceived by the Tongue, which
those that Understand the Nature of Artificial Salts, sufficiently know: It is
certain that there is some natural Salt in all Meats and Drinks; it is also
certain, that Salt not only helps the commixing and concoction of the Meat, but
also contributes much to the fermentation of the Humors.

The Ductus Salivales, which we have now made mention of, have but one strong
Tunicle, not unlike the Ureters, but that they are lesser.

Of each side one.

They take their Original, endued with many Roots, from a certain great
Glandule, lying under the Tendon of the Musculus Digastricus, not far from the
upper Part of the Jaw; then they run under the Tongue, above the great Nerve of
our eighth Pare, to the more inward parts of the mouth, where, in the two
ranine Glandules, near the bridle of the Tongue, they terminate; from whom
being variously perforated, issues out the Spittle into the Mouth; of which,
the enquiring Reader may more largely satisfy his curiosity, out of the
Writings of Glisson and Van-Horn.

The Meat thus chewed by the Teeth, and prepared by the Mouth, through the
Gullet, by the assistance of proper Muscles, is carried into the Stomach, which
that it may the better keep it, it presently purseth it self together, so that
the upper Orifice is close shut, but the lower not so straight, that though
very lightly pressed, may there find passage.

The Meat received by the Stomach, and moistened by Spittle, Drink, and its own
humidity, forthwith by the heat of the Stomach, begins to be concocted; the
Order is not observed here, which was in the eating of the Meat; yet in the
beginning I have observed the Meat to be disposed in the same order, as it was
devoured by the Animal that was dissected; but afterward the Stomach
continually digesting, first sends away that Meat which is of easiest
Digestion, to the Guts, and it does not detain it, whilst the other is also
concocted, which Loosnesses and Vomiting evidently enough declare, if you look
into the Excrements.

The Meat being concocted, assumes a whiteness like to Cream, and this is
called Chile.

The Chile out of the stomach through the Pylorus enters the Intestines, in
which passage there is a notable Peristaltick motion: Out of this the Venae
Lacteae suck what is useful to nourish the parts; and the unuseful is cast out
through the Belly: The Venae Lacteae consist of one very thin Tunicle, but are
endowed with several Valves, extended from the Liver toward the Glandules,
they are distributed through all the Mesentery, and so are carried for the most
part to the small Guts, especially the Jejunum; but yet the great Guts are not
altogether destitute of them, that none of the Nutriment may be lost.

From the Intestine, both these Vessels and the Chile contained in them, go to
the three Glandules of the Chile, the greatest of which is in the middle of the
Mesentery, called by Asellius, Pancreas; the two lesser are called the Lumbar
Glandules, situate near the left Kidney.

Each of these Glandules send forth a Branch, which joining above the left
Kidney, constitutes a Vessel called Vena Lactea, about the bigness of a great
quill.

This great Lactean Vein, lying between the Arteria aorta, and the Vertebra's
of the Loins, covered with Fat, runs upwards, and above the Heart, ascends by
the Gullet, and so hastens to the left Subclavial Vein, where it ends in one,
two or three branches; here a most thin valve occurs at the very end of the
Vein looking inwardly, that the Chyle might not return back again, or run
further into the Arm; out of this Subclavial they descend by the ascending
Trunk of Vena Cava into the right Ventricle of the Heart, that there by the
help of the heat, and natural quality, it may be changed into Blood.

Being converted into Blood, it passes by the Pulmoniack Artery to the Lungs,
which are by part of it nourished, and the rest of it goes through the
Pulmoniack Vein to the left Ventricle of the Heart, that it may be more
perfectly elaborated; thence by the great Artery is carried to all the parts of
the Body, communicating to them nourishment for the preservation of Life.

These ways of Conveyance is displeasing to some, who would rather retain that
by the Mesaraick veins known, and so greatly cried up by the Ancients, than
admit of a new Truth; therefore they say that the Chile, together with the
Blood, may by this way be most conveniently carried to the Liver, seeing that
the Venal Blood is carried not from the Liver to the Guts (which was the false
Opinion of the Ancients) but from the Guts to the Liver, and so not here to be
allowed a contrary motion of each Liquor, already sufficiently known.

But in truth these Opinions they defend, rather by a probable Ratiocination,
out of their old affection to the Liver, than that they can make it out by
natural or demonstrative Arguments, or answer these Queries following.

1. What is the use of the Lacteal Veins?

2. Why is their rise in the Guts?

3. Why the Valves are so placed, that they may hinder the regress of the Chile
into the Guts.

4. Why do they all go together with the Chile to the Glandule of the Chile,
and none of them to the Liver?

5. Why are the great Lacteal Veins joined together?

6. For what end does the Chile pass into the Subclavial Veins? All which can
be made appear in the Body to the sight.

That part of the Blood which is not altogether useless, yet not fit for
Nutrition, passes out of the Arteries, ever joined together by Inosculations
with the Veins, into the Vena Cava and Porta, and so by their means is brought
again into the Liver and Heart, that it may be amended, and again concocted.

I do not only say that the Blood is carried by the Vena Cava into the Heart,
but also by the Vena Porta into the Liver, which I prove by these Reasons.

1. The Liver is the biggest of all the Viscera; not that I would infer its
pre-eminence from its greatness (see Chap. 2.) but I suppose Nature would never
have created so great a Body, but for the performing of some extraordinary
operation.

2. Its greatest Vein, coming out with a large Orifice, forthwith goes to and
enters the Heart. What necessity is there for the Vena Cava to be distributed
with such numerous Branches through the Liver, and so presently to ascend into
the Heart; for indeed it ought to convey back the Blood not amended. Its Trunk
likewise, and that of the Arteria Aorta might ascend directly up the Body to
the Heart, without concerning it self with the Liver, especially when the Vena
Porta, near the Liver, may also yield sufficient ways for freeing all the Blood
from Choler: It ought to receive the Blood concocted in the Liver, and convey
the same to the Heart.

3. Its color is red. I well know that it is sometimes observed to be white,
pallid, yellow, green; but this color is to be ascribed to the Disease, not to
its natural Constitution; for in all Bodies perfectly sound, it is found red.

What wonder is it, that the Liver being red, in weakness should contract a
whiteness; does not a red face grow pale, when the Body is affected with
sickness? How easily likewise that the Liver separating the Choler, should be
died with a yellow or green color? It Is also observed in the first xx or xxx
days after conception, it is naturally white, neither becomes red before the
maternal Blood (concerning which, some of the Moderns have far otherwise
ascribed) comes to the nourishment of the already formed parts, which is the
same in all Spermatick parts, even in the Heart it self: But will you conclude
from hence, that this red color only happens to the Liver, and is not more
proper to it, than it is to the Muscles, which yet therefore do not make Blood?
To this I answer, that the affluent Blood is so necessary here, and so
appropriated to the Liver, that without it it cannot be called a perfect Liver;
but both the color, substance and number of Vessels are so difierent in a
Muscle, and in the Liver, that in no wise the parts deserve to be said to be
like one another; and what absurdity is it to say; that a Muscle sanguifies,
when even the Heart it self by the principal Anatomists and Philosophers, is
acknowledged a Muscle.

4. The Maternal Blood comes first up the Umbilical Vein to the Liver, ere it
goes to the Heart of the Infant: And the Valves and Ligatures evidently
demonstrate, that the Arterial Blood is carried by the Umbilick Arteries from
the Child to the Womb, but the Venal by the Umbilick Vein from the Womb to the
Child; but whether the Infant is nourished by the Maternal Blood, or by an
External Humor, like as a Chicken in the Egg, is to me all one; when it is
evident, the Blood, which either coming from the Mother or Infant, passes
first to the Liver, before it enters the Heart.

5. The Choler is separated from the Blood in the Liver; for every one knows,
that there can no separation be made, without there be first a Concoction.

From all these Arguments I cannot gather any thing, but that the returning
Blood is carried by the Vena Porta to the Liver, that it may there be purified,
and in some manner concocted, in which its operation, that the Blood may be
rendered more perfect, it is carried to the Heart, especially when by reason of
its continual and necessary Pulsation, the Blood cannot remain long in the
Heart: and for this reason I judge, the whole Blood must needs be moved about
with a circular motion.

The Blood made in the Liver, as is declared but now in the eighth Chapter,
enters the Vena Cava, and from thence into the Heart.

And thus the Royal Liver, at the same time, when Kings are taken away, may yet
use a limited power, and may remain with honor in its own Kingdom.

But what shall we do with the Melancholic Spleen, which makes many laugh? It
has many accusers, and not fewer excusers.

1. It was never accounted by Hippocrates the Learned Greek, a receptacle of
the Excrements; or is it any where to be found in him, that he called the
Spleen another Liver.

2. The great number of Veins and Arteries, and so by consequence the abundance
of Vital Spirits, do not permit the Excrements to be collected here.

3. It has not any convenient Cavity wherein the Melancholy, Faeculent Juice
can be received.

4. And if you imagine that there is no necessity here of a Cavity, its
Parenchyma is too thick, and not porous enough, therefore unfit for the
reception of so thick a Humor; which also is never naturally found in it.

5. It is too great a Bowel to perform so vile an Office.

6. In dead men, where Melancholiness has been the cause of their death, upon
the examination of the Internal parts, there none of them less recede from its
natural state than the Spleen, the Heart only excepted, whom the Vital Spirits
do so greatly defend, that it is less affected than other parts, which seldom
happen to the Intestines, Kidneys, Gall and Bladder.

What is therefore its Use? It elaborates the Acid Humor, which is very
necessary, but not Excrementitious, and mingles it as a Ferment with the Blood,
by which it becomes more perfect, and fitter for Circulation.

In my judgment the Salt of the Blood affords matter to this Humor, which it
greatly requires that it may not be corrupted; but this Salt which proceeds
from the Meat and drink, is never so pure, but that it has need to be brought
to a more perfect state in our Body. But this is my Opinion.

The Supremest of the Kings is the Heart; to this are two others subject, the
Liver and Spleen (I beseech you give me leave to make use of this Similitude in
favor of the Ancients) the Heart makes the Blood, the Liver repeats the
Concoction, and separates the Choler; the Spleen from its own Salt, by an
innate vigor, produces an Acid Humor, which as a Ferment by the Venal Splenic
Branch, it mixeth with the Blood, to render it the perfecter, and the more fit
for Circulation; if any Excrementitious part should be there separated, it is
all by the Caeliack Artery, and the Haemorrhodal Vessels sent to the Guts.

If it appears to any one to be a contradictory, that by Salt a Humor should be
made Acid, we advise that person to taste some Spirit of Salt.

About sixteen years since, the great Anatomist Franciscus Sylvius put forth
some particular things concerning the use of the Spleen; he was of opinion,
that the Blood was not made in the Ventricles of the Heart, neither that it was
carried from the Heart by the Arteries to all the parts of the Body, for
nourishment-sake alone, but that it likewise underwent some other Mutation in
the rest of the Viscera's, particularly that the Spleen further concocts the
Arterial Blood, and brings it to a higher degree, yea that it more then
perfects it, so that the Blood in a manner in this place assumes the nature of
Ferment, by whose means in a short time, a great quantity of Mass may become
acid; in the same manner he affirms, that the Blood more and more concocted in
the Spleen there receives strength, by which it restores the returned and
weakened Blood, and preparing together with it the Chile, that it may the sooner
be turned into Blood: The Reasons which he produces for it, are these:

1. The Spleen receives a much greater quantity of Blood from the Heart, than
is necessary, for its nourishment.

2. That it can be returned back again to the Heart, by no other way than by
the Branches of the Vena Cava and Porta; for what has hitherto been delivered
of the short Vessel, are to be accounted but ridiculous Fictions, as may most
evidently be made appear in dissected Bodies.

3. Seeing this Blood is continually mixed with the returned Blood and Chile in
its passage to the Heart, it ought not to be an Excrement; for so the Noble
Parts, and the whole Body would not be purged, but the more injured.

4. Chemistry has long since taught us, that such mutations happen daily in
Nature.

The Remaining Part of the Blood unuseful to the Body, therefore Excrementious,
is thrown out through the Guts, Ureters, and Parts of the Skin, etc. concerning
which it is not necessary to add more here; but now we are forced to describe
those new watery passages, which the studious in Anatomy have long and
diligently inquired into. The watery passages, the Lymphatick Vessels have
their rise both from the Liver, and from the Joints, and receive the liquid
Juice from the Arteries with which they correspond.

Those which come from the Liver, embrace the Vena Porta, and so pass to the
Misaraick Glandules of the Chile, as do those also that ascend from the Feet;
thence they discharge their Water into the great Lacteal Vein, which as we have
already declared, carries the Chile to the Heart.

Those which proceed from the Arm, both lie above and under the Veins, until
they come to the Subclavial Vein, which they enter about the same place; where
the great Lacteal Vein does, being furnished with a particular Valve just at
their entrance, and so altogether they carry the Water to the Heart.

This Water is Sweet, not being as Urine is, Salt.

These Vessels consist of a very thin Tunicle, whence they are soon broke.

Use of them in my opinion, is to take the superfluous Water from the Arteries,
and carry it to the Glandules of the Chile, and Lacteal Vein, by which the
Chile being made more Liquid, may the more conveniently be conveyed through the
narrower passages, thence to return the same to the Arterial Blood, making it
fitting to serve to the nutrition of the moist parts, and to the cooling and
moistening of the hot.

But that it may the more clearly appear, in what manner I conceive, how what
has already been said, is performed in our Body; observe that the Meat is
converted in the Stomach into Chile, to which part of the Drink is mingled,
this mixture is carried through the Glandules of the Chile, and the great
Lacteal Vein into the Heart, where it is changed into Blood, which is by means
of the Arteries to be conveyed through the whole Body; every part of this Blood
nourishes those parts which are of the like temperament with it self; the Hot
part of it nourishes the Hot; the Dry, the Dry; the Moist, the Moist, etc.
that which is here not well concocted, must be brought back again to be
perfected. Why we say that the Veins are not sufficient, and the passages not
commodious enough to perform the same, whose Office we know is to bring back to
the Heart the Blood not sufficiently concocted; the Reason is that the Water
always remaining in the Vessels, rendered the Blood too thin, so deprived it of
its natural consistence and strength.

From all those so clearly and distinctly laid down, it sufficiently appears
what the CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD is, to wit, a continual motion of the Blood
out of the Arteries into the Vena Cava and Porta to the Liver and Heart, that
in them it may be fitted for the Nutrition and the life of the whole Body.

Out of the subtilest part of the Blood are the SPIRITS produced, which are
twofold:

1. Vital, which begotten in the Heart, carry life to the parts of the Body.

2. Animal, who out of the Vitals elaborated in the Brain, impart Sense and
Motion to the Body.

The Natural at the same time that the Circulation of the Blood was found out,
vanished.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. The Ductus Salivales, when the string of the Tongue is to be cut, or the
Ranine Vein to be opened, or any other Disease of the Tongue that is to be
cured by Manual Operation, warn you to have great care of those little
Glandules in which they end, that they might not be hurt with the Launcet, lest
there follow a continual spitting.

The great Glandule also of the Neck, from whence these Ductus's take their
rise, when it is inflamed, admits not of the use of Mercury; for from hence a
dangerous Salivation may very easily be raised.

2. The Lacteal Veins, either the greater or the lesser, are oftentimes from a
Contusion or Wound so greviously hurt, that they cannot carry the Chile to the
Heart; and though the wound be cured with great diligence, care, and speed, yet
the Patient will fall into a Consumption, whence follows Death inevitably: This
Truth will defend Surgeons from many Calumnies.

In Children, and older People, is often perceived an induration and
inflammation of the Abdomen; the cause of which is the hardness of the Mesaraic
Glandules, which allow not passage for the Chile to the great Lecteal Vein,
except the very thinnest of it; whence the flesh of the Muscles wastes, the Body
becomes heavy and weary, and at length a Fever, and a wasting of the whole
Body. This evil I use to remedy without any great trouble, with this External
Liniment.

Take compound Ointment of Marshmallows Ointment of Sow-bread, of Martiaton, of
each two drams; Oil of white Lillies, of Camomile, of each three drams: Mix it
into an Ointment.

Inwardly the following Troches are excellent, being continually used the whole
time of the Cure.

Take prepared Steel, prepared Crab's-eyes, of each a scruple; Vitriolated
Tartar, half a dram; Sal Prunella, xvj. grains; Species Aromatici Rosati, a
scruple; white Sugar, two ounces: Make them into Troches according to Art.

In this case Purging is not to be used, but with Cassia, Cream of Tartar, and
Laxative Syrups; for the Glandules will not bear strong Purges.

3. The Blood taken out upon the opening a Vein, oftentimes after some few
hours space, appears very dry, and destitute of all Serum, which for the most
part is ascribed to its too great Heat, and Adustion: but this Argument is very
invalid for if the same day, the same, or another Vein be again opened, there
will be found a great quantity of Serum in the Blood; therefore the true Cause
is to be deduced from the Circulation of the Blood, but especially in the
Lymphatick Vessels, which at that time draws the Serum and Humidity, and so
leaves the Blood dry.

It very often also happens, that the Body becomes Tumid, Turgid and Languid,
upon which the fearful Physician forthwith pronounces naught but dangers.

When with the use of Internal and External Sudorificks, the Patient in a short
time may be cured: The Cause of this Disease is not from the intemperature and
debility of those parts the Ancients called Noble; for it may easily be
distinguished from the Dropsy, which these parts occasion; for although the
sick persons are very dull and weary, yet are they not anxious, but breath
free, and the Belly swells not much. In the Face, and Joints especially, is a
watery Matter collected; but if the swelled parts are compressed by the Finger,
we perceive much less Serum to be contained in the parts, than in a true
Dropsy; from whence those that understand not the true Cause, are wont to
ascribe this Inflammation to wind: But the Lymphatick Vessels when comprest,
broke, or by any other way obstructed, so that the natural motion of the Lympha
is hindered, occasions this evil.

1. The Circulation of the Blood, requires all venomous and depraved Humors,
which are thrown out either by Nature it self, or that outwardly happen to the
Body, at the very first instant, forthwith to be expelled out of the Glandules
and the Skin, by the means of attractive Medicines, lest that the whole Blood
in a very short time be infected, and the Heart it self oppressed, and suffer
under it: The which does sufficiently declare, how dangerous it is to open a
Vein, and to purge in a Venereal and Pestilential Bubo, nay, in all venomous
Wounds; as on the contrary, how necessary it is to cast forth the offending
matter; by the use of Sudorifick and Attracting Medicines: As moreover, how
that the invention of the Circulation of the Blood, is of very great use in the
Art of Physic.

CHAP. XV. The Division of the Body.
MAn's Body is most conveniently divided into the Venters, or Regions, and
Joints.

There are three Venters.

1. The Head, or the supreme Region or Cavity, to it is joined the Neck, which
is its prop.

2. The Thorax, Breast, or middle Region.

3. The Abdomen, lower Belly, or lower Region.

The Joints are the two Arms, and the two Legs.

Chirurgical Considerations.
We divide the Body after this manner, that it may be known what place each
part of the Body ought to keep; to those that read the following, every thing
will become more manifest.

But there is so great consent of all the Parts, so great concord, that no part
may be by it self considered, without a consideration of the whole; therefore I
think it necessary, that in a few words the foundation of this mutual consent
be here declared.

1. In every part is required a natural temper; for the Liver being too hot,
the Stomach too cold, the Brain too dry, etc. the whole Body must be out of
order.

2. A sufficient number, for in the Hand, if the least Bone, Tendon or Artery,
etc. be wanting, forthwith its operation is injured.

3. A just magnitude: one Foot greater than the other, causes a troublesome
walking.

4. A Natural Figure, Softness, Thickness: yea, color it self.

5. A convenient Connection and sight.

6. The presence of the Vital Spirits, which are brought to the Part by the
Arteries.

7. The presence of the Animal Spirits, which are carried by the Nerves.

8. Outwardly the Skin, that covers the whole Body; Inwardly, the Dura Matter,
the covering of the Brain, Palate, Tongue, Jaws, Breast and lower Belly,
requires also a particular Consideration.

9. It is likewise necessary that the Nutriment be well concocted, naturally
carried and received, that there may no defect be observed in the Parts.

The End of the First Book of the Third Part.
The SECOND BOOK. OF THE HEAD.
CHAP. I. Of the Outward Parts of the Head.
THE Head, as Supreme Lord, both of its own, and of a thousand other Bodies,
not only governs it self, but others well, when formed with a healthy
Constitution, and instructed with the knowledge of its own Office; but they
live a miserable life, whose Head is not justly and with Art composed, and who
neither enquire into, or know its Substance or Figure.

Its Figure is Oval, the upper part is called Vertex, the forepart Frons, the
hinder-part Occiput, the sides Temples, the rest is called the Face, and
consists of the following parts.

First appears the Skin, in several places endowed with Hair, but in all with a
Scarf-skin.

Under this lies the Membrana Carnosa and Pericranium, which takes its rise
from the Dura Matter; and passing through the Sutures of the Skull, first
invests the Skull, then all the other Bones.

Anatomists that are very curious, make the Pericranium to be double; the
outward retains the old name of Pericranium, the inward is called Periostium.

The Bones which lie under these Membranes, first we divide into the Skull and
Jaws, then into many other Bones.

The Skull is composed of eight Bones, joined together by proper and common
Sutures.

The proper Sutures are true or spurious.

The true are three.

1. The Coronal. 2. The Sagittal. 3. The Lambdoidal.

The Spurious are the two squamous Sutures of the temporal Bones.

The common are three likewise.

1. The Frontal. 2. The Sphoenoidal. 3. The Ethmoideal.

The Bones themselves which have many perforations and cavities for the passage
of the Air, of the Veins, Arteries and Nerves, are eight.

1. The Bones of the Forehead, always in Children, sometimes in old people, is
divided just to the root of the Nose by the sagittal Suture.

2, 3. The Bones of the fore part of the Head, or Bregma.

4, 4. Temporal Bones, or Petrosa.

6. The Lambdoidal, or Bone of the hinder-part of the Head.

7. The Sphoenoidal, or Wedge like Bone.

8. The Ethmoideal Bone, or Cribrosum.

The Muscles of the Forehead are the two Attollentes; Muscles of the hinder
part of the Head, are the two Deprimentes.

The Jaws consist of several Bones conjoined so by Harmony, that in old people
they appear but as one; the one is called the upper, the other the lower Jaw.

The upper Jaw is composed of eleven Bones, of each side five, the odd eleventh
is placed in the middle.

1, 2. Os Zygomaticum, or yoke-bone makes the lower part of the Orbite of the
Eye, constituting with its Apophisis the Os Jugale, or Zygoma.

3, 4. Os Lachrymale makes the internal corner of the Eye, having a large
Orifice descending to the Nose.

5, 6. Os Maxillare, or Jaw Bone, particularly so called, which is the greatest
of all the Bones, which constitutes the Jaws.

7, 8. Os Nasi, or Bone of the Nose, which in its end has five united
Cartilages.

9, 10. Os Palati, or Bone of the Palate.

11. Vomer, A peculiar Bone above the Palate, which supporting the interstice
of the Nose, and joined to it by Harmony.

The upper Jaw moves not but when the whole Head moves, therefore needs not
proper Muscles.

The lower Jaw (which generally remains divided in the forepart till the
eighth year, and afterward is so closly joined together, as it appears to be
but one Bone) has two Processes, and in them a Cavity, big enough to allow a
convenient situation to the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, from whence the Teeth
receive their Nutriment and Sense: The Branches of the Nerves about the Chin,
pass out again through a little Orifice* are distributed into the Muscles of
the Lips.

It is moved by six pair of Muscles, which are, 1. Pterygo^ Internus.
Attollentes. 2. Digastricus. Attollentes. 3. Latus, Deprimens. 4. Pterygoideus
Externus, bringing them forward. 5. Masseter. 6. Musculus Temporalis.


This Muscle has this peculiar to it self, that it is covered by the
Pericranium, by which the subjacent temporal Bones are altogether destitute of
it, which is not observed in any other part of the Body. But no man hitherto as
I know of has yet given the Reason of it; for whatsoever has been delivered
by others concerning this, has been so slight, that they give little
satisfaction to the lovers of Truth. But of late, Job Mekeren an Experienced
Surgeon of this City, has in an Epistle communicated something particular
relating to this matter, the substance whereof I here give you, until he put
forth his Observations (some of which I have seen.) TO Dr. PAUL BARBETTE
Physician at Amsterdam.
SIR,
I Will truly declare to you my Opinion concerning the Question I informed you
I had moved in the company of some Physicians, which was, Why the Bones which
lie under the temporal Muscles, are not covered and invested by the Pericranium
as are the other Bones.

On the 6th. of Janaury 1654, being commanded by the Honorable Senate of this
City, to open the Head of PETER JACOBS, Brick layer, then was my Opinion, which
I had been hitherto big withal, sufficiently confirmed; for as soon as I had
observed a great depression in the upper part of the Skull, I also found a
great quantity of coagulated Blood, which had part of it past through the Ears,
and part of it remained yet in the Cavity of the Ear; then being very desirous
to know the way by which this Blood had descended into the Cavity of the Ear;
which, when I had diligently enquired into, I also discovered the reason and
cause wherefore the Pericranium covers in this place the temporal Muscles, and
not the Bone under them.

First, The Opinion and the Answer (which the Honorable and Experienced Dr.
TULPH Burgomaster of Amsterdam, had given to the propounded Question, to wit
from whence this Blood should come, which very often in Wounds of the Head
flows out of the Ears?) I found to be true and reasonable; for I perceived, as
the Noble Consul had affirmed to me, that the Blood from the upper part of the
Head, did descend between the Skull and Pericranium, and so did enter the space
that is between the Os Parietale and Petrosum, and from thence to be as it was
strained through a Sieve into the Cavity of the Ear; afterward in searching
further, I found the Os Petrosum to be removed a great distance from the Os
Parietale; so that in the place where the Bones did recede from each other, was
a motion observed, beginning at the Os Petrosum, and ending in the Os
Parietale, there where the Toothy unition in the Os Jugale in the inward part,
which is covered with a Callus (as it ought to be in every Articulation) to
hinder bruising, is observed.

And this being so, it may be concluded, that the Pericranium, if it had
invested the Bone under the temporal Muscles, without all doubt it would have
passed it self between the Os Petrosum, whence from its moving and rubbing in
eating, speaking, or any other Motion, would have always felt intolerable
pain. Thus have you, Sir, what I thought (hoping to proceed further) the reason
to the Question propounded, etc.

Farewell.



This Opinion is indeed judicious, and very probable; for in dead Men's Skuls
the upper Bone of the Temple is movable as is the lower; and in the Suture of
the Zygomatick Bone, is a Cartilage found, which is necessary in every Joint;
for I confess the motion is little, but greater would not be required than what
suffices to afford passage to the thick Humors, either from External or from
Internal Causes, collected sometimes in the Cavity of the Ear, by the which the
Brain and Ears may be freed from many and various inconveniences: I hope time
and diligence will give us greater light in this thing.

Each Jaw is armed with necessary Weapons, which are called Teeth.

In Men, for the most part thirty two; in Women, twenty eight.

Four are called Fore teeth, or Cutters.

Two Dog, or Eye-Teeth.

All the rest are called Jaw-Teeth, or Grinders.

After the 20 th, 40 th, 80 th. year, oftentimes comes forth with pain, two
Teeth in the very furthest part of the Jaw, which some call the Teeth of
Manners or Wisdom, others the late Teeth.

Before we come to the other Muscles of the Head, we deem it necessary to
describe some parts which are not as yet mentioned, that is, the Eye, Ear,
Nose, Mouth.

The Eye with the Lids, to wit, the Membranous coverings before Cartilaginous
and Hairy, defend from External Injuries; has two Corners or Angles.

In each corner is a Glandule; that which is in the lesser External Corner, is
great, white, hard; that in the greater External Corner, is lesser, soft, red,
and covers the Punctum Lachrymale.

Four Tunicles contain the three Humors.

One of them, which comes from the Pericranium is likewise common to the Lids,
and is called Conjunctiva or Adnata.

The other three are proper, and are thus reckoned.

1. Cornea, coming from the Dura Meninx.

2. Uvea, from the Pia Matter; this sometimes dilating it self, then again
contracting it self, constitutes the Pupil, showing the many colored Oval
Circle, called the Iris.

3. Retina, from the Brain it self, or rather from the Optic Nerve; which
proceeding further, is changed into the Aranea.

To these three may be added a fourth, Vitrea, which is ill omited by many.

The Humors of the Eyes are,

1. The Aqueous. 2. The Chrystalline. 3. The Vitrecus.

The second pair of Nerves, or the Optic Nerve brings the Spirits for sight;
the third pair, or the Motorious, for Motion.

Branches of the Internal and External Carotide-Artery bring to it the
Nutritious Blood; and the superfluous is returned by the Internal and External
Jugular Veins.

Fat and Muscles make up the rest of the Eye.

The Fat serving to the Calefaction, Humectation and better motion, is here in
great quantity, every where distributed between the Vessels and the Muscles.

The Eyelid has four Muscles.

One straight Muscle, three orbicular.

The Eye it self has six, of which four are straight.

1. Attollens, or proud. 2. Deprimens, or the humble. 3. Adducens, or the
Drinking or Reading Muscle. 4. Abducens. or disdainful Muscle.
Two oblique, which are called the Lovers Muscles; of these,

1. Obliquus Externus, or Troclearis, because it passes through a Pully.

2. Obliquus Internus.

The outward Ear, or the Cartilaginous Auricle, is joined to the Bone of the
Temples.

It has a very sensible Membrane, and behind it also some Glandules, to which
the Head sends the superfluous humors.

Vessels, it receives from the External and Internal Jugular and Carotide.

Nerves, from the second pare of the Nerves of the Neck, as also from the six
pare of the Nerves of the Brain.

Here is but little Fat; what little there is, is below the Lap; it receives
four Muscles, of which, the three former are to it common with other parts, the
fourth proper to it self.

1. Antrorsum ducens, which moves it forward.

2. Retrorsum ducens, which pulls it backward.

3. Quadratus, deorsum trahens, pulling it down.

4. Tripartitus, lifting it up.

The inward part of the Ear has four Cavities for sound; and for defense and
strength, as many Bones.

The Cavities are.

1. Meatus Auditorius, whose extremity a little and strong Membrane covers,
which is called the Tympanum, and Membrane of the Drum.

2. Tympanum. 3. Labyrnthus. 4. Cochlea.

The little Bones are of the same bigness in Children, as in older People;
which are,

1. Malleclus, or the Hammer.

2. Incus, or the Anvil.

3. Stapes, or the Stirrup.

4. Os Orbiculare, or the Orbicular Bones.

The Noble Lewis de Bills, the great Anatomist, in a particular Treatise, shows,
that the Os Petrosum (which hitherto by reason of its great thickness and
solidness, was a vast hindrance to those that had a desire to view these Bones
of the Hearing in their natural situation) not to consist of one only Bone, but
to be made up of four, joined together by Harmony, which may very easily be
separated by (...).

Within are two Muscles, the one joined to the Meatus auditorius, the other to
the Malleclus.

The Nose covered with a Scarf-skin, Skin, Muscles, and the Periostium, has
two Cavities separated by a Cartilaginous Septum; each of these again is
divided into that which ascends to the Os Ethmoides; and into that which
descends above the Palate, into the further part of the Mouth.

The sides of it are called Pennae, Alae, or wings; the lower fleshy part is
called Columna, or the fleshy Pillar.

In the inside they are invested with a thin Membrane, which is very sensible,
arising from the Dura Matter, which is as to the Nose, likewise common to the
Mouth, Palate, Tongue, Larinx, Gullet, and to the Stomach it self.

The Bones of which it is compounded, are many and spungy, replete with
Caruncles, that the Snot might not voluntarily distill forth.

Arteries from the Carotide, bring nourishment to it; Veins from the Jugular,
return the Blood that is not perfectly concocted. Nerves from the first pare,
according to our order, serve for the smelling, as do those from the fifth
pare, serve to the feeling.

It has no Fat; Its Bones we have already given you; its Muscles are six.

1, 2. Deprimentes, depressing the Nose.

3, 4. Dilatantes, or dilating the Nostrils.

5, 6. Constringentes, or pulling the Nostrils together.

In great Noses there are likewise two other Muscles, which we called
Aperientes, which open the Nostrils.

The Mouth, the Gate of Air, Speech and Nourishment, has two Lips, the parts
of each side, called Cheeks, as that below is called the Chin.

The Lips have two Muscles common to the Jaw.

1. Quadratus, or drawing backward. In some this motion is performed by the
Zygomative.

2. Buccinator.

The upper Lip has two Muscles proper to it self.

1. Sursum Trahens, or drawing it upwards.

2. Deorsum Movens, or moving it downwards.

The under Lip has but one, Deorsum trahens, or drawing it downward.

Common to both the Lips, are

1. Oblique sorsum trahens, or drawing them obliquely upwards.

2. Oblique deorsum trahens, or drawing them obliquely downwards.

3. Sphincter Oris, Constrictor, or Orbicularis which purseth the Mouth
together: The inward parts of the Mouth, are the Teeth, the Gums, the Palate,
Uvula, Tongue, and Os hyodis.

Of the Teeth we have treated.

The Gums offer nothing worthy a particular consideration.

The Palate consists of a sensible Membrane common to the Stomach, which has
its rise from the Dura Matter.

The Uvula is a long little Body, it has two Ligaments, and as many Muscles,
but very little.

The Tongue (as a Sword-cutting out Honor either well or ill, as it is moved
by pure or impure Spirits) behind, is fastened to the Larinx, Os Hyodis, to the
Jaws, and to the Tonsils; before, to a certain Membranous and strong Body,
whose extremity makes the String of the Tongue.

Of both sides the string lies a Glandule called Ranina, from the neighboring
Vessels.

It has two Veins called Raninae, from the Jugulars; two Arteries from the
temporal; two great Nerves from the seventh pare, as also many little ones from
the fourth and fifth.

It is destitute of Fat.

Its Muscles are,

1. Genioglossus, which brings the Tongue forward.

2. Styloglossus, which draws it upwards.

3. Myloglossus, which draws it obliquely upward.

4. Basiglossus, which draws it directly inward.

5. Ceratoglossus, pulling it downwards.

Os Hyodis, by the assistance of Muscles and Ligaments, is tied to the sharp
process of the temperal Bones, and to the Buckler-like Cartilage of the Larinx;
it is composed of five united Bones; the middlemost of these, which is the
greatest, called the Basis of the Tongue, has two Cartilaginous Productions,
which often degenerate into Bones.

It has four Muscles on each side.

1. Geniohyodes, raising it directly upwards.

2. Sternohyodes, moving it directly downwards.

3. Styloceratohyodes, obliquely bringing it upwards.

4. Coracohyodes, obliquely drawing it downwards.

All these are the outward parts of the Head, which is either solely moved by
its own proper Muscles, or together with them likewise with the Muscles of the
Neck; these shall be treated of hereafter. The proper Muscles are.

1. Flectens, or the nodding Muscle.

2. Splenius, or the Muscle that shakes the Head.

3. Complexus, the associate of the Splenius.

4, 5. Obliqui, drawing the Head obliquely backwards.

6, 7. Recti, drawing the Head straight backwards.

Chirurgical Considerations.
Very many, as well Internal, as External Diseases, take their rise from the
Head, which is is not improperly compared to a House-roof that receives the
vapors of the whole House; which afterward being changed into a Catharre,
distills upon the inferior parts, creating a Pain, and Palsy in the Joints; an
inflammation in the Eyes and Jaws, etc. a shortness of breathing in the Breast,
and in the Stomach a depraved Chylification; in the Guts a looseness, etc. some
of the External Diseases shall here be considered by us, the Internal belong to
the consideration of the Physician.

1. There is often in the Head Porago, Achor, or Fav^s, which is a crusted
Scab, happening as well in old as young people; these Scurffs are oftentimes
very thick, sometimes accompanied with moisture, which causes great itching
and a very ill smell.

The Cause is salt Phlegm; it is for the most part a stubborn Disease, and very
easily returning again.

The Cure] In this case are generally used, strong Purging, Bleeding, Sweating,
Salivation, Unctions, pulling out of the Hairs: But without using any of these
Remedies, I have often cured this Disease, only with this Decoction.

Take Ashes, (which are called by the Dutch Weidasch, in English Potashes,)
with White Wind, make a Lixivium of a moderate Acrimony, in a quart of which,
boil the Leaves of Marjorum, Southern-wood, of each two handfuls; of
Maidenhair, a handful and half; Rose leaves three pugils: Make a Fomentation.

With this let the head be washed twice or thrice a week warm; then dry it well
with hot Linen Clothes, and in a few weeks space, the Patient with thus doing,
will be cured: You may likewise sometimes use gentle Purging Medicines.

2. In a Hydrocephalus, and great Cathars, an Issue with great success may be
made in the Nape of the Neck, because the Cavities of the Dura Matter are
thereabouts joined to the Jugular Veins; especially in Children, in whom very
often the Sutures do too much gape.

3. Fat things hurt the Head, because it is not covered with many Muscles.

4. In the Skull sometimes a rough matter is collected in several places, which
if not removed by those Medicines that purge Phlegm, and outward discussives,
in process of time acquire a very great hardness, which still increasing, grow
into a perfect Horn, not to be cured, but by Surgery.

5. Upon the Skull likewise comes other Abscesses, which although they may
belong to a Steatoma, Atheroma, or Melicerides, yet in the Head especially they
are called Testudo, Talpa, Natta. These give little hope of Cure, where the
Bone is much corrupted; otherwise they may be taken away by a Thread, or what is
better, by a Knife, when they reject other Remedies. The manner of taking them
away by a Knife, is this; the Skin being divided in form of a Cross, the
Bladder is to be taken out, then the Pericranium being separated, the Cranium
is to be scraped with a Raspatory, till you come to the sound part, then
sprinkle upon it some Astringent powder, and let the Skin forthwith be
consolidated again; which if it be too loose, a little part of it may be taken
away, which is very seldom necessary to be done, when it may be closed enough
in the time of the Cure.

6. If the Sutures of the Skull are too open, they bring a weakness upon the
Brain; if they are too straightly united, they cause the pain of the Head.
Experienced Chirurgions affirm, that it is as safe to use the Trepan in the
very Sutures themselves, as any other part of the Head.

7. The Muscles of the Head occasioning nothing differing from other Muscles,
except upon a Wound, or Contusion of the temperal Muscle, a Convulsion easily
follows; neither ought it to be transversly divided, lest there happen a
distortion of the Mouth.

8. The Teeth, seeing they neither are furnished with Membranes, nor Nerves,
are altogether insensible; but they which attribute the pain to those Membranes
which cover the Alveolus, it ought to be ascribed to many Nerves that are
distributed through them; yet the Causes in this Case are various, and must be
well distinguished, to wit, 1. a hot Distemperature, 2. a cold distemperature,
3. a sharp humor, 4. a solution of continuity.

In a hot distemper, Bleeding, and Purging is very necessary; apply
Cupping-glasses to the Neck and Shoulders; let the Head be purged with Errhins:
In the beginning, this Water being held in the Mouth, profits much.

Take the Roots of Tormentil an ounce; Leaves of Vervain, a handful and a half;
Flowers of Balaustians, two Pugils; Cypress Nuts, two drams; red-Saunders,
three drams; Scales of Iron, one dram; Vitriol, two scruples; Rose-Vinegar, two
ounces. Let them boil in a sufficient quantity of Red-wine, to a pint and half;
keep it for your use.

The Flux being stayed, we discuss the remaining with the following Decoction.

Take the Roots of Bistort, three drams; of Flower-de-luce, two drams; Leaves
of Sage, Hysop, of each half a handful; Galls, a dram; Frankincense, Sandarach,
of each two drams; Juniper Berries, an ounce: Boil them in Red-Wine.

In a cold Distemperature, the Patient must avoid all cold potable Medicaments,
yea the very Air it self, those Medicines that purge Phlegm profit, Bleeding
hurt. The following Medicine which is of great virtue may be held in the Mouth.

My Spirit for the Toothache.
Take shavings of Guaiacum, four ounces; Seeds of Stavesacre, Pomgranate-rinds,
Galls, White-Frankincense, of each an ounce; Crude Opium, red flowers of Poppy,
Camphore, White-Ginger, Cloves, Long-Pepper, of each half an ounce, Leaves of
Sage, Arsmart, Tobacco, Horse mint, of each one handful; Roots of Henbane,
Pellitory of Spain, Mandrake, Hounds tongue, Nettles the less, of each an ounce
and half: Let them infuse fourteen days in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of
Wine, then distill it in Balneo Mariae.

A sharp Humor falling upon the Teeth, is cured almost in the same manner as a
hot distemperatur; but if those Remedies are not sufficient, the following
Mixture is to be used in a Spoon, which is not only of great virtue in this,
but in all the other kinds of Tooth ach.

Take water of Plantane, an ounce and half; of Roses, Mint, of each an handful;
Alexipharmick water, half an ounce; Cinamon-water, two drams; Julip of Roses,
or Syrup of Red Poppies, an ounce; Laudanum Opiatum, three grains. Mix them.

In solution of continuity, and rottenness of the Teeth, it is best to pull
them out.

In the Breeding of Teeth in Children, the pain may be mitigated with
fresh-butter and Virgins-Honey, or with a Decoction of the Brains of a Hare or
Coney in Ale; but in a long pain it is very convenient to cut the Gum, to give
passage to the Tooth.

9. From the Blood and mixed Humors arises the Ophthalmia, sometimes true,
sometimes spurious, sometimes seizing on one Tunicle of the Eye, sometimes on
more; that which happens only in the great corner of the Eye, is called
Aegylops; the white of the Eye may be vexed with little Bladders called
Phlyctenae, which being broke, there follows an Ulceration, except stayed,
corrupting the whole Eye.

But if this Ulcer seizes only the Caruncle, and that the Punctum Lachrymale
afterward grows callous, it becomes a Fistula Lachrymalis. If these Diseases
yield not to these Remedies proposed in our Surgery, others are to be made
use of; Phlectenae are soon removed by the following Powder.

Take white Sugar Candy, prepared Tutty, of each half an ounce; red Coral
prepared, Camphore, white Vitriol, Saccharum Saturni, of each two scruples: Mix
them, and make them into a Powder.

A beginning Ulcer of the Eye requires first mundifying, afterward
consolidating Medicines.

A Mundifying Medicine.
Take Mirrhe, 15. grains; Aloes, six grains;

Sugar Candy, one dram; the yolk of an Egg, Goats-milk, three ounces: Mix them.

A Consolidating Medicament.
Take red Coral prepared, burnt Hearts horn, Sarcocol of each a scruple; Dragons
Blood, half a scruple; burnt-Lead, a scruple; Starch, half a dram; Crocus
Metallorum, half a scruple; Gum Tragaganth dissolved in Rose Water, a dram;
Horse-tail-water, as much as suffices to make it into a Collyrium.

If the Punctum Lachrymale, in the great Glandule of the Eye be callous, and
from the continual Flux of Humors, degenerates into a Fistula, first, the
Callosity is to be removed, before the other accidents will cease, for which
the following are used by us; the Phlegm and Spirit of Vitriol, burnt Alom,
blew Vitriol, Verdigreece, Mercury water, Aqua Fortis, Unguentum Aegyptiacum;
but the best of all is Unguentum Fuscum of Felix Wurtz, boiled to the
consistence of a Suppository, and put into the Fistula.

The Callosity being taken away, the Ulcer may be cured by the following
Medicine.

Take Roots of Flower-de-luce, round Birthwort, Bark of Frankincense, of each
dram and half; Mirrhe, Mastick, Sarcocols, Aloes, Cadmia Fossilis, of each a
dram; Honey, as much as is sufficient to make it into an Ointment.

If the Os Lachrymale, or Zygomaticum be foul, the Skin being divided, an
actual or potential Cautery must be applied, that the Caries may be removed,
otherwise it is impossible to cure the Fistula, that not taken away.

10. The pain of the Ears proceeds from a cold or hot distemperature, or from a
solution of continuity, which oftentimes an Ulcer follows; for a cold
distemperature, and what accompanies it, the Wind, besides the common and
particular Medicines, outwardly may be applied this with very good success.

Take Oil of Rue, Henbane, of each half a dram; of distilled Marjoram, half a
scruple; Castor, six grains; Eastern-Saffron, four grains: Mix them.

The Smoke of Tobacco blown through the bole of a Pipe put into the Ear, has
done good to many for the pain of the Ears, and for Deafness; oftentimes also a
decoction of Cloves in Red Wine, has profited, if two or three drops of it be
instilled warm into the Ear, and the Ear afterward be stopped with one of the
boiled Cloves.

Two drops of the following Spirit, Morning and Evening dropped into the Ear, is
excellent.

My Spirit for the Ears.
Take Ants-Eggs, No 100, Castor, Pulp of Coloquintida, Marjoram, Savin,
Wormwood, Rue, a handful; Seeds of Cummin, Anise, Fennel, Caraways, of each
three drams; Bay-berry-husks pulled off, Juniper Berries, of each half an once;
Pomegranate-rinds, six drams; Roots of black Hellebore, round Cyprus,
Raddishes, Sow-bread, of each an ounce; middle-siz'd Onions, No vij. bitter
Almonds, two ounces: Infuse them 14 days in a sufficient quantity of rectified
Spirit of Wine, then distill them in Balneo Mariae.

In a hot distemperature, first we ought to divert the Flux of humors by
Bleeding, Purging, Scarifications, Glisters, etc. then the following Medicines
by Cotton inbibed, we may put into the Ear.

Take womans-Milk, two ounces; Whites of Eggs well beaten, half an ounce;
Oriental Saffron, half a scruple; Goose-grease dissolved, two drams; Crude
Opium, five grains: Mix them.

Or,

Take Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, Rose-Vinegar, of each an ounce; Philonium
Romanum, two drams; Eastern Saffron, half a scruple: boil them, and strain them
for your use.

Or,

Take Roots of Marshmallows, an ounce; leaves of Mallows, of Mandrake, of each
one handful; Heads of Poppy, No. ij. flowers of Dill, Camomile, of each two
handfuls; Linseed, three drams; boil them in Cows-Milk for a Fomentation.

The Flux and pain being ceased, what yet remains, may be discussed by those
Remedies but now set down in a pain from a cold distemperature.

Where the Inflammation Apostumates, which we understand by a Feverish Pulse,
and by the continual increasing, we must assist Nature by suppurating Medicines.

Take Unguentum Basilicon, two drams; Oil of Linseed, three drams: Mix them.

Or,

Take Goose grease, Oil of sweet Almonds, of white Lillies, of each two drams:
Mix them.

Or,

Take Roots of white Lillies, an ounce and half; a large Onion roasted in the
Embers, and beaten together; add to them the Meal of Marshmallows, half an
ounce; Linseed, six drams; fresh-Butter, an ounce and half; Oil of Camomile,
and Linseed, of each half an ounce; Saffron, half a dram; Make it into a
Poultice.

The Apostume being broke, the Ulcer is first to be mundified; for which
purpose are convenient Honey of Roses, of Centaury, the juice of Smallage,
Fennel, Beat, Onions, Leeks, Decoction of Agarick, Lupins, Urine, Lie,
Oxes-gall, Unguentum Aegyptiacum.

Then must be used those Medicines that may dry and consolidate the Ulcer.

Take Roots of round Birthwort half a dram; of Flowerdeluce, a scruple; washed
Ceruse, prepared Tutty, of each a dram; Mirrhe, Sarcocols, Litharge of Gold, of
each two scruples; artificial Cinabar, half a dram; Scales of Iron, a scruple;
Honey of Roses, as much as is sufficient: Make it into an Ointment.

Where Worms come in an Ulcer from an impure matter, the following are
convenient to kill them.

The juice of Wormwood, Centaury, Arsmart, a decoction of Coloquintida, of
white Hellebore, Ox-gall, Oil of Wormwood, of bitter Almonds, etc.

Or,

Take Aloes, Mirrhe, of each two drams; Coloquintida, half a dram; tops of
Wormwood, half a handful: Boil them in white Wine for an injection.

11. The Nose as well as the Ear is subject to inflammation, which presently in
the beginning we are forced to remedy by the Medicaments formerly mentioned in
an inflammation, lest otherways its Cartilages should become carious, which may
cause a great deformity.

Sometimes a Tumor called a Polypus, seizes the inward Cavity of it,
occasioned from impure and pituitous Blood; which is twofold: for it either
resembles a Tent or Pellet, and is called by the general name Sarcoma, or it
spreads it self with many small branches into the inward parts of the Mouth, or
into the external parts of the Nose, and is in specie called a Polypus; that
which it of a whitish color, not painful and soft, is easily cured; but that
more difficultly, which is very red; never that which is livid, black or
stinking; being touched, it turns into a Cancer, and overspreads the whole Face.

The Cure of it is performed by Medicaments by a Thread, or by a Knife; in the
beginning those Medicines that are dry and astringent are most convenient.

Take Pomegranate-rinds, flowers of Balaustians, of each a dram; Cadmia
Fossilis, two drams; Crude Antimony, Crocus Martis, of each half a dram;
Mastick, Mirrhe, Loadstone, Litharge, of each a dram: Make them into fine
Powder.

These effecting nothing, Exedents are to be used.

Take burnt Alom, Bole-Armenick, Balaustians, of each three drams: Make them
into a Powder.

Another stronger.

Take Vitriol, half an ounce; Alom, Pomegranate-rinds, Galls, of each two
drams; red Mirrhe, burnt Birthwort, of each a dram: Make them into a Powder.

Another yet stronger.

Take Vitriol, four ounces; Alom, Verdigreece, of each half an ounce; Vinegar,
six ounces: Calcine them in a luted Vessel.

Another, very effectual.

Take red and yellow Arsnick, Alom, Galls, of each half an ounce: Make them
into fine Powder

I have seen those Tumors totally eradicated by the water wherein Mercury
sublimate is boiled.

But they seldom are cured by Medicine; for the most part we use here an
Instrument described by S^nnertus and Aquapendens.

It may also be drawn forth with a pair of Forceps; they may also be removed by
a Thread (if it can be conveniently put about it) what remains may be cured by
application of the Medicines but now mentioned.

12. The Mouth is inflamed upon many Causes; the chief are, 1. The heat of the
Blood. 2. The acrimony and saltness of the Spittle. 3. A Rheum from the Head;
generally there follows little Blisters, and an Ulceration, which not being
carefully looked after, turns to a Gangrene, especially in Children after the
small Pox and Measles; in this case, besides the common Means, this is
excellent.

Take Felix Wurtz his brown Ointment, two drams; Honey of Roses, an ounce and
half; Spirit of Vitriol, half a scruple: Mix them.

13. Under the Tongue happens a Rannula or Baetrachios, a Tumor which is more
frequently produced from Phlegm, than from any other part of the Blood; and it
is often cured by this Powder.

Take Pepper, Ginger, of each a dram; Sal Gemmae, and common Salt, of each two
scruples; wild Marjoram, Calamint, Orise-roots, Hermodactils, of each half a
dram; Mastick, a scruple: Make it into a Powder.

Strew it often upon the Tumor, which if it goes not away, open it in one or
more places, that the moisture may come forth, and apply Honey of Roses to the
Wound; some in this case use an actual Cautery, but I rather approve of a
Launcet.

14. For the Corruption of the Gums, this Powder is good.

Take Roots of Comfrey, Pomegranate-rinds, of each a dram; Frankincense,
Mirrhe, white Vitriol, of each half a dram; burnt Vitriol, a scruple: Make it
into a Powder.

15. Epulis, a Tumor of the Gums must be suddenly taken away by a Thread or
Knife, lest it should turn into a Cancer.

16. For the taking off an ulcerated and rotten Uvula, Bartholine has
described an excellent Instrument in his Anatomical Observations; but it may be
conveniently enough cut off with a pair of Scissers, and the Bleeding may be
stopped with Cyprus Vitriol, Unguentum Aegyptiacum, or the like, is sufficient to
perfect a Cure. Fabritius Hildanus judiciously took it away by the help of a
Thread, which is to be imitated by them who fear an Incision.

CHAP. II. Of the internal Parts of the Head.
NOw we approach Palas's Tower, which is sometimes empty, and sometimes filled
with Folly; wherein, if an ill mind, be, as it were, a familiar Inhabitant,
Virtue must prudently look to it self; but yet let it continue its Dominion,
whilst its Enemy in the mean time lurking in some corner, shall no where be at
quiet.

Before we can enter into it, and look into the Brain, there are two Curtains
to be drawn open, the Pia and Dura Matter.

The Dura Matter in the outside rougher than in the inside, encompasseth the
Brain very loosly, lest its Arbitrary Motion should be hindered, dividing the
same by the help of certain foldings, which is called Falx, into the right and
left part, and also separating it from the Cerebellum. In this Falx are always
found four Cavities, sometimes seven; in which many of the branches of the
Carotide-Arteries are inserted, afterward joining with the Jugular Veins.

These Cavities have the use and substance of Veins, so that they may not
unproperly be reckoned among the Veins.

The Pia Matter is more sensible, and has more Arteries than the Dura, which
does not only invest the whole Brains, but also enters the winding every where;
which, for this cause may more easily be separated.

We do divide the Brain into three Parts, which are, 1. The Brain it self. 2.
The Spinal Marrow. 3. The Cerebellum, or little Brain.

The Brain is of an Ashy color, and of a softer substance than Marrow (which
is both whiter and solider) whence also it was wont to be called Rind; it
receives several Branches from the Carotide-Artery, and is destitute both of
Nerves and Sense.

It has diverse turnings and windings, which fold in deeply, especially those
in the forepart of the Head, where the great Fissure divides the Brain
outwardly even to the Marrow.

The Marrow is the Mother of all Nerves; within the Skull it is called the
Marrow of the Brain; but without it is termed the Spinal Marrow.

The Cerebellum, or little Brain, is more of an Ash Color than White, receives
Arteries from the Cervicalis and Carotide; yet there are fewer branches here
than in the Brain, as being much less.

It has no windings, but is made up as it were of several thin plates lying
one upon another.

These being thus considered, the Anatomist takes off some part of the Brain
with a Knife, and forthwith the Corpus Callosum, and the Fornix joining to it,
come in view.

Under these laterally lie two great Ventricles, in figure resembling a
Horse-hoof, which the Septum Lucidum distinguishes into the right and left, or
into the first and second.

In them is contained the Rete-Mirabile, or Plexus Choroides, consisting of
many little Glandules, composed from the branches of the temporal Artery,
twisted together in form of a Net.

In the forepart these Ventricles are united, and make a third.

In this third Ventricle are two Cavities; the first of them runs to the
Infundibulum, and to the Glandula Pituitaria, the other to the fourth Ventricle
contained in the Cerebellum; above this Ventricle are observed four round
Bodies, which are called Testes and Nates, to which joins the Glandula
Pinealis, which is falsely called by some the seat of the Soul* Of late the
famous Sylvius has demonstrated it not to reside in the Ventricles, but
without them; by whom also it is esteemed but a Glandule: and that with more
reason, because that both he and I have found in it not seldom two or three
Stones, but sometimes four, which we yet keep by us.

The Bodies being removed, eight pair of Nerves appear, which we have already
treated of; on the forepart of whom joins the Rete Mirabile of Galen, which is
a complication of the Cervical and Carotide-Arteries.

After these, the Cerebellum comes in view, like a double Globe, in the midst
of which is the Processus vermiformis, and Pons Varolii, under it lies the
fourth Ventricle.

Last of all, the Spinal Marrow shows it self, divided in its beginning into
two Parts, not unlike a Writing-Pen, which descending down the Back, imparts
its branches over the whole Body.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. In Wounds of the Dura Matter, two Symptoms render their Cure very
troublesome, to wit, a Flux of Blood and extreme Pain; if the Skill be not
sufficiently open, without any delay the Trepan is to be applied on the Part
affected, and forthwith the extravasated and grumous Blood being discharged,
let this Ointment be applied.

Take Manna of Frankincense, two drams; Aloes, one dram; Mirrhe, a dram and
half; the softest Hares hair, half a scruple; white of an Egg, as much as
sufficieth to make it into a Liniment.

The Powder is also very useful, that is described in the Chapter of particular
Wounds, in the second Part of this Surgery.

To mitigate the pain, Oil of Roses, Violets and Myrtles used warm, as also the
warm Blood of a Hen or Pigeon, etc. is very much commended.

The Flux of Blood and the Pain being ceased, the following Medicines are to be
used, which are not to be left off, unless the Matter begins to flow too
plentifully.

Take Oil of Turpentine, two ounces; Spirit of Wine, Syrup of Wormwood, of each
an ounce: Mix them.

But if a Gangrene or Putrefaction should happen, the following Liniment is of
great use.

Take Sarcocols, Mirrhe, Aloes, of each a dram: Syrup of Wormwood, Honey of
Roses, of each two drams; Ung. Aegyptiacum, two drams and an half; Aq. vitae,
an ounce and half; White Wind, an ounce: Let them boil gently, then strain them.

Neither do I apprehend any danger is to be feared in the taking off part of
this Membrane when putrifi'd, so that you can come at it with a pair of
Scissers, and that the Sinus or Pia Matter be not hurt.

2. When the Pia Matter is likewise affected, the Surgeon must abstain from
all Oils, although they be drying, lest a Corruption of the soft Brain be
caused: Drying Cephalic powders are very convenient to be used here. But
seeing that these Wounds for the most part are Mortal, I shall say no more of
them.

CHAP. III. Of the Neck.
THe Neck under the Scarf-skin, Skin, and fleshy Membrane, and the common and
proper Membrane of the Muscles, has of each side four Muscles.

Of these, the Longus and Scalenus bend it.

Transversalis and Spinatus draw it back of each side.

It has five Veins, Cervicalis, Muscula Superior and Inferior, Carotis,
Interna and Externa.

And as many Arteries, Cervicalis, Muscula Superior and Inferior, Carotis
Interna and Externa.

It has Nerves from the Par Vagum, and the Spinal Marrow.

In the forepart of it, are many Glandules, which are greater in Women than in
Men.

Under these the Larinx, the Organ of the sound lies, composed of five
Cartilages, which are, 1. Thyroides, or Buckler-like. 2. Crycoides, or Annular.
3. Arytenoides. 4. Glottis. 5. Epiglottis.


It is moved by six pair of Muscles, which are, 1. Hyothyrodaei, the pair that
lift up the Larinx. 2. Bronchii, the pair that pull it down. 3. Cricothiroidaei
antici, the pair that dilate. 4. Cricothiroidaei laterales, pursing it
together. 5. Thyro-arythenoidaei, that open it. 6. Arythenoidaei, Sphincters
that close it.


After these, the Almonds or Paristhima (by some called Tonsils) offer
themselves; then the Pharynx, to which appertain seven Muscles, by whose
assistance the Meat and Drink are swallowed.

1, 2, Sphenopharyngaei, which raise up the Pharinx.

3, 4. Cephalopharyngaei, moving it inward.

5, 6. Stylopharyngaei, dilating it.

7. Constrinctor or sphynctor, which closes the Gullet.

The back-part of the Neck has seven Vertebra's, the processes of some of
which are perforated, to give passage to the Vessels that carry the Blood into
the Brain.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. We have already sufficiently treated of the Cure of Scrophulas or the Kings
Evil; I will only give you here the Oil of Langius, whose Virtues are very
excellent, not only in the Kings Evil, but also in malignant and sordid Ulcers,
if it be carefully used.

Take Oil of Philosophers or Brick, half a pound; Frankincense, Mastick, Gum
Arabic, Turpentine, of each three drams; pound them togather, and distill them
in an Alembick; then add to the distillation Salt of Holm-Oak, two drams; and
distill it again, and reserve the distillation in a Glass for use.

In the room of the Salt of Holm-Oak, which grows not in Holland, Sal Gemmae
may serve instead of it.

2. In a Hernia gutturis, or Bronchocele, seldom Medicaments effect any thing,
when for the most part the Cause of the Disease (to wit, preternatural Phlegm
mixed with Wind) is contained in a peculiar Bladder, and the Tumor lies under
the Muscles, having its Original not from the Glandules, but from the Aspera
Arteria, or Windpipe; yet in the beginning, the following do good.

Take Roots of Ireos, Galangal, of each a dram and half; Pennyroyal, Savory,
Rupture-wort, of each a dram; Seeds of Fennel, Annise, of each a dram;
Parsly-seeds, half a dram; Long-Pepper, Spikenard, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each
two drams Mirrhe, half a dram; Burnt-Alom, half an ounce; White Sugar, three
ounces: Make it into a fine Powder.

Let the Patient take of this Powder each Morning a dram and half in White Wine.

Take Gum Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Bdellium, dissolved in Vinegar, of each an
ounce; powder of Orrise-roots, two drams; Mustard and Nettle-seeds, of each a
dram; Pulp of Coloquintida, Eastern Saffron, of each a scruple; Sal Gemmae,
Alom, of each a dram; Naval-Pitch, six drams; Rosin of the Pine, an ounce: Make
it into a Plaster.

These Medicines effecting nothing, after this manner the Tumor may be taken
away. First, Take up the Skin, and divide it long-ways; then it being separate
of each side to the bottom, from the Tumor, take out the Bladder, whole if
possible; for if any part of it be left behind, the little Artery which brings
nourishment to the Tumor, must be divided; lest it increase a new. Then let the
Part affected be washed with Vinegar, wherein a little Salt and Nitre has been
dissolved; for the Flux of Blood is not in this case at all considerable;
Lastly, Bring the Lips of the Wound together with a stitching Plaster, it being
not necessary to use a Needle here.

Of the Angina and luxation of the Vertebra's of the Neck, we have spoken of in
their places.

The End of the second Book of the third Part.
The THIRD BOOK Of the Thorax or Breast.
CHAP. I. Of the External Parts of the Breast.
THe middle Region of the Body, whose upper part is called the Shoulders,
forepart the Breast, hinder-part, the Back; under proper and common Teguments,
has proper and common Muscles.

The common are those of the lower Belly and Scapula's; those we have shown
already; these are four.

1. Serratus Anticus minor, which brings the Scapula forward.

2. Trapesius, or Cucullaris, which moves it upward, and obliquely backward.

3. Romboides, which moves it obliquely downwards.

4. Levator.

The proper Muscles of the Thorax are twelve,

1. Subclavius or Extensor.

2. Serratus Anticus major, or the inferior raiser up the Ribs.

3. Serratus posticus superior, or the superior riser up of the Ribs.

4. Serratus posticus inferior, or the depressor of the Ribs.

5. Sacrolumbus, which draws the Breast together.

6. Triangularis, which likewise draws the Breast together.

Under these Muscles lie the Breasts, in both Sexes abounding with quantity of
Fat, and in the Female with many Glandules.

The Back and Loins (whose Muscles in this place we are forced to describe)
have four pair of Muscles.

1. Quadratus, or the flexor of the Vertebra's.

2. Longissimus, or first extender of the Vertebra's.

3. Sacrum, or the second extender.

4. Semispinatum, or the raiser up of the Back.

After the Musclers, follow the Collar-bones, the Shoulder-blades, the
Breast Bone, the Ribs, and the Vertebra's; of the Veins, Arteries and Nerves we
have formerly treated.

The Clavicles, or Collar-Bones, being spungy bones, are joined to the upper
process of the Shoulder Blade, by strong Ligaments and movable Cartilages.

The Scapula or Shoulder Blade is a broad and thin Bone, lying upon the outside
of the Ribs, furnished with two Ligaments, three processes, and five appendices.

The Sternum, or Breast Bone being distinguished in Infants, by seven or eight
lines, and by three or four in old people, is very spungy, and has in its
lower part a Cartilage, called Cartilago ensiformis or mucronata.

The Ribs in each Sex are twelve; the seven uppermost, which are the true, are
joined with a double Tubercle to the Vertebra's, but with a Cartilage to the
Sternum, are hard and round; the five lowermost, which are the Bastard-Ribs,
are lesser, softer and shorter, having Cartilages about the Os Sternum, but not
touching it.

Between these Ribs on each side, are Muscles found, which are called
Intercostals, eleven within, and as many without; so that in all there are
forty four, the Fibers here are placed cross-wise.

In the Cavity of each Rib, formed in the lower part of it, resides a Vein,
Artery and Nerve, which extend themselves into the middle of the foresaid
Muscles.

The Vertebra's of the Back are for the most part accounted twelve, and have
nothing considerable.

Chirurgical Considerations.
I omit here diverse operations, having already treated largely enough of them
before.

What now offers it self, is a Fistula of the Breast, of a more difficult cure
in that, than in any other part, by reason of the continual motion of the
Muscles; therefore it is highly necessary to distinguish these Fistula's; for
the oblique do very hardly admit of any Cure: Those that perforate the Breast,
are not easily made whole again; those that have their rise from between the
Pleura and the Muscles, the matter falls down; whence it comes to pass, that
afterward it is difficultly discharged; therefore in this case there
necessarily is a short breathing, and a slower motion of the Breast: The
Callous is to be removed by the same Remedies we have set down in the Chapter
of Fistula's, and so sometimes the Pleura, and the flesh of the Muscles unite
again; but if these effect nothing, let the Surgeon put a little crooked
Silver-pipe into the Fistula, so that the end of it may touch the bottom,
through which let him pass a Needle fitted with Silk, answering to the
crookedness of the Pipe, which being done, let him with the Needle perforate
the Skin, then the Needle being drawn through, let both ends of the Thread be
tied together, and the Thread every day be anointed with some Exedent Medicines,
and the Callosity being taken away, let the Ulcer be skinned. The Instruments
which are used in this case, are described in Tab. 38. Figure 5. of Scultetus,
of the old Edition.

The Breasts of Women often in those that give suck, from the great quantity of
Milk, wax hard and painful, and by the Dutch is called Drop; which affect may
be cured in one days space, with compound Ointment of Marshmallows, the watery
matter being sucked out by a Woman or Whelp: but this discharge being neglected
or delayed, every day the Breast grows harder and harder, nay, becomes
enflamed; then Bleeding, Purging, Sweating is requisite: Outwardly this
Cataplasm may be applied.

Take meal of Marshmallows, of Fenugreek, of each an ounce; Flowers of Elders,
Camomile, of each an handful; red Roses, two pugils; Crumbs of course Bread* an
ounce and half: Boil them in Ale, adding to them of Rose-Vinegar, an ounce.
Make a Cataplasm.

The Flux of Humors and Pain being ceased, the remaining may be discussed by
the following Cataplasm.

Take Meal of Beans, of Linseed and Fenugreek-seed, of each an ounce;
Cummin-seed, three drams; boil them in Wine, adding to it compound Ointment of
Marshmallows, Oil of Camomile, of each half an ounce: Make it into a Cataplasm.

When it begins to apostumate, Maturatives are to be used.

Take Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows* of each a handful; Powder of Linseed, an
ounce; of Fenugreek-seed, an ounce and half; Leaven, half an ounce; boil them
in Milk, adding to them Vnguentum Basilicon, an ounce; Saffron, a scruple: Make
it into a Cataplasm.

The Tumor being suppurated, must be opened with a Caustic; or, what is
better, with a Launcet, and put a Tent into it, dipped in common Balsom of
Brimstone until the end of the Cure; laying upon the Breast Emplastrum
Diasulphuris Bulandi.

3. A Gibbosity arises from the spine of the Back, when the Vertebra's are
removed outwardly, or of one side, from their natural place; which is
occasioned sometimes by an External Cause, some by an Internal, especially when
some pituitous Humor is collected about them; this Humor must be taken away by
discussive Oil; and Plasters, before what is started out, can by a
Steel-compress, fitted to the Body of the Patient, be reduced: This reduction
is not so much performed by the Compress, as it is by the Emollient quality of
the Iron: For this reason, it is necessary that the Patient, though cured, for
a year or more after, use another Bandage, that the soft Bones may not again
start out.

It is here likewise to be observed, that in the middle of the Back, about the
seventh Vertebra, with great success may an Issue be made, to intercept Rheums
flowing to the Hip, Kidneys, Feet, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Internal Parts of the Thorax.
THe Breast now comes to be opened, that we may view the Fountain of Life,
which the Celestial Truth affirms to consist in the Blood; for what reason is
it therefore that the Sovereign Sanguification is not attributed to the Heart,
where every where, and by all, it is called the Original of Life.

Within, the Breast is invested by the Pleura, which is afterward doubled, and
at length quadrupled, extending it self from the Vertebra's to the Sternum, and
then it is called Mediastinum, dividing the Lungs and Thorax.

Near to the Throat there adheres to the Mediastinum, a Glandulous Body called
Thymus.

The Lungs drawing in the Air, and so cooling the Heart, is furnished to this
purpose with a Trachea, Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe; this lies upon the
Gullet, and consists of Cartilaginous Rings, and a double Membrane.

The outermost of these Membranes which is the thinner, arises from the
Pleura; the innermost, which is the thicker, from the Dura Matter.

The annulary Cartilages are joined together with Ligaments, and make not a
perfect Circle, as being destitute of a fourth part that lies upon the Gullet.

The Windpipe distributes Branches through the whole Lungs, which are strong
enough, but not at all Cartaliginous.

The Lungs themselves covered with a thin, porous Tunicle, consist of a soft,
red, spongy substance.

In the forepart they adhere to the Sternum; in the back-part to the
Vertebra's, filling the greatest part of the Breast.

It has seven lesser Vessels, of which we shall speak in their places.

The Heart, the Workhouse of the Blood, the Fountain and Origin of Life, as
the Sacred Writ it self also witnesses, is included in a certain Case, called
by Anatomists, Pericardium: It consists of two Membranes, the outermost comes
from the Mediastinum; the innermost from the Vessels of the Heart; it contains
a clear watery Liquor, void of all Acrimony, which we no longer doubt of to be
brought from the Ductus's of the Limpha.

The Heart it self consists of a fleshy, serene and hard substance, which is
invested with a proper Tunicle, furnished with Fibers of all sorts, and like a
Muscle is continually moved.

It is placed in the middle of the Breast, but the point of it inclines
sometimes to the left side.

In Figure it is like to a Pineapple, having in its upper part two Auricles or
little Ears, which always beat before the Heart it self.

In old people, the right Auricle is bigger than the left, which in Infants is
the contrary; in the throwing forth of the Blood, the Auricles, as well as the
Heart it self, are purst together, and dilated as often as they take in the
Blood; and this Constriction and Dilation makes the Pulse.

For the concoction, reception and throwing forth of the Blood, it has two
Cavities, and four Vessels.

The Cavities are distinguished by a fleshy Division, in which I could not yet
find any way appointed for the motion of the Blood out of the right Ventricle
into the left, although many Anatomists do certainly affirm it.

These Cavities are divided into the right and left; the right, which is the
greater, receives the Vena Cava, and Arteria pulmonalis, or Vena Arteriosa; the
left, which is the least, receives the Arteria aorta, or great Artery, and Vena
pulmonalis, or Arteria venosa.

Of these Vessels, as also of the Nerves, and Chylous passages, or the
Thoracick lacteal Veins, we have treated of in the first Book.

Under the Windpipe in the Cavity of the Breast, lies the Oesophagus or
Gullet, resting upon the Vertebra's.

About the fifth Vertebra of the Back, it inclines a little to the right side,
that it may give way to the Arteria aorta, unto the eleventh Vertebra; thence
with a straight Ductus it passes the Diaphragm into the lower Belly.

It consists of a double Membrane; the outermost is fleshy, having straight and
round Fibers, the innermost transverse and oblique: Many add to these a third
from the Peritonaeum, and rightly in my opinion.

The Diaphragm, in nature of a Fan, serving to respiration, divides the Thorax
from the Abdomen, and adheres to all the Bastard-Ribs, to the Cartilage of the
Breast Bone about the Vertebra's, sending two fleshy Processes to the lower
parts.

Its edges round about are fleshy, variously movable like a Muscle, but its
Center Membranous and very sensible.

It has three perforations, 1. In the middle of it, through which the Vena
Cava passes. 2. In the left side, through which the Gullet, with the adjacent
Nerves. 3. About the Vertebra's, for the passage of the Arteria aorta, with the
Vena azygos.

It receives more Nerves than any other part of the Body from the Collar-Bones
to the Feet, which arise not only out of the Brain, from the Parvagum, but also
from the Spinal Marrow, and from the fifth and sixth Vertebra of the Neck. Of
the other Vessels we have already treated.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Pleura is not only subject to Inflammation, upon which follows a
Pleurisy, an Empiema, and Impostumation; but also a certain pain, which a salt
Humor produces: This may be distinguished from a Pleurisy, because here is a
dry Cough, yet no Fever, also free breathing enough. I have used to remove this
by Bleeding and Sweating, and if you fear a Pleurisy, apply outwardly this
Plaster.

Take Marrow out of an Oxes-bone, Ducks-grease, of each three ounces; the
Mussilage of Marshmallows, Linseed, Fenugreek-seed, of an ounce; Frankincense,
Mastick, of each half an ounce; Oil of Nucista expressed, two drams; yellow Wax,
as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

2. Mediastinum, has not so great a Cavity in Man, as in Dogs and other
creatures; yet it happens sometimes that a purulent matter descends between the
two Membranes of it, which can by means be evacuated by the Lungs; therefore we
are forced to perforate the Sternum with a Trepan, that so through the made
Orifice, by the use of Tents, Spunges and other Instruments, the Matter may be
discharged.

3. In that kind of Quinsey, which we above call Cynanche, where the Patient is
almost suffocated, we remedy by Laringotomia, or opening the Windpipe; the
Disease it self is far more dangerous than this Operation; therefore it would
be well if it was oftener practiced; nevertheless there is required a diligent
consideration, that the other parts, to wit, the Lungs, Pleura, Gullet, etc. be
not also enflamed, or already full of matter, which may frustrate your labor,
and afford cause of scandal; but every thing being well weighed, the Operation
is to be performed in this manner; Let the Head be a little bent backwards,
that the Windpipe may the more plainly appear, and the annulary Cartilages
recede the further the one from the other; then divide the Skin according to
the length of the Larinx unto the hollow, and let a stander-by with his Fingers
pluck open the Skin of each side, that the Surgeon may see the two long
Muscles, Sterno hyoidei, which he must remove a little asunder either with a
Knife of Wood or Bone; then the Larinx appearing, he must make his Incision
with a Launcet, in the middle between the third and fourth annulary Cartilage,
taking great care that he hurt not the Cartilages themselves; upon the Breaths
coming forth, take out the Knife, and put a Silver Pipe into the Wound, which
must not be so long as to reach the hinder part of the Windpipe, lest it cause
a continual Cough; the danger of suffocation being over, which for the most
part happens to be about the third or fourth day, or at least ought then to be,
the Pipe must be taken forth, and the Wound is to be cured in the ordinary
manner according to Art, from which it differs not.

4. It Is no new thing for Worms to generate in the Pericardium, which, except
killed, corrode the very Heart it self. They may be destroyed with a Decoction
of Scordium, Wormwood, Centaury, etc. drunk twice or thrice a day.

Concerning the Wounds of the Lungs, Heart and Diaphragm, see our Surgery. A
Wound of the Gullet is cured after the same manner as that of the Stomach.

The End of the third Book of the third Part.
The FOURTH BOOK. Of the Lower Belly.
CHAP. I. Of the External Parts of this Belly.
THE lower Cavity, properly called the Belly, is divided into three parts; of
which,

1. Is the Epigastrium, each side of which is called Hypochondria.

2. The Region of the Navel whose sides are called Ilium.

3. Hypogastrium, the sides of which are the Groins.

The lower hairy part is called Pubes.

The Abdomen under common Teguments, has ten Muscles, of each side five, very
necessary for the exclusion of the grosser Excrements contained in the Guts;
they are these.

1. Obliquely descending, which in the upper part, the Navel; in the lower, in
Man, the process of the Peritonaeum; In Woman, the long Ligaments of the Womb
perforates.

2. The Oblique ascending.

3. The Recti, or straight.

4. The Pyramidal.

5. The Trarsverse.

In the middle of the Abdomen, between the two straight Muscles, arises the
Linea Alba, or White-Line, from the meeting of the broad Tendons of the other
thin Muscles, which is very sensible.

Of the Veins, Arteries and Nerves, both of the outward and inward parts of the
lower Belly, we have already treated of in the first Book; as likewise
something of the Bones. But the more curious Examiner meets withal, first, five
Vertebra's of the Loins, which are very full of holes, and greater and thicker
than all the rest.

Next to them follows the Os Sacrum, which is triangular; in old people being
only of one Bone, but in young, consisting of five or six.

To this is joined the Os Coccygis, bent in Women more outward, in Men more
inward.

On the sides of the Os Sacrum is the Os Innominatum, or Coxae, consisting of
three Bones joined together with a Cartilage. Of these,

1. Is the Os Ilium, much thicker in Women than in Men.

2. Os Pudis, more easily separable in the forepart in Women than in Men.

3. Os Ischion, or Coxae, furnished with a large Cavity, which is called
Acetabulum or Pixis, appointed to receive the head of the Thigh Bone.

Chirurgical Consideration.
The outward Division of the Lower Belly, plainly declares what Internal Parts
may be affected: In the right Hypochondrium, the Liver is situated, extending
it self beyond the Bastard-Ribs two fingers breadth, to the Sword-like
Cartilage of the Sternum.

In the middle lies the Stomach, extending it self to the softer parts of this
Belly, so that it reaches four fingers breadth beyond the Bastard-Ribs; Beyond
the soft places near the Kidneys lies the Spleen.

In the middle of the Vmbilical Region, and about it lies the Small Gut, which
being wounded, is most dangerous.

In the right side, about the Kidney, the Gut Colon takes its rise, transversly
running between the Stomach and Navel to the left Kidney, where winding
downwards, and becoming narrower, is the frequent receptacle of Wind, and
whence long pain and great tension, which is undeservedly attributed to the
Spleen on the other side, the Intestine rests upon the Mesentery, as does the
Stomach upon the Pancreas.

In the middle of the Hypogastrium, are the Bladder and Womb placed, and under
them the Intestinum rectum.

On the Side lie the Spermatick Vessels, and the Glandules, in which both
benign and malignant Buboes are produced.

But all these Parts cannot be wounded, except the Peritonaeum and Omentum be
first perforated, yet in many men the Omentum descends not below the Navel; and
contrariwise in others, it reaches to the Os Pubis it self.

CHAP. II. Of the Internal Parts of the Abdomen.
THe first of the Internal Parts is the Peritonaeum, comprehending all the
others, before and behind, above and below.

It is a double Membrane; its rise is rather deduced from the membranous
quality of the Soul, than from the Meninges of the Brain.

It is joined to the Diaphragm, and to the first and third Vertebra of the
Loins.

It is thicker in Women from the Navel to the Privy Parts, and therefore
stronger, terminating about the Os pubis.

In Men it is thicker from the Navel to the Diaphragm, and after it has
received the Spermatick Vessels, as in a Sheath, it sends them through the
outer Membrane to the Testicles, where it constitutes their first Coat. Between
the foldings of this Peritonaeum, lie four Vmbilical Vessels.

1. The Vmbilical Vein.

2, 3. The two Vmbilical Arteries.

4. Vrachus, coming from the Navel, which is nothing else but an indurated knot
of the aforesaid Vessels.

In Infants these Vessels are open, in old people altogether closed, and turned
into Ligaments: Yet I could never by any means observe in Abortives of six,
seven or eight months, the Vrachum pervious into the Bladder; for neither Probe
nor Wind would pass.

The Umbilical Vein goes to the Liver, the Vrachus to the Bladder, both the
Umbilical Arteries to the Iliack Branches of the great Artery.

The Omentum or Caul, keeping the Stomach and Intestines warm, is very fat and
double; yet it consists of very thin Coats, which are perforated with many
little holes.

It takes its rise from the Peritonaeum, under which it also lies, for the most
part extending it self as far as the Gut Colon, and sometimes as far as to the
Os Pubis.

The Stomach, the Workhouse of the Chyle, is composed of three Tunicles; the
outwardmost is common from the Peritonaeum, the innermost from the Dura Meninx,
the middlemost is proper to it self; the first is the thickest, the middlemost
fleshy, and the innermost wrinkled.

It has Fibers of all sorts, inwardly crusted over with spungy flesh.

It is situated in the middle of the Hypogastrium resting upon the Vertebra's
of the Loins; its left Orifice is called Os, or Stomachus; its right Orifice
Pylorus.

The Guts are joined to the Stomach, which convey the Chyle, and expel the
Excrements; they are almost of the same substance with the Stomach, and are all
divided very well into the thick and thin.

The thin Guts are,

1. The Duodenum, in which the Vesica Fellea, with the Ductus Coledochus, and
the new Ductus Pancreaticus are inserted.

2. Jejunum, in which are more Lacteal Veins than in any of the rest.

3. Ileon, which is the longest of all.

The thick Guts are,

1. Coecum, with its worm-like appendix.

2. Colon, with two outward Ligaments, and one internal Valve.

3. Rectum, with the two Muscles, Any levatores, and with one Sphincter all
these Guts are joined together by the help of the Mesentery, and also to the
Vertebra's of the Loins.

The Mesentery consists of a double strong Membrane, with many Glandules
between each Membrane, which are so very small, that they can scarce be
perceived by the Eye; but commonly after a long sickness, three excepted, they
show themselves, and are greater than their natural constitution, long, white
and hard.

The greatest of them is seated in the midst of the Mesentery, which being
pressed, yields Milky juice, sometimes thicker, otherwhile thinner, which is
nothing but Chyle, as likewise do the other two, which for the most part are in
the left side, under the Emulgent Vein, above the Muscle Psoas, not far from
the Vertebra's of the Loins.

As these Glandules receive many Lacteal Veins, so each of them again produces
a Branch, which forthwith being joined together, make the Thoracick Lacteal
Vein, which ascending, as has already been declared, carries the Chyle to the
Heart.

The Pancreas or Sweetbread, lies under the Stomach like a Pillow, joined to
the Gut Duodenum, into the which the late invented passage, from the Author,
called Ductus Wyrsungianus, penetrates; in this is often Choler found, but
never Blood.

The Spleen, which perfects the Blood, contains an Acid humor, which it sends
not to the Stomach by the Vasa brevia, but to the Liver by the Ramus Splenicus.

It consists of a rare substance, covered with a proper Tunicle, not proceeding
from the Peritonaeum.

It is of a darkish red color.

It joins to the bottom of the Stomach by the means of the short vessels, and
to the Bastard Ribs, and left Kidney, to the Caul and Peritonaeum, and to the
fleshy part of the Diaphragm, by the assistance of Carnous Fibers.

There is no Bowel abounds with so many Arteries as the Spleen, except the
Brain.

The Nerves, which it receives from our seventh pair, are distributed through
its Tunicle, rather than through its Parenchyma.

It is not placed in the fore, but back-part of the left side, near the left
Kedney, lying upon the Bastard Ribs and Vertebra's, which is to be well
observed.

The Liver, the Instrument of Blood, Mother of the great Veins, is situate in
the right Hypocondrium, and covers a great part of the Stomach.

It is divided (as it were) into two parts, by the Umbilical Vein, which
afterbirth serves it for a Ligament.

It is a great, thick and hard Body, of a red color.

It is fastened to the Diaphragm by two Ligaments from the Peritonaeum, and to
the Muscles of the Abdomen by the Umbilicial Vein.

Some few Arteries it receives from Coeliaca, and serveral Nerves from the
Spinal Marrow, and from our seventh pair.

In the right side of it, underneath, is inserted the Vesicula Fellis, or Gall,
with the Porus Biliarius; the branches of both together with the branches of
the Vena Porta, are comprehended in a certain common Bladder, called by
Glisson, Capsula; these branches of the Vesica Fellis and Ductus Colydochus, or
Biliarius, being detained in the Liver, are dispersed through its whole
Parenchyma, every where included in the abovenamed Capsula, which is red, about
the thickness of an Artery, taking its Original, as it appears, from the
Peritionaeum.

The External Branches being joined, perforate the Gut Duodenum, taking two
little Arteries from the Coeliaca, and Veins from the Vena Porta, called
Gemelle, together with the Bladder it self.

The Kidneys, which depurate the Blood, consist of a peculiar hard flesh,
invested with a proper Tunicle,

Outwardly they are encompassed with Fat, and with a large, loose Coat from the
Peritonaeum.

They lie upon the Muscles of the Loins (yet the left is higher than the right)
within the folding of the Peritonaeum.

And above the Kidneys are two hollowed Glandules, called Renaes succenturiati,
or Capsulae atribilariae; these are furnished with Branches from the Emulgent
Veins and Arteries, and with Nerves from the Par vagum.

The Kidney being opened, appear the nine Carunculae pupillares, through which
the Serum distills into the Pelvis, to be carried through the Ureters into the
Bladder.

The Ureters or the Urinary passage, whilst within the Kidneys themselves, is
very large, but when come from them, is very narrow; it is furnished all along
with two Coats, the innermost is proper, the outer common from the Peritonaeum.

Within the duplicature of the Peritonaeum, it descends downward upon the
Muscles of the Loins to the Bladder, into whose Neck it is inserted; then it
ascends upwards between the Membranes, where it perforates the innermost Coat;
and through the same hole, together with the Ureter of the other side, enters
the Bladder, which is so very little, and so straightly closed, that there
needs not here any Valve to hinder the return back again of the Urine.

Vesicae Vrinaria, or Bladder consists likewise of two Membranes, the External
is thick and fleshy, the innermost not.

It is seated between the Duplicature of the Peritonaeum, in the Cavity of the
Hypogastrium, which is commonly called Pelvis.

In Women it is joined before by its Neck to the Vagina uteri.

The Neck of the Bladder is very fleshy, and by the assistance of the Fibra's,
like a Sphincter it opens and closes the Bladder; in men it is longer,
narrower, and more crooked; in Women, shorter, wider, and straighter.

The Vessels that bring Blood to the Bladder, are the branches of the
Hypogastrick Vessels; it receives many Nerves from the seventh pare, and from
the Os Sacrum.

The Spermatick Vessels yet remain, which wonderfully vary according to the
diversity of the Sex.

In Men the Spermatick Veins and Arteries first appear, of each side one, which
serve for the bringing of the Blood to the Testicles for its preparation.

The right Spermatick Vein comes from the descending Trunk of the Vena Cava,
the left from the left Emulgent, and both the Arteries from the great Artery.

These four Vessels being very crooked, and covered by the Ureters, pass to the
Testicles; but before they come to them: near, and in the process of the
Peritonaeum, are united by several inosculations, and joining themselves with
the Nerves, make one Body, which is called Pampiniforme.

The Testicle, or Stones themselves, the Organs of Seed, have each a Muscle,
called Cremaster, they have two common Tunicles; and three proper.

The common are,

1. That wrinkled Purse which is called the Scrotum, to wit, the Skin which is
thinner and softer than in other parts.

2. Dartos, to wit, the Carnosa Membrana, which has many Vessels.

The proper are,

1. Elytroides, arising from the process of the Peritonaeum.

2. Erithroides, from the Muscle Cremaster.

3. Albuginea, from the Spermatick Vessels.

The substance of the Testicles is white, soft, thin, something like to the
Glandules.

Upon them with a transverse situation lies the Corpus vermiforme, which
sensibly becoming narrower, constitutes the Vas ejaculatorium, which is
Epididymis, or Parastata.

Vas ejaculatorium, is white and hollow like to the Ureters, which carries the
Seed about the neck of the Bladder into the Vesiculae seminales, where it is
kept till a convenient time.

Proceeding a little further, before, you shall find two great Glandules, in
which, an Oily Liquor is contained, to mitigate the acrimony of the Urine,
these are called Prostatae.

At last comes the Penis or Yard, appointed for the evacuating of the Seed and
Urine.

Its Substance is peculiar to it self, the like being not in the whole Body.

It has no Scarf-skin, and is destitute of Fat, even in the most fat Bodies.

It is covered with a loose Skin, which is double, and makes the Praeputium,
and covers the Glans, to which it is tied by means of the Froenum or Bridle.

Under the Skin and fleshy Membrane, lie the Vessels above described.

Near to these are the four Muscles, which are the two Erectores, and the two
Ejaculatores; under the Muscles, are two Nervous Bodies, which make the
greatest part of the Yard.

By their fungousness, rendering it either stiff or flacid. In the lowest part
of the Penis appears,

The Vrethra, or passage for the Urine, consisting of two Coats, the innermost
is very thin and sensible, the outermost thick and fleshy.

In Women, the Spermatick parts in this, differ from Men's, that they are
shorter and less, and by a wreathing and winding approach the Testicles;
likewise they communicate several Branches to the Uterine Tubes, and to the
Womb it self.

The softer Stones are placed on the sides of the Womb, qualified to elaborate
the Seed; they are covered with only one Coat, and that is proper.

They have no Parastats. The Testicles inwardly are full of little Bladders,
which both contain the Seed, and by means of the Tubes conveigh it to the Womb.

These Tubes join to the Womb of each side, and to the Testicles but only of
one side.

These have a Cavity consisting of a double coat, which also contains some
little Bladders, in which many will have the Seed to be further perfected.

The Womb, the receptacle both of the Seed and Child, is situate in the middle
of the Hypogastrium, called Pelvis, between the straight Gut and the Bladder.

It has two strong and thick Coats the first, which comes from the
Peritonaeum, the other is proper, and between both many fleshy Fibers.

It is conveniently divided into the Fundus or Botton, the Orifice and the Neck.

The Fundus, the Globous part of the Womb, has four Ligaments; the two
uppermost are broad and membranous. which are joined to the Os Ilium, the two
lowermost are red and round, and pervious to the Clitoris, thence like a
Goose-foot, destitute altogether of their hollowness, they spread themselves
upon the forepart of the Thigh.

The Orisice of the Womb, which at one time can very straightly close it self
together, yet at another is very dilatable, has in its lower part a Tubercle
or knotty substance, as also many little holes.

The Cervix or Neck of the Womb, appointed to receive the Penis, is very much
wrinkled within, and almost eight inches long. To the Dissector comes first in
view the Meatus Vrinarius, or the passage for the Urine, which is short and
straight, then in this Cavity is the Clitoris seated, which is something in
softness or hardness resembling to a Man's Yard.

To this joins the Hymen, perforated in the midst for the passage of the Urine
and Courses, to which join four Caruncles, called Myrtiformes; then follows the
Alae, Nymphae or wings which defend it, and the hairy Lips.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. The Coats of the Peritonaeum grow very thick in Hydropick persons, nay in
process of time they acquire a Cartilaginous hardness, which is very necessary
to be known; in a Paracenthesis or opening of the Abdomen, there oftentimes
suddenly follows a watery swelling in the Cod.

After a Paracenthesis made by the formerly described Instrument; the reason of
it and the passage are true, that the Water by little and little sinks down
above the process of the Peritonaeum, in the space between the Peritonaeum and
the right Muscles of the Abdomen.

2. Sometimes between the fouldings of the Caul is Wind detained, the cause of
long continued pain, which brings along with it fear also of a future abscess.
In this case, besides Sudorificks, we use discussing Oils and Plasters. In the
same folding is Water also sometimes included, which promises no certain hope
of Cure.

Steatoma's and other Abscesses are often generated in the Caul, by reason of
its great quantity of Fat, and its many Glandules, which are very difficultly
cured.

3. The Guts, which move themselves variously like to Worms, sometimes they
fall inwardly into one another, especially when afflicted with great pain; in
this case the Excrements cannot pass to the Fundament: this Malady is called
Miserere mei, or the Iliack Passion; ordinary means effecting nothing, a great
Cupping-glass without Scarification, is often to be applied to the Part
affected, and taken off again; but whether it is not better to divide the
Muscles of the Abdomen and the Peritonaeum, and draw out with the Fingers the
fallen-in Gut, than to suffer the Patient inevitably to die.

4. The Mesentery, from it self, and also from the great number of the
Glandules is subject to Inflammation, Tumors, Ulcers, and to Corruption. These
Diseases, seeing they are very difficultly distinguished from others, require
an experienced Physician; we llkewise speak the same of the Sweetbread, and of
the Spleen: Yet in the mean time, I will communicate to you this Plaster,
whose virtues I have often experienced in the Cure of the Tumor of the said
Parts.

Take Gum Caranna, Ammoniacum, of each a dram; Quicksilver killed with
Turpentine, half an ounce: Make it into a Plaster.

5. The Ligaments of the Liver, which joins it to the Diaphragm, and to the
Sword-like Cartilage, are often so much relaxt, that the Liver descends to the
Region of the Navel; this we remedy with this Plaster.

Take Roots of Bistort, three ounces; Bole-Armenick, two drams; Cummin-seeds, a
dram; Gum Galbanum, an ounce; Ol. Nucistae expressed, a dram: Make it according
to Art into a Plaster.

Moreover the Liver is not freed from Inflammations, Ulcers, nay not from
Gangrene it self.

6. The Gall may be broke from an extreme Cough; a Stone also, nay sometimes
many, are generated in it.

I was last year with a certain Scot, who in the space of four weeks voided two
hundred Stones and more by Stool, and was cured only by the use of the
following purging Conserve.

Take Electuary of the juice of Roses, an ounce; Powder of Jalop, a dram;
Spirit of Salt, a scruple: Make it into a Conserve. Let him take each day or
each other day the quantity of a Nutmeg.

7. For Wounds and Ulcers of the Kidneys, our Surgery furnishes you with
sufficient Medicines.

The Vreters are also subject to Exulcerations, but are cured by the same
means, which are proper in Ulcers of the Kidneys: If they are broke either by a
great Stone, or other Cause, the Disease is accounted incurable.

8. Besides Stones, Worms also are generated in the Bladder, which may be
expelled by Diuretics mixed with those things that kill Worms.

Take Aqua Antinephritica, an ounce; Water of grass, two ounces; Spirit of
Salt, six drops; Corallin, a scruple; Syrup of Wormwood, an ounce; Mix them.
Let the Patient take one half in the Morning, the other in the Evening.

This injection also is covenient, it bringing them forth in a short time.

Take Holy-Thistle-water, six ounces; Mirrhe, Aloes dissolved in Spirit of
Wine, of each a scruple; Honey of Centaury, half an ounce: Mix them.

9. The Testicles may as well as the other parts be inflamed; where, besides
the general means, these outwardly are convenient: In the beginning let this
Cataplasm be applied.

Take Powder of Red-Roses, Myrtles, Balaustians, of each two drams;
Barley-Meal, two ounces and an half; Oil of Roses, Elder-Vinegar, of each an
ounce; Red Wine, as much as is sufficient to make it into a Poultice.

In a vehement pain.
Take Meal of Linced, Barley and Fenugreek, of each an ounce; Leaves of
Henbane, a handful; Mallows, half a handful; Hog's Grease, an ounce; Oil of
Poppy-seeds, an ounce and half; Milk, as much as suffices to make it into a
Cataplasm.

If after the Inflammation an Ulcer follows, let the Surgeon assist Nature
with Suppuratives; the following Plaster is excellent to mollify, ease pain,
and to suppurate, which is also very good in any other Tumor.

Emplastrum Filii Zachariae.
Take Yellow-wax, Oxes-marrow, Hens and Ducks-grease, of each a pound; the
Mussilage of Linseed, Marshmallows, Fenugreek, of each four ounces; Oil of
Linseed, as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

The matter being come to suppuration, must be discharged, which the Surgeon
may do with a Launcet; for I cannot commend to him here a potential Cautery,
from which I have observed very ill success: Let the Orifice be little, and
penetrate only the Tunicles, For in this case although the matter be good,
nevertheless the disease is dangerous, and easily degenerates into a Cancer or
Gangrene, which cannot be taken away more conveniently than with a Knife, and
must be done at the first appearance of it; then let the Surgeon endeavor
to cure the Ulcer as soon as possible, after the following manner; let the Part
be defended from all cold, and continually corroborated by Medicines, that the
natural heat may be preserved in it: This Lotion used warm, is good.

Take Flowers of Balaustians, Red-roses, Myrtles, of each two pugils; Aloes, a
dram; Franckincense, two scruples; Plantane-water, three ounces; Red-wine, as
much as suffices: Boil them, and strain them.

This being used, apply the following Ointment, putting over it a Plaster or
Cataplasm moderately discussing.

Take prepared Tutty, Ceruse washed, of each two drams; Red-lead, Litharge of
Gold, of each a dram; Sarcocols, three drams; Burnt-lead, two drams; Vnguentum
Apostolorum, half an ounce; Oil and Wax, as much as suffices to make it into
an Ointment.

10. If the Yard be wounded, for the most part it is mortal: This Ointment is
very excellent.

Take washed Ceruse, three drams; Mirrhe, Litharge, of each a dram and half;
Sarcocols, prepared Tutty, of each a dram; Tragaganth, two drams; Oil of Roses,
as much as suffices to make it into an Ointment.

An Inflammation of it is cured in the same manner as an inflammation of other
sensible parts; but if an External Ulcer should happen, the Cure must be
performed both by Internal and External Medicines, lest it contracts a
Malignity, and degenerates into a Sphacelus.

Take Litharge, half an ounce; Burnt-lead, three drams; prepared Tutty, two
drams; Aloes, a dram and half; Pine-bark dried, four scruples; Lapis
Haematitis, a dram; Seeds of Dill burnt, of Gourds burnt, of each two scruples;
Oil of Roses, Quicksilver, of each three drams; Wax, as much as suffices to
make an Ointment.

But if it yields not to this by reason of its foulness,

Take Verdigreece, half a dram; Water of Plantane and Roses, of each two
ounces; White Wind, four ounces; Spirit of Wine, an ounce: Mix them, and boil
them a little.

To this may be added, Mercury precipitate, if there be occasion.

A Sphacelus in this case, has no certainer cure than extirpation in part, or
wholly, lest the mischief creep inwardly, and kills the Patient.

How the Internal Ulcers of the Yard ought to be cured, we have set down in the
Chapter of particular Ulcers: But in this we may describe this Medicine, by the
use of which a Cancerous Yard was cured.

An Unguent of Peter Baierus.
Take the juice of the tops of Bramble, Stalks of Roses, Vinegar, of each two
ounces* Franckincense, Mastick, of each three drams; Litharge of Gold, an
ounce; Sack, four ounces; Juice of Housleek, three ounces; Aqua vitae, four
ounces: Verdigreece, two ounces and half; Vitriol, Burnt-alom, of each a dram
and half; Camphire, a dram; Oil of Roses, four ounces: Powder those things that
are to be powdered, very fine, and being searched, let them boil all together
upon a gentle fire, except the Camphire, which is to be put in at the end, to
the consumption of the Juices, then add the Wax, and make it into an Ointment.

11. The Spermatick Vessels sometimes in Women, are so greatly obstructed, that
together with the Testicles in the side of Hypogastrium, they swell to the
bigness of ones Fist.

12. In the Tubes of the Womb, the Woman's Seed is sometimes corrupted, from
which arise grievous Symptoms; the Courses being for some Months obstructed,
oftentimes there follows a Dropsy; the Water here collected, we have observed
in dead Bodies that have been opened, to flow directly through the Tubes into
the Duplicature of the Peritonaeum.

13. The Womb, from the preternatural afflux of Blood, is often inflamed,
especially in lying-in Women, and in those whose Courses flow disorderly, this
Inflammation oftentimes is changed into an Abscess, if negligently handled;
whose Cure belongs to the Physician: But a Sphacelus is incurable. For what the
Ancients relate concerning the extirpation of the Womb, to wit, that it may all
be taken off without any great danger, is to be reckoned amongst their other
Errors; but whether this Animal in living Creatures, this necessary part,
joining to so many other parts, and furnished with such abundance of Arteries,
may be cut out without danger of Life? The same thing I believe has happened to
them in this case, as has happened in the describing and curing the falling down
of the Womb, who here and there have taken the extended Tunicles of the Vagina
Vteri for the Womb it self; for I easily grant these Tunicles may without any
great danger be taken away: But I truly esteem a Sphacelus of the whole Womb to
cause certain death.

14. The Neck of the Womb is subject to Haemorrhoids in the same manner as the
straight Gut is; these flowing, may be distinguished from the Courses by these
following signs; in the flowing of the Courses, we can observe no Branches of
the Vessels in the Neck of the Womb, they come out of the Womb it self, and
they cause no pain, except in the Hypogastrium; these Vessels by which the
Evacuation is made, are the Hypogastrick and Spermatick Arteries; but the
Haemorrhoids are the Branches of Vena pudenda, they may be known both by the
sight and feeling, and there is no pain but in the privy part it self: They
ought to be treated in the same manner as the other Haemorrhoids are; to ease
pain, this Ointment is excellent.

Take Mussilages of the Seed of Quinces, Marshmallows, of each half an ounce;
Saffron, Oil of Roses, Hens-grease, of each a dram; the Yolk of an Egg* Make it
into an Ointment.

This Mixture is excellent.

Take Litharge of Gold, washed Oeruse, burnt-Lead, of each a scruple;
Purslane-water, five ounces: Mix them.

Let the Haemorrhoids be washed with it, and let a Linen Cloth dipped in it be
applied to the Part affected.

The End of the fourth Book of the third Part.
The FIFTH BOOK. Of the Joints.
CHAP. I. Of the Hand.
UNder the name of the Hand, we comprehend also the Arm, whose Teguments, both
proper and common, as also its Vessels, are already sufficiently described.

It is commonly divided into three parts.

1. The Shoulder. 2. The Cubit. 3. The Hand, properly so called.
The Shoulder, or upper part of the Arm, consists of one Bone, and nine Muscles.

The Muscles are,

1, 2. Deltoides, and Supra spinatus, which two raise it upward.

3, 4. Aniscalptor, Latissimus, and Rotundus major, which two pull it downward.

5, 6. Pectoralis and Perforatus, or Coracoidaeus, which two draw it forward.

7, 8, 9. Infra-spinatus, Rotundus minor, and Immersus, or Subscapularis; which
three move it backward.

By these three last moving together, the Arm is as it were turned about, and
obliquely outwardly raised up.

The Bone is great and long, its Head or upper extremity is invested with a
Cartilage, Membranous Ligament, and four Tendons, and furnished with a
particular Cavity, in which the Tendon of the Muscle Triceps lies.

The Lower Extremity is like unto a Pulley, which permits the Cubit to be bent
very much inwardly, but not to extend beyond the right Line.

The Cubit consists of two Bones, which are by proper Muscles properly moved,
which although out of order, we are forced to set down in this place.

The Lower Bone, which is greater and longer than the other, is called Vlnae;
in its upper extremity are two triangular processes observed, which are called
Rostra or Glandes.

The Lower Extremity ends with a round Knob, to which is joined a sharp
Process, which is called Styloides.

It is moved by four Muscles, of which two are Flexors.

1. Biceps. 2. Brachiaeus.
Two Extensors.

1. Longus. 2. Brevis.
The upper Bone, which is less and shorter, is called Radius, or the lesser
Focil, it is received in the upper part by the Vlna, in the lower part it
receives the Vlna, in the middle they are a little distant from one another,
which space is yet filled with a thin Ligament.

It is also moved by four Muscles, whereof two are Pronatores, or pullers down.

1. Rotundus. 2. Quadratus.
The other two are Supinatores, or raisers up.

3. Longior. 4. Brevior.
Some add to these two other Muscles, but they are very seldom found, and
diversely described.

The Hand is divided into three parts, the Carpus, or Wrist, the Metacarpus, or
the distance between the Wrist and Fingers; and the Fingers themselves.

The Carpus has four Muscles.

Two Flexors, the Cubitaeus, and the Radiaeus internus.

Two Extensors, the Cubitaeus, and Radiaeus externus.

Under these lie eight little Bones, as yet without name, which are in the
first years Cartilaginous and soft, but afterward become harder; they are tied
and joined together with strong Ligaments.

The Metacarpus has two Muscles, called Palmares, longus and brevis.

And four Bones fastened to the Carpus by the assistance of the Cartilaginous
Ligaments.

The Fingers consist of fifteen Bones, which as yet have no certain names given
them, and fourteen Muscles; whereof,

Two are Flexors, sublimis and profundus.

Two Extensors.

Four Adductors, Lumbricales.

Six Abductors, or Interossei. Three are External, and as many Internal.

Besides these, the Thumb and Little Finger have a particular Flexor and
Extensor.

These are besides to be considered in the Hand,

1. The Armilla Membranosa, which is a round Ligament, comprehending the many
Tendons of the Hand, as it was in a Circle, easily divisible into many others.

2. Vagina Membranosa, which hold in the Tendons contained in the Hand.

3. Fissura oblonga, framed in each Tendon, for the passage of the Tendons of
the Muscles moving the third Joint; this serves in nature of a Pully.

4. Ossa Sesamoidea.

Chirurgical Considerations.
1. The Shoulder oftentimes is broken or put out of joint, but is oftener
afflicted with a Cathar and Gout. In a cold Gout, I never found any thing more
efficacious than the Stiptick Plaster of Crollius, mixed with Oil of Bricks or
Philosophers; as also the following Plaster.

Take Naval-Pitch, Colophony, of each three ounces; Mussilages, of
Marshmallow-roots, two ounces and an half; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Mastick,
Mirrhe, Frankincense, of each an ounce and half; Propoleos, Misletoe of the
Oak, round Birthwort, burnt Brass, yellow-Wax, Turpentine, of each three
ounces; Oil of Earth, two ounces; Make it into a Plaster according to Art.

In a hot Cathar, or the like Gout, I have always found this Fomentation of
singular use.

Take Vitriol, white and green, of each half an ounce; prepared Nitre, six
drams; Crude Alom, one dram; Mirrhe, two drams: Opium, a dram; White Wind, half
a pint; rectified Spirit of Wine ten drams: Elder-Vinegar, three ounces: Mix
them for a Fomentation.

Under the Armpits, Veneral Buboes appear as well as in the Groins.

2. Often tough Phlegm seizes upon the Joint of the Shoulder and Elbow, from
whence comes a stiffness. I have learnt by experience to esteem much in this
case of Balsom of Peru, as also of the following Ointment.

Take Fox-grease, and Rams-grease, Fresh-Butter, of each two ounces; Oil of
Earthworms, an ounce; rectified Spirit of Wine, four ounces; boil them to the
consumption of the Spirit of wine, then add Oil of Rosemary, of Amber, of each
three drams; of Tiles, or of the Philosophers, two drams: Mix them, and make it
into an Ointment.

One or more of the little Bones of the Carpus oftentimes are dislocated,
which, if not presently reduced, becomes an incurable evil.

A Ganglion is here very frequent, besides the Cathar and Gout, whose cure we
have but just now taught.

4. In the Metacarpus and Fingers, both above and below meet many Tendons,
which are easily injured in Wounds and Ulcers, which is carefully to be
observed, lest a Palsy follow: In which no other Medicines are needful, than
what we have already in the foregoing declared: But these are chiefly to be
considered of; 1. That the Bandage is not to be bound too hard. 2. You must not
put in the Probe too deep, nor too often. 3. The Hand and Fingers are to be
placed upright, not depending. 4. These Parts are easily affected with a
Sphacelus, which these signs certainly denounce: When there is no matter in due
time; the Lips in the beginning are dry, or yield a little thin moisture; the
heat, pulsation, and redness is greater here, than in the fleshy parts;
afterward the Lips are turned in, and become livid, and at length black. In
this case, all those Medicines are to be applied that may put a stop to the
Gangrene, and as formerly we have set down.

CHAP. II. Of the Foot.
THe Foot is also divided into three parts, to wit, into the Thigh Leg, and
Lower Foot.

The Thigh has but one Bone, to whose motion serves fourteen Muscles.

Two Flexors, Psoas and Illiacus.

Three Extensors, Glutaeus Major, Medius and Minimus.

Three Adductors, Triceps.

Six Abductors, Quadragemini and obturatoris duo.

The Abductors and Adductores working together, roll about the Thigh.

The Thigh Bone is the greatest of all the Bones of the Body, outwardly it
buncheth forth, and is a little bended inwardly, and so descends internally
oblique to the Knee.

It has three Processes, easily separable in Infants.

The Leg consists of two Bones; the greater of which, is in the inside, and is
called Tibia, or the greater focile; the lesser, which is in the outside, is
called Fibula, or the lesser Focile; both very much resembling the Bones of the
Cubit; they are a little distant one from the other, but are tied together by a
Ligament.

It is moved by eleven Muscles, which are,

Four Extensors, Rectus, Crureus, Vasti duo.

Four Flexors, Biceps, Semimembranosus, Seminervosus, Gracilis.

Two Adductors, Longus and Poplitous.

One Abductor, Fascialis.

Between the Thigh and Leg lies the Patella or Knee-pan, in Infants
Cartilaginous, in old people, hard and strong, placed on the outside of the
Joint.

The Foot is divided into three parts, the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes.

The Tarsus is moved by six Muscles, viz.

Two Flevors, Tibiaeus anticus and Peronaeus.

Four Extensors, Biceps, two Gemelli, and Sole^s, to which many add a fifth,
Tibeaeus posticus.

Three of these Extensors from one very strong Tendon, which is called Cordia
Hipocra^^^a.

It is made up of seven Bones, which are, 1. Talus, or Astragalus. 2. Calx, or
Os Calcis, 3. Os Naviculare, or Cimbiforme. 4. Os Tesserae, or Cuboides. 5, 6,
7. Ossa tria Cuneiformia, or Shpaenoidea.


The Metatarsus consists of five Bones.

The Toes have fourteen Bones; for the great Toe has but two Joints.

The Matacarpus has no Muscles, except Plantaris, which is not unlike Palmaris.

The Muscles of the Toes are seventeen, to wit,

Two Flexors.

One Extensor of the four Toes, for which use it is furnished with a fourfold
Tendon.

Four Adductors or Lumbricales.

Ten Abductors, or Interossei.

To the great Toe are peculiar,

One Flexor.

One Extensor.

Two Adductors.

One Abductor.

Here also, as in the Hand, are observed the Ossa sessamoidea, which are always
placed between the full grown Joints, partly that they may corroborate the
Joints, partly that they may defend the tender Joints; in old people they are
always numbered from ten to twenty, never in Children.

Chirurgical Considerations.
The Foot in its natural constitution, as also in its Diseases, has many
things agreeing with the Hand, therefore it would be superfluous to repeat them
over again.

1. Considerable here is the Sciatick pain, caused from a sharp Humor gathered
in the Joint, where the Thigh Bone joins with the Os Ischium; when the Ligament
tying these Bones together, is from such an Humor relaxed, the Bone recedes
from the natural places, and brings upon that part a lameness: If the Bone or
Cartilage be corroded, and the Vessels comprest, there follows an Atrophy of
the Legs, and sometimes of the whole Body.

2. Tumors in the Knee, are very dangerous and hard of Cure, by reason of the
firmness of Muscles, the great number of Ligaments, Tendons, and Bones, and the
cold and dry nature of the parts, not being of force sufficient to dissipate
the moisture; therefore it is most necessary to assist it with warm Medicines as
soon as possible; and if any signs of Suppuration appear, forthwith let it be
opened, lest otherwise the Patient becomes lame, the Part wastes, and at last
happens death it self. Upon the opening of the Abscess, for the most part there
follows a gleet of some Humor, which renders the Cure very difficult: For this
I commend the often praised Restorative Powder.

3. A great Tendon is inserted in the Calcaneus, or Bone of the Heel, which
being wounded, or much contused, brings Convulsions, and death it self.

About this place comes Kibes, whose cause is intense cold or heat with
dryness: Here first are observed Fissures in the Skin, then follows an
Ulceration: All fat things and Plasters profit here, especially the following.

Take Powder of Galls, of round Birthwort, of each half a dram, red Lead, a
dram; Mercury sublimate, six grains; Litharge, Mirrhe, of each a dram and half;
Camphire, a scruple; Franckincense, two drams; green Wax, as much as suffices
to make it into a Plaster.

In the room of green Wax, you may take the Fat of Deer, or of Rams.

4. The Fingers or Toes being frozen, must be rubbed with Snow, or with a
bruised frozen Turnep; then this following Plaster is much commended.

Take Hog's Grease; fresh Oil of Olives, of each an ounce; white Wax, two
ounces: boil them a little, and make a Plaster.

5. Issues are often made in the Joints; we have formerly declared the place:
In the Arms, between the Muscle Deltois and Biceps; in the Thigh two fingers
breadth above the Knee in the inside; in the Leg, the uppermost, two fingers
breadth below the Knee; the lowermost, two fingers or three above the Ankle.
That you may make these Issues without pain, instead of a Conclusion, take this
Caustic, which works without pain; which is also very much to be commended in
sordid and cancerous Ulcers, and in Excrescencies.

Take Crude Brimstone, white Arsnick, Crude Antimony, of each two ounces; the
Brimstone being melted by a gentle fire, and stirred about with a Spatula, add
the Arsnick and Antimony powdered, and mix them whilst they are incorporated
with the Brimstone, and look red. Afterward,

Take of this Mixture, an ounce; Caput mortuum, of Vitriol, half an ounce: Mix
them, and make a Powder; let it be washed six times in Spirit of wine, and dried
for your use.

A TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE.
THE Plague is a Disease whose nature is not to be comprehended by us; the
Cause thereof seems to proceed from a Spirituous and Infectious Vapor, which
is powerful enough to make a sudden dissolution of the consistence of the
Blood, by which means the Heart is deprived both of strength and life.

I do assert that the Nature of it is not to be comprehended by us, as well
because it is a Punishment inflicted on us by the immediate hand of Almighty
God, who vouchsafes not that his Incomprehensible Wisdom and Essence (which is
sometimes faintly described to us) should be narrowly pryed into by his
creatures; as also that it is in it self so mutable, that if we should
seriously recollect our selves, and recount the several Pestilences wherewith
all former Ages have been visited; we shall not thereby be able to instance in
two of that whole number which have agreed with each other in all
circumstances: From whence we may easily infer, that in the Cure of this
Disease, an Experienced Physician may much more safely follow the Dictates of
his own Reason, than adhire strictly to the Method and Prescriptions of others.
For although it does sometimes by the more remarkable symptoms sufficiently
evidence it self, yet we cannot likely discover its Nature and Essence,
although we should the most industriously attempt it.

But that we may cautiously enquire into it, we must know that it is sometimes
not accompanied by any Fever: And it is necessary that what Physician soever is
ignorant of this should either by perusing good Authors, or his own Experience,
acquaint himself thoroughly with it. I have been sent for to several Patients my
self, who although they appeared otherwise in good health, not refusing their
meat, nor disturbed in their sleep, have nevertheless had Buboes arising in
their Groin, on their Neck, under their Armpits, or behind their Ears, which
have apparently discovered a greater Malignity than could be discerned in those
Buboes, which in other persons have been attended by a violent Fever: And many
hereupon who have been incredulous, and lightly regarded the cautions which I
have given them upon this account, have with great danger to themselves
experimented, that as soon as those Buboes have sunk down, the Pestilential
Symptoms which have appeared, have been very dreadful, and much more dangerous
than in those that have carefully used the means prescribed to them, who have
been also much more easily and speedily cured than the other.

Sometimes the Plague is accompanied with a Fever; and again, there are some
Pestilent Fevers without the Plague.

To distinguish this Fever from the Plague, I used to observe, that they that
are seized with it, complain of pain in their Head and Stomach, which sometimes
is dispersed over the whole Body; sometimes it confines it self to the
Armpits; the Neck, the Parts behind the Ears, or to the Groin. To outward
appearance, there is not the least swelling. If the Patient by such means as is
requisite be provoked to sweat at the beginning of the Disease, the pain
utterly cease, and in a few days he will be perfectly restored to his
health, the Disease not having at all discovered it self* by any outward
Symptoms. Why such a Fever should be accounted a Species of the Plague, I see
no reason; But there is no one but will confess it to have seized on that Body
on which Buboes, Carbuncles, and Spots do outwardly appear.

The cause of the Plague is either Internal or External; but unto which soever
we impute it, it is necessary to conclude, that there is in it a power of
dissolving the natural Consistence of the Blood, and depriving the whole Body
of its strength.

As to the Inward Cause, which is Meat and Drink, it is evident to all, that it
cannot produce in any Body whatsoever so great and sudden a change; but it is
most certain, that by a long and continued course of bad Diet, the Blood may by
degrees be after such a manner dissolved, weakened, and corrupted, that some
part of it assuming to it self a malignant quality; a man may be surprised by a
sudden Disease, and sometimes be deprived of life it self; which has been
observed in sick persons at several times, when there has been no contagion in
the place, nor any suspected, who have been troubled with perfect Buboes, and
other Symptoms of the Plague, much more intolerable than others have been at
any time when the Air has been infected.

As to the outward Causes, every one confesses that there are such; but their
Nature is known but to few: The Chemists, who are able by the force of Fire
distinctly to separate the Parts of simple Drugs, endeavor to find the
Original of the Contagion in a Volatile Salt, which suddenly dissolves the
fixed Salt of the Blood; which has indeed some appearance of truth, though it
will not be relished by all men.

If you enquire into the Cause hereof from others, their answer will be
various, but most of them very idle and impertinent.

It has by some been thought probable that a Plague might proceed from the
Heavens; they affirming that the Stars do actuate the Subluminary Bodies, both
by the influence of their Light, and by several other qualities inherent in,
and peculiar unto them. But the Conjectors raised from hence, are very
uncertain, and the foundation of them unsecure. We are not ignorant of the
Fopperies of Astrology, and of the vanity of those Predictions, which have no
other Foundation than the several Courses, the Conjunction and Opposition of
the Stars; which are all so frivolous, that we cannot think it worth our labor
to refute them.

We acknowledge that the Air may be several ways corrupted; from whence the
Vapors which have been received from the Earth, are sent down again amongst us,
which like Fire may inkindle our Blood, Corrupt waters, Carcasses either not at
all buried, or else shallowly interred; the South Wind, which may be supposed
to promote the Putrefaction; Men already infected, and successively imparting
the Contagion to the sound, and by that means spreading the Venom through the
Bodies of Men, and the Air itself.

This Pestilential Infection may likewise for a long time lie couched and
concealed in Straw or Stubble, amongst Garments, Hangings, and the Furniture of
Beds; which we have sometimes observed strangely to impart their Malignity to
those that have handled them, or approached unto them.

But all these things only inform us of the means by which this Pestilential
Poison is conveyed unto us; but no one has as yet declared what it is, and
wherein its Nature does properly consist.

The Symptoms of it are these. The sick persons are seized with a shivering all
over their Body, which is presently followed with an inward heat, which is
oft-times very intense, yet without any great thirst; sometimes the thirst is
excessive, and the Fever moderate. But whether the heat of the Fever be great
or small, it is most commonly accompanied with a dryness of the Tongue, and an
Urine of the same constitution which you might expect from a man in perfect
health: They are taken sometimes with a great drowsiness, sometimes with a
Dilirium, or with an excessive pain in the Head; and in this case, the white of
the Eyes appears of a Saffron-colour, and they are more wakeful than is
consistent with their ease and quiet: great pain at the Heart, the Pulse seems
small, if not at first when you touch it lightly (for then it oftentimes
appears to beat high) yet at least when you press it closely with your Fingers.
The strength fails in the beginning of the Disease, and decreaseth much more
visibly than in the most burning Fever, which has no Malignity attending it.
Some are taken with a Diarrhaea, which can by no means be stopped: Others bleed
much at the Nose, the Eyes, the Ears, or Mouth; some at the Yard or Womb. Some
are troubled with a continual Vomiting, others with a Nauseousness. On some
Bodies there appear red or purple spots; and on others Buboes behind their
Ears, on their Neck, under their Chin, in the Groin, and under the Armpits: In
some there break forth red Wheals or Pushes; in others white Bladders, or
Carbuncles. And wheresoever these Bladders, Buboes, Carbuncles, etc. do appear,
they are a most certain sign of the Plague, although the bigness of them may be
inconsiderable; especially if they either accompany, or are Consequents of a
Fever.

As to the Prognostics, we must consider, that the Plague is a very
treacherous Disease, and whilst it flatters us most, it intends us the greatest
mischief. A Bubo is less dangerous than a Carbuncle, and a Carbuncle than the
Spots, which very seldom portend less than present death wheresoever they are
displayed.

A Bubo behind the Ears, on the Neck, or under the Armpits, is more dangerous
than that in the Groin.

Carbuncles on the Hands and Feet, may by some be thought less pernicious,
because they are more remote from the Heart; but since they happen amongst many
Nerves and Tendons, they are more to be feared than those which appear in other
parts of the Body which are better covered with flesh.

A Carbuncle arising after a Bubo, is a sign of Death. If a Bubo or Carbuncle
appear before the Fever, there is less danger than if they follow it at a
distance, and arise slowly.

A blew Circle encompassing the Bubo the second day after its appearance, is a
sign of Death.

If a Bubo suddenly disappears, the state of the Patient is dangerous, unless
Nature dispatcheth the Malignant Humor to some other Part.

Thus we have often observed, that upon the retreat of that Morbifick Matter
which has caused a Bubo in the Groin, there has appeared a Gangrene in the
Foot, and on the same side which was before affected, and many have by that
means escaped.

If a Cupping-glass applied to the Patient, raises no Blister, we may
reasonably conclude his condition to be desperate.

It is an infallible sign of Death, if after Cauterization, or the application
of a Cupping-glass, the Carbuncle abates not in 12 or 24 hours, as likewise if
there is no moisture proceeding from it; but if a Bladder appears, or any
separation of the matter be made (which is so much the better, by how much it
is the greater) with a sufficient purulency, the Patient is then past danger.

A Carbuncle which seems to have a little tail, or push at the end of it, is
very dangerous, as are likewise those which look white; which, unless the Fever
does very much abate, are certain forerunners of Death.

If the Patient that has a Bubo in his Neck, or behind his Ears, be troubled
with a pain in his Throat, and a difficulty in swallowing, and no considerable
Inflammation appear, we have always found it a certain Rule, that in this case
he outlives not 12 or 15 hours.

Sleep more sound than ordinary, Diliriums, waking often in the night,
inflammation of the Eyes, pain at the Heart, a trembling and convulsion of the
Joints, are all very dangerous Symptoms, but do not always portend Death.

A great Fever without a pain at the Heart, is not so dangerous as a lesser,
which is accompanied with that Symptom.

The greatness of the danger may sometimes be judged from the great dryness of
the Tongue.

If by the administration of Sudorificks, Sweat is not provoked, the Patient
usually miscarrieth.

A Flux of Blood was heretofore held dangerous in all Plagues; but in our Age,
all that can either bleed at the Nose, or have their Menstrua's, come off safe:
We have no president of any that have pissed Blood; but a Dissentery is the
sign of an approaching Death.

It is very certain, although it but seldom happens, that incurable Carbuncles
do break out about the Eyes, Nose and Stomach, and even amidst the Entrails
themselves.

If they seize on the Bladder, they become mortal to the Patient, and put him
to excessive pain.

I can instance only in one, who after he had for 30 hours or more been
troubled with the Spots, at length, after exceeding great pain, accompanied
with a Delirium, he voided first, Blood and after that, a purulent matter
through his Yard, by which means he was restored to his health; I conjectured
that there was a Carbuncle in the case, which seized not on the Membranous part
of the Bladder, but on the Neck thereof.

As to the Cure; Blood-letting is very prejudicial to those that already have
the Plague, and dangerous to such that would prevent it.

The Poison oftentimes lies hid within the B^dy for some days, weeks, or
months, before ^^ discovers it self by seizing on the conveyances of the Blood.
Wherefore I would advise you seriously to consider, if by opening a Vein, you
invite it immediately to the Heart, whether the diminution of Blood, Spirits
and Strength, which is effected by this means, be not the Cause why the Heart
is suffocated and deprived of that vigor which it should make use of to
repulse the Enemy. I confess some Experienced Physicians of good credit, have
reported, that in hot Countries there is no better means for restoring a
Patient visited with the Plague, unto his health, than that of opening a Vein,
provided it be done cautiously, and at the beginning of the Disease; but
whosoever have attempted it in colder Climates, have quickly learnt by
experience, that it ought to be forborne.

Purging, which is oftentimes very necessary in other gentle Diseases, is
excluded by the Malignity of this. But every one is not quick-sighted enough to
discern when it is requisite to be done, and when to be forborne: Moreover, it
is evident, that in a Malignant Disease, the Physic which is administered to a
Patient, ought to be more mild and gentle than at other times; for besides that
the Body cannot then bear strong purgations, a Dysentery is oftentimes the
consequence of them. I have when I have been fully persuaded that there was no
Malignity in the Disease* oftentimes used this, or some such like Potion with
good success, viz.

Take Rhubarb, a dram and half; Senna, two drams; Cream of Tartar, a dram;
Scorzonera-Roots, half an ounce; Aniseeds, half a dram; Boil them in
Holy-Thistle-Water, and to three ounces of the strained Liquor, and Syrup of
Succory, with Rhubarb, six drams; Spirit of Salt, a little; Confection of
Alkermes, a scrupel: Make it into a Potion.

I never adventured to prescribe any thing Purgative to such as have been taken
with the Plague, before the fourteenth day, at which time the Fever and the
other Symptoms of the Disease would be abated. There are some who have
attempted it while the Carbuncles remain purulent, and before the Bubo is
perfectly cured.

But I dare not advise any one to follow that Method, whatsoever Remedies they
administer at the same time, which may be intended specifically against the
Plague.

But if it happen that the Patient for several days be very costive, and
troubled with a pain at his heart, and hopes to be relieved by Purgation,

It is to be considered, that the Venom of the Disease, and not the Costiveness
is the cause of the pain at the Heart; it is therefore most requisite to make
use of Sudorificks, to corroborate the Heart, and not to concern your self for
the costiveness of the Body: but if you desire to open it a little, it is
better to make use of a Suppository than a Glyster, which is not altogether so
safe, but has been prejudicial to many on this occasion: and to others it has
done but little good, and not at all opposed the Malignity of the Disease: But
to such as will not take this advise, which has been very confirmed by
experience and several good Reasons, and will still persist to make use of
Glysters, it is fit however that they forbear to prescribe Scammony as an
Ingredient, especially to Women in the time of their Flowers.

Juleps are in this case very necessary; but all persons may not make use of
them, nor any at all times. I am never wont to prescribe them without joining
with them some Sudorificks (which will appear hereafter) and this I take to be
the safest course; for if the sick person should make use of such things only
as refrigerate while he sweats freely, the Sweat would oftentimes strike
inward, and the Venom would be conveyed to the Heart, from whence would follow
sudden Death.

There is no means more requisite than that of Diaphoreticks and Cordials,
especially those that are acid, which produce such effects as are certain, and
therefore the more laudable; for they rectify the Mass of Blood, and free it
from the venom which infects it. They dissolve the pituitous Matter which is
lodged in the Stomach and the Entrails, and correct the Choler, which in this
Disease is the cause of much mischief. Nevertheless the several disguises of
this Disease, and the vanity of the Symptoms which attend it, do require that
they should be often changed; since when the Disease is more gentle, those
things are not to be used, which would do good service in an accute one.

Medicaments against the Plague.
Roots of Zedoary, Butter-Bur, Angelica, Ditamny, Galangal, Vipers-grass,
Gentian, Master-wort, Lovage, Burnet, Orrise Florentine, and ours, China,
Sarsaparilla.

Leaves of Rue, Scordium, Sage, Holy-Thistle, Swallow-wort, Wormwood,
Southern-wood, Centuary the lesser, Valerian, Sorrel, Fluellin, Balm, Marjoram,
Rosemary, Thyme, Mint.

Flowers of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, Roses, Marrigolds; St. John worts,
Rosemary, Indian-Spikenard, Jesamy.

Seeds of Citrons, Oranges, Rue, St. John's wort Anise, Coriander, Lovage.

Fruits, Citrons, Oranges, Walnuts, Figs, sharp Cherries, Pippins, Ribes, sour
Pomegranates, Barberries.

Spices, Musk, Ambergreece, Civet, Benjamin, Storax Calamita, Cinnamon, Mace,
Nutmegs, Cardamums, Camphire.

Animals or their parts; Flesh of Vipers, Mummy, Serpents, Quails, Thrushes,
Hartshorn, Unicorns-horn, Bezoar, Stone of an Indian Hog, Ivory, Castor.

Precious Stones and Earths, the Jacinth, Granate, Emerald, Ruby, Carbuncle,
Pearls, Coral, Bolearmenick, Earth of Lemnos, and Sealed, Gold, Silver.

Salts, Common, brought lately from the River Nile, which moves Sweat most
powerfully; of Scordium, of Wormwood, Rue, Self-heal; Holy-Thistle, Vitriolated
Tartar, Bezoarticum Minerale.

Threacle of Andromacus's, Diatesseron, Mithridate of Damocratis, Diascordium
of Fracastorius, Confection of Alkermes, of Hyacinth.

Species Liberantis.

Electuaries, of the Egg, Rob. of Currants, of Barberies.

Conserves of Balm, Mint, Rosemary-Flowers, Borage, Bugloss, Marigold-Flowers.

Troches, of the Juice of Barberries, of Citrons.

Out of all which, you may make choice of such as you judge most fit for the
purpose.

The Writings of Authors, who have treated of this Disease, will give you an
account of other Compounds, out of which you may choose such as please you best.

I shall here propound such only as I have found to be most efficacious, and
which I shall constantly make use of, till by experience I shall discover some
others, whose nature is more excellent; and that the use of them may the more
plainly appear, I shall premise some Medicaments that some years since were
prescribed by my self, and those Learned Men, Dr. Francis Sylvius, and Dr.
Francis Vanderschagen, wherewith we thought it necessary to oppose that
pernicious Enemy with which we were to contend.

Our Prophylactick Water.
Take Roots of Angelica, Zedoary, of each an ounce; Roots of Butter-Bur, two
ounces; Leaves of Rhue, four ounces; Leaves of Balm, Scabious,
Marrigold-Flowers, of each two ounces; unripe Walnuts sliced, two pound; fresh
Citrons sliced, a pound: let them be all bruised together, then pour upon them
six quarts of the best Wine-Vinegar distilled by it self in a Glass- Cucurbit
in Sand.

Let them digest a night, then distill them with a gentle fire of Embers to
dryness, but without burning, and preserve this Vinegar for your use.

If you desire an Extract or Salt, pour some of the distilled Liquor upon the
Caput Mortuum, or to the remander, and let it digest for three days, till it
has drawn out a Tincture, with filtre, and distill the filtred Liquor in
Balneum Mariae, to the consistence of an Extract: After the Extract, calcine
the Caput Mortuum, and draw forth the Salt.

Our Prophylactick Conserve.
Take fresh Citrons, two pounds, the Juice hard pressed out, the outward Coats
separated from the inward Pulp, and bruised very small; adding Conserve of
White-Roses, half a pound; of Red-Roses, of Borage-Flowers, of each half a
pound; preserved Orange-peels, four ounces: Make it into a Conserve.

Our Alexipharmick Powder.
Take Roots of Contrayervae, half an ounce; Pestilent-wort, Tormentil,
Elicampane, of each 2 drams; sealed Earth, Bole-armenick, of each three drams;
Shavings of Hartshorn, Ivory, of each a dram; Red Coral prepared, four
scruples; Biting Cinnamon, two drams; Diaphoretick Antimony, half an ounce: Make
it into a Powder.

I have made use of these three foregoing Medicines with very great success, as
have also those famous Physicians beforementioned, when they have applied them
to several that have been visited with the Plague. When I have given them for a
Preservative against the Plague, I seldom mixed any other with them; but for
the Cure of it, I never made use of them single, but have always given them
with these, or some such like, viz.

Take Diascordium of Fracastorine, four scruples; Salt Prunella, a scruple;
Salt of Wormwood, half a scruple; our Prophylactick Water, Holy-Thistle-water,
Syrup of Barberries, of each an ounce: Mix them for a draught.

Or,

Take our Alexipharmick Powder, a scruple; Vitriolated Tartar, eight grains;
Salt of Coral, 15 grains; Confection of Alkermes, half a dram; our
Prophylactick Water, an ounce and half; Rue-water, as much as suffices, Syrup
of Holy-Thistle, an ounce: Mix it for a draught.

Or,

Take Antimony Diaphoretick, a scruple; Salt of Scordium, of Rue, of each half
a scruple; our Prophylactick water, an ounce; Fumitory-water, as much as is
sufficient; Julep of Roses, an ounce: Mix it for a draught.

Take Confection of Hyacynth, Diascordium, Threacle, of each two scruples; our
Prophylactick extract, fifteen grains; Spirit of Salt, half a scruple: Mix it
into a Bole.

Take our Prophylactick Conserve, a dram and half; prepared Crab's-eyes, a
scruple; our Prophylactick-water, half an ounce; Syrup of Limons, an ounce;
Elder-Vinegar, half an ounce: Mix it for a draught.

Take Bezoartick Minera, fifteen grains; Sal Prunella, a scruple; Lozenges of
Sugar pearl'd, half a dram: Make it into a Powder.

Let the sick person take some of these Medicaments for the provoking of Sweat
plentifully; to which purpose, let him take Mutton or Chicken-broth an hour or
two after he has taken his Medicament; let the Sweat be gently wiped off with
a warm Cloth, and another applied to his Breast: For we have found it not safe
to change the Shifts, and other Linen about the Patient, unless they are too
much moistened by Sweat.

We may safely administer these, or the like Sudorificks twice in a day to the
Patient, or thrice in 24 hours, and that very much to his benefit.

There are some, who every six hours have very advantagiously made use of a new
Sudorifick. Nor are you easily to be persuaded to cease from the use of these
means, although the Patient should tell you that he is well in health, lest you
find the treacherous Disease of a sudden to surprise you both again.

For young Children (who do usually abhor the taking of Physic) I have found
nothing better than the following Powder, given them in their ordinary Drink
two or three times, in the space of 24 hours; the Sugar may be omitted, if the
Patient digusts sweet things.

Take Diaphoretick Antimony, 15 grains; Lozenges of Sugar pearl'd, a scruple
and half: Make it into a Powder.

Or,

Take Crab's-eyes prepared, Shavings of Ivory, Bezoartick Mineral, of each six
grains: Make it into a Powder.

We will treat of Juleps when we come to discourse of the Cure of the Plague.

The Symptoms of the Plague.
THey are many, and very various, but most of them are accompanied with some
others; which when the former are cured, the latter are very easily removed. We
therefore think it very needless to give an account of them all in this place,
it will be sufficient to instance in the chief of them, amongst which, we in
the first place encounter with.

A Fever: Of such a Nature, that it admits not of any purging, or letting of
Blood, which the Experience of several has sufficiently confirmed.

The Sudorificks before prescribed are no less useful for this Sympton, than
for the Plague it self; but the Fever and great dryness of the Tongue,
requiring such things as refrigerate, they are not to be administered, except
they are mixed with Sudorificks, as we have shown before.

Take Water of Borage, Sorrel, of each two ounces; our Prophylactick Water* an
ounce and an half; Juice of sour Oranges fresh Citrons, of each two drams;
Julep of Roses, as much as will make it conveniently sweet; Oriental Bezoar,
fifteen grains: Mix them.

Let the Patient often take the quantity of a spoonful hereof at once, whereby
his thirst will be much better allayed, than if he should drink ten times the
quantity of Beer, and that without any check or hinderance to the Sweat.

Or,

Take Holy-Thistle-Water, a pint; our Prophylactick Water, two ounces; Syrup of
sour Pomgranates, two ounces and an half: Mix them.

Or,

Take Scorzonera-roots, Butter-bur-roots, of each an ounce; Sorrel-leaves, two
handfuls: Boil them in Barley-water, and to a pint of the Liquor, add Syrup of
Violets, two ounces; Sal Prunella, two scruples; or Spirit of Salt, as much as
is sufficient: Mix them.

For the Rich, such like Juleps as these may be prepared, which are both
pleasant to the Palate, and very Cordial.

Take Borage-water, three ounces; Holy-Thistle-water, a pint; Rose Water, an
ounce; Lozenges of Sugar pearl'd, an ounce; Ambergris, two grains; Musk, a
grain; Juice of Citrons, as much as suffices: Mingle them.

Wesop-Ale, or some such like, which is well boiled, may here be very useful,
especially if some Nutmeg scraped, or a piece of calcined Hartshorn be tied up
and steeped in it. Nor need we fear any mischief from exceeding either in the
quantity or the frequent repeating of it; but we must take heed that it be not
given cold, lest Gripings, Flux, and a pain at the Heart, and such like
Maladies should be caused thereby.

To such who have weak stomachs, and a pain at their heart, I do use to give
the liberty, when their Fever abates, to drink Mosel, or Rhenish-wine with
Sugar, and the juice of Limons, provided that they take it in a moderate
quantity: But I believe they do err very much, who prescribe to their Patients,
whilst the Fever continues still very high, some sort of French Wine, either
alone by it self, or mixed with their Sudorificks.

That Oriental Stone, called Lapis Porcinus, or Pedro Porco, is of very great
use, if it be steeped for a while in your ordinary Drink; for it strongly
provokes Sweat, and very much refreshes the Heart.

This Stone, if I mistake not, is generated in the Gall of an Hog, for it is
exceeding bitter; and though it be very hard, yet every time it is infused, it
abates somewhat of its quantity, which is discoverable by the Tincture which it
imparts to the Liquor. Nor is the Gall of a man sometimes void of such Stones,
which are like unto those taken out of an Hog, in savor, hardness and color;
and we might find them too perhaps in their efficacy likewise, if we thought
fit to make trial of them.

This Fever is often accompanied with drowsiness, which forbids the use of the
principal Sudorificks, such as Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, etc. because
there is Opium in their composition, which makes them not so effectual for the
preventing of sleep. It is more requisite to use this following, which is
agreeable for dispelling the Vapors which infect the Head, and the heat about
the Heart.

Take Salt of Rue, of Scordium, Prunella, of each half a scruple; Vitriolated
Tartar, 8 grains; our Prophylactick Water, an ounce; Balm-water, as much as
suffices; Syrup of Betony, an ounce: Mix them for a draught.

Let Sweat be thereby provoked, and let it be the care of the Attendants, that
after the first or second day, the Patient may be kept from sleep, if it be
found that he has strength to bear it.

There is sometimes joined with the Fever, continual Watchings, and a great
pain of the Head.

I do not use to be much concerned for the watchings, although it should
continue for the first three days without intermission, for it often falls out,
that by the use of Sudorificks only, the pain is the first day abated, on the
2d becomes tolerable, and on the third is quite taken away.

Opium has in it the virtue of causing Sweat, and is a great Ingredient in
Treacle, Diascordium, and Mithridate, which without it, would not in my
judgment have that Sudorifick quality, for which they are now noted. It is also
reckoned by several Authors amongst those Medicines which are famous for
dispelling of Poison, whose use is very requisite in all malignant Fevers; nor
do I believe that there can any other Medicine be named which gives so present
relief to the Patient as Opium; concerning the operation whereof, they are able
to give a better account, who have been frequent and curious in the use of it.
I have sometimes in this case (though contrary to Custom) given it sparingly,
when I have found the sick person not to sleep in the first, second or third
days: But when he has waked for six or seven days together, and found a great
decay of strength, this following Prescription, taken every quarter of an hour
by a spoonful, till sleep has seized on him, has afforded great relief, and
the sleep produced thereby, has been undisturbed, and of long continuance.

Take our Prophylactick-water, an ounce and half; Borage-water, an ounce;
Cinamon-water, three drams; Confection of Hyacinth, a dram; Lozenges of Sugar
pearl'd, three drams; Laudanum Opiat, two grains: Mix them.

You may safely make use of Opium, after the manner before mentioned; but in
Gachectick and infirm Bodies, whosoever gives it too boldly, or is fearful of
prescribing it at all, discovers that he understands not its Virtue and
Efficacy.

Before I come to the use of Opiat Laudanum, I endeavor to ease the pain of
the Head by these following, viz. by applying Ground Ivy bruised to the nape of
the Neck, and to the soles of the Feet, and palms of the Hands; this, or some
such like Composition.

Take Leaves of Rue, a handful and half; sour Leaven, two ounces; Pigeons
dung, an ounce; common Salt, half an ounce; Elder-Vinegar, as much as suffices
to make it into a Poultice, to be applied to the soles of the Feet, and palms
of the Hands.

Or,

Take Bolearmenick, sealed Earth, common white Chalk, of each half an ounce;
Vinegar of Marigolds, as much as suffices: Apply it as before.

To the Forehead I have often applied the Powder of Cloves, moistened with the
Spirit of Wine; for I take Vinegar to be hurtful, as are also all Emulsions.

Vomiting and the Hiccough is another symptom of the Plague. It has been
observed by several who have been so curious as to open Bodies which have died
of the Plague, that Carbuncles have often appeared in the Stomach, and amongst
the Entrails, whose testimony is not to be rejected, since it is so agreeable
both to Reason and Experience.

These (If they are not the Cause of the Vomiting and Hiccough, may be easily
removed by a spoonful of this following Preparation, taken cold every quarter
of an hour.

Take Mint-water, our Prophylactick-water, of each an ounce and half;
Cinamon-water, half an ounce; Confection of Hyacinth, a dram; Salt of Coral, a
scruple; Syrup of Myrtles, half an ounce; Rose-Julep, half an ounce: Mix them.

By the use hereof, the Vomiting is usually stayed, especially if the Stomach
be sometimes anointed with this following Oil.

Take Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, a dram and half; Oil of distilled Mace,
half a dram; Oil of Wormwood, a dram: Mix them.

In the mean while, let the sick person forbear to drink too plentifully, and
as soon as the Vomit is stayed, let him make use of some good Sudorifick.

Another Symptom of the Plague is a great Flux which is usually a sign that
Death approaches; but when the sick person has not voided mere blood, nor any
thing of a bloody substance, I have sometimes found these following
Prescriptions to be successful.

Let him abstain from all things that are either acid or salt; which except in
this case, are of great use in the Plague; and likewise from drinking much: But
if his thirst be so exceeding great, that he cannot bear it, let him take one,
two or three spoonfuls of this following Mixture.

Take Tormentil-Roots, an ounce; Red Roses, a handful; Shaving of Hartshorn a
dram; Seeds of Sorrel and Myrtle, of each a dram: Boil them in Smiths water,
and to nine ounces of the Liquor, add of the Confection of Hyacinth, a dram;
Syrup of Mirtles, an ounce. Mix them.

Many have also from Treacle alone received great benefit by swallowing a
little of it every four hours, till they have taken the quantity of a dram; as
likewise from this following, taken by spoonfuls.

Take Fracastorius his Diascordium, two drams Amber, half a scruple; red Coral
prepared, Dragons blood, of each a scruple; prepared Pearls, half a scruple;
Fennel-water, an ounce; Plantane and Rose Water, of each an ounce and half;
Syrup of Comfery of Fernelius, an ounce* Mix them.

Clysters of an astringent, drying and emollient quality, given twice or thrice
in a day, have likewise in this case been found very necessary.

Take Roots of Comfrey the greater, an ounce; Bistort and Tormentil Roots, of
each three drams; Oak-leaves, half a handful; Flowers of Balaustians, Red
Roses, of each a pugil; Aniseeds, three drams: boil them in Cows Milk that has
been burnt to; into 8 ounces of Liquor, dissolve of Venice Turpentine, two
drams: one Yolk of an Egg, white Troches of Rhasis, a dram; Honey of Mercury,
half an ounce; of Roses, an ounce: Make a Clyster,

The Bathing of the Belly with the Lees of white or rather of red Wine, and the
applying to it afterward a warm cloth three or four times doubled, have by some
been found to be of singular benefit, or else the Ointment and Plaster
following may be made use of.

Take Oil of Mastick, of expressed Nutmegs of each a dram; Oil of Dill, Wormwood,
Myrtles, of each two drams; old Treacle, three drams: Mix them.

Take Bolearmenick, Franckincense, Mastick, Dragons-blood, of each two drams;
Mummy, three drams; Powder of Galls a dram and half; Seeds of Carrots Lovage
Anise, Myrtles of each a scruple; Oil of Nutmegs by expression, three drams;
Venice-Turpentine, as much as suffices to make it into a Plaster.

And thus much may suffice to have been spoken concerning the inward Symptoms
of the Plague; the outward are three, the Spots, called Petechiae, the Bubo,
and the Carbuncle.

The Spots can hardly any other way be better removed than by inward Remedies,
but they do usually portend some mischief.

The Bubo, I am wont to deal with after this manner following. At the first
appearance of it, and although the swelling has arrived to no considerable
height, I draw a Blister, without making use of Cupping-glasses, which by
reason that they cause a great deal of pain, and create a Fever, and draw unto
them both the good and bad Humors, and cause a greater alteration than was
before in the Blood, I do utterly lay aside: After 7 or 8 hours cutting the
Blister. I apply unto that part a Magnetic Plaster of Arsenick; the virtue
whereof is so great, that I know not any more excellent; which will appear to
whomsoever shall make use of it; the account of it out of Hartman and Agricola,
is as follows.

The Magnetic Arsenical Plaster.
Take Crude Antimony, yellow Brimstone, white Arsenick, of each two ounces.

When you have beat them very small, let them be put into a Viol covered in
Sand, to which you must apply fire till they are all melted, and appear to be
of a dark red color; when it is cool, it may be taken out of the Vessel, and
this is that which they call the Arsenical Magnet, and has not in it any thing
of Poison, as it may be easily experimented upon Dogs afterward.

Take Gum Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of the Arsenical Magnet, of each
three drams; Turpentine of the Larch-tree, Wax, of each half an ounce; Oil of
Amber, two drams; Dulcified Earth of Vitriol, a dram.

Let the Gums be dissolved in the strongest Wine-Vinegar, and strained through
a Linen Cloth, let them after that be boiled up to their former consistence,
then melt the Wax and the Turpentine together by themselves, and when you have
taken them off from the fire, stir them well till you have brought them to the
consistence of an Ointment; then add to them the Gums beforementioned, and the
Arsenical Magnet, together with the Earth of Vitriol, and Oil of Amber, and you
will have that plaster which is most effectual for drawing forth all sorts of
Poison.

I have found the virtue of this Plaster to be such, that if it be applied to
those parts where the Skin is somewhat hard, it leaves not the least sign of a
Scar, and yet does so plentifully draw forth the malignant Humor, that a Bubo
of the bigness of a Walnut, will in the space of 5 or 6 days be utterly taken
away; but because it does not always so suddenly produce this Effect, it is
often very necessary to raise a Blister for evacuation of the Humors. And it is
observable, that in some strong Bodies it causes no Escar at all, unless when
the Blister has corroded, not only the outward, but also the inward Skin. But
in Children, and more tender Bodies, it will of it self cause an Escar,
although there be no Blister drawn before the application of it.

This Escar or Crust is the true seat of the Venom, which is extracted, and is
of that thickness (especially considering that the Skin is but superficially
corroded) that it is well worth our while to consider it. For I do believe that
to be the reason why it is much sooner separated than other Crusts or Scars
that are caused by Art; for in the space of 24 or 36 hours, if no Scarification
has preceded, it may be easily taken off without any, or at least with a very
small pain, if you make use of any Antipestilential Plaster, and add unto it
some Treacle, or Vnguentum Basilicum, or else the severing of the Escar may be
very much promoted by this Ointment.

Take Virgins-Honey, Ducks-greese, of each an ounce; Soot, six drams;
Turpentine, an ounce; Yolks of two Eggs, Treacle, three drams; Oil of
Scorpions, as much as suffices to make it into an Ointment.

But if the Tumor is not sufficiently abated when the first Crust is taken off
by the Arsenical Magnetic Plaster, it is requisite that you create a second
or third, and then proceed as before.

The Ulcer may be consolidated by a Plaster of Minium, of White Lead,
Diapompholigos, or some such Remedy which dries up the Humor, and brings the
Ulcer to a Cicatrice: But we must observe this by the way, that this
Consolidation is not to be wrought too suddenly, lest part of the poisonous
Humor which still remains in the Body, should cause some new Disease, which may
be fatal to the Patient.

For want of the Magnetic Plaster, you may make use of this following, if you
take care first to raise a Blister, the virtue whereof has been found to be
very great by several, for the taking away of painful Scrophula's, and the
excellent qualities that are in it, have made it famous by the name of

The Divine Plaster.
Take Gum Galbanum, an ounce; Ammoniacum, two drams, Oppoponax, three drams;
yellow Wax, twenty ounces; Oil of Olives, 24 ounces; Litharge of Gold, 17
ounces; Olibanum, two ounces: Mirrhe, Frankincense, of each ten drams;
Verdigreece, long Birthwort, Mastick, of each an ounce; Bdellium, Loadstone, of
each two ounces: Make it according to Art into a Plaster.

If the Bubo is too protuberant, or cleaves to the Tendon, a Vesicatory is too
weak; but an actual Cautery is not so necessary: it will be therefore best to
make use of a potential one, and among those several wherewith I have been
acquainted, I know not any one that is more corrosive, and yet causes less
pain than this following.

Take unslaked Lime, dram 1; of black Soap as much as suffices: Mix them.

There are few which are not acquainted with such things as are useful for
drawing of Blisters; among the rest, this Prescription following is to be
commended.

Take sour Leaven, half an ounce; Euphorbium, Seeds of Staves-acre, of
Mustard, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, of each a scruple and half: Cantharides,
a dram and half; strongest Wine-Vinegar, to make for a Blistering Paste.

If the pain be great, the following Poultice may be made use of, unless
necessity require that the Surgeon should make use of a Cautery.

Take Leaves of a Scordium, Rue, Hemlock, of each a handful; Camomile and
Dill-flowers, of each a pugil; tops of Wormwood, two handfuls; Crumbs of Bread,
two ounces; boil them in Milk; adding to it of Eastern Saffron, half a dram;
Yolks of two Eggs; Treacle three drams: Make it into a Cataplasm.

The suppuration of a Bubo is very rare, the means necessary for it, are such
as Surgeons are very well acquainted with, and are not, if Nature inclines
to it, to be neglected. The Abscessus in this case is to be opened, first by a
Launcet, and not by the application of any Caustic; but the Ulcer that
proceeds from hence, is very slowly healed.

None but such as are unskilful, make use of the Plaster of Frogs and Mercury;
for it drives the Venom inward, and threatens much danger to the sick person;
wherein we are confirmed both by the Writings of Ancient Authors, and by our
own experience.

The Carbuncle.
Called by the Greeks Anthrax (for it is to no purpose to insert any nice
distinction between them) shows it self in several shapes; but the Symptoms of
it are many times very fallible: It is easy to conclude of it when ever it
discovers it self by a little Push of a dark Purple Color, with an
Inflammation round about it; but often appears with a White Push without any
considerable prominency, which seems to contain a sort of purulent Matter that
portends no mischief; but if you squeeze it, you will find it dry and very
hard, and it eats very deep into the Skin underneath it.

Sometimes there appears one single Bladder filled with Limpid Matter, which if
it be not opened in the space of 24 hours, it grows black, and upon its
dissection sends forth two or three drops of black Blood.

Otherwhiles, several little white Blisters discover themselves. If these grow
hard underneath, and are accompanied with a Fever and Inflammation, there is no
question but that they are Malignant; and I know not why they may not be
reckoned in the number of Carbuncles, especially since they are wont to
dispatch a man in as short a time as the purple ones; and they are to be dealt
with after the same manner, if we expect that our endeavors should succeed.

To the Cure of it, it is requisite that the Suppuration should with all
diligence be promoted, and thereby the danger prevented of the Infection
dispersing it self. And for this purpose I have found nothing more effectual
than an actual Cautery; which has also been approved of by several
Surgeons; but there are some who apprehending it to be too cruel a Remedy,
do upon that account reject it, and choose rather a Potential Caustic, or some
Medicines whereby Blisters may be raised: Both which I my self likewise have
made use of, when it has not been allowed that we should use other means, and
when I have hoped that these might be sufficiently efficacious. For a Physician
is often constrained to comply with the Humor of such as are conversant about
the sick Person, and will pretend to know much, although it be many times to
the prejudice of his Patient.

They that approve not of any of the forementioned Remedies, may make use of
the Magnetical Arsenick Plaster, which in this case we have found to be of
great virtue.

For the separation of the Scar, those means which we mentioned in treating of
the Bubo, are very necessary: Many have very much commended this following
Poultice.

Take Roots of Comfrey the greater dried, two drams; Marshmallow Roots dried,
half an ounce; Leaves of Scordium dried, two drams; Meal of Linseed and Wheat,
of each half an ounce; make them into fine Powder, pour upon them clean water
as much as is sufficient; let them boil a little, that the Mucilages may be
dissolved, and till it comes to the consistence of a thick Poultice; then add
of Honey, Turpentine, and Vng. Apostolorum, of each, three drams; Basilicon,
Tar, of each two drams; the Yolk of an Egg; Eastern Saffron, a scruple: Mix,
and if you please, you may add two drams of Treacle.

Preservatives against the PLAGUE.
IT is the Doctrine of the Devil to teach that the use of all Means is to be
neglected; who once spoke to our Savior, and endeavored to persuade him to
cast himself headlong from the top of the Temple, because they need no other
security, whom God supporteth by his mighty Hand: but he that has given us
Life and Health, requires that we should make use of some helps for the
conservation of both; and therefore if you take my advice, I would wish you to
observe the Rules following.

Amongst which, in the first place is challenged, and that deservedly, fervent
Prayer.

Flight is very allowable to Christians, if it be consistent with their quality
and condition of Life; but let those that make use of this, not depend too much
upon it, but remember that it is not possible to fly beyond the reach of the
Omnipotent.

And to take these Directions with them, viz. That they fly early, go far off,
and be slack in their return.

When we go out into the Air, either by day or night, we ought to take special
care that it be clear and free from Vapors.

To which intent it has been in such cases very useful, and found exceeding
advantageous to keep good fires both in public an private, since the Air is by
nothing sooner nor more effectually purified.

It is also very necessary that the Houses be daily washed, which if it be done
with Vinegar instead of Water, it is much better.

Things of a strong Odor, such as Amber, Musk, Civet, Benjamin, etc. do not
only correct the Malignity, but attract the Venom to them, and have been found
hurtful by experience, and are therefore consequently to be concluded so by
reason.

It is useless and ridiculous to anoint the Nostrils with Treacle and
Mithredate.

Those things which do really purify the Air, are Amber, Pitch, Mirrhe,
Frankincense, the Wood and the Berries of Juniper, Sulphur, Assa Foetida, Horn
(but especially Gunpowder) being either kindled, or put upon a few lighted
Coals.

Such as take Tobacco, do very much commend the virtue of that Plant; I do not
disapprove the use of it, though as much as I can, I void the Smoke.

An inordinate Diet is very hurtful at all seasons, but especially in a
Pestilential one. There can be nothing prescribed in general which may agree
with each man in particular; there is very much to be allowed to Custom, but we
must at all times industriously avoid all Meats that are difficult to be
concocted, and take great care that the Stomach be not overcharged.

For our Diet ( if we can so contrive it) we ought to make choice of Veal,
Mutton, Beef, Pullets, Capons, Peacocks, Larks, Chaffinches, Quails, Hares,
Conies, etc. Perch, Pike, Whiting, Sole, Salmon, etc. Eggs, Butter, Green and
Parma Cheese, Buttermilk; Cichory, Endive, Sorrel, Lettuce, Chervil, Parsley,
Rosemary, Sharp-Apples, Quinces, Limons, Oranges, Capers, etc.

On the other side, Flesh and Fish which has been dried and salted, are very
hurtful; as Bacon, and Pork, Haddocks, Eels, Crabs, Shrimps, Green Fruit, and
all things that are hard of Digestion.

Walnuts are very much commended, and not without good reason; for there may be
very much use made of them: The green ones preserved, do much good to those
that abound with Choler; but such as are come to their full ripeness, whether
you take them fresh gathered, or when they are more dried, all that make use of
them, will tell you that they are very pernicious.

The strongest Beer, and Wine of a middle strength, are very useful at such
times, if moderately taken; but we cannot allow that any, except such as are
very ancient, should daily make use of strong and sweet Wines, nor of Spirit of
Wine and Brandy.

Go not forth into the Air with an empty Stomach, but always take some
Preservative against Infection.

Take our Prophylactick Water, 6 ounces; Julep of Roses, 3 ounces: Mix them;
take the quantity of a spoonful or two each morning.

Or,

Take our Prophylactick Conserve, 3 ounces; take the quantity of a Chestnut in
the morning or as often as you are to go to an infected place.

Vinegar, and all sharp things have been commended to us by long experience;
but they will not well agree with such as are troubled with a Cough, weakness
of Stomach, or the Cholick, if they are taken either alone, or in too great a
quantity.

I never had any great esteem for outward means, but those that can fancy it,
may wear about their Neck this Amulet.

Take Arsenical Magnet, a dram; Benzoes, as much as is sufficient; make them
into great rowls, and sew them up in red Lawn.

We have before described the Arsenical Magnet when we treated of the Bubo.

Sleep and Watching, exercise of the Body, and the use of Women, if immoderate,
are very hurtful.

Costiveness is prejudicial, but not so much as a great looseness.

Sadness, Fear and Anger will make very strange alterations in the Blood; he
who knows how to moderate those Passions, is most prudent.

Practical Observations.
I.
A Young Man aged twenty two years, being lately returned from the East Indies,
on the 21 of July, 1655. in the Evening was suddenly taken with a great pain in
his Head, and a shivering through his whole Body, having that day received much
injury from the Water and Air; the day following he became exceedingly
delirous, so that he could not by four men be kept in his Bed.

The Plague at that time raged very much in the next Town, which was very
populous: but there had as yet appeared no Symptoms of it in this of ours: We
met with no outward signs of any Malignity, nor did those within appear so
considerable, as to forbid the breathing of a Vein, which the Delirium did very
much press us upon: I therefore prescribed a Cordial Mixture, which might also
be Sudorifick; whereof 2 spoonfuls was to be taken each quarter of an hour, and
after the space of one hour a Vein to be opened in the right Arm, and seven
ounces of Blood to be taken from thence: I had more than once before made trial
of this Mixture in a Pleurisy, which was accompanied with Spots: The
Description of it is as follows.

Take Waters of Borage, Holy-Thistle, Bawm, of each an ounce; Alexipharmick
Water, an ounce and half; Cinamon-water, half an ounce; Confection of Alkermes
without Ambergris and Musk, a dram and half; Syrup of the juice of Citrons,
an ounce* Mix them.

The mixture was taken, and a Vein opened, and such things as we thought
fitting applied to the Temples, the Neck, and the Soals of the Feet, but all
was not sufficient to overcome the Malignity of the Disease, for he dyed that
night.

II.
A Man and his Wife on the 5 th of July, were both taken with Buboes in their
Groin; She was very drowsy, Feverish, and Anxious, but by the use of
Sudorificks and drawing Plasters, she was by the 10 th day following restored
to perfect health. He was seized on by a pain in the Head, and a small Delirium
which continued till the 5 th day, on which he was taken with a great fit of
Bleeding, which with some intermission continued for two days, this according
to the opinon of all Practical Physicians was to be judged very dangerous. But
when I considered that his strength was not at all hereby impaired, but on the
otherside, the pain in the Head and the Fever abated, nor did the Bubo strike
inward; I cast away fear, and concluded that the Judgments of men by time and
experience might be much corrected. I therefore thought it not the best course
to continue here the use of Sudorificks, but rather to strengthen the Heart,
and to incrassate the Blood, and thereby to stop the Flux of it. To which
purpose I prescribed this which follows, to be taken by a spoonful at a time.

Take Water of Roses and Plantane, of each four ounces; Cinamon-water, six
drams; Dragons-Blood, red Coral prepared, of each a scruple; Confection of
Hyacinth, a dram; Spirit of Salt, eight drops; Syrup of Barberies an ounce and
half: Mix them.

Upon the taking of this, the Bleeding and the Delirium both ceased; and
thereupon the Patient grew well, the Bubo continuing for ten weeks after.

III.
A Maid on the 4th of September, was taken with a Fever, a pain at the Heart,
and in the Head, and with a Bubo, which broke out about the inward part of the
bending of the left Arm, and seized on the Tendon of the Muscle Biceps; from
hence proceeded a very acute pain, not only in that part where the Bubo
appeared, but also about the Armpits by consent of parts, although there was no
swelling, which thereabouts appeared. I gave her this Sudorifick forthwith.

Take Diascordium of Fracastorius, four scruples; Sal Prunella, a scruple;
Alexipharmick-water, an ounce and half; and Holy-Thistle-water, as much as is
sufficient; Syrup of Limons, half an ounce: Mix it for a draught.

To the Bubo I applied the Divine Plaster.

The Sweat came plentifully, but the pain of her Arm, a Delirium, and continual
watchings, after the use of several other things, forced us to use this
Landanum Opiat.

Take Bawm-water, an ounce; Holy-Thistle-water, an ounce and half;
Alexipharmick-water, an ounce; Confection of Hyacinth, a dram; Julep of Roses,
ten drams; Laudanum Opiat, two grains: Mix them.

Of this she took every half hour one or two spoonfuls; and although it caused
Sweat, yet it procured no Sleep. The Surgeon for variety, made use of his
Pestilential Plaster; but neither was the pain hereby remitted: we were
therefore forced at length to apply this following to break it.

Take of unslack'd Lime, of Black-Sope, as much as suffices.

By the help whereof the Fever very much abated, though the pain continued as
before; but yet in the space of 10 or 12 days it utterly left her; but the Bubo
remained open for six weeks after, for the whole Glandule was consumed by the
Ulcer, and some part of it which was corrupted, was necessarily to be separated
from the other. In the mean while, we had great cause to fear that the
putrefaction had pierced deeper, because the Ulcer was deep, and the sides of
it callous, and a serous matter came from it; but by the blessing of God the
Cure succeeded according to our wish.

IV.
A Bookseller in May was very much troubled with two Biles, whereof one broke
out on his Buttock, the other on the Scrotum. To remove the cause hereof, and
to abate the Tumor, I prescribed this following Laxative Apozem to be taken two
or three days together.

Take Tamarinds, an ounce; Cream of Tartar, two drams; Senna, 6 drams; Rhubarb
2 drams and an half; Aniseeds, a dram and half; boil them in Whey, and to a
pint of the strained Liquor, add two ounces of Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb:
Make it into an Apozem.

To the Swelling I applied the Plaster Diachilon with Gums, by the means
whereof they were wholly removed.

The same person the 26th of August (at which time the Plague raged here very
much) was taken with a Bubo in his Groin, which, when after inquisition made
(that I might satisfy the curiosity of him and his Wife) I had declared to be
Pestilential, it was strange to see what terror seized upon them both, but I
quickly caused them to cheer up again, by letting them know that the Life was
not at all in danger; for the Man in all other respects was very well, he eat,
drank, and slept well, had no Fever nor pain at his Heart; nevertheless I gave
him Sudorificks more than once; and the Surgeon drew a Blister, and
afterward applied Plasters and drawing Poultices, whereby in the space of
four weeks the Bubo was wholly dissipated without any Suppuration.

V.
A young Emdener of 26 years old, on the 12th of Aug. fell into a continual
Fever, accompanied with drowsiness, trembling of the Lips, blackness and
dryness of the Tongue, all malignant signs; but I restored him again by the
30th of the same Month: to effect which I prescribed him a Sudorifick, Morning
and Evening, and for his ordinary Drink, this Julep.

Take Holy-Thistle-water, a pint; Alexipharmick-water, 2 ounces; Julep of
Roses, 2 ounces and half; Spirit of Salt, eight drops: Mix them.

On the 3d day there was Spots discovered all over his Body, nor was his
drowsiness or the trembling of his Lips abated, but he vomited not at all. I
gave him this Sudorifick.

Take Salt of Scordium, of Holy-Thistle, of each a scruple; Antimony
Diaphoretick, half a scruple; Crab's-eyes bruised, twelve grains; our
Prophylactick-water, Mint-water, and Syrup of the juice of Holy-Thistle, of
each an ounce: Mix it for a Draught.

By the use hereof the Fever abated very much, and on the eight day I found
that he had a Thrush; for the separation whereof, I prescribed this Mixture to
be taken by spoonfuls.

Take the juice of the greater Housleek, half an ounce; Water of Self-heal, of
Purslane, of each an ounce and half; the yolk of one Egg, Syrup of Violets
compound, six drams: Mix them.

This being twice or thrice reiterated, and making use at the same time of a
Lohoch of the Syrup of Purslane and Violets, by means hereof the Thrush was
removed, and the Fever cured without either Purging or letting Blood.

VI.
I was sent for on the 18th of August to a Woman great with child, which was
taken with a great drowsiness, and had a Pestilential Bubo brake forth in her
Groin, but she had scarcely any Fever; her Eyes looked well, and her Tongue was
moist, and she seemed very heart-whole, she had now gone seven months, and on
the night following she was delivered, which I concluded to be a certain sign
of Death, and found it true; for on the next day about ten of the Clock she
departed.

The Husband of this Woman fell sick the same day, he was delirous, his Eyes
sparkled, his Tongue was dry, all which I noted for very ill signs, his Fever
was but small, but the pain at his Heart very great, his Urine like that of men
well in health. After having taken two Sudorificks, he began to come to
himself, his Tongue was observed to be moist, and a Bubo appeared in his Groin,
and a Carbuncle on his Back, which on the next day had three or four more
joined to it. These Symptoms promised good success, but it happened otherwise;
for as soon as he saw his Wife dead, he was so altered, that the Bubo striking
inward, and the Sweat stopping, the 3d day after he died.

An old Woman related to him, had a Carbuncle without a Fever, and by our usual
way of proceeding, was cured in nine days.

VII.
A Midwife which went trembling and unsteady, gave me occasion from thence to
suspect some extraordinary weakness in her, or a Delirium: nor was I mistaken;
for when I came to feel how languidly her Pulse beat, I found it evident; but
yet I could discover no outward Symptom: nevertheless the dryness of the
Tongue, the difficulty of Breathing, and such other signs did discover that
some Malignity was concealed within; at length upon enquiry, she told us that
she had a push upon her right Thigh, which, upon search, we found to be a
Carbuncle of the breadth of a Shilling. She would not grant that she had any
Bubo in her Groin (which nevertheless I doubted not of) nor suffer the
Surgeon to search. He gave her what was requisite to be applied outwardly,
and I prescribed her a Sudorifick; after two days she recovered her strength
and became of a right mind, and the 3d day seemed to be perfectly well; but on
the Evening of that day all was changed, she became restless and almost
distracted, and died that night.

She had taken before I was sent for, Manna with Cream of Tartar, and after
that, Tamarinds, all which doing no good, but the Disease still increasing upon
her, she conjecturing that there was some Malignity in it, took an ounce of
Plague-Water; which, though it were much weaker than the Malignity required,
yet she took it for two days by my advice; but on the third (whatsoever I
persuaded to the contrary) she changed all her Linen, even to her
Head-cloaths, and drank Whey in which Tamarinds had been boiled, from whence
proceeded her sudden change for the worse, and upon that her Death; and these
are the effects of self-conceitedness.

VIII.
Helena van Wyngaerden, a Servant of mine, on the first day had some slight
Symptoms of the Disease, the next she was taken with Vomiting, a pain in the
Head, and at her Heart, especially when she endeavored to rise from her Bed,
her Eyes looked red, but her Tongue was well enough, and her Fever was but
small; a few days before, without my knowledge, she had been at an house that
was visited; I gave her presently a Sudorifick; whereupon, the third day after
a Bubo appeared in the left Groin; I continued the use of Sudorificks, and the
Surgeon took care of the Bubo, by which means, within a fortnight she
perfectly recovered, and went again about her business.

IX.
The Daughter of N. Domer, on the second of September, complained of a great
pain in her head, and at her Heart, and her Tongue grew black and dry. The
first and second day we put her into a Sweat, and on the third, she told us
that she was perfectly well; her Tongue became moist, her Pain, her Fever and
Anxiety left her; nevertheless I persuaded her to continue the Sudorificks, but
she arose and ate and drank, went abroad, and after that slept well all night;
but in the morning the former Symptoms returned, and in the evening of the same
day there appeared Spots, and the next morning she died.

X.
N. N. had lain very ill for six days, at what time I was sent for to him on
the twentieth of August, he began to be lightheaded, his Tongue became black
and dry, and he had a great anxiety at his Heart, his Eyes were fixed, his
Hands trembled, and a great Carbuncle discovered it self on his Cheek, whose
Tail reached to his very Chin, which was also hard and much swelled. It seemed
to threaten a much greater increase; for it was very dry, and much inflamed,
and not circumscribed within any bounds. To this was added a pain in the Throat
(which Symptom I conjectured to be mortal) and a very intense Fever. This
desperate case put us in mind of desperate Remedies; wherefore being guided by
my ow Reason and Experience, and persuaded by the Authority of the most Eminent
Physicians, both Ancient and Modern, I boldly recommended to him an actual
Cautery, which was presently applied by the Surgeon, without any great pain
to the Patient: This Operation was performed in the Morning at ten of the
Clock, and between 4 and 5 in the Afternoon it appear^d purulent, and the Crust
began to be separated, nor did the Core of it creep any further; all which
effects, I know not from what means they could have been expected besides this.
In the mean while he sweat plentifully, and all things gave his Friends to hope
that he would again recover; but I was of another mind, as knowing well the
nature of this treacherous Disease. The same Evening he took another
Sudorifick, and slept quietly enough all night. On the 21 day the Cheek that
was affected, discovered on it some moisture, the Fever continued as it was:
Between his forefinger and his middle one there brake forth a very painful
Carbuncle, which affected the whole Arm. To this there was applied another
actual Cautery without any great alteration discerned in the Patient; then we
prescribed him a Julep which might cause Sweat, and some food that was
nourishing, but no Sweat appeared, and the affected places being drier than the
rest, fore-boded an ill event. At 9 in the Morning another Surgeon was sent
for, who approved of whatsoever we had done in this case; at midnight he fell
into an high Delirium* so that he could not be held in his Bed by those which
attended; about morning he betook himself to rest, and in one hour after
departed: Some of his Friends accused me of being negligent, which ingratitude
I can the better bear; since I am conscious to my self, and give thanks to God
for it, that I omitted nothing which the Rules of Art required to be done.

XI.
The Wife of Cornelius Janson being fifty years old, was after she had been
sick two days troubled with a Bubo in her Groin, and a great anxiety of Heart;
but the Fever was but small: Her Eyes (which I do much observe in all sick
persons (looked very well; as soon as she sweat, she began to confess her self
better, her anxiety was presently removed, and her Fever also after few days:
The Bubo (a Blister being first drawn (was dressed by a Surgeon with the
Magnetical Arsenick Plaster: She fell sick on the eighteenth of September, and
her Son on the 23d, who was taken with a pain in his Head, and refusing all
Medicines, died within three days, but she recovered.

XII.
Everard Tessalear, a Vintner, was taken on the 28th of September, with a
chilness all over him, and then with a very great heat, his anxiety was great,
and his breathing difficult, accompanied with nauseating, a pain in the Head, a
trembling of the Hands, a burning of the Eyes, and an intolerable pain on the
right side of the Groin, yet without an apparent swelling. I gave in my Opinion
that he was taken with a Pestilential Fever, and prescribed some Remedies for
that purpose; after the first Sudorifick, the pain in the Head and Groin
abated, and the Vomiting was stopped; after the second, the pain became
tolerable; and by the fourth, it was wholly taken away, and the Fever cured:
Being so suddenly restored, he believed not that there was any Malignity in it,
and went abroad forthwith; which I did very much disallow, accusing him of
unthankfulness to God, and foretelling that he was to suffer somewhat more
severe, because I could easily perceive his Health and Strength not to be
confirmed, and that there was need of a further course of Physic to settle it.
He still refused to hearken to me, till on the day following he was attaqued by
the same Enemy, and his Wife also; he first complained of a pain in his Groin,
and then of a Bubo, which Symptoms confirmed the truth of what I had foretold,
and caused him to repent when it was too late: The fear of Death made him now
desirous of repeating the Sudorificks, by means whereof, through the Divine
assistance, they were both cured in nine days, though the Bubo continued on
the Woman for a Month after.

XIII.
Albert N. on the second of October, was taken with a great pain at the Heart,
his Pulse was not to be discerned by a gentle touch, his Countenance was like
one in an Agony, he was extreme prone to Vomit and to Sleep; but he was pretty
well in his Senses, his Eyes were not inflamed, his Tongue moist, the Fever but
small, and the Thirst not great: The Vomiting was presently relieved by the use
of those things which we have mentioned in their proper place; but the Sweat
came but slowly: whereupon I gave him the next day a more powerful Sudorifick,
whereof we found very notable effects, but his thirst by that means being
increased, made him drink a great quantity of Beer, whereby the vomiting
returned, and because he complained of a pain in his Belly, we were afraid of a
Diarhaea; wherefore instead of Beer, we gave him this following Mixture by
Spoonfuls.

Take Rose Water, two ounces; Holy-Thistle-water, four ounces; Mint-water, an
ounce; Cinamon-water, three drams; our Prophylactick-Water, an ounce and half;
Syrup of Myrtles, two ounces: Mix them.

And in the Evening he took this Sudorifick.

Take Confection of Hyacinth, a scruple; Treacle, Diascordium, of each two
scruples; Salt of Coral, fifteen grains; our Prophylactick-Water, ten drams:
Mix it for a draught.

The night after passed quietly, the Vomiting ceased; the third day after there
was a Carbuncle discovered on the inside of the left Nostril: We applied to it
our Divine Plaster, and inwardly we gave Sudorificks, and such things as might
refrigerate; on the 4th day his Nose was observed to be cold, and to look of a
purple color, the Carbuncle extending it self to the Processus Mammiformis;
the Pulse beat low and unequal, nevertheless he took another Sudorofick, but
without success; for about Noon many mortal signs discovered themselves; and
although he was all along of a sound mind, yet after two hours he departed.

XIV.
The Wife of John N. Surgeon, in September was suddenly taken with a Fever,
with drowsiness and anxiety of heart. I prescribed this Sudorifick.

Take Diascordium of Fracastorius; a dram; Confection of Hyacinth, Lapis
Prunellae, Salt of Scordium, of each a scruple; our Prophylactick Water, an
ounce; Betony Water, as much as suffices; Syrup of the juice of Holy-Thistle,
half an ounce: Mix it for a draught.

It produced no Sweat, which was an ill Omen: The next day therefore she took
this which is somewhat stronger.

Take Treacle, Diascordium, of each a dram and half; our Prophylactick Water,
an ounce and half; Salt of Holy-Thistle, a scruple; Syrup of Limons, six drams:
Mix it for a Potion.

And this also effected nothing: For variety sake in the Evening I gave her
this following.

Take Salt of Wormwood, Scordium, Prunella, Antimony Diaphoretick, of each a
scruple; Syrup of the Juice of Holy-Thistle, an ounce; Our Prophylactick Water,
two ounces: Mix it for a Draught.

By the help whereof she began to sweat, and the Fever to abate, together with
the anxiety; but the third day after the Spots appeared, which carried her off
immediately.

Her Husband, after eight days, beginning to visit his Patients again, came
about eight in the morning to one that was sick, when sitting down on a Stool,
he was suddenly so taken, that he could not rise again; about Noon, by the help
of his Son and his Man, he went home, where taking his Bed, he was presently
seized with a great drowsiness, which I called a Coma; because whatever I did
or said to him, I could not get two words from him; I presently prescribed him
a Clyster, and this Ointment for his Head.

Take Oil of Marjoram, a scruple; Oil of Rue, a dram; of Amber rectified, a
scruple; Rosemary, half a scruple: Mix them.

I advised also that they should endeavor to make him sneeze by putting
Tobacco to his Nose, and give him inwardly some of this Mixture.

Take Anti-Epileptick water, of our Porphylactick water, of Betony and
Rosewater, Syrup of Stoechas, of each an ounce.

The Clyster came from him without any effect, and Tobacco did no good; he took
a little of the Mixture; and about evening I prescribed him another Clyster,
and this Sneezing-Powder following, was blown up his Nostrils with a Quill.

Take the flower of Lillies of the Valley, Leaves of Marjoram, of each half a
scruple; white Hellebore, three grains: Make them into fine Powder.

By the help hereof he sneezed 3 or 4 times, and a purulent Matter came from
him at his Mouth, but a greater quantity of it went down his Throat; besides
which, there remained a great deal of it in his Mouth, which we could easily
squeeze forth by pressing his Cheeks. These were sufficient signs of an
Abscessus in the Brain, and consequently of certain Death, especially when we
could not perceive that his Senses returned to him, not that he was any other
way relieved, but on the contrary, his voice quite failed him, and he began to
rattle in the Throat; nor was I deceived in my conjecture; for in a short space
he died.

Four of his Children, and a Maidservant followed him; his Man was cured of a
Bubo under his Arm-pit by drawing a Blister, and by applying some drawing
Medicines. His eldest Daughter and youngest Son still survived: He had a Fever,
but was not very sick; but she was handled more severely: She had a Thrush
appeared on the eighth day, which took off not only the Fever, but the whole
Disease; and thus of ten in Family, but three escaped. You have here an account
of the true Signs and Effects of Malignity, which none but such as are
possessed with the Spirit of contradiction, can deny to be Contagious.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Intended to have published at least forty of these Observations, but being
taken up with giving an account of other things which will conduce very much to
the illustrating of our Art (which in their due time may be made public) I
could make no further progress in this: Make use of these for the benefit of
your Friends, and, if you desire to see them, put us in mind of the other.

FINIS.
An Index of Things and Words.
A.
ABdomen, or the lower Belly, page 266. Hardened and Inflamed. page 263
Abscesses, or Imposthumes, their manner of opening, page 42 Acetabulum, or
Pixis, page 312 Achor, see Porrigo. Aegylops, page 284 Alae. Anaplerosis, what
it is, page 2 Aneurism, its Cause and Sign, page 135 Anodins, page 94 Antrophy,
page 238 Anus, fallen down, 35. Imperforated, and Cure, page 46 Aperientes,
what, page 277 Armilla, the Hand, Arsnick, its Quintessence, page 124 Artery,
its difference, etc. Aorta, Pulmoniack, 228. Humeraria, Axillares, Carotis,
Cervicalis, Coeliaca, Emulgens, Gastro, Epiploica, Intercostalis superior,
Lumbaris, Phrenica, Scapularis, Spermatica, Splenica, Subclavialis, Thoracica,
229. Cruralis, Epigastrica, Hypogastrica, Iliaca, Pudenda, Vmbilicalis, 230,
Venosa, 226, How to be opened, page 231 Arthrodia, what, page 208 Articulation,
what, Ibid. Astragalus, page 211 Atheroma, its Cause and Cure, page 111 Atlas,
page 210 Auricles, page 307
B.
BAsis of the Tongue, page 279 Batrachios, page 291 Beensuyger, page 211
Beenureeter, page 212 Bleeding, on whom, and how to be performed, page 37
Bones, what, their Nutriment, 207. Their Connection, Number, Use, 208. Of the
Arm, 210. Hammer of the Ear, 210, 276. Of the Heel, 211. Of the Hip, Coccygis,
Ilium, Innominatum, Iscium, of the Breast, of the Temples, 210. Ethmoides,
Forehead, of the Head, page 209 Bone of the Breast, its Fracture, 14. Of the
Collar, page 210 Breast, what, 266. Hardened, Inflamed, Apostemated, page 303
Bronchole, page 34 Bubo, its Cause and Sign, page 116 Bubonocele, page 33
Bullets* their Extraction, 73. Medicines for that purpose, page 159 Burnings,
and their Cure, page 190
C.
CAncer, its Difference, Cause and Cure, 122 of the Bone. page 212 Carbuncle,
its Difference, Cause, page 121 Carpus* page 210 Cartilage, what, 215.
Swordlike, 210. of the Breast-bent, page 216 Cataract of the Eye, the cause,
and removing it, page 60 Catharticks, page 112 Cautery, Actual and Potential,
37. Convenience and Inconveniency, page 44, 69 Child dead, the signs, 75. Its
Extraction, page 74 The Glandules of the Chyle, 253. Its motion by the
Intestines, page 254 Choleric people, how known page 203 Chilification, its
History, page 153, 154 Surgery, what it signifies, and the operations
thereof, page 1 Cicatrice, or skars taken away, page 244 Circocele, page 33
Closing the Womb, page 46 Comminution, what, page 2 Contra-Fissure, what, page
10, 11 Contraction of the Member, its cause, page 236 Convulsion, the Remedies,
page 256 Corrosives, page 112 Cubit, its Bones* page 210
D.
DIairesis, what, 2. Its parts, Diaphoreticks. page 36 Diaphragm, and its
parts, page 308 Diarthrosis, what, page 208 Dislocation, page 17 Dortos, page
320 Dropsy, Cause and Sign, page 103 Dura Matter.
E.
EAr, Membrane thin and strong, pain, soreness, 46 Its Bones, page 209 Emphyma,
its Signs, Cure, page 54 Enarthrosis, what, page 208 Enterocele, page 26, 33
Epedymis, page 320 Epigastrium, page 311 Epiglottis indurated, page 215
Epiploica, page 226 Epulis, page 292 Erysipelas, its Cause, Cure, page 95
Excresis, what, page 2 Extention, page 4 Extirpation of a dead part, page 78
Extraneous Bodies, how drawn out of a Wound, page 157 Eye, its parts, Lids,
their Substance and Use, Iris, page 274
F.
FAce, what, page 268 Falx of the Dura Matter, page 293 Fat, whether part of the
Body, page 247 Fiber, its Difference and Use, page 220 Fibula, fractur'd, page
16 Fissure, what, page 3 Fistula, its Cause, Signs and Cure, 186. of the
Breast, 302. Lachrymalis, page 285 Flesh, what, 237. Fleshy Rupture, its Cure,
page 80 Focil, its Dislocation, page 23 Fracture, what, 2. Its Cause and Cure,
3. Of the Skull, 10. Of the shoulder of the Hip, of the Jaw Bone, of the Nose,
13. of the Ribs, of the Breast Bone, of the Backbone, 14. of the Elbow, of the
Fibula, of the Knee-pan, 16. great and little, page 334 Froenum, or Bridle,
page 321 Frons, page 268
G.
GAngrene, its Difference, Causes, page 126 Ganglion, page 336 Gibbosity, its
Cause and Cure, etc. page 304 Ginglymus, what, page 208 Glandes, page 333
Glandules, of the Eye, 274. Of the Chyle, of the Loins, 253. of the Neck, page
263 Glotis, straight, wrong, page 216 Gums. page 278
H.
HAir, its shedding, 249. Whether parts of the Body, 247. Hare-Lip, its Cure,
page 87 Hand, page 266 Head, what, its Figure, Parts, etc. 268. Wounds, their
Cure, 172. Sores, page 194 Heart, its History, 306. its Wounds, page 174
Haemmorrage of the Nose, how cured, page 231 Herps, its difference, cause,
cure, page 109 Hip-Bones, Fractur'd, page 14 Humors of the Eyes, page 274
Hydrocele, page 33 Hydrocephalus, its Cure, page 281 Hypocondria, page 311
Hypogastrium, Ibid.
I.
JAws, their Bones, page 270 Jejunum, page 315 Iliack Passion, page 324
Inflammation, its cause and cure, page 90 Infundibulum, page 294 Internal
Means, page 1 Intestines, 315. Intestines, or Small Guts, their Wounds, page
157 Joints, what, page 266 Iris, of the Eye, page 274 Issues, when, where, and
how made. page 70
K.
KIdneyes, and their History, 313, 218, their Wounds, page 176 King's Evil, its
Cause, Sign, Cure, page 113
L.
Labor Natural and Preternatural, its Cause, page 74 Larinx, cannot be
inflamed, page 216 Leeches, their choice and use, page 63 Leg, page 210
Ligaments, what, and how many, their Wounds and Wrenches, page 217 Ligature,
page 5 Linea Alba, page 312 Lips, and their parts, page 278 Liver, its History,
its Use, 255, 317* its Situation, 312. its Ligaments, 324. its Inflammations,
Ulcers, Gangrene, 325. its Wounds, page 175 Looseness, page 280 Lungs, and its
parts, 306. their Wounds, Signs, Cure, page 173 Lymphatick Vessels. page 261
M.
MAnual Operations. page 1 Marrow of the Brain, Spinal, 293. of the Bones, page
207 Matrix, fallen down, page 34 Mediastinum, 305. its Cavity, page 309
Medicines discussing Wind, 108. against too great increase of flesh corroding,
257. Drawing or attractive, 118. for a Cancer, 124. provoking Sweat, Cordials,
128. Against a Gangrene, 129. for the Eyes, 138. against a Quinsie, 143.
stopping a flux of Blood, 154. against Convulsions 156. against proud flesh,
157. to draw forth Thorns, Bones, Bullets, etc. 159. Digestives, 161, 179.
Sarcoticks, 162, 179. Vulneraries, 162 Epulottick, 164, 179. against Wounds of
the Nerves, 166. Defensives, 179. against Worms, 181. against Corruption of the
Bones, 183. against spreading Ulcers, 184. against Fistula's, 188, against
Burnings, 191. Purging Choler, 7. Purging Phlegm, 8. purging Melancholy, 9.
Repelling, 92. Resolving, or Discussing, 92. Suppuratives, 93. Anodins, 94.
Emollients, 102. Purging water, 104. Cosmetick water of Minsickt, 243. taking
away Skars, page 244 Meliceris its Cause, Sign and Cure, page 111 Membranes,
what, and how many. page 219 Mesentery, and its History, its Tumors,
Corruption, Ulcer, page 316 Metacarpus, page 336 Metatarsus, page 338 Mouth,
its Inflammation, Ulcer, Gangrene, page 291 Muscle, what, etc. page 237
N.
NAils, whether parts of the Body, page 247 Nates of the Brain, page 294
Nerves, their Difference, 233. their Coutusion, its Cause and Cure, page 234
Nodes, page 214 Nose, and its parts, 277. Haemorhage, how cured, page 231
Nostrils broken, page 13 Nymphae. page 323
O.
OCciput, page 268 Oedema, or Phlegmatic humor, its Cause, Sign, Cure, page 98
Omphalocele, Navel-Rupture, page 33 Opthalmia, its Difference, Cause, Signs,
etc. page 284
P.
PAlate, page 278 Palsy, page 280 Paracentesis, when, in what place, and how
performed, page 48 Paronychia, its Cause, Sign, Cure, page 133 Part of the
Body, what it is, and its division, 205 parts of the Body divided, page 266
Patella, or Knee-pan, its Fracture, page 16 Pericardium, its parts and Liquor,
page 306 Pericranium, what, from whence, page 268 Peritonaeum, page 314 Pia and
Dura Matter, 292. their Wounds and Cure, 295. its History, page 292 Phlegmatic
people, how known, page 203 Pixis, page 312 Pexus, Choroides, page 294 Pleura,
its diverse pains, page 308 Physic and Physicians, page 1 Pleurisy, its cause
and cure, page 58 Polipus, its cause and cure, page 289 Po^rigo, its cause,
page 280 Porus Biliarius, page 318 Processus vermiformis, of the Brain, page
295 Prostataes page 320 Pudenda Virginam, if closed how to be opened, page 46
Pylorus, page 315
Q.
QVinsey, its Cause, Difference, Sign, page 141 Quintessence of Arsenick, page
124
R.
Radius, page 210 Ranula, its Cause, page 291 Rete Mirabile, page 294 Ribs, and
their difference, 210, 302. Fractur'd, 14 Dislocated, page 23 Rostra, page 210
Ruptures, their Causes, 26. Cure, page 29
S.
SAnguine persons, how known, page 202 Scarf-skin and Skin, page 243 Scirrhus,
its Cause, Sign, etc. page 101 Scraping, 37, how its performed on the Bones,
page 65 Scrotum, its watery Tumor, how cured by Paracentesis, page 51 Secundine,
its extraction, page 74 Seton, where, how, etc. to be made, page 71 Shortness
of Breath, page 280 Shoulder Blade Broken, page 13 Sinchondrosis, page 208
Sincurosis, Ibid. Skull, and its parts, 209. its Fractures, 10. its Bones and
Sutures, page 209 Sphacelus, its Causes, Signs, Cure, etc. page 116
Sparmatocele, page 34 Spermatick Vessels, page 319 Spinal Marrow; page 293
Spittle, its use, matter, etc. page 250 Spleen, its Wound, page 175 Sternum,
page 208 Stitching, in cure of Wounds, how to be performed, page 160
Sticking-Plaister, page 161 Stomach, its History, page 315 Stone in the
Bladder, cause, sign, etc. 83. its Extraction, page 82 Suture, page 208
Sumphysis, Ibid. Synerthosis, Ibid. Synthesis, what it is, page 1 Syssarcosis,
page 208
T.
TAlus, page 338 Tarsus, and its Bones, page 211 Teeth, how many, etc. 273.
their pain, its cause, and cure, 282. their Breeding in Children, how remedied.
page 284 Temperaments of men described, page 202, 203 Temples, what, page 268
Terebration, 37. How performed, page 67 Testes, of the Brain, page 294
Testicles of men, 320. in Women, 321. Inflamed, 326. Cancer, Sphacelus, page
327, 328 Thigh, 210. Broken, 15. Dislocated, page 24 Thorns, things to draw
them out of a Wound, page 158 Tibia, 210. Its Fracture, page 16 Timpanum, page
276 Tongue-tied, the Cure, page 47 Tophs, page 214 Tumor, its Causes, etc. 88.
Flatulent, its Cause, Cure, etc. page 107 Tunicle conjunctiva, Adnata, Retina,
Aranea, Cornea, Vitrea, Wea, 274. Elytroides, Erithroides, Albuginea, page 320
V.
VAlves, of the Vena Cava, 225. of Vena Pulmonalis, 226, of the great Artery,
228. of Arteria Pulmonalis. page 230 Veins, their difference, 221. Adiposa,
224. Atteriosa, 230. Axillares, 224. Azygos, 223. Basilica, 224. Cava, and its
distribution, 222. Cephalica, Cervicalis, 224. Coronaria Stomachi, 226. Cordis,
223. Emulgens, 224. Epigastrica, Ibid. Gastrica minor, 225. Major, 226.
Gastroepiloris, 225. Haemorrhoidalis, 226. Hypogastrica, 224. Intercostalis,
Jugularis, 223. Intestinalis, Ischiatica, 225. Lactea Magna, 253. Lumbaris,
224. Mammaria, 223. Mediastina, 223, Mediana, 224. Mesenterica, Mesocolica,
226. Muscula inferior, superior, 223. Phrenica, ibid. Poplitea, Porta, 225.
Pulmonalis, 226. Saphena, 225. Spermatica, Salvatella, 224. Subclavia, 223.
Splenica, 226. Thoracica, 224. Vmbilicalis, 314. which to be cut in particular
Diseases. page 227 Venters of the Body, what, and how many. page 266 Ventricles
of the Brain, 294. of the Heart. page 307 Vertebra's of the Neck, 210, 297. of
the Loins, 312 of the Abdomen, of the Back. page 210 Ulcers, their difference,
causes, signs, cure, 177, 178. with foul Bones, their cause, sign, cure, 182.
Spreading and Malignant, 184. Fistulous, 186. of the Eyes, 194. of the Legs,
199. of the Nose, 195. of the Bladder, 197. of the Womb, 199. Vlcerous
Excrescency. page 211 Unition. page 2 Vreter, 319. Exulcerated. page 325
Vrethra. page 321
W.
Watery Passages, 261. Tumor. page 103 Wind, Medicines discussing it. page 108
Womb, its History, 322. inflamed, etc. 329. its falling down, 34.
Haemorrhoides, 330. whether it can be taken away. page 329 Worms in the
Pericranium, in the Bladder, their Remedies. page 325 Wounds, their difference,
causes, signs, etc. 147. their symptoms and cure, 153. of the Stomach, their
cure, 174. which are mortal, 149. their Lips, how to be joined, 159. of the
Ears and Lips, 173. of the Head and Brain, 172. of Heart, 174. of the Face,
172. of the Guts, 175. of the Liver and Spleen, 175. of the Nerves, their
causes, etc. 166. of the Eyes, 173. of the Lungs, Ib. of the Kidneys 176. Made
by Gun-shut, 168. of the Tendons, 166 Poisoned, 170. of the Bladder page 176
Wrenching, page 17
Y.
YArd. page 321
FINIS.
MEDICINA MILITARIS: OR, A BOBY OF MILITARY MEDICINES Experimented.

BY Raymundus Mindererus, Late Chief Physician of the Electoral Court of
Bavaria, and of the Imperial City of Aspurg.

Englished out of High Dutch.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Shortgrave at the Turk's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1686.

CISTA MILITARIS, OR, A Military Chest, Furnished Either for SEA or LAND, With
Convenient MEDICINES and necessary INSTRUMENTS. Amongst which is also a
Description of Dr. LOWER'S LANCET, for the more safe Bleeding.

Written in Latin By Gulielmus Fabritius Hildanus. Englished for public
Benefit.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Shortgrave at the Turk's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1686.

A Description of a LANCET, FOR The more secure Letting of BLOOD,
By Dr. LOWER.
FOrasmuch as it has been thought convenient by several good Surgeons, to
contrive a safe way of Blood-letting, for the benefit of young Beginners in
that Profession; and whereas Dr. LOWER of late, in his Treatise of the Heart,
has discovered a plain and secure way of Bleeding, and given a figure of the
Lancet, which he commends for that purpose, I have been advised, for the
public Good, to translate what he has written, and likewise give the figure
of the Lancet, and description of the Use of it, as it is printed in the 166
page of the last and truest Edition of his Book, Printed at Amsterdam 1671. in
the Author's own words.

HOw great Ebullition sometimes happens in the Blood, in what vessels, and with
what swift motion it is cast about every where through the Body, and if an
Artery be opened how quickly, and with what force it breaks out, it has been
hitherto treated of in the foregoing Discourse; by which it appears, how
necessary sometimes Blood-letting is, to diminish its Quantity, or to stop its
Career, and how dangerous the Administration of it is, if it be performed by a
rude and unskilful hand.

For it often happening, either by want of skill, or common practice of
Bleeding, (which makes the Mind fearful, and consequently the Hand trembling
and uncertain) that an Artery is opened, or a Nerve or Tendon cut or pricked,
whence follows Swellings, Pains, Inflammations, Gangrenes or Convulsions, which
put the member in danger of being cut off, or rendered useless, I thought it
might not be beyond the scope of my Treatise, if, by way of Appendix, I should
show by what means and Instrument any Vein might be safely and securely opened,
(if it swell upon a Ligature (though it have an Artery, Nerve or Tendon
immediately under it.

Forasmuch therefore as never any harm happens in Blood-letting, unless a Vein
be pricked through or slipping aside, the Lancet be put too deep into the part,
the Fabric of this Lancet is such, and ought to be so put into the Vein, as
both may be easily prevented.

For the Lancet is so contrived, that it is not cutting on each side, unless it
be near the point, but is purposely blunt, and made round on the lower side,
which is to be applied next to the skin, that it may more easily slide over it,
as it appears by the following Table, in which.



a the Lancet.

b the place where the upper edge of the Lancet ends in a plain.

c where the under edge of the Lancet ends, the rest of the under part being
polished round, and thick, (but not made thicker than the upper plain part)
that it may not grate or tear the skin (upon which it must be applied) by its
compression.

Which figure of the Lancet differs nothing from a common ordinary Lancet, but
that the under edge of it is blunted almost to the point.

The way of using it is only this, that the Member being tied, and the Vein
swelling, the Lancet must be applied as near to it as possible, but so that the
Lancet may be depressed as much as may be; then the Point of it being directed
upwards, it must be gently, and by an oblique transverse Incision be put into
the Vein: which if so directed, neither can the Vein avoid the point of the
Lancet, or the parts underneath be any way offended. Which way of Blooding, as
it is most easy, so it will never prove unhappy to any one, though but meanly
skilful.

And though I do not write this to Physicians and Surgeons, who are expert
and frequently exercised in bleeding; yet having seen many peoples health and
life endangered, either by ill Blood-letting, or because a good Surgeon
could not timely be called in by Physicians, who most commonly forbear the
Practice of it, therefore I have devised this figure of a Lancet, that they may
more securely and confidently use it.

CISTA MILITARIS, OR, A Military Chest, Furnished either for Sea or Land, with
convenient Medicines and Instruments.
WHilst I was in the Low Countries in the year 1612. in the City of ^orsk, I
was entertained with great kindness by that Noble and Valiant Gentleman,
Alexander de Schweichel, Governor of the Place and Works, who amongst the
other things worthy seeing, showed me the Military Chest of the most
Illustrious Hero, Maurice, Prince of Orange, etc. wherein not only Medicines
and Instruments, but also Linen, Rowlers, and other Necessaries were prepared,
and disposed all in order in a Room, but not as then put into the Chests, which
were fitly contrived for that purpose, because that the Garrison-Souldiers
might be supplied with what they needed for their healths; and also that the
Medicines that were wanting or decayed, might be forthwith renewed: an evident
sign, and great demonstration of the Piety, Prudence, and Care of this Prince
toward his Soldiers. This Chest, as often as necessity required marched with
the Camp, and in the greatest and most dangerous occasions the Soldiers were
for the present succored, and assisted from it. Then afterward they were
carried to the next Cities, where they were taken care of by Physicians and
Surgeons, appointed and paid by the States: and if by chance any Soldier
lost a Limb, or was lame, he was relieved, and had an Annual Pension from the
States. This Pious and Christian Constitution made the Soldiers despise all
dangers, and encouraged them to be both valiant and daring.

Therefore that Generals may understand what things are most necessary to
furnish a Chest with, I thought good to set down both the principal
Medicaments, and Instruments, that a Surgeon, following the Camp or Sea,
ought to be provided with; and if there should be occasion for any others, he
may furnish himself at the next Shop he comes at.

The Chest ought to be so divided into Partitions and Classes, that all
confusion and intermixing of Medicines may be avoided, and the Virtue and
Propriety of each preserved. To this purpose I have divided it into twenty
Classes.

The first contains purging Simples, which must be put up in Leather-bags,
except Manna and Cassia extracted, which may more conveniently be kept in
Galli-pots. Those Bags again are to be put into other larger, and writ upon in
great Characters, Purging Simples.

In the second Classis are contained Purging Electuaries, which are to be kept
in Galli-pots, writ upon, Purging Compounds: and so of the rest.

Syrups, and distilled Waters, are to be put into double Glasses, close cork'd,
and tied down with Bladders. They must be so placed, that they may not move,
and so break each other, and their cells lined with Baiz.

Pills are to be wrapped up in white leather, rubbed first with oil of sweet
Almonds.

Cordial Powders and Electuaries, being put into leather bags, are to be so
placed in a separate classis, that they may not mix with the Purgers.

Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Seeds are likewise to be kept in Bags of Leather or
Linen, and to be so distributed, that in the first Classis the Roots, second
Herbs, etc.

Oils, and common Balsams, in Glass-bottles, with screwed Pewter-heads; but the
precious Chemical Oils, as of Cinnamon, Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, etc. ought to
be preserved in double Glasses well stopped with Cork, and waxt. The Balsams
likewise of these are to be kept in Glasses, or Silver.

Unguents, and Fats are best kept in Galli-pots, or of Pewter, well tied down
with Paper and Leather. And Turpentine so likewise.

Plasters, Gums, Wax, the Sewet of Bears, Cows, Goats, and the like, which are
of a solid consistence, are to be put in Bladders wrapped afterward in Paper.

Metals, and subterraneous Medicaments, as Vitriol, Alum, Letharge, Bole, etc.
as also Meals, must be put into Leather-bags: but prepared Tutia, Seif Album,
Ostiocolla, and the like, which are to be used in Colliriums, or given
inwardly, are to be wrapped up in Paper, and put into Leather-bags, and placed
amongst the Cordials. Let all the Bags be tied close, and written upon in great
Letters, to prevent confusion.

Arsnick, Orpiment, crude Mercury, sublimate, proecipitate, caustic* Minium
Troches, Spirit of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, and the like corrosive Medicines, are
not to be placed in the Chest, lest the Glass, or what other things they are
contained in, break, and so spoil and prejudice the other Medicines, and withal
endanger the lives of the sick; therefore to prevent this, it is more
convenient to keep them in some Box or Chest apart by themselves.

The Instruments are to be preserved in this manner. Those that are for
cutting, and edged, as Rasors, Scissors, Incision-Knives, etc. are to be kept
in Cases, the rest are wrapped in Paper, or rather in Flannel.

These being thus prepared and in readiness, you must take a Catalogue of all*
that you may presently, and without trouble, find them when you have occasion
for them.

As your Chest is divided into classes, after the same manner it is necessary
to write your Catalogue; and as often as any Simple and Compound Medicine is
wanting, mark it on the Margin of the Catalogue, that you may supply its defect.

All which, kind Reader, I thought good to advise: the Classes following now in
order.

CLASSIS I. Contains the Purging Simples.
Agerick. Aloes. Rhubarb. Cassia. Crocus Metallorum. Colocinthis. Diagridium.
Senna. Hermodacts. Manna. Mechoacans. Myrobalans. Juice of Damask Roses.
Trochisci Alhandal. Turbith.
CLASSIS II. Purging Compounds.
Benedicta Laxativa. Confectio Hamech. Diacarthamum. Diacatholicon.
Diaphoenicon. Diaturbith cum rhabarbaro. Electuarum de succo Rosarum.
Electuarium Lenitivum. Pulvis Sennae praep. Brass-savoli. Syrup of Roses
solutive. Pill: Aggregativa. Aureae. Cochiae. de Agarico. Lucis majoris. Ruffi.
Extract: Rudii. Species for Suppositories.
CLASSIS III. Electuaries, and Powders strengthening the Heart, and noble parts.
Aromaticum Rosatum. Bolus orientalis. Camphire. Confect. Alchermes. de
Hyacintho. Prepared Coral. Burnt Hartshorn prepared. Cremor Tartari. Diaireos.
Diamargaritum frigidum. Diarrhodon Abbatis. Diatragaganthum frigidum. Diatrion
Santalinum. Flower of Brimstone. Bezoar Stone. Prepared Pearls. Mithridate.
Meconium. Vpium. Laudanum Opiatum. Ostrocolla, prepared to be given inwardly.
Philonium Romanum. Pulvis ad Epithemata cordis. Shavings of Hartshorn. Sal
prunella. Tartarum vitriolatum. Sealed Earth. Theriac. Londinens. Andromachi.
Diatesseron.
CLASSIS IV. Aromaticks, or Spices.
Calamus Aromaticus. Cloves. Cinnamon. Saffron. Gallingal. Mace. Nutmegs.
Pepper. Sugar. Ginger.
CLASSIS V. Distilled Waters, and the like.
Of Sorrel. Aniseed. Burrage. Bugloss. Marigold. Cinnamon distilled without
Wine. Bawlm. Plantain. Roses. Aqua Vitae. Absynthii. Minthae. Theriacalis.
Juices of Barberries. Citrons. Pomegranats. Vinegar of Roses. Common Vinegar.
CLASSIS VI. Syrups
Of Sorrel. Unripe Currants. Barberries. Bugloss. Citrons. Quinces. Pomegranats.
Limons. Liquorice. Poppies. Roses not laxative. Dried Roses. Violets. Mel
Rosarum. Oxymel simplex, scilliticum. Diamoron.
CLASS. VII. Roots
Of Marshmallows. Angelica. Birthwort long, and round. Bistort. Briony. Avens.
Onyons. Succory. Comfrey. Sow-bread. Elecampane. Eringo. Fennel. Gentian.
Swallow-wort. Orris. White Lillies. Liquorice. Parsley. Burnet. Plantain.
Polypody. Squills. Tormentill.
CLASS. VIII. Herbs.
Wormwood common, and Roman. Agrimony. Ladies Mantle. Jack by the hedge.
Marshmallows, Leaves, Flowers and Tops. Betony. Carduus benedictus. Centaury.
Knotgrass. Cuscuta. Dittany of Crete. Horsetail. Eyebright. Fumitory. St.
John's Wort. Marjerome. Balm. Mint. Mercury. Nep. Origanum. Plantane.
Self-heal. Winter-green. Ribwort. Rosemary. Rue. Sage. Sanicle. Scabious.
Scordium. Golden Rod.
CLASS. IX. Flowers
Of Dill. Betony. Borrage. Bugloss. Marigold. Camomile. Pomegranats. Melilot.
Primrose. Roses. Rosemary. Sage. Elder. Mullein. Violets.
CLASS. X. Seeds
Of Dill. Anise. Caraways. Coriander prepared. Cummin. Quinces. Foenugrick.
French Barley. Linseed. Parsley. Plantane. Reddish. Mustard.
CLASS. XI. Fruits.
Almonds. Bay Berries. Acorn-cups. Figs. Preserved Cherries. Quinces. Galls.
Acorns. Limons. Lupins. Oranges. Pomegranats. Mirtle-berries. Cypress-Nuts.
Rose-cups. Prunes. Tamarinds. Raisons.
CLASS. XII. Oil
Of Almonds, sweet and bitter. Dill. Aniseeds. Balsom of Tolu. Vigo's Balsom.
Oil of Carawayseeds. Cloves. Wax. Camomile. Cinnamon. Quinces. Fennelseed. St.
John's Wort. Juniper Berries. White Lillies. Earthworms. Mastick. Mint.
Myrtles. Nutmegs. Olives. Roses. Scorpions. Turpentine. Violets. Yolks of Eggs.
Petroleum. Foxes. Elder. Linseed.
CLASS. XIII. Unguents.
Aegyptiacum. Album Rhafis. Apostolorum. Aureum. De Minio Camphoratum
Defensivum Chalmetaei. Dialtheae. Diapompholigos. Nicotianae. Populeon.
Rosatum. Ad Ambusta Hildani. Basilicon. Linimentum Arcei. Martiatum.
CLASS. XIV. Fats
Of Geese. Beef. Capons. Deer. Goats. Men. Hens. Hogs. Bears.
CLASS. XV. Plasters.
Apostolicum. Basilicum. De Betonica. Diapalma. Diachilon simplex and
compositum. De Melliloto. De Mussilaginibus. Oxycroceum. De Ranis. Paracelsus.
CLASS. XVI. Gums, etc.
Ammoniacum. Benjamin. Wax, white and yellow. Colophony. Elemni. Euphorbium.
Mastick. Myrrh. Olibanum. Pitch. Stirax Calamita. Turpentine. Tragaganth.
CLASS. XVII. Minerals, and their like.
Alome, crude and burnt. Antimony crude. Arsnick. Lime washed. Ceruse. Crocus
Martis. Gypsum. Lapis Calaminaris. Causticus. Medicamentosus Crollii.
Sabulosus. Lythargirium aureum, and argenteum. Mercurius crudus. Sublimatus.
Praecipitatus. Nil praeparatum. Niter crude prepared. Burnt Lead. Realger. Seif
album. Brimstone. Tutia prepared. Vitriol crude, and burnt.
CLASS. XVIII. Meals
Of Bay Berries. Beans. Barley. Lentiles. Darnel. Lupines. Wheat. Mill-dust.
Pulvis adsistendum sanguinem.
CLASSIS XIX. Instruments.
Besides the above recited Medicines, it is also most requisite, that a
Surgeon should be furnished with necessary Instruments, without which he
cannot perform his duty as he ought. They may be divided into two sorts, some
to be fitted for a Box, which he ought continually to carry about him in his
Pocket; these ought to be made small and little, that they may neither load
him, nor afright the Patient: the others are to be kept in the Chest, whilst
occasion calls for their assistance. I never visited my Patients without a Box
of Instruments in my Pocket, in the which were contained the following:

A Razor.

A pair of Scissors.

Two Incision Knives,

Four Lancets to bleed withal.

A crooked Knife to open Apostems.

A Phlegm, to divide the Gums in the Toothach.

An Extractor, to take out foreign things out of Wounds.

A pair of Forceps for the same use.

Needles, to stitch up great Wounds, which are to be of different Sizes, some
great, others small, etc.

A stitching Quill, which is used in stitching Wounds: it ought to be of that
length, as to contain the Needles within its hollowness. Wounds of the Fleshy
parts only are to be stitcht, nervous parts in no wise. In wounds of the face I
never use Needle, but that which is called the dry stitch.

Spatula's, great and little.

Probes.

Speculum oris, one end of which, in affects of the Jaws, and Throat, is to
depress the tongue, the other to scrape it.

Vvula-spoon.

A Burrus quill, to sprinkle Powders upon Wounds or Ulcers.

A Hook, single at one end, and two at the other.

A Hone, to set the Incision-Knives, Lancets, etc.

I had all these Instruments, and many more, made me by a skilful Artist in
Silver, which I used only within the Town, Patients being less afraid of them
than of Iron: but at Sea and at Camps it is not so safe for a Surgeon to
have them of Silver, therefore they may be very conveniently made of Iron or
Steel, except the Probes, which ought to be made of Lead, Copper, or Latin.

These Instruments a Surgeon ought always to have about him, as also a
Salvatory with six divisions, which ought to be furnished 1. with unguentum
Basilicon, 2. with ung. Aureum, 3. Apostolorum, 4. Nutritum, 5. Album Rhasis,
the 6. with Rubrum Exsiccativum, or de Minio: it ought to be made of Horn, or
some solid wood, as Ebony, Guajacum, or Box, for Unguents are better preserved
in wood, than in Silver, Copper, etc. It is also requisite that he has about
him in a Pewter Bottle some oil of Roses, to anoint any wounded part, it eases
pain, etc. as also another pot with a digestive.

Thus much for the Instruments, which a Surgeon ought to wear about him; now
follow the others, and first of those that are used about the Head.

1. Trepans, by which the Skull is perforated in great Contusions, to give
passage to extravasated and concreted blood collected in the head.

2. Levatories, to raise the depressed skull.

3. Scalpra's, to scrape the carious skull.

4. A great Speculum oris, by which the Tongue, in great inflammations of the
Jaws and Throat, is depressed.

5. Another speculum oris, to force open the Mouth, which, as I have seen
sometimes in spasmus's, to be so close shut, that a drop of Broth could not be
poured in.

6. Several Instruments to draw Teeth.

7. And because sometimes in eating, a fish-bone or the like is fixed in the
Throat, and so would suffocate the person, therefore it is necessary for a
Surgeon to have in his Chest such an Instrument, as I have described in the
36 Observation of the first Century: but if he has it not at hand, let him
forthwith make fast a piece of Sponge to the end of a Catheter, and thrust it
down the Throat.

8. Instruments to draw forth Bullets from Gunshot-wounds, of which there are
diverse set down by Authors. I esteem that the most convenient, whose
Description you may see in the 88. Obs. of the first Century.

9. A great Saw, for amputating great Members.

10. A little Saw for the dismembring Fingers, and Toes; it not becoming a
Rational Surgeon to separate them with Chissels, as I have more largely
shown in my Treatise of a Gangrene, etc. chap. 17.

11. Because in amputating, the greater part of Surgeons use a Knife, it is
convenient to have one well set, and strongly fixed in a Handle.

12. A crooked Knife: its Description see in the above named book of a Gangrene.

13. I, in the taking off of Members, instead of a Knife, use a Cautery, made
in fashion of a Knife, well edged, and red hot: its description is in the above
named Treatise. He ought likewise to have ready other Cauteries, some larger,
others lesser; some sharp, others round, which may be used to stop the flux of
Blood after Amputation, or other great and dangerous Hemorages.

14. And because Soldiers, from their debaucheries and impure copulation, are
oftentimes troubled with the running of the Reins, Carbuncles, and suppression
of Urine, it is necessary a Surgeon should be provided with Catheters and
Syrenges.

15. For the reducing of Broken Bones, and Dislocations there are several
Instruments, both by Hippocrates, Orthasius, and other Authors, set down; but I
have always found in my practice the Instrument of Ambrose Parey, which is with
a Pulley, the most convenient; especially if you join to it the Girdle and
Remora, as in the 86. Observation of the fifth Century: it is not only the most
convenient, but most useful Instrument for all Fractures and Dislocations,
except of the Fingers, Ribs, and Mandibles (which are set by the hand alone; it
is also little, and therefore not troublesome to carry about one.

16. A Surgeon ought also to be provided with Splints of several bignesses,
some little, others big, according to the qualities of the members broken,
which ought to be made of thin pieces of Wood, or of Scabbards.

He must be provided likewise with Mortars, Sives, Skillets to boil Cataplasms
in, and also to mix up Ointments; and with Glyster-pipes, whose use in
Angina's, wounds of the Head, Fevers, etc. are very useful.

The Description and Cuts of the Instruments are given by Ambrose Parey, Joh.
Andreas a Cruce; but because this should be a complete Treatise of Surgery,
there is added to it several Copper Plates of the most useful Instruments for
almost all operations, but especially of all those that relate any way to the
operations mentioned in this Book.

CLASSIS XX. Linen Rowlers, and the like.
THE Chest cannot be perfectly furnished, if Linen, and the benefit received
from it, in the application of Medicines, be wanting; for what profit
Medicaments, though the most excellent, without Linen? especially in great and
dangerous fluxes of Blood, fractures and dislocations of the Bones, and in
other accidents, where there is danger in delay; therefore you must have always
in readiness Rowlers, both large, narrow, and middle-sized, Linen clothes
doubled, which we call Compressors, or Boulster-pledgets of Tow.

Lint, which we use to apply Medicaments upon, and to keep the lips of the
Wounds asunder, that they unite not again.

Tents also of Lint, of prepared Spunges* Gentian roots, and the like, which
are to be of several sizes, some big, some little, etc. they ought to be
prepared at leisure hours, that they may be ready when occasion requires.

He must have also Spunges, and Oxe-bladders, which are necessary to tie down
Pots and Glasses, and also used in Amputation.

If a Sea or Land-Chirurgeon be furnished with the above recited things, and
have about him both faithful and expert Servants, he will be able to give
assistance to a whole Fleet or Army, and preserve infinites from death.

Candid Reader, I have been somewhat prolix in the setting down the
Medicaments, and other things, by reason I designed to describe a most perfect,
and every way complete furnished Chest; but if thou art to furnish one at thy
one particular charge, thou may select out of them the most useful and
necessary Medicaments; but be sure likewise that it be so provided both with
Medicaments and Instruments, that out of it, when occasion requires, thou may
be able to assist and relieve the Sick; for what thou art employed about here,
is neither Beast, nor Precious Stones, but Man, for whom the Son of God shed
his precious blood upon the Cross: therefore if any thing be neglected, it must
be answered before the Almighty, to whom an account of all our Actions must be
rendered.

FINIS.
A BODY OF MILITARY MEDICINES EXPERIMENTED.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Morals of a Soldier.
WHereas the Old Philosophers wished to every one MENTEM SANAM IN CORPORE SANO,
a Sound Mind in a Sound Body; considering how much it conduces to the Health
of the Body to have the Mind free from Vice and Vexation: It will behove a
Soldier, as much at least as any man, to endeavor after that Soundness and
Integrity of conscience, which may inspire him with true Fortitude, undisturbed
from the troubles and anxieties accompanying Impiety and Injustice. To this
end, he ought, in the first place, be constant in paying his Duties to Almighty
God, by serving Him in public and private, by imploring the Divine protection
and blessing in all his Just undertakings, and by returning his humble
acknowledgments for every good success. Next, he ought to serve his Prince
faithfully to the best of his skill and power, to obey his Officers readily,
and to do to all others, as he would be done to, if he were in their condition.

CHAP. II. What care a Soldier is to take of his Body.
THe Mind being thus taken care of, thou art to advise with a skilful Physician
concerning thy Body, whether it be not necessary to purge it, the better to
secure thy self from Agues and Fevers. Then furnish thy self with some
Mithridate or Treacle, to use it against Infection; taking of it in the morning
fasting, against the ill Air, the quantity of a Hasel-Nut. Take also with thee
a quantity of Zedoary, Angelica, Imperatoria or Masterwort, and Carlina; of
which thou shall do well, now and then to eat some for the preservation of thy
strength, and against the corruption of the Air. But especially keep thy Head
and Feet warm, by the neglect of which thou may cast thy self into great
danger. Take heed of surcharging the stomach, which is to prepare and to convey
the nourishment for the whole body, and restrain as much as thou can thy
appetite, there being nothing more hurtful to health, than when that is
irregular and extravagant.

Gird thy self well, that thy body may be close, and so be secured from
receiving mischief in leaping, falling, storming, etc. and thy bowels from
being put out of their place.

Take also with thee out of the Apothecary's shop a powder, called Pulvis
solutivus de Tribus, which is not dear. Of this, when thou need purging,
take the weight of a ducat or a little more, according to thy constitution, in
warm flesh-broath or the like, early in the morning fasting; so ordering the
matter, that that day thou may keep thy self warm in thy quarter. Fast two
hours after the taking of it, and then eat warm meat. The same be done with
Pulvis Sena Montagnana, and Pulvis solutivus de Tartaro.

If thou be troubled with Corns on thy feet, apply to them every day fresh
lard, and continue this, till by the fatness of the lard they grow soft; and
then they will fall off from the very roots without pain.

To free or secure thy self from Vermin, take a good quantity of Wormwood, and
the inner cuttings of horse-hoofs, cut out by the Farriers when they shoe
horses; boil these both together in half lie and half water, and so put thy
shirt into it, and afterward dry it in the Air, without washing it out any
other way, and not a Lowse will come into it. This Experiment is found approved
amongst the old German Soldiers; and although there should be a Lowse in thy
shirt, it would not stay there.

If thy feet be moist and sweaty, (which is very troublesome not only to thy
self, but to others also,) take the filings of Brass, which are sometimes used
for dust to dry moist writings with, and put some of it into thy socks, and
walk upon it. Refresh this every other or third day, and thou shall soon be
freed of that inconvenience: Nor be thou troubled, that it makes, as it will
do, thy feet look greenish; for there is no hurt at all in that, since you are
not like to put them in your cap.

Take also with thee some Stags or Bucks-grease, to make use of in case thou
should be galled any where in riding, or going on foot. Anoint the part
therewith at the fireside, and it will soon be healed.

To prevent Rust, draw thy Sword through the fat of a Goose or a Capon, or
grease thy Arms therewith.

Take care to have always about thee a hard crust of Rye-bread; for if thou art
dry, and destitute of water, wine or beer, to quench thy thirst, chew some of
this dry crust, and it will moisten thy mouth, and considerably abate thy
thirst. The same may be done with a Leaden-bullet, rolled to and fro in the
mouth, Lead being cooling.

It has been prescribed above, to take with thee the Herbs Imperatoria and
Carlina. Of this be mindful; for if it should happen, that thou should be
obliged to stand some hours in battle or in the field, take a piece of it in
thy mouth for hunger, thirst, and refreshment, and thou shall find, it will
keep thee a good while from faintness. But woe to thy fellows, if they want it;
for they will certainly faint, unless thou be so kind as to give them a share
in thy provision.

In the best Apothecary-shops may be found a root, called Costus, somewhat like
Cinnamon; which has the same effect. And if others should eat Onions, others
drink Brandy, and I only hold in my mouth of this root the bigness of half a
Pea; I should keep in breath a good while longer than they. But take notice,
that this, I speak of, is not the common Costus, which hitherto has been sold
for the true in common shops; but that which comes to us from the Indies.

If thou art a Horseman, take a good quantity of Bay Salt, a little Brimstone,
Clove, and Ginger, and mingle with it some of the powder of the two abovesaid
herbs, Imperatoria and Carlina, and give it to thy Horse, or in case of want of
Provender let him have of it upon his bit, or give him some upon a slice of
bread, and it will make him strong and vigorous.

If thou art to ride in a German Saddle, the two hind-knobs whereof are wont
only to be stuffed out with straw or horse-hair; get thee made two Tin-flasks
with good screws, fitted for those places. In one of them carry Brandy, in the
other Vinegar. The Brandy will serve thee in cold nights, and fresh mornings;
and and 'twill be good also for thy horse, giving him a little of it upon
bread. The Vinegar will be of use to thee for the heat of the day, washing thy
mouth with it, as also spirting a little of it into thy horses mouth. Besides
mingling it with water, it will afford thee a good cooling drink.

If it he very cold, put some of that horse-hair, that is wont to be curried
out of their mains and tails, into thy Boots. I never received on such
occasions more warmth from any thing, especially keeping my self dry. A
Hares-skin is also good for this purpose, making socks of it; but if it grow
wet, it is naught.

Gather of the Wheel-grease that runs out at the nave of the Wheels, and would
else be lost, which has taken in some of the substance of the Iron that is
about the Axel-tree, witness its blackness: This is a good Ointment for Horses.

When thou come into the field, and art to lie abroad, look out for some
rising ground, that the Rain, which may possibly fall, may run away from thee:
And avoid as much as is possible. Valleys, Marshes, Ditches, Meadows, and the
like low and moist places.

Besides, observe the Air, and put up thy Tent toward the East; which quarter
though it be cool, yet it is wholesome. But lest it should be too cool, order it
so, that thou may enjoy that wind, which comes from between the East and
South, as being one of the wholsomest of all Airs, and temperate, the South-air
qualifying the sharpness of the Eastern. Beware of the Western wind, especially
that which blows from between the South and West. The Air of Midnight is
wholesome enough and dry, but sharp and piercing. Believe it, a Soldier is much
concerned in the Air; nor has Hippocrates without cause written a whole Book
De Aere, Aquis and Locis, to teach, how the Air, Water, and Places are to be
discerned and chosen.

Moreover, look about thee for good clear Water, such as grows warm and cool
again sooner than other waters; and observe this mark for my sake. I know
water, that will not boil Pease, Vetches, Stock Fish, Flounders, etc. In some
Springs Iron is turned into Brass, and great care is to be had in the choice of
water for drinking.

But if thou can not have Spring Water, but art necessitated to use Pit or
Ditch-water; have a care not to drink it without straining, least thou should
swallow Frog or Snake-spawn. For I have known and had in my cure a
Countryman, who voided, though not at once but at different times, two
hundred fifty and five Frogs, and of them many in my own house, in the presence
of diverse Ecclesiastical and Secular Persons; and some of the biggest of them,
being dried, are still to be seen in the Repositoy of Mantua, as also in that
of Mr. Philip Hainhofer at Auspurg. And there is a Cook in the Hospital of
Wessenburg or Landsberg, who, (as appeared by the event) had drunk the Spawn of
Serpents, out of which were bred diverse Serpents in his Body, some of which he
voided by virtue of the Medicine he took, amongst which there was one of the
length of a Bavarian Ell. The Man has been since in good health, and continues
in his service to this day.

Wherefore it will behove you to spread your handkerchief over the Ditch-water,
and so drink through it; or if you take any of it up unstrain'd, quench first a
red-hot Stone or Iron in it, whereby the noxious quality will be destroyed. Or,
if you lie still, and can get any Oil of Vitriol, let some drops of that fall
into it, and you need not then fear any corruption or poison in such water.
Otherwise, if time will permit, let it boil up and cool again, and put a crust
of bread into it, and you may drink of it safely.

Those Waters that run out of stony hills and from under rocks, are the best;
to which may be reckoned those Springs, that flow from high places, and purge
themselves in clear sand and pebles.

If thou meet with Beer or Wine, take heed of excess; and forbear drinking New
beer that has not yet done working, or is not some days old, because new beer
causes the Strangury. And in case this should trouble thee, take a handful of
Hay-blossoms, boil them in water, and Urine over it, drawing into thy body the
warm steam thereof, and anointing thy Navel several times with warm suet.

If thou art hot, and can not forbear drinking, make water first; then wash
thy mouth, and cool the arteries on both thy temples, and those of both thy
wrists, and then drinking will hurt thee less.

If you chance to drink whilst you are hot, (which is so dangerous a thing that
some have dyed within 24 hours after it; others have fallen into consumptive
Coughs, others been troubled with Pains in their sides and with Impostumes,
etc.) then take of the leaves of Bellis or Daisy, which grows in all meadows
and pasture-grounds, and is green both winter and summer, and wash them clean,
and dress them like a Salad with Oil, Vinegar and a little Salt, and forthwith
eat thereof; and it helps immediately, as I know by much Experience. But this
must be used presently, the sooner the better. I can say with truth, that in
all my Practice of Physic for above 20 years I have not met with any
Experiment of so quick an Operation from any herb, as from this. But here I
must note, that I have always used the Red Daisy, and have not tried the other
sorts; though I am apt to believe, the others may have the like effect. You
must not eat the Flowers, but only the Leaves. This Experiment should be put up
on all posts every where, for the good of Courriers, Mowers, and other
laboring Men, that are wont to drink plentifully when they are hot, and
thereby spoil themselves in great numbers.

But to proceed; as thou art to beware of excess of drinking at all times, so
thou art especially to forbear when thou art to stand Sentinel, lest thou
should fall a sleep; whereby thou may lose thy life, at least, thy place and
thy preferment for ever.

Neither be fond of Gaming at dice, tables, etc. whence are occasioned
quarrels, mistrusts, deceit, swearing, and what not?

Avoid also the company of base women, lest thou should be constrained to
undergo the Mercurial Salivation, and with it a very lean Diet, of thin broth,
water gruel, barley-broth, prunes, roasted apples, and such like, without any
flesh-meat at all.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Physicians and Surgeons in an Army.
EVery Army ought to be well provided with one or more able Physicians, such as
are not only expert in the cure of inward Diseases, but also understanding in
outward Cases, as Wounds, Burnings, Luxations. Dislocations, Erysipelas's or
St. Antony's Fires, etc.

These Physicians ought to be no Youngsters, that are lately come from Schools
and Univerversities, knowing only in Controversies and Disputations, but such
as are expert in the Cure of Diseases, especially such as are most frequent in
Armies. They are also to be Men of good nature, great honesty and
condescension, willing to take pains with the poor as well as the rich.
Physicians thus qualified may so gain the hearts of the Soldiers, that these
will love and honor them as if they were their Parents.

Likewise the Surgeons ought to be learned, discreet, and affable, such as
have been long versed, and experienced, in all the operations of Surgery,
that can distinguish well of Diseases, and with prudence make their judgments
thereon: They ought also to be diligent, and careful of those committed to
their charge, and very knowing in all manner of outward applications, as
Unguents, Plasters, Pulments, Lenitives, Stiptiques, Attractives, Digestives,
Causticks, Escharotiques, as also their Mollifying, Dissipating, Repelling,
Suppurating and Mundifying, etc. Medicines. They ought to be skilful in
discerning them, and withal in knowing well the cases and times where and when
to use them, They are to be very careful in observing the beginning, middle and
end of Ulcers, Wounds, etc. since it often may be impertinent and even hurtful
too, to use that in the beginning, that may be pertinent and beneficial in the
midst of the cure, and the like.

An able and dextrous Surgeon is a great Treasure in an Army, and cannot be
enough valued, especially if he consult in all dangerous cases with an
understanding Physician.

These two, Physicians and Surgeons, are to be intimate friends together,
assisting one another without envy and pride, for the better relief and the
greater safety of their Patients.

It Is very necessary, both these should go abroad and travel before they
undertake to practice, thereby to acquire experience, and to learn also to
converse with the more discretion and gentleness with all sorts of humors. And
when they come to practice, the Surgeons ought to advise with Physicians,
who are but lame Doctors, if they be not skilled in Surgery; since this is
the third part of Physic, from which it can and ought not to be separated,
being an integral part thereof. It is recorded in history, that above 2000
years since, Podalyrius and Machaon, Sons to Esculapius, went both with
Agamemnon in the Expedition for Troja, and there purchased great honor by
their practice not so much of Physic as Surgery.

CHAP. IV. Of Fevers, Hungarian Distempers, Spotted Fevers, and other
Pestilential Diseases, as also of Hereditary Maladies, together with their
Remedies.
It Is known seldom to fail, that in an army there reigns some Disease or
other, according to the nature and constitution of the Country, Air, and Diet.
The reasons are;

First, that amongst so great a number of Men, raised from so many different
places, there are to be found Men of very different tempers and constitutions,
sound and unsound; and amongst the latter, some that are scabby, others
scorbutical, others laboring under venereal Diseases, many inclined to
dangerous and infectious Fevers, etc. all which a Physician must have a
watchful eye upon, and endeavor to prevent their spreading.

Secondly, that Soldiers in an Army want conveniences wherewith to take due
care of their health; but are often constrained to expose themselves and sleep
in the open Air on moist ground, the vapors whereof penetrate into their
bodies; and they are careless or want oppertunities of expelling them out again
by sweat. Whence is caused an inward putrefaction in the blood and humors,
which sometimes proceeds so far, as to assume a venomous nature, and to break
out into spots, tumors, bubo's, carbuncles, etc.

Thirdly, that Soldiers commonly keep an irregular diet. Sometimes they have
plenty and do supperabound; at other times they have nothing; and then being
very hungry, when they come again to a place of plenty, they over-feed and
surfeit; whence are bred crudities in the Stomach, and corruption, which
causes malignant Fevers in abundance. Besides, they often feed upon Meat that
is unwholsom, as stinking Venison, rotten Cheese musty Bread, etc. which cannot
but occasion many Diseases. And when they come to places, where Fruit abounds,
as Apples, Pears, Plums, Melons, Cherries, Grapes, etc. they over-eat
themselves, and thereby cause Gripings in the Guts, Diarrhaea's, etc.

Lastly, sometimes the Air is corrupted, especially after a great Battle, and
slaughter of Men that remain unburied; whereby the Air being tainted infects
the living that take it in. Which is often made worse by the exhalations of low
and moorish ground, and by thick Fogs.

These are the general Causes of the common Distempers reigning in Armies;
against which thou art to arm thy self accordingly. First then be careful in
thy Diet; eat not greedily and indiscreetly every thing that comes to hand; and
though it be good, yet eat and drink not too plentifully of it, but restrain
thy appetite, considering how destructive every excess may be to thy health.

If thou can and have no aversion from it, drink every Morning of thy own
Urine, which prevents corruption in the Stomach, opens obstructions in the
Liver, Spleen, Mesaraic Veins; which if not removed, there will follow Fevers,
the Yellow Jaundice, Swellings, and difficulty of breathing. If thou art averse
from doing so, eat some Bread and Butter with Rue on it; or, if it be not hot
weather, take in the morning the quantity of a Hasel-nut of Mithridate or
Treacle; or infuse in Brandy, or rather in Spirit of Juniper Berries, some
Zedoary, Angelica, and a little Citron-peels, and drink a spoonful of it in the
Morning.

When the Air is corrupted, and there be at hand a Goat, rub thy self at him,
and let not the strong smell keep thee from it. Also put Quicksilver in an
empty Hasel-nut, closed up with Spanish Wax, and hang it about thy neck; or the
Zenechton prepared of Arsenic, (after the manner by and by to be described)
sowed up in thin Leather; for if it should touch the bare skin, it would cause
Blisters and do harm. This Zenechton is a Plaster, out of which are cut pieces
of the bigness of a Dollar, which are carried about the Neck, and hang down
near the Heart; keeping good a whole year. And when the infection is past, this
Zenechton being reduced to Powder, will yet serve to kill Rats and Mice with.
It is to be thus prepared,

Take of Yellow and White Arsenic, of each an ounce, or of an ounce; of gummi
Tragacanth an ounce; put this gummi in Rose Water or in common water over
night, and it will yield a slimy Water. Then beat thy Arsenic in a Mortar, and
put so much of this gummed Water to it, as is necessary to reduce it to a Paste
having the consistence of Dough; work it well and round it, and then cut off a
slice of the bigness of a Dollar, somewhat thicker; let this slice dry in the
Air, and sow it in a piece of thin Leather (well-dressed Dogs-skin is the best
for this purpose;) carry this about thy Neck so as to let it hang down upon,
and to touch the place of thy Heart. Some mix with it a proportion of the
Powder of dried Toads, which I have done my self, it being esteemed more
powerful. Some carry about their Necks dried Spiders; Theophrastus commends
Celondine, Leaves and Root, carried about the Neck.

Remember also to burn frequently Juniper-wood before thy Tent; though all
ordinary fires cleanse the Air: Upon which account Hippocrates advised great
fires to be made in Greece at the time of a great Plague, which was thought to
have been removed by that means. Some burn only a few Chips of Juniper-roots,
or some of the Berries of that shrub, which is as effectual.

If these means cannot be had, burn some Gunpowder, ordering it like a Train;
this purifieth the Air likewise. And the volleys of shot made mornings and
evenings in a Camp, conduce very much to the dispelling of Mist, and qualifying
raw weather.

Frankincense also, Mastick, and such other Perfumes as dry and clear the Air,
may be very usefully burnt; and even a Scholars Perfume made of waste Paper is
not to be despised.

If thou can get Rue, smell often to it: And remember me for this general
hint, to take good notice of all Herbs that are green Winter and Summer, and
which are not eaten by Horses or Cattle; for they are endowed with excellent
virtues for the good of Man, and therefore made to grow at all seasons of the
year.

When the Air is pestilential, or breeding any Epidemical Disease, then wash
thy face with Vinegar every morning. If thou can get Acetum of Rue,
Elder-flowers, Lavender, Roses, Marigold-flowers, it is the better. Or, if you
have the convenience, prepare the following Acetum: Take Rue, Elder-flowers,
Burnet-roots, white Dittany, Carlina, of each equal quantity; a few Orange or
Citron-peels, (of which the latter are the better of the two,) and a little
Camphire, and some Walnut-kernels (the fresher the better,) leaving the bitter
skins upon them; put all these into common Vinegar, and with this infusion
moisten every morning thy Temples, Mouth and Nostrils, and the beating Arteries
of both thy Wrists; taking down a good spoonful of it, and thou have a good
preservative.

If it be cold weather, take Angelica-roots, Zedoaria, white Dittany, some
dried Citron-peels, and a little Camphir, infuse them all in Brandy, especially
in such as is made out of Wormwood or Juniper Berries. Of this Liquor drink in
the morning a spoonful. But if thou be of a hot constitution, then content thy
self with the former Acetum, in which you may mix a little Treacle.

Some advise to take fasting some of the Juice of Marigold, freshly expressed
out of the Flower and Leaves, as a good preservative against the Infection.
This I have not tried; but I have often in such cases used the Acetum of
Marigold-flowers, especially for a Cordial and Sudorifick, and, I think, with
very good success.

Or make an Electuary of Rue and Juniper Berries, of each equal quantity,
adding thereto a double quantity of Walnuts, with their bitter skin on them,
some Figs, a little Treacle, and a little Saffron; beat them together in a
Mortar, and pour on them, whilst thou art beating, as much Rue-vinegar as will
reduce it to a thick Pulls or Electuary: Of this take the bigness of a Hasel-Nut
or two, fasting.

Take the Roots of the greater Burrdock, and those of Celondine, both well
cleared, and the Bark of Ash; infuse them twenty four hours in half White Wind,
and half Rue-vinegar; then distill it, and in the distilled water mix a little
Brimstone-oyl, to render it a little sowrish. Of this take two spoonfuls in the
morning for a preservative. But if any be already infected with the Plague, let
him take of the same six or eight spoonfuls at a time, and sweat upon it, it
being a very sudorifick Liquor, which, under the name of Aqua Bardana
composita, has been used by me and my Colleagues in Hospitals and other places
with very great success. You may mix some Mithridate with it, if you please.

Else take Carlina, Imperatoria, Serpentaria, Valerian, Saxifrage, Tormentil,
Gentian, Angelica and Zedoaria, all cut small; infuse them in Brandy, and drink
of it a spoonful in the morning for a preservative; but if thou have the
Contagion, take two spoonfuls, to sweat upon it, in case the Pestilential
Poison be not yet broken out, and the Patients Tongue not dry; but if it be,
content thy self with the newly prescribed Acetum, as being more safe, and an
Inflammation being to be feared from the Brandy.

Hold Zedoar, Angelica, Lovage or Imperatoria, in thy mouth; but if thou be
subject to the Headache, then cut it first small, and infuse it in Vinegar, and
let it stand infused for the space of 24 hours; then take it out again, dry it,
and use it as prescribed above.

Amongst the good Preservatives reckon this also: Take Garden-rue, beat it into
a mortar, pour Vinegar on it, and strain all through a cloth; mix some Treacle
with it, set it by in a glass, and take of it in the morning half a spoonful or
a whole. Put a little Camphir to it, if you will have it stronger.

Or put Camphir in Worm-wood-wine, and drink a good draught of it every morning

When I served in times of great mortality, I infused in Wine Carduus
benedictus, Wormwood, Scordium, Dictamne of Creet, Burnet-roots, and
Citron-peels, and after I had taken every morning a good mess of sourish broth,
I drank after it a good glass of this infusion. As long as the herbs retain a
bitterness, fresh wine may be infused upon them.

Infuse also white and well cleansed Garlic in Acetum made of Rue, and take of
it a spoonful or two in the morning.

In the Apothecary-shops are Pills, called Pestilential Pills: Among these
cause a little Camphir to be mixed, and of it let Pills be made; of which take
at once three or four every week, taking them in a spoonful of White Wind, an
hour before supper. These prevent all inward putrefaction, and keep off all
infection, nor do they suffer any collection, of morbifique matter within thee,
though they purge not, but only keep the body soluble. They are made up of Aloe
Myrrh and Saffron. Formerly I have printed a whole Book of such Pills, which I
called Marocostinas in Latin; where I have described their virtues at large.

For the Rich may serve what follows; Take Terra Sigillata, Bolus Armenus,
Pulvis Alexipharmacus, or Bezoardicum Nicolai, or the Cordiales Alexandrini
Benedicti; item Species de Hyacintho, Aqua Stapediana, Acetum Theriacale, or
the Red Hungarian Powder; all these serving not only to preserve, but also to
recover, by Gods blessing.

Provide out of the Apothecaries-shops Pastils of the extract of Angelica or
Zedoaria; take one or two of them in thy mouth every morning, and there let
them melt down.

Keep thy body clean every way; be cheerful; avoid rashness; nor be afraid,
considering that many have been infected by fear, terror, and melancholy.
Cheer thy self up now and then with a glass of good and sincere Wine, but not
to excess. Never fasting, nor never full. One that is empty will soon be caught
with this distemper, especially if he live amongst infected people. If he do,
let him drink a good draught of Wormwood-wine, Juniper-berry-wine, Rosemary,
Sage, or Zedoar-wine; which may keep thee from many dangers. But remember, not
to drink more of it than will cheer thee up and revive thy Spirits. At least,
drink a little Wine with Camphir and Vinegar, kindling the Camphir and letting
it burn in the Wine, so as to let it sink into it; for if it burn on the top,
it will there remain swimming: And if the Wine be skinned over with it, kindle
it again till it be quite burnt out. Take of Camphir for one draught, the
quantity of a pease; but if thou be subject to the Headache, then Camphir will
not agree with thee.

In case that any come to be infected, he is forthwith to be separated from the
sound, and to be laid to bed, so as his head and shoulders may lie somewhat
high; by which means he will be less subject to faintness. Then let him
presently take some Sudorifick Medicine, to make him sweat; for if the poison
be not speedily driven from the heart, the Patient is lost. You are also to
take great care, that this Distemper prevail not, and to endeavor to discover
it before the Patient be quite disabled: For, as soon as any begins to droop,
grows melancholy, faint and feeble in his limbs, so as that he is hardly able
to hold up his head, drawing his breath with difficulty, letting his head fall
to and fro, losing his stomach, growing yellowish about his eyes, with the
apples of his eyes standing out, finding headache, interrupted heats and colds;
as soon, I say, as these symptoms appear in times of the Plague, Spotted
Fevers, Hungarian Disease, etc. you may then look to it by times; forasmuch as
such Patients, that are already infected, go often about until the sixth or
eighth day, as I have known my self, until the lurking poison of the heart has
got the prevalency; and then the poor Patient is quite cast down, and often
dies in very few days, and even in a few hours. Wherefore thou art not to stay,
till the swellings and boils appear behind the ears, under the arms, etc. or
till the Carbuncles, Bubo's, and the like, break out; but thou art immediately
to make use of the best Medicines, thou can be Master of, to drive out the
poison, if thou will save thy life. I never found any thing, that was
considerable, done in the Plague, by means of Purging and Bleeding; but rather
on the contrary, all those that had Spots, if they were Purged or let Blood,
soon after died. However, I will prescribe nothing magisterially to any man;
let every one endeavor to do, what he can give a good account of. I have,
together with my Colleagues, treated many hundreds in our Hospitals infected
with the Plague, without ever opening a Vein, and yet we have by Gods blessing
recovered near 600 persons, besides those that by the same mercy we have cured
in their several Houses.

Now to procure sweat in the very beginning, take the quantity of two
Hasel-nuts of Treacle, dissolve it in common Vinegar; but if thou can have a
cordial Acetum, made of Rosemary, Lavender, Elder-blossoms, Rue, Roses, or
Elder-berries, use it much rather, and give it the Patient to sweat.

Or take the roots of Celondine, boil them in Vinegar, and dissolve some
Treacle in it: Or take Carduus benedictus, Rue, Petasites or Butter-burr, a
little Angelica, Zedoaria, or Saxifrage-roots, boil them together in half
White Wind, and half Vinegar, or only Water, dissolve a little Treacle or
Mithridate in it, and let the Patient take it warm, to make him sweat.

Mithridate has the like virtue with Treacle, yet neither of them are safe to
take for Women with Child, old Persons and young Children.

You may also make use to good purpose of the Saxon-powder, taking of it the
weight of a Ducat in Caduus benedictus, Scabius, or Sorrel-water; which Powder
is thus to be prepared:

Take Valerian half an ounce; Celondine, or Nettel-roots, of each one ounce;
Polypody, Althaea, (or Marchmallow,) wild Angelica, of each two ounces; of
garden Angelica, four ounces; of the rind of Laureola, (or Lowry,) an ounce and
an half: These roots are to be dug up in their best strength, viz. between the
middle of August and the middle of September, and being cleansed, they are to
be cut small, and then put in a glazed pot, pouring a sharp Vinegar upon it, so
as to cover it two inches high. Then lute on the cover with a lute made of
whites of Eggs and Flower; let all be boiled upon a gentle fire; then pour off
the liquor, and dry the roots, and reduce them to powder, mixing with it some
26 berries of Herb Paris, (or One-Berrie (which look like Pepper-corns, very
good against poison; and thus the powder is made. This herb grows in shadowed
and moderately moist places; I have found of it several times in Koshinger-wood
near Ingolstad: It has four leaves on one stalk, and one berry on the top. An
herb belonging to the family of Solanum's or Night shades; whence the leaves of
it do very much cool Inflammations, especially those of the Eyes, when laid
upon them.

Take notice of Sorrel, bruise some of it and pour Vinegar on it, (the Rue
acetum is the best,) and strain the juice through a cloth; put into it a little
powder of Angelica, about the weight of half a Ducat; or of the root of Dictam,
or of Butter-burr, or a little Treacle or Mithridate, and give it to sweat.

On this occasion of mentioning Dictam, I must add, that in our Country there
grows only the white Dictam, which is, among others, an excellent Antidote, but
you must take of it the double quantity and weight to that of Creta. You may
boil of the root of half an ounce in half White Wind and half Vinegar, or,
instead of the Wine, in Carduus benedictus water; and drink of the Decoction
warm, and put your self to sweat; or take of the powder of it a dram and an
half in warm broth with a little Vinegar, for the same purpose.

The Dictam of Creta has hairy leaves and purpureous blossoms, and is used in
the prepation of Treacle. This herb by its odor drives away Serpents. The wild
Goats being hurt by any Arrows eat this herb, and it is said, that by this means
the Arrows fall out of the wound. This perhaps has no other ground than that
of the Poet Virgil, affirming that Venus with this herb healed her Son Aeneas
when wounded in the War. His words are Aeneid. 12. Hic Venus indigno nati
concussa dolor;
Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem foliis and flore comantem
Purpureo, non illa feris incognita Capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.


About this time came in the Hungarian Infection, which was a Disease that bred
such a a putrefaction in the bodies of Men, that even when they were near
death, they fell a vomiting but that with such a stench, that no body could
endure it. Here those Medicines do well, that preserve the body from
putrefaction; for the Plague, Spotted Fevers, and the Hungarian Distemper,
proceed all from inward corruption. And of them, the Plague attacks the Spirits
residing in the Heart, and so kills very quickly; whereas Spotted Fevers have
their seat in the Blood, and therefore do last twelve, fourteen, and sometimes
twenty days before they kill. But the Hungarian Disease is seated chiefly in
the putrified Phlegm of the Head and Brains; whence those that labor under it,
are tormented with great and maniacal headache.

But though these three Diseases have their rise from one and the same cause (
Putrefaction,) and are to be cured by the same remedies; yet is therein
required the discretion of a prudent Physician, for the ordering and
prescribing of Medicines according to circumstances.

Take a dram of Zedoary, give it pulverised to the Patient in Acetum of Rue,
or Elder, or Marrigold flowers, or even in common Vinegar: Let him sweat upon
it. It Is good against all sorts of venom, and causes a sweet breath, as
resisting inward corruption.

In the Apothecary Shops you find an Electuary, called Diascordium, found by
that famous Physician Hieronymus Fracastorius. It is like to Treacle and
Mithridate; only it is red from some Ingredients giving it that color. This may
be used with safety by Women with Child, young Children and all sorts of
Persons, whereas, as was said above, Treacle and Mithridate may not. It is made
chiefly of Scordium or Water-Germander, which has the smell of Leek when
bruised.

Galen in his first Book De Antidotis, Chap. 12. writes, that when in a great
Battle some slain Bodies chanced to fall upon this Herb, they rotted not as far
as they were touched by this Herb.

The said Fracastorius did compound this his Diascordium out of this Herb
Scordium, Tormentil, Serpentaria, Gentian, Bole Armeniac and Terra Sigillata,
and such like Ingredients.

It is chiefly to be used in the hot Diseases of the Head; which I have done
many a hundred times. Take of it the weight of about two ducats in common
Vinegar, or in Elder-water, or rather in the expressed Juice of fresh Sorrel,
and sweat upon it. It Is very good especially in the Hungarian Sickness and
other venomous and infectious Diseases. To young People you may give a lesser
quantity, and proportionably you are to lessen the Dose for Women with Child or
in Child bed, and little Children.

Besides take notice of the Powder of Doctor Hessius, which has been used with
great benefit, and is thus prepared.

Take a dram of Sugar Candy, a quarter of an ounce of pulverised Ginger, and
a dram of Camphir; reduce all to a fine Powder; give of it to the infected
Patient the weight of a dram in Vinegar mingled with the Water of Marigold
flowers, Scabious or Sorrel, and sweat upon it. If you have none of these
Waters, then look that the Vinegar be not too sharp, and to that end dilute it
with some Wine and Water. Mean time, though in this case I highly value
Camphir, yet in stead of Ginger I would use Zedoary, Saxifrage, Carlina or
Imperatoria, or the true Petasites or Butter-burr.

Again, Brimstone is none of the meanest Remedies in these infectious cases;
for it preserves the Body from Putrefaction. Wherefore take of the noble
Flowers of Sulphur a quarter of an ounce, being sublimed from Colcothar; add to
it one scruple of Camphir, an ounce of the Spirit or Oil of Cyprian or Venetian
Turpentine. Put all this into a Glasshead, lute it well and put it upon hot
Sand or Ashes, whereby the Oil of Turpentine will come to open the Brimstone,
and produce a red color like a Ruby, or at least as yellow as a high-colour'd
Hyacinth. Of this give some to the Patient three or four times, mingled with a
little Treacle, or in Sorrel, Cardobenedictus, or Scabious-water. This Balsom
is excellent also in sore Breasts that are growing purulent, taken in warm
broth, or in a good Wound-drink. But this must be in cases of no great heat or
inflammation, in which it would be dangerous.

Amongst all the Remedies, which serve against Infectious Diseases, that of
Henricus Stapedius, to be found in my Book de Pestilentia, is an excellent one,
and perhaps the best for curing as well as preserving; of which half a spoonful
being taken fasting, is able to keep a Man well for twelve hours or more: But
if any be already infected, he must take of it at any time immediately, to the
quantity of a spoonful and an half, or two spoonfuls, for sweating. Which is to
be repeated every eighteen or twenty four hours, to make the Patient sweat,
till he recover, or till the Pestilential Boyls and Carbuncles break out behind
the Ears, under the Arms, or elsewhere. This Water, though it be somewhat dear,
yet its virtue countervails its price. The older it grows the more virtue it
has.

Many have ascribed great efficacy to the Blood of Animals: Thus old
Democritus, (witness Galen,) prepared an Electuary of such Blood, called
Diathaematon. Some esteem much the Blood of Storks, because they eat Toads and
Snakes; others value the Blood of Hens, because they eat Spiders and other
venomous Insects. I should esteem most the Flesh or Blood of Badgers; which is
to be dried in the shade, and that done, you must mix with it Saffron, Camphir,
and some or other of the Anti-pestilential Roots, as of Angelica, Zedoaria, or
the like, together with a little live Brimstone to the quantity of a ducat;
which is to be taken in Acetuni of Rue, or Marigold-flowers, or Walnuts, and in
case of want of these, in common Vinegar: Upon which the Patient is to sweat.
If thou art a good Husband, have ready a good Acetum of Rue, Walnut-kernels and
Marigold-flowers, taking the greater quantity of Rue; and as you use it, fill
it up again with Acetum of Elder-berries.

The Rich do use for their Physic in the time of the Plague, the red
Hungarian, as also the Imperial red and gray Powder, Bezoar, Hartshorn,
Antidotum Matthioli, Terra Sigillata, Bole Armeniack, Scorzonera and
Contrayerva, Species de Gemmis, Diamargariton de Hyacintho, and other high
Medicines, of which I have largely discoursed in my above cited Book De
Postilentia. But I, though I have used such Remedies among the Rich, yet I
content my self commonly with the plainer and most common Medicines, of which I
have more knowledge and experience.

The Pickle of Ebulus or Walwort, ( alias Dane-wort, or Dwarf-elder,) which is
of kin to Elder; as also the Pickle of Juniper Berries, are also of great use
in this case.

The Physicians of Ausburg made great use, in the year 1572. of the red
Imperial Powder; the composition of which is in the Augustan Dispensatory at
large, as also in my Book de Peste.

These are the several means to provoke sweat, which I esteem to be of great
efficacy for that purpose upon a sudden. And though Soldiers have not the
convenience of a Bed for sweating, when they are in a march, and often cannot
put off their Clothes for many nights together; yet let them use such
sudorifick means: for, though they cannot sweat outright, yet they may fall
into a dampish moisture, which if it strike not in again, may prove as good as
a sweat. Yet in this case he must turn his Shirt: Quod non facit sudor,
praestat id tenuis udor.

But here is to be noted, that it is not enough, once only to give a sudorifick
Medicine to an infected Body; considering that the venom, like a raging Sea, is
tossed to and fro every way. And though it should seem to thee, as if by thy
approved Antidote thou had overcome the Disease, the symptoms of it excepted,
yet thou art not to trust in this case; for I my self have been sometimes
deceived, and hard put to it to make good what by confidence I had omitted.
Wherefore you must not trust to the once taking a sudorifick Potion or Powder,
because such malign and lurking Diseases, that keep no stitch, do indeed fly
the first time from thy Medicament, and hide themselves under it, but they are
wont suddenly to re-appear. Wherefore you must repeat the Antidotes, that were
first administered to you, for the time of 16, 18, 20, or 24 hours, according to
circumstances, and so long and often, till you judge your sick Brothers or
Friends Heart secured from the infectious Venom.

When the sweating is over, thou must then refresh thy Patient, first by drying
him well, and next by giving him a little Vinegar to taste in a spoon. The Rich
may afford some slices of Citron, of which Theopompus Chius writes, that the
Tyrant Clearchus Heracleota, who lived in Pontus, having poisoned many People,
the virtue of Citron was at length found out, of which a slice being eaten
proved an effectual Antidote against it. The same virtue may be found in a
slice of a common Apple; and the Syrupus de Pomis is one of the Cordials of our
shops.

But the thirst, that uses to follow upon sweating, will not be quenched with
so small a matter; wherefore take three parts of water, one part of Vinegar,
and, if the Patient be not too hot, one part of Wine, mixing some Sugar
therewith, and of this let him drink a good draught, and it will cool and
refresh him.

Besides, take some of the guts of Hens, and some slices of Radish, sprinkle
them with Vinegar and Salt, and bind them to the soles of his feet; this will
draw away the heat. But let not the Radish lie too long upon them, because it
will give a stink that may increase the headache, wherewith the People that
have the Plague are commonly troubled enough without provoking it. Moreover you
will do well to tie about his wrists some Rue beaten with Vinegar. Anoint his
Loins and Backbone with the Unguent of Roses, or with fresh Butter; but if
there appear any Spots, forbear to anoint him, lest they should be driven in.

You will do well to have Epithemata of good things about you, as of Rose water
and Elder-vinegar, to lay over the Heart; with which mix some Camphir. But if
you find any thing of Specks, etc. broke out, you must use no wet thing.

Anoint his Heart with Oil of Scorpions, take the Oil of Sea-blossoms and of
those Earthworms that appear after rain, of each six ounces, of St John's Wort
Oil two ounces, of fresh Elder-blossoms and Rue, each a handful and an half, of
the Acetum, of Marigold-flowers and Roses, each about three ounces, of live
Spiders forty five: Boil all these together, till the Vinegar be so qualified,
that when it is thrown into the fire, it cause no cracking there. Then strain
it, and in this strained Oil put a matter of five and twenty Spiders more, of
the biggest sort, and add to it of Camphir dissolved in the Spirit of Roses
half a dram; let it stand in Balneo Mariae or upon hot embers for twelve
hours, and then put to it of Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an ounce, and
let them work together. With this Oil anoint the eight Pulses, viz. both
Temples, behind both Ears, both Hands, and both Knees, as also the Heart. And
this is an excellent Succedaneum to Scorpion-oyl, much used by the Germans.

Besides, you must refresh and strengthen the Patient with convenient Meat and
Drink; I mean with good Flesh or Barley-broath, with a little Vinegar in it to
make it savoury to him who will have appetite to little else, till he have
shaken off this venomous Distemper; which when he has done, his stomach will
be so keen, that you will find work enough to keep him from surfeiting.

Be also careful to keep thy Patients Body open; if he be obstructed, use a
Clister, or take Butter or Hog's Grease, mixing a little Salt with it, or, if it
be to be gotten, a little Micetrickles, and put it into his bowels. Physic at
the mouth for this purpose is not always safe: When the Patient is discharged
of the venom, a little liquor of stewed Prunes with some Senna-leaves in it
will do well for opening the body. Some fresh Butter eaten in the morning, or
melted in warm Broth, and taken down, is wont also to keep the body soluble.

The Drink of these Patients may be, Water with some Bread soaked in it; or
take of such Water, wherein Bread has been soaked, one quart, and a little
Vinegar, with two or three spoonfuls of Kitchin-sugar, mingling it well
together. If you have no Sugar, use such Water with Vinegar alone: This affords
good Drink in malignant Fevers. Among the Romans it was drunk by the Soldiers,
under the name of Posca.

You may also take a handful of well cleaned Plantain-roots, and boil them up
in three quarts of Water, and then decant the Water, which though it be
somewhat bitter, yet it is very good in Fevers, and a good Drink in hot
Distempers.

If you have Oil of Vitriol, let a few drops of it fall into clear Water,
mingling it well; and you will have a factitious Sawer-brun or Acidula. But use
no Metalline Vessel for this purpose. With this kind of Water many People have
been served in all sorts of Fevers; the Oil of Vitriol, in such Distempers, if
rightly used, being very beneficial.

But if a Man should have with it any Pulmonick Disease, in that case he must
forbear acid things, and use Liquorice, and content himself with Ptisane. Nor
is it at all good to use acids in Pestilential Pleurisies.

And since on this occasion we mention this case, and we having above given
warning, not easily to blood in Pestilential Diseases; yet may Venae-section be
sometimes, upon good consideration, used in that Pleurisy, provided it be done
in the very beginning, and the Patient be strong and full of Blood. Yet this is
not to lessen the blood, but only to give it vent; but before bleeding the
Patient is to sweat by taking some of the above specified Antidotes.

If the Patient have violent Headache, lay on his head Vine-leaves or fresh
Cabbage-leaves; and, if you have no Alablaster-salve, take two parts of
Vinegar, and one part of Oil of Olives (the Sea-blossoms Oil, and Elder-Vinegar
were better;) dip long rags of linen therein, and having well squeezed them
again, lay them lukewarm over the face and temples. Even Vinegar alone is good.
Of such Applications you may make many, of Acetum of Roses, Elder-blossoms, and
the like, with a little Camphir. The expressed Milk of Peaches is also very
effectual in this case.

If at the going off of this Distemper, a hot defluxion should fall into the
Eyes, take Camphir and infuse it in water, and often moisten the Eyes
therewith; and if it should be cold and windy weather, you will do well to keep
your self out of the open Air, and not to let this water dry up in your Eyes in
the cold wind.

In case of having lost thy hearing, take of thy own Urine, and with it wash
thy Ears within, but withal dry them very well, because that moisture is very
noxious to the Ears: And it often happens, that after the Hungarian Sickness
People grow deaf or hard of hearing. Others put the water of Carduus-benedictus
distilled with Wine into the Ears, or the Oil of bitter Almonds.

If thy Throat swell, or the Palate of thy Mouth be fallen down, gargarize thy
Throat with warm Milk, wherein Figgs have been boiled, or sweetened with Sugar.
The Flowers of Phyllirea or Mock-privet, which grows in the Hedges, boiled, and
used for a gargarism, heals also a sore Throat. The same does the middle rind
of Oxyacantha or Haw-thorn, if boiled, with a little Allom dissolved in the
Decoction. If you have the Juice of Mulberries, mix a little Honey of Roses
with it, and often take a little thereof. The Roots of Sloes boiled in red
Wine, and the Mouth often washed therewith, is also very good.

If thou have the Squinancy, boil Scabious in Mead, and drink thereof warm,
when strained. Beat Turnips and fry them in Butter or Oil, and clap them in a
cloth round about thy Neck.

If thou cast up blood, take Mouse-ear, Ground Ivy, Cumfrey; boil them in half
Wine and half Water, or in Meat, and Drink often of it. But if the Plague reign
not, open first a Vein.

For a violent Cough, boil white Turnips, well cleansed in common water; throw
away this first water, pour on other water, and in it let the Turnips boil till
they grow soft. Strain this water, sweeten it with Sugar, or infuse in it
Liquorice cut small; and drink of it mornings and evenings warm. Or make a
Decoction of St. John's bread, and drink it, abstaining from all four and salt
things.

The bleeding at the Nose is also incident to persons infected; which is no
good sign, though in sound persons it often frees from the Headache and cools
the Liver. If this bleeding be too violent, clap Ice-cold water about the
Patients Neck, or let him put his Pudenda in cold Vinegar.

CHAP. V. Of the Inflammation of the Tongue, its rise, and concomitants,
together with the Remedies.
WHen the Tongue is inflamed, the whole Oesophagus or Weasand is inflamed also,
and this from beneath upward, because the inward fire sends up its smoke all
along, as it were, that chimney, which like soot sticks to it, drying and
blackning the same.

But there is another Inflammation, much more dangerous, which taking its rise
about the Heart, and therefore is called the Inflammation of the Heart, which
proceeds from the great inflammation of the orifice of the Stomach, situate
near the heart, in which is inserted the sixth pair of Nerves, which makes the
said orifice very sensible of any pain. This part being seized by so great an
inflammation, which is venomous withal, it must in a manner harden, and shrink;
and this heat is of that extent that, the inner Membrane of the Stomach and
that of the Tongue being one and the same, what befalls the Stomach, the Tongue
must needs be sensible of it. Whence it comes to pass, that if the Gall
overflows and passes into the Stomach, the Tongue presently finds the
bitterness of it: or if the Stomach be full of slime or foul, or the like, the
Tongue is soon affected therewith.

There is another kind of Inflammation, by the Latins called Prunella alba.
This is of the same kind with the rest, but not of the same degree; for it is
not of so dry a nature, as the others are, but commonly is moist, yet overlays
all the Gums, the Throat, and the Weasand with such a tough white slime, like a
kind of Leather, and so covers the Almonds with the same, that sometimes it can
hardly be removed even with Instruments. The Tongue is as if it were crusted
over with dough, the Gums like an Oven that by the heat of fire is burnt white,
the Almonds covered as 'twere with white leather, and the Palate of the Mouth
likewise. And in this case if the Patient will speak, he lalls and stutters,
his Tongue being burdened with a load of slime; or, if he make his Tongue
wagg, the slime spins out like a thread, and so invades the Teeth as if they
were laid over with varnish. And when this varnish on the Teeth grows black (as
I have often observed it to do) and dries on them, it is a mortal sign; of
which Hyppocrates says, Quibus in febribus livores circumdentes nascuntur, his
fortes fiunt febres, 4. Aph. 53.

These are the three sorts of Inflammation; for which let us now seek out the
Remedies, beginning from the last, the White. This is not to be mastered by
gargarisins alone, but the hand must be employed also. Take therefore
Cotton-wooll, or Flax, and wind it about a stick or rod, and dip this in
Vinegar, and rake his Throat and Gums therewith, yet taking care not to make it
raw; let him gargarise between, and wash well his Mouth with Water and Vinegar,
or Mul-berry-juyce. Privet that grows in the hedges, or the middle rind of
Haw-thorn, boiled in Water and a little Vinegar, then strained, with a little
Sal-armoniack put into it, is in this case an excellent gargarism; but if there
be blisters upon the Tongue, or elsewhere, then take instead of Sal-armoniack a
little unburnt Allom, and mix it therewith. If you can have the Juice of
Turnips, or the Juice of fresh House-leek, dissolve therein also a little
Sal-armoniack, and use it to wet the stick, wherewith thou cleansest the Throat
of the Patient; dipping it often therein, and carrying it about the Uvula or
Palate of the Mouth; and you will see lumps come away as big as Pease. The skin
is under this Prunella alba fair and red, but tender. Whilst thou art cleansing
the Patients Mouth, let him often gargarise with the Waters above-specified,
and he will clear his Mouth of the loosened lumps. If thou can get
Mulberry-juyce mixed with Honey of Roses, the Mouth will heal the better; for
upon this sort of Inflammation there usually follows a Putrefaction of the
Mouth; and in case thou perceivest any such thing, take Wood Sorrel, and the
above said rind of Haw-thorn, make a Decoction of it, and put in it a little
Allom, and often gargarise with it. Clean thy Teeth from the slime with Water
well sharpened with Vitriol.

The common Inflammation of the Mouth may be cured with frequent washing of the
Mouth, taking a gargarism made of House-leek, Lettice, Nightshade, or
Self-heal Water, mixing a little Honey of Roses and Mulberry-juyce with it. Of
this gargarism the Patient is also to swallow a little, thereby to moisten the
Throat.

Some take House-leek, and beat it, and put to a pound of it half an ounce of
Sal-armoniack, mixing it well together. And so they put it for some days in an
earthen pot glased under ground; then they distill of it a Water in Balneo or
in Sand: Which is excellent both to drink and to gargarise, though the
Sal-armoniack make it a little unpleasant.

But there is nothing better to allay this Inflammation than Niter; which is so
well known amongst Soldiers, that they are wont to give one another Gunpowder
to drink, which Powder performs this effect not upon the account of the Coals
or Brimstone, but the Saltpeter.

For this cause Experienced Physicians and Surgeons endeavor to purify
Niter for this use, that it may have the greater effect; and this they do in
manner following:

They take of the purest Niter they can get, as much as they think fit; they
beat it to a fine powder, and melt it in a large Crucible, and whilst it boils
up and foameth, they pour into it a little powdered Sulphur, and so let it boil
together, till the blew Sulphur-flame cease; then they cast in more fresh
Sulphur: Which they repeat often, and then pour out the Niter into an earthen
vessel glased, making Lozenges of it, of which they put one pulverised into a
quart of limpid water, and so give the Patient to drink of it as much as he
needs to quench his thirst. Or they give of this purified Niter to their
Patients, laboring under this Inflammation, the quantity of a ducat or half a
ducat weight in Broth, or in Ptisan, till they find the Tongue cleared of its
slime.

The use of Saltpeter thus prepared removes also the Inflammation of the
Heart, especially if it be melted upon Lead, and then proceeded with as before.
For Lead is a considerable cooler, of which cooling quality the Niter, whilst
it is melting upon it, takes in not a little. Let then your Lead melt, and
when it is melted, dissolve the Niter upon it, and then, to purify it, cast
some Brimstone into it, as was said above, till it be cleansed from all
impurity; and then give of it to thy Patient two or three times a day,
according as need shall require.

Otherwise, take live Crafishes and fresh Housleek, beat them together in a
Mortar, squeeze out the Juice, with it mix a little Sal-Armoniack, or a pretty
deal of thy prepared Niter; make a Potion of it, and give of it even cold to
thy Patient, repeating this several times, every eight or ten hours once,
according as you shall see occasion.

Or, take fresh Lard, (if it be salted, draw it through hot Water to unsalt
it,) and cut a slice of it two fingers large, and of the thickness of a knives
back; put this into the Mouth of thy Patient, it is an excellent Remedy against
this Inflammation; of which I shall give the reason hereafter. I have seen
wonders done with it. But if thy Patient do rave, then fasten this slice of
Lard with a Thread and Needle to his Shirt or Doublet, lest he swallow it. Or
take fresh Butter, and put it in cold Water, and of it give thy Patient at a
time the quantity of a Hasel-nut to hold it upon his Tongue, and let it melt
there; which will keep the Tongue always moist. And if thou work among this
Butter some of thy prepared Niter, it has a wonderful effect, though the taste
be not pleasant.

I promised above to explain the Reason of the Cure of these Inflammations.
When you take a Gargarism of the Waters of Nightshade, Wood Sorrel,
Knot-grass, Endive, Housleek, and the like, mingled with Vinegar, you do well,
but this is not enough; the reason is: If you wet a piece of Leather, you make
it indeed limber, but when it comes to be dry, it grows hard and shrinks,
except you grease it over with some fatty matter, and then it will remain
smooth. So it is with the Tongue; though it be made clean with Gargarisms, yet
will it become again rough and untoward, unless some fatness be used: For which
cause I have directed to use Lard, or Butter mixed with Niter.

If the Almonds be swelled, thou must abstain from all sour things, and
prepare a Gargarism of Figgs, St. John's Bread, Mallows-flowers, Liquorice,
Elder-canes, mixing with it some Rose-honey, or Juice of Walnuts, or the Rob
Diamorom, gargling often with it, seeing that this symptom is a dangerous
thing; for when the Throat swells of it, few Patients do escape death,
especially if it be a Pestilential Squinancy. And in case there appear any
Tumor outwardly, take fine Flower, Milk and Saffron, making a Pulse of it; and,
to keep it from growing hard, mix with it Althea-salve, or Hounds-tongue-salve,
the Oil of blew Violets, Mullein, white Lillies, Camomile, or the like, adding
a little Oil of Scorpions to it, and applying this outwardly.

Make also a Scraper of Alder-wood, if it may be had; if not, other wood will
serve, though Alder be best. Throw it into cold Water, and let it lie there,
using it as often as there is need; yet take heed of making thy Tongue sore or
raw.

CHAP. VI. Of Fevers, Belly-aches, Tumors of the Belly, Yellow-Jaundise, and
Distempers of the Liver.
IN Camps there is nothing more frequent than Fevers of the Stomach, arising
from ill Diet, which Soldiers are often put to for want of better, eating what
they can get, Cheese, Herbs, Flesh half boiled, stale and musty Bread, and the
like. Hence is gathered a morbifick matter in the Stomach, which causes
putrefaction, and consequently Stomach-fevers.

In this case thou art first to purge: And for that purpose make use of the
Pulvis solutivus de tribus, recommended above, taking the weight of a Ducat, or
a Ducat and an half, in warm Broth, and fasting two or three hours after it.
Or fetch from the Apothecary of the Tabulatum Diaturbith cum Rhubarbaro, or the
Diaphoenicon in tabulis, taking half an ounce at a time, and keeping thy
Chamber. Or, infuse Sena-leaves in Wormwood-wine, and drink a small glass-ful
of it an hour before thy breakfast: This will also serve very well, especially
if some Carduus benedictus have also been fermented in the Wormwood-wine.

If thou art troubled with Gripings or Inflation of the Belly, take of Zedoar,
or Angelica-roots, or Orange-peels, cut them small, and take at a time the
weight of a Ducat in hot Broth. If the Inflation be much, take in the morning
the quantity of a Hasel-nut of Mithridate, fasting an hour after it; and if the
pains of thy Belly prevail, make a Decoction of Wormwood in Wine, and drink of
it as hot as thou can; this will allay the pains, and give thee some stools.
Mean time abstain from raw Fruit, and Beer, Milk, Herbs, and such like.

If thou art swollen, take half a dram of Rubarb, and about the same quantity
or a little less of Mechocan; reduce it to powder, and take it in
Wormwood-wine, or warm Broth, in the morning fasting, and eat nothing within
an hour or two after. Be careful to take down some Treacle in the morning
fasting; but you are first to be purged. Otherwise make a Decoction of the
Roots of Elecampane and Pimpernel, or Swallow-wort, in Wine, and drink a warm
draught of it mornings; it will provoke Urine. If thou can bear amongst it
Wormwood, Carduus benedictus, or Centory, add them in the Decoction, and it is
a good potion for the Liver.

An Herb, called by the Latins Euphatorium Avicennae, in English (I think)
Common Hemp-Agrimony, has a great operation in swelled People, drinking of the
Decoction thereof, made in Wine. Besides, use in this case Parsley and
Smallage-roots in thy meat. Boil Horseradish, and drink of the Decoction warm
in the morning. Thy ordinary drink is to be a water, in which has been boiled
a good quantity of Cummin, Annis or Fennel. You may also now and then drink a
little Wine, swelled people having no great heat in them.

From these obstructions of the Liver and Mesaraic Veins comes difficulty of
Breathing and a dry Cough, which occasions the Inflation of the Belly, and
helps to entertain the crudities and indigestions: Mean time there uses to
follow upon this the Yellow Jaundise. For this, take the Roots of Cyclamen or
Sow-bread, reduce them to powder, and take the weight of half a ducat in Mead,
or Wine mixed with a little Honey, sweating upon it; and you shall find your
sheets discolored of a yellowish color. In the same manner make use of the
seed of Aquileja, or Columbine. I have reduced these three to powder, and mixed
them together, and given of it the weight of a ducat to sweat; which has
proved very successful. Orange-peels used in like manner, do also much good in
this case. The bitter Centory boiled in Mead, and a good draught drank of it
warm in the morning, is also very good. Likewise a Decoction of the white
Hore-hound and Chicory-roots is also used to good purpose in this case. These
things expel also Worms, if any do lodge within thee; for which may also be
used the Soldiers Pills of Aloe, called Marocostinae. In this case Vinegar of
Squills is also an excellent remedy, taking of it in the morning early a
spoonful, two or three, and exercising after it. It will open the Breast, and
make you expectorate phlegm and slime in abundance.

If you be troubled with Wind and Gripings of the Guts, be careful to have your
Body soluble. Boil Calamus, cut small, in Broth, drink of it hot, putting a
little Angelica, or Masterwort. Do this mornings and evenings, and beware of
drinking cold, and abstain from all Milk, keeping your self very warm,
especially about the Feet, which you will do well to bathe with a Decoction
made of Asarabacca, Camomile, wild Trefoil, wild Marjerom, wild Thyme, putting
a little Salt into it. For your drink, boil Cummin, Annis or Fennel in Water,
and now and then a glass of Wine may do well.

These Gripings may also be cured with drinking very bitter Wormwood-wine, as
hot as you can endure it. This is also opening. If you boil Elecampane and
Orange-peels with the Wormwood, it will have the greater effect. And if you add
to it Allium Sylvestre (Crow-Garlick) you have an excellent Medicine for this
purpose. This I have used my self, and found present relief from it, when in a
very hard Winter upon a Journey I was taken with these Gripings. It Is indeed a
very unpleasant potion, exceeding bitter, especially being to be drunk hot; but
the good effects will make amends for that. If the pains should not cease after
all this, mix with it the quantity of a Hasel-nut of Treacle or Mithridate, and
so drink it off together.

If you can get Malvasy, mix a little Oil of Olives with it, and drink of it
warm. Oil of sweet Almonds would be better, one half of that and the other of
Malvasy; though these things perhaps will not so easily be had in a Camp. Fresh
Butter may serve instead of Oil.

Else make a Decoction of Juniper Berries, or Laurel-berries, and Elecampane in
strong Wine, and drink a good draught of it mornings and evenings. Or reduce
the Herb Carduus benedictus to powder, and drink its weight of a ducat in warm
Malvasy or other strong Wine; it will remove the Gripings, especially if you
mix with it a little Zedoary pulverised.

For your Meat, take Larks, if they chance to be in season, draw them, and fill
their bellies with Garlic, and so roast and eat them.

Make a Decoction of Burnet, or of Masterwort, and Laurel berries, in Beer,
strain it, and melt a little Butter in it, adding a little Pepper, and so drink
of it hot.

For an outward Application, take the Oil of Rue and Wormwood, dip Cotton into
it, and put it warm to thy Navil. Or beat Onions, and fry them in Dill or
Camomile-Oyl, wrap it up in a linen Cloth, and apply it to thy Belly, where
the pain is most violent, refreshing it often.

The Oil of Laurel-berries, mixing a little Juniper-berry-oyl or Nutmeg-oyl
with it, may be used with great benefit, anointing the Navil therewith, and
afterward put to the Navil a warm dry bag filled with Bran and
Camomile-blossoms. Or fry Cow Dung in the Oil of Dill, or of Camomile, or of
white Lillies, and apply it thus to thy Navil, keeping thy self, and especially
thy Legs, very warm.

If you perceive any Hydropical Distemper in you, make a Decoction of Wormwood
and Juniper Berries in Wine, drink every morning a warm draught of it fasting.
You may also to very good purpose boil with it Swallow-wort, Burnet, or
Succory-roots, adding also to it some Annis or Fennelseed. But it will be
requisite first of all to purge with Mechoacan and Rhubarb; and now and then to
repeat this purgation. Abstain from Milk, Beer, Fruit, and all raw and
obstructing food. If you knew how to use Elder, you would have an excellent
Purge to free your Body from the Hydropical water, because the Juice of the
Roots of Elder purges Hydropical Persons exceedingly: But it is not so safe to
use it, unless you do it with great caution, because a very little of it taken
inwardly purges both by stool and vomit, like Antimony. Half a nutshel full
may suffice. The like effect you will find in Elder-buds boiled, and then dressed
with Oil and Vinegar like a Salad, eating a very little of it. But I advise you
not to use too much of it; else it will cast you into great faintness. The
juice of the Roots of blew Lillies has the like virtue, but is likewise to be
used with great discretion.

Otherwise take Earthworms, and having washed them clean in Wine, reduce them
to powder, and take of it for some mornings the weight of half a dram in warm
Broth or Wine, mixing a little Rhubarb with it.

The Swelling of your Legs may be removed by heating some Tiles and sprinkling
them with Wine, and clapping them about your Legs to make them sweat. For a
swelled Groin, take warm Milk, wherein Calamus Aromaticus has been boiled, and
sweeten it well with Sugar, and apply it.

CHAP. VII. Of all sorts of Fluxes; as also the Tenasmus, or vain endeavor of
going to stool; and the Haemorrhoid or Piles, and Marisca's or sore Fundaments.
IN Wars and Camps, Bloody and other Fluxes are very frequent, caused by an
irregular and ill diet; and these Distempers, especially the Bloody Flux, carry
away abundance of Men. Where it is to be noted, that the Bloody Flux is
infectious, and very catching.

Commmon Fluxes and Loosenesses may easily be cured. Amongst other Remedies,
take burnt Hartshorn, and take it often in Broth; or pulverise
Medlar-kernels, and take of the powder in Broth likewise. Also an Electuary
made of Quinces and Sloes will cure them. The same does Nutmeg, and the Roots
of Tormentil, Snakeweed, or the Roots of Cinquefoil, baked in Eggs, and eaten.
Likewise the Seed of Dock, broad Plantain; item Terra Sigillata, or Bolus
Armenus, and Wheaten-bread coming hot out of the oven, and dipped in red Wine,
and eaten. Again, Mastick pulverised, and put into Almon-milk, red Wine, or
Broth, the weight of a dram, is good for such a Looseness especially as
comes from indigestion; adding a little Nutmeg or Galingal to it. Oaken-leaves
also, or the Rinds of Pear Trees, with a little Mace boiled in Wine, and drunk,
cures common Fluxes. Again, Bursa Pastoris (Shepherds-Purse) boiled in
Steel-water with a little Coriander, and drunk, is also very good; and so are
Crafishes boiled in Vinegar, and the scales beaten to powder, taking a dram
of it mornings and evenings, either in red Wine or in Broth wherein in red-hot
Steel has been several times quenched. Hawes also boiled, and made into a
thick Electuary, and strained, is beneficial, if taken in the morning fasting,
and an hour or so before supper, the quantity of a Walnut.

Besides, take new Milk with its Cream on it, quench therein diverse times
red-hot Pebble-stones, so that the Milk may grow hot of it; then mix with it
two or three well-beaten Yolks of Eggs, two ounces of Sugar, melting in it an
ounce and an half of the Suet of a Deer or Stagg, and about half an ounce of
Albumgraecum, using it for a Clyster, which cleanses and heals the Guts, and
allays the sharpness of the Blood and other corrosive humors, that annoy the
Bowels.

But take heed of not stopping too suddenly the Bloody Flux, or any other
Laske; for if you do, the annoyance will remain in the Body, and cause
Impostumes, Difficulty of breathing, and other dangerous Distempers. Wherefore
consult with thy strength, and if that be considerable, make not too much have;
yet keep a bridle upon it, so as to be able to stop it when there is need. Mean
time, if it be without a Fever or heat, you may do much with new Milk, drinking
it also mornings and evenings warm, some red-hot Stones having been quenched
therein, and some Sugar mixed with it, to prevent curdling in your Stomach.
This Medicine was known to the famous Grecian Physicians, Aetius, Alexander
Trallianus, and Galenus himself, l. 10. de Simpl. Med. facult. If you add a
little Albumgraecum to it, 'twill be the better. I have my self done much good
with thus prepared Milk, but then there must be no Fever; which if there be,
you will easily perceive it by a great thirst, quick pulse, hot hands, and little
sleep etc. For bloody Fluxes are not wont to be accompanied with shaking
Fevers, but only with hot fits, which spend more of the Patients strength in an
hour, than shaking Agues in several days; which is to be well heeded.

Eggs boiled hard in Vinegar, and given to the Patient, that is troubled either
with the Bloody or any other Flux, it will be stopped.

The Roots of Tormentil, or of Snake-weed pulverised, and this powder drunk in
a convenient vehicle, the weight of a dram, is one of the most approved
remedies against these Fluxes; Tormentil-roots being very powerful not only to
stop them, but also to take away their catching malignity.

The Moss that grows on wild Rose-shrubs, reduced to powder, and taken in Wine,
wherein have been boiled the husks of Acrons, is an approved remedy in this
case.

Scrape red Lead or Rudle, such as Carpenters mark their lines with, put it
into Wine or Broth, wherein has been boiled the broader kind of Plantain and
Tormentil-roots; or take it in an Egg.

Hares-blood dried, and taken inwardly, is also a tried Medicine in this
Distemper. Item, open a new-laid Egg, take out the white, and fill it up with
Nutmeg, or the pulverised root of Tormentil, or of Snake-weed, and give it the
Patient to eat; or put into it some pulverised Boodstone, and it will do good.

I have used with good success the Seed of the broader Plantain, grossly beaten,
and roasted in an Egg, against the Flux; and I know it also to have been
beneficially used against the Bloody Flux.

Take of Mummy, a little Mastick, Bol-Armeniack, Sanguis Dracon^, mix them
together, and make a powder of them, and take of it in a convenient Liquor, the
weight of a dram, once or twice a day.

Take Rye-biscuit, and boil it in Water with Coriander, and the roots of
Tormentil or of Cranes-bill; quench some Steel in it once or twice, and give of
it to the Patient to drink.

Make a Decoction of Shepherds-purse and Meadow-sweet, in Water and Wine, and
now and then drink of it.

Burn live Crafishes in an earthen Pipkin well-closed, until they be so burnt
as to be reduced to powder; of which give to the Patient mornings and evenings
a Thimble-full or two in a convenient Liquor.

A dried Liver of a sucking Lamb, or of any other such Animal, is very good in
this case, provided such a Liver, before it is dried, be boiled in Vinegar. Let
the Patient take a dram of it twice a day. Also the Blood of a Lamb, or of a
Hind, both dried, will have here a good effect.

Take a Pigeon, Wood-cock, or Patridge, and having drawn any of them, fill them
with Mastick and a little Nutmeg, and so roast them on a Spit, and whilst they
are rosting, baste them with red Wine, and so let them roast till they grow so
hard as will make them pulverable; then reduce them or any of them to powder,
and take a spoonful of it at a time in warm Broth.

The highest Experiment in this case is Crocus Martis, taken in the Juice of
the broader kind of Plantain, or in a Pulse of red Beans, or Rice-broath; the
dose is half a dram. But when the pain is very great, you may then add to it
some opiat Medicine, as of the Trochisques de Garabe, or one only grain of
Laudanum Opiatum. And give the Patient now and then a little new-made Treacle,
or mix with it a few grains of the Confection of Archigenes; for of such
Medicaments a Field-Apotheque is not wont to be destitute.

For the Patients ordinary drink, boil water, and in it Coriander, dried Sloes,
dried slices of Quinces, burnt Hartshorn, Mastick, Nutmeg, or any one of
these; putting to it some of the roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, or such like
adstringent roots. Of this water the Patient may drink according as his
necessity shall require.

The red Juice of Quinces, boiled up without Sugar, is also much to be
commended in this case, for strengthening the bowels, two or three spoonfuls of
it being taken at a time, and that twice a day.

In many places a drink is made of Sloes, Pilosella or Mouse-ear, and
Juniper Berries, infusing them all in common water, and letting them ferment
together. This yields a pleasant acid drink, allaying the violence of the Flux,
and quenching thirst withal.

The Rich may make Granat or Quince-wine. But I have here undertaken to deliver
such things, as are parable and cheap for the poor common Soldier.

I am sorry, that in the Field there is no convenience of administering
Clysters: For, though I prescribe none without great necessity; yet Clysters
being of great benefit in Diseases of the bowels; they being to them like
Plasters, I cannot but recommend in this Distemper Clysters of Milk, wherein
Pebble-stones have been several times quenched, mixing a little of the melted
Suet of a Stag or Hind, without any Oil or other fat. I remember, I had once a
Patient of quality, that had about an hundred stools within twenty four hours,
who by the use of such Clysters, once or twice applied, was fully restored. The
cause whereof is, that the Milk washes the bowels, and clears them of the sharp
humors that annoy them; moreover, it is healing and repairing, by reason of the
Pebbles quenched therein. The Sugar is abstersive, and helps to clean the
injured places. The Fat sticks to the parts annoyed, to defend them from being
further hurt by the subsequent humors, which running down over it, can find no
stay there, and consequently cause no more hurt to those parts.

Yet must you not put in any greasy Fat, or any Oil of Olives, because they
hinder healing; and all Oil, except that of Linseed, Poppies, Hemp and Almonds,
is very sharp; and you will find, that if any drop of Oil of Olives should
chance to fall into your Eye, no Juice of Oranges or Limons is so strong as to
exceed the acrimony of that Oil. But of this Oil more will be said in the next
Chapter, to which I therefore refer you. If you would have your Clyster yet
milder and more sanative, you may beat a yolk or two of new-laid Eggs, and mix
them with it; though I have contented my self with the Ingredients before
mentioned, and found great benefit thereby. Else you may in this case use for a
Clyster the Cremor hordei, mixed with yolks of Eggs beaten in it; which is also
very good to wash out the bowels.

Here is no convenience of making much use of Apothecary-shops; else many
things might be prescribed to lay upon the belly and the navil, as also diverse
fermentations, and stomachical Unguents. You may therefore content your self
with those plain and easily parable means, already delivered, and be thankful
to God for them.

But then you are also to think upon means to obviate Symptoms of this
Distemper, and particularly Drought, which is wont very much to torment people
in this Disease. It Is true, Acid things do quench thirst, but they cannot be
used boldly, and therefore you must use them with great discretion and
wariness. And as for sweet things, they usually increase thirst, and do easily
corrupt, and turn into gall. Wherefore give to the Patient preserved Currants;
or if fresh ones be in season, mix a quantity of them with Honey or Sugar, and
give him of it to eat upon white-Bread and Butter. Or plump dried
Black-cherries, or dried Damascene-prunes* in half Wine and half Water, and let
him hold and squeeze them in his mouth. Or, if you can, mingle some Almond-milk
with Chalybeat-water, and let him drink thereof; and this is both meat and
drink. Or let him drink water, wherein Coriander and roots of Tormentil have
been boiled. Or boil in water dried slices of Quinces, roots of Bistorta or
Snake-weed, and burnt Hartshorn, put into it a tosted crust of Rye-bread
rubbed with Nutmeg, but let it not lie in it above a quarter of an hour, lest
the water should thicken and become viscous. Marmelat also of Quinces,
Black-cherries, and Sloes is proper in this case, giving the Patient a slice of
it to hold upon his tongue, and so to swallow it down.

Further, you must learn how to remedy a Tenasmus, which is more irksome to the
Patient, and, occasions more trouble to the Physician, than the Bloody Flux it
self, since it night and day painfully provokes the poor Patient to go to
stool, and yet to no purpose. For this I have used many remedies, but found
almost nothing more beneficial, than Fomentations of this nature following:
Take Potentilla (wild Tansie Silver-weed) Knot-grass, Mullein, and Oak-leaves,
of each as much as you please, put them into two linen bags, and let them boil
in Smiths-water, wherein much Iron has been quenched: Squeeze out these bags
between two boards, and let them be held alternately to the anus, as hot as can
be endured. Black Pitch, such as is found on Larch and Fir-trees, put upon a
heated fire-shovel, and the fundament held over it, is also a good remedy; and
so is Turpentine, used after the same manner.

Again, take a black well-burnt Brick out of the hearth, heat it thoroughly,
and wet it with sharp Vinegar, and wrap it about with a linen cloth, and let
the Patient sit on it as hot as he can endure it. This was the Experiment and
Remedy of old Aetius; but he reduced the Brick to powder, and by boiling it in
Vinegar, reduced it to a pulse, and so put it into a linen rag, and applied it
to the fundament. You may choose which you please of the two.

Milk-Clysters, such as above prescribed, would also be good, but that it is not
safe with Clyster-pipes to vex the anus, which is already sore enough. Yet you
may give a Suppository of Deers-suet mixed with some Oil of Mullein. And the
gray Diapompholox, or the white Camphire-unguent, or the like, mixed with it,
would not be improper in this case.

If there be a Falling down of the fundament, then let it often take in the
fumes of the abovementioned Herbs, adding to them the beaten stalks of
Sloe-shrubs, and those of red Roses, as also Mouse-ear, and Mug-wort. The outer
bark of Elder, and of Shepherds-purse, does also well with it. But above all
things keep the Patient warm, and let by no means any of the abovesaid steams
grow cold on the sore part.

Make also a Decoction of Garlic, and pour it hot into your close-stool, let
the Patient sit upon it, to receive the hot steams. Besides, put some burnt
Hartshorn in a linen cloth, and so strew it upon the fundament, by little and
little to drew it up. Or heat an Oaken-board very well, and cover it over with
Stags-suet, and let the Patient sit upon it whilst it is hot. Put Colophonium or
the Rosin of Pinetree upon a heated Iron, and let the Patient by holding his
fundament over it take in the steams thereof, Anoint also the part with Butter,
in which Onions have been boiled; and strew upon it Album-graecum very finely
pulverised. You may also make a Salve of Ceruse, Bol-Armeniack, Dragons-blood,
Stags-suet, Boodstone, Oil of Myrrh, or Butter in which first has been
boiled broad Plantain, Mullein, or wild Tansie Silver-weed; and with this
anoint the fundament.

As for the Marisca's, which do torment Men especially, they may be cured with
Oil of Eggs, Salve of red Hounds-tongue, as also with the Vnguentum Populeum,
or with Butter stirred up and down in a Leaden Mortar, till it turn gray or
blackish, Let the Patient drink also of Scrophularia or Fig-wort, infused in
his drink, this being a specific for that evil. Also the Oil of Mullein,
Elder-blossoms, Water-lilly, and White-lillies, is an excellent remedy for it,
a rag dipped therein being laid upon the part affected. To use scarifying on
the lower part of the backbone, is also very good, though it be very painful.

If the Hoemorrhoid-vein bleed in a convenient time, and do not overbleed, it
is an exceeding good thing, and preserves from many Diseases, as the
Inflammation of the Lungs, Stitches of the sides, the Leprosy, Melancholy,
Quartans, and the like. If the same vein should bleed in one that is mad, or
disturbed in his mind, or in one that is troubled with the Inflammation of the
Kindneys, these Distempers would thereby be allayed. But if it should bleed too
often and too violently, it weakens much, causes a pale color and the
Dropsy. My Colleagues and I have often opened it by Leeches, and thereby found
great benefit. But in case it should exceed in bleeding, you must deal with it
as you do with the Bloody Flux, and give to the Patient Terra Sigillata,
Bol-Armeniack, burnt Hartshorn, and the like adstringent things. If you can
get some teeth of the Hippo-potamus, rasp it into powder, and drink some of it
in red or white wine; it stops all bleeding, of the nose, mouth, guts,
fundament, hoemorrhoids, the matrix, especially the bleeding of Women after
delivery.

Here is also very useful the expressed Juice of Plantain, Shepherds-purse, and
of the tender leaves of Ras-berries, or Brambles, infused in wine and drunk.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pestilential Boyls, Ulcers, Carbuncles and other venomous Sores.
ABove I have prescribed some, both Preservative and Curative, Medicines
against the Plague, reserving for this place the Chirurgical means, to be used
against that Distemper, thinking it best to discourse of them together in a
place apart.

Concerning then the Pestilential Bubo's and Sores, that rise behind the Ears,
under the Arms, and about the Groin, the Cure of them consists chiefly in this,
that they be ripened with speed; for which end are to be employed mere
emollient and suppurating things. Yet are you to know to distinguish between
Boyls, there being some of them that are not venomous, especially in young
people; and they may be hereby discerned, that at the touch they cause no pain,
whereas the Pestilential ones are very painful; which are also discovered by
the accompanying venomous Fever, and other pernicious Symptoms. And of these
latter great care must be had to bring them out, and to a speedy maturation,
because those that lie deep are very dangerous.

Some there have been, that have used Scarification, and even Vesicatories,
thereby thinking to fetch out the venom. Others have pierced the Sores through,
about a hands breadth beneath the Sores, putting the root of black Helebore
into them, thereby to draw out the venomous matter. But such means have rather
irritated the evil, caused great pains, and put the Patient to greater danger.

Wherefore I judge nothing safer and better, than, as I was intimating, to use
Emollients. Take then of the common Diachylon, and lay it upon the envenomed
Boyls; and besides make a pulse of these herbs, viz. of Camomile, Mallows,
Melilot, Dill, Line-seed, Fenu-greek, Althaea, the roots of White Lillies, as
also salve of Althaea, Oil of Camomile and Lillies, mixing a little Saffron
with it, and some Oil of Scorpions. Of this pulse make some warm and lay it
over the Diachylon upon the Sore.

Or, boil Wheaten-bread in the broth of Mallows and Camomile, till it grow
soft, then saffron it over, and mix March-mallows-salve with it, and lay it on.
Or make a Plaster of Figgs and roasted Onions; or, make a pulse of
Bread-leaven, Honey, yolks of Eggs, and the juice of Onions, adding a little
Turpentine to it, and so lay it on.

If the mere common Diachylon be not sufficient, use the Plaster Diachylon cum
gummis or de Mucilaginibus, or mix a Melilot-plaister with the common
Diachylon, make a pulse of it with Oil of Lillies, mixing a little Oil of
Scorpions with it, and so lay it on.

In laying on of Treacle, I have this consideration, that Treacle, hinders
putrefaction, which is the thing here most of all desired, because all
maturation, which here is a reducing the Sore to suppuration, is a kind of
putrefaction.

Here also the Plaster called Basilicon is of good use; likewise the Ceratum
Oesipum Philagrii and Mesuae, which Cerata are made of Gummi Ammoniac,
Bdellium, Turpentine, liquid Styrax, Goose-grease, Marrow of Cows-bones and
Oesipum, and a little Saffron. Some take a dried Toad, and lay it upon the
boil, to draw out the venom.

Now when the Sores are softened and ripe, and yet break not of themselves, they
are to be opened with a lancet; and if you have to do with Persons so delicate
that they cannot endure a lancet, you may make use of the Lapis Septicus or
Corrosive-stone, which opens without pain, but is more slow. Mean time beware
of opening the Sores too soon; for then they will turn to a hard swelling,
which the Patient will not wear off whilst he lives.

There are also some Plague-sores that never break, but wear away by sweat. Yet
if they should leave behind some hardness, you may, when the danger is past and
the sickness overcome, make use of some fomentations of Melilot, Camomile,
March-mallows, Mullein and such like: You may also take of the Gum, called
Tacamahaca, and mix with it a Plaster of Melilot or Diachylon, and lay it on.

The Sores being opened; they must be kept open with small pellets, (called by
the Germans, Quellmaisseln,) dipped in a Salve made for this purpose out of fresh
Butter, Yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine, well mixed together cold.

But it happens sometimes, that such Bubo's, by reason of the venomous matter,
do eat in, or grow fistulous, or make matter-baggs, in which the matter
settles. In this case you must use the Vnguentum fuscum, Apostolicum, or the
Aegyptiacum: Or make the following water, to be squirted into such Sores;
namely of Celondine, Scordium or Water-germander, Carduus-benedictus, Centory,
or the like Herbs, together with Tormentil and Whitlow-grass; all boiled in
wine. If the Sores be very ill, you may boil with it some quick Brimstone, and
Myrrh, and if need be, mix with it a little fine Verdigrease. Or, take Honey
four ounces and an half, a quarter of an ounce of Aloes Epatica, a dram of
Salt, an ounce and a half of Scordium, mix all well together, and keep it for
use; and when you have occasion for any of it, then dissolve it in wine, and
fpirt it in. Mean time, enlarge the opening of the Boyls with the aforesaid
Pellets, that so the matter may have vent enough, and come away without any
impediment.

The Unguent of Ulysses Aldrovandus is also very good, for the clearing of such
Sores; and it is made of Oil of Roses, the Juice of broad Plantain,
sharp-pointed Dock, Centory, and Nightshade, with a little Litharge, burnt
Lead, and prepared Camphir. Instead of the Juice of Nightshade, you may take
that of Cumfry.

As for the Sores called Anthraces, and those they call Carbuncles, great care
must be taken to break them soon, and to heal them slowly, that so the
poisonous matter may all come away. They ripen and break soonest by fatty (but
not hot) Plasters and Unguents; especially such as are made of Butter, Leaven,
Yolks of Eggs, and Honey; or if you mix together Turpentine, Vnguentum
Populeum, or Rose-salve mixed with Yolks of Eggs, or the Vnguentum Anodynum mixed
with the Ointment of Hounds-tongue, and laid on it. It must be often refreshed,
because such hot Sores and Ulcers, before they break, do so draw, waste, and,
as 'twere, lick up those fatnesses, that sometimes of the Plasters, that have
lain on them, there remains nothing but the bare ragg. The Emplastrum
Basilicon, or the common yellow drawing Plaster, is here the most useful.

You must also surround the Anthrax with good defensives; for if it invade the
neighboring part never so little, it will soon make a large halo or circle,
which will at length separate from the sound, and fall away like an Escarre.
For such defensives make use of Album Camphoratum, or the Vnguentum de
Liquiritia, known by our people under the name of Dr. Mindererus his Licorish
ointment. Item the Vnguentum de Lithargyro; or the Vnguentum Jovis, prepared of
fresh Butter, with Thlaspi minus, or Bowyers Mustard, (otherwise narrow-leav'd
wild Cresses,) Cranes-bill, Elder, Poppy, Vervain, and some shaved Licorish.
Some take nothing but Vervain and the fresh leaves of Henbane, beaten together,
and the Juice strained, and so used. Of this Ointment you may make much with
confidence; for it will do you very good service in Inflammations, especially
in the case of the swelling of the Groins.

Amongst the approved Medicines for this purpose, may deservedly be reckoned
the Plaster made of Soot; which is thus to be prepared: Take of the finest
Chimney-soot one ounce and a quarter; of Leaven, Turpentine and fresh Butter,
ana one ounce; of Venetian Soap an ounce and a half; two Yolks of Eggs; of
Treacle and Mithridate, ana a quarter of an ounce: Beat all these together in a
Mortar, and so reduce it to a paste, and then use it Plaister-wise.

When the Anthrax or the Carbuncle is broken, you must then handle it very
gently and discreetly, using only the above-described Egg-salve, putting it
into the opening, and covering the Sore only with the common yellow drawing
Plaster, or the Plaster prepared of Oil, Wax and Rosin, or Turpentine. Let
the matter work out well, and when you are sure that it is very clean, and have
a mind to consolidate it, make only use of Triapharmacon, vulgarly called the
brown Diachylon; you may besides put into it some of the Vnguentum de Tutia,
and that of the Diapompholox, and one of the Plasters of them upon it. The
Vlme-plaister also, made of Oil and Ceruse, heals also very well. But be very
careful, lest any of the matter remain lurking in the Ulcer. If here and there
any should be found yet remaining, as often happens, then make use of the
Emplastrum Apostolorum. But if you can prepare the Diapalma, otherwise called
Diacalcithros, make use of that. I am wont to call it the Fistula-plaister,
because it does not easily suffer Fistula's to stink, but keeps them clean and
sweet. Such a Plaster is also that, which is called Isis, to be found in
Galen, and performing the same thing. They are both to be found in the Augustan
Dispensatory, together with the way of preparing them.

Now what concerns Old Sores, which many are troubled with, in their Legs
especially, because the humors of the body usually settle there; you must above
all things be careful to keep them clean, and to that end wash them, at least
once a day, with your own Urine: Or boil Carduus benedictus, Egrimony,
Plantain, and Roots of Tormentil, in half small Mead and half Wine, and wash
the Ulcer with it, as often as you dress it. Among the common Plasters for
such evils is the brawn Diachylum one of the best. Else you may prepare this
Ointment which follows: Take the middle rind of Elder, and St. John's Wort, boil
them in Oil, putting a little Wine to it, and so let it boil up till the Wine
be boiled away; then take it off from the fire, and let it cool; this done,
stir a little Turpentine amongst it, and a Yolk or two of Eggs, according as
you make a greater or lesser quantity; mixing with it a little Alum and
Vitriol, (the white is the best,) stir all well together, and apply it to the
Ulcer, and make a bandage, and cover it as usually. For a good
Drawing-plaister, take Rosin, Beeswax and Oyl-Olive; the quantity of the Rosin
must be but the half of the Wax: Let them melt together, and stir amongst it
some Tartar exquisitely powdered. Use not much of fatty things to such Ulcers.
I have had under my care such Ulcers, that were to be healed with only dry
things, as with strewing in of Crocus Martis, and the red Earth of Vitriol, of
which hereafter.

For this reason the ancient Physicians and Surgeons invented a dry Stone,
which they kept so secret, that they called it Lapis Philosophorum; which is
easily made, as follows: Take Alum, Hungarian Vitriol, of each one pound,
beat them to powder, and mix them well together; then put all into a glased
earthen pot, and pour upon it two quarts of Water, boil them together, and stir
them continually with a Spatula, taking off the scum: When it is boiled in, put
to it an ounce of Bolus Armenus, an ounce and a half of Ceruse, a quarter of an
ounce of Camphir, all finely powdered, stirring it well about; lastly, put it
to a quart of sharp Vinegar, and boil all together to a stony consistence;
which reduce to powder, and of it strew a little into the Ulcer, or let some of
it dissolve in a convenient Liquor, and wash the Ulcer therewith, or dip some
Linen rags in it, and lay it over the place.

It Is also prepared this way: Take green and white Vitriol, of each a dram;
of Lapis Calaminaris, Ceruse, Bol-Armeniack, of each two ounces and a half; of
Sal-Armoniack an ounce. Beat them all to powder, put them in an earthen pot,
mingle and stir them together in Vinegar, to be a thick pulse; then put your
pot upon a hot Charcoal-fire, to let it grow red hot, so as that the matter be
reduced to a stony consistence; of which dissolve about half an ounce in half a
pint of Water, dip Linen rags into it, and put it twice a day upon the Ulcer.
It Is also very good for purulent Breasts.

I was speaking above of Lavements: These you may prepare of all sorts of
Wound-herbs, by boiling Consound, Bugle; Fluellin, Ground Ivy, Yarrow,
Snake-weed, Avens, Arsmart; you may also, against putrefaction and the settling
of purulent matter, mix sometimes a little Myrrh, or Aloes Epatica,
Frankincense, Mastick, quick Brimstone, Camphir, Niter, Alum, Vitriol, or the
like. Nor is it needful to bind your self to this or that precisely, but you
may take such of them as you can get.

I have a peculiar Ulcer-salve, which I call Vnguentum Decameron, being made of
ten sorts of Juices. Of these the principal is the Juice of Persicaria,
(Arsmart;) to which are added the Juices of Groundsel, Tobacco, Yarrow,
sharp-pointed Dock, Cranes-bill, broad and pointed Plantain, Centory, St.
John's Wort, and Celondine. These Juices must be well strained, and then kept
for some days in glasses or glased Vessels to settle, and then very gently pour
off the clear from the sediment. Which done, boil them with fresh Butter, and
some good Licorish newly scraped, as also some Tormentil and Cumfrey, adding a
little red Hounds-tongue Salve and Oil of Myrrh, and Deer-suet: Let all be
boiled together, till the cracking cease, and the Juice be boiled in. Then
strain it through a Linen Cloth; and add to it some Venice-Turpentine, Gum
Elemi and a little Beeswax, both the latter melted each a part. Of the Wax
there needs no more than to bring the Salve to a due consistence. Then is this
Unguent prepared, to which may be added a little refined Verdigrease, which
will make it perfect. It is of great efficacy in foul Wounds, for both
cleansing and healing; as experience will show.

A Surgeon, in meeting with Ulcers, is to observe well the purulent matter
that issues, since he may from thence learn the condition of the evil, whether
it proceed from foul Blood, Gall, corrupt Phlegm, or Adust Melancholy. If the
evil grow worse, and the Humors of the Body force their way copiously through,
then beware, and withal exhort the Patient to purge, or to sweat with taking
some Sassafrass, or the like.

The Sanies or matter that is thick, white, and well digested, is the best; but
when there runs but a sharp water out of the Ulcer, this is not good, and is
withal painful. Which to obviate, you must use Litharge, Ceruse, and the like;
putting also beaten Lead upon the place, and cleansing the fistulat holes with
Lead-oyl, qualifying its sharpness with Oil of Eggs. This Lead-oyl is made two
ways, the the one out of Ceruse, which is green; the other out of Litharge,
which is yellow or reddish Both are prepared with Vinegar.

Boil Celondine in wine, and with this wine you may also cleanse the Ulcer with
good effect. Mix afterward a dram of Verdigrease with about four ounces of
the Juice of Ground Ivy; use it with wiecks or rags dipped therein for the foul
Ulcer-holes.

Burn Oyster-shells to powder, and use it for old Ulcers that need cleansing,
which this powder will well perform by reason of the Salt that is in those
shells. You may sometimes have occasion also of the Mercurius praecipitatus, or
the Mercurius dulcis Cosmeticus. If you can prepare this you have a good Remedy.

As for hard Knobs and Boyls, they commonly owing their rise to the Venereal
Disease are not so proper for this place. However you may make a plaster
against such Knobs of the phlegm of Althaea or Marshmallows, Gummi Ammoniac,
Galbanum, Turpentine, Myrrh, Missel-toe of the oak, mixing a little Bee-wax
therewith and some Oil of Earthworms. If you will have it stronger, mix with it
Gumm Elemi, Tacamahaca or Carana. But this can only be compassed by the rich
men; the poor must be content with the Melilot-plaister, mixed with Saffron and
the Oil of Mullain or Dill. You may also prepare for such Patients a Salve of
Fox-oyl, Dill-oyl, Turpentine, Man-grease, and the like, mixing therewith some
Oil of Earthworms and the Oil of Mullain-flowers, Camomil and white Lillies.

CHAP. IX. Of the Chirurgical means of staunching blood, of Wound-balsoms and
plasters, of Wound-drinks, and remedies for Burnings.
THis is the most necessary Chapter of this whole Tract. For, although in every
Camp, yea in every Regiment, and even in every Company there ought to be one or
more Surgeons; yet because in a battle, or the storming of a strong-hold,
there may be wounded a very great number of men, who, by reason of the
multitude, cannot all be dressed by the Surgeons, every common Soldier,
that is sound and unhurt, is obliged to assist his fellow, considering it may
soon be his own case.

In the first place then, refresh thy fellow that is wounded, with wine, cold
water, vinegar, or the like; then place him in a right posture. For, if the
wounds be in the head or about the breast, you ought to lay him high with his
head and shoulders, that so the blood may sink down from the places wounded. If
his leg be hurt, put it so that it may not hang downwards, and thereby the
afflux from the body be prevented, which otherwise might cause a tumor. If the
wounds be in the middle of the body, then place him so, that, if possible, he
may lie somewhat hollow with his back.

This done, wash the wound very gently, (so as not to anger it,) with mere
wine, or even with pure common water, only with a very little salt cast into
it: or with the Patients own urine; and then dry it with lint of long-worn
linen, without much stirring in the wound, for fear of making the veins bleed
again.

If any one do bleed so copiously, that it is not easily stopped, and the
Patient is in danger* then receive of his blood in an Iron pan, and letting it
run about therein, hold it over the fire till it be dry and between your
fingers friable to powder; of which strew some into the bleeding wound, and it
will stop it. But of this case more hereafter.

The wound being cleansed, and the bleeding stayed, take fine linnen-raggs,
burn them as you are wont to do for tinder, and quench it in Oil of Olives; and
put some of it into the wound, If you have no plaster at hand* take a slice of
unsalted lard and lay it on. If that be also wanting, dip a pledget of
linnen-raggs in warm wine, and being wrung out very dry, lay it upon the wound,
and a dry bandage over it, that so the moist pledget may long keep warm. Though
in such wounds, as are apt to bleed much, warm bandages are often to be
avoided, and sometimes (but with singular care and discretion) cold bandages to
be used, if the hurt be not in the brain, breast or bowels. Whence old
Hippocrates has this Aphorism: Frigido vero in iis locis utendum, unde sanguis
aut fluit aut fluxurus est. Yet this must be done with great caution, lest in
the place affected there should follow a Gangrene.

After this, take Oil of Olives and Wine, beat them well together, and warm the
mixture; dip it in Linen pledgets, wring them dry, and lay them on warm with a
dry bandage over it. This must de done once every hour, or every two hours, nor
let this care and labor seem irksom to you, for it will have a good effect.

This Dress is almost the only thing, which the Knights of Maltha make use of
at Sea to heal their wounds; for the Oil allays the pain and the swelling, as
the Wine cleanses, and these two together cause healing. Whence the Samaritan
in the Gospel is said to have poured only Oil and Wine into the wounds of him,
that was fallen among Thieves. You may therefore make out of these two a
Wound-salve that may be equivalent to almost every common Wound-balsom,
preparing it thus:

Take one part of Oyl-olive, and two parts of Wine, boil them together till the
Wine be boiled in, and the Oil, when any is thrown into the fire, cracks no
more; and you have a Wound-oyl according to wish: Put of it with fine Linen
shavings into the wound, and it will, for a plain Remedy, do marvels.

You may also melt Lard unsalted, mix it with Honey and Rye-flower, and so make
it into a Salve, which, though plain and simple, may when put upon the Wound,
have as good an effect, as many Plasters that are in great esteem.

Otherwise, for a very good Wound-salve, take of the best Aloes cleanly
pulverised the weight of a ducat, mingle and stir it with half an ounce of fine
Honey; melt afterward by it self half an ounce of Deer-suet, and stir it among
the other Ingredients: Thus you have a good Salve against the putrefaction of
wounds, and for the asswaging of their pains, as also for healing them, if you
duly apply it to the wound: If you will add to it a little Cyprus-Turpentine with
the Yolk of an Egg, you may.

The black Wheel-grease in a time of need is also a good Wound-salve, and is
only despised because of its plainness. When you use it, lay only over it the
leaves of Snake-weed, or of pointed Plantain.

But by all means keep the wound clean, and let not many look into it, for fear
they should by their breath annoy it; some being fasting, others having eaten
one thing, others another. But especially admit not many Women, when you open
the wound for cleansing and dressing it. But above all things take care to
exclude the Air as much as is possible from the opened wound, especially if any
Artery or Nerve be hurt. Take notice, that Carpenters and Joyners, when they
have hurt themselves, do almost by this only means of well closing their
wounds, and keeping out the Air, heal themselves. They take a very thin chip,
and lay upon it some of the Glue, wherewith they join together the Boards of
their work, and this they apply to the wound, first well cleansed, and let it
lie on, till it fall off of it self, and the wound is healed. But this will not
do in case any Bones be hurt.

Item, take Honey and the Dust-flower of the Mills, fresh Butter and
Bol-armeniack, and knead it well together, without any fire, until it be as
thick as a Plaster, and this laid on is very good.

Item, take Cumphrey well cleansed, cut it small, add to it one or two of the
Vulnerary Herbs, such as you may meet with in the field, as Pyrola or
Winter-green, Yarrow, Plantain, Fluellin, Orpin, Consound, Sanicle, Bugle, etc.
Boil this in Linseed-oyl and a little Wine, until the Wine is boiled away; and
this being strained, put to it some raw Honey and one or two well beaten yolks
of Eggs, (according to the quantity you make) and a little Turpentine, and so
thrust it, with some Hemp or Flax dip in it, into the wound.

Limewater is one of the simplest or plainest Remedies, but heals admirably
well. Take only some unslaked Lime, pour on it clear Water, and let it stand
upon it till the Lime be fallen to the bottom: Wash the wound with it,
especially such as are old running Sores, and you will find a wonderful effect.

These plain means may be used, in case you want a Chyrurgeon, taking the
assistance of your Fellow-souldier in the application; though those very
Remedies may challenge a place among the most chargeable ones, prescribed and
applied by Masters. And provided the Chyrurgeon do not under-value these my
plain and cheap Remedies, but receive them thankfully, I am ready here to teach
him some ways, hitherto concealed by me, which I scruple to keep any longer
from public knowledge.

Know then first, that to a Physician belongs also the knowledge of Surgery,
as a third part of the Art of Medicine, the other two being the Pharmaceutica,
prescribing Medicines for inward Diseases, and the Diatetica, ordering the
Patients Diet and other necessaries. I have my self, whilst I practiced
Physic, dressed in Camps many wounds with my own hands and cured them,
carrying always my Chirurgical apparatus about me, without any disparagement to
my Profession; imitating herein the Examples above-alledged, of Podalyrius and
Machaon, two of the chief Physicians of the Ancients in the Army before Troy,
who were not at all ashamed to practice Surgery, and to attend the cure of
wounded Soldiers.

First of all then, consider well, whether the wound be mortal or no. Next,
what limb or part it is that has received the wound: The wounds in the Head
are commonly the most dangerous, by reason of the Symptoms incident to them, as
the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness or other Convulsions, the Palsy and Laming of
the Limbs by reason of the hurt Nerves, as also Phrensy, loss of Hearing and
Speech, etc. which are wont to be consequent, according as the respective
Nerves have been struck or wounded. If the Breast be any where wounded, great
care also is to be had, and the means must be directed to prevent purulency,
(which that place, by reason of the heat there, is subject to,) and to heal the
Pleura or the inner Membrane of the Ribbs; the like is to be done concerning
the Diaphragme, etc.

You ought also to observe, what kind of wound it is you have to do with,
whether any Bone, any Nerve or Artery be hurt; whether it be a mere
flesh-wound, and the like. If it be a gaping wound, you must, if it has taken
cold from the Air, bathe it with warm Wine, and keep it very close; and make
use of the strong astringent Plaster, prepared of Rosin, Gumm Elemi,
Turpentine, Pitch, with some Mastick, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, as also some
Boodstone, Mummy, and Crocus Martis mixed therewith, and keep all on carefully
with a good bandage, which is a great matter in all wounds. For, some months
since, I had a Patient under my cure, whose Skull in the place of one of its
futures was severed, so as that I found a considerable space between the two
parts separated. I ordered a Surgeon of my particular acquaintance to draw
those parts forcibly together with good bandages; which being well done, I
caused his Hair to be shorn away, and an astringent Plaster to be applied,
which was almost like a Rupture-plaister: whereby in three or four weeks, to
the admiration of many, my Patient was perfectly healed. This plaster was the
Ceratum ex pelle arietina, mixed wit Gumm Elemi, and with a little Ceratum de
Betonica.

You must also be provided with good Blood-staunching remedies. The common ones
are, Bol-armeniac, Sheep-trickles, Boodstone, Tragacanth, Terra Sigillata,
Mill-dust, Hares-hair, Peacocks-dung, etc. Avoid by all means Causticks,
especially Sublimat* Arsenic, Colcothar; with which you anger a wound, and cast
the Patient into very dangerous symptoms: For, though they may by their
corrosiveness at first astringe the wound, yet they do afterward so fret and
eat it, that you would think, hellfire were in it. Beware also of a hot Iron,
which many have a refuge to as to a Masterpiece and the last remedy.

Among the chief Astringents, is Frog-spawn; which therefore you are, when it is
in season, to make good provision of, for the whole year. Take therefore in the
Spring a lump of rags, and dip it into Smiths-water, in which first some crude
Alum has been dissolved. Let this lump be dried again, and then draw it
thorough the Spawn of Frogs, so as that the Spawn may every where hang on it,
and expose it to the Air to dry; and afterward draw the same again thorough
Frog-spawn: Which repeat as often as you can, during the season of Frog-spawn;
for the oftener you dip the rags into it, the more virtue they will receive.
This Spawn stauncheth bleeding, with a good bandage. I have often used with
good success the distilled water of Frog-spawn in the bleeding of the Nose,
first mixed with crude Alum, and then drawn up into the Nostrils. Take a green
Frog, burn him in a pipkin, not to ashes, but so as to be reducible to powder:
This powder put into a small Taffaty-bagg, and hang it about the neck of a
woman that floods excessively; and she will find great help from it.

Having often made mention of Alum, which is one of the chief remedies for
stopping of blood, I will make public the Magistery of Alum, which I have
hitherto kept secret. Take then of the best and clearest Alum as much as you
please; pulverise it, and put the powder into an Oxe-or Swines-bladder, tying
it very close; Then throw it into a kettle of hot water, and the Alum will be
dissolved; this Solution bring over the helm out of a low retort, until the
Alum get a caput mortuum; then cease to urge the fire any more, lest you force
corrosive spirits from it, which are noxious to our present purpose. This caput
mortuum put again into a bladder, and dissolve it as before; and do this so
long, until the whole body of your Alum be brought over the helm. But you must
filter the first solution for fear of any dust or other heterogeneous matter
mixed with it.

This is the Magistery of Alum, able to draw the veins together without
corrosion. Apply this to wounds, or any other bleeding part. You may mix with
it Tragacanth, Gummi Arabic, Sanguis Draconis, and well-beaten Whites of Eggs.

Take good notice, whether the wounded Patient have heated himself in storming
a place, or by any other military execution, or whether he be yet distempered
by passion; for as long as this lasts, the blood is in a rage, and can hardly
be stopped. In this case stop the wound with Peacocks dung; and take Vinegar
and Whites of Eggs well beaten together, a little Alum, and refined
Saltpeter* put to it as much Frog-spawn, Shepherds-purse, broad Plantain, or
other convenient water, as is necessary; so that there may be three parts of
water and one part of vinegar; dip pledgets into it, and clap them cold to the
wound, and the bleeding will cease,

Crocus Martis also is an excellent stauncher of blood, to be used both
inwardly and outwardly. For inwardly it cures the Bloody Flux and other
Fluxes; and outwardly applied to wounds and strewed into them, it closes the
veins. But it must not be prepared with Aquafortis, or distilled Vinegar, or
any corrosive thing, but only by the heat of a reverberating furnace; and
afterward distill often from it some proper water, as of Roses, Speed-well,
Self-heal or broad Plantain, after which preparation it is diverse times to pass
again through a reverberating furnace, until it grow as light as a
down-feather: And then it is fit for our purpose; for as long as it is strong
and heavy, the body of it is not thoroughly opened.

Among other things, you may make use of the Red earth of Vitriol; which is to
be thus prepared: Take Vitriol, as much as you please, put it in a new unglased
pipkin, into a Potters oven, to deprive it of its moisture, and to reduce it to
a Colcothar: Then pulverise this calcined Vitriol, and in a large glased
earthen dish pour hot water on it, letting it stand so for four or five hours;
then decant the water, and pour other hot water upon it, as before, repeating
this three, four, or five times, until all the salt be got out of the said
Colcothar; which whether it be done, may easily be found by the taste. Then dry
this red dulcified Earth, and it will prove a very good blood-staunching
medicine; which may also in other cases be variously used; as you will find it
hereafter of great use in my plaster for wounds made by thrusting.

The water you had poured on this Colcothar, you ought not to throw away as
useless, but to put it by; and, for other occasions, you may boil it away, and
it will leave a Salt behind, as white as snow, with which you may do wonders in
foul Sores. I have used it with good success in such cases; in which it
cleanses and makes a firm ground for new and good flesh to grow upon. For,
though there be many things, that cleanse Sores, yet they leave the flesh loose
and spungy; but this is both astringent, and withal makes such a sound and
firm bottom, that you may trust to it: Whence also it is to be used in
fistulous Sores.

But to return to the stopping of Blood; take the blood of a Lamb or Sheep, let
it stand in a clean earthen vessel, until the serum be severed from it; pour
this off, and dry the blood well in a new glased pipkin, upon hot embers: Then
pulverise it, and mix with it a fourth part of clean pulverised Tragacanth, and
strew this into the wound. If the issue of the blood be so impetuous, that it
washes away the first application, then wipe the wound again, and strew into it
of the same powder the second time. Putting amongst it Alum, Crocus Martis or
the red Earth of Vitriol, you will do well: Bind the wound with the Emplastrum
Santalinum, (which is called Incognitum by our Surgeons,) or with the
Ceratum ex pelle arietina, due to Arnoldus de Villa nova.

The blood being stopped, and the wound cleansed, you must then apply good
vulnerary Oils or Wound-balsoms. Oils are all, as I mentioned above, fatty;
whence it is, that they do not easily consolidate wounds, unless you put to
them some refined Mastic, Sarco-colla, Sanguis Draconis, Sandarach, or the like.

But to open unto you the good affection of my heart, I shall describe here my
Wound-balsom, wherewith I have, by Gods assistance, done much good, viz.

Take as much as you please of Turpentine of Cyprus, which comes from Venice,
and is taken inwardly; and the same quantity of the red Oil of St. John's Wort,
dissolve them together: Then take Gumm Elemy, dissolve it apart, and pour it
among the other; and so let all cool, and when it is half cold, pour amongst it
a little Oil of Beeswax, and your Balsom is prepared. I cannot tell you the
precise weight of each ingredient, because as often as I have prepared it, I
have done it by the Eye, and as it seemed good unto me; only note, that there
must be so much of the Gumm Elemy as to give it a due consistence; which you
may try, by casting a drop or two of it into cold water; this Balsom being to
be thinner than an Unguent, and yet thicker than Oil.

This Balsom heals very speedily, especially when used in wounds freshly
inflicted, on fine pledgets, and only with a yellow Tractif bound over it.

Be also provided with good Plaster for wounds made by Thrusting, such as are
the Opodeldoch of Theophrastus, or the good black Thrust-plaister* thus to be
prepared: Take of Oil of Roses seven ounces; of Colophonium, black Pitch, white
Wax, Roman Vitriol, Ceruse, Frankincense, Myrrh, ana eight ounces; of Mastic,
one ounce of the Oil of Eggs, two ounces; of Spike-oyl, one ounce; of the Oil
of Juniper Berries, three ounces; of Mumia, two ounces; of white Vitriol and
red Corals, ana two ounces; of Heron-suet, one ounce; of Magnet, two ounces; of
well cleansed Earthworms pulverised and of Camphir, ana one ounce: Of all this
make a powder secundum artem.

My Opodeldoch, that I make use of, is almost like this, but that I mix with it
the red Earth of the Oil of Vitriol, above spoken of in the matter of
Blood-staunching; and add also to it Turpentine and Gumm Elemi, with some
Tutia, Aloes epatica, well prepared Lapis Calaminaris, and Crocus Martis: And
thus the Plaster becomes red and hard, like Spanish Sealing-wax. I take also
Gummi Ammoniac, Galbanum and Opoponax, the Oil of St. Johnswort and Myrrh. This
Plaster draws from the bottom, and reaches deep. A Soldier, having this about
him, and, upon occasion, working it only to some flatness, there being no need
of laying it on a cloth, may thus put it on the wound, taking it off mornings
and evenings to wipe it clean; and then working it through again, lay it on as
before: And so he may heal himself; which when done, let him clean the
Plaster, and role it up in a bladder, for another occasion.

I have seen considerable opperations of Gumm Elemi used alone, laid on
leather, and put upon the thrust; but this wound is then to be kept from
falling together.

To prevent incidental heat and inflammation of the wounds, make use of the Oil
of Roses, Bol Armeniac, Whites of Eggs and Camphir. But to avoid trouble, you
may find ready, in the Apothecary-shops, the Vnguentum album, Vnguentum de
Minlo, Camphoratum de Liguiritia, de Lithargyro, Santilinum, and the like; to
be put about the wound when dressed.

You may with great benefit, and you ought also, especially in the wounds of
the Head, provided there be no danger of bleeding, lay over the bandage some
fine rags moistened in wine, and well dried again. This allays the pain, and
withal prevents swelling.

And in case the wound be swelled, you may also to good purpose make use of
Fomentations made of the herb and flowers of Mullein, Betony, Egrimony,
Cowslips, Camomil, Melilot, Ground Ivy, red Roses, Bugle, and the like: But
beware of all hot things, whatever they be. Boil the aforesaid herbs or the
like in half wine and water; but if the wound be not inflamed, take two parts
of wine and one of water. With such fomentations I have done much good; among
others upon a Fencing-Master of Nurenberg, called Cameysen, who in the public
Fencing-school received thrusts in both his Eyes, insomuch that by reason of
the great swelling that ensued thereupon he lost all his sight; but by the use
of such fomentations, God blessing the means, I recovered his sight.

A Bone being broken, set it carefully, and bind it up strongly, having laid
upon it Oxycroceum or Emplastrum de pelle Arietina. You may also comfort such
wounds with the like fomentations, as before described.

On the bank of the Rhine is found a Stone in the gravel, called Lapis
sabulosus, which is easily reducible to powder: Of this, if you can get it,
give to the Patient, whose bone is broken, a dram to be taken in broth,
mornings; of which he will find a very good effect.

In the case of a Limb wrenched, clap to it Bran boiled in wine, sometimes,
according to occasion, mixing with it a little Salt, and Marshmallows or red
Hounds-tongue-salve. If it have happened long ago, then make a pulse of
Wheaten-flower, Milk, and the Oil of Camomil or Mullein; mixing a little
Saffron with it, and clap it on hot. If there be any collection or coagulation
of blood, the Unguent of Hounds-tongue will do well, together with a linen
compress moistened in warm wine.

You must also be provided with good Wound-drinks; but they must be prepared
diversely, according to the several places wounded. Thus in the wounds of the
Head, Betony challenges the pre-eminence and the greatest quantity of all the
Vulnerary Herbs; In the wounds of the Sides, Carduus Benedictus, claims that
right; in the wounds of the Breast, Veronica (or Speedwell) ought to have it;
in those about the Kidneys, the Herb Strawberry must be preferred; in those
near the Liver, Agrimony will have the precedence, and so forth. Mean time, the
Vulnerary Herbs to be used in such occasions, are these; Sanicle, Winter-green,
Ladies-mantle, Speedwell, Orpine, Mugwort, Ground Ivy, Straw-berry-leaves,
Agrimony, St. John's Wort, Cinquefoil, Bugle, Tormentil, Snakeweed, Avens,
Woodrooff, etc.

You may make an excellent Wound-drink of these four Ingredients, viz.
Winter-green, Orpine, Mugwort and Snakeweed, boiled in half Wine and Water; but
in case there be an Inflammation, Wine is to be forborne, or very little of it
to be employed.

If any Bone be broken into splinters, do not pull them out with any violence,
but loosen them with a good Ointment of Eggs, keeping the wound open the
longer. Nature her self will not suffer any splinter to remain behind.

Now you must be ready with some good thing for Blood coagulated, in case any
person should have been flung down, squeezed, beaten, or fallen from a high
place. The right powder for this purpose is thus made: Take of Terra Sagillata,
or Bol-Armeniack, Sanguis Draconis and Mumia, ana half an ounce, of Sperma Ceti
and Rhubarb ana half a dram, reduce it to a powder; of which give the Patient
the weight of about a ducat in Wine, or Chervil-water. Or take a good quantity
of Chervil, boil it in Mead or Flesh-broath, and let the Patient drink a good
draught of it warm, three times a day. Or let him drink a Thimble-full of
Sperma Ceti in Beer, adding a little Butter to it. Or take of Mumia half an
ounce, or Sperma Ceti two drachms, of Oculi Cancrorum (of which the blew ones,
which sometimes fall from Crafishes whilst alive, are the best,) three drachms,
adding to it a little Licorish and Cinnamon, and some Tormentil Roots: Of this
pulverised give every day to the Patient, mornings and evenings, the weight of
about half a ducat, and by this means you will expel purulent matter and blood,
and bony splinters, and sometimes even bullets lurking in the flesh; not
omitting other good Wound-drinks, and vulnerary Balsoms, Plasters, Ointments
and Fomentations. Again, take of the red Hounds-tongue Ointment, of the bigness
of a great Walnut, dissolve it in warm Broth; it expels all coagulated blood,
especially if you mix some Sperma Ceti with it.

If you have any Thorns, Thistles, Bullets, Small-shot, or the like, to draw
out, where perhaps you cannot reach them with Instruments, then burn live
Crafishes in a new Pipkin, until they be reducible to powder, but burn them not
to Ashes. This powder mix with Hares-suet, and lay it on, and you will find a
good effect. Also take the Roots of the big Reed that grows in Marshes, dry
them to be pulverised, and mix Virgin-honey with it, and lay it upon the part;
and of the same powder give the Patient to drink, twice a day, the weight of
half a ducat in Wine, or in Broth, or in a vulnerary potion, if you have at
hand. The first of this I learned of the Excellent Doctor Schleer of Constance.

The Excrement of a Gander, being applied, is also powerful in drawing out
Iron. Again, Quince-wine mingled with Vinegar, and putting some Saffron and
Gunpowder amongst it, if you give it to one that has been shot, it will do
him good. Otherwise, they make a plaster of the Roots of Cumfrey, Aron,
Polypody, Juniper, and dried Radishes, all reduced to powder, and mix it with
Hares-suet and gray Diachylum, making a thick Ointment of it, and spreading it
over a piece of Hare-skin, and so laying it on. This is greatly praised,
especially when seconded with good Wound-drinks, of which Master-wort is one of
the Ingredients: But if you have not this at hand, take a Beet and boil it in
Wine, and lay it warm on the wound. Likewise young Swallows, not yet fledge,
burnt to powder, and this powder made by Acetum of Roses into a pulse, and laid
on, does the same.

You ought also to be provided for the Synovia: And if you proceed aright with
my Wound-balsom above described, and keep the wound warm, you may therewith do
much good. Mix with it, ex abundanti, the red Earth of Vitriol, above
discoursed of. This Synova is a dangerous thing, and often causes almost
intolerable pain, if it be not well handled; the Herb of Straw-berries and its
Juice have great virtue in this case. Some make use of the White of Eggs,
Bol-Armeniack, and the like. The Magistery of Alum also belongs hither; for,
Alum mixed with Vinegar, and clapped on very warm, allays it also.
Elder-blossoms likewise, used every way, are effectual in the same case. Employ
also diligently such Defensive-plaisters, as are not fatty, because fat lays no
hold on water.

To proceed to Burnings, I know almost no better Salve for burning than this;
Take a Tench, or any common-Pond-fish; fry one or more of them with good
Butter, pour the fatness upon cold Water in a broad earthen Pan, and you have
an excellent Ointment against Burnings. When, some years since, a Powder-Mill
was blown up, and the Attendants upon the work so miserably burnt, that they
looked as if they had been roasted, they were healed with this Ointment, only a
little finely powdered Sage being mixed with it.

Cream and Linseed-oyl mingled together, and rags moistened therein, put upon
the burnt part, heals, though the burning were made with Aquafortis; for, to
my knowledge, a certain Chemist that had thus burnt all his Arm, was thereby
restored. Or, take Oil of Elder, or stale Oil that has been long in a burning
Lamp; beat half as much, as you take of that, of the Whites of Eggs amongst it,
and anoint the burnt part therewith. If you can get no Oil of Elder, take any
other cooling Oil, as of Nymphaea, (Water Lillies) Poppy-seeds, Violets or
Roses, or the Oil of Poplar-buds, or of Marsh-Marigold Flowers.

If you can have Quince-wine, it marvellously exstinguishes the burning of any
shot, dipping a Linen pledget in it, and drawing it through the wound, or left
in it, repeating this every twelfth hour. The Juice or Wine of Quinces must be
used as it comes from the fruit, without any mixture of Sugar. This I learned
from a Nobleman, a great Soldier, of long experience in the Wars of France,
the Low Countries, and Hungary.

The Vnguentum Jovis, made of Henbane, Vervain and Butter, is also very useful
for this purpose. Likewise the Ointment of Calx viva, which is first six or
seven times to be slaked and dulcified with pure water, pouring every twelve or
sixteen hours fresh water upon it, and decanting the former, so as to leave
always the Calx at the bottom; which is then to be mixed with Oil of Roses, or
some other cooling Oil, for an Ointment.

If you be well acquainted with Elder, and know how to use it, you may obtain
out of it one of the best Cures of Burnings, especially out of its middle
rinds. Again, Yolks of Eggs and Linseed-oyl, equal quantities, mixed together,
and spread over the burning, is also very good. Egg-oyl likewise used by it
self, and Vernice employed by Joyners, do well also; but the latter of these
two, if it be mixed with Oil of Spicanard or Petroleum, is to be mingled
amongst Linseed-oyl.

Spread fresh Butter upon Cabbage-leaves, having first fried the Butter with
some blossoms or the middle rind of Elder; and so lay them to the burning;
Elder being a great resister of Inflammations, and therefore very good to allay
St. Antonies fire; if you pull its mild green rinds from the stem, and lay them
on, without moistening them. Else they use against the said Fire, Flower mixed
with the powder of Licorice, to be clapped on with a ragg done over with red
Saunders. My way is, to take the shavings of some fresh and juycy Licorice, and
to fry them in new Butter; then to strain the Butter from it, and to fry the
like fresh Licorice therein, and to strain the Butter from that again;
repeating this five or six times. Among this strained Butter I stir some pure
and fine Ceruse, Whites of Eggs and a little Camphire. And with this Ointment I
have, by the assistance of God, done much good in the said inflammation of St.
Antonies fire; and the common people do to this very day call this Ointment by
no other name than that of Doctor Minderer's Licorice-Ointment. But to return
to the quenching of Burnings.

If you can have Milk-cream, mingle it with Cow Dung freshly made, and so clap
it on; though fresh Cow Dung alone allays burning. Crafishes pounded alive, and
fried in fresh Butter or in common Suet, the Butter strained here from, is also
a good Ointment against burnings. Unsalted Lard, melted by a Wax-candle, or an
hot Iron, and dropped upon fresh cold water, and then gathered up from the
water, and carefully rubbed from the same, has the like operation. Take one of
the cooling Oils abovenamed, and fresh Butter, boil the middle rind of Elder
in it, and with a sufficient quantity of Wax make of it a Salve, and this also
will cure burning.

You ought also to be provided with a fit apparatus, Lints, Swathing-clouts,
etc. and to take Deer-suet, Oil of Roses or Elder, and white Wax, and melt them
over the fire, yet so as that you melt the Wax, by it self, and add of it no
more to the rest than to make it a thin plaster. Into this compound you must
dip some fine lint, and you will find it very useful for any angry part; as also
when one limb presses or otherwise incommodes another, as happens in hydropical
and other swollen people, whose belly so sinks down, that the thighs suffer by
it; in which case such lints are to be put between the parts, to keep them from
immediately touching and pressing one another.

A grangrene is cured with Sal-armoniac boiled in Urine, especially in that of
the Patient, and clapping such Urine upon the part affected:

The quantity of the Sal-armoniac may be six drachms.

For frozen Feet, take Gander-suet and Deer-suet; dissolve them together, and
pour them into a white excavated Turnip, and expose this for a while to the
Air, Rain, Wind, Hoar-frost, Snow, according as the season shall be: Then mince
the Turnip, and fry it in the same Suet which you had poured into it; that
done, squeeze it out, and let the fat fall upon cold water; and being there
brought to consistence, take it off, and bring it over the helm from burned
Wine, and decant this carefully from it again, and it is duly prepared. You may
also recover frozen Feet with white rotten Turnips, beaten with Butter or
Tallow, and so clapped on.

CHAP. X. Of several promiscuous Medical Practices, for the Service of the
honest Soldier.
THis Chapter I have annexed to the former as an Appendix, for the ease and
good of Soldiers; wherein some things will occurr, not inferior to those that
have preceded. But herein I have kept no order, but set them down
promiscuously, yet faithfully, to supply what may have been omitted before.

If you be troubled with the Toothache, coming from the cold in winter, take
the root of Pyrethrum (Pellitory of Spain) and boil it in Vinegar, and hold
this Vinegar warm in your mouth, and it will draw out the phlegm that causes
the pain. Or, take the root of Elder, boil it in half Wine and half Water, and
hold it warm upon the Teeth. But what you take of this Decoction must be often
spit out, and other fresh taken into you mouth; of which I have found wonderful
Effects.

The root of Heath boiled together with the same herb in wine, and laid on is
esteemed to be powerful in drawing out thorns and splinters.

You may make a good Ointment against the Itch and Scabs, of Savin, stale Fat,
Brimstone and Juniper Berries Oil.

If your Limbs after long sickness be weak, boil Valerian-roots in Camomil-oyl,
and anoint such Limbs therewith. Also the Oil of Lillies in the valley, and
that of yellow Violets, is good for the same purpose.

For worms in the Fingers, bruise Parsicaria (Arsmart,) and lay it on; or take
of a Piggs Bladder of Gall, and put it on the affected Finger like a Thimble.

If you have any coagulated or congealed blood in your Breast, make a Decoction
of Scabious, Chervil, and Germander, in two parts of wine, one part of water;
and strain it, and drink of it mornings and evenings.

Against the putrefaction of the Mouth, make a Decoction of Privet in water,
adding afterward a little Alum to it, and use it for a gargarism. Also a
Decoction of the middle rind of Hawthorn, with a little Alum, is of great
effect in the same case.

Cabbage and Colewort-leaves burnt to ashes and a Lixivium made of it, and
clapped on, cures a Gangrene, and the wild Fire, especially if you mingle a
little Oil of Elder therewith. If you can have no Elder-blossoms for this Oil,
take the green middle rind of Elder, and boil it in Oil Olive, and then strain
the Oil; which done, take fresh rind of Elder, and proceed with it as before,
repeating it three or four times to make the Oil the stronger. You may add a
little wine to it whilst it is boiling, but that must all boil away, and so long
till the Oil cracks no more in the fire.

Southern-wood stamped with grease and laid on, draws out splinters.

If you have the Itch or are scabby, and can light upon some water standing in
the hollowness of a Beech-tree, wash your self with it. Or make a Decoction of
the brown rind of Alder, (which is under the gray,) in Butter, and anoint your
self with it; mixing, if you will a little Brimstone therewith.

If you be troubled with the Ring-worm, or any running Scab, infuse Litharge in
Vinegar, and let it stand a night infused, or make a Decoction of the same in
Vinegar. But your pain or vessel must be of brass. This Vinegar mingle with Oil
of Elder, or of Roses, or the like, and it will become a fine gray Salve,
curing such running Scabs as aforesaid, and cooling also Inflammations.

If your Body be bound, take Sage pulverised and mix it with grease, and anoint
your Navil with the quantity of a hasel-nut of it. This I have with very good
success advised to women in childbed, that were thus bound and obstructed. If
you will have it stronger, mix with it the Gall of a Fish or of any Animal
whatsoever; but then you must not give it to a woman in childbed.

Gromel (by the Latins called Milium Solis) pulverised, and the weight of half
a ducat of it taken in wine or broth, provokes urine; yet must the belly be
opened first. The same does Linaria or Toad-flax, boiled in wine or broth.
Likewise distilled water of Radishes, repeating the distillation several times
from other fresh Radishes. Which will have the better effect, if the Patient
bath his lower parts in a bath made of Marshmallows, Melilot, and the like.

Gromel, abovementioned, taken in warm broth, expels the birth: And so do the
blossoms or buds of Walnut-trees; Crab's-eyes also, pulverised and taken in warm
broth; likewise Issop boiled in wine, and drank warm. This I have inserted for
the sake of poor Souldiers-wives, who amongst us often follow the Camp. If they
have any great After-pains, let them bath their lower parts in a Bath made of
Dill, and Camomil-flowers. And the yolks of hard Eggs, beaten together with
some convenient Oil (Nut-oyl is the best,) and a Plaster made of it, and laid
to the belly, is also very good. If they have too great a profusion of blood,
let them take a dram of burnt Hartshorn, and burnt Ivory, in a convenient
Vehicle.

In case of a mortal wound, take of pure Turpentine four ounces, wash it with
fresh limpid water, and then dissolve it over a mild fire; which done, mix with
it two ounces or two ounces and an half of white Wax, dissolved apart: To this
add about three ounces of Woman's milk, which is sucked by a Boy. The Turpentine
and Wax being somewhat cooled together, must be well stirred, and then poured
on cold Vinegar; whence, when it is brought to a consistence, it is to be taken
off, and made into a Plaster, and so laid on.

Horse-tail* (in Latin, Equisetum) heals the wounds in the urinary parts, the
powder of it being taken in broth or Speedwel-water, or the Decoction thereof
being drank.

Gummi Ammoniac is a good discutient of hard Tumors and Knobs: Tacamahaca
appeaseth pain proceeding from cold, being laid on the part affected.

To make the pellets used to be put in wounds that are to be kept open, (which
here in Germany we call Quellmaissel,) take a Sponge of the finest sort, put it
in Whites of Eggs well beaten and mixed with Rose Water, to make the said
Sponge imbibe this moisture. Which done, bind it close together with thread, and
let it well dry in the Air, and so convey of it into the wound that is to be
kept open: where it will swell again, and so distend the wound.

If you be troubled with the Gonorrhaea, take House-leek growing on old walls
(called by the Latins, Semper vi^ninus,) put it into your shoes, and go
barefoot upon it; anoint your loins and privy parts with Henbane-oyl; and take
mornings the quantity of two big hasel-nuts of well washed Turpentine, for some
days together, avoiding all aromatic, hard, and salt meat.

An old Experimenter has noted, That whosoever shall wash his head twice a
week with a Lixivium made of Juniper-ashes, his sight shall never fail him, but
remain good to his end; nor shall that person be troubled with any vermin upon
his head, nor with any headache, nor suffer any change of his hair. For my part,
I never tried it; but it being a very plain and safe thing, I thought good here
to insert it.

Against the biting of a Mad-dog, lay Assa foetida with Garlic upon the bite;
it will draw out the venom.

To free your self from the Gravel, make a Decoction of Ash-wood in wine, and
drink of it warm once or twice a day upon an empty stomach; using withal good
baths. Vervin also the leaves and roots, beaten together, and drank, is very
good in this case.

If you have a strong breath, proceeding from a foul stomach, infuse Wormwood
and Carduus benedictus, together with some Citron-peels in in wine, and let
them boil a little therein, and then drink a good draught of it mornings. Chew
also and swallow sometimes a little Myrrh, and take now and then three or four
Aloes-pills.

I could add many other things, if my leisure would permit: These which I have
set down, you will take in good part; and though I have not tried them all my
self, yet you may rest assured, that such as have not been experimented by my
self, have been tried by my honored Colleagues and other honest persons, and
approved.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A
AIR, what to be observed of it in the Camp. 28. Preservatives against the
corruption of the Air. 36, etc. Animals, their blood of what efficacy. 51
Antonies fire, how to be allayed. 112
B
BElly, the cure of the Aches, and Tumors, and Gripings thereof. 64, 65 Beer,
new Beer causes the Strangury. 30 Blood, how to cure casting up of Blood, 57.
And the bleeding of the Nose, Ibid. Blood coagulated, how to be helped. 107,
115 Boyls Pestilential and their cure, 81, and seq. Brick well burnt good
against a Tenasmus. 78 Brimstone a good Medicine in infectious cases. 48 Bread,
Wheaten-bread coming hot out of the Oven and dipped in red Wine very good against
Fluxes. 70. The same duly prepared good in pestilential Sores. 82 Bones
broken, how to be ordered. 10^ Bran good for wrenching of Limbs. ib. Burning,
how to healed. 110
C
CArbuncles pestilential, and their cure. 81 Carlina good against faintness. 26
Surgeons of an Army, and their qualities. 32 Cold Nights how to provide
against. 28 Corns of the Feet how to be cured. 25 Cough, and its cure. 57
Crafishes burnt alive good against the Bloody Flux. 74 Crafishes, after a
certain way prepared, of great use for drawing out of the body Thorns,
Smallshot, etc. 108. The same fried in fresh Butter allays burning. 112 Crocus
Martis a high Remedy against the Bloody Flux. 74 Clysters, and their use in the
field. 75 Cheerfulness good in Pestilential times. 42
D
DAisie and its excellency. 31 Diseases in an Army, and their cure. 34 Diet to
be well observed in the Camp. 35 Drinks how to provide in the field. 27. The
excess of it to be avoided. 30. The danger of drinking whilst one is hot, and
the care to be taken in that case. 30, 31. Drinks in cold weather. 39 Drawing
out of Thorns, Splinters, etc. how to be effected. 115 Dropsy, and its cure.
69 Drought, how to be remedied. 77
E
EGg-oyl good for Burnings. 112 Elder-flowers good in the plague, 38, 39
Elder-vinegar good to apply to the Heart in the plague. 53 Elder-roots, the
Juice of them purges hydropical persons exceedingly, 69. But to be used with
great caution. ibid. Boiled Elder-buds have the like virtue. ibid. Emollients
in pestilential Boils. 82 Excrement of a Gander is powerful in drawing Iron out
of the body. 109
F
FAintness how to prevent..26, 27 Feet sweaty how to remedy. 26. Feet frozen
how to recover. 113 Fevers of all sorts how to be managed and cured in an Army.
34, 64 Fluxes, their several sorts and cures. 70. Of the Bloody Flux in
particular, and its cure. 72 Frankincense dryes and clears the Air. 37
Fundament, the cure of its falling down. 78
G
GAngrene how to cure. 113, 115 Galling how to cure. 26 Garlic useful in
Fluxes by way of decoction. 79 Goat, good for men to rub at them when the Air
is corrupted. 67, 36 Groin swelled how to cure. 70 Guts, the Griping of them
how to be cured. 69 Granat-wine cures the Bloody flux. 75 Gunpowder purifies
the Air. 37 Gum Elemi of considerable use in wounds. 105 Gonorrhoea how to be
ordered. 118 Gravel how to be removed. 119
H
HAwes our Fluxes* 71 Hartshorn, good against Fluxes* 70 Hearing how to be
recovered. 65 Heart, the cure of this Inflammation. 62 Haemorrhoid-vein, the
use of its bleeding, 80 Horses how to be made vigorous. 27. Ointment for
Horses. 28 Hunger and Thirst to be prevented by certain herbs. 26
I
IAundise, the cause and cure of it. 66 Imperatoria good against faintness, 26
Infection, its preservatives and cures, both for the Poor and Rich. 35.46. The
Hungarian Infection and its cure. 46. and ^^^. Inflammation its several sorts
and cures. 58, -- 64 Juniper-wood burnt good in times of the plague. 37 Itch
how to be cured. 11^
L
LArd, when fresh very good against the Inflammation of the Mouth. 62 Lard good
against Burnings. 112 Lead a considerable cooler. 62 Legs, the cure of their
swelling. 70 Liver, the cure of the Obstructions thereof. 66 Lillies, the Juice
of the Roots of blew Lillies have great virtue of purging hydropical persons,
but to be used with great discretion. 69 Lapis sabulosus good to heal broken
Bones. 106 Luxations how to be ordered. ib.
M
MArisca's, and the cure of them. 79 Mastick, drys and clears the Air. 38
Mesaraick-veins, and the effects of their being obstructed. 66 Milk duly
prepared good against the Bloody Flux. 72 Moss of wild Rose-shrubs an approved
Remedy in Bloody-fluxes. 73 Mouth, how to remedy the falling down of the Palate
of the Mouth. 56
N
NIter excellent to allay Inflammations. 61. The way how to prepare it for that
use. 62 Nose, how to remedy the bleeding of it. 57
O
OBstructions of the Liver, and the cure. 66 Oil of Scorpions very good to
anonit the Heart with in the Plague. 53. A good Succedaneum to it described. 54
Oil of Vitriol good in Fevers. 55 Oaken-leaves do cure common Fluxes. 70
P
PEstilential Diseases and cure. 38. and seq. 81. and seq. Physicians of an
Army and their qualities. 32 Pear Trees, the Rinds of them cure common Fluxes.
71 Preservatives fit for Soldiers. 25, 26, etc. Purgatives fit for Soldiers.
25 Putrefaction the cause of grievous Diseases. 47, 64. Putrefaction of the
Mouth how to be cured. 115
Q
QUinces-wine good against the Bloody Flux, 75. The same extinguishes
marvellously the burning of any shot. 111
R
RIngworm, how to be cured. 116 Rust of Arms how to prevent. 26 Rye-biscuit
duly prepared good against the Bloody Flux. 73
S
SCarification and its use. 82 Soldiers Morals. 23 Soldiers care of his Body.
24 Soldiers Diseases in the field; through the whole Book. Sores pestilential
and their cure. 81. and seq. Spotted Fevers and their cures. 34. and seq.
Squinancy and its cure. 57 Strangury and its cure. 11 Sufeits and their cures.
34 Swellings of the Throat and Almonds, how to be cured. 56.64. Swelling of the
Legs how to cure. 70 Sweat and the ways of procuring it. 44. and seq. See also
51. and seq. Swallows, burnt to powder, good to those that have been shot. 109
Synovia* how to be ordered. 110
T
TEnasmus and its cure. 77 Tench fried good for Burnings. 110 Thirst, how to
quench in case of want of drink. 26. Thirst how to quench in Fluxes. 77 Throat
swollen how to cure. 56 Toothache its cure. 114 Tongue, the cure of the
Inflammations of it. 58 Turnips, after a certain way prepared, or rotten, cure
frozen feet. 113
V
VErmin how to remove. 25 Vein, the use of the bleeding of the Hemorrhoid-vein.
80 Vesicatories and their use. 82 Ulcers and their cure. 81 Vinegar good to
wash the Temples with, in times of the Plague. 38 Venae-section not easily to
be admitted in pestilential Diseases. 43, 55 Vulnerary Herbs for several sorts
of Wounds, 107
W
WAter, its differences and choice 29 Wheel-grease a good Ointment for Horses.
28 Wind in the Guts requires keeping the Body soluble. 67 Worms, Earthworms
good against the Dropsy, together with the way of preparing them. 70 Wounds,
their Inflammation how to be prevented. 104. Their swelling how to be helped.
ib. Wound-drinks of several sorts. 107 Wounds mortal how to order. 117 Worms in
fingers, how to be cured. 115 Wounds how to be cured, see chap. 10.
FINIS.

